UDC

631'313'7

: 620'16

IS : 9980
( First Reprint SEPTEMBER 1998 :

- 1988 (Reaffirmed 2004 1995) ) ( Reaffirmed

Indian

Standard

GUIDELINES FOR FIELD PERFORMANCE AND HAULAGE TESTS OF POWER TILLERS ( First
1. scope tillers. -- Covers the guidelines Revision )

for conducting field performance and haulage test of power

2. Field Performance 2.1 General range of implements, matched to the power tiller, required for operations given shbuld be supplied by the applicant. The tests shall be conducted with these implements. If the supply of matching implements has not been made by the applicant, the test shall be performed with those implements which are available at the testing station and as mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the testing station.
A

2.1.1

under 2.1.2

2.1.2

The field operations shall consist of following:

a) Dry land operation 1) Ploughing with mouldboard plough/disc plough, 2) Tilling with harrow/cultivator, 3) Tilling with rotary tiller, and 4) Any other ( to be specified by the manufacturer ). b) Wet land operation c) Stationary operations, if recommended by the manufacturer. 2.1.3 In case any of the operations mentioned in 2.1.2 ecommended, the same shall be declared by the applicant. 2.2 Selection of Land and Preparation of Power Tiller for Tests 2.2.1 Selection of land - The land selected for tests shall preferably be agricultural land on nrhich a crop was harvested within the last one year. The field operation should be made, as far 3s possible, in test plots where furrow length of a minimum of 50 m would be available. In case If puddling test, the furrow length may be a minimum of 25 m. The plot selected for ploughing, after the harvest of the last crop, should not be given any previous tillage operations. If tilfed. it ;hould have a well-settled and reasonably compact soil. The surface should be reasonably level. The condition of the plot shal! be checked and reported in accordance with Appendix A. 2.2.2 Preparation of power tiller for tests [ a ( 1, 2, 3 ) and b ] are not

2.2.2.1 The power tiller should be fitted with accessories in accordance with the nanufacturer's/applicant's recommendantions. The servicing and maintenapce shall be carried out n accordance with the schedule prescribed by the manufacturer/applicant in the printed literature. 2.2.2.2 The power tiller shall be fitted with ballasts as recommended by the manufacturer/
according spplicant in his sale/instruction manual. ln case Of Pneumatic tyres, it shall be inflated :o the recommendations of the manufacturer for field work.

2.2.2.3

neasured at the central line of the tyrs/steel wheel shall be at least Nhen new.

At the beginning of the test, the height of the tyre tread bars or lugs of steel wheels 65 percent of their height,

Adopted 23 September 1988

I

@ January 1989, BIS

I

Gr 3

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI

IS : 9980

- 1988

2.3 Field Operatioti 2.3.1 Field operations with each implement ( see 2.1.2 ) shall be carried out for a duration of at least 25 hours. The total duration of field operations with different implements during initial commercial and batch testing of the power tiller, shall be 150 and 75 h, respectively. 2.3.2 The operations except puddling shall generally required for the type of operation. different soils is given below for guidance: Soil Type Fine sand Sandy foam Silt loam Clay loam Clay be carried out in fields having The soil moisture range for tillage Moisture, Percent ( Wet Basis ) up to 5 2 t0 a 5 t0 a 6to12 6to 12 soil moisture operations for

2.3.2.1 The moisture content shall be determined as stipulated in IS : 2720 ( Part 2 )-1973 `Method of test of soils: Part 2 Determination of water content ( second revision )`. 2.3.3 The gear selected shall be one in which satisfactory and safe operation is attained. gear selected for the operations shall be; maintained during the test except at head land. limiting factor for the speed should be such that the wheel slip shall be within 20 percent. The The

2.3.4 The throttle setting for a particular operation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's/ applicant's recommendation. The initial throttle setting shall not be disturbed during the operation with particular implement. However, the setting may be reduced at head-land. A device to restrict the increase in position over the pre-set value may be mounted at the throttle during the operation and such device shall be supplied by the manufacturer/applicant. 2.3.5 For puddling opetation, the field should have an average initial water depth of at least 100 mm. Operational speed should be so selected as to obtain proper tilth taking into account the manufacturer's/applicant's recommendations. 2.3.6 During and after the operation, the data/observations shall be recorded in accordance with Appendix A. In case of puddling test, the ingress of water and mud in critical components Lubricating oil and coolant ( water ) and assemblies of the power tiller shall be reported. consumption shall be measured after the completion of all operations. 23.7 Stationary operation - If recommended by the applicant, the power tillers shall be The test with other machines may be operated for running a centrifugal pump and sprayer. conducted by the testing station on the request of the applicant. The data shall be recorded in Appendix B. 3 Haulage Test be tested for haulage with a trailer of the capacity on a level road/track. The short recommended by

3.1 The power tiller shall the manufacturer/applicant.

3.2 The haulage test shall be conducted have gradient not exceeding 10 percent.

distance

of track. may

3.3 The power tiller shall be ballasted in accordance with the recommendation of the manufacturer/applicant. In case of pneumatic tyres, the inflation pressure shall be maintained as recommended by the manufacturer for road work. 3.4 The test consisting of equal test run in both the directions shall be conducted under identical conditions, and range and average of test observations shall be reported. The total distance covered in both the directions of one test run shall be up to 50 km. During the initial commercial testing, 3 test runs and during batch testing, only one test run would be covered. 3.5 The gears selected be appropriate to the satisfactory and safe operation. reduced by reducing the engine speed as and when necessary while conducting 3.6 The observations/data shall be recorded according to Appendix C. The speed can be the test.

2

APPENDIX A ( Clauses 2.2.1 and 2.3.6 )
DATA 1. Site of Test Plot 2. Size of Plot a) Length. m b) Width, m 3. Field Conditions: a) Type of soil ( see IS : 7926-l c) Last crop grown; d) Details of tillage f) Soil moisture, 975 `Classification of soil for testing of agricultural machinery'; SHEET FOR RECORDING FIELD OPERATION TEST DATA

b) Levelness of field and slope, percent; operations, if any, after the harvest of last crop; test ( depth of water ); mm

e) Types of weeds and intensity; percent, in case of pudding g) Bulk density of soil; h) Shear strength of soil ( by using a 75 mm vane shear meter ) and cone index; j) Any other field conditions influencing power tiller performance. 4. Field Operation a) Ge.ar selected 1) Power tiller 2) Rotavator b) Engine speed, rev/min 1) At no load 2) On load c) Type of operation ( data for different operations to be recorded separately ) Data: for

1) Dry land operation 2) Wet land operation d) Width e) Average of head land and method of ploughing/tillirtg operating speed, km/h

f) Average width 1) Width 2) Depth

and depth, m

g) Average draft of implement, h) Average wheel slip, percent j) Average wheel sinkage during k) Total duration m) Stoppages of test, h

kN

pudoling

operation,

mm

and reasons for stoppage h

n) Total time for stoppage, p) Net duration of work, h ha

q) Total area covered, r) Time required, s) Area covered, h/ha ha/h

IS : 9980

- 1988 l/h and 1 /ha ml/h ml/h

t) Fuel consumed, u) Lubricating w) Coolant x) Ambient

oil consumption,

(water

) consumption, "C

temperature,

y) Observations, after puddling nents/assemblies: 1) Lubricating

test, for entry of water and dust/mud

in the following

compo-

oil in engine sump and transmission

2) Brake assembly 3) Clutch assembly 4) Axle assembly 5) Electrical components

z) General observations: 1) Type and size of implements 2) Point of hitch and its height 3) Ease of steering 4) Unusual noise and vibration, used ( in case of trailed implement )

if any, observed during operation

APPENDIX B ( Clause 2.3.7 )
PROFORMA 1. Equipment a) Sprayer b) Pump c) Any other 2. Sizes of Equipment 3. Mounting 4. Discharge Details with Power Tiller Rate of Pump/Sprayer at Pressure........., I/min Used: FOR RECORDING STATIONARY OPERATION DATA

5. Ease of Handling 6. Suitability of Power Tiller ( Adequacy of Power, Fitment and Safety of Use )

7. Any Other Observation

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.6 )
DATA 1. Trailer Details: a) Brief specification b) Make and model of trailer used SHEET

C
TEST

FOR HAULAGE

c) Type d) Size of platform e) Unladen mass of the trailer, f) Gross mass of the trailer, t

t

4

1s: 9980
g) Distance between the centre of power tiller wheel and the centre of the trailer wheel, h) Tyre size and inflation pressure j) Height of hitch above ground level, mm 2. Power Tiller Details: a) Type, size and inflation b) Ballasting c) Wheel track, mm d) Height of hitch above ground e) Mass of power tiller, 3. Test Results: a) Date of test b) Total distance c) Total duration kg level, mm pressure ( in case of pneumatic tyre ) of power tiller wheel of the power tiller

- 1988
mm

travelled, of test, h

km

d) Stoppage and reason for stoppage e) Total stoppage time, h f) Net duration of run, h g) Average speed of travel, km/h h) Fuel consumption 1) Total, I 2) Hourly, 3) Specific, I/h l/km/t

j) Distance travelled per litre, km k) General observations 1) Effectiveness of brakes 2) Manoeuverability of power tiller-trailer combination

EXPLANATORY

NOTE
gained in the use of Budni, a need was

This standard was first published in 1981. Based on the experience this standard by the Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute, felt to revise it.

This standard is based on the procedure being followed at the Central Farm Machinery Training and Testing Institute ( Ministry of Agriculture ), Budni. It is, however, recommended that the test results obtained under different field conditions shall not be compared for evaluating the field performance of power tillers. In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2`1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. 6 Printed at printograph, New Delhi, India

