IS 5182 (Part 1) : 2006 
(Reaffirmed - 2012) 


IRAT HITA (Reaffirmed 2018) 
MA VET cb A Ht T&lq 
AT 1 Ja AT 


(qer gader ) 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF AIR POLLUTION 
PART 1 DUST FALL 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.040.30 


© BIS 2006 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


May 2006 Price Group 3 


Environment Protection.and Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Environment Protection and Waste Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


The precise measurement of solid material deposited at any particular site is difficult and it should be noted that the 
amount collected and retained in a collector is influenced by factors, such as the height of the collector above ground, 
the nature of the site and the meteorological conditions, for example wind force and rain fall. These factors have to be 
kept in mind when any comparison is made of the quantity of deposit measured at different sites, or even at the same 
site under varying weather conditions but such comparisons may be valid in relation to known circumstances, specially 
when results are averaged over several months. 


When a collector is suitably sited, the observed-amount of deposition can reasonably be regarded as being representative 
of a larger area than that actually covered by the collector. The period of exposure is commonly called a calendar 
month, but this is a varíable number of days and, for purposes of comparison, the results may be suitably expressed in 
terms of the average daily rate of deposition. 


The standard was first published in 1969 under a series of standard methods of measurement of air pollution taking 
considerable assistance from BS 1747 : Part | : 1961 ‘Methods for the measurement of air pollution — Part | Specification 
for deposit.gauges'. Based on the last three decades experience and technologica! development on the analytical 
procedures the concerned Committee decided to revise the standard. 


There is no ISO Standard on the subject. This standard is prepared based on the measuring techniques available.and use 
in India. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 
In reporting the result of a test or-analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 


calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values 
(revised). 


IS 5182 (Part 1) : 2006 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF AIR POLLUTION 
PART 1 DUST FALL 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) prescribes a method for the 
collection and measurement of dust fall rates. 


1.2 Other Analysis 


Soluble and insoluble deposits are subjected to analysis 
for ions, elements, inorganic and organic compounds. 
These additional analysis have been used in source 
apportionment studies. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of this 
standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties 
to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water (third revision) 
4167 : 1980 Glossary of terms relating to air 
pollution (first revision) 
3TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definition given in 
IS 4167 shall apply. 


4 FIELD OF APPLICATION 


This method is applicable to area surveys for determining 
particle fallout nuisances and has been adapted to the 
measurement of wet and dry deposition. 


For a month-long sample duration, the lower quantifiable 
limit is determined by the reproducibility of the filter 
and drying crucible weight differences. These exhibit 
standard deviations (sigma) of approximately + 2 mg. The 


three-sigma lower quantifiable limit for a container with a ` 


125 cm? collection area is then approximately 0.35 g/m? 
mo. Fora month-long sample duration there is practically 
no upper quantifiable limit unless the capacity of the 
particle fallout container is exceeded. 


5 INTERFERENCES 


5.1 Bird droppings, insects, algae, fungi and large plant 
material are not considered to be a portion of particle 
fallout. Bird droppings are minimized by a bird ring. 
Fungicides and algaecides can be added to the container 
collection solution. Particles larger than | mm diameter 
are removed by sieving. 


5.2 Soluble Gases 


Gases can be dissolved by the container solution and may 
manifest themselves as soluble particulate matter. This 
interference will be negligible for mass concentrations but 
may bias measurements of particulate chemical species. 


5.3 Wind Speed 


The sampling efficiency of cylindrical containers has been 
shown to be nearly zero for wind speeds of greater than 
7 m/s for particles of the order of 100 uum diameter. The 
efficiency is approximately 60 percent for 100 um particles 
in | m/s winds. Alternative container designs have been 
proposed to minimize this interference. 


5.4 Particle Blowout 


Dry particles collected in a container can be re-suspended 
by wind with subsequent removal. A quantity of water in 
the container minimizes these intereferences. 


5.5 Leacher to Container Surfaces 


Certain metal ions have been found to leach into various 
materials when in solution. This interference is negligible 
for soluble mass measurements, but it may affect the 
concentrations of various chemical species. 


5.6 Leaching from Container Surfaces 


Contaminants on the surface of the collection container 
will be measured as particle fallout. Rinsing of containers 
prior to use will minimize this interference. 


6 APPARATUS 
6.1 Particle Fallout Collector — A cylindrical container . 


is located on a stand at least 1.2 m from the support surface. 
A bird ring extends above the rim of the container to 


IS 5182 (Part 1) : 2006 


prevent birds from perching on the container. Container 
can be made of glass, plastic, or stainless steel, should 
have a circular opening of greater than 15 cm diameter, 
and-should have a length of two to three times this diameter. 
Figure ] shows the collector configuration. 


6.2 Sieve — Stainless steel sieve No. 18 (1 mm mesh) to 
be used to remove large particles from the sample: 


6.3 Crucibles — Non-porous ceramic or glass crucibles, 
50 to 100 ml to be used for evaporation of soluble species 
in determining soluble particle fallout. 


6.4 Filter Unit or Filter Funnel — A 200 ml or larger 
filter funnel capable of accepting a 47 mm or larger filter 
to be used for separating soluble from insoluble particles. 
Either gravity or a vacuum assist can be used to draw the 
solute through the filter. 


6.5 Angle-Edged Rubber Spatula — The spatula 
(sometimes called a policeman) to be used to remove 
deposits that adhere to the sides and bottoms of the 
container. 


6.6 Analytical Balance — A balance with the sensitivity 
of 0.1 mg and a range adequate for weighing of both 
crucibles and filters. Class S weights shall be used for 
calibration. 


6.7 Laboratory Oven — An oven suitable to evaporate 
water from a portion of the filtered liquid placed in a 
crucible, by maintaining the temperature at 105 + 1°C. 


6.8 Graduated Cylinder — The graduated cylinder, 
| litre capacity is used to determine the volume of liquid 
in the container. 


NOTE — An alternative to this method involves weighing the 
container before and after sampling and equating the change in 
mass to the liquid volume. 


6.9 Filter — A quartz or glass fiber filter is most 
appropriate for the removal of solid particulate matter. 
Chemical analysis of particles deposited on the filter may 
require other types or media. 


7 REAGENTS AND SUPPLIES 


7.1 Water — Reagent grade water conforming to IS 1070 
shall be used. 


7.2 Algicide and Fungicide — Copper sulfate will inhibit 
the growth of algae. Mercuric chloride will inhibit the 
growth of both algae and fungi, but it is toxic. One-tenth 
of a gram (sufficient to provide a concentration of 


15 mg/l when the container is full) of these reagents should 


be sufficient. These reagents should be fully dissolved in 
the collection fluid and should never attain concentration 
levels, which would cause them to precipitate and be 
mistaken for insoluble particles. 


NOTE — These reagents should only be added if algae and fungi 
growth have been observed when no chemicals are added... 


7.3 Anti-freeze (Isopropy! Alcohol) — Anti-freeze may 
be added to reduce the freezing temperature of the water. 


BIRD RING 


PARTICLE 
FALLOUT 


Fic. 1 PARTICLE FALLOUT MEASUREMENT APPARATUS 


2 


n 


This is necessary only when temperature is expected to 
fall below 0°C. A 20 percent solution is usually adequate, 
though higher proportions of anti-freeze may be necessary 
in colder climates or ones with higher precipitation levels. 


8 PROCEDURE 


8.1 Figure 2 presents a flow diagram of the routine 
Operating procedures described in the following 
sub-section. 

Wash dust fall storage container with distilled water 
and send to field for sample collection. 


Install dust fall container in sampling stand. Add water, 
algaecide, and fungicide, if required. Record sample 
ID, sampling time, and volume of added liquid and 
forward these information’s to laboratory on data sheet. 
Leave container for ] month and bring it back to lab 
after noting removal time to laboratory on completion 
of sample collection. Record removal date and time on 
data sheet. 


Dry and weigh fiber filter. Pour container contents 
through sieve and filter. Dry and weigh filter. Quality 
contro! includes zero/span verification every ten 
samples and re-weights | out of 10 samples. Record 
filter weight gain and volume of filtered liquid. 


Dry and weigh crucible. Transfer 100 ml of filtered 
liquid to the crucible and evaporate in a drying oven. 
Weigh the dried crucible. Quality control includes zero/ 
span verification every ten weights and re-weights of } 
out of 10 samples. Record crucible weight gain and 
volume of evaporated liquid. 


Calculate insoluble, soluble and total dust fall rates as 
shown in calculations. 


Fic. 2 FLow DIAGRAM FOR THE Routine Dust FALL OUT 
MEASUREMENT 


8.2 Sampler Sitting 


A sufficient number of sampling sites shall be chosen to 
obtain representative samples of an area under study. 
An initial survey with many sampling sites may be 
conducted to determine whether or not a smaller number 
of sites is adequate. A minimum of four stations is 
considered necessary to be representative. Each sampling 
site needs to be located at least 100.m away from fugitive 
dust area sources and major point sources. The rim ofthe 
container shall be between 2.4 m and 15 m above ground 
level and at least 1.3 m above the supporting surface. The 
top of any nearby obstruction shall not exceed.a line which 
is 30° from horizontal at the height of the container 
opening. : 


IS 5182 (Part 1) : 2006 


8.3 Container Preparation 


Thoroughly wash the container with soap and water with 
final rinse with reagent grade water prior to sample 
collection. Cover the container before transporting it to 
the field to protect it from contamination. 


8.4 Field Sampling 


Place the container on the stand and remove the cover. 
Place the cover in a protective bag and store it until the 
container is retrieved from the field. Pour 0.2 to 1.0 litre 
of water (which may contain algicide or anti-freeze as 
specified in 7.2 and 7.3) into the container. The amount 
of this liquid should be sufficient to prevent evaporation 
through out the sampling period, but not so much that the 
container will overflow after receiving a normal amount 
of precipitation. Measure this volume of liquid with a 
graduated cylinder and record it on the identification label. 
It is often convenient to pre-measure this liquid in the 
laboratory and to transport it to the field in a reagent bottle. 
Put identification label.on the side of the container and 
assign an identification number to the sample. Note the 
sampling site, date, and start time of dust fall sampling on 
the label. The standard sampling duration is 30 + 2 days. 
After completion ofthe sampling period, note the removal 
date and time on the identification label. Record any 
observations, such as nearby emissions activities, the 
presence of insects, bird droppings, or other unusual 
material in the container, algae formation, and freezing, 
on the label. Securely place the lid on the container and 
return it to the laboratory. UT 


8.5 Laboratory Analysis 


8.5.1 Filtration and Volumetric Measurement 


Dry a quartz or glass fiber filter in the oven at 
approximately 105 + 2?C overnight and weigh it on the 
analytical balance. Place it in the filtration funnel or filter 
unit. Channel the liquid exiting the filtration unit into a 
graduated cylinder. Carefully pour the liquid in the 
container through the No.18 sieve and into the filtration 
unit. Ifthe container contains less than 0.2 litre of liquid, 
add some amount of deionized distilled water and.mix it 
thoroughly with the contents of the container. When the 
container has been emptied of all liquid, record the volume 
collected in the graduated cylinder on the data label. 
Scrape the wall ofthe container with a clean rubber spatula 
while rinsing them with water. Filter this liquid until no 
visible signs of dust remain the container. If the volume 
of liquid collected is to be determined gravimetrically, 
weigh the full container with its lid removed both before 
and after the filtration process. 


8.5.2 Insoluble Dust Fall Measurement f 

Dry the filter in the over for at least 2 h at 105 + 2°C. 
Re-weigh the filter on the analytical balance and calculate 
the increase in mass resulting from the filtration process. 


IS 5182 (Part 1) : 2006 


8.5.3 Soluble Dust Fall Measurement 

Weigh a clean crucible on the analytical balance. Transfer 
25 to 100 ml of the filtered liquid from the graduated 
cylinder to the crucible. Heat this liquid in the over at 
105 + 2°C for a sufficient period of time to evaporate all 
of the liquid. Re-weigh the crucible up to constant weigh 
and calculate the increase in mass attributable to soluble 
species. Record the volume of liquid evaporated on the 
identification label. 


8.6 Maintenance 


No additional maintenance is required other than that 
already specified in the procedures. 


8.7 Replicates 


Re-weigh one out of ten filters or crucibles. These replicate 
analysis are used to calculate propagated precisions of the 
measurements. 


8.8 Calibration 


8.8.1 Gravimetric Analysis 


Place a 3 g weight on the analytical balance prior to and 
after each weighing session and verify the balance 
calibration to within +0.1 mg. The balance shall be 
serviced and recalibrated if this tolerance is not met. 


8.8.2 Volumetric Measurements 


Scales on graduated cylinders shall be verified upon receipt 
by weighing them before and after filling to a desired level 
with deionized distilled water. The increase in weight in 
grams shall equal to the number of millilitres to within 
+ 2 percent. 


9 CALCULATIONS 


9.1 Calculation of Insoluble Particle Fallout Rate 
Insoluble particle fallout rate, g/m? mo; 


c, = Oc MO 
AT 
where 
A = areaof particle fallout container opening, in m°; 
T = sampling duration, 30-dmo; 


= weight of blank filter; in g; and 
M. = weight of loaded filter; in g. 


9.2 Calculation of Soluble Particle Fallout Rate 
Soluble particle fallout rate, g/m? mo, 


(M,-M) V. 


C = 
AT V, 


M. = weight of blank crucible, in g; 

M, = weight of loaded crucible, in g; 

A = area of particle fallout container opening, in m’, 
T = sampling duration, 30-dmo; 

V, = volume of all liquid collected, in litre; and 


V, = volume of liquid removed for evaporation, in 
Titre. 


9.3 Calculation of Total Particle Fallout Rate ` 


C, 7 total particle fallout rate, g/m? mo, 
C=C +C, 
where 
C, = insoluble particle fallout rate, g/m°mo; and 
C, = soluble particle fallout rate; g/m^mo. 


9.4 Sample Validation 


Samples are invalidated when large quantities of 
wind-blown garbage, insects, and bird droppings are 
observed in the container liquid. 


10 PRECISION AND ACCURACY 


10.1 Precision 


Inter-comparison studies in different urban areas have 
found average collocated precisions (one sigma) of 
1.46 ug/m? mo among different laboratories and average 
collocated precisions of 1.03 g/m? mo within the same 
laboratory for total dust fall. This precisions appears to 
be independent of the range of dust fall rates measured 
between 3 and 11 g/m? mo. For the water-insoluble 
fraction, the inter laboratory average standard deviation 
was L8 g/m? mo and the within laboratory average standard 
deviation was 0.78 g/m^ mo. For the water-soluble fraction, 
the between-laboratory average standard deviation was 
1.64-g/m? mo and the within laboratory average standard 
deviation was 0.59 g/m? mo. 


10.2 Accuracy 


Inter laboratory analyses of samples spiked with known 
quantities of salt, sand, and granular polystyrene yielded 
average recoveries of 96 + 16 percent for total dust fall 
and 91 + 18 percent for insoluble dust fall. 


11 EFFECTS OF SAMPLE STORAGE 


Algae and other biological material may grow in containers 
which are stored for long periods oftime. Soluble species 
may leach from or adhere to the container surface. Samples 
should be analyzed as soon as possible following 
collection. 


IS 5182 (Part 1) : 2006 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Environment Protection and Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 32 


Organization 
In personal capacity (40/14, C.R. Park, New Delhi-110019) 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Hardwar 

Cement Manufacturers’ Association, New Delhi 

Central Fuel Research Institute, Dhanbad 

Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 

Central Mining Research Institute, Dhanbad 

Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 

Confederation of Indian Industries, New Delhi 

Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, Department of Civil Engineering, New Delhi 


Department of Science & Technology (TIFAC), New Delhi 


Delhi College of Engineering, Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour Institute, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Envirotech Instruments Private Limited, New Delhi 


Food Research & Analysis Centre, New Delhi 


Gujarat Pollution Control Board, Ahmedabad 


Hindustan Lever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Manufacturers’ Association, Mumbai 


Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Pror Du Biswas (Chairman) 


DR (SHRIMATI) G. G. PANDIT 
Da I. V. SARADHI (Alternate) 


DR N. G. SHRIVASTAVA 
Da K. C, NARANG 
Dg L. C. RAM 
Dr S. RAJAMANI 
Dr B. K. TEWARY 
Dr S. D. MAKHUANI 
Dr C. S. SHARMA (Alternate D 


Dn S. K. Tvaa (Alternate ID 


Suri A. K. GHosE 
Suni R. P. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri P. N. PARMESHWARAN 
DR MUKESH KHARE 
DR Atut Mitta (Alternate D 


DR ARVIND Nema (Alternate Il) 


Dr P, SANJEEVA Rao 
Dn G. Srinivasan (Alternate) 


Dr RAKESH MEHROTRA 
Suni V. K. MiNocHA (Alternate 1) 
Dr (SHRIMATI) A. MANDAL (Alternate M) 


Suri S. S. GAUTAM 
Suri M. R. RAJPUT (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) MADHURI SHARMA 


Suri B. B. LAL 
SHRI SUSHEEL SADH (Alternate) 


Surt RAKESH AGARWAL 
Dr RAJENDRA PRASAD (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. SAXENA 
Dr R. PRABHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Kumar P. S. SHAH 


Suri B. B. Dave 
Suri Apitya Jnavar (Alternate) 


Suri V. N. Das 
Sunt A. A. PANJWANI (Alternate) 


Dr R. C. MAHESHWARI 


IS 5182 (Part D : 2006 


Organization 
Indian Council of Medical Research, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Packaging, Mumbai 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Faridabad 


IPCL, Vadodara 


Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow 

Ministry of Defencce (R&D), DRDO, New Delhi 

Ministry of Environment & Forests, New Delhi 

Ministry of Non Conventional Energy Sources, New Delhi 


Town & Country Planning Organization, Ministry of Urban Development, 
New Delhi 

Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Mumbai 

National Institute of Occupational Health (CMR), Ahmedabad 

National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur 


National-Productivity Council, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


NCCBM, New Delhi 
Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 
Shriram Institute of-Industrial Research, New Delhi 


SGS India Limited, Chennai 


Steel Authority of India Limited, New Delhi 
Thapar Centre for Industrial Research & Development, Patiala 
The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri H. N. SAIYAD 
Suri S. C, ADAK 
Dr M. P. SiNGu 


Suri ANUPAM Desat 
Suri Map BANERJI (Alternate) 


Dr S. K. BHARGAVA 
Suri J. C. Kapoor 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI Vinon Kumar JAIN 


Sun K. K. JOADDER 
Dr Santosh VIDHYA DHARAN (Alternate) 


Deputy City ENGINEER CIVIL 
Deputy Executive ENGINEER (Alternate) 


-Dr V. Krishna MugTHY 


Dn A. K. MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


DR V. l. PANDIT 
Dr Taran Nanpy (Alternate) 


Suri R. C. Monca 
Dr A. K. Saxena (Alternate) 


Sunt R. GorAL 


Suri M. S. BHAGWAT 
Dr S. N. Pan (Alternate) 


Dr E. SUNDERASAN 
Dr-U. K. SanooP (Alternate) 


Suri V. G. K. Nair 
Dr JAGDISH Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri S. RAVI 


Suri J. KUMAR 
Dr MEENAKSHI KAKKAR (Alternate) 


Dr MaAHESHWAR Roy 
Dr S. K. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) B. SWAMINATHAN 
Dr S. Nann (Alternate) 


Dr U. C. Srivastava, Director & Head (CHD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri N. K. PAL 
Director (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. CHD 32 (1357). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue . Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters : 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
Telephones : 2323 01 31, 2323 33 75, 2323 94 02 (Common to all offices) 
Regional Offices : Telephone 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 76 17 
NEW DELHI 110 002 L 2323 38 41 
Eastern : 1/14 C.L T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 84 99, 2337 85 61 
KOLKATA 700 054 2337 86 26, 2337 91 20 
Northern ` SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 260 38 43 
260 92 85 
Southern  : C.IL. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 J 2254 12 16, 2254 14 42 
2254 25 19, 2254 23 15 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 92 95, 2832 78 58 
MUMBAI 400 093 2832 78 91, 2832 78 92 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Printed at Prabhat-Oftset Press, New Delhi-2 


