ат ет ATH IS 16299 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


watt ആറി, те യീ тя യി 
fatsra faei аят at ous wi 
+ wóns fufersd dq sat wh 
wu d «Еа пече За dn 
зпя-ете эїзтїт ва Bor ണ്ണ 
вала faferex — tifa afear 


Periodic Inspection and 
Requalification — High Pressure 
Steel Cylinders for the On-Board 
Storage of Compressed Natural 

Gas as a Fuel for Automotive 
Vehicles, Cylinders for HCNG 
Blends and CNG Cascade 
Cylinders — Code of Practice 


ICS 23.020.30; 43.060.40; 75.060 


© BIS 2014 


яка res = 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Wh чая, 9 етте WAL Art, ൯ І5ееПй-110002 
Ша” МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2014 Price Group 9 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Gas Cylinders 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard provides information and procedure for the periodic inspection of compressed natural gas cylinders. 
These cylinders, installed in vehicles or cascade are certified by the manufacturer to meet the requirements of 
relevant standard and are designed to store compressed natural gas. 


Cylinders undergo cyclic loading and it is imperative that due importance and care should be taken during its life 
cycle. Cylinder contains high energy contents due to gas at high pressure in it which makes it a safety concern 
and therefore, compliance with the requirements and following the detailed procedures listed in the standard are 
of upmost importance. 


These cylinders are certified by the manufacturer for the storage of natural gas/HCNG blend. Cylinders for 
storage of compressed natural gas/HCNG blend are required to maintain or improve the level of safety currently 
existing in practice. 


Any testing station desiring to obtain recognition for periodic testing and examination of cylinders shall provide 
the facilities listed in Annex A. 
While implementing this standard compliance with statutory regulations shall be ensured. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16299: 2014 


Indian Standard 


PERIODIC INSPECTION AND REQUALIFICATION — 
HIGH PRESSURE STEEL CYLINDERS FOR THE 
ON-BOARD STORAGE OF COMPRESSED NATURAL 
GAS AS A FUEL FOR AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES, 
CYLINDERS FOR HCNG BLENDS AND CNG CASCADE 
CYLINDERS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard deals with seamless steel cylinders 
intended for on-board storage of compressed natural 
gas (CNG) as a fuel, intended to be permanently fixed 
to the automotive vehicle, cylinders for HCNG blends 
and CNG cascade cylinders. 


This standard specifies the requirements for periodic 
inspection and testing to verify the integrity of such 
gas cylinders to be re-introduced into service for further 
period of time. 


This standard does not apply for periodic inspection 
and testing of composite cylinders. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
3224 : 2002 Valve fittings for compressed gas 
cylinders excluding liquefied 
petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders — 
Specification (third revision) 


4379 : 1981 Identification of the contents of 
industrial gas cylinders (first revision) 

5844 : 1970 Recommendations for hydrostatic 
stretch testing of compressed gas 
cylinders 

7285 Refillable seamless steel gas 


cylinders — Specification: 
Normalized steel cylinder (third 
revision) 

Quenched and tempered steel cylinder 
with tensile strength less than 1 100 MPa 
(112 kgf/mm?) (third revision) 


(Part 1) : 2004 


(Part 2) : 2004 


IS No. Title 


8868 : 1988 Periodical inspection interval for gas 
cylinders in use 

General standard for qualification 
and certification of non-destructive 
testing personnel — Specification 
Cylinder for on-board storage of 
CNG as a fuel for automotive 


vehicles — Specification 


13805 : 2004 


15490 : 2004 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to those given in IS 7241 shall 
also apply. 


3.1 Abrasion — Damage to cylinder or equipment 
caused by wearing, grinding or rubbing away of 
material by friction. 


NOTE — Abrasion can be the result of many cycles of 
something rubbing lightly on the surface of the cylinder or 
equipment, or due to a few cycles, perhaps only one, of heavy 
rubbing. 
3.2 Impact — Forceful blow to the surface of the cylinder 
that can cut, gouge or significantly indent the surface. 


NOTE — Impact can also induce such damage as de- 
laminations, which are not readily apparent through visual 
examination. 


3.3 Competent Authority — Any national body or 
authority designated or otherwise recognized as such 
for any purpose in connection with this standard. 


3.4 Competent Person — Person who by a 
combination of training, experience and supervision 
is able to make objective judgments on a subject, 
authorized by the competent authority. 


3.5 Condemn — Cylinder or piece of equipment in a 
state no longer fit for service and for which repair is not 
allowed. 


3.6 Cut — Damage caused by a sharp object coming 
into contact with the cylinder's surface. 


IS 16299: 2014 


3.7 Inspection Mark — Mark, label or tag placed by 
an inspector on the cylinder indicating acceptance of 
the cylinder. 


3.8 Pressure Relief Device (PRD) — A device 
designed to reduce the possibility of failure of a charged 
cylinder for excessive pressure particularly when the 
cylinder is exposed to heat. 


NOTE — Pressure relief device can be activated either by 
excessive temperature or excessive internal pressure or both. 


3.9 Rejected Cylinder — Cylinder that needs to be 
removed from the service. 


3.10 Working Pressure (P,,) / Service Pressure — 
Working pressure means the internal pressure of the 
gas in the cylinder at a temperature of 15°C. 


NOTE —АП the pressures referred in this standard are gauge 
pressures. 


3.11 Test Pressure (P,) — Test pressure means the 
internal pressure required for the hydrostatic test or 
the hydrostatic stretch test of the cylinder. 


3.12 Valve — Device installed in threaded openings 
of the cylinder that is used to regulate gas flow into or 
from the cylinder. 
NOTE — A manual valve is turned on or off with a handle. A 
solenoid valve is turned on or off electrically. Some solenoid 


valves may have manual override and can be operated manually 
with special tools. 


4 APPROVED TESTING STATION AND 
PERIODIC INSPECTION INTERVAL 


4.1 АП inspection and tests shall be carried out at 
authorised station complying with the requirements of 
this standard and approved by the competent authority. 
The inspection tests shall be carried out only by 
competent and authorized persons. 


4.2 Intervals Between Periodic Inspection and Test 


АП cylinders are required to be inspected and tested at 
interval of 3 years or the interval in accordance with 
the requirements given in IS 8868 or as approved by 
the statutory authority throughout their life. The 
shortest of the specified interval shall be applicable. 
The service life of CNG on board cylinder is fixed as 
20 years under the Gas Cylinders Rules, 2004. 


Copies of the original inspection and tests shall be 
checked to ensure that the cylinder complies with the 
approved design and that the retest results are in line 
with those obtained at the time of manufacture and 
that there is no departures except than what is laid down 
in this standard. 


Subsequent periodic inspections and tests shall be 
carried out to ensure that the cylinder is fit for further 
service. 


4.3 Date of First Retest 


A cylinder shall be due for a periodic inspection and 
test before the first retest starts from the date of 
manufacture. Any practice of re-stamping the unused 
cylinders with a new date at the time of their sale is not 
permitted. 


5 LIST OF PROCEDURES FOR PERIODIC 
INSPECTION AND TEST 


Each cylinder shall be submitted to periodic inspection 
and test. The following procedures form the 
requirements for such inspection and test: 


a) Identification of cylinder and preparation for 
inspection and test (6); 

b) Depressurization and de-valving (7); 

c) External visual inspection (8); 

d) Internal visual inspection (9); 

e) Tare weight and water capacity verification 
(10); 

f) Inspection of cylinder neck (11); 

g) Pressure test and ultrasonic examination 
(42); 

h) Inspection of valves and pressure relief device 
(43); 

j Cylinder repairs (14); 

k) Final operations (15); 

m) Rejection and rendering 
unserviceable (16); and 


cylinder 


n) Re-testing of rejected cylinder (17). 


It is recommended that the above listed procedures be 
performed in the sequence. In particular, the check of 
internal condition (9) shall be carried out before the 
pressure test or ultrasonic examination (12). 


Cylinders that fail during inspection or tests shall be 
rejected (16). Where a cylinder passes the previously 
listed procedure, but when the condition of the cylinder 
remains in doubt, additional tests shall be performed 
to confirm its suitability for continued service (10) or 
the cylinder shall be rendered unserviceable. 


Depending on the reason for the rejection, some 
cylinders may be recovered (see Annex C). 


The inspections and tests shall be carried out only by 
competent persons. 


Cylinders showing evidence of fire or excessive heat 
exposure shall be declared unserviceable and shall be 
destroyed as per the procedure. Fire damage may be 
evident by discoloration, darkening, charring or sooting 
of the surface in the area of exposure of cylinder 
surfaces. 


6 IDENTIFI CATION OF CYLINDER AND 
PREPARATION FOR INSPECTIONS AND TESTS 


6.1 Cylinder Removal 


The cylinder shall be removed from the vehicle prior 
to any inspection and testing. Removal and 
reinstallation of the cylinder shall be carried out in 
accordance with the technical requirements of 
automotive industry standard and/or the requirements 
of the relevant agencies. 


The removal and re-installation shall be carried out 
only by competent person. 


6.2 Before any work is carried out, relevant cylinder 
data and its ownership shall be identified and recorded. 


7 DE-PRESSURIZATION AND DE-VALVING 
PROCEDURES 


7.1 All cylinders shall be presumed to contain gas 
under pressure and following precautions shall be 
observed: 


a) The gas from the cylinder shall be released in 
a safe manner keeping in mind dangers 
associated with the natural gas. Cylinders shall 
be emptied at stations at the designated area 
approved by the competent authority only; and 

b) Fencing shall be provided to prevent access 
of unauthorised person in the CNG, HCNG 
unloading area. The minimum distance 
between the fence and the chimney shall be 
15 m or as per the layout approved by the 
competent authority. 


7.1.1 Gas shall be emptied in a vent stack. The position 
of the vent stack shall be taken into account in the 
sitting—location of the installation. While emptying the 
cylinder, gas level in the stack shall be monitored by 
gas detector. 


7.2 The valve shall be opened and if no gas escapes 
and the port is not visibly blocked, a charge of low 
pressure nitrogen or other inert gas shall be blown into 
the valve outlet. When no gas discharges the valve shall 
be treated as ‘obstructed’. Then the nitrogen supply is 
removed. Any discharge of gas from the cylinder 
indicates the cylinder mouth is not obstructed. At the 
end of completion of such discharge, the cylinder shall 
be considered as completely empty. 


7.3 Should the valve be suspected of being obstructed, 
the contents of the cylinder shall be released in safe 
manner as mentioned in Annex D. Work on cylinders 
shall be carried out in the open air. 


7.4 All valve fittings shall be duly identified with 
respect to identity of corresponding cylinders and 
records for the same shall be maintained. 


IS 16299 : 2014 


8 EXTERNAL VISUAL INSPECTION 


8.1 Preparation for External Visual Inspection 


The cylinder shall be cleaned and have all loose 
coatings, corrosion products, tar, oil or other foreign 
matter removed from its external surface by a suitable 
method, for example, by brushing, shot blasting (under 
closely controlled condition), water jet abrasive 
cleaning, chemical cleaning or other suitable methods. 
Cylinder valve opening shall be suitably plugged to 
prevent entry of water or foreign particle into the 
cylinder. The method used to clean the cylinder shall 
be validated and controlled process. Care shall be taken 
at all times to avoid damaging the cylinder or removing 
excess amounts of material of cylinder wall (see 
Annex С). If there is any plastic or insulation sticking 
to the surface, it shall be removed. 


8.2 Inspection Procedure 


The external surface of each cylinder shall be inspected 
for: 


a) dents, cuts, gouges, bulges, cracks, 
laminations, or excessive base wear; 

b) heat damage, plug or neck inserts or electric 
arc, suspicious marks etc (see Annex C); 

c) corrosion (see Annex C) — special attention 
shall be given to areas where water may be 
trapped; and 

d) other defects such as illegible or incorrect, 
unauthorized stamp marking, or unauthorized 
additions or modifications. 


The rejection criteria shall be as laid down in Annex C. 
Cylinders no longer suitable for future service shall be 
rejected and rendered unserviceable. The inspection 
shall be carried out in a well illuminated area. 
Magnifying glass may be employed to detect cracks. 
Any surface coating that may obstruct optimum visual 
inspection shall be removed. 


9 INTERNAL VISUAL INSPECTION 


After degassing cylinders shall be inspected internally. 
Before starting the internal inspection the cylinders 
shall be cleaned internally under closely controlled 
conditions by one of the following methods: 


a) Shot blasting, 

b) Water jet abrasive cleaning, 
c) Steam jet, 

d) Hot water jet, 

e) Chemical cleaning, and 

f) Other suitable method. 


The method used to clean the cylinder shall be 
validated, controlled process. Care shall be taken all 


IS 16299: 2014 


times to avoid damaging the cylinder or removing 
excess amounts of cylinder wall (see Annex C). 


Each cylinder shall be inspected internally using 
adequate illumination to identify any defects similar 
to those listed in 8.2 (a) and 8.2 (c). Precaution shall 
be taken to ensure that the method of illumination 
presents no risks to the tester while performing the 
operation. Any internal liner or coating that may 
obstruct optimum visual inspection shall be 
removed. 


10 TARE WEIGHT AND WATER CAPACITY 
VERIFICATION 


Each cylinder shall be checked for tare weight and 
water capacity before proceeding for further tests. Tare 
weight of the cyinder to be conformed with the original 
tare weight punched on the cylinder and that mentioned 
in the certificate. Any cylinder which loses in its tare 
weight by over 5 percent shall be condemned. 


Where there is doubt concerning the type and/or 
severity of a defect found on visual inspection, 
additional tests or methods of examination may be 
applied, for example, ultrasonic techniques or other 
non- destructing tests. Only when all doubts are 
eliminated, the cylinder may be further processed (see 
Annex С). 


If a hardness test is required it shall only be according 
to standard. The result shall meet the minimum required 
design hardness value. 


11 INSPECTION OF CYLINDER NECK 


11.1 Cylinder to Valve Threads 


After removal of valve, the valve threads shall be 
examined to identify the type of thread and to ensure 
that they are: 


a) clean and of full form, 

b) free of damages, 

c) free of burrs, 

d) free of cracks, and 

e) free of other imperfections. 


Cracks manifest themselves as lines that run vertically 
down the thread and across the thread faces. They 
should not be confused with tap marks (thread 
machining stop marks). Special attention should be 
paid to the bottom of the threads. 


11.2 Other Neck Surfaces 


Other surfaces of the neck shall also be examined to 
ensure they are free of cracks or other defects (see 
Annex C). 


11.3 Damaged Internal Thread 


Where necessary and where the manufacturer or the 
competent authority confirms that the design of the 
neck permits, threads may be re-tapped or the thread 
type changed to provide the appropriate number of 
effective threads. After re-tapping or changing thread 
form, the threads shall be checked with the appropriate 
thread gauge (see IS 3224). 


12 PRESSURE TEST AND ULTRASONIC 
EXAMINATION 


12.1 General 


Each cylinder shall be submitted to hydraulic proof 

pressure test and ultrasonic examination. 
NOTE — Take appropriate measures to ensure safe operation 
and to contain any energy that may be released during the 
hydraulic test. It should be noted that pneumatic pressure test 
requires more precautions than water pressure test since, 
regardless of the size of the container; any error in carrying 
out this test is highly likely to lead to a rupture under gas 
pressure. Therefore these tests should only be carried out after 
ensuring that the safety measures satisfy the safety 
requirements. 


Each cylinder subjected to a hydraulic pressure test 
shall use a suitable fluid, normally water, as the test 
medium. The test pressure shall be in accordance with 
the stamp markings on the cylinder. 


Once a cylinder has failed one of the above mentioned 
tests, none of the other test methods shall be applied to 
approve the cylinder. 


12.2 Hydraulic Volumetric Expansion Test 


The test shall be carried out as per IS 5844. For 
determining the volumetric expansion of the cylinder, 
water jacket method is to be used. 


Internal cleaning and visual internal inspection of the 
cylinder shall be carried out before the hydraulic 
volumetric expansion test. After the cylinder has been 
held at test pressure for a minimum period of 30s, the 
permanent volumetric expansion of the cylinder 
expressed as a percentage of the total expansion at test 
pressure shall not exceed the percentage given in the 
design specification. The cylinder shall be rejected, if 
it shows a permanent expansion (that is, volumetric 
expansion after the pressure has been released) in 
excess of 10 percent of total volumetric expansion 
measured at the test pressure P,. 


Cylinder shall be thoroughly dried after hydraulic test. 
12.3 Ultrasonic Examination 
12.3.1 Scope 


This is based on techniques used by cylinder 
manufacturers. Other techniques of ultrasonic 


inspection may be employed, provided these have been 
demonstrated to be suitable for the defect detection 
and has been approved by the statutory authority. 


12.3.2 General Requirements 


The ultrasonic testing equipment shall be capable of 
at least detecting the reference standard notches as 
described in 12.3.3.2. It shall be serviced regularly in 
accordance with the manufacturer's operating 
instructions to ensure that its accuracy is maintained. 
Inspection records and approval certificates for the 
equipment shall be maintained. 


The operation of the test equipment shall be done by 
qualified and experiences personnel certified at least 
to NDT Level 1 and supervised by personnel certified 
at least to NDT Level 2 (see IS 13805). 


The inner and outer surface of any cylinder which is 
to be tested ultrasonically shall be in a condition 
suitable for an accurate and reproducible test. 


For flaw detection the pulse echo system shall be used. 
For thickness measurement either the resonance 
method or the pulse echo system shall be used. Either 
contact or immersion techniques of testing shall be 
used. 


A coupling media which ensures adequate transmission 
of ultrasonic energy between the testing probe and the 
cylinder shall be used. 


12.3.3 Flaw Detection of the Cylindrical Parts 
12.3.3.1 Procedure 


The cylinder to be inspected shall have a rotating 
motion and the search unit shall have a translation 
motion relative to one another such that a helical scan 
of the cylinder will be described. The velocity of 
rotation and translation shall be constant within + 10 
percent. The pitch of the helix shall be less than the 
width covered by the probe (at least 10 percent overlap 
shall be guaranteed) and be related to the effective beam 
width such as to ensure 100 percent coverage at the 
velocity of rotational movement and a translation used 
during the calibration procedure. 


An alternative scanning method may be used for 
transverse defect detection in which the scanning or 
relative movement of the probes and the work piece is 
longitudinal, the sweeping motion being such as to 
ensure 100 percent surface coverage with about 10 
percent overlap of the sweeps. The cylinder wall shall 
be tested for longitudinal defects with the ultrasonic 
energy transmitted in both circumferential directions 
and for transverse defects in both longitudinal 
directions. 


IS 16299 : 2014 


The ultrasonic sensitivity shall be set at +6 dB in order 
to improve the detection of defects equivalent to 5 
percent of the cylindrical wall thickness in the 
thickened portion. 


In this case or when optional testing if carried out on 
the transition area between the wall and neck and / or 
wall and base, this may be conducted manually, if not 
carried out automatically. 


The effectiveness of the equipment shall be periodically 
checked by passing a reference standard through the 
test procedure. This check shall be carried out every 
4 h. If during this check the presence of the appropriate 
reference notch is not detected then all cylinders, tested 
subsequent to the acceptable test check, shall be 
retested after the equipment has been reset. 


12.3.3.2 Reference standard 


A reference standard of convenient length shall be 
prepared from a cylinder of similar diameter and wall 
thickness range and from material with the same 
acoustic characteristics (subjected to the same heat 
treatment) and surface finish as the cylinder to be 
inspected. The reference standard shall be free from 
discontinuities which may interfere with the detection 
of the reference notches. It is preferable that these test 
standards are either prepared by cutting available heat 
treated cylinder or shall be procured from the cylinder 
manufacturer. 


Reference notches, both longitudinal and transverse, 
shall be machined on the outer and inner surface of 
the standard. The notches shall be separated such that 
each notch can be clearly identified. 


Dimensions and shape of notches are of crucial 
importance for the adjustment of the equipment (see 
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2). 


The length of the notches (Е) shall not be greater than 
50 mm. 


The width (W) shall be not greater than twice the 
nominal depth (7). However, where this condition 
cannot be met a maximum width of 1.0 mm is 
acceptable. 


The depth of the notches (Т) shall be 5 + 0.75 percent 
of the nominal wall thickness (5) with a minimum of 
0.2 mm and a maximum of 1.0 mm, over the full length 
of the notch. Run-out at each end is permissible. 


The notch shall be sharp edged at its intersection with 
the surface of the cylinder wall. The cross- section of 
the notch shall be rectangular except where spark erosion 
machining methods are used; then it is acknowledged 
that the bottom of the notch shall be rounded. 


IS 16299: 2014 


Key 
1 — External reference notch 
2 — Internal reference notch 
NOTE 
T « (5 + 0.75) % S but < 1 mm and > 0.2 mm 
W < 2T but if not possible then < 1 mm 
E « 50mm 
Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC REFERENCE NOTCHES FOR LONGITUDINAL DEFECTS 


NOTE 
T< (5 + 0.75) 96 S but 0.2 < T>1mm 
W < 2T, but if not possible then W < 1 mm 
E<50mm 
Fic. 2 SCHEMATIC REFERENCE NOTCHES FOR CIRCUMFERENTIAL DEFECTS 


12.3.3.3 Calibration of equipment 


Using the reference standard described in 12.3.3.2, the 
equipment shall be adjusted to produce clearly 
identifiable indications from inner and outer surface 
notches. The amplitude of the indications shall be as 
near equal as possible. The indication of the smallest 
amplitude shall be used as the rejection level and for 
setting visual, audible, recording or sorting devices. 
The equipment shall be calibrated with the reference 
standard or probe, or both, moving in the same manner, 
in the same direction and at the same speed as will be 
used during the inspection of the cylinder. All visual, 
audible, recording or sorting devices shall operate 
satisfactorily at the test speed. 


12.3.4 Wall Thickness Measurement 


The cylindrical part shall be 100 percent examined to 
ensure that the thickness is not less than the guaranteed 
minimum value. 


12.3.5 Interpretation of Results 


Cylinders with indications which are equal to or greater 
than the lowest of the indications from the reference 
notches shall be withdrawn. Surface defects may be 
removed; after removal of defects, the cylinders shall 
be subjected to ultrasonic flaw detection and thickness 
measurement. 


Any cylinder which continue to show flaw or 15 shown 
to be below the guaranteed minimum wall thickness 
shall be rejected. 


12.3.6 Certification 


Every cylinder, which has passed ultrasonic testing in 
accordance with this specification shall be stamp 
marked with the symbol “ОТ”. Each time the cylinder 
is retested such mark will be punched on the cylinder 
as per 15.4.1. 


13 INSPECTION OF VALVES AND PRESSURE 
RELIEF DEVICE 


If valve or any other accessory is to be reintroduced 
into service, it shall be inspected and maintained to 
ensure that it will perform satisfactorily in service and 
meet the requirements of gas tightness as per valve 
manufacturing standard that is IS 3224 or any standard 
approved by statutory authorities. 


An example of suitable method for valve inspection is 
given in Annex B and that for pressure relief device 
(PRD) inspection is given in Annex E. 


14 CYLINDER REPAIRS 


No person shall repair or cause to repair any leakage 
in the body of a seamless cylinder. Refer Annex C for 
rejection criteria. 


IS 16299 : 2014 


15 FINAL OPERATION 


15.1 Drying, Cleaning and Painting 
15.1.1 Drying and Cleaning 


The interior of each cylinder shall be thoroughly dried 
by a suitable method at a temperature not exceeding 
300 °С immediately after hydraulic pressure testing, 
so there is no trace of free water. The interior of the 
cylinder shall be inspected to ensure that it is dry and 
free from other contaminants. Immediately after this 
operation the interior of the cylinder shall be sprayed 
with an oil based corrosion inhibitor which is 
compatible with natural gas and/or HCNG blend, so 
that harmful combination of the gas does not result. 
Cylinder valve opening shall be suitably plugged to 
prevent entry of water or foreign particle into the 
cylinder. 


15.1.2 Painting and Coating 


Cylinders are sometimes repainted using paints that 
require stoving. Plastic coating may also be re-applied. 
Paint or coating shall be so applied that all markings 
stamped on the cylinder remain legible. 


In no case shall the temperature of the cylinder exceed 
150 °C. For temperature between 100 °C to 150 °C the 
exposure time shall be limited to 30 min. If the stoving 
time exceeds 30 min at a temperature between 100 °C 
to 150 °C or exceeds 150 °C then a hardness test shall 
be conducted (see 10). 


15.2 Re-valving of Cylinder 


Before re-valving the cylinder, the thread type shall 
be identified and conformed for accuracy. The 
appropriate valve accordance with IS 3224 or to any 
other specification approved by the statutory authority 
shall be fitted. Sealing tape or seal ring — as applicable 
for the particular thread design shall be used and torque 
specified by the valve manufacturer or cylinder 
standard shall be applied to ensure leak tight joint. 


15.3 Check on Cylinder Tare Weight 


The tare weight of the cylinders shall be obtained by 
weighing on a scale calibrated with traceability to 
national or international standards. The weigh scale 
shall be checked for accuracy on a daily basis. The 
capacity of weighing scale shall be suitable for the tare 
weight of the appropriate cylinders. 


15.4 Re-test Marking 
15.4.1 Re-test Date and Re-tester Symbol 


The retest date is the date of the present test, which 
shall be indicated by the year and month. The re-tester 
symbol is the symbol of the test station. 


IS 16299: 2014 


15.4.2 General 


After satisfactory completion of the periodic inspection 
and tests, each cylinder shall be permanently marked 
at the cylinder neck below the original stamp marking 
or retest stamp marking, provided space is available 
or fitting a metallic disc in between the valve and 
cylinder. The following shall be marked: 


a) Name/symbol of retesting station; 

b) Mark for ultrasonic testing: UT; 

c) Month and year of retest date: mm/yyyy; and 

d) Month and year next due date for retest: mm/ 
Уууу. 


Other systems сап also be used after getting approval 
from statutory authority. 


15.5 Identification of Contents 


Before the cylinder is reintroduced into service, if 
painting is required, care shall be exercised in 
accordance with 15.1.2 and colour coding shall be 
suitable for CNG/HCNG as per IS 4379. 


15.6 Records and Test Report Format 


A record of cylinder shall be maintained for all tests, 
reconditioning and inspections at the cylinder re- 
tester’s works and copies shall be made available to 
the inspecting authority and owner of the cylinder, if 
desired. A test certificate duly approved and signed by 
the repairer and the inspecting authority shall be 
forwarded to the statutory authority and the owner of 
the cylinder. A sample format is as per Annex F. A 
copy of test certificate shall be retained by the repairers 
for a period not less than six years. 


16 REJECTION AND RENDERING CYLINDER 
UNSERVICEABLE 


Any cylinder which fails to pass periodic examination 


or test or which loses in its tare weight by over 5 percent 
or for any other defect is found to be unsafe for use or 
after expiry of the service life of the cylinder, shall be 
rejected and shall be destroyed by any of the following 
ways under the intimation to the cylinder owner. 


a) Hlattening; and 

b) Cutting into pieces in such a manner that the 
pieces cannot again be joined together by 
welding or otherwise to form a cylinder. 


Records of all rejected and destroyed cylinders shall 
be maintained. 


16.1 Disposal of Rejected Cylinders 
The following guidelines should be adhered to: 


a) Do not render a condemned cylinder 
unserviceable without the owner’s 
permission; 

b) Keep failed cylinders in a secure place, away 
from the testing area for a minimum of four 
weeks, unless the reason for failure is obvious; 
and 

c) Do not return a failed cylinder to the owner 
without rendering it unserviceable (see 16). 


17 RE-TESTING OF REJECTED CYLINDER 


A cylinder that fails the inspection and test shall be 
condemned without re-testing, except as covered 
below. In general the equipment and procedures of the 
testing station should make a re-test unnecessary. 


If the tester believes that a fault in his equipment or 
procedure may have invalidated a test result, then the 
cylinder should be retested once the fault has been 
corrected. Records of retesting of such rejected 
cylinders shall be maintained. 


NOTE — A cylinder should not be subjected to its test pressure 
more than once in any 24 h period. 


IS 16299: 2014 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword and Clause 4.3) 
FACILITIES REQUIRED FOR CYLINDER TESTING STATIONS 


A-1 MANAGEMENT 


A-1.1 General Requirements 


Personnel, organization, equipments, inspection 
procedures, recording of cylinder data and test data 
shall be adequate and satisfactory. The test station will 
be operated with safe operating conditions. The systems 
and procedures shall ensure that cylinders, which fail 
to meet the requirements and intent of these rules are 
duly identified and is ensured that same are not returned 
into normal service. All personnel shall fully recognise 
their individual responsibilities and that the minimum 
inspectional requirement shall not be lowered for any 
reason whatsoever. 


NOTE — The area of responsibility shall be divided into three 
separate functions as indicated below. The numbers of 
personnel employed shall, however, be related to the quantum 
of work. 


A-1.2 Manager 


The manager responsible for the working of the test 
station shall be adequately qualified; his qualifications 
shall include training on the dangers associated with 
gas cylinders, purpose of inspection, test methods, 
equipment, test requirements, and recording of test 
results, and safety hazards associated with the gas 
cylinders and their retesting. He shall be a graduate in 
Mechanical or Chemical Engineering with at least 3 
years of experience in the examination and testing of 
gas cylinders. He shall also be conversant with the 
Standards, Specifications and/or Regulations 
applicable to the automotive cylinders for which the 
test station is approved. 


A-1.3 Supervisor 


The supervisor shall possess the following 
qualifications: 


a) He shall be a science graduate or diploma in 
Mechanical or Chemical 
Engineering with at least three years 
experience in the examination and testing of 
gas cylinders; and 

b) He shall be conversant with these rules, 
Standards, Specifications and/or 
Regulations applicable to the automotive 
cylinders for which the test station is 
approved. 


A-1.4 Operator 


Personnel conducting inspections and tests shall have 


qualifications and experience suitable for the work on 
which they are engaged. They shall be trained to 
understand the dangers associated with high pressure 
gas cylinders and the purpose and method of inspection. 


А-2 EQUIPMENT 


A-2.1 Type of Equipment 


The test station shall have adequate equipment to carry 
out inspection and testing of CNG, HCNG blend gas 
cylinders as required under these rules. It shall contain: 


a) One set of these rules, Standards, 
Specifications and/or Regulations applying to 
the automotive gas cylinders, which the test 
station is authorised to test. All these rules, 
Standards, Specifications and/or Regulations 
shall be maintained with all current 
amendments; 

b) Fenced area having arrangement for 
unloading/de-gassing the cylinders; 


c) Hydrostatic test apparatus comprising 
pressurizing equipment, pressure gauge and 
volumetric measuring equipment in 
accordance with IS 5844. The apparatus shall 
be equipped with at least two 15 cm diameter 
(minimum) working pressure gauges. 
Pressure gauge shall capable of reading to 
within | percent of the test pressure for 
pressures up to and including 15 kgf/cm? and 
within 2 percent for pressures above 15 kgf/ 
ന്ന്‌. It shall be tested at regular intervals and 
in any case not less frequently than once in a 
month. It shall have accuracy of + 0.5 percent; 

d) Non-destructive testing facilities like 
ultrasonic flaw detection etc for detection of 
stress corrosion cracks developed during the 
service, and minimum wall thickness of the 
cylinder; 

e) Dead-weight pressure gauge tester of 
appropriate pressure range or a master 
pressure gauge of 15 cm minimum diameter 
covering the appropriate pressure range. 
Pressure gauge shall capable of reading to 
within 1 percent of the test pressure for 
pressures up to and including 15 kgf/cm? and 
within 2 percent for pressures above 15 kgf/ 
cm", It shall be tested at regular intervals and 
in any case not less frequently than once in a 
month. It shall have accuracy of + 0.5 percent. 
Master pressure gauge shall be calibrated 


IS 16299: 2014 


g) 


h) 
2) 
К) 


т) 
п) 


р) 


q) 


from a NABL accredited laboratory; 
Boroscope, extra-low voltage lamps (6 V or 
12 V considering human safety) to permit 
adequate internal viewing of cylinders and 
other lamps necessary for close examination 
of external surfaces; 

Straight edges, templates, steel scale, vernier 
caliper, miscellaneous tool and gauges for 
measurement; 


Thread gauges, taps for cleaning threads, and 
to correct slightly damaged threads, if any; 
Weighing equipment; 

One set of standard test weights for daily 
calibration of the weighing machine, stamped 
by the relevant statutory authority; 
Adequate cylinder handling equipment; 
Adequate water storage and cylinder draining 
equipment; 

Facilities for internal drying of cylinders 
(electrical heater for compressed air line is 
recommended. Blowers are not useful for this 
purpose); and 

Stamps for marking/stamping. 


A-2.2 Range and Accuracy 


The range and accuracy of equipment shall be as 


follows: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


4) 


е) 


Any measuring instrument/equipment shall 
have range which is 1.5 to 2 times the 
measured value; 

Hydrostatic test apparatus in accordance with 
IS 5844; 


Weighing equipment error not greater than 
+0.1 per cent; 

Working pressure gauge error not greater than 
1 per cent of the pressure; and 

Master pressure gauge error not greater than 
0.25 per cent of the full-scale deflection. 


10 


A-2.3 Calibration 


Calibration of equipment shall be carried out at periods 
not exceeding the following: 


a) 
b) 
с) 


9) 


Working pressure gauge — | month; 
Master pressure gauge — 6 months; 


Weighing equipment — checked by test 
weight daily when in service; and 
Test weights — 2 years or as per the 
requirements of weight and measure 
certification, whichever is lesser. 


A-3 WORKING CONDITIONS 


Working conditions for the test stations shall be 
conducive to satisfactory, accurate and safe inspection 
and testing of gas cylinders. The test station shall 
comply with the following conditions: 


a) 


b) 


с) 


d) 


е) 


f) 


It shall have good lighting to permit ready 
external examination of gas cylinders, 
preferably including natural lighting; 


It shall have adequate ventilation to remove 
residual gases from cylinders; 

The painting area shall also have sufficient 
ventilation; 

It shall provide sufficient space to permit safe 
working; 

It shall be maintained in a clean dry condition; 
and 

It shall have adequate fire safety measures as 
per the statutory requirements. 


A-4 QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


The cylinder testing station shall have in quality 
management system according to IS/ISO 9001 duly 
certified from Bureau of Indian Standards or any other 
internationally reputed agency. 


NOTE —The test station shall adopt procedures, which fully 
comply with the requirements of these rules and guidelines 
issued by statutory authority from time to time. 


IS 16299: 2014 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 13) 


INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF VALVES AND THEIR JUNCTIONS 
RECOMMENDED PROCEDURE 


Remove the valve from the cylinder. 


All threads shall be checked to ensure that thread 
diameters, form, length, and taper are satisfactory. 


If threads show sign of distortion, deformation or 
burring, these faults shall be rectified. Excessive thread 
damage or the serious deformation of the valve body, 
hand wheel, spindle or other components is cause for 
replacement. 


Maintenance of the valve shall include general cleaning 
together with replacement of elastomers and worn or 
damaged components, packing and safety devices, 
where necessary. 


Where the use of lubricants/elastomers is permitted, 
only those approved for the gas service shall be used, 


particularly for oxidizing gas service. 


The PRDs must be replaced with new. The specification 
of new PRD shall be suitable to the working pressure 
of the cylinder. Old PRDs shall be destroyed and the 
records shall be maintained. 


After the valve has been reassembled, it shall be 
checked for correct operation and shall be 
subjected to either a pneumatic test at working 
pressure of cylinder, using air or any inert gas or 
hydraulic test at 1.5 times the working pressure of 
the cylinder with the valve seat closed and outlet 
open and then with the valve seat open and the 
outlet plugged to confirm there are no internal or 
external leaks. This may be done prior to the valve 
being refitted to the cylinder. 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 5, 8.1, 9, 10, 11.2 and 14) 


DESCRIPTION, EVALUATION OF DEFECTS AND CONDITIONS FOR 
REJECTION OF SEAMLESS STEEL CNG CYLINDER AT THE 
TIME OF VISUAL INSPECTION 


C-1 GENERAL 


CNG cylinder defects may be physical, material or due 
to corrosion as a result of environmental or service 
conditions to which the cylinders has been subjected 
during its life. 


11 


The object of this Annex is to give general guidelines 
as to the application of rejection criteria. 


C-2 PHYSICAL OR MATERIAL DEFECTS 


Evaluation of physical or material defects shall be in 
accordance with Table 1. 


IS 16299 ; 2014 


Table 1 Rejection Limits Relating to Physical and Material Defects in the Cylinder Shell 
(Clause C-2) 


Type of ae 
Defects Definition 
(1) (2) 
Bulge Visible swelling of the cylinder 
Dent A depression in the cylinder that has neither 


penetrated nor removed metal and is greater in depth 

than 1 percent of the outside external diameter 
Cutorgouge A sharp impression where metal has been removed or 
redistributed and whose depth exceeds 5 percent of 
the cylinder wall thickness (see Fig. 3) 


Crack Split or a rift in the metal (see Fig. 4) 
Damage Excessive general or localized heating of a cylinder 
usually indicated by, 
a) partial melting of the cylinder 
b) distortion of the cylinder 
C) charring or burning of paint 
Stamping Marking by means of a metal punch 
Arcortorch Partial melting of the cylinder, the addition of weld 
burns metal or the removal of metal by scarfing or cratering 
Suspicious Marks introduced other than by the cylinder 
marks manufacturing process and approved 
Vertical 
stability 


Rejection Limit” 
(3) 


AII cylinders with such a defects 
When the depth of the dent exceeds 3 percent of the external 
diameter of the cylinder 

Or 
When the diameter of the dent is less than 15 times its depth 
When the wall thickness is less than the minimum design 
thickness 


АП cylinders with such defects. 

АП cylinders in categories (a) and (b) 

АП cylinders in category (c) may be acceptable after inspection 
and / or testing 


Allcy 
All cy 


inders with illegible, modified or incorrect markings 
inders with such defects 


АП cylinders with such defects 


Deviation from verticality which may present a risk during 
service (especially if fitted with foot ring). 


D When applying the rejection criteria given in this table, the conditions of use of cylinders, the severity of the defects and safety 


factors in the design shall be taken into consideration. 


C-3 CORROSION 


C-3.1 General 


The cylinder may be subjected to the environmental 
conditions that could cause external corrosion of the 
metal. 


Internal corrosion of the metal may also occur owing 
to service conditions. 


There is difficulty in presenting definite rejection limits 
in tabular form for all sizes and types of cylinders and 
their service conditions. The limits of rejection are 


usually established following considerable field 
experience. 


Extensive experience and judgment are required in 
evaluating whether cylinders that have corroded 
internally are safe and suitable for return to service. It is 
important that the surface of the metal is clean of 
corrosion products prior to the inspection of the cylinder. 


C-3.2 Types of Corrosion 


The types of corrosion generally may be classified as 
in Table 2. 


Table 2 Rejection Criteria for Corrosion of the Cylinder Wall 


23:3) 


Rejection Limit in Accordance with 8 


(3) 


If the depth of penetration exceeds 10 percent of original thickness of 


If the wall thickness is less than the minimum designed wall thickness 
If the depth of penetration exceeds 20 percent of the original thickness 
of the cylinder wall, or 

If the wall thickness is less than the designed thickness. 


If the wall thickness is less than the designed thickness. 


If the diameter of the pits is greater than 5 mm, refer to the “local 
Corrosion" row. 

If the diameter of the pits is less than 5 mm, the latter, the cylinder 
should be assessed as carefully as possible in order to check that the 
remaining thickness of the wall or base is inadequate for the intended 
use of the cylinder. 

If, after thorough cleaning, the depth of penetration exceeds 20 percent 


(Clause С 
Type of Definition 
Corrosion 
(1) (2) 
General Loss of wall thickness over an area of more than 
corrosion 20 percent of either the interior or exterior total wall, or 
surface area of the cylinder (see Fig. 5) 
Local Loss of wall thickness over an area of less than 
corrosion 20 percent of either the interior or exterior total 
surface area of the cylinder, except for the other 
types of local corrosion described below. 
Chain pitting Corrosion forming, a narrow longitudinal or 
or line circumferential line or strip or isolated craters or 
corrosion pits which are almost connected (see Fig. 6) 
Isolated Pits Corrosion forming isolated craters, without 
significant alignment (see Fig. 7) 
Crevice Corrosion associated with taking place in, or 
corrosion immediate around, an aperture. 


of the original wall thickness. 


12 


2014 


1$ 16299 


3 Сот ок GOUGE 


ЕС 


Fic. 4 CRACK 


13 


IS 16299: 2014 


Fic. 5 GENERAL CORROSION 


Fic. 7 ISOLATED PITS 


14 


IS 16299: 2014 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 7.3) 


PROCEDURE TO BE ADOPTED WHEN DE-VALVING AND WHEN IT IS 
SUSPECTED THAT A CYLINDER IS OBSTRUCTED 


D-1 CHECK FOR OBSTRUCTED VALVE 


The following procedures shall be carried out only by 
trained personnel. In view of the potential hazards in 
cylinders, this operation can lead to injury from stored 
energy release and fire, hence personnel shall take such 
precautions as deemed necessary for the work to be 
performed. When the gas, if any, has been released 
and the pressure within the cylinder reduced to 
atmospheric pressure and when there is no frost or dew 
on the outside of the cylinder, the valve may be 
removed after an additional check is made to establish 
that there is free passage through the valve. 


As indicated in 7, a systematic check shall be made to 


Key 


establish that the passage through the valve is 
unobstructed. The method adopted shall be a 
recognized procedure such as one of the following or 
one that provides equivalent safeguards: 


a) By introducing inert gas at a pressure up to 5 
bar and checking its discharge; and 

b) By using the device shown in Fig. 8 to hand 
pump air into the cylinder. 


D-2 VALVE UNOBSTRUCTED 


Only when it is established that there is no obstruction 
to gas flow in the cylinder valve, the valve may be 
removed. 


( А. 
coe നി 


1 — Rubber tube (internal diametre 8 ന്ന, external diametre 13 mm) ground to olive shape and bonded 
2 — Copper tube (internal diametre 3 mm, external diametre 8 mm) 


3 — Bonded 
4 — Rubber bulb 
5 — Hand pressure 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 8 TYPICAL DEVICE FOR DETECTING OBSTRUCTED CYLINDER VALVE 


IS 16299: 2014 


D-3 VALVE OBSTRUCTED 


When a cylinder is found to have an obstructed gas 
passage in the valve, the cylinder shall be set aside and 
handled by specially trained personnel in this task as 
follows: 


IM 
Tas 


ту 


> 


പ 

AW 
Мя: 
ху “ч 


б 
Е 
Е 


Ж Ағу; 
E — | 
пра ДИР 


E 2 

NS 

പ ര 
റ്‌... 

ര്‌? 


The preferred method is to partially unscrew the valve 
within a glanded cap, secured and joined to the cylinder 
and vented to a safe discharge. The principles of a 
suitable device is illustrated in Fig. 9. This procedure 
shall be performed in a controlled manner in such a 
way as to avoid personal injury. 


“ХУ 


Кеу 
1 — Drive for de-valving machine 
3 — Gas tight seal 
5 — Pressure gauge 
7 — Direction of rotation 
NOTE — Operate remotely using devalving machine 


2 — Gas tight gland 

4 — Oylinder frame and clamping device 
6 — Vent valve 

8 — Gas disposal system 


Fic. 9 TypicAL DEVICE FOR THE REMOVAL ОЕ A DAMAGED GAS CYLINDER VALVE 


16 


IS 16299: 2014 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 13) 
PRESSURE RELIEF DEVICE (PRD) INSPECTION 


E-1 GENERAL 


The CNG/HCNG blend cylinder is equipped with a 
cylinder valve with a PRD in the threaded opening at 
one end of the cylinder. All PRDs shall be in direct 
communication with the contents of the cylinder, 
regardless of whether the cylinder valve is open or 
closed. 


E-2 REQUIREMENTS 


The vent line may need to be removed from the ends 
of the cylinder for this inspection. The PRD and tubing 
shall be cleaned as necessary with a rag and mild 
detergent solution to allow inspection of their external 
surface and any orifices. The choice of detergent shall 
be compatible and non-reactive with the materials with 
which it comes into contact, for example the use of 
ammoniacal compounds on brass can cause stress 
corrosion, and hence detergents containing ammonia 
shall not be used on brass components. Inspection of 
the valve and plug/PRD shall include the following 
aspects. 


a) Examination of the valve and PRD assemblies 
for damage — the valve and PRD assemblies 
shall not be deformed or show other signs of 
damage. Damaged valves and PRD 
assemblies shall be replaced. 

b) Examination of the interface between the 

valve and cylinder port, the PRD and cylinder 

port and any other plug and cylinder port — 
these interfaces shall be tightly seated with 
no gaps or looseness. If there is evidence of 
looseness or seal damage, the cylinder shall 
be depressurized, the suspicious area 
disassembled and the seal shall be replaced, 
as necessary (see Annex B). The components 


17 


shall be reassembled/reinstalled in accordance 

with the torque limits recommended by the 

cylinder manufacturer. 
c) Leak testing of all the connections between 
the valve and cylinder port, and the plug/ 
PRD(s) and cylinder port. All PRD 
connections and the valve shall be checked 
for leakage. These connections shall be 
serviced if any leakage from these areas is 
detected. 


External inspection of PRDs for corrosion, 
damage, rust, bulging, plugging of the PRD 
vent system and mechanical defects, such as 
leakage, extrusion of fusible metal or 
looseness of attachments: this shall be done 
each time a CNG/HCNG blend cylinder is 
inspected. 


d) 


E-3 APPROVED EQUIPMENT 


The inspector shall verify that the PRD(s) in use with 
the cylinder is (are) approved and specified by the 
manufacturer for the cylinder type. 


E-4 DAMAGED EQUIPMENT 


Dents, gouges and scratches whose depth is greater 
than or equal to 0.50 mm in locations other than the 
hexagonal torque nut shall be reviewed as per the PRD 
manufacturer’s recommendations to determine what 
action, if any, should be taken with regard to the PRD. 


E-5 REPLACEMENT 


Once removed, PRDs shall not be installed on any other 
cylinder but may, if they are appropriate and pass 
inspection, be reinstalled on the same cylinder from 
which they were removed, as recommended by the 
cylinder manufacturer. 


IS 16299: 2014 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 15.7) 
TEST REPORT FORMAT 


This Annex provides guidance on the range of information to be included in the documentation associated with 
re-tested cylinder approval. Example of suitable format is provided below. Each report shall be signed by the re- 
tester. 


Name and address of the Retesting station 


Name and address of the cylinder manufacturer 


Name and address of the cylinder owner 


Cylinder Description : 

Manufacturing Standard Serial Number 

Outside Diameter —————————_ mm; 

Guaranteed minimum wall thickness ———————— mm; Length ————— ————— mm 
Maximum Working Pressure —————————— —- Test pressure 

Water capacity marked on cylinder ————— litre 

Tare weight marked on the cylinder ——— — — — kg 


Date of original hydrostatic/hydrostatic stretch test of cylinder 


Name of the gas 


Cylinder thread type , its condition and Conformation 
with gauge 

Actual water capacity ————— litre 

Actual weight ————————— —— kg 

Variation in tare weight that is weight marked on the cylinder and actual weight —————— kg 

Cylinder actual wall thickness observed mm 

Total volumetric expansion ————— cc, Permanent volumetric expansion сс 


Condition of cylinder surfaces 
Test reports and certificates furnished by the manufacturer, if available. 
Detail of valve fitted on the cylinder 

Make 


Type 
Thread condition 


Remarks 


Supervisor’s name and signature 


Approved by : Name, designation and signature 


Place - Date 


Seal of the organization 


18 


IS 16299: 2014 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


BOC India Limited, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Kolkata 


Kabsons Gas Equipments Limited, Hyderabad 


Kosan Industries Limited, Surat 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bangalore 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Praxair India Limited, Bangalore 


Research and Development Establishment (Engineers), Pune 


Sakha Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
SICGIL India Limited, Chennai 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARAI), New Delhi 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Salem 


Steel Authority of India Limited, Ranchi 


Supreme Cylinders Limited, Delhi 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune 


19 


Representative(s) 


Suri Т. R. Tuomas (Chairman) 
Suri О. К. СОРТА (Alternate) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
SHRI MATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 


Suri J. VEDAGIRI 
SHRI SANJAY PHULLI (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 
Suri Р. б. CHoupuury (Alternate) 


SHRI К. MANOHARAN 
SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU (Alternate) 


SHRI P. M. SAMVATSAR 
SHRI А. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI M. SELVAKUMAR 
SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 
Suri S. M. RaMBHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN К. PANDEY 
SHRI Urwar BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDRA К. GARG 
Suni NIKHILESH К. Сакс (Alternate) 


Suri SATISH KABRA 
Suni S. Gopararan (Alternate) 


Suri S. К. Dey 
Suri S. B. Bomat (Alternate) 


Suri О.У. MANNUR 
SuniMATI KAROBI MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI RAGHUNATH KULAI 
SHRI Arun Nayak (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. Р. TIWARI 
Suri K. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
SHRI ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHATTOPADHYAY 
Suri A. Basu (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARJIT S. Кони 


SHRI FAROOQUE DADABHOY 
Suri К. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Suri К. К. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 


SHRI М. PRABAKARAN 
Suri №. К. VuAYAVARGIA (Alternate) 


ӛнкі DEBASHIS KARMAKAR 
Dr B. K. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. L. FATHEPURIA 


Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


IS 16299: 2014 


Organization 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Trans Valves (India) Private Limited, Hyderabad 


Vanaz Engineers Limited, Pune 


In personal capacity (Menon & Patel, 14/1 Mile, Mathura Road, 
Faridabad) 


In personal capacity (303, Shantikunj, Pandav Bunglows Lane 
Athwalines, Surat) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Suri Y. К. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dn S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. RARIKAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. К. JAIN 
Suri Амо JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri S. К. SARVATE SHRI S. J. Vispute (Alternate) 


SHRI EBRAHIM M. PATEL 


SHRI Г. D. THAKKAR 


Suri J. А. SippiQui, Scientist “Е” and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI VISHAL TOMER 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Dissolved Acetylene Cylinders, Generators, Acetylene Pipe Lines and High Pressure 


Gas Cylinders Subcommittee, MED 16:3 


Organization 
BOC India Limited, Kolkata 


Al-Can Exports Private Limited, Distt Thane 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Bharat Pumps and Compressors Limited, Allahabad 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Limited, Mumbai 


Hindalo Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, New Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Limited, Howrah 


Jai Maruti Gas Cylinders Gases Limited, Gwalior 


KVK Corporation, Mumbai 


Maruti Koatsu Cylinders Limited, Mumbai 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Pune 


Petroleum and Explosive Safety Organization, Nagpur 


Praxair India Limited, Bangalore 


Rama Cylinders Private Limited, Mumbai 


Sahuwala High Pressure Cylinder (P) Limited, Visakhapatnam 


20 


Representative(s) 
SHRI VUTUKURU RAMANA (Convener) 


Suri VuAY К. PARIKH 

Suri D. С. Dave (Alternate) 
SHRI SAKET TIKU 

SHRIMATI VEENA PETER (Alternate) 
SHRI MOHAN KUMAR 

Suri Р. G. Снопоновку (Alternate) 
Suri Р. М. SAMVATSAR 

SHRI А. С. KHAMKAR (Alternate) 
SHRI SUBHANKAR GUPTA 

Suri V. RAMASWAMY (Alternate) 
SHRI M. SELVAKUMAR 

SHRI ALOK Kumar Gupta (Alternate) 
SHRI SHANKAR SHARAN 

Suri S. M. RAMBHAL (Alternate) 
ӛнкі PRAVEEN К. PANDEY 

Suri UrwaL BHANDARI (Alternate) 
Suri D. К. GARG 

Suri №. К. Gara (Alternate) 
SHRI Аѕнок К. NIGAM 

ӛнкі MANU Kumar NicAM (Alternate) 


Suni К. CHANDGOTHIA 
Suni V. CHANDGOTHIA (Alternate) 


Suri Nitin J. THAKKAR 
Suri A. S. SARAN (Alternate) 


Suri J. Р. TIWARI 
Suri К. SUDHAKARAN (Alternate) 


Suri Т. В. THOMAS 
Suri D. K. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI MILAN SARKAR 
SHRI ARINDAM Das (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY R. NAPHADE 
Suni SANJAY S. MANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI T. SUBRAMANIAN 
Suni Еумү MunauipHaAR (Alternate) 


IS 16299: 2014 


Organization Representative(s) 


SICGIL India Limited, Chennai SHRI FRooQUE DADABHOY 
Suri К. PADMANABAN (Alternate) 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers (ARAI), New Delhi Suri К. K. GANDHI 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR Karn (Alternate) 


Tata Motors Limited, Pune Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI AMUL VERMA (Alternate) 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
Suri R. BEHANI (Alternate) 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune Dr S. S. THIPSE 
Suri S. D. Rairikar (Alternate) 


21 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (1159). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 С1.Т. Scheme УП M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


