IS 9981

: 2000

(Reaffirmed 2006)

Indian Standard AGRICULTURAL EQUIPMENT PRODUCE PROCESSING GLOSSARY OF TERMS

( First Revision )

ICS 01.020; 65.060.01

0

BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN;9

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

A Ll`qMSl

2000

Price Group 3

Agricultural

Produce Processing ana Milling

Machinery

Sectional Committee,

FAD 5 1

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted~by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft tinalized by the Agricultural Produce Processing and Milling Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. With the increasing emphasis on processing of agricultural produce, particularly grains, seeds and fodder, a large number of equIpmen are being manufactured and used in the country. A need was, therefore, felt to prepare a standard giving authentic detinitlons to the various terms used in relation to these equipment. The standard was first published in 198 I. This revision has been taken up to incorporate terminologies and up-date some existing definitions on basis of comments revised. a number of new

IS 9981 : 2000

Indian Standard AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE PROCESSING EQUIPMENT - GLOSSARY OF TERMS ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the definitions of various terms relating to agricultural produce processing equipment.

blast and separating the foreign material which is substantially lower in specific gravity than the produce to be cleaned. 2.12 Blower A device to produce air blast.

2 GENERAL

TERMS

2.13 Block Flow - Diagram showing various sections of plant block without detailing individual machines. 2.14 Carborundum - A synthetic abrasive, whose hardness is about two and a half times that of natural emery. Chemically it is Silicon Carbide. 2.15 Chaffing - Pneumatic separation of very light materials from the produce. 2.16 Cleaning --The removal of foreign or dissimilar material by washing, screening, hand picking, aspiration or any other means. 2.17 CoIour Sorter - Equipment used for sorting out material/grains from stock on the basis of colour set to preset standard. 2.18 Conditioner - A machine in which grain is treated with any agent for mellowing purposes.
2.19 Conditioning - It is the process of changing the condition of grain/raw material to suit processing requirements. It is ordinarily achieved by addition of moisture or drying followed by tempering.

2.1 Abrasivity - The property of particles of bulk materials, when in motion, to wear away the surface they are in contact with. 2.2 Abrasive Polisher - A machine used to remove bran from endosperms, using abrasive action between the kernel and the emery stone.

2.3 Air Lock - An equipment used for introducing or removing mill stocks into/from pneumatic conveying line. 2.4 Atomiser - A machine for converting liquid material in finely divided spray. 2.5 Aeration --The
process of movement air through grain at low air flow rate. of ambient

2.6 Angle of Internal Friction - The angle whose tangent is the coefficient of the internal friction between particles. The limit of this angle is a right angle. 2.7 Angle of Nip - The angle between the roll faces at the level where they will just hold a particle or grain and draw it into the crushing or husking zone. 2.8 Angle of Repose - When a granular material is allowed to flow freely from a point into a pile, the angle which the side of the pile makes with the horizontal plane is called the angle of repose.
NOTE - The aogle of internal friction and the angle of repose are not synonymous because of the presence of interlocking and cohesive forces.

2.20 Corundum - Naturally available abrasive material used in polishers, also called emery. 2.21 Cracking - Development of fissures, checks or sun cracks on grains. 2.22 Curing Natural or artificial aging of the agricultural produce brought about usually by some (dry or wet) heat treatment.
NOTE - In case of rice, it is the process of steaming freshly harvested paddy, so that rice undergoesa little heat treatment and attains to some extent the properties of aged rice.

It is the process of cleaning by air blast and separating the foreign material which is substantially lower in specific gravity than the produce to be cleaned.
2.9 Aspiration -

2.23 Differential slow rolls. 2.24 Diagram -

Speed -

Ratio of speed of fast to

2.10 Polisher Brake -- A long rectangular soft rubber block placed in an abrasive cone polisher between the wire mesh segments for restricting motion of kernels around the rotating cone. 2.1 I Aspiration It is the process of cleaning by air

Usually applied to a flow sheet.

2.25 Dust Collector - A machine for removing dust from exhaust air from a mill machinery. 2.26 Determination
Determination is a unit

IS 9981 : 2000 operation to separate sperms of the kernel. oil rich germ from the endotemperature and humidity.

2.27 Degree of Milling - The amount of bran removed from the brown rice or seed coat removed from coarse grains during the milling operation. It is usually expressed as a percentage of the brown rice or milled cereals. 2.28 Dehydration - The removal of moisture very low level by applying external heat. to a

2.43 Grading - The process of sorting grains into different lots conforming to certain predetermined standards. 2.44 Grain Processing - The process of upgrading the quality of grains for improving their marketability, storability and suitability for human consumption. 2.45 Gravity Separator - A machine used for classifying and separating products with only slight difference in specific gravity differences. 2.46 Glazer-A machine used for removing adhering bran from kernels under slight pressure to impart shine to the kernels. 2.47 Grinder - A machine used to convert or pulverise grains/kernels into grits and flours. Main machinery used in the process include burr mill, hammer mill, pin mill, disc mill, ball mill, etc. 2.48 Gyrosifter - A grader in which whole kernel and broken are separated by screening after passing them over a set of gyrating screens. Rotary flat sieve could also be used for grading. 2.49 Grinding - Grinding is a unit operation for size reduction of grains or its parts with some dissociation of the anatomical parts of the grain from one another. 2.50 Glazing - Glazing is a unit operation done after milling to make kernels shinier or glossier by removing adhering particles on the surface. 2.51 Hulling - Generally refers to the removal of the outer shell or outer portion of the seed coat of grain that is hull. Hulling also refers to the removal of both hulls and bran as in the machine Engelberg Huller. 2.52 Humidified Polisher - Final friction polisher using humidified air for removing adhering bran and imparting shine to the milled rice grains. 2.53 Indented Disc Grader - A grader in which whole kernel is separated from brokens which are picked up in the indents providing on a set of revolving discs. 2.54 Indented Drum Grader - A grader in which indents are formed in a cylindrical drum which revolves slowly and pick up brokens and this separate them from kernel mass. It is also known as trieur cylinder. 2.55 Leaching - The outward diffusion of water soluble constituents of kernel into the soak water during soaking process. 2.56 Malt - Designates a product resulting from the germination of a.cereal grain, which is a rich source 2

2.29 Drying - The reduction of moisture in a product usually to some predetermined moisture content. 2.30 Elevator - A conveying equipment having belt with buckets attached for lifting grains. 2.31 Exhaust enclosure. Air suction from any machine/ a

2.32 Edge Runner-A batch type machine to flatten partially cooked and dried paddy to produce rice flakes. 2.33 Emery Coated Polisher -- Emery of specific grit size bonded with magnesium oxide and magnesium chloride coating on the surface of a roller/cone disc to provide necessary abrasion for polishing. 2.34 Fan - Bladed rotor, in a fixed case, for exhaust or movement of air. 2.35 Filter - A chamber containing elements to treat dust laden air. sleeve filter

2.36 Firing -- A process of applying heat to dry a substance rapidly as in processing tea. 2.37 Flaking Rolls - A machine for flattening partially cooked and dried kernels/grits continuously, as the kernels grits pass between a pair of heavy rolls in one pass. 2.38 Flotation - It is a process to remove light materials like bran from heavy materials like wheat by adding a flotation agent in the water. 2.39 Flow Sheet - Diagram showing distribution stocks and machines in milling process. 2.40 Fluidization
by the upward

of

flowing

Suspension

of a layer of grain

force between grain and upward flowing air counter balances the weight ofthe grains the layer ofgrain is said to be incipiently fluidized. 2.41 Gelatinization - The process by which starch granules change to a jelly like form, and fill the voids in the grains and cement the fissures together at specific temperature. 2.42 Germination
plumule water and is placed

air. When the frictional

-.

Growth

of the radicle

and

in seed, when

the latter absorbs adequate in a normal environment of

IS 9981 : 2000 of hydrolytic brewing. enzymes and a main raw material for 2.72 Plansifter - Plansifter is a with a circular motion imparted of sifter with even number of mixture to be sieved is fed in at sieve to sieve by gravity. flat, horizontal sieve at the central point compartments. The the top, falling from

2.57 Malting - Malting involves steeping, germination and kilning of sprouted cereals. It improves the bio-availability of nutritients, enriches the seed with hydrolytic enzymes and improves the aroma. 2.58 Mesh Opening Aperture size of wire sieves.

2.59 Mixing - The mixing of solids consists of distributing. as uniformly as possible, groups of either granular or powder particles by involving them in complex movements.
2.60 Milling

2.73 Puffing - It is the sudden expansion of water vapour (steam) in the interstices of the kernel/granule. Roasting of conditioned grain with or without sand media produces highly crisp and porous product retaining grain shape. 2.74 Rice Glazing - Polished rice treated with talc (and iti some cases with glucose). 2.75 Roasting - Roasting is the High Temperature Short Time (HTST) process in which the dry or water soaked grains are subjected to dry heating for predetermined period of time with or without sand media. 2.76 Roaster - A machine which imparts heat to dry or wet grain with or without sand media. 2.77 Rollers The unit consists of a pair of cylindrical rollers arranged with their axis parallel and set in a heavy frame. Rolls may be steel, stone or emery coated. 2.78 Sampler - A small metal probe for taking samples of grains from bags or from bulk containers. 2.79 Scalping - The process of cleaning in which good grains or seeds are dropped through screen openings while larger material is carried over the screen into a separate spout. 2.80 Scarification - Scratching of hard seed coat to remove the mechanical barrier to obtain uniform germination with better penetration of moisture into the seed. 2.81 Screening - Separation of grains by a mechanical device where the desired material is carried over the device and the undesired material penetrates the device. It is a method of separating particles according to size alone. 2.82 Scouring - Scouring is the process in which outer layers (mainly those comprising the husk/hull) are partially removed through abrasive action. Also see polishing. 2.83 Seed Processing - The process of upgrading the quality of seeds for improving their plantability and storability. 2.84 Seed Treating - The process of application of a thin coat of insecticide or fungicide over seeds or similar applications to improve the storability and protect viability. 2.85 Sieve Aspirator 3 A grader which ~separates

from harvested stock.

Refers to removal of hulls and bran and dried grain to produce refined

2.61 Paddy Separator-A machine used to separate the mixture of paddy and brown rice obtained after shelling. 2.62 Packer - A machine used for the filling of sacks and closing them. 2.63 Parboiling - It is partial cooking of paddy by imparting heat treatment to the soaked paddy by steaming. 2.64 Pearling - This polishing or whitening. is another term used for

2.65 Peeling - The removal of the outer layer of a fruit or vegetable is generally referred as peeling, paring or skinning. 2.66 Pneumatic Conveying - The movement stocks by USEof controlled air currents. of

2.67 Polishing -- The removal of outer layer of the grain by mechanical operation. It is also known as whitening or pearling. 2.68 Popping --- Roasting of conditioned kernel with or without sand media to produce highly crisp and
porous Popping product without retaining the grain shape. of water IS the result of sudden expansion

vapour (steam) in the interstices

of the kernel.

2.69 Primemover

-

Initial source of motive power.

2.70 Pitting - Pitting is a process in which the surface of the grain is scratched to impart cracks in husk/hull so as to facilitate penetration of oil or water in pulse milling. Also known as scratching. 2.71 Pre-treatment - Pre-treatment is the operation of treating the grain in order to loosen the husk or hull (seed coat) or ease of milling. The pre-treatment consists of water and/or oil application, soaking, drying and tempering, light roasting or chemical treatment in -pulse milling.

1s 9981 : 2000 brokens from kernel mass by means of vibrating screens in conjunction with air stream. The traces of bran adhering to whole kernel and brokens are separated by an aspirator. 2.86 Separation - It is an operation in which a product is separated from other products, using the difference.in physical, thermal, electrical or any ofher properties of the produce. 2.87 Shelling Removal kernels from pods or husk. of grains from cobs or stationary and the lower one rotating. The discs may be emery or stone. This unit is used to remove husk/ hull from the grain. 2.99 Weigher weighing machine determined weight. 3 GRAIN Usually applied to automatic deliv~ering products of pre-

PROCESSING

EQUIPMENT

2.88 Sieving---~-The separating of desired grains by a mechanical device, where the desired grain penetrates the device and the undesired material is carried over the device. 2.89 Sifting - It is the process of separating small size particle through sieves moved in circular motion. 2.90 Sifter - This is a machine used in the sieving operation of powdery material composed of a surface with regular openings having uniform shapes and dimensions and positioning in a regular manner as fixed in a frame. The surface may be wire mesh or perforated sheet metal. 2.91 Soaking (Steeping) - The part of parboiling when paddy is soaked in water in order to raise its moisture content. 2.92 Sorting - It involves inspection, followed by separation according to variety, size, colour, degree of ripeness, maturity, defects, etc. It is actually a separating operation supplementary to grading.
NOTE only Sorting is a form ofseparation of food materials whereas value. grading and food products dul-mg purpose at any stage ofprocessing, assembly and receipt is done for the

3.1 Aspirating Leg - A vertical duct in which the upward movement of a controlled air blast remove lighter grains and impurities from vertically falling grain. 3.2-Conveyor - An equipment or component through which material is moved from one point to other. 3.3 Cyclone Separator - It is a separating device in which strong centrifugal force acting radially is used in place of relatively weak gravitational force acting vertically downwards. 3.4 Destoner - A mechanical stones from the grain. device which separates

3.5 Double Aspirating Separator - A separator which uses an aspirating leg both before and after sieving. 3.6 Elevator - A conveyor moved upwards. in which the material is

3.7 Friction Polisher - The type of polisher which operates on the principle of removing the bran from the kernel by using friction between the rice kernels and the screen in the polisher. 3.8 Gyro Sifter - A machine in which grains of smaller size are separated by passing them over ~gyrating screens. Small sized grains tend to get collected at the centre while the larger ones move towards the periphery and get separated. 3.9 Huller - A machine from the grain. 3.10 Maize Sheller grain from cobs. used for removing the hull

of raw food materials

ofestablishing

theircommercial

2.93 Specific Mass - It is attributed to mass over volume quotient. (kg/m3 or g/l) of a liquid or a solid body. 2.94 Tempering - It is a process where in the grain is held temporarily in a bin, between two drying passes, so that the moisture content and temperature within the centre ot`the kernel equalize with moisture content and temperature on the surface of the grain. 2.95 Test Weight - Test weight of grain is the weight of a known volume of grains. 2.96 Thickness separates products Grader - A machine which on the basis of their thickness.

An equipment

to remove maize

3.11 Paddy Sheller or Dehusker to remave husk from paddy grain.

An equipment

3.12 Pre-cleaner - A separator to remove extraneous matter from grain before drying by means of sieves and an air-stream. 3.13 Reels or Revolving Screens - Cylindrical screens with slight inclination into which the material enters at one end and falls through openings into a collecting mechanisms while over-size material is discharged at the opposite end. 3.14 Rice Refining 4 Machine The machine to

2.97 Trieur Cylinder An indented revolving cylinder used for separation of brokens from unbroken rice, for length wise separation. 2.98 Under Runner Disc Sheller - A machine consisting of two horizontal discs, the top one

IS 9981 : 2000 remove fine bran adhering to the surface of the kernel after whitening operation. 3.15 Riddle - Oscillating deck used for holding the grain of specific size, usually used in dockage tester. 3.16 Rubber-Roll Sheller - A machine used to remove husk from paddy. It consists of two rubber rollers, rotating with a differential speed and the paddy passing-between the two surfaces is dehusked. 3.17 Scalper - An equipment cleaning of grain. or screen used for pre5.1.2 Feed Interference The obstruction in advancing the fodder against the back of the blades. 5.1.3 Feed Rolls - The corrugated or slotted rolls placed one above the other to compress the fodder and to hold it firmly while cutting takes place. 5.1.4 Throat of a Chaff-cutter - The rectangular passage through which the compressed fodder passes for cutting. 5.2 GANDASA - A iron plate attached to a wooden handle and having cutting edge at one side and operated by hand. 6 MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT 4.4 Spool Type Potato Sorter rows of spaced rotating spools. 5 FODDERPROCESSING 5.1 Chaff Cutter-A the fodder. A potato sorter with

EQUIPMENT

machine with blades for cutting

5.1.1 Cutter Head - The assembly of-the component which actually cuts the fodder. This may be of cylinder or fly-wheel type.

3.18 Screw Conveyor -.-- A type of conveyor in which a long screw is used to transport grains horizontally or on inclinations up to 30�C. 3.19 Sieve Separator
an oscillating

sieve.

A

simple

separator

employing

3.20 Single Aspirating Separator a single aspirating leg.

A separator with

3.21 Steel Huller or Metallic Huller - A machine used for paddy hulling. It consists of a fluted cylinder rotating within a steel screen and a steel blade. 3.22 Under-Run Disc Sheller - A machine which removes the husk from the paddy. It consists of two horizontal discs, the top one stationary and the lower one rotating. 4 ROOT CROP PROCESSING EQUIPMENT

6.1 Delinter - A machine used to remove residual lint (fuzz) from cotton seed. 6.2 Groundnut Decorticator A machine separate groundnut kernels from pods. 6.3 Sugarcane Crusher - A machine expression of juice from sugarcane. to

4.1 Potato Grader or Sorter - A machine used to grade potatoes according to size. 4.2 Reciprocating with reciprocating Potato Sorter grids. A potato sorter

used for

6.3.1 Horizontal Sugarcane Crusher - A sugarcane crusher in which the crushing rollers are placed in horizontal position. 6.3.2 Vertical Sugarcane Crusher crusher in which the crushing rollers vertical position. A sugarcane are placed in

4.3 Rotary Potato Sorter -- A potato grader with a rotating, perforated drum having appropriate size of peripheral openings.

5

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No.
FAD 5 1 (938).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 Regional Central Offices : Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 38 41 85 61 91 20

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110 002

1

Eastern

: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700 054 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022

{

337 84 99,337 337 86 26,337

Northern

1 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 I Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MUMBAI 400 093 Marol, Andheri (East) {

60 38 43 602025

235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 l5 832 92 95,832 832 78 91,832 78 58 78 92

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CGIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. H'YDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE.RAJKOT.THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at : Prahhat Offset Press, New Delhi-2

