( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 )-- 1985

lndian Standard
CONFERENCE SYSTEMS
PART
Acoustics
Chairman SHRI IS. D. PAVATE Members SHRI M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate to Shri K. D. Pavate ) Ahuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI SANDEEP AHUJA SHRI K. R. GURUMURTHY ( Alternate) Department of Telecommunication, New Delhi SHRI R. K. BHATIA SHRI T. R. WADRWA (Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI K. Cn~~onAcnunAN SHR~ I. S. VEDI ( Alternate ) Railway Board, Ministry of Railways SHRI P. K. GHOSH SHRI SRANRAR ( Alternate ) DR P. N. GUPTA Department of Electronics, New Delhi Electronic Component Industries Association SHXI R. K. JON ( ELCINA ), New Delhi ~&RI L. K. VISHWANATH ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) COL KRISHAN LAL SHRI B. S. RUPRAI ( Alternate ) Bolton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SHRI J. S. MONQA SRRI M. S. MONGA ( Alternute ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR V. MOHANAN DR ( KUMAIU ) SHAILAJA NIKAX All India Institute of Speech & Hearing, Mysore SHRI S. S. MURTIIY ( Alternate ) Central University, Hyderabad PROF B. S. RAMAKRISHNA Peico Electronics & Electrical Ltd, Bombay; and SHRI S. L. REDEY The Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay SHRI M. M. Josar ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore REPRESENTATIVE Directorate General~of Supplies & Disposals ( InsSHRI M. SANKARALINGAM pection Wing ), New Delhi SHRI R. S. Anox A ( Alternate ) Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi SHRI A. K. SEN SHRI W. V. B. RAMALINGAM ( Alternate ) CDR P. K. SINHA Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) LT R. S. DATTA ( Alternate ) ( Continued on pap 2 )

1

GENERAL
Committee, LTDC 5
Research Institute

Sectional

Repsenting Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani

@ Copyright 1986
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyight Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11456( Part 1 ) - 1985 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members Regresenting SUPERINTENDINO SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi WORKS ( FCOD 1 SURVEYOR OF WORKS I/F~oD ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN,. Director ( Electromcs ) Secretary SHRI PAVAN KUMAR Deputy Director ( Electronics ). IS1

Panel
Convener
SHRI

for Sound

System,

LTDC

5 : P6
New Delhi

A. K. SEN Members

Directorate

General of All India Radio,

SR~I W. V. B. RAXA~,INGAM ( Alternate to Shri A. K. Sen ) Ahuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI SANDCEP AI~UJA S~nr K. R. GuRnMURTIsY ( Alternate ) Bolton Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SAIL1 J. S. Mosc;a SHRI M. S. MONGA ( Alternate ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute SHRI K. D. PAVATE ( CSIR ), Pilani Central University, Hyderabad PROF B. S. RAM~KRISRNA Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. L. REDI.:Y SHRI M. M. JOSIII ( Alternate ) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers' SHRI D. 1'. SIIAL~N~A Association, Bombay

2

IS : 11456( Part ,I )- 1985

Indian Standard
CONFERENCE SYSTEMS
PART 1 GENERAL

0. FOREWORD
Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 September 1985, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The purpose of this standard is to prescribe the minimum requirements for conference systems in order to ensure interchangeability and optimum performance under conditions of normal operation. 0.3 This standard will facilitate the determination of quality of conference systems, the comparison of different systems and the determination of their proper application by listing the characteristics In this standard, the word which are useful for their specification. `quality' is intended to denote mainly electrocoustical quality, such as intelligibility, freedom from interference, and not the quality from the point of view of safety, durability, resistance to environmental conditions, etc. Quality will be judged from thepoint of view of the user ( interpreter, delegates, etc ), who is concerned with the characteristics of system as a whole and not as a rule, with design details or components. 0.4 The use of this standard, both by the manufacturers and users will facilitate comparison between manufacturers' specifications and user requirements -for a particular system.
NOTE - It is recognized that some operators may have to continue to operate existing systems, within a limited period of transition, however it is desirable that some existing conference systems be replaced by systems conforming to this standard.

0.1 `This Indian

0.5 This standard
Part Part 1 2

will comprise

the following

two parts:

General Electrical requirements standard assistance has been derived from 2-18 `Draft - IEC Publication Conference issued by the International Electrotechnical

0.6 While preparing this IEC 29B ( Secretariat ) System: Part 1 General' Commission ( IEC ).

3

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 ) - 1985

0.7 For the purpose

of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded IS : 2-1960*. off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) applies to conference systems and to the Parts of which they are composed or which are used as auxiliaries to such A conference system may consist of: systems.
a) Microphone systems: microphone discussion systems system ( CMS system ( CDS ); systems ( CVS ( CIS ). refer to both wired OF TERMS given in and wireless 1; and ); i) conference ii) conference b) Conference c) Conference The systems systems. 2.

interpretation voting

described

in this standard AND

TERMINOLOGY

EXPLANATION

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the terms and definitions IS : 1885 ( Part 3 )t shall apply, in addition to the following.

2.1 Persons 2.1.1 Delegate facilities A person participating in a conference of a conference system to speak and listen. having the

2.1.2 Interpreter - A person who interprets or more other Ianguages via the interpretation

a spoken language system.

into one

2.1.3 Operator - A person operating the control equipment and the audio/visual equipment, changing tapes on taperecorders and monitoring quality of sound to the interpreters and delegates.

ofequipment
operator.

2.1.4

Technician - A person who is trained in the diagnosis and repair faults and who can in addition perform the functions of an

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( wised TElectrotechnica.1 vocabulary: Part 3 Acoustics.

).

4

IS : 11456 ( Part `1 ) - 1985 2.1.5 Audience - P ersons not actively having only the facility for listening. 2.2 Earphones participating in the conference,

2.2.1 Earphone - Electroacoustic transducer by which acoustic oscillations are obtained from electric signals and intened to be closely coupled acoustically to the ear. 2.2.2 Headphone Assembly of one or two earphones and one or on a headband. two earphones

2.2.3 Headset on a headband.

Assembly

of a microphone

2.2.4 Insert Earphone - Small earphone that fits either in the outer ear or is attached directly to a connecting element for example earmould inserted into the ear canal. 2.2.5 ear. Supraural Earphone Earphone applied externally to large the outer

2.2.6 Circumaural to cover the region 2.2.7 Ear Shell -

Earphone - Earphone of the head including Circumaural

having a cavity the ear. hanging the

enough

type of earphone

on the ear. earphone is

by which 2.2.8 Stethoscopic Headphone - Headphone remotely coupled to the ears by means of a tube. 2.3 Microphones by

2.3.1 hlicrophone - Electroacoustical transducer signals are obtained from acoustical oscillations.

which

electrical of which is

2.3.2 ~Omnidirectional Microphones - Microphone the response is substantially independent of the direction of sound incidence. 2.3.3 Directional Microphone - Microphone the dependent on the direction of sound incidence. response

of which

2.3.4 Unidirectional .Microphone - Directional microphone of which has a prominent maximum for one direction wave. 2.4 Channels 2.4.1 Floor Channel is the audio channel chairman or lecturer 5

the response of the sound

2.4.1.1 The floor channel speech of the speaker ( delegate,

through which the ) is distributed.

IS : 11456 ( Part

1 ) - 1985 or `OR' System
indicators

2.4.1.2 The floor channel shall be designated by `0' ( original ) on all channel selectors or Simultaneous Interpretation ( SIS ) and Language Distribution System ( LDS ) equipment.
NOTE - If `0' indicates the `OFF' `OR' shall be used for floor channel. position of the selector channel, the

2.4.1.3 A language channel language whenever that language channel. 2.4.2 Language Channel

may also serve to distribute the floor coincides with the one assigned to that

2.4.2.1 A language channel assigned language is distributed.

is an audio

channel

through

which

an

2.4,2.2 Language channels shaI1 be designated by the numbers 1, 2) 3) , . . . , . . . on all channel selectors of the Simultaneous Interpretation System ( SIS ) and Language Distribution System ( LDS ) equipment. 2.4.2.3 Call channel - The channel through which warning signals are transmitted from the interpreter to the chairman or lecturer or operator, or from the operator to the chairman or lecturer. 2.5 Systems

are 2.5.1 Automatic System - In an automatic system the microphones operated by the delegates. A Conference Interpretation Systems ( CIS ) may preferably be supervised by the operator. 2.5.2 Manual Systems - In a manual operated and controlled by the operator. 2.6 Conference Room Con;figurations system the microphones are

2.6.1 `Round Table' Conjguration - The delegates are positioned around All delegates are able to take part in the a table or a set of tables. conference. can deliver his speech from a 2.6.2 Seminar Conjguration - A lecturer lectern facing the audience. There may also be a table for a chairman of a panel. The delegates are positioned, facing the front of the room. The lecturer and if present the chairman or the panel as well as the delegates are able to take continuous part in the discussion. 2.6.3 `Lecture' Conjguration - A lecturer can deliver his speech from There may also be a table for a lectern or a table facing the audience. a chairman or a panel. The lecturer and if present the chairman or the panel are able to take continuou$ly part in the discussions; the audience has a limited possibility for question and discussion. 2.6.4 Press Conference Conjiguration - The speaker can deliver the speech from a table at the front of the room to the participants, who have a limited possibility for questions and discussions. 6

IS : 11456 ( Part

1) - 1985

2.6.5 Parliament Configuration - A lecturer can deliver his speech from The delegates are positioned, facing a lectern at the front of the room. the front of the room. The lecturer can present his speech to the delegates, who have possibility for questions and discussion. 2.7 Typical 2.7.0 The Conference following Systems conference CMS Systems, Systems, CVS systems CIS ( 2.7.4 types are recognized: ) ) ) ( 2.7.2 ) of installations can be typical

a) Microphone b) Conference c) Language d) Conference 2.7.0.1 recognized:

Systems, Distribution Voting Three

and CDS LDS

( 2.7.1 ( 27.3

Interpretation Systems,

General -

different

Permanent Installations furniture and cabling are integrated.

In permanent fixed and the

installations the systems components

Semi-Permanent Installations - In semi-permanent installations the furniture is portable or fixed, the cabling is fixed and the system components are either integrated into the furniture or placed on tables. - In portable Portable Installations nents, including cables, are pluggable 2.7.1 Microphone Systems systems all systems compoand removable.

2.7.1.1 Conference Microphone Systems, CMS - A CMS is a single channel sound system with centralized control which allows all delegates to participate in the conference. The number of microphones in such a system is usually small in relation to the number of delegates. The microphones normally used are of all types.

t PUBLIC ADDRESS AUXILIARIES MlCROPHONE CONTROL

FIG. 1

CONFERENCE MICROPHONE SYSTEM-CMS 7

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 2.7.1.2 Conference Discussion System, CDS - A CDS is a single channel system with either decentralized AUTOMATIC, or centralized MA.NUAL functions for microphone control for the delegates and for the
chairman. In such a system all participants involved in the discussions have ready access to a microphone from their seats. Usually the sound reinforcemecit is decentralized, consisting of low level loudspeakers situated generally no farther than 1 metre from any delegate. Centralized sound reinforcement; ( a public address system ) may also be used and should be provided for observers.

sound

FIG. 2

CONFERENCE DISCUSSION SYSTEM-CDS

In both of the above systems, CMS and CDS, several microphones may be operated at the same time; this should not produce a significant Both systems should include outputs for audio recording drop in level. ( tape or cassette ) and for connection to a public address system. Interconnection facilities for TV, Press, Media sound distribution centres ( MSDC ), telephone conferences and simultaneous interpretation system ( SIS ) are also advisable. 2.7.2 Conference Interpretation Systems, CIS - A CIS is formed by combining a microphone systems ( CMS/CDS ), interpreters equipment and a single or multichannel language distribution system ( LDS ). TWO types of CIS exist. is 2.7.2.1 Single channel ClS - In a single channel CIS interpretation distributed via a single LDS channel to the delegates, while the floor may be distributed via a public address system. As a consequence, a ( See Fig. 3a. ) maximum ~of two languages can be used. The number should be limited of delegates to one. microphones operational at any time

8

IS : 11456 ( Part

1 ) - 1985

I

f
t
INTERPRETER'S EQUIPMENT

i

M-u
CMS/CDS

I
LDS

CDS = Conference Discussion System CMS = Conference Microphone System LDC = Language Distribution System

FIG. 3a

CONFERENCE INTERPRETATION SYSTEM-SINGLECHANNEL

2.7.2.2 Multi-channel CIS - In a multi-channel, CIS interpretation and the floor channel are distributed via their individual LDS channels As a consequence, more than two languages can be to the delegates. used with a maximum dependent on the number of channels available. ( See Fig. 3b. ) The number of delegates microphones operational at any time should be limited to one.

OCH -k_,( CMS/CDS INTERPRETER'S EQylPMENT LOS /

CDS == Conference Discussion System CMS = Conference Microphone System LDC = Language Distribution System

FIG. 3b

CONFEXENCE INTERPRETATION-SYSTEM MULTI CHANNEL 9

IS : 11456( Part 1) - 1985 2.7.3 Language Distribution System ( LDS )
2.7.3.1 In the single channel interpretation from the interpreters CIS the LDS serves to distribute to the delegates. the

2.7.3.2 In the multi-channel CIS the LDS serves to distribute the floor language ( original ) and the interpreted language(s) from the It is necessary to have for speaker and the interpreters to the delegates. It is advisable to each interpreted language its own language channel. have additionally a spare channel. 27.3.3 categories: Various types of LDS are used, falling into two main

a) Wired b) Wireless 2.7.4 ( induction, radio, infrared ) Conference Voting System, CVS

2.7.4.1 A CVS is a centrally centrolled data processing system linked to a decentralized voting terminal network. Each voting terminal is equipped with at least three selection possibilities-Yes, No and Abstain. 2.7.4.2 The central control allows the chairman/operator to select At the end of a vote the final totalized and to start the voting procedure. results will be clearly displayed to the chairman/operator/delegates. 2.7.4.3 Standard voting vote procedures are: of individual votes. voters and how the options

a) Secret/closed b) Open 2.7.4.4 being: vote

No identification

Identification of individual each individual voted. of the results may be

The

display

selectable,

a) Direct dis$ay - Interim results are displayed while vote is taking place. Upon conclusions of preselected voting time final results are displayed. Final results b) Delayed display - No interim results are displayed. of the vote are displayed only upon expiration of the predetermined voting time. 2.7.4.5 The duration of the vote shall be preselectable, and will be ( that is chairman limited ( that is 3Os, 6Os, 90s ,... . . . etc ) or unlimited determines conclusion of voting ). 2.7.4.6 Recommended accessories are: ) to display the summed

a) Large displays ( visible to all delegates and/or individual results. 10

IS : 11456 ( Part b) Video displays to display the totalized and/or individual c) Printers for hardcopy documentation and/or individual results.

1 ) - 1985 results

of all voting data, summed

I

I
l

I I
PRINTER

0

-

-

+

0

-

CENTRAL CONTROL I I I D&LAY

DISPLAY

DELEGATE

VOTING

TERMINALS

FIG. 4 3. REQUIREMENTS .3.1 General

CONFERENCE VOTING SYSTEM,CVS OF THE EQUIPMENT

3.1 .l The components and the equipment used in the conference system shall conform to the relevant Indian Standards. 3.1.2 Indicators 3.1.2.1 Colour code The following colours shall be used for indicator lights or light-emitting diodes ( LEDs ) on typical conference system components. Colour red
Function

red green or yellow 3.1.2.2
Size and brightness -

Microphone ON no luminant should be used to indicate the microphone off status Outgoing channel, occupied other functions Under consideration. 11

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 3.2 Microphone 3.2.1 General 3.2.1.1 In order to effectively participate delegate microphone shall be provided. in conference proceeding Systems ( CMS and CDS )

3.2.1.2 In connection with the CMS systems ( manual controlled ) preferably the following microphones are used: a) table/standing c) podium/lectern d) buttonllavalier microphones ( standing table ) microphones ( neck ) microphones b) floor ( standing ) microphones

e) boom ( movable ) microphones f) roving ( hand held ) microphones 3.2.1.3 In connection with the CDS systems ( automatic controlled ) the following microphones are used: a) table/standing microphones or b) floor ( standing ) microphones. 3.2.1.4 The types of the microphones to be used are dependent on the `conference room configuration ( see 2.6 ). The following microphone application is preferred:
CONFERENCE ROOM CONPIGURATION TYPE OF MICRO\ PHONE Table Lectern Button/Lavalier Floor Boom/Roving L = Lecturer, D - Delegates, A = Audience, P = Panel, and ( ) = Optional 12 D (A) P/D ("p) (f) (A) P P L * (DL'P ROUND TABLE SEMINAR LECTURER PRESS CONFERENCE PARLIAMENT

or manual

D

IS : 11456 ( Part 3.2.2 Functions for CDS Table ChairmanlDelegate Microphones Controls

1 ) - 1985

3.2.2.1

Microphone

a) A microphone operation push-button switch is required on' all chairman and delegate microphone units for automatic system.

b) cl

A request push-button switch is required on all phone units for manual controlled systems, procedure is not used. A priority microphone push-button units. switch is recommended

delegate microif the hard-up for all chairman

3.2.2.2 The optional loudspeaker integrated in the microphone unit shall produce the floor channel at an adequate level for one or two delegates. 3.2.2.3 A microphone status indicator is required on all types of microphone units, to make the speaker aware that his microphone is `ON'. It may also assist the chairman, other delegates, interpreters and the operator to locate the position of the speaker. 3.3 Interpreter's General control for listening shall be provided and for Equipment

3.3.1

3.3.1.1 In each interpreter's both separate speaking together with corresponding indicators each interpreter.

3.3.1.2 The control panel/unit shall be situated between the front It window and the working surface so as to occupy a minimum area. shall not obstruct the view to the hall nor encumber the working surface.
booth.

NOTE -

Adequate

acoustic

isolation

shall

be provided

between the interpreters

3.3.2

Functions

and Controls in 3.3.2.3, 3.3.2.4, 3.3.2.5, 3.3.2.9 to Single Channel Conference below are applicable Systems. to

a) Only the functions and controls and 3.3.2.10 shall be applicable Interpretation Systems. b) All functions Multi-channel

and controls as outlined Conference Interpretation

3.3.2.1 Incoming channel selector - Selectors shall operate cause no mechanical or electrical noise. No short-circuiting between two channels when operating these controls.

smoothly and shall occur

3.3.2.2 Incoming channel @e-selector - In order to ensure safe and instantaneous changeover from floor to relay channel a toggle ( lever ) switch shall be provided which normally supplies the original ( floor ) channel and, in its relay position, the channel set on the selector. 13

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 3.3.2.3 Volume control - For adjusting listening levels, potentiometers with logarithmic progression shall be used which are audibly effective throughout their full range. 3.3.2.4 Tone control - A stepless bass control shall be provided to depress the lower frequencies by at least 12 dB at 125 Hz with respect to 1 kHz. A stepless treble control may also be provided to enhance higher frequencies by at least 12 dB at 8 000 Hz with respect to 1 kHz. 3.3.2.5 Headphone/headset terminals - For each interpreter one headphone/headset connector socket is required, suitably placed under the working surface and to the left of the working position in permanent installations or on the interpreters control console in portable installations. The output terminals shall be protected against short-circuit. 3.3.2.6 Monitor loudspeaker(s) - ( opt ional for portable systems ) - The function of the monitor loudspeaker(s) is to allow the interpreters to remove their headsets temporarily and continue to follow the proceedings while the booth is `silent'. The loudspeaker(s) shall reproduce the floor channel and be muted automatically as soon as one of the microphones in the same booth is activated; it shall have its own volume control. 3.3.2.7 Outgoing channel selection - In normal operation of a MultiChannel Conference Interpretation System one language is assigned to each booth, that is one outgoing channel is operated from each booth. However, there is frequently a need for tow or more outgoing channels to be operated from the same booth. In such cases two or more language The control may be spoken in alternation via these outgoing channels. panel shall have the provision for selecting a minimum of two outgoing channels. For these purposes two systems are in use: a) AB Selection i) ii) either one of the two channels ( A or B ) may be selected the output channel is selected on the interpreters control console and the interpreters in that booth effect the transfer from A to B and vice versa. preselection of channels A and B may be made either on the interpreters console or on the operators equipment.
Selection

iii)

b) Multi-channel i) ii)

any channel may be selected the output channel is selected directly on the interpreters% console by the interpreters 14

IS : 11456( Part 1 ) - 1985
Occupied Channel Indication - Whenever a given out-going channel is operated in common by several booths ( for example, interpretation into English from a French and a German booth ) a visual indication is necessary, signalling occupancy of that channel. This visual indication shall appear on all interpreters panels, which have access to this channel, while an interpreter's microphone is activated on that channel. This indication ( usually a LED ), shall disappear as soon as the channel is cleared ( that is no microphone active on the channel ). In order to fulfil this function, the indicator shall light up as a result of microphone activation but not when selecting the outgoing channel. Interlocking - If two or more desirable to provide an interlocking occupancy of a given channel. channels are provided it feature in order to prevent symbols may be double be

Language Symbols Provision for language provided close to the channel selector keys.

should

3.3.2.8 Call channel to ChairmanlLecturer,`Operator ( optional for portable systems ) - In the event of breakdown in the proceedings ( for example a delegate starting to speak without a microphone or other emergency ) interpreters must be able to warn the chairman and/or lecturer discretly A special key via a special link terminating in a monitor loudspeaker. shall activate this link regardless of the microphone switch position. It is desirable that this warning be transmitted also to the operator. 3.3.2;9 controls the microphones, channel is consoles the Microphone activating key - A microphone `ON/OFF' switch microphone link to the outgoing channel. If all interpreters' which have access to channe1, are switched-off, the floor automatically linked to this channel. On dual interpreters' microphone control may be combined in one single switch.

3.3.2.10 Muting key - A self-releasing key shall cut off the interpreter's microphone signal without switching back to the floor channel ( see 3.3.2.9 ) but shall extinguish the microphone status indicator. lamp 3.3.2.11 Microphone status indicator - For each microphone or LED shall indicate the `ON' status of the microphone. Interpreter's Console/Panel Console < < < < < < 300 mm 400 mm for dual console 210 mm 150 mm 10" <a <45" lO<h<50mm l5 position a

3.3.3

3.3.3.1 console

Free-standing width M7

console depth D console height H panel inclination Gc front height h

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 ) - 1985

FIG. 5 3.3.3.2 Built-in panel panel width W panel depth D panel inclination built-in depth 4 dz

FREE STANDING CONSOLE

cI

< 300 mm < 400 mm -with loudspeaker incorporated < 600 mm for dual panel < 210 mm O"-15"

< 130 mm <40mm

FIG. 6

BUILT-IN PANEL 16

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 3.3.4 Description
3.3.4.1 of the Interpreter's Equipment )

Listening

( incoming ) Section ( for each interpreter ( 3.3.2.1 ( 3.3.2.3 > connections ( 3.3.2.5 ) ) for portable ) ) )

a) channel b) channel c) volume

selector control

pre-selector ( 3.3.2.4

( 3.3.2.2

d) tone control f)

e) headphone/headset

monitoring loudspeaker ( 3.3.2.6 ( at least one per booth, optional Headphones/Headsets earphones

systems )

3.3.4.2

a) 2 supraural

per headphone into the ear ) or

( the stethoscopic type with earpieces inserted circumaural type of headphones are unacceptable b) maximum weight

: 150 g per headphone
250 g per headset of the cordset ) of 1.5 m, terminating in a non-

( with the exception c) flexible locking

cordset with a length plug ( headphone )

d) maximum contact pressure : 2'5 N ( adjustable pressure is recommended 3.3.4.3 Speaking ( outgoing ) section selection ) ( 3.3.2.11 ( 3.3.2.7 ) )

)

a) outgoing b) microphone c) muting d) microphone 3.3.4.4

channel

activating

key ( 3.3.2.9

~key ( 3.3.2.10

status indicator

)

Microphones for each interpreter or two three interpreters for portable

a) one unidirectional microphone unidirectional microphones for equipment. b) flexible c) effective d) headsets cordset with a length against ), each interpreter insulation ( optional for ) 17

of I.5 m. vibration ( instead of headphone and

mechanical

one headset microphone

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 3.3.4.5 Other facilities a) call channel to chairman/lecturer,operator for portable equipment ) b) call key for messenger ( optional ) 3.4 Delegates Listening Equipment ( part of LDS equipment ) ( 3.3.2.8 ) ( optional

3.4.1 Listening Units - Two types of listening units exist : wired and Although various transmission technologies are available, only wireless. the following characteristics and elements are recognized: 3.4.1.1
Wired listening unit

a) Positioning b) Ergonomic

of unit on or integrated layout of controls

in conference table or chair,

c) Volume control d) Channel selector ( not applicable f) -Headphone 3.4.1.2 output sockets.

for single channel

use )

e) Monitor loudspeaker for floor channel ( optional ).

Wireless listening unit ( receiver )

a) Positioning on table and portable b) Ergonomic layout of controls c) Volume control d) Channel selector ( not applicable for single channel use ) e) Maximum weight : 200 g f ) Minimum operational lifetime of a single change or battery: 3.4.2 HeadjAones For delegate headphones a) Delegate comfort reproduction and ambient the following shall be considered:

15:h

i) acoustical : quality of sound noise insulation ii) physical : weight and reliability iii) iv) hygiene : shall be observed

maching : electroacoustical transducer shall match electically and mechanically with the system.

b) The cordset shall be longer than 80 cm.
NOTE Examples of types of headphones which can be used are given in 2.2.

18

IS : 11456 ( Part 1) - 1985 3.5 Technicians 3.5.1 The Equipment Equipment

Survey of Technicians' technicians'

booth may contain: according the to 3.5.3 to and/or equipment the chairman, rack, according for call-channel according equipment, and equipment. Booth

a) control

equipment

b) microphone to 3.3.4.4,

c) headphones/headset d) sound recording e) audio-visual

to 3.3.4.2,

equipment,

f ) public-address
3.5.2 Technicians'

3.5.2.1 The technicians' booth, if provided, shall correspond to an interpreters' booth as specified in Indian Standard on `Booths for simuland equipment' ( under taneous interpretation - General characteristics preparation ) with provisions for a sliding front window. 3.5.2.2 Conference facilities with built-in or without permanent equipment, shall have at In all other cases ( semi-permanent or mobile permanent equipment, it is recommended to booth. If this is not possible, sufficient room 3.5.3 Control Equipment The control equipment enables the technician to monitor all microphone and interpretation system - functions in the room as dictated by the conference proceedings and by the to the interpreters' booths, with least one technicians' booth. booths ), with or without have a built-in technicians' area shall be provided.

3.5.3.1 and control conference chairman.

3.5.3.2 Call channels may be available from the interpreters technician and from the technician to the chairman/lecturer. 3.5.4 Microphone Operation Mode modes may be used: The following microphone

operation

a) The delegate or the technician can activate a microphone by a push-button at the microphone position, or by the control equipment ( i.e. a dual control system ). b) The delegate has a `request floor' button, which signals the technician, but the latter retains control of microphone activation c) Only the technician queue can operate the microphone sequence system with or without priority. d) An automatic e) Chairman's and switching can operate 19

microphone

IS : 11456 ( Part 1 ) - 1985 3.5.5 Status
functions Monitoring can be monitored: requests On the control equipment the following

a) Individual

and activated

microphone(s)

of the delegates is linked to

b) whether the interpreters' the language channel. 3.5.6 Audio Monitoring and

booth or the floor channel

a) By headphone channels. b)

eventually

in addition

by loudspeaker

of all

By programme level indicators ( optional for automatic controlled systems ), continuously indicating the level of the floor channel and having possibilities to indicate the level of each interpreters channel. channel shall be volume control ).

3.5.7 Volume Control The volume of each controllable separately ( not for systems with automatic 3.5.8 Auxiliaries

a) Auxiliary input facilities may be provided for additional sources, for example additional microphone systems, tape recorders, sound tracks from film or video. b) Auxiliary ~output facilities may be provided, for example to connect the floor channel to a public address system, to connect one or more channels to broadcast facilities, to connect all channels to recording equipment.

20

