IS : 12274 - 1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRONIC FLASH APPARATUS FOR PHOTOGRAPHIC PURPOSES

UDC

771'448'6

: 614-8

@ CoQyright 1988

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI Or

14

December

1988

uDc

771'448.6: 614-a \

IS : 12274 - 8907 IEC Pcb 491( 1984 )
India:, Standard

�AFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR _ELECTRONIC FLASH APPARATUS FOR

PHOTOGRAPHIC
National Foreword

PURPOSES

This Indian Standard, which is identical with 1E.C Pub 491 ( 1984 ) `Safety requirements for electronic flash apparatus for photographic purposes'. issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of Ihe R~adio Communications Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. In the adopted in Indian Standards; a) Comma practice standard attention certain terminology is specially drawn and conventions to the following: marker marker. appear, while are not identical in Indian with those used the current they should

( ,) has been is to use a point

used as decimal ( * ) as the decimal Standard'

Standards

b) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. c) For the purpose Cross
Reference Znternational Standard

referring

to this standard, are applicable.

of the Indian

Standard,

only the metric

dimensions

Corresponding

Indian Standard

IEC Pub 27 Letter symbols to be used in electrical technology IEC Pub 68-2-2 ( 1974 ) Basic environtesting procedures, Part 2: mental Tests - Tests B: Dryheat IEC Pub 68-2-3 ( 1969 1 Test heat, steady state Ca: Damp

IS : 3722 Letter symbols and signs used in electrical technology ( series ) IS : 9000 Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 3 Dry heat test IS : 9000 ( Part 4 )-I979 Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 4 D,smp heat ( steady state ) IS : 9000 ( Part 8 )-I981 Basic environmental testing procedures electronic for and electrical items: Part 8 Vibration ( sinusoidal ) ttst , IS : 1293-196? outlets ( @St Three-pin
rcvtiion )

IEC Pub 68-2-6 ( 1982 ) Test Fc guidance: Vibration ( sinusoidal )

and

IEC Pub 8'3 ( 1975 ) Plugs and socketoutlets for domestic and similar general use standards IEC Pub 167 1964 ) Methods of test for the determination of the insulation resistance of solid insulating materials IEC Pub $27-2 ( 1979 ) Polyvinyl chloride insulated cables of rated volta'ges up to and including 4:iO/750 V, Part 2 Test methods ' IEC: Pub 245 Rubber insulated cables of rated voltages up to and including 4501 759 v

plugs

and

socket

IS : 2259-1963 Methods nation of insulation insulating materials

of test for determiresistance of solid

1Y : 694-1977 PVC insulated cables for ItForking voltages up to and icc!u&ng 1 100 volts ( Tecond revision ) IS : W33 Elastomer insulated cables ( serlls )

r\\dopted 29 October 1987

Q December 1988, BIS

I

Gr 14

INDIAN BUREAU OF STANDARDS MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NE1Y DELHI 110002

IS I 32274- 1987 IEC Pub 491( 1984 )
SEC Pub 249-l ( 1982 ) Base materials -printed circuits, Part 1 Te?t methods for IS : 5921 ( Part 1 )-1983 Metal-clad base material for printed circuits for use in electronic and telecommunication equipment: Part 1 General requirements and tests ( JirJl revision ) IS : 9002 (-Part 6 )-1980 Equipment for environmental tests for electronic and electrical items: Part 6 Constant relative humidity chamber ( non-injection type ) IS : 4800 Enamelled ( srritr ) round winding wires

,

IEC Pub 260 non-injection humidity

( 1968') Test enclosures of type for consfant relative

*

IEC Pub 317 Specification types of .winding wires

for particular

IE~C Pub 320 ( 1981 ) Appliance couplers for houF?hold and similar general purposes IEC Pub 417 ( 1973 ) Graphical symbols for use on equipment. Index, survey and compilation of the single sheets IEC Ptib 536 ( 1976 ) Classification of electrical and electronic equipment with regard to protection against electric shock TEC Ptib 598-2-9 ( 1970 ) Luminaires, Particular requirements, Part 2 Section 9 - Photo and film luminaires ( non-professional ) IEC Pub 664 ( 1980 ) Insulation within low-voltage nation clearances and including distances for equipment The Radio IEC Publications Standard: IEC Pub IEC Pub coordisystems creepage

IS : 3010 Appliance-connectors ( non-reversible inlets ( series ) IS : 2032 Graphical symbols technology ( series )

and appliance three-pin type ) used in electro-

.IS : 9409-1980 Classification for electrical and electronic equipment with regard to protection against electric shock IS : 10322 Luminaires ( J.&es of G standurd~ )

SP 39 Insulation coordination within low voltage systems including clearancea and creepage distances for equipment ( under print )

Communications Sectional Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following and has decide`d that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this Indian Cartridge fuse-links for miniat\He fuses Colours of the cores of flexible cables and cords Polyvinyl chloride insulated cables of rated Toltages ing 450/750 V, Part 1: General requirements Base materials for printed Cord sets Plastics - Determination thermo-plastics circuits, of the up lo and includ-

127 ( 1974 ) 173 ( 1964 ) ( 1979 )

IEC Pub 227-l

IEC Pub 249-2 ( 1970 ) IEC -Pub 799 (1984 ) IS0 306-1974 I

Part 2: Specifications Vicat softening temperature of

2

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

c

1. 1.1

Scope This standard applies to the following electronic flash apparatus for photographic purposes, having a stored energy not exceeding 2000 J, together with associated ap,paratus and not intended to be subjected to dripping or splashing: - apparatus of the single-flash type which can have more than one flash head operating at the same time; - apparatus for the illumination of sequential photographic exposures; battery chargers and supply units to be used in connection with electronic flash apparatus for photographic purposes. These auxiliary units may form a part of the mains plug; accessories, This standard such as light regulators and slave units. specified in the instruction leaflet.

-

does not apply to stroboscopes.
exist for apparatus having a stored energy exceedins and thermal radiation. 2000 J. this standard

As long as no appropriate requirements may be used. iti so far as it is applicable. Additional requirements

may bc necessary.

e.g. for explosion

With regard to the supply, mains-operated battery-operated apparatus
This standard

the following

categories

are covered:

ap_patatus; apparatus; of mains and battery supply.
and tropical chmates

having a combination
is intended to cover apparatus

which can be used both in modcratc

For the modclling lamps combined with clcctronic flash apparatus for photograph!c purposes. additional Photo and Film Lummaires requirements may bc taken from 1EC Publication 598-Z-9: Lummwres. Section Nine Vion-professional). as far as applicable.

1.2

This standard does not apply to apparatus (r.m.s.) against earth. This standard is concerned (see Clause 3).
A

designed for a rated supply voltage exceeding 250 V

1.3

with safety only and not with the other properties .

of the apparatus

2.

Definitions The following definitions apply for the purpose of this standard:

2.1

The type test of a product is the complete series of tests to be carried out on a number of specimens representative of the type, with the object of determining whether a particular manufacturer can be considered to be able to produce products meeting the standard. By hand denotes that the operation does not require the use of a tool, coin or any other object.

2.2

3

.'

(IECpage9)

IS : 12274-1987
IEC Pub 491 (1984)

2.3

1ccessibfe part denotes
( :lause

a Part which can be touched
part is considered

by the standard

test finger (see Sublayer (see Sub-

S.l.lj.
as being covered wth a conductive

Any accessible area of a non-conducting :lause 4.3.1).

2.4

5ve part denotes

Sub-clause 2.5
Zreepage

8.1.1 j.

a part,

contact

with which may cause

a significant

electric

shock

(see

denotes the shortest distance alon, 0 the surface of an insulation material between two conductive parts. (According to I E C Publication 664: Insulation Co-ordinatian within Low-voltage Systems Including Clearances and Creepage Distances for Equipment.)

distance

2.6

Clearance

denotes

the shortest

distance

in air between two conductive

parts.

2.7

Supply mqins denotes

any power source with an operating voltage of more than 34 V (peak) which is not used solely to supply the equipment specified in Sub-clause 1.1. , the mains voltage for which the manufacturer has designed the

2.8

Rated suppl?* voltage denotes

apparatus. 2.9
Part directI>+ connected

a part of an apparatus which is in electrical connection with the supply mains in such a way that a car nection between the part and either pole of the supply mains causes in that connection a current equal to or greater than 9 A.
A current of 9 A is chosen as the minimum In tests to determine short-circuited. rupturing current of a 6 A I-USC. IP the `upply mam5. fuses in the apparatus arc not which parts arc directly conncctcd

to the suppl~p mains denotes

2.10

Part conductiveljl connected to the .wpp/l mains denotes a part of an apparatus which is in electrical connection with the supply mains in such a way that a connection through a resistance of 2000 R between the part and either pole of the supply mains causes in that resistance a current greater than 0.7 mA (peak), the apparatus not being connected to earth.

2.11

Supplr unit denotes an apparatus-which or more other apparatus are fed.
Batter}? charger denotes

takes energy from the mains and from which one

2.12

provides 2.13
Terminal

an apparatus which is directly fed from the supply mains and which energy in the form necessary to charge a battery.
device denotes

conductors 2.14
Thermal

a part of an apparatus by which connection is made to external or other apparatus; it may contain several terminal contacts. denotes a device which prevents the maintenance of excessively high in certain parts of the apparatus by disconnecting those parts from their supply. a device which interrupts the supply when a cover is opened

release

temperatures 2.15

Safety switch denotes

2.16

Printed board denotes

a base material

cut to size, containing

all holes and bearing at least

one conductive

pattern.

(IEC page

11)

4

IS : 12214-1981 IEC Pub 491(1984)

2.17

Conducri~ pattern denotes a configuration printed board.

formed by electrically conductive material of a

2.18

Class I apparatus denotes an equipment in which protection against electric shock does not rely on basic insulation only, but which includes an additional safety precaution in such a way that means are provided for the connection of accessible conductive parts to the protective (earthing) conductor in the fixed wiring of the installation in such a way that accessible conductive parts cannot become live in the event of a failure of the basic insulation.
Such appbatus may have parts consisting of Class II construction.

2.19

Class II upparutus denotes an equipment in which protection against electric shock does not rely on basic insulation only, but in which additional safety precautions. such as double insulation or reinforced insulation, are provided, there being no provision for protective earthing or reliance upon installation conditions.

2.20

Basic insufarion denotes an insulation applied to live parts to provide basic protection against

electric shock. 2.21
Supplemenrury insulation denotes an independent insulation applied in addition to basic insulation in order to provide protection against electric shock in the event of a failure of the basic insulation. Double insularion denotes an insulation comprising both basic insulation and supplementary

2.22

insulation. 2.23
Reinforced insularion denotes a single insulation system applied to live parts which provides

a degree of protection against electric shock equivalent conditions specified in this standard.

to double insulation

under the

The term "insulation system" does not imply that the insulation should be one homogeneous several layers which cannot be tested singly as supplementary or basic insulation. The definitions given in-Sub-clauses 2.18 to 2.23 are according to I EC Publication and Electronic Equipment with Regard to Protection against Electric Shock.

piece. It may comprise

536: Classification

of Electrical

3.

General requirements The~apparatus shall-be so designed and constructed as to present no danger, either in normal use oi under fault conditions, providing particularly: personal protection against electric shock; personal protection against the effects of excessive temperature;

-.. protection against fire.
In general, compliance is checked under normal operating condirions and under-fault conditions specified in Sub-clauses 4.2 and 4.3, by carrying out ~11the tests indicated.

5

(IEC

page 13)

IS : 12274-1987 I&C Pub 491 jlO84!

4.
4.1
4.1.1 4.12

Cheral

corxiitions for tests

Conduct of tests Tests according to this standard are type tests.

.+ill tests are carried out on one and the same appara,tus and in the order af the clauses as far i as this is possible. Cnless otherrrirr temperature pressure of860 specified, tests are made under normal operating mbar. conditions at an ambierrt to ?S"/o and an air

4.1.3

within the range of 1.5 "C to 3-5 "C, a relative humidity of45?/, mbar to 1060

4.1.4 -

Linless otherwise specified: waveforms are substantially measurements of- voltages sinusoidal: and currents are carried out with instruments which do not

appreciably, affrct the values to he measured. 4.1.5 Test requirements in a -fresh condit.`on. 4.2 Kormal operattng cnndttions `1, are based on the uhe of+fuliy `charged rechargeable batteries or dry* batteries

of the folhming 4.2.1 4.2.2

Normal operc,ting cotti'itions art!`conS&reU to consist i, (f I conditions.. s .

qf the

most unfavourable

combination

Any position of normal USC of the apparatus. A supply* voltage of 0.9 times or 1.1 times any, rated .supply~voltage.for set. For apparatus having a rated suppli; voltage range not requiring the adjustment of a voltage Mhich the apparatus is

setting device, a supples voltage ($0.9 times the lower limit or 1 .I times the upper bmit of the 0.9 times or I .I times rated supply. voltage range ; [f considered necessary*, a supply, voltage of a nominal supply voltage within the range marked on the apparatus.

Any rated frequency For battery-operated condition.

of the suppiy voltage. apparatus, the spectjied battery in a _fully charged state or in jrc~sh

The apparatus operated 4.2.3

on each type of supply for which it is designed.

AnyI position of controls which are accessible to the user for adjustments by hand, except,,vol(agc
setting devices complying with Sub-clause 13.6. and other accessories. to the mains or with its own supply , to earth or not, and either pole of the isolated

4.2.4 4.2.5

Connection Apparatus connected

or not of_fiash heads, capacitors which can be used either

while connected

to the mains or not. earth terminal being connected

4.2.6

Any protective supply source,

used during the ,test, being earthed.

CIEC page 15)

\6

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 l-1984)

This does not imply that dim&sion.i! ignored.

rtx;t:lrc~lients of Insulations

specified in Sub-clausc~ 8.3.:' and X.3.8 txn he

If an insulating barrier consists of two parts separa:tad by a capillary slit. the path along :hc c;~t shy rll,d bc *..L.cn into account when measuring creepage dls:.tnccs and clearances. The speaified creepage distances and cIcarancc~ xrc the minimL.m actual separations taken mro :nc<n':nt tpl:r:~nccs rn assemblies and piece oxts. Guidance for the determination Sub-clause 4.3.3. of crecpllgc dlstanccs and clcaranccs involving cnumciicd WI~CZIS given 1~

The dimensions ef Table I are rcplawd
log

b.:, rhc values cui~uiut~~l,fj.om the jijrtltulcl.
, with a minimum

a,,= 0.78 log &

i

of 0.5 mm.

where d is the distance in mikmetrcs mid c the peak vuluc of'thc \wltage in 1,olt.r. Thcsc distunces can he derermiryd by rclferwce to Figure 7, page 97. This reduction in creepage &stanccs and c-learances is permit trd on/v as .fur us owrhcwting concerned (see Sub-clause IO.2 j..
-The reduced values above apply to the conductors soldering terminals. Coverings of lacquer or the like on printed themselves, but not to mounted componcnr\

i.i~

or associated

hoards arc ignored when calculating

the distances.

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

TABLE I

10

\----I al----

I

I i

I

t

IIll

-1

I

I

i

illi

-

I I

I I
/

I

-

i

I

_

I

*-.,
I
.'

1
I I
20 40

A-.10

60

80100
Peak

200

400

6006001ow

2ooo

4w

value of the voltage, in V
241176

/ ii~'parts coruluctively connected to ihe supply* mains with voltages ii1 tlw rarlge of 220 V lo c'.~!/ V i r.nl.s. J , rhc dimensions are equal lo those related lo 354 V peak. For wl!a~es over 4 000 V peak, the voltage test is used lo determine or not (see Sub-clause wlierher the creepage

tiiSILIIIL'C.$ or clearances

shall be short-circuited

9.2).

1 voltage across rwrlation

the basic insulation

is determined

bq' short-circuiling

the supplemcnlaty

and vice versa. by he following: 34 V corresponds 354 V corresponds 34 V corresponds 354 V corresponds to 0.6 mm to 3.0 mm to I.2 mm to 6.0 mm 4.3.3 und 8.3.S.

The gruphs of Table I are dcjned Curve A: Curve B:

tinder certain condirions,

/he disturtces muJ be reduced as given in Sub-clauses

(I1.C'

page

19)

8

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

4.3.2 Short-circuit across or,~$applicable,
filaments sf lamps. Short and open circuiting

interruption

sf semiconductor

devices and interruption

of

of -glow+scharge

lamps I used for indication or -regulation).

4.3.3 Short-circuit
coverings However,

across

insulation in assessing

consisting

of covering

of lacquer,

enamel

or textile.

`Such for

are ignored

the creepage 317:

distances and clearances Specifications

specified

in Table I. Winding

if enamel forms

the insulation of a wire and withstands the voltage test prescribed for Particular Types-of I mm to those creepage distances and clearances.

Grade 2 in Clause I3 of IE C Publication Wires, it is considered as contributing

This sub-clause does not imply a need to short-circuit
tubings.

the insulation

between turns of coils, insulating

sleeves or

4.3.4 4.3.5

Short-circuit Short-circuit

across electrolytic

capacitors. of which might cause an infringement shock or overheating, of Sub-clause 9.2. with the exception

across insulating parts, the short-circuiting

of the requirements

regarding protection against elecrric

of insulating parts which comply with the requirements 4.3.6

Shorr-circuit or disconnection, whichever is more unfavourable, of capacitors, resistors or inductors other than fransformers and motors, the short-circuiting or disconnection of which might cause an infringement of the requirements regarding protection against electric shock or overhearing. These fault conditions do not apply to : a) resistors complying b) c) inductors compl@g with the requirements with the requirements of Sub-clauses of Sub-clause JO.2 and IS.1 13.8.1 13.2, provided that rhe voltuge UI

capacirors comp@ng wirh the requirements of Sub-clause their terminals does not exceed 354 V (peuk)

Requirements for capacitors which need not be short-circuned against overheating are under consideration.

or disconnected

when checking

the protcctlon

d) self-healing

capacitors

(e.g. of the metaliized paper t_~pe) crs.fur as overheating

is concerned.

In order to determine which are the insulating parts and the components (see Sub-clauses 4.3.5 and 4.3.6). the short-Fircuiting or disconnection of which might cause an infnngement of the requirements regarding protection against electric shock or overheating, the apparatus is inspectdd and its circtut diagram is studied. 4.3.7 Loosening, by a ql'tarter of a turn, unlocked screws or similar devices which are usedforjxing covers over live parts.

4.3.8

For battery chargers and supply units: connection the output reF;minals. including short circuit. For battery chargers andsupply units: connection

of the most unfavourable

load impedance

to

4.3.9

to a supply voltage of 250 V a.c., independent or unit and with the voltuge setting device, `. f

of -the rated supply voltage or voltages of the charger if any, set ai the most unfavourable position.

4.3.10 4

Stopping of forced

cooling.

9

(IEC page 21)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491(1984)

4.3.11 -

Locking sf moving parts of apparatus provided ,i*ith: motors having a locked rotor torque smaller than the.full load torque; motors with moSng, parts which can be jammed hi* mechanical_failures or by handling of the equipment, if sucha failure or handling is probable.

4.3.12

Continuous operation of motors. relay coils or the like, intended-for short-time or intermittent operation, if continuous operation may occur accidentall_v.

5. 5.1

Marking

General The apparatus shall be marked in accordance with the requirements and 5.3.

of Sub-clauses 5.2

The marking shall be: easily discernible on the apparatus when ready for use, in such a way that there can be no misunderstanding; indelible and legible.
Compliance is checked by inspection and b!* the .follo,i.ing test, The marking shull not be removed when rrrhhcd IightlJ ,l'ith o piece of cloth soaked with petroleum spirit or lc'atcr.
T'nc mformarlon should prcfcrobly bc put on the cxtcrior of the apparalus. 11 is, howrvcr. ficrmissihlc IO pu! it on another place thar IS easily acccssiblc by hand, provided that the location of the marking 15 g~vcn in the instructions for use.

Letter symbols for quantities and units shall be in accordltncc with I EC Publication 27: Letter Symbols to be Used in Electrical Technology. Graphical symbols shall be in accordance with I EC Publication 417: Graphical Symbols for Use on Equipment. Index, Survey and Compilation of the Single Sheets. Fuse holders shall Abemarked in accordance with Sub-clause 13.32. Mains switches shall be marked in accordance with Sub-clause 13.4.3.

Compliance is checked by inspection. 5.2 IdentiJication

The apparatus shall be identified by: name or registered trade mark* b) model number or name.
Compliunce is checked bv inspection. II is not
prohibited
;O mark Class II apparatus

a) manufacturer's

with the double square symbol

q (417-I~EC-517?).
and is unlikely

This symbol shall be so placed that 11will bc obvious that it is a part of the techntc:tl information to be confused with the maker's name or lrade mark.

(IEC page 23)

10

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

5.3

Supply

The apparatus shall be marked with the following information: a) Nature of supply: a.c. only with the symbol -; d.c. only with-the symbol or z (for battery apparatus only).

b) Rated supply voltage or range of the rated supply voltages which can be applied without
operating a voltage setting device, unless the apparatus is supplied from a separate supply. unit only. Apparatus which can be set to different rated supply voltages shall be so constructed that the indication of the voltage to which the apparatus is set is discernible on the apparatus when ready for use..If the apparatus is so constructed that the user can alter the supply voltage setting, the action of changing the setting shall change also the indication. For battev chargers and supply units which form part of a mains plug. it is permitted voltage to which the apparatus is set is on the engagement face of the plug. of the correct mains frequency.
Compliance is checked 64' inspection.
that the indication of the

d) Rated mains frequency (or range of frequencies) in hertz, if safety is dependent on the use

5.4 5.4.1

fnsrructions _for use

Battery chargers and supply units shall be accompanied by an instruction leaflet in which shall be indicated the type of flash apparatus with which it is to be used. The flash apparatus shall be accompanied by an instruction leaflet in which shall be indicated the type of supply unit or battery charger with which it is to be used. It is
also permitted to give this information on the devices themselves.

Compliance is checked by inspection.

5.4.2

The instructions for use shall state that the apparatus shall not be exposed to dripping or splashing.
Compliance is checked by inspection.

5.4.3

The instructions for use shall contain a warning to the effect that: batteries shall not be exposed to excessive heat such as sunshine, fire or the like, dry batteries shall not be subjected to charging.
Compliance is thecked by inspection.

5.5

Terminal devices

Terminal devices shall be marked with the following symbols:
a) protective earth terminal, if any: @ (417-IEC-5019).

11

(IEC page 25)

IS : 12214-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

h) terminal devices which are live under normal operating terminals for mains supply and mains socket-outlets: The flash shall point to the terminal device.

conditions, with the exception \ (417-IEC-5036).

of

This symbol may only be used to indicate the existence of a live terminal and may not be used to label non-live termmals for the purpose of avoiding more stringent insulation requirements.

Compliance discernible from

is checked

by inspection.

The marking 14.4).

qf a prodectiw

earth

terminal

need not he

the outside purposes,

(see Sub-clause

For information (417-IEC-5033).

it may be useful to mark apparatus

suitable for both a.c. and d.c. with the symbol: r,

6. 6.1

Heating under normal operating conditions In normal use. no part of the apparatus shall attain an unsafe temperature.

Compliance and

is chircked qfrer

b_~*monitoring

the temperatures

w&r

the conditions

specified

hclo~*

inl,)tediatei!

the)* have been applied. it is .w~itched is wpplicd, on .jor u period of 4 h \t.itlrout ,jlu.shing,

!f the apparatus i/ oni!. hattcrj~

can hc mains-operated, huttcrj*

or rcchargeuhle

it is .s~c~itci:cd on .for 30 .s.

_-

111the cusc qf \c.inding.s. h,, the rc.~i.stuncc method: in other casts. b!, un!` other suitublc nwthod. of the resistance of wIndIns\. the influence of circuits 05 loads

Care should bc taken that durmg the mcasurcmcnt connected to these alndlngs IS negligible. Temperaturc rises shull not' csccwl

the wlues

given

in column

/ of Tublc

/I.

5.2

Insulating material supporting parts conductively connected to the supply mains shall be resistant to heat if, in ~normal use, these parts carry a current exceeding 0.5 A and might dissipate substantial heat due to imperfect contact. . In those cases where two groups of conductors, each supported by insulation parts, can be rigidly connected or joined together (c.g. by plug and socket), one only of the insulating parts shall meet the test. Where one of the insulating parts is fixed in the apparatus. this part shall meet the test.
Compliance Note is checked II. temperature h_13 subjecting the insulating mutcriul to the test .spec$ied under a) in

6 to Tuhle

The .wftcning

of

the insulating

muteriul

shull

be ut least

150 `.C.
of

Examples of parts which might dissipate substantial adaptors. screw tcrmrnals and fuse holders.

heat in normal use are contacts

switches and of voltage

(IEC` pdge 27)

12

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

TABLE II

I
Parrs

Permissible
Norma/

temperature

rr,w_K Fault cc~tiditions II

cjf the apparatus

operating conditions I

External

parts

Metal parts Ken-metallic -.
Inside of enclosures

parts

knobs. handles, enclosure (note knobs, handles. enclosures (note

etc. I) etc. (note 2) I, note 2)

30 IO 50 60

65 65 65 65

of insulating

material

(note 3)

(now 3)

Windings (note 4).
wires insulated with non-impregnated silk, cotton, etc. wires insulated with imprpgnated silk, cotton, etc. Okoresinous enamelled wires Wires enamelled with pol_vvityl/ormoldeh~de or po&rethane
5-i

resins

70 ,I/ 85

75 101I 135 I.50

Core lamtnallons

T
n;,
,/I

ii

Phennllormuldeh~d~ mou1drnE.r with rrrinrral Lummutev bonded with cpo.~~. rrsins Nutural ruhher

ftl1er.s

Thermoplask

materials

/note 5)

i
ambient tcmpcraturc of 35 C, but the measurements

The values of the temperature arc made under normal

rises 3re based upon a maximum conditions.

operating

Notes I, -

For areas hoeing no dimension exceeding 5 cm ud which arc not likeI! to he touched in normul temperature rises up to 65 A' ure ullowed under normul operating corlditrons.

use

2. -

r/these temperature rises ure higher thurt those allowed tq thy class nature of the materiul is thr governing ,fuctor.

of the

rrlrvunt

in.wlating

mnteriul,

tit~,

3. -

The pcrmissihle tempcruturc the relevunt ntateriuls.

ri.ves .for the inside q/enclosures

of insuluting

muterial

ure those indicuted.for

13

(IEC page 29)

fS : 1227401987 IEC Pub 491(1984)

1. -

For the purpose qt'this standard. the pcrmissihlc rempera'urc risc.c arc hnscd on tire rcco~~lr~lc~~rtiutiolls in I EC Publication 85: Thermal Ewluarron and Classification qi Eiccrricul frtsul~~tior~. The rrurtc*rrul.~quofc~i above are shown on!,. as examples. If ma~crial.\ orhrr rharr rhorc lisrcd in I E C Puhlicnrion 8.5 arc uwd. the maximum temperatures shouid.nor cscecd rhose which how hecn prowl to hc sari.:fuctory.

5. 6. -

Natural

and syrherir

rubbers are noi considered as hcirq rhermoplastic

marerials.

Due lo their wide variety. it is nor possible to spec$v pernzissihle rewperature rises for materials. While the matter is under consideration, the.following method shall be used:

thernwplasric

a) a softening
-

remperarure specified in IS0 Standard rhe depth ofpenetration

qf the material is determined on a separate specimen. under Ae condirions
306, mod@ied as follow: is 0.1 mm;

the total thrust of 10 N (I kg/) is applied before the dial gauge is set to :ero or irs initial reading noted.

b) the temperature -

limits

to be consideredfor

determining

the temperature

rises are: as obtained

under normal operating under a) ; under faulr conditions.

conditions, a remperature

10 C lower than the sqfrening temperature

7. -

the softening

temperature

itself.

The table does not apply to materials used in the construction
The possibility qf raising under coqsiderarion. the values for

of resistors.
po/.vvinyl chloride is

8. -

wires ana cables rnsurated wirh heat-resistunt

7. Resistance to deformation at elevated ambient temperatures The enclosure of the apparatus temperatures.
Compliance is chcckcd

shall be sufiiciently resistant to deformation
test.

at elevated

by the fi&wiiig

Tlw apparatus is subjcctcd,for a period of two dais (4~' II) to the test prcsc~rihcd in I E C Publication 68-2-2: Basic Environmental Testing Procedures, Part 2, Tests - Tests B: Drj, heat, Test Bh. at a temperature of 70+2 C. After this treatment, the apparatus shall .shoJc~ no damag_e in tllc .wi.sc
qf

this standard.

8.

Shock hazard under normal operating conditions

8.1

Testing on the outside

8.1.1

General Accessible parts and terminals for the connection to the synchronizer of the camera shall not be live.
In order to determme whether u part is accessible (see Sub-clause 2.3), the jointed test ,@nger according to Figure Za, page 91, or the rigid test finger according to Figure 2b, page 91, is applied in every possible position, in case of doubt with a maximum force qf 30 N (3 kgf). The test is carried out on all outer swfuces.

;

(IEC page 31)

14

.

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

The force shall be so exerted by the tip of the test finger as 10 avoid wedge or lever action.
A rigid test finger loaded as above should be applied around any opening, or at any place where deformation could ~cause an opening. At the sat&time, a jointed test finger is applied without force to determine if live parts have become accessible.

During rhe tests, the distances between accessible metal parts and live parts shall become not less than the values given in Table I, live parts shall no1 become accessible.
An electrical contact conductive parts. indication with a voltage of approximately 40 V is recommended to show contact with

,

In order to verify that a part ,or terminal contact is not live, the following measurements are curried out between any two parts or contacts, then between any part on terminal contact and either no/e of the supply source.

The measurements are also curried out 2 s after withdrawal of plugs and/or connectors from the corresponding socket-outlets or connector sockets. If possible, flashing is made during the measurements. The purr or terminal contact is not live if: from each part or contact, the current measured through a non-inductive resistance of 50 000 Q does nor exceed 0.7 mA (peak) U.C. or 2 mA d.c. and moreover: for voltages between 34 V (peak) and 450 V (peak), rhc capucitance does not exceed 0.1 pF, for voiIages between 450 V (peak) 45 jlc. and 15 kV (peak), the dischurge does not exceed

For frequencies above I kHz, rhc limit qf 0.1 mA ipeak) is multiplied b_vrhe ~luc jrequenc! in kilohertz, hut shall not exceed 70 mA (peuk).
The values indicated for the capacitances arc rated values.

qf the

The test establishes that if the voltage at the part exceeds 34 V (peak) a.~. or 100 V d.c., the source impcdancc is such that a current greater than 0.7 mA (peak) a.c. or 2 mA d.c. cannot bc drawn through a resistance of 50007l R.

8.1.2

Operating shafts Operating shafts shall not be live.
Compliance is checked by measurement.

8.1.3

Ventilation hole Ventilation and other l.?les over live parts shall be so designed that a suspended foreign body (for example a neck&e) introduced into the apparatus shall not come into contact with any live part.

15

(EC page 33)

.

IS : 12274-1987 JEC Pub 491 (1984)

Compliance

is checked bj) inserting through the holes a metal test pin with a diameter 9f4 mm

and a length qf 100 mm. The test pin is suspendedjFee!\* limited to its length. Tiring the test, the apparatus live. The test pin shall not become 8.1.4

fromONE end,

the penetration

being

is held in an!. position.

hlains voltage adjustment There shall be no risk of electric shock during the operation of changing the voltage, or nature of supply, either by hand qr by a tool which does not involve the removal of a cover.
Cqmpiiance $th is checked tool. by making the tests described in Sub-clause 8.1.) or by a test made

the appropriate

8.1.5

Withdrawal of mains plug Apparatus intended to be connected to the supply mains by means of a m&ins piug shall be so designed'that there is no risk of electric shock when touching the pins or contacts of the plug after its withdrawal from the socket-outlet.
Compliance is checked by the following test. conditions. The apparatus is operated under normal operating

The mains switch, if any, is then moved to the ofl-position, unless it is more unfavourahle to keep it in the on-position, and the apparatus is disconnectedfrom the supples mains /I_I* means qf
the

plug. being made

TM-O second.7 after withdrawal qf the plug, no pin sItal/ be live. the measurement according to Sub-clause X.1.1 1 between a pin and an?* other contact of the plug.

In order to reasonahl~, cover the most ur~favouruhlc situation the test ma!' he repeated ten times. 8.2 Testing yftcr removal

up to

ofprotective

covers

A part which is exposed by the removal by hand of a cover shall not be live.
Compliance
Any removable

is checked

by application

of the -tests of Sub-clulLK~ 8: 1.1.
to be a protecu~c cover (see Sub-clause 8.3.1).

part of a voltage setting device is considered

8.3 8.3.1

Constructional

requirements

The insulation non-impregnated
Compliance

of live parts shall not be provided by hygroscbpic wood, paper and similar fibrous materials.
by inspection

materials, such as
test.

is checked

and, in case of doubt, b_s the following

A specimen of the material, as speciJied in Clauw9 of I E C Publication 167: Methods of Test for the Determination of the Insulation Resistance qf Solid Insulating Materials, is subjected to the test prescribed in I E C Publication 68-2.3: Part 2, Tests - Test Ca: Dump Heat, Steady the conditioning period being Stute, (temperature 40 +_ 2 "C, relutive humidity: 90% to 95X,, four davs (96 h)

.
shall withstand the tests of Sub-clause 9.2.

After this test, the specimen

If necessary, the test is made on more than -one specimen.

1s : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984) 8.3.2 The apparatus

shall be so constructed that there is no risk of an electric shock from accessible parts or from those parts rendered accessible following the removal b> hand of a cover. However, internal parts in a battery compartment which become accessible. either with or without a tool, when replacing the batteries. shall be insulated from live parrs by at least basic insulation. Apparatps having a stored energy not exceeding Sub-clause 8.3.4). For apparatus 150 J shall be of Class I1 construction (see

having a stored energy above 150 J, Class I and II construction

is permitted. from live

Terminals for the connection to the synchronizer parts according to Sub-clause 8.3.4.

of the camera shall be insulated

Compliance is met by either,satisfying Sub-clause 8.3.3 or Sub-clause 8.3.4.

8.3.3

For Class I apparatus, the accessible metal parts (except fa,r those parts of the apparatus which are of Class II, see Sub-clause 2.18) shall be separated from live parts by basic insulation meeting the requirements of Item a) of Sub-clause 8.3.4.
This requirement does not apply to insulation the short-circuiting of which does not cause any shock hazard c.g if one end of a secondary winding of a separating transformer is connected IO an accessible metal part, the other end need not meet any special insulation requirement with regard to the same accessible metal part.

Class I accessible insulation -becoming

a_pparatus shall be provided with a protective earth terminal or con&t to which metal parts shall be reliably connected, except those insulated from live parts by meeting the requirements of Sub-clause 8.3.4 or those which are protected from live by a metal part reliably connected to the protecrivc earth terminal.
bctwccn the primary and the vcondary winclmgs

Examples of such a metal part arc a metal screen in a transformer (see Sub-clause 13X.3). a metal chassis, CIC.

8.3.4

For Class II apparatus, the accessible parts shall be insulated from live parts either by double insulation specified under Item u) or by reinforced insulation specified under Item h).
This requirement does not apply to insulations. the short-circuiting of which does not cause any shock hazard C.F. if one end of a secondary winding of a separatmg transformer is connected IO an accessible metal part. the other end need not meet any special insulation requirement with regard to the same acce+hlc metal pari.

A component complying with the requirements of Sub-clauses 1'3.1 or 13.8 may bridgr basic, supplementary, double or reinforced insulations. Basic and supplementary insulations may each be bridged by a capacitor complying with the requirements of Sub-clause 13.2. Double or reinforced insulations may be bridged by a single capacitor complying with the requirement,s of Sub-clause 13.2 if an appropriate a'nd reliable procedure is employed to check the uniformity and continued conformance to the relevani specification for the current production. Alternatively, two capacitors of the same nominal'value in series. each complying with the requirements of Sub-clause 13.2, are required. Moreover, the external insulation of a capacitor of the insulated type shall not bridge reincorced irisulation or double insulation used in the construction of the apparatus, unless the exteriial insulation of this capacitor meets the requirements of Sub-clause 8.3.7.

17

(IEC page 37)

IS : 1227401987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

4

If accessible parts are separated from live parts by basic insulation insulation. the follow~ing shall apply.

and supplementary

Each of these insulations shall comply with the requirements of Clause 9 and with the requirements for creepage distances and clearances specified in Sub-clause 8.3.5. Internal insulations not complying with the requirements of Sub-clauses 8.3.6 and 8.3.7 or 8.3.8 are neglected when computing the creepage distances and clearances.

b) If accessible parts are separated

from live parts by reinforced insulation, the following shall apply. The insulation shall comply with the requirements of Clause 9. Moreover, it shall comply with the requirements for creepage distances and clearances specified in Sub-clause 8.3.5. Internal insulations not complying with the requirements of Sub-clauses 8.3.6 and 8.3.7 or 8.3.8 are neglected when computing `the creepage distances and clearances.
of reinforced insulation is given in Fi_gure 11, page 101

An example of assessment

8.3.5

Creepage distances and clearances shall be not less than the values indicated in Table I, except that they may be reduced by 1 mm if all the following three conditions are met:
-

they are not between accessible metal parts of an enclosure and live parts, if such external forces, as can be expected in normal use, including transportation, may reduce them, they are maintained by rigid construction, and of of

-

-

their insulation properties conductive dust produced commutator motors.

are not likely to be significantly affected by any deposition inside the apparatus. for example by the carbon brushes

The minimum creepage distances and clearances shall not bc rcduccd below two-thirds of the values given by the curves of Table I, after taking into account any reduction allowed for wire enamel according to Sub-clause 4.3.3, with a minimum of 0.5 mm for basic insulation and supplementary insulation, and with a minimum of I mm for reinforced insulation.

Compliance

is checked by inspection and measurement. are measured whilst c~,force of 2 N is applied to any internal part connected to accessible parts (including time a,force of 50 N bj, means of the rigid test finger of the enclosure.

The creepage distances and clearances live part (including live wires) and to any wires connected to them) and at the same being applied to any point on the outside

8.3.6

Insulating layers on live parts, or on the inside surface of accessible metal parts or on any other internal metal part, are deemed to provide adequate protection if they withstand the following three tests in the order given. Such layers may be used as reinforced insulation, provided that they are not under such mechanical stress which, at the normal operating temperature, would be likely to lead to deformation or deterioration of the insulating material. Ageing test. The coatedpart is subjected to the test prescribed in I E C Publication 68-2-2: at a temperature of 70 + 2 "C and for a period of seven days (168 h).
18

(IEC page 39)

IS : 122'74-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

After this treatment, the part is allowed to cool at room temperature and inspection shall show that the layer has not loosened or shrunk awav_from the base material.

Impact test.
The part is then conditioned, for a period of 4 h, at a temperature of - 10 + 2 "C. While still at this temperature, the layer is subjected to a blow applied to any point of the layer that is likely to be weak, from a spring-operated impact hammer as shown in Figure 4, page 94. After this test, the layer shall not be damaged; in particular, it shall show no cracks visible to the naked eye.

Scratch test.
Finally,. the part at the highest temperature attained under normal operating conditions is subjected to a scratch test. The scratches are made by means of a hardened steel pin, the end of which has the fornt of a cone having a top angle of40", its tip being rounded with a radius of 0.25 +_0.02 mm. Scratches are made by drawing the pin along the surface at a speed of about 20 mm/s as shown in Figure 5, page 95. The pin is so loaded that the force exerted along its axis is 10 + 0.5 N. The scratches are at least 5 mm apart and at least 5 mm from the edge of the specimen. After this test, the layer shall neither have loosened nor be pierced, and it shall withstand a dielectric strength test as spect$ed in Sub-clause 9.2, the test voltage being applied between the base material and a metal foil in contact with the layer.
The tests may be made on a separate specimen of the tiated part. More stringent tests which are necessary for insulating layers on the outside of metal parts are under consideration.

8.3.7

a) The insulation between live conductors in wires or cables and accessible parts, or between

live parts and conductors in wires or cables connected to accessible metal parts. shall have a thickness of at least 0.4 mm if made of polyvinyl chloride. Other materials are allowed provided that they withstand the dielectric strength test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 and that their thickness ensures an equivalent mechanical strength, where the construction so requires.
b) In Class II apparatus,

double insulation shall be provided between accessible parts and conductorsin wires or cables conductively connected to the supply mains. In the case of conductors in wires or cables connected to accessible metal parts, double insulation shall be provided between these conductors and parts conductively connected to the supply mains. Either the basic insulation or the supplementary insulation shall have a thickness of at least 0.4 mm. The other insulation may be thinner, even if made of polyvinyl chloride, provided that it withstands the dielectric strength test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 for basic insulation nor supplementary insulation. If double insulation consists of two layers which cannot be tested separately, it shall withstand the dielectric strength test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 for reinforced insulation. The enamel layer of a wire complying with I EC Publication 317, grade 2, is acceptable as one of the insulating layers, provided that the combination of the insulations withstands the dielectric strength test specified inSub-clause 9.2 for reinforced insulation.

19

ItEC page 41)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

5% resf voltage of Sub-clause 9.2 is applied bct\recn the conductor and a nreraljoil wrapped
rtigh tlv around the insulation

qf the wire over a length qf IO cm.

3 is applied het\\,een a metal In rhe case of insulating sleeves, the test voltapc of Sub-clause 9._ rod inserted into the sleeve and a metal foil wrapped tightl!, around the sleeve owr a length of IO cm.

8.3.8

Insulations other than those mentioned in Sub-clauses satisfactory if they comply with the following:

8.3.6 and 8.3.7 are considered

to.be

Basic insulation and supplementary insulalion shall each withstand the dielectric strengh test specified in Sub-clause 9.2 unless the thickness of the insulation is at least 0.4 mm. For double insulation either the basic insulation a thickness of at least 0.4 mm. or the supplementary insulation shall have

Reinforced insulation shall have a thickness of at least 2 mm. A thinner insulation is allovved. provided that it has a thickness of not less than 0.4 mm. and that it is not subjected to a mechanical stress which. at normal operating temperature, would be likely to lead to deformation or deterioration of the insulating material. In addition the insulating material shall withstand the dielectric strength test specified in Sub-clause 9.2.
Thee requirements do not apply to transformers complying with Sub-clause 13.8

8.3.9

The construction of the apparatus shall be such as to prevent short-circuitin? of insulations. betueen live parts and accessible metal parts or parts connected to them, due to accidental loosening of screws. etc. Tire requirement Clause Il. is deemed to hc met if the uppuratus withstunds the tests spc.c[fic~d in

8.3.10

The construction of the apparatus shall be such that. should an>' wire become detached, the creepage distances and clearances are not reduced below the values specified in Sub-clause 8.3.4 by the natural movement of a detached wire. This requirement does not apply if there is no risk of a wire becoming detached.

Compliance is checked tqy mspection and measurement.
Examples of methods deemed to prevent a wire end irom becoming detached arc: place the conductor of the wireis anchored to the tag before soldering. is hkely to occur as a result of vibration; wires are twisted together in a reliable manner: `JW close to the soldering unless break`.,

wires are fastened together by insulating tape, sleeves or the like; the conductor of the wire is inserted into a hole in the printed board before soldering, the hole having a diameter slightly greater than that of the conductor; the conductor of the wire is securely wrapped around the terminal by means of a special tool: the conductor of the wire is crimped to the terminal by means of a special tool. The methods of Items a) toJ) apply to internal wires and the methods of Items a) to c) to external flexible cords.

In case of doubt, the vibration test of Sub-clause

11.1.2 is carried out to verij) compliunce.

It is assumed that not more than one connection will become dctachcd at the same time. An accidental contact between detached ends of live wires and parts of the enclosure made of materials to those listed in Sub-clause 8.3.1 is allowed.

similar

(IEC page 43)

20

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

8.3.11

The construction of the apparatus shall be such that. if a. test finger can partly enter the apparatus through a hole in the enclosure (see Figure 1. pa_ec 90). the tip of the test finger may be separated from any live parts by basic insulation only. provided contact cannot be made with the insulation material.

The basic insulation of Table I.
Compliance

may be provided

by a clearance

having a value according

to curve A

is checked by measurement.

9.

Insulation requirements
Moisture treatment

9.1

The safety of the apparatus in normal use.

shall not be impaired

by humid conditions
described

which may occur
,followed

Compliance is checked by the hrtmidir~~treatment immediatel~~ bj, the tests of Sub-clause 9.2. Eiectrical components, und subjected,

in this sub-clansc,

cosers and other parts. which can he removed tyt hund, ure removed

If necessary*, to the humidit~~ treatment with me main purt.

Apparutus arc .wbjccted to the test prescribed 40_1_" C, relutiw humidity: 90% to 95%). Briorc being pluccd in the chumho. i1nci34 c. Th

in I EC

Puhlicution

N-2-3

I tcmperatrrre.

the uppurutus is hronght to N tentperuturr hcr~c~cr~40 C

uppurutus is kept in the chmmhcr for five dfl~*.s f 120 h)
h! kccp~n,$711at thus tcmpcraturc for at

In most cxcs. the appuratus may bc brou_rht to the spccilicd tcmpcraturc least 4 h before the humidity treatment. Some methods of achieving the spccificd relative humiditx\ of bon-lnlcction Type for Constant Kclative Humidity. The air In the chamber must bc stirred not precipitate onto the apparatus. and the chamber

arc described in 1 EC t'ublxation must be so dc+mcd

260: Tc~t_I3xAosurcs water will

that mist or condcnscd

A.fter this treatment, the npparutus shull .&ON.no dumuge in the SL nw of` this stundurd.

9.2

/nsulurion resi.rrunce and dielectric, ,strength

Insulation
Compliance

shall be adequate.
is checked by the following tests and, unless othstx~isc .ctrrtcd, t~r~ntcdicrtcf~~ ufter 9.1. to Sub-clause

the moisture treatment according

The insulutions listed in Tuble III shall he tested: for insulution resistunce with SO0 V d.c.,

for d'>l I rength as follows: IL cc t rtc J'

lnsulutions stressed with d.c. (plus an_vripple) voltuge are tested with N d.c. voituge. Insulution.~ stressed with U.C. voltage UYC tested with un U.C. \~)ltuge at muins frr~qwrc~. M'hcrc coronu, ionization, churge eJTects or the like mq occur. u dc. test vo/tuge is rcw~~nmcnd~d. The test voltqes ure applied for I min.

21

(IEC page 45)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

The apparatus is deemed to cnmpiv v.`iththe requirement If the insulation resistance nlcasured qfter I min i,c-not less t/la!;the vul'uesgil,en in Table III and no~flashover or breakdown occurs during the dielectric strertgrl! test. When iesting enclosures of' insulating material, foil is pressed tightly aguinst accessible parts. The' test is not made on insulation the short-circuiting of which does not cause an?, shock hazard, e.g. in case one end of a secondary winding of a separating transformer is connected to an accessible metal part, the other end need not meet ary special insulation requirement ,tvith regard to the same accc _,lble metal part. Resistors and capacitors compl_yingwith Sub-clauses 13.1 and 13.2 respectively, connected in parallel with the insulations *o be tested, are disconnected. Inductors and lz+ndings, which otherwise would prevent the tesl _j?om being made, are also disconnected. In the case of apparatus w,iGa high:fr~que;w~ pulse ignition, the ignition pulse is ignored in computing the test voltage if the duration of the pulse does not exceed 1 ms.

I. Brtween
supp&

the poles

qf the circuit

dir&r!),

connecrcd

/o the

mains. parts separated insulation. separared bl, reinforced insuiurion. 4 Mf2 Curve R (see Ftgurc 9: h) basic insulation or hi,

2.

Bclween

supplementary 3. Between parts

The

voltage

0 is the hrghest insulation voltages

peak

value

occurring voltage.

across

the insulation

under

rwrnmi arul jkrlr

condirlonr.

thr with

apparatus

being connected

to the ratedsupplj* short-circuited in thr range and 4 240 220

The voltage

across rhc basic, insulation

is to he determitted

the supplementary In respect ojmains

and vice versa. V to 250 reinforced V Ir.m.5.) insulation. the lest voltages are 2 120 I'

peakfor

basic

ond

supplementary

insularions

V peak,for

Curves

A and B of Figure

9, puge

99, are defined

by thefollowing

points: Test voltage (peak) Curve A v v I5 kV 75 kV Curve 1410 4240 3980 15 kV 75 kV v V B

Operaiing (peak)

voltage

34 354 1410

v v v

707

IO kV SO kV Between conductors on

a printed

board,

described

in Sub-clause

4.3.1.

the

a.c.

test volrqge

i.s 3 c with a minimum

of

707 Vpeok.

Accessible metal parts may be connected together during the dielectric strength test An insttiment to carry out the dielectric strength test is described in Figure 8, page 98

(IEC page 47)

22

`5 : 12274-1987 Ed: Pub 491 (1984)

10. 10.1

Fault conditions (see Sub-clause Shock I,arard Protection conditions. agkst

4.3)

electric shock shall still esist when the appxutu>

is operated

under fault

Con@ance is checked by making the tests dcscribcd in Sub-:~iau:~~s6.1 and 8.2, modified as ~!lowrr below, under fhulr conditions. For terminal contacts, the permissible current ii increased to 2.8 1x4 (peak).

The.fault condition described in Sub-clause 4.3.9 shall he maintained until stea& state has been reached, but not for more than 4 h. [f short-circuiting or disconnecting a resistor or a capacitor causes an infringement sf the requirements, the apparatus is not deemed to be unsatisfactory, but the relevant part~shall eompl? with the requirements of Clause 13. !f, during the tests, an insulation mentioned in Table III is subjected to a voltage exceeding the voltage occurring under normal operating conditions, and if this increase involves a higher test voltuge according to Sub-clause 9.2, this insulation shall withstand a test .for dielectric strength at the higher voltage, unless the higher voltage is due to the short-circuiting or disconnection of a resistor or a capacitor complying with the requirements qf Clause 13.
It is advisable IO identify beforehand all the component avoid more than one moisture treatment. parts to be tested with a higher test voltage in order to

10.2

Heating When the apparatus is operated under fault conditions, no part shall reach such a temperature. nor shall flammable gases be liberated to such an extent. that thcrc is a danger of fire to the surroundings of the apparatus. Any heat devclopcd in the apparatus shall not impair its safety. Compliance is checked by subjecting the apparatus to a heating test under jault conditions.

The temperature rises shall not exceed the ~lucs given in Tahlc I/, column II. Hou,cver. higher temperuture rises are allowed .for ,I*inding!s und coil formcrs, provided that u ,fliilure of their insulation does not cause an infringement qf the requirements regarding protcrtion uguinst electric shock, and that no flammable gases ure liberated during the test. It the temperature is limited b_~s the operqtion of thermul releases, fuses orjuring temperatures ure measured 2 min ufter the operution of the device. resistors, the

Jf`no temperature-limiting device operutes, the temperuturcs are measured qftcr u .steu&* state has been reached, but not Later thun after 4 h operation of the uppurutus. If the temperature doubt. is limited by fuses, the following additional test is carried out in care qf

The fuse-link is short-circuited during the test und only the current through this short-circuit link, under the relevant fault conditions, is measured: if this current remains less thun 2.1 times the rated current of the fuse-link, the temperatures ure meusured after a steady stute has been reached, but not later than ufter 4 h operation of the apparatus;

23

(IEC page49)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

- if this current is either immediately 2.1 times the rated current of the firw-link or more. ot after a period oftime reaches this value, both the firs+link. and short-circuit link are removed at that moment and the temperatures arc measured 2 min otter the removal.

In case of doubt the maximum resistance value of the,firse-link shall he taken into account when establishing the value ~oj`the current.
The above test is based on the fusing characteristics specified in I bC Publication 127: Cartridge Fuse-links Miniature Fuses. which also gives the information necessary to calculate the maximum resistance value. for

In determining the current through the fuse, consideration should be given to the fact that this current may vary as a function of time. It should be measured therefore as soon as possible a.ter sbvitching on. taking into consideration the heating time of the apparatus, especially where electronic tubes are used.

Temperatures are measured as indicated in Clause 6, except that, ,for parts so enclosed ot located in the apparatus that internal James cannot ignite materials wutsidc the enclosure, the q?ect is checked by measuring the temperature of the enclosure q!` the part I$ the apparatus. whichever applies.
Melting of insulation materials not of importance within the meaning of this standard is disregarded.

Te check whether gases liberated from high-frequency spark generator is made.

component parts are fiannnahle

or not, u test with a

If a temperature rise exceeding the value given in Table II is due to short-circuiting an insulation, the apparatus is not deemed to he unsati.sfactor_v hrrl this insulation shall ~~ith.vt:tnd a dielectric strength test as described in Sub-clause 9.2 prcccdcd hj, the nioisrurc trccllrnt')tf according to Sub-clause 9.1. //~a temperature rise `exceeding the value given in Table tl is due to .Fhort-c,irt.uiti,lg or disconnecting u resistor, u capacitor or on inductor, rhc apparatus is noi tlecnic~l to hc, unsatisfuctorv if the resistor, the cupacitor or the inductor cornplics \t.ith the rrqriirctllc~t!t.\.of Ciausc 13 lw Sub-clau.~ 4.3.6).
!f'u temperature rise cscecding the vulucs of Table /I is due to rhc di.v~o,lrlcclirtS of (I rrsistor. tile overload test spccijied in Item h) of' SN~-~~~I~.FC 13. I is repeutcd on the resistor nunrntctl in Ihe apparatus, including the connections mude hl. the tllmlllltul,tllrCr. During this ~c.vt, the connections shall not jail.

ij a temperuturr rise on a printed board ut one or more .~nall ureus, the totul area of which does not exceed 2 ctn2,for each.faulr condition, exceeds the va111~.~ ~;YOI in Tuhlc Ii, the appara~u.~ is not considered to be unsatisfuctory, provided no~flunvnuhle ga.se.s are liherarcd dtrirlg~iw ~cst and, in addition, the printed bourd shall withstand the ji,llo\l~ing .flantc test :

The, test is made according supplemented as follo~~s. the pre-conditioning deleted,

to Sub-cluuse

4.3 oj I E C Puhlicution

249-l

modtjicd

and

in standurd atmospheric as prescribed

conditions as prescribed in Sub-clause 4.3.3.3, Jirsr purugraph,

I .I .I is

treatment of the specimens 12.5 + 5 -.C. during 24 h I

in Sub-clause

is made UI

The uvrruge burning time of the jour specimens shuil not exceed IS s, ir-respective of the thickness of the base material.
To verify compliance or insulation test. with the requirements of this sub-clause. it may be necessary to rcpcat the dicledtric strength

(IEC page 51)

24

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

11. 11.1

Mechanical strength Compierc apparatus

The apparatus shall have adequate mechanical strength and be so constructed withstand such handling as may be expected in normal use.

as to

Compliance is checked by the following tests. However. devices forming a part qf the mains plug are oniv subjected to the impact test as described in Sub-clause 11 .1.3.

11.1.1 aBump rest
The apparatus is placed on a horizontal support of wood which is allowed tofall 50 times_from a height qf 5 cm onto a wooden table. After the test, the apparatus shall show no damage in the sense of this standard.

11.1.2 Vibration test
The apparatus is subjected to a vibration endurance conditioning b!* sl~~eeping, as specjfied in I E C Publication 68-2-6: Part 2: Tests - Test Fc and Guidance: Vibration (sinusoidal). The apparatus is fastened in its normal position of use to the ~ihration-grncralor by means of straps round the enclosure. The direction qf vibration is vrrlicai and the srvcr-itjqis: Duration. Amplitude : Sweep rale: 30 min 0.35 mm approsimurciv one oc'lar,*c per minitlc

Sweep frequency range: IO Hz. 55 Hz, IO H:

I 1.1.3

Impact tesl

The uppuratus is hcidfirm!,* in the hund and is su@~lerl to three hlo~,s,fk~~ru s,~rirlg-(~pcr~lt'd impacl hummer us shown in Figure 4, pugc 94, applied to cays point of the csloior rhar protccrs live Qarrsand is likei)* to be weak, including hundies, 1c~~cr.r. .s,i.itc.h knobs and thr like, bus pressing the hammer nose perpendicularly to the surfuce. This test is also made on signal lamps and their col'ers, but orti~ if thq* protrude from the enclosure by more than 5 mm or if the individual projected surfuc'e ureu e.u~ed~s I cm'. Flush tubes and incandescent lamps, other than signui lamps, arc excluded from the impact test. After the test, ~theapparatus shall withstand the die/e&c strength tesl' qf Sub-&use 9.2 and shall show no damage in the sense of this standurd; in purticulur, live parts shall not have hccome accessible, enclosures shall show no visible cracks and insukuting hurriers shall ~01 have been damaged.
Damage to the finish, small dents which do not rcducc crecpap distances or clearances below the specified values, cracks which are not visible to the naked eyr, and wrfacc cracks in fibre-reinforced mouldings and the like arc ignored.

25

(IEC page 53)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

I?.

Parts connectrd

to thr supply mains

12.2

The Insulating

materials

referred

to in Sub-clause

6.1 shall be resistant

to fire.

-4 ITC: is under consideration

13.

Components `An:r :5.>mponrnts arc part of a range of values it is usually noI necessar) IO 1es1 every value within that range. If \~TI. r,lnt'_e of values consists of several technolog+ll) homogeneous sub-rangcs. the sample should be repreienrarlve 01'ext. of these sub-ranges. Moreover. it is recommended. where possible. IO make USCof thr concepr of jtrc~rurally slmllar components.

Resistors the shori-circuiring or disconnecrinf of;vhich would cause an infrinpment of the requirements for operation under fault conditions (see Clause IO). shall have an adequate stable rebislance value under overload. Such resistors shall be positioned inside the enclosure of the apparatus.

h

I--or other resistors, cicrrcnt through to the specified conditions.

the ten spcciriiei~.s urc eucli .sirt+tcd i7wri.siircii is jittcd is kept before tlirolrgh cw.stNnt. wlue, \\~liicli

to u w~lrtrgc oJ'.sirch u 1~114~thrrr the N rc.si.vtor. Iming u re.ri.sttriiw eq1rrrl i4iider jtr~rlt tl(ljkr nlor(

it is 1.5 tit7ie.s the wluc iionlinal the test the wltugc the value nwanrrcd

to the c4pprrri4tlr.r, IRAQI opcrutetl is uttcrirlcd heut test. aml .shull mt

Duriitg

The value oj' resisturm thun 3OY%from .I.0 faih4re.s For resistors und clearances cluuse 8.3.4. Resistors ,i,ith internal are ullowed. connected he1 Ii'een

is nzeu ,L4red Cohen .sterrdj. stutc the dump

hct,lveen end-cup

live pc4rt.s Nnd uccessihlc tcrn~iri~4tion.r .sliull

mrtc41 pc4rt.s. the creeprr~ye di.stumw with the rcy1iireinciit.s qf' Sub-

conipl~~

end-leud

termi~lution.s

are only,

ullond

f

the intcrrlul

.spuciyq.s trre

cleurl_v and precisely

defined.

Coinpliuncr

is checked

ty

nieu.si4reinent

and inspection.

(IEC page 55)

26

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

1; 3 _ ._

Capacitors

13.2.1 Capacitors and resistor-capacitor units. the short-circuiting or disconncc! rng 01` xhich would cause an infringement of the requirements under iault conditions M'ith rcyard IO shock hazard. shall have adequate dielectric strength. Compliance is checked by the .follo\\?ng tests. 132.2 General For capacirors and units comprising capacitors with shunr resistors, a sample qf30 cw~ponents is required. All 30 are subjected to the initial resistance measuremenr (Sub-~hc.rc 13._`.3). A sample q{ ten is then subjected to the surge test (Sub-clause 132.4). another .SCirJ~pleqf ten is subjected 10 the endurance test (Sub-clause 13.2.5), and rile remaining ten ure slrhjeclcd to the humia'it_s test I Sub-clause 13.2.6). 13.' _. 3 i 3.2.3.1 Initial resistance The resisrance measured between the terminals of u conJpoJJent cotnprising
resistor shall br not less than 0.5 MR. nor Jkore thun 4 MR. rJwu.SurC~dat II cu,wciror und

a shltnt

The insulalion resistance of a cupacitor ( \c*here there is no shunt resistor), (d.c. I maintained for 2 min. shall be not less than 1000 .\fR.

5'10 V

13.2.3.2

The sample q/ 30 is to he mrtrsurcd. und the resistuncc
IitJiits.

C!f cuc~h conlponcrtt

is to hc withit

the spcc$d

132.4 132.4. 1

Surge test
.d
c'Otll~OilCllt .dltd~ tW

.SU/JjCWd (0 50 di.SC~hCWgC~.S Of U l?lCISiiJJlllJJ

)`Nfl'

Of`

~,7hllh.,~iY~l??

li

1 IfI-

cupucitor

charged

to

IO k V.

A.Ster the ICSI: a j the rcsistancc bctwen
resi.stor shall

the tcrmir~u1.s (!I' a co~JJponent comprising
b!- IJJorc thun 50% qf the wluc qf a capucitor 2 min, ( \c.hen there is no shunt MQ,

u Cupucitor rncuswcd tkfore

und

u shunt

not huve changed resistunce

the, test ; ut

b) the insulation
ld.c.),

resisror)

, mcuswed

500 V

muintained,for

.shull be not less thun NO

c)

the component alternating for foil wrapped un insuluted

shall

withstund

without

breukdo\~*n,Jor applied between

u period

of 1 ,Jlin, u 2000

L' lr.tJ1.s.)

voltuge closely

of mains frequency, between the around

the tertJJitJu1.s of' thr CwJJponent and, together und the CYISP.or u metul

component,

the terminals

connected

body c$ the component, hut muintuining a 3 JJJm distance between thefoil and each component terminal. The test voltage is to be ohtuincd in the munner specified in Sub-&use 13.2.4.4. The circuit to be used in performing
the surge test is shown in

13.2.4.2

Figure 3u), page 92.

13.`2.4.3 If the component under test contuins u resistor which nwJd dissipate more than 0.5 W during the tests of Item c) of Sub-cluuse 13.2.4.1, the component is to be cooled during the test by immersion in u bath of silicone. oil or minerul oil.

27

(IEC page 57)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

The test voltage spec#ied in Item c) qf Sub-clause 13.2.4.1 shall be obtained,from a suitable 13.2.J.3 rransl`ormer, the output voltage of which can be adjusted. The voltage is to be increased gradual& .tronz zero. at a rate sf 75 V/s until the required teir ralue.is reached, and is to be held at thar value.for 1 min. A sample of ten components is subjected to the.surge test with no failures permitted. I' one i3.U.5 component fails, an additional sample of ten components is tested, all of which shatl then comply with the surge test. [f more than qne of theJirst sample_fail or [f one or more of the second sample .fail, the components are deemed not to be satisfactor-v.

13.2.5

Endurance

test of a component under the conditions described in

13.2.5.1 After 1500 h of operation Sub-clause 13.2.5.2:

a) the resistance between the terminals of a component comprising a capacitor and a shunt
resizror shall not have changed more than 50% of the value measured before the test; (d-c. I maintained for 2 min, shall be not less' than 500 ML?;

6) rite insulation resistance of a capacilor (where there is no shunt resistor), measured at 500 V

c) (he component shall satisfy the test
13.2.5.2

of Item

c) of Sub-clause 13.2.4.1.

The components are pluced in u circula(ing uir owrr~for LI period of 1500 h. The uir in the _

A somplc of WI components is subjected IO rhe ettdurancr~test \l.itil 1x1,firilltrc.\ pcrruittc~d. 13.2.5.3 [f ow contponent .faiIs. an additionul sut~~ple qf ierl component.s is ~e.stc~d, uil of which .shaNthen comply- lt.ith(he endurance test. Jf more than one qf ~hejirst sumpke firil or [j'onc or more of rhc second sumple fail, the components ure deemed not IO be .suti_sfuctory.

13.2.6

Humidity

test

A component shall be subjected to the lest prescribed in I E C Publicurion 68-2-3, severity 13.2.6.1 21 duys. 13.2.6.2 After recover?*:

a) the resistance between terminals of a componennl comprising u capacitor and a shunt rcsisror shall not have changed by more thun 50% of the vulue measured before the lest; b) the insulation resistunce of a capacitor (when there is no shunt resistor), measured aI ~500 V (d.c.1, maintained for 2 min, shall be not less than 300 MQ: c) the componenr shall satisfy the test ef Item c) of Sub-&use 13.2.4.1.

(IEC page 59)

28

IS : 12274~1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

I 3.3.6.3 A sample qt` ten components is subjected to the humidit?, test with no,Jhilures permitted. !f one component .iails, an additional sample qf ten components is tested. all of which shall then comply with the humidity test. If more than one qf the.first santplc.fail or if one or more qf the second'sample .fail, the components are deemed not to be sati<factory.

13.3 13.3.1

Fusing and interrupting devices

Thermal releases shall have adequate rupturing capacity.
Compliance is checked by a test in which are established such conditions as are necessary to cquse the release to operate. During the test, repeated ten times, no sustained arcing and no damage in the sense of this standard shall occur. If by construction the release element is destroyed by operation, the test is made on ten individual elements.

13.3.2 Fuse-links used in order to prevent the apparatus from becoming unsafe within the sense of this standard shall comply with I EC Publication 127 unless they have a rated current odtsjde the range specified in that standard. The rated current and symbol relative to the pre-arcing timelcurrent characteristic of the fuse-link shall be marked on its holder or close to it. in the order given in I EC Publication 127. Fuse-holders so designed that fuse-links can be connecied in parallel in the same circuit, shall not be used.
Compliance is checked h, lhc lcsts of Sub-clause 10.2 und h!. inspection.

13.3.3

Fusing resistors shall have adequate rupturing capacity.
Conlpliunce ix checked during the tests urtder.fuult conditiom ~scc Sub-cluuse 10.2).

13.3.3 If live parts are rendered accessible during replacement of fusing or interrupting access to such parts shall not be possible by hand operation only:
Compliance is checked by inspection.
.

devices,

13.4 Muins switches 13.4.1 Mains switches, if any, shall disconnect all parts of the apparatus from all poles of the supply mains with the exception of the protective earth conductor. However, fuses, interference suppression coils, capacitors and discharge resistors between mains poles need not be disconnected. Disconnection from all poles is not necessary if the apparatus is so constructed that, with the switch `in the off position,,no capacitor, except those between the mains poles, can remain under mains voltage stress.
Compliance is checked by inspection.

29

(IEC page 61)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

!?.-I.?

hlain~ switches shall have adequate making and breaking capacity constructed that the moving contacts can come to rest only in the "on" positions.

and shall be so and in the "off"

Compliance is checked b_vinspection und h!, one qf rhc,t~~llowing endurance rests: the switch, tested as part of the upparatus ,1yorkin, (7 under normal operl!ring conditions. is subjected to: - _C 000 cvcles of operation when used on apparurus having a stored energ?. not exceeding I.50 J, or IO 000 cycles of operation when used on apparatus having a stored energy exceeding 150 J.

Both rests are curried out at LIrate of one q&e per minute, the duration of the "on-load" period being 50 s and the "ofl-load" period being 10 s. During the "off-load" period the_flash ca,oaciror is discharged with a time constant of I s.

b)

the switch. tested as a genzralpurpose component in n circuit as shown in Figure IO, page 100, is subjected to: - _i000 c.vc1e.s of operation when used on opparntus having a stored energ!' up to I_50J and IO 000 cycles of operution when used on qpurarus having u stored cncrg~' in esccss qf 150 J.

Both rests are curried ozt at a rute qf seven q'cles per minute. the durution ol'thc "on-/ood" and "qff-load" periods being equul.jbr cuch cj*cle.

The tests urc mude on rhrec specimens. [f one qJ:the .specimeiis,frtilsin either of the tcst.~of &h-t 1rir.se.v 13.4.2.! or 13.4.17.2.the tc.vts qf these ,sub-clauses urc repcured on three nc~~spec'imens, NO.firilurc hcing ullo~~l.

13.4.2.1 The switch shall be so constructed conditions is not excessive.

that the temperature

rise under normal

operating

.Compliance is checked b? the ,following test: Following the endurance conditioning according to Item a) of Sub-cluusc 13.42, the .s\rirch is'louded;%r I It with the ruted mains current of the.flush uppururus (see Sub-cl~rsc 13.4.4). Follo\ring the endurunce conditioning according to Item h) of Sub-cluusc 13.42, the .sn.itch with conductors having u nominul cross-sectionul uretr of'O.75 mm' und is then loaded for I h with its rated current.
isfitted

In both cases, t!ze current is pussed through the specimen b!l meuns of an ausilicrry switch.

(IEC page 63)

30

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

Thetemperature q/ the terminuls is dctermincd h!* means of mcl~!`ng particles or sir;tilar indicators, or bv means qf thermocouples which aw so cho.sen ana' positioned that the?? have negligible effect 011 tltc temperature being deiermincd.
The temperature 13.4.2.2
-.

rise shall not exceed 5.5 K during the I h period. dielectric tests. strength.

The switch shall have adequate

Compliance is checked by the foilowing

the switch shall withstand, `in the "on" posrrinn, a dielectric strength test as spec$ed in Sub-clause 9.2, without being previously sutjccted to the moisture treatment, the test voltage being decreased b_~, SO0 V r.m.s. (7t)O 1,'peuk). The voltuge is appiie.d between live parts and those parts which become accessible #*hen the .w.itch is mounted in an apparatus, and, in addition, between the poles in the cuse of an ull-pole mains switch; the switch Sub-clause being 1000 or resistor shall withstand, in the "of' position. a dielectric strength test as .xpec$ed in 9.2, Hithout being previously subjected to the moisture treatment, the test voltuge V r.m.s. (I 410 V peak j across each contuct gap. During the test. UIIJ~ capacitor in parallel with the contnct gcps is disconnected.

-

13.4.3

Switches shall be identified

unambiguously.

Where switches are submitted for testing for subsequent use as general purpose components apphcable to this standard. they shall comply with the relevant test of Sub-clause 13.42 as well as the requirements of the clauses of this standard where applicable. The switches shall be marked with type reference, manufacturer's name or t&de mat-k. rated voltage. rated current and either t~he rated peak surge current or the ratio between the rated peak surge current and the rated currenl. Compliance is checked bJ_ inspection
NIP

b!. the xkwutt
3 4x Or so

tests.

Examples of markmg of general purpose swltchcs: 2/x 250 Or

2 A/8 A 250 V The preferred rated currents arc

or 2 A/4x 250 V -

I A. 2 A and 5 A.

The preferred values of the ratio between the rated peak surge current and the rated current arc 2, 4, 8. 16. 32. and 64. Where the ratio is quoted. this number is folbwcd by the sign x. The values for the rated voltage are 130 V and 250 V.

13.4.4

The characteristics of the switch, with reference to the marking. shall be appropriate the function of the switch in the apparatus under normal operating conditions. Compliance is checked by inspection and by measurement. The ruted mains current of a fiash apparatus is determined b_y thc_foll~~~c~ing~m~ula:

for

where :

i, = maximum mains current (peak value) immediatcty after a flash has been made i, = mains current (peak value) at the end of rhe re-charge period qf`lheflash capucitor. Thr end CI/ the re-clrarRc pried
is delermined IJJ the indicaror or. if there i,s no ittdrcator. h!, Ihe measured v&u~c ott rhc~_jiu.4 crtpucitor, ulich shall be 8% of the maximum peak volrage, rhe apporarus supplied at its rated mnitts voltage.

31

(EC

page 65)

IS : 1227401987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

The apparatus is operated under normal operating conditions except that the apparatus is connected to its rated supply voltage. i0 and 1, are measured when the apparatus is ready forjash to the mains supply for at least 30 min. operation and has been connected

The peak surge current is the maximum peak value of the mains current when the flash apparatus is switched on, after thejash capacitor has been discharged~completely. Current spikes up to JO0 ps duration are disregarded. The measured peak surge current and calculated rated mains current (I,) shull not exceed the marked current rating of the mains switch.

13.5 Safety switches Safety switches if any shall disconnect the apparatus from all poles of the mains and shall operate satisfactorily, even if the enclosure of the apparatus is opened slowly.
Compliance is checked by inspection and by manual test, without, however, trying to maintain an arc.

13.6

Voltage-setting devices

The apparatus shall be so constructed that changing the setting from one voltage to another or from one nature of supply to another is unlikely to occur accidentally.
Compliance is checked by?inspection and by manual test.
Changing of the setting which

necessitates

consextive

movements

by hand is deemed

to comply

with this

requirement.

13.7

Batteries

If screws are used to fasten covers of battery compartments,

these screws shall be captive.

The battery shall be so arranged that there is no risk of accumulation of flammable gases. Apparatus containing batteries holding liquid shall be so designed that insulations cannot be impaired by leakage of the liquid.
Compliance is checked by inspection. 13.8 13.8.1 Windings

Inductors Inductors, the short-circuiting or disconnecting of which would cause an infringement of the requirements for operation under fault conditions (see Clause I~O), shall have adequate overload capacity.
Compliance is checked by the following test. When the inductor has reached the temperature which occurs after use of the apparatus for 4 h under normal operating conditions, it is connectedfor I min to an U.C. voltage of twice the value and twice the frequency of the voltage applied under normal operating conditions. During the test, no defect is permitted.
For inductors

subjected

to pulses, tests are under consideration.

(IEC page 67)

32

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

1J.8.2

Insulation of windtngs Separating transformers, induction motors where the power is supplied to the stator only, relay coils and as far as applicable, autotra sformers, are considered to provide reinforced insulation between live parts and accessible mek..t parts or parts connected to accessible metal parts, if they are so constructed that their use will not `impair the protection against electric shock. The requirement is met when these components satisfy either the constructional requirements and dielectric strength test of Item a) or the test and construlrtional requirements of Item b) . a) All creepage distances and clenrances shall comply) with the requirements of Sub-clause 8.3.5 for reinforced insulation. The coil-farmers providing reinforced insulation shall have a thickness of at least 0.4 mm. For separating transformers. Partition walls providing reinforced insulation shall have a thickness of at least 0.4 mm.

When a single coil-former with separate partition walls is used, special measures shall be taken. An example is b_v using an insulating film covering the slit \chere the partition wall meets the coil-former, in order to prevent reliably any conductive connection bet\l.een the primary and secondary windings, even when a wire breaks \r,ithin the lvinding.
When the windings arc positioned concentritcallv. there shall be reinforced insulation between the primary and secondary windings. However, rhe reinforced insulation may consist of :hree separate Iayers, provided that each combination of two layers piuccd in contact between the two metal pins as shown in Figure 8. page 98, can nirhsrand the diefccrric strength test of Table II/, /ten/ 3, M`itltout being previously* subjected to rhe humidit!~ treatment. Sprcial mesures shall bc taken 10 prevent o n*irc or u broken end of u \rire slipping ofl the outer windings onto the inner windings, or vice versa.

-

-

The insulation between the primary and sccondurj, windings untl hctwecn the primary windings and (he iron core, of the iron core is connected to acc~~ihle rnetul parts, and between secondary windings and the iron core, if the iron core is connected to live purts, shall withstand the dielectric strength test of Tublc III, Item 3, inrrnediutel~~ after hu:,ing been subjected to the humidity treatment specified in Sub-clause 9.1.

For other components: The insulation betwe~en the live windings and accessible metal parts, or parts intended to be connected to accessible metal parts, .shall rzithstand the dielectric strength test of Tuble III, Item 3, immediately after having been subjected to the humidity treatment spec$ed in Sub-clause 9.1.

b) Three specimens of the component are subjected to seven cycles, euch consisting of the following sequence of tests, with a recovery period of 24 h in ambient conditions between euch cycle. The specimens are placed in an oven for a period of 72 h at a temperature equal to rhe value of the temperature rise as determined by the test of Sub-rluuse 6.1 plus 70 "C. For sepuruting transformers a voltage of 500 V r.m.s. is applied between the primary and secondary windings.

33

(IEC page 69)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

.A, fier 24 ir rccover_v ar ambient conditions. the specinterts are suhjccred to the test prescribed ill I E C Publication 68-2-b. with the fbllowing paranwter.s:

Duration: Arnplitud>: Frequenq~: Direction: i'juring, the vibration test. the specimens After the vibration test, the specimens 9.1 -for a duration of 48 h.

3 inin I.2 t?rn 5.5 & 5 Hz verticai
mdjsed IIS in the appuratus.

are positioned

are subjected IO the !wnidity

treatmwt

specified in

Sub-clause

For separating transformers qfter each humidit_v eqosure, the imulation between the primaq, and secondan, windings and between the primar_v windings and the iron cow, if thr iron core is
connected to accessible metal parts, shall and between w?thstarul secondary, the dielectric \t.inditlps strength and the irou core, if the iron test of Table //I. /ten1 2. core is connected to live parts,

For other components,
and accessible withstand metal the dielectric

qfter each hun1idit.v exposure. the imulutiorr bctrvee~r the live ,t?rldings
or parts intended to he connected to wcessiblr nwtul parts. .&II strength

parts,

:e.st qf Tublc III, Item 2.

4 component corkpl~~ing with these reyuiromwt.s is not impected us regards the irlterriul creepage distances, irltcrnul clearanws urtd di.stmcc.s throug~h i, sulutiom.

13.8.3

~run$ormer.s

irttended

to provide

protection

hi, earthing

Transformers intended to provide protection with tne following requirement.

by earthing (see Sub-clause

8.3.3) shall comply

A metal screen intended to bc connected IO the .wfet_y earth tcrmiwl of un uppurutus shull be positioned betbvecn the printur~~ und secondur~ windings in such u NYIJ* thut it efj&.tiwl?' prel~cnt.s the primary. soltagc being applied to the .secondaq~ winding in the case of UII irwrtlation fuult.

(IEC page 71)

33

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

23.9 13.9.1

.Votors

Motors shall be so construct, .! as to prevent, in estended normal use. any electrical or mechanical failure impairing 7 1ompliance with this standard. The insulation :.' ail not be affected and contacts and c+lluecCons shall be such that they do not work loose by heating, vibration, etc.
Compliance is checked by the following tests carried out on the apparatus under nnrmnl operating conditions. a! The motor is connected yoitage, each time.for for periods apparatus. In the case of short-time
It may he convement

to I .I times the rated supply voltage and to 0.9 times the rated supp/~* 48 h. h/lotors for short-time with the operating or intermittent operation are connected of the time if limited b_y the construction

in accordance

operation,

suitable cooling intervals are inserted.
after the test of Sub-clause 6. I.

to carry out this test immediately

b/ The motor is started 50 times while connected times while connected

to I .I times the rated supply voltage and 50 being

to 0.9 times the rated srrppl~* voltage, each period qf connection

at least 10 times the period from start to .full speed. but not less than 10 s. The intervc:!.y between c, starts shall be not less than three times the period of connection.

In addition. u motor provided with a centrjfqal or other automutica!/~~ operated starting s\\.itch.is started 5 000 times at 0.9 times tire ruted suppI\' wltage. During the test, additional wntilation maJ' he used.

Fnr induclmn

motors with power supplied to the stator only, see also Sub-clause

13.8.2

13.92

Motors with rotating windings placed in grooves and subjected (peak) shall have creepxge distances and clearances of at Icast:
-

to a voltage

over 34 V

-

2 mm for insulation 4 mm for insulation
Compliance is checked

between between

iron cores and windings of enamelied iron cores and accessible parts.

wires;

tq. mea.wremcnt.

13.9.3

Motors shall be so constructed insulations, etc., are not exposed
is checked

or mounted that wifing. windings, commutators, slip-rings, to oil, grease or other substances having 2 deleterious effect.

Cornpliunw

bJ_ inspection

13.9.4

Screw-type brush caps snail be capable abutment and shall engage by a minimum
Compliance is checked

of being screwed home to a shoulder of three full threads.

or similar

by inspection and bl. manual test.

35

(IEC page 73)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

13.9.5

Movmg rarts liable to cause persona1 injury shall be so arranged or enclosed as to provide in normal us: adequate protection against this danger. Protective enclosures, guards and the like shall hzve adequate mechanical strength. Tl:e,, shall not be removable by hand. Complian:r is checked ty inspection and bv manual test. shall have adequate mechamcal strength.

13.9.6

Series motors

Compliance is checked h_s insportion and by connection to 1.3 times the rated supply voltage for J mirl \r-i!h the lowest possible load. After the test, windings or connections shaN not have loosened and there shall be no other deterioratior: impairing the safety of the motor.

14. 14.1

Terminal detices Plugs and Iockets Plugs ani appliance couplers for the connection of the apparatus to the supply mains and socket-outiers for providing mains power to other apparatus shall comply with the relevant specifications for plugs and socket-outlets and for appliance couplers. Plu_rs ant appliance couplers which are live. althou_ch nor intended for the connection of the appars;us to the supply mains, .shall comply with 1 EC Publication 83: Plugs and Socket-out& for Domestic and Similar General Use. Standards. and I EC Publication 310: Appliance Couplers for Household and Similar Gcncral Purposes, rcspcctivcl>,. as far ;I\ applicable. with the exception of the shape and dimension.s. They shal: not be compatible with mains plugs. mains socket-outlets and appliance couplcrb. to thcsc

14.1.1

Mains so&et-outlets mounted on Class II apparatus outlets of other Class II :!pparatus.

shall only allow connection

Mains so&et-outlets mounted on Class I apparatus shall either allow connection of Class 11 apparatus only or shall be provided with protective earth contacts which arc rcliabl>. connected :o protective earth terminals or contacls. Compliar;cr is checked drccording to the relevant specjficurion and h_~, inspection. 14.1.2 Connec:ors not intended for the mains supply shall not be interchanfeablc with khe mains plugs, sockzr-outlets or appliance couplers, complying M.ith the relevant specifications.

Compliance is checkea' uccording to the relevant spec$cafion 14.2 14.2.1 Devices jiirming a part of the mains plug A device provided with pins intended to be introduced impose undue strain on these socket-outlets.

and by inspection.

into fixed socket-outlets

shall not

Compliance is checked by engaiirrg the device, as in normal use, br*ifhthe socket-outlc: of a test apparatus as shown in Figure 6,page 96. The buluncing urm qf'fhc test apparatuspivot.r ubout a horizontal axis through the centrc lines of the contact tubes oJ`the socket-outlet ut a di.rtuncc of 8 mm behind the engagement fuce qf'fhe socket-outlet.

(IEC

page75)

36

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pbb 491 (1984)

With the device not in engagement, the balancing arm is in equilibrium, the engagement, face of the socket-outlet being in the vertical position. A.fter the device has been engaged, the torque to he applied to the socket-outlet to maintain its engagemenr.face in the vertical plane is determined bJ> the position sf a weight on the balancing arm. The torque shall not exceed 0.25 Nm.
This test is compatible with the test described in the 1 EC standard similar purposes - Part I (in preparation). for plugs and socket-outlets for household and

The testing dence shown in Figure 6, page 96. is intended for the tesring of devices forming a part of the mains plug with dimensions in accordance with plugs of Group C in I EC Publication 83. For devices forming a part of the mains plug with dimensions other test devices and requirements may be necessary. of tiroup A or Group B in I EC Publication 83,

142.2

The device shall comply

with the standards

for the dimensions

of r.~ai.?s plugs.

Compliance is checked by measurement in accordance with the relevant standard.
The dimensions of some types of mains plugs are specified in I EC Publication 83.

11.3

Terminalsfor external flexible cords

13.3 1 Terminals shall be so located or shielded that even if a strand of a conductor should escape from a terminal. there is no risk of accidental contact between live parts and~accessible metal pans. A free strand of a live cond ctor shall not touch any accessible metal part and a strand of an earthing conductor, if any. shall not touch any live part. Compliance is checked by inspec:ion and bj. the follo~\?ng test. An 8 mm leyth of insulation is removed from the end of a stranded conductor hovirtp the nominul cross-sectionul area spec$ed in Cluuse 15, which is then connected to the ~tcrmirlul lt.ith one strand free. The free strand is bent in evcr~~possible direction without tearing hack the insulation and without bending the strand around barriers and it shuN not make contact prohibit& k!, the requirement. 13.3.2 Screw terminals shall be so fixed that they will not work loose when the screw: are tightened or loosened. Compliance is checked by connecting und disconnecting ten times a conductor of the specified maximum cross-sectional area. The value of the torque to be applied shall be 213 of the \,alucgiven in Table V.
Screw terminals may `be prevented from working loose by two fixing screws, by fixing with one screw in a recess without appreciable play, or by other suitable means.

14.3.3 Screw terminals shall allow connection to be made with sufficient damaging the conductors. Furthermore, they shall allow a conductor special preparations (e.g. soldering of the end of the conductor, use of eyelets) and they shall prevent the bare conductors from slipping tightened.

contact pressure without to be connected without of cable lugs or bending out when the screws are lccording to

Compliance is checked by inspection of the conductor ufter it has been fitted Sub-clause 14.3.2 for the first time.

37

(IEC page 77)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)
l-1.3.4 The supply conductors and the earthing conductor of u non-detachable shall not be soldered directly to the conductors of a printed board.

mains cord or cable

Compliance 11.4 Protective

is checked by inspection.

earth terminal is provided with a protective earth terminai. the following shall apply:

If an apparatus

a) for apparatus provided with a connector socket for the mains supply, the protective contact shall be an integral part of this socket;

earth

b) for apparatus to be connected to fixed wiring or provided with a non-detachable flexible cord or cable, the protective earth terminal shall be adjacent to the mains terminals.

The protective earth conductor shall be connected to a screw terminal, termination or to another device of comparable effectiveness.

to a soldered

The protective earth terminal shall be of a robustness at least equal to that of the mains zterminals and of a type such that the same tools can be used for the connection of the conductors. All parts of a protective earth terminal shall be such that there is no danger of corrosion -resulting from contact with the copper of the earth conductor or \vith any ~othcr metal part.

A protective earth terminal shall comply ivith the requircmcnts of Sub-clause 11.3. In addition. cithcr the screw or the body shall be of brass or of' other metal no less resistant to corrosion and the contact surfaces shall be bare metal. It shall no\ bc possible to loosen the screw by hand.

Requlremcnts consldcratlon.

and tests for conncctmg

means other than scrcu wrmlnal\

and wldcrcd

tcrmlnatwns

arc under

The connection between the protective earth tcrmlnals and Sub-clause 8.3.3) to be connected thereto shall be of ;t IOU, resistance. Compliance is checked hi, the fbllorr~ing (est.

parts

rcquircd

(see

A current of IO A dcrived,fiom un u.c. soww with u no-load w~ltugc not c~.~cwding 6 I/ i.rpuxwd /or 1 min hc~rrwn the protective earth tcrminul und each (?I'rhc uc~ccxvihlc wctul purts in turn.

The voltage drop between the protective eurth terminal of the uppuratus and the ucccssihlc metal part is measured and rhe rcsistunce is calculated from the current und this voltugc drop. The resistance qf thejicxihlc cord is not included in the resistance mcusurcment.

The resistance shall not exceed 0.5 R.
Care IS taken that the contact resistance between the tip of the measuring probe and the metal part under WSI does not Influence the test results In the cast of a low rated supply voltage, a reduced rcsistancc value may bc ncccssary.

(IEC page 79)

38

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

15. External flexible cords 15.1 Mains supply flexible cords shall co,mply with I EC Publication 327: Polyvinyl Chloride Insulated Cables of Rated Voltages up to and in&ding 45Oi750 V, or I E C Publication 215: Rubber Insulated Cables of Rated Voltages up to and including 450/750 V. A non-detachable mains cord shall be of the same type as prescribed for cords sets in I EC Publication 799: Cord Sets.
Compliance Publications is checked by testing mains supply Jlesible cords according to IE C 227 or 245 and by inspection.
flexible cords are allowed.

In some couniries, non-sheathed

Non-detachable flexible cables and cords of Class I apparatus shall be provided with a green/yellow core, connected to the protective earth terminal of the apparatus and if a plug is provided, to the protective earth contact of the plug.
Compliance is checked by inspection.
l-73: Colours of the Cores of

The colour code for cores of flexible mains cords is contained in I EC Publication Flexible Cables and Cords.

15.2 Conductors of mains supply cords shall have such a cross-sectional area that when a short-circuit occurs at the apparatus end of the cord, the protective devices in the electrical installation operate before the cord overheats.
Compliance is checked by inspection.
is that the minimum rcquircd cross-sectional arca for such conductors dcpcnds

A consequence of this rcquiremcnt on the local wiring rules.

A nominal cross-sectional arca of 0.75 mm' will satisf! all national standards with the cxccption of those balid in the United States of America and Canada. whcrc a nomlnal cross-scckmai arca of 0.81 mm: is rcquircd A nominal cross-sectional area of 0.5 mm2 is allowed provided the cord IS non-dctachablc. consumption does not cxcccd 3 A and the flcxiblc cord IS not longer than 2 m. the m;Lxlmum current

15.3 Conductors of flexible cords used as connection between the apparatus and other apparatus used in combination with it, shall have a cross-sectional area such that the tempcraturc rise
of the insulation excessive.
Compliance

under normal

operating

conditions

and under fault conditions

shall not be

is checked

by inspection.

In case of doubt, the temperature

rises of the insulution

are determined under normal operating conditions and under fault conditions; the tcmperuture rises shall not exceed the values gillen in the appropriate columns of Tuble II.

15.4 al Flexible cords used as connection between the apparatus and other apparatus used in combination with it, and comprising live conductors, shall have adequate dielectric strength.
Compliance is checked by the following test:

A specimen of the cord, 5 m long, is immersedfor 24 h in wuter at u temperature qf 20 + 5 "C, a length of about 10 cm at euch end of the specimen being kept above the water. A test voltuge of 4 0 or 2820 V (peak), whichever is the higher, is then uppliedfor 15 min between each live

conductor and the water.

39

(IEC page 81)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

In addition, this soltage is applied hct~wn each live conductor and each conductor intcndec/ to he connected to accessible metal parts -of the apparatus. No breakdown shall occur during the tests. The voltage 15 is the higher value occurring across the insulation either under normal operating condirions or under ,fauh conditions.
If a lenpth

of 5 m of cord cannot be obtained. the lon_rest available piece is used.

b) Flexible cords used as connection between the apparatus and other apparatus used in combination with it, and comprising five conductors, shall withstand flexing and other mechanical stresses occurring in normal use. Compliance is checked by the flexing test given in Sub-clause 5.6.3.1 of I E C Publication 227-l: Part I: General Requirements, and in Sub-clause 3.1 sf I E C Publication 227-2: Part 2: Test Methods, except that the following table applies.

TABLE IV

I

Overall diameter

(D) of the flcxiblr cable or cord (mm)

I

Mass (W

Pulley diameter

I

(mm)
60 120 1X0

I

-i)< 6 6<D< 12 12<D<20

' 5.5

The apparatus shall allow the cxtcrnal flexible cords. comprising one or more live conductors. to be so connected that the connecting points of the conductors arc relieved from strain. that the outer covering is protected from abrasion. and the conductors are prcvcnted from ttvisting. Moreover. it shall not be possit .e to push an external cord back into the apparatus ' its aperture if ttis involves danger. The method by which the relief from strain and the prevention be tlearly,seen. Makeshift methods, not permitted through

of twisting is provided

shall

such as tying the cord into a knot or tying the cord with a string, are

The devices for strain and twist relief shall either be made of insulating material, or have a fixed covering of insulating material other than natural rubber. if an insulation fault of the cord or the conductor may make accessible metal parts live. For Class I apparatus, the arrangement of the terminals for the mains supply flexible cord, or the length of the conductors between the device for strain and twist relief and the terminals, shall be such that the live conductors become taut before the conductor connected to the protective earth terminal, if the cord slips out of the device for strain ahd twist relief.

(IEC page 83)

40

IS : 1227401987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

Compliance is checked h.v inspection and by the following test. The apparatus is fitted with the flesihlc cord, the devices ,for strain and twist relief being appropriately used. The conductors are introduced into the terminal.s, and the terminal screws. [f any. are slightly tightened, so that the conductors cannot easily change their position. After thispreparation, pushing the cordSfurther into the apparatus shall not be possible or shall cause no danger. A mark is made on the cord, under strain, near the aperture. and thej%xihle cord is subjected 100 times to a pull of 40 N (4 kgf) f or a duration of 1 s each. The pull shall not be applied in jerks. Immediately afterwards, the cord is subjected for a period of 1 min to a torque of 0.25 Nm (2.5 kgfvcm). During the test, the cord shall not be displaced by more than 2 mm, the measurement being made while the xord is still under strain; the ends of the conductors shall not be noticeably' displaced in the terminals and no damage to the Jlesiblc cord shall lx>caused by thedevice.sfor strain and twist relief. The test is made with the type ofJesible cord attached to the apparatus.

15.6 Inlet openings for flexible cables or cords shall be in insulating material or be provided with bushings of insulating material, which is substantially free from ageing effects under conditions of normal use. The openings shall be so shaped that there is no risk of damage to the cable or cord during its introduction and subsequent movements.
Compliance is checked by inspection. bv f?tting flexible cords and by the fi&ming test.

Bushings of insulating material are subjected to an ageing tc.r~for 10 davs (240 h) at a tcmpcraturc 30 I C above the tcmpcraturc to which th(~~, arc acbjectcrl under normal oprrating conditions, with a minimum of 70 C. After the test) the bushing is subjcrtcd to the diclcctric strength test of Sub-clause 9.2, the test voltage being upplied bctwren a metal rod of the same section as the cord, inserted instead of the cord. and the metal part in ,~~hich the bushing is jiscd. 16. 16.1 Electrical connections and mechanical fixings

Screw terminals providing electrical contact and screw fixings which during the life of the apparatus will be loosened and tightened several times shall have adequate strength. Screws exerting contact pressure and screws with a diameter less than 3 mm which form part of the above-mentioned screw fixings shall screw into a metal nut or a metal insert. However, screws with a minimum diameter of 1.8 mm are allowed, without a metal nut or a metal insert, provided: they are not used for electrical connections; they are not intended to be operated by the user; the fixing of a single part is made by more than two screws.

Screw fixings which during the life of the apparatus will be loosened and tightened several times include terminal screws, screws for fixing covers (as far as they must be loosened to open the apparatus), screws for fixing handles, knobs arrd the fike.

41

([EC page 85)

IS : 12i74-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

Compliance is checked by the following tcs~. The screws arc loosened and then tightened. with a toraui according to Tahlc I'; five times itt tIte case of screws operating in a thread in metal, ten times in the case of screws operating in wood or in a thread in insulating material. In the latter case, the screws are to be completely removtl and reinserted each time. The screws shall not be tightened in jerks. After the test, there shall be no deterioration impairing the safety of the apparatus. The material in which the screws are inserted is vertfied by inspection. TABLE V
Nominal Torque (Nnl fkgf. cm)) Screw with heads 0.2 12) 0.3 13) 0.4 (4) 0.5 IS) 0.8. IX) 1.2 112) 2.0 (20) 2.5 (25)
Screws withour heads

diameter

of screw

(mm) 1.8 2.2 2.5 3 3.5 4 5 6

0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.4 0.7 , 0.X --

(1.0) (1.5) (2.0) (2.5) (4) (7) IX)

16.3

Means shall be provided to ensure the correct introduction of screws into female threads in non-metallic material. if they will bc looscncd and tightened several times during the life of the apparatus and contribute to safety. I Compliance is checked by, inspection and hi. manual test.
This requirement is deemed to bc met if introduction in a slanting rpannet is prevented. e.g. by guiding the-screw in the part to be fixed, by LI recess in the nut or a lead IO the screw.

16.3

Screws or other fixing-devices intended to fix covers or the like, shall be captive in order to prevent replacement during servicing by screws or other fixing devices, which might cause a reduction of creepage distances or clearances between accessible metal parts and live parts. below the values given in Table I. Such screws need not be captive if, when replaced by screws having a length of ten times their nominal diameter, the distances are not less than those stated in Table I. Compliance is checked by inspection and measurement.

16.4

Electrical connections in parts directly connected to the supply mains (see Sub-clause 2.9) shall be so designed that contact pressure is not transmitted through insulating material other than ceramic, unless there is sufftcient resiliency in the metallic parts to compensate for any possible shrinkage of the insulating material. Compliance is checked by inspection.

(IEC page 87)

42

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

16.5 X sc`rswor rivet which fixes together parts direcrly connected to the mains. carrying a current of more than 20 mA, and which serves also a~ a mechanical fixing, shall be locked against loosening.
Compliance is checked by inspection and bj, manual test.
Sealmg by compound or the like provides satisfactory locking only for screw cdnnections not subject to torsion.

For rivets, a non-circular_shank

or an appropriate

notch may be a sufliciel?t guard against rotation.

16.6 Cover-fixing devices, other than screws, shall have adequate mechanical strength, if the safety of the apparatus might otherwise be impaired. The locked an8 unlocked positions of these devices shall be unambiguous. be possible to unlock them inadvertently. and it shall not

Compliance is checked by inspection, by operating the device and by the following test, usualI). applicable to those devices whose operation is efiected by a combination of rotary and linear movements. The device is locked and unlocked and the torques orjorccs necessary are measured. Wiih the device in the locked position, a torque or force of twice the value necessary ~to lock the device, with a minimum of I Nm (10 kgf . cm) or 10 K il kgf) is applied in tire locking direction, uniess it is unlocked by a smaller torque or force in the same direction. This operation is performed ten times. The torque or force necessary for unlocking the device shall be at least 0.1 Nm (1 kgf . cm) or I `1' (0.1 kgf). qfter the test, the device shull S~OM' no deterioration impairing the s&t?. of the upparutus.
For certain types of locking devices, different tests ma)- be necessary.

43

(IEC page 89)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

Point from which creepage distances are measured

est finger

Clearance

VA

K\\\\\

Fictitious Live party

conductive

layer

Ref.: Sub-clnuse

4.3.

I.

IIN

84

FIG. 1, Accessible parts.

I

(IEC page 90)

44

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

1
1

60
60 t

-i

!
I

`Cylindrical

insulating

material

I

i

\
Spherical

Dimensions irl IJI~~/IIIIC~IN~.\
Tolerances: on angles: & 5' on hncrir dimens;ons
ICSS

419174

than 25 mm: 25 mm: 8. I. I.

over

+O." - 0.05 kO.2

Ref.: Sub-clause

FIG.

2al Jointed test finger;.

Dimensions or the fingertip: see Figure 20).

Dimrnsions

in millitncrrc~s

ReT. : Sub-clause

X.1. I.

FIG. 2b)

Rigid test finger.

45

(IEC page 91)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

Rs

C

I

I

I I

b

C, = 1 nF R, = 1 kfI R2=4MQ

R3 = 100 MR Ro= O,lMf2 R, = I5 MR

CR, is used only when the tests of
Sub-clause 13.2 are performed on a component comprising a capacitor only.) The switch S is a critical part of the circuit. It shall be so designed that as little as possible of the available energy is dissipated in arcing or inadequate insulation. An example of such a switch is given in Figure 36). The component X under test is connected to the terminals C and D., Optionally the vo!tage divider R3, R, may be provided so that an -oscilloscope connected across R4 permits the observation of the voltage waveform across the component under test. This voltage divider is compensated so that the observed waveform corresponds with that across the component under test.

References: Sub-clauses 13.1 and 13.2.

FIG. 34) Circuit for surge tests.

WC pge 92)

46

I

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

"k,othkr
Switch Coil Plunger r

controlled appropriate

by a motor or any device

Coil

Rod of insulating

material

The switch (S in Figure 3~)) comprises the following parts : The brass pillars A and B support circular electrodes E spaced at a distance of 15 mm; K is a brass sphere of 7 mm diameter and is supported on a rigid rod of insulating material approximately 150 mm long. A. B and K are connected as shown in Figure 3a), K by means of a flexible wire. Care must be taken to avoid bouncing of sphere K.

FIG. 3h)

Example of a switch to be used in the circuit for surge tests.

47

4.

(IEC page 93)

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

Release-mechanism Release bar

spring

I

f

Release jaw

LHammer

head

I
Hammer spring

Hammer shaft

The apparatus consists of three main parts: the body, the striking element and the spring-loaded.release nose. The body comprises the housing. the striking element guide. the release mechanism and all parts rigidly fixed thereto. The mass of this assembly is 1250 g. The strikmg clement comprises the hammer head. the hammer shaft and the cocking knob. The mass of thts
asscmbl! 1s 350 g. The hammer

head has a hcmisphefical face of radius IO mm and is of polyamide having a Rockwell hardness of R 100: 11is lixcd to the hammcr;haft in such a way that the dtstancc from its lip to the plant of the fronl of the nose. when the striking clcmcnt is on lhc porn1 or rclcasc. is 20 mm The nose has ;I mass of 60 g and the nose sprtng IS such that II exerts a force of 20 N when the rclca& jaw-s arc on the poml of rclcasmg the striktng clcmcnt. The hammer spring is adjuslcd so that the product of the compression. m milhmctrcs. and the force exerted. in newtons. cquals 1000. the compression bctng approxtmately 20 mm. With this adjuslrrient. the Impact energy is 0.5 2 0.05 Nm.

The release mcchamsm springs are adjusted so that they exert just sufficient pressure to keep the relcasc jaws in the closed position. The apparatus is cocked by lfulling the cockmg knob back until the roicasc jaws engage with the groove in the hammer shaft. The blows are applied by pushing the release nose against the sample in a direction perpendicular to the surface at the point to be twlcd. The pressure is slowly increased so that the nose moves back until it is in contact with the release b&s, which then move to operate the release mechanism and.allow the hammer to strike. Ref.: Sub-clauses 8.36ind
11.1.3.

FIG. 4.. Test hammer.

(IEC page 94)

48

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

B ------------.--------I

C 1

I I I I

I I I I I

Direction

of movement of the pin

`Specimen

unaer test

The pin is in the plane A B C D which is pcrpcndxular

to the specimen under test. Rd.: Sub-claux 8.3.6

FIG. 5.

Scratch

test for insulating

layers.

49

(IEC page 95)

IS : 12274-1987 WC Pub 491 (1984)

,/
Socket-outlet

8mm

Specimen \

Balancing arm

Ref.

: Sub-clause 14.2

FIG.6. Testing device for apparatus forniing a part of the mains plug.

(IEC page Y6)

50

/

Mrtill pan having a mass of 100 g

Metal frame holding the upper pin in an upright position and allowing it to move up and down

dgcs of the test pin rounded radius of 0.5 mm

Specimen

under test

insulating

base

ierminals

for test voltage

.VZl?rC

Kcf.:

Sub-clouscs

9.2 and 13.X.20 ).

FIG. 8.

Ilielcctric

strength

test inslrutncnt.

IS : 12274-1987 IEC Pub 491 (1984)

`Specimen

under test

The circuit values are:

RI

= $ where E is the rated voltage and 1 is the rated current. = R, ,2 X

.where X is the ratio between the rated peak surge current and the rated r.m.s. currcnl.

R2

R, CR, D

x00 = y R, = 2500 ps = a silicon rectifier

The circuit elements and the source impedance are chosen so as IO ensure a 10% accuracy ol' the rated peak surge current and the rated current. Rcl-.: Subclause 13.4.2h).

FIG.

IO.

Circuit

for mains switch testing.

.

WC pageW

54

IS : 1227401987 I%C Pub 491 (1984)

Electrically separated Supply mains

accessible

The diagram shows a separating mains transformer T, where point "a" is live relative to point 9". If"a" and "b" are inside the apparatus, the sum of the distances x and y is taken into account for the purpose of checking
compliance with Sub-clause 8.3.4.

Reference:

Sub-clause

8.3.4

FIG. 11. Example of assessment of reinforced insulation.

55

(1EC page 101)

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones : 3 31 01 31 3 31 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75 36 24 99 21843, 41 2442, 41 26 19, 31641 41 29 16 6 32 92 96

Regional Central : *Eastern

Offices: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW D~ELHI 110002 : l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700064 Sector 35-C, 160036

Northern : SC0 445-446, CHANDIGARH Southern: twestern

C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), BOMBAY 400093

Branch

Offices: 2 63 48, Road, 38 49 66, 2 63 49 38 49 56 66716 761002 5 3627 3 31 77 23 10 83 63471, 21 68 76, 69832 21 82 92 6 -23 05 695034 6 21 04, 6 21 17

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur BANGALORE 660058 Gangotri Complex, 6th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82183, Lewis~Road, BHUBANESHWAR

63/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781.003 6-8-66C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 600001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Estate, PATNA 800013 University P.O., Palayam, TRIVANDRUM ( With Sale Point ):

Patliputra Industrial T.C. No. 1411421, Inspection Offices

Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A NAGPUR 440010

West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square,

2 51 71 5 24 35

Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411065

*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringheo Approach P.O. Princep Street, Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombav is at Noveltv Chambers. Grant Road, Bombay 400007 $Sales Office in Bangalore is at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, Bangalore 560002 Printed

27 68 00 89 66 28 22 39 71

at Printograph, New Delhi, India

