( Reaffirmed 1999 )

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO DOMESTIC AND COMMERCIAL GAS BURNING APPLIANCES
(First Revision)

I

UDC

001*4 : 683.945

@ Cojp.ght

1988

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 6

November 1988

IS : 6480 - 1988

Indian Standard

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO DOMESTIC AND COMMERCIAL GAS BURNING APPLIANCES
( First Revision)
0. FOREWORD
in a manner so that they are stood by a user of this standard. generally under

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 15 February 1988, after the draft finalized by the Domestic and Commerical Gas Burning Appliantes ( Pressure Type ) Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 0.2 This standard is intended to make available simplified definitions of terms used in the production and trade of domestic and commercial The definitions are given gas burning appliances.

0.3 This standard was first published in 1971. In this revision, latest terms and modified definitions have been incorporated. 0.4 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from BS 1179 : 1980 `Glossary of terms used in the gas industry', issued by the British Standards Institution.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This domestic standard defines the terms and commercial gas-burning relating to appliances.

given change the thermostat

in the temperature of the parts of other than the sensing element,

2. TERMINOLOGY A Aeration-Adjuster - A device, such as shutter, used for regulating the screw, clip or vane amount of air entrained by a jet of gas ( airadjuster in case of furnace ). Aerated Burner - A burner in which the primary air has been mixed with the gas before it leaves the burner port(s). Air-Gas primary mixture. Ratio - The ratio air to the volume of of the volume of gas in a gas--air combus-

Anchor Block - A block surrounding or attached to a pipe to prevent movement of the pipe due to pressure or thermal stress. Appliance or structure Base - The lowest supporting frame of the appliance, exclusive of legs. - A governor installed in to control burner output.

Appliance Governor or before an appliance

Atmospheric Burner - An aerated burner where the combustion air is entrained at atmospheric pressure. Automatic Boiler - An appliance with automatic water feed which can give a continuous supply of boiling water. Automatic Igniter - An automatic device which ignites the gas in a burner when the valve controlling the gas to the burner is turned on and will relight the flame when the burner gets accidently extinguished at any setting. Automatic Valve ( for Gas Control ) - The automatic device consisting essentially of a valve and operator that controls the gas supply to the burner(s) during normal operation of an appliance. Axial Tap - A tap in which one or more valves or pistons move axially to open and close the ports.

Air Port - An aperture tion air to a burner.

for admitting

Air Shutter - An adjustable device for varying the size of the primary air inlet(s). Airing Cupboard Heater - A heating unit of low heat output designed for installation in a ventilated cupboard or other suitable small enclosed space to enable it to be used for airing clothes or household linen, or for similar purposes. Ambient Temperature Error - The change in the controlled temperature produced by a

IS : 6480 - 1988 B Backlash - A control knob movement that does not transmit an effect through the mechanical linkage to the control element of a thermostat. Baffle - An object placed in an appliance to change the direction of, or retard, the flow of air-gas mixture, or flue gases. Bain Marie - An appliance food in bulk in hot condition: for keeping cooked - Bottled marketed Gas - Liquefied petroleum in pressure containers. gases

Branched Flue System - A common open flue system in which the products of combustion in each appliance discharge by way of a substantially vertical subsidiary flue into the main flue. Breakfast Cooker - A small appliance consisting of an oven surmounted either by two boiling burners or by one boiling burner and a grill. Bubble Leak Indicator - An apparatus for measuring gas leakage rate as illustrated in IS : 5116-1985 `General requirements for domestic and commercial equipment for use with LPG'. Burner - A device for the final conveyance of the gas or a mixture of gas and air to produce a suitable flame which is maintained on or in it. Burner Body a burner. Burner situated. Box A main A box casting in part ports. which of or pressing a burner of is that

a) Open Wall Bain Marie - A shallow receptacle containing water and heated from below. Pots and pans containing cooked foood are stored in to be kept hot. ( Wet ) - A b) Fitted Container Bain Marie shallow receptacle containing hot water and having a top provided with containers in which cooked food is stored for being kept in hot condition. c) Fitted Container Bain Marie ( Dry ) - As (b) but without a water well, in which the containers are kept hot by the circulation of thermostatically controlled hot air. Balanced-Flued Appliance - A room-sealed appliance in which the combustion air inlet and products outlet are so disposed that wind effects are substantially balanced. Balanced Flue Duct - The duct within a balanced flue terminal assembly carrying products of combustion from the combustion chamber to the outlet. Balanced Flue Nozzle the outlet end of a balanced The nozzle flue duct. forming

Burner Head - The incorporates the burner

a burner

Burner Mixing Tube - A tube connecting the injector and the burner ports, in which mixing of air and gas takes place. C Cafeset - A hot beverage appliance comprising an automatic boiler or pressure boiler with attached heated side urns for the storage of hot milk and coffee. Calibration Point - A point within the working temperature range used for the purpose of checking temperature calibration. Calorific Value ( Heat of Combustion ) The number of heat units liberated by the complete combustion of unit volume or mass of gas under specific conditions. a) Gross CaloriJic Value - The sum of the number of heat units liberated by the complete combustion of the unit volume or mass of gas and heat released by condensation of water vapour produced from the condition. b) Net Calorifc Value - The gross calorific value minus the heat released by the condesation of water vapour produced from the combustion. Cap - An external fitting used to close let. A pipe or fitting so treated is termed Chimney - A conduit or structure a flue or flues connected to outside charge of combustion products. 3 an outcapped.

Bar Burner - A burner in the form of a length of tubing with a series of burner ports or jets in one or more parallel straight lines. Bio-gas - Fuel gas produced and/or other biomass. from cattle dung

Boiling Table -' An appliance of following types, with one or more individually controlled burners for heating cooking utensils. Open Top Boiling Table - A boiling table in which cooking utensils stand on open metal grids over individual burners and are heated by direct flame contact.

b) Solid
c)

Top Boiling Table - A boiling table consisting of smooth metal plate(s) heated by burners underneath.

Stockpot Stand/Stove - A low level boiling table usually having one burner, with open or solid top, primarily for use with stockpots or for urns, vegetable pans or similar large utensils.

enclosing air for dis-

IS:6480Closed Position of Thermostat - That end which results flow of gas

1988

position of the thermostat setting in, or tends to result in the smallest through the thermostat.
Cock A type of valve,

taken from the room in which the installed and in which the provision the diversion of down draught.
Cooking Cooking Range Range

appliance is is made for

used to stop the main supply of a fluid, that is operated by rotation of a drilled or slotted plug and that is normally left in the `OiN' position.
Combined

ed for domestic

- A heavy duty cooker designor commercial cooking. Back -

ing the back of a cooking

An outer range.

panel

form-

Appliance - A combination of two or more appliances having separate functions, each with its own burner and control system, but designed to be installed as a composite unit. Combustion

Cooking Range Side Panel ( Left Hand, Right Hand ) - A panel forming an outer side of a

cooking
Crown Crown

range.
-

The outer top panel

of a cooker

oven.

A phenomenon of rapid oxidation of fuel accompanied by the production of heat or heat and light.
Chamber

-

Combustion

appliance within fuel occurs.
Combustion

which

- The the main -

portion of an combustion of Properities behaviour of of

melled burner oven.
Cluster

Tray/Crown Plate - A separate enatray having opening to accommodate heads, covering the crown of a cooker Burner -

more than the The

one mentle

An inverted is fitted.
D

burner

in which

Characteristics

a fuel ( gas ) which influence flame when fuel is burnt.
Combustion Products -

resulting from oxygen of air.
Commercial

the

combustion

constituents of a fuel with

Damper

- A device used to vary the volume of air passing through a confined cross-section by varying the effective sectional area. Deep Fat Fryer -

Butane -

carbon gases consisting butylenes.
Commercial

The liquefied Ca hydromainly of butanes and/or
Mixture - A gas mixture butylene with

food by immersion

An appliance in hot fat or oil.

for

cooking

Butane-Propane

liquefied C3 and C4 hydrocarbon consisting mainly of butanes-and/or propane andior propylene.
Commercial Propane -

Delay-Off Timer - A control device used in conjunction with an appliance which, w-hen operated, will give a pre-determined period of operation and then switchoff. Delay-On Timer - A control device used in conjunction with an appliance which, when operated, will give a pre-determined period of delay and then allow gas to flow to the appliance. Direct-Fired Oven -

hydrocarbon gases consisting and/or propylene.
Common

The liquefied C3 mainly of propane

Flue System - A share open flue system including branched flue system, serving two or more appliances installed in the same room or separate rooms or space(s). Concentric

An
flow

products of combustion compartment.
Direct

oven in which the through the oven

A burner centric rings of different ratings separate gas taps.
-

Burner

-

having operated

conby

Condensate

Gas Thermostat - A thermostat in which the main supply of gas to the burner is passed between the valve and valve seating, and is, therefore, directly controlled by the sensing element. Distant

a gas, including
Contact

The liquid which separates from flue gases due to cooling effect.
Top/Fry Flate -

Grill/Fry

mate1 frying. burner giving

plate

grill
Type

heated

from
-

below,

A solid used for

Control/Remote Control - A device which enables a gas flame to be ignited, extinguished and sometimes controlled from a position distant from the consuming appliance. Door Catch -

Continental

A burner having ports near to the surface being heated and flames which extend radially.
-

Burner

into which closed.
Door

the

The fitting on a cooking range door latch fits when the door is
- A means of reducing the the walls of a heated space of

Devices designed to regulate the gas, air, water or electrical supplies to a gas appliance. These may be manual, semi-automatic or automatic.
Conventionally-Flued Appliance

Controls

Insulation

heat flow through object:

appliance

in

which

the

air

for

- A flued combustion is 3

a) Air Space Insulation - Insulation consisting of two adjacent surfaces constructed so as to prevent the full circulation of the air held between them.

IS : 6480 - 1988

b) Sotid Insulation - Any solid material to obstruct the flow of gas.
Door Latch - The fitting ing range which engages the door is closed. Draught

used

Flame

on the door of cookthe door catch when at the

- The part of the flame failure Detector device which is responsive to flame properties and signals the presence of flame. F,lame Failure - The loss of flame from the normally detected position due to any cause other than the deliberate de-energising of the safety shut-off valve. Flame Failure Device~( Flame Safeguard ) A control responsive to flame properties, detecting the presence of a nominated flame and, in the event of ignition failure or subsequent flame failure, causing safety shut down.

- A pressure below atmospheric base of a chimney or in a waste gas flue. Diverter -

Draught

A device for preventing conditions in a secondary flue from interfering with the combustion performance of an appliance.
Draught Hood - A device built into an appliance, or made part of the flue pipe from an appliance which is designed to (a) assure the ready escape of products of combustion in the event of no draught, back draught or stoppage beyond the draught hood, (b) prevent a backdraught from entering the appliance, and (c) neutralize the effect of stack action of the chimney or gas vent upon the operation of appliance. Draught Stabilizer

Flame

Lift - Separation of a flame from burner port, whilst continuing to burn with its some distance from the port. Excessive hfting is termed flame blow off. Flame Speed -

of flame through

The rate of linear gas-air mixture.

propagat:on

which
Drilled

increases

A flue break, the area of with increasing flue draught. giving individual multiple drilled

-

Burner - A burner number of small flames from burner ports. Drying Cabinet -

Flash-Back ( Light Back ) - Transfer of combustion from burner port to a point upstream in the gas/air flow into the mixing tubeand usually to the injector:

ing unit for drying hold linen.
Drying

A cabinet containing a heator airing of clothes or house-

a) Direct Flash-Back - Flash-back through the burner itself. b) Indirect Flash-Back - Flash-back by a flame not passing through the burner itself, lhat is, roll over.
Flashing Pilot - A pilot with means of projecting a burst of flame to reach a burner port for ignition purpose. Flash Tube ( Lighting Tube ) - A device for . . igmtmg gas burner in which a flame is made to travel to the burner ports through a tube in which an inflammable mixture of gas and air has been induced. Flat Flame Burner -

Cupboard Heater - A heating unit specially designed for drying rather than airing, and, therefore, of higher heat output than of airing cupboard heater.

A burner designed in two independent sections to be operated as a whole or in apart by a single gas tap.
Drip Trays -

Duplex

Burner

-

for collecting water.
Dual Burner

A tray beneath the evaporator condensate and sometimes defrost
-

produces

a flame resembling
( Eddy

A burner which the shape of a fan.
Filter ) -

Two burners
E

fabricated

in one

Flow Straightener

unit.

forated dix or gauge burner port.

in a burner

mixing

A pertube or products

Egg

Bar -

Flue - A passage or port for conveying of combustion or waste gas outside air.

A bar

to

keep

eggs in place in a re-

storage

space.

Flue Break

Excess Air - Air in excess of theoretical quirement for combustion fuel.
F Facia

- An opening into secondary flue in the same room as, an additional to, the opening at the draught diverter. Flue Collar -

to accommodate appliance mechanisms through pass.
Flue Gases

A projection or the flue pipe. Products

recess

provided including to and

which
Flame

panel on an the control operating
Blow-Off Check I

-- A

of combustion

unused

air.

burner
Flame

port resulting

Senaration of a flame from in extinction.

Flue Gas

Baffles - A baffle incorporated control ( the flow of produ~cts of combustion air through the heating body ).

portion of the flash-back.

A guage, grid or any other burner assembly used to avert 4

Flue-Lining - A coating on the internal surface of a flue pipe or tiling on the internal surface of

IS:6480 - 1988 a chimney sation. to provide potection against condendevice, attached to a Gas Taper - A lighting cooking range, incorporating its own gas supply but not its own means of ignition.
Gas Thermostat -

Flue Losses - The sensible heat of the flue gases leaving above room temperature. Flue Main

heat and latent the appliance at of com-

bustion

-- A flue carrying products from two or more appliances. ( Flue Spigot -) -

a gas valve perature.
Gasket -

for

A thermostat incorporating maintaining a desired temof material act as a for cooking 75 percent of a

Flue Nozzle

ing the outlet
Flue Outlet

end of a balanced The opening the products

A nozzle -formflue duct.

inserted seal.
~Grill Grill

A suitably cut-out sheet between joint surfaces to
) - An of radiant

through which discharged.
Flue Subsidiary

of a gas appliance of combustion are

( Griller Area -

food by means of the browing grill designed
Grill High

appliance heat.

flue connecting
Flue~System

- In common flue system, a an appliance with the main flue.

The area. over which is uniform.
Deflector ) -

Grill Fret ( Grill Level

The part

- A complete assembly of flue components from one 0~ more appliances to a single terminal including primary fuel(s) and draught diverter(s), if any. Flued Appliance

to emit radiant i-ange.

heat. the hot plate

A grill above

of a cooking fits inside-the
Grill Outer

Grill Inner Cover

An appliance designed for connection to a flue for venting the products of combustion outside the room in which the appliance is situated. designed Appliance - An appliance for use without connection to a flue system, the products of combustion being allowed to mix with air of the room or space in which the appliance is situated.
Forced-Draught Burner - A burner the combustion air is provided under usually from an air fan.

-

- The part of a grill which grill outer cover. Cover

The

part

forming

the

outer

top section

of grill.

Flueless

A shallow container in which food is cooked under a grill the food being placed either in the grill pan or on the grill pan grid.
Grill Grills Pan Grid -

Grill Pan -

food being
-

cooked

A grid which in grill pan.

supports for an

the

in which pressure,

through
Grilling

A non-closable fitment which air passes.

opening

G Gas - Fuel gas as normally manufactured and/ or distributed through the mains of a gas-undertaking.
Gas Igniter -

Hearth ( Solid Brander ) - A solid metal plate located below a grill burner on which the food is placed for simultaneous cooking on both sides. Grind Runners -

cooking

range

which

Projections inside support shelves.

a

gas

An ignition

device

built into an
H

appliance.
Gas Iqjector ( Injector

able and/or adjustable calibrated amount of through an orifice.
Gas Iron

A jet removby means of which a gas is allowed to pass flat iron designed to

Jet ) -

Hearth

be heated
Gas

- A hand-held by gas. -

material beneath
Heating

A floor-level slab of non combustible to prevent overheating of the floor a heating appliance.

-

An instrument for meaning, indicating and sometimes recording the volume of gas which passes through it without interrupting the flow of gas.
Gas Piston Lighter - A lighting ed to a cooking range? incorporating supply and means of Ignition. Gas Solenoid Valve -

Meter

Surface - All surfaces which transmit heat from flames or flue gases to the medium to be heated.

device attchits own gas

Hot Food Cabinet - An appliance in the form of cupboard, in which plates may be heated or food stored in covered containers, with or without heated top. Hot Food Cabinet Warming Space - The total of the space in all compartments that can be usefully employed for stacking plates in cubic metres. 5

operated suPPlY*

valve

An electromagnetically for opening and closing the gas

IS:648011988 Hot Plate ( Hob ) - Stove having a solid plate which is heated by burners underneath, and on which the vessels to be heated rest. Hot Water Cylinder vessel used for storage water. A and closed cylindrical circulation of hot to prevent the fill between them. circulation of air held

b) Solid Inmlation - Any solid ( not liquid or gaseous material ) used to obstruct the flow of heat.

I
Ignition Burner - A removable burner incorporated as an integral part of a liquid `or' solid fuel appliance, for igniting the fuel. Independent Flue System ( Additional Flue ) - A flue system that is not built into a structure of a building but may be supported by attachment there, too. Indirect Oven -- An oven ducts of combustion do not oven compartment. in which the proflow through the Leak Clamp -- A clamp used to press a gasket against a spigot and socket joint to prevent leakage. Limited Main Flame Establishing Period A period during which the main burner safety shut off valve is permitted to be open before the pilot is extinguished and the flame safeguard is required to supervise to main flame alone. Lineal sealing rotates. Seal surface The distance measured along the of a tap in which the closure fibres in the and airJet Burner - A self contained aerated adapted for screwing into a gas manifold. K Knob - A gripping component attached to a control ( gas tap, thermostat, etc ) for manually rotating it. burner

Indirect Oven Thermostat System - A control system of two or more integrated automatic devices to maintain an oven temperature as selected by the operator. That portion of the system responsive to oven temperature causes operation of another portion of the system to turn on or shut off the gas supply to the oven burner. Induced Circulation - Movement of air, water or other fluid by or with the assistance of mechanical means. Injector - A device in which gas ( or air ) issuing from a jet entrains and mixes with some or all the air ( or gas ) required for combustion. Injector Jet - A jet, forming injector, that may be removable able. part and/or of a.n adjust-

Lint - A mixture of dust, fluff, droplets of grease, which can collect ways of burner.

Input, Cold Rated - The manufacturer's maximum recommended input when the _appliante is cold and before ignition, this rate will adjust itself to the hot rated input at thermal eauilibrium.
I

Liquefied Petroleum Gas ( LP Gas or LPG ) - A mixture of certain light hydrocarbons of the type of commercial butane, commercial propane and commercial butane-propane mixture which are derived from petroleum and are gaseous at normal ambient temperatures and atmospheric pressure but may be condensed to liquid state at normal embient temperature and moderate pressure. LPG-Air Mixture - Liquefied petroleum gases distributed at relatively low pressures and normal atmospheric temperatures which have been mixed with air to produce desired heating value and utilization charateristics. Low-Water Cut-Off - A device to cut off the gas flow in the event of the water level in an annliance falling below a nredetermined level. I _* M Main Control Valve - A valve in the gas line before all regulating devices and the branch to the pilot(s) except when the pilot(s) are equipped with independent shut-off valves, ~for the purpose of completely turning on or shutting off the gas supply to the appliance. 6

Input, Hot Rated mum recommended equilibrium.

The manufacturer's maxiheat input at thermal

Input Rating - The gas burning capacity of the appliance in vilocalories per hour as specified by the manufacturer, tested at ambient temperature and pressure. Instantaneous Water Heater - An appliance in which water is heated only as it flows to the point of delivery. Insulation - A means of reducing the heat flow through the walls of a heated space or from a heated object. a) Air Space Insulation - Insulation consisting of two adjacent surfaces constructed so as

IS : 6480 - 1988 Mixer mixing Mixer tube. - The combination tube and mixer head. Face The air of mixer throats, This pressure will adjust itself to the normal pressure at thermal equilibrium. Normal Hot Pressure - The pressure test point which gives the hot rated input. at hot the

inlet end of the mixer

Mixer Head - The outlet end of the mixer tube of an injection type burner usually enlarged into which the primary air mixed with the gas stream flows. Mixer ( Mixing ) Tube ( Burner Tube ) - A tube connecting the injector and the burner ports in which mixing of gas and air takes place. If frequently commences as converging section leading in succession to a throat and a diverging section. it is then often erroneously called at venturi tube. Mixer Throat - The inlet end of the mixing tube which has the smallest cross sectional area. Mobile Appliance - An appliance mounted on wheels or skids so that it can be moved from place to place as required. Multipoint Water Heater - An instantaneous or storage water heater designed to deliver hot water at several points. N Natural Circulation - The movement of heated or cooled air, water or other fluid unassisted by mechanical means. Natural Draught - The by the lowering of pressure arising in a chimney. air supply induced due to warmed air

Normal Test Pressure - The pressure specified for testing purposes at which adjustment of burner ratings and primary air adjustments are made. the inlet nozzle of a Nozzle - It is generally defined shape where a flexible tubing is connected carrying the gas supply to the appliance. 0 Operational Torque - The torque to turn a directly operated tap at any temperature over the range of working temperatures declared by manufacturer when the tap is operated at an angular velocity of 3 rad/sec. Orifice - The opening in an orifice cap, orificespud or other device whereby the flow of gas is limited and through which the gas is discharged. Oven - An appliance of food items. for baking and roasting

4

Directly Heating Oven ( Internally cheated Oven ) - An oven in which the burners are situated, and the products of combustion circulate, inside the oven space. Heated Oven ( Externally Heated Oven ) - An oven in which the burners are situated outside the oven space and the products of combustion do not enter it. Semi-Directly-Heated Oven ( Semi-Externally Heated Oven ) - An oven in which the burners are situated outside the oven space but the products of combustion pass into it.

b) Indirectly

Natural Draught Burner ( Atmospheric Burner ) - An aerated burner where the combustion air is entrained at atmospheric pressure. Natural produced oilfields. according with it. Gas - The gaseous hydrocarbons from the underground deposits of The gas is described `wet' or `dry' to association of liquid hydrocarbons

OvenDeck - The surface of an oven on which cooking pans or materials, to be cooked are placed during the cooking process. Oven Roof Removable inner roof of an oven which cleaning, etc. A panel forming can be removed the by

Niting - (a) Parts integral with, or fitted to, a valve, cock or tap to limit the turning angle of the plug, also (b) limiting the turning angle by such means. Niting, Washer - Niting by means of a washer moving with the plug of a cock or tap and having one or two lugs which engage stops on the body of cock or tap at the limits or angular movement of the plug to coincide with the ON and OFF positions. Nominal Flow Ratio - The flow rate of a fluid at a specified pressure loss as claimed by the manufacturer. Normal Cold Pressure - The pressure required at the test point to give the cold rated input.

Oven Walls Removable ( Left Hand, Right the inner side Hand, Back ) - Panels forming of an oven which can be removed for cleaning, etc. P Pan Boiling ( Directly Heated/Jacketed ) An appliance either incorporating a single directly heated vessel generally of more than 45 litres capacity, for boiling food in bulk or a coiling pan with a second pan of slightly smaller 7

IS I 6480 - 1988 size fixed inside to which heat is transferred hot water or steam in the outer pan. from Pilot-Turn-Down Test - A test conducted to determine whether the main flame ignites reliably and smoothly when the pilot flame is turned down to one-half of the flow rate at which it will just continue to actuate the flame detector. Pinhole Burner - A burner the burner ports are a number assembly of which of very small holes.

Pan Brat - A heated tilting pan of about 13 cm depth used for bulk shallow~frying of, for example, eggs, becon, sausages, etc. Pan Supports - A framework of the appliance on which the cooking vessels rest. taking Pastry Oven - A shallow oven, usually trays at only one level, designed to give very even temperature conditions. Several units may be arranged one above the other, or a number of compartments or decks may be incorporated in a deeper oven. Per-Ignitable Burner - A burner in which .a flame initiated at the air inlet part passes to the burner parts where it continues to burn. Permanent Pilot - A pilot which is intended to be kept permarrently alight and is controlled independently of the main gas burners. Pilot - A small gas flame for igniting gas at the burner ports. ( In specific circumstances the main flame at low rate may be used in order to obviate the need for a pilot flame. ) Pilot Flame Establishment - The establishment of a proved and supervised pilot flame. Pilot Flame Ignition Period - The period through which the ignition spark remains energised and during which the pilot safety shut-off valve is permitted to be open before the flame safeguard is required to supervise the pilot flame. Pilot Flame Proving Period - The period during which the pilot flame is supervised follow_ing the cessation of the spark and before the opening of the main gas safety shut-off valve. Pilot Fully Protected - The pilot protected against the Aame failure by a flame failure device. Pilot Interrupted/Pilot Transient - A pilot which is automatically ignited each time the burner is started up and which is extinguished automatically at the end of the main flame establishing period. Pilot Ladder - A bar burner of small gas consumption, providing pilot ignition for a number of space burners. Pilot Pressure Protected - A pilot protected against failure of the gas supply by means of a low pressure cut-off valve of the manually re-set typePilot Semipermanent - A pilot which comes on with the main burner and remains alight during the whole of their period that the main burner is on.

Plate Air Guide - A plate designed to control the flow of secondly air for combustion, fitted below the radiants and in some instances used to support the radiants. Plug Tap - A tap that is operated a taper plug in a mating bore. by rotating

Poppet Valve - A valve in which the seal is achieved by the axial movement of a closing member against a scaling face substantially at right-angles to the direction of the axial movement. Portable Appliance - An appliance designed to be carried by the user, from place to place as required. Power Burner - A burner in which either gas or air or both are supplied at a pressure exceeding the line pressure ( for gas ) and the atmospheric pressure ( for air ); this added pressure being applied at the burner. Pre-aerated Burner - An aerated burner which the gas and primary air supplied already mixed. to are

Pre-mix Air-Gas System - A pre-aerated burner system in which gas is mixed in a predetermined and adjustable ratio with part or all of the air for combustion. Premixing Burner - A power burner in which all the air for combustion is mixed with gas as primary air. Pressure Burner - A burner which is supplied with an air-gas mixture under pressure usually from 0'175 to 2'450 KN/ms ( I.75 to 24.50 gf/cm* approximately ) and occasionally higher. Pressure Regulator - A device used for controlling and maintaining a uniformed gas supply pressure at its outlet. Pressure Relief Valve - A valve in an oven or flue system designed to yield sefety to an abnormal increase of internal pressure. Pressure Valve -Differential - A gas control on an instantaneous water heater operated by the pressure difference created by water flow through a venture throat or an orifice. Primary Air - Air introduced into steam before it leaves the burner port. Primary Circuit for return circuit through a gas

Water - The flow and which water circulates

a

IS:

6480-1988
there. of watercombusair has

between the water-heater or calorifier.
Primary Primary Products Flow Flue -

and the

cylinder,

tank

if it lights
Scale -

back, or if a light is supplied Crust deposit on the surface

from the heater to a draught guides in combustion
Proving Purge

The or boiler

pipe conveying water to the cylinder or tank. an appliance

ways.
Secondary Air - Air admitted to the tion zone after combustion with primary commenced. Secondary

A flue connecting diverter.

Deflector - An attachment which a required direction the products of fi,orn a flueless appliance. Oven A low temperature for proving yeast foods.

Circuit of Water - A subsidiary circuit in which hot water circulates between the cylinder or tank and the draw-off branches. Secondary Flue -

oven

of

high humidity

of gas
order

- To free a gas conduct and air. -

of air or mixture that is pushed in

system connecting terminal.
Securing Rods,

The part a draught
Plate

of an open diverter to

flue the

Wall

Push Button

to operate

A component a control.
R

which the outer wall plate inner wall plate of a balanced
Semi-Automatic Valve

- The rods by is attached to the flue terminal. )-

( for Gas Control

A valve that automatically, bottom part of a plate stove the of hot
Semi-Rigid

is opened manually or vice versa.

and

closed

Rack

Bottom

-I The Plot Plot -

rack.
Rack Lower

A grid below the

Connection - A readily manipulated tube to facilitate the quick installation of an appliance in a fixed position. Service Suitability Number - It is a number of' a tap which designates the degree of severity

a cooking plate

range. A flat shelf above range.

Rack Upper Rating -

of a cooking

of service for which the tap is intended.
Simmer Burner

gas rate control.
Ratio

The nominal maximum which a component is
-- The

volumetric designed to

simmering,
Simplex

- A burner often thermostatically

designed controlled.

for be

Aspect

the minor
Reversion

ratio of the major axis to axis of the cross section of the flue.
Pressure -

operated
Single

Burner - A burner which can only as a whole by a burner gas tap. Water Heater

Point

A measure of the resistance of a gas to flamelift, indicated by the gas pressure at which a flame which has lifted at higher pressure returns to the burner port of a standard burner.
Ribbon Strip Burner

ous or storage water hot water at one point.
Size Piping -

heater

- An instantanedesigned to deliver

of piping
Snap

attached
Acting

The size of the nominal diameter to the largest connection.

fitted with a metal of burner ports.
Ring

An aerated bar burner ribbon insert forming lines

-

toroE

Burner - A burner in the form of a with series of burner ports or jets in it -

working thermally quickly. OFF.
Socket

Thermostat - A thermostat at two positions only and which, when initiated, passes from one to the other The positions may be high/low or ON/

A thermostat in which the sensin.g elements consist of a rod and a concentric tube of materials of dissimilar coefficients of expansion. S
Safety Tap - A tap that cannot be turned on without first performing a deliberate additional manual operation. Such operations generally include pressing against a spring, raising a hinged member, inserting key, etc. Salamadar

Rod Thermostat

- A cvlindrical pipe fitting having two female ends info which iiies or fittings may be connected to effect a joint.

soot flame. greater
Spark

Un-burnt

carbon

particles

present

in leakage

a

Soundness

- Absence of external than the permissible limit.

Ignition - Ignition of an air/gas mixture by means of an electrical discharge from a sparking plug or suitable electrode or flint xtone. Gravity ( Relative Density ) - The ratio of the mass of unit volume of dry gas to that of unit volume of dry air under the same conditions of temperature and pressure. Spillage Tray Specific

etc.

- A grill used for browning A form of contact grill. Burner -

mellets,

Self-Extinguishing

gned so that the flame is unstable

A burner desiat the injector 9

for collection

- A tray located under burner(s) of spillage from cooking vessels.

IS : 6480 - 1988 Splash Back - A vertical panel amounted with back edge of a hot plate. along Graduating - A thermostat Thermostat, which changes from the completely open to completely closed position or vice versa quickly but not with a snap. Thermostat Hysteresis - The diflerence between the equilibrium temperatures in the controlled environment when the same thermostat setting has been made from opposite directions. Thermostat Setting - A position thermostat scale selected by the user. Toasted Area - The area which bread can be toasted. on the

Stoichiometric Mixture - Mixture of gas and air in proportions determined by the theoretical air requirement. Storage Water Heater - An appliance in which a volume of water is heated under thermostatic control and stored for use when required. Stove - An assembly of one or more burners forming a separate unit allowing direct contact between the flames or hot gases from the burners and the vessel above them. Stove Bars .- Bars on the vessels being heated. T on an appliance that Tap - A type of valve controls fluid flow and will be liable to be kept in off position when appliance is not in operation. Temperature Range - The difference between the controlled temperatures of the sensing element at the maximum and minimum scale positions. Terminal - A device fitted at the end of a flue to allow or assist products of combustion to minimise down draught and prevent escape, entry of material which might block the flue. Theoretical Air Requirement - The calculated volume of air required for complete combustion of unit volume of a gas ( also called stoichiometric air ). Thermal Differential - For a snap-acting thermostat at a particular setting, the difference between the temperatures at which the valve opens and closes. Thermal Log - The difference between effective temperature of the sensing element that of the medium in which it is located. the and a stove which support

of the grill grid over

Tunnel Burner - A burner in which combustion takes place inside a refractory or metallic duct. U UDuct - A duct in the form of a `U', the ends being open and adjacent ane limb of which provides combustion air whilst to the other limb are fitted room sealed appliances. Union - A composite fitting, incorporating a fastening but to facilitate the connection and disconnection of pipes, fittings and appliances. U~pright Burner - A lighting burner the gas flame is above the burner port. V Valve - A device used to stop or regulate the flow of fluid by the closure or partial closure of an orifice. Vapour Pressure - The pressure created by the vapour of a substance in an enclosed space containing the particular substance. Vent - A non-adjustable purpose-made opening or duct that is designed to allow the passage of a fluid at all times. Vitiation - Contamination combustion products, with of oxygen content. W Wall Plate, Inner - The internal component of a balanced flue terminal adjacent to the appliance. Wall Plate, Outer - The external component of a balanced flue terminal through which air is drawn from combustion and the products of combustion are passed. W~ater Circulator - A water heating appliance primarily designed for supply of domestic hot water in conjunction with ~a separate storage vessel. 10 of air, specially by consequent reduction in which

Thermostat - A thermally actuated control device for maintaining a desired temperature. Thermostat Adjustment thermostat, normally by ensure correct calibration. - The regulation the manufacturer, of to

Thermostat Gas - An automatic device actuated by temperature change, alone without auxilliary power, designed to control the gas supply to a burner or burners, in order to maintain temperature between predetermined limits and in which the thermal actuating element is an integral part of the device, Thermostat Gas, Snap-Acting - A rapiclly acting thermostat that switches the gas flow rate instantly between closed and open position.

IS : 6480 - -1988 Water Governor - A device regulation of water flow rate. for automatic Y yellow Flame Burner _ A burner in which secondary air only is depended upon for combustion of the gas. of a yellow Yellow Tipping - The appearance colour at the top periphery of a flame.

Weep Tube - A small diameter tubing for conveying a weep flow or gas operating a relay valve. Working Pressure - The minimum pressure at the inlet of an appliance which Will ensure that the rated heat input is achieved.

11

BUR
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan,

EAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

9 Bahadur

Shah Zafar 3 31 13 75

Marg,

NEW

DELHI

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices Telephone )

Telephones Regional Central *Eastern Northern Southern TWestern :

: 3 31 01 31 Offices:

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002

Shah Zafar

Marg,

3 31 01 31,

3 31 13 75 36 24 99

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, Sector 35-C, 160036 MADRAS 600113 Andheri ( East ), 41 24 42, 2 1843, 41 25 19,

3 16 41 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093 Offices: Shaikh

Marol,

Branch

`Pushpak', Nurmohamed AHMADABAD 380001 Peenya Industrial Area, BANGALORE 560058

Marg,

Khanpur, Road,

2 63 48, 38 49 55,

2 63 49 38 49 56 66716

1 st Stage,

Bangalore-Tumkur Road,

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada T. T. Nagar, BHGPAL 462003 Plot No. 82183 Lewis Road, 53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua GUWAHATI 781.003 5-8-56CL. N. Gupta Marg HYDERABAD 500001 RI 4 Yudhister 117/418 Patliputra Marg, Road,

BHUBANESHWAR

751002

5 36 27 23 1083 6 3471, 21 68 76, 69832 21 82 92 6 23 05

5th By-lane, Station Road ),

( Nampally JAIPUR

C Scheme, Nagar, Estate,

302005 208005

B Sarvodaya Industrial

KANPUR PATNA

800013 TRIVANDRUM 695035 62104,

T.C. ~No. 1411421, Inspection Pushpanjali, NAGPUR Offices

University

P.O. Palayam, Point ):

621

17

( With-Sale 205-A

First Floor, 440010

West

High Court 1332

Road, Shivaji

Shankar Nagar,

Nagar

Square,

2 51 71 5 24 35

Institution of Engineers PUNE 411005

( India ) Building,

*Salk Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringhee P.O. Princep Street, CALCUTTA 700072 +Sales Office in Bombay is at Novelty Chambers, BOMBAY 400007

Approach, Grant Road,

27 68 00 89 66 28

Printed

at Printograph,

New

Delhi,

India

