:

IS : 11315

Indian Standard

4

( Part 4 ) - 1997 (Reaffirmed 2005)

METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART 4 ROUGHNESS

UDC

624.121 : 550.347'4 : 620-191

@ Copyright 1988 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARC

Gr 5

May 1988

IS : 11315( Part 4 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART 4 ROUGHNESS

Rock
Chairman DR
BHAWANI

Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,
Rejresenting

BDC

73

SINQH

University of Roorkee,

Roorkee

Members ASSISTANT (IRI) DIRECTOR Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune DIRECTOR (CW & PRS) I SHRI S. L. MOKHASHI ( Alternate I Research Station, Karnataka Engineering DIRECTOI%( CHIEF ENGINEER ) Krishnarajasagara SHRI R. NA~A SIMHA IYENQAIE( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad DR A. K. DUBE Irrigation and Power Department, Amritsar SHRI P. S. GOSAL Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay DR UDAY V. KUL~ARNI Cent;Jorupding Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR G. S. MEHROTRA RESEARCE OXBICER SHRI A. GHOSH ( Alternate ) SHRI M. D. NAIR' Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi PROF T. S. NA~ARAJ ( Alternate ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI P. L. NARULA Institute Central Road Research SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi PROF T. RAMAMURTHY DR G. V. RAO ( Alternate ) National Geophysical Research Institute ( CSIR ), Dn Y. V. RAMANA Hyderabad Indian Geotechnical Society, Delhi DR G. V. RAO

( Continuad on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1988 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian CoPyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

'

IS : 11315 ( Part 4 ) - 1987
( Continued jrom page 1 ) Members RESEARCH OFFICER ( MERI SECRETARY DIRECTOR (C) ( Altarna2c) SHRI C. D. THATTE SHRI G. RAXAN, Director ( Civ.Engg ) ) Rcprcsenling Irrigation __ ._ Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nasik Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi Irrigation Department, Governmept of Gujarat Director General, BIS ( Ex-qficio Member ) Secretary SHRI K. M. MATWJR Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

Rock

Slope Engineering, Improvement

Foundation on Rock and Rock Subcommittee, BDC 73 : 4

Mass

Convener PROF L. S. SRIVASTAVA Members SHRI B. D. BALI~A University of Roorkee,j Roorkee ( CSIR ),

SHRI A. P. BANERJEE SHRI D. J. KETKAE ( Alternale ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR), DR R. K. BHANDARI Roorkee SHRI A. GHOSH ( Alternate ) Jaiprakash Associates Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Central Road Research Institute SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DRT.RAMAMURTHY OR K. G. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur DR YUDHBIR

Central Mining Research Institute Dhanbad Cemindia Company Limited, Bombay

2

IS : 11315 ( Part 4 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTICiN OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART 4 ROUGHNESS

0.

FOREWOKD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 4 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Iudian Standards on 30 August 1987, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.
0.2 In view of the advancement in the field of rock mechanics, a number of methods for assessing the strength characteristics of rock and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Slope Engineering and Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee of Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee. The majority of rock masses, in particular, those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that structure of a rock mass and the nature of described and quantified to have a its discontinuities are carefully complete and unified description of rock masses and discontinuities, and it may be possible to design engineering structures in rock with a Careful field descriptions will minimum of expense in situ testing. enhance the value of in situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of resuhs will be made more reliable. 0.3 Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most tyues of joints, weak bedding zones, shear zones and faults. planes, week schistocity planes, weakness The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontspacing, persistence, roughness, wall strength, inuities are orientation, These paraaperture, filling, seepage, number of sets, and block size. meters are also evaluated from study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 0.4 It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the mechanical behaviour. This standard covering various parameters to describe 3

IS : 11315 ( Part
discontinuities part covering parts covering

4 ) - 1987
parts, each The other

in rock masses is being formulated in various one parameter. This part covers roughness. other parameters are also being formulated.

0.5 Roughness describes inherent roughness and waviness relative to the mean plane of a discontinuity. Both roughness and waviness contribute to the shear strength. Large scale waviness may also alter the dip locally. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960".

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 4 ) covers the method of roughness of discontinuities in rock mass.
2. TERMINOLOGY for quantitative description

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, IS : 11358- 19877 shall apply.
3. GENERAL

the definitions

of terms

given

in

3.1 The wall roughness of a discontinuity is a potentially important component of its shear strength, specially in the case of undisplaced and interlocked features ( for example unfilled j6ints ). The importance of or filling thickness, or the degree of wall roughness declines as aperture, any previous displacement increases.
the roughness of discontinuity walls can be 3.2 In general terms, characterized by a waviness ( large scale undulations which, if interlocked and in contact, cause dilation during shear displacement since they are too large to be sheared off ) and by an unevenness ( small scale roughness that tends to be damaged during shear displacement unless the discontinuity walls are of high strength and/or the stress levels are low, so that the dilation can also occur on these small scale features ). 3.3 In practice, waviness affects the initial direction ment relative to the mean discontinuity plane while the shear strength that would normally be sampled medium scale in situ direct shear test ( see Fig. 1 ).
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( reviwf ). tGlossary of terms and symbols relating to rock mechanics.

of shear displaceunevenness affects in a laboratory or

4

IS : 11315 ( Part

4 ) - 1987

1. LABORATORY SHEAR TEST 2 IN-SITU SHEAR TEST

FIG. 1 DIFFERENT SCALES OF DISCONTINUITY ROUGHNESSARE SAMPLEDBY DIFFERENT SCALES OF TESTS. WAVINESSCANBE CHARACTERISED BY THE ANGLE ( i ) 3.4 If the direction of potential sliding is `known, roughness can be sampled by linear profiles taken parallel to this direction. In many cases, the relevant direction is parallel to the dip ( dip vector ). In cases where sliding is controlled by two intersecting discontinuity planes, the direction of potential sliding is parallel to the line of intersection of the planes. In the case of arch dam abutment stability, the direction of potential sliding may have a marked horizontal component. 3.5 If the direction of potential sliding is unknown, but nevertheless of importance, roughness must be sampled in three dimensions instead of two. This can be done with a compass and disc-clinometer. Dip and dip direction readings can be plotted as poles on equal-area nets. Alternatively, discontinuity surfaces can be coloured relative to their mean planes using photogrammetric methods. This can be a useful technique if the critical surfaces are inaccessible. 3.6 The purpose of all roughness sampling methods is for the eventual estimation or calculation of shear strength and dilation. Presently available methods of interpreting roughness profiles and estimating shear 5

IS : 11315 ( Part 4 ) - 1987 strength are summarized under estimation of shear strength. 5 on presentation of results and 6 on

3.7 Roughness describes the inherent surface relative to the mean plane of a discontinuity.

roughness

and waviness

3.8 The linear profiling method of sampling roughness requires the following equipment: (a) folding straight edge of at least 2 m length graduated in mm, (b) compass and clinometer, and (c) 10 m of light wire or nylon with paint markings at 1 m intervals ( red ) and 10 cm interThe line should be attached to small wooden blocks or vals (blue). similar handles at each end, SO that it can be tensioned to form a straight reference line above the plane of large undulating discontinuities. 3.9 The compass and disc-clinometer method of sampling roughness the following equipment: (a) a geological compass which requires incorporates a horizontal levelling bubble and a rotatable lid which is connected to the main body of the compass through a graduated hinge for recording dip, and (b) f our thin circular plates made of a light alloy, of various diameters ( that is 5, 10, 20 and 40 cm ) which can be fixed in turn to the lid of the compass. 3.10 The photogrammetric method of sampling assorted equipment described under Photogrammetric of this standard. ' 4. PROCEDURE 4.1 Linear and typical to occur. Profiling - Discontinuities of the surface presumed to are selected that are accessible be involved if shear failure was roughness Method requires in Part 1

4.1.1 Depending upon the relevant dimensions of each plane, either the 2 m straight edge or the 10 m wire ( or sections of either ) are placed or stretched above the plane of the discontinuity parallel to the mean direction of potential sliding. For convenience, they should be in or points of the discontinuity and contact with the highest point they should be as straight as possible. ( A small lump of plasticene can be helpful in preventing the straight edge from sliding down steeply dipping joints. It can be placed between the straight edge and the high spots. ) The perpendicular distances (JJ ) from the straight edge ( or wire ) to the surface of the discontinuity are recorded to the nearest mm, for given tangential distances ( x ) ( see Fig. 2 ). It is advisable to be flexible in the choice of ( x ) since a regular interval ( for example, 5 cm ) might result in missing a small step or similar feature of potential importance to the shear strength. On average, x intervals equal to approximately 2 percent of the total measuring length are sufficient to give a good overall impression of roughness. 6

IS : 11315( Part 4 ) - 1987

ROUGHNESS PROFILE

Scale

Y

IUNUSED FOLDING

HALF OF 2179 STRl iIGHT

Fro. 2 A METHOD OF RECORDING DISCONTINUITYROUGHNESSIN Two DIMENSIONS,ALONG THE ESTIMATEDDIRECTION OF POTENTIAL SLIDING 4.1.2 The x and y readings are recorded in parallel, together with the azimuth and dip of the measuring direction. This may by different from the orientation u/P of the discontinuity. most common and maximum 4.1.3 Profiles typical of the minimum, These profiles roughness are recorded using the above procedures. or may apply to a whole discontinuity set, to one critical discontinuity, to each surface measured, depending upon the detail required. 4.1.4 The waviness angle ( i ) illustrated in Fig. 1 should be recorded using the straight edge and chnometer, if the profile was so short that waviness was not automatically sampled during profiling. 4.1.5 The approximate wave length and amplitude of waviness too large to be sampled by profiling should be estimated, or measured where accessibility is no problem. 7

IS : 11315 ( Part

4 ) - 1987

4.1.6 Photographs representing the surfaces of minimum, modal and maximum roughness should be taken, with a 1 m rule placed against the surface in question clearly visible.
NOTE 1 - The mm graduated ruler used to measure the perpendicular distances, J, should be tapered to a point so that the fine details of roughness can be recorded if desired. Most of the automatic recording profilographs are suitable for describing the finest details of roughness. They obviously give a much more accurate picture oi' roughness than that obtained by the present suggested method. Normally, this accuracy is unnecessary for rock mechanics purposes. NOTE 2 - Offsets planes are indicative or steps dividing a discontinuity surface into several parallel of lack of persistence, and should be carefully profiled.

NOTE 3 - There are many other methods of recording roughness in addition to the For example, the wave-length and amplitude of surface features profiling method. could be measured and recorded for several different scale intervals, that is, < lcm, l-10 cm, lo-100 cm, > 1 m. Alternatively, a very large undulating joint exposure could be rapidly recorded by laying a straight edge ( for example, 1 m length ) against the surface at 1 m intervals in the down-dip direction and recordine the din ofoeach position by means of a clinometer fixed to&the straight edge. The length df straight edge could be varied in the same manner as with the compass method, if desired.

4.2 Compass and Disc-Clinometer that are accessible and typical of the if shear failure was to occur.

- Discontinuites surface presumed

are selected to be involved,

4.2.1 The small scale roughness angles ( i ) ( Fig. 3 ) are measured by placing the largest circular plate ( for example, 40 cm dia ) against the surface of the discontinuity in at least 25 different positions, and recording dip direction and dip for each position. ( A surface area at least ten times as large as the area of the largest plate is assumed 18. ) 4.2.2 This procedure is repeated in turn for the other plate diameters. The overall sensitivity of the measurements is improved if a large number of positions are recorded with the' smaller plate diameters, for example, 50 positions with a 20 cm plate, 75 positions with a 10 cm plate and 100 positions with a 5 cm plate. 4.2.3 Each set of dip equal area not in terms poles. direction of poles. and dip data is plotted on a separate Contours are drawn for each set of

4.2.4 Photographs representing surfaces of minimum, modal and maximum roughness should be taken, with a 1 m rule placed against the surfaces in question clearly visible.
NOTE 1 - The smallest base plates give the greatest scatter of readings and also the largest roughness angles. The largest base plates give the least scatter of readings and also the smallest roughness angles. NOTE 2 - The large number of dip direction and dip readings ( from approximately 200 plate positions ) represents at least one hours work per sampled plane. This will only be justified in special circumstances. If a large number of discontinuities need to be measured. the photogrammetric method is recommended. Alternatively, if the potential sliding direction is known, the profiling method is recommended, thereby reducing the amount of data collection to the single direction of potential sliding.

8

IS : 11315( Part 4 ) - 1987
CLAR COMPASS

0, -

' 10

' 20

' 30

' 10

' 50 -cm

PLATE

DIAMETER-

L *_._ , .

a.,-*

LOcm

OF POTENTIAL-LO SLIDING

FIG. 3 A METHOD OF RECORDING DISCONTINUITY ROUGHNESS IN THREE DIMENSIONS FOR CASESWHERE THE POTENTIAL,DIRECTIONOF SLIDING IS NOT YET KNOWN. CIRCULARDISCS OF DIFFERENT DIMENSIONS ( 5,10,20 AND 40 CM ) ARE FIXED IN TURN TO A CLAR COMPASS AND CLINOMETER. THE DIP DIRECTIONAND DIP READINGS ARE PLOTTEDAS POLESON EQUAL-AREA NETS 9

IS : 11315 ( Part

4 ) - 1987

NOTE 3 - The maximum roughness angles for the given disc sizes can bc plotted for any direction of potential sliding ( scc Fig. 3 ). The tangent of these maximum

roughness angles multiplied by the appropriate base length ( disc diameter ) gives the displacement ( dilation ) that will occur perpendicular to the discontinuity for a shear displacement equal to the given base length. Several base lengths ( disc diameters ) are analyscd in this way, so that a dilation curve can be obtained. This
will give a realistic picture of the shearing process when there is minimal damage to asperities. The method is, therefore, most appropriate to shearing of joints in hard rocks at low effective normal stress levels. ( Asperities smaller than the minimum plate diameter are assumed not to influence the process of dilation. )

4.3 Photogrammetric

Method

grammetry can be used to on the surface of inaccessible lined under photogrammetric

- In special cases, terrestial photoobtain the coordinates of numerous points discontinuities using the procedures outmethod. From this data, it is possible to roughness. The minimum of the camera base from 1 mm intervals might be likely, profiles should be, if this is known.

compute contour maps or profiles of the surface contour intervals will depend on the distance the surface in question. In' some instances, achieved, though 1 cm or 5 cm would be more computed for the direction of potential sliding,

NOTE - The coordinates representing points on the surface of the given discontinuity are recorded using a stereoscopic plotting instrument or a stereo comparator, with automatic recording equipment ( that is, punched tape ). Roughness profiles can bc drawn by computer. Methods are available for estimating the shear strength and dilation characteristics of discontinuities ( specifically unfilled joints ), based on statistical analysis of these surface coordinates,

5. PRESENTATION

OF RESULTS

5.1 Linear Profiling - The x and y readings should be plotted to the same scale ( not distorted ) and inclined correctly, as shown digrammatically in the inset to Fig. 2. Profiles representing the minimum, most common, and maximum roughness should be drawn on the same page 1to make comparison easier. The three profiles may represent a discontinuity set, a single critical discontinuity, or each surface sampled. This will depend on the amount of detail required. A scale should be included in all the drawings. Profiles should be identified clears, and the azimuth and dip of the measuring direction should be stated, in case this differ3 from the previously recorded orientation ~13 of the discontinuity. 5.1.1 Photographs of the relevant surfaces and maximum roughness should be presented showing minimum, modal together with the profiles.

5.2 Compass and Disc-Clinometer - The field measurements of dip direction and dip obtained with the various diameters of disc should be plotted as poles on equal area nets, one for each disc. These can be combined and presented on a single contoured plot, as shown in Fig. 3. 5.2.1 Measurements from several discontinuities of a given set may be grouped on the same equal area net if desired, to show the range of roughness ( and the overall variation in orientation caused by any waviness). 10

IS : 11315 ( Part 4 ) - 1987 5.2.2 Photographs of the reIevant surfaces showing minimum, modal and maximum roughness should be presented together with the pole diagrams. - For purposes of visual presentation 5.3 Photogrammetric Method in a report, the most useful figures will be profiles rather than contour The profiles, which wrll normally be diagrams of surface roughness. plotted by computer, should be presented with 1 : 1 vertical : horizontal scales in preference to exaggerated vertical scales. 5.3.1 If the direction of potential sliding is unknown, the profiles should be computed and presented to represent the roughness in the line of dip ( dip vector direction). Correctly oriented profiles can be produced at a later stage. 5.3.2 Photographs of the relevant surfaces and maximum roughness should be presented showing together minimum, modal with the profiles.

5.4 Descriptive Terms - In the preliminary stages of field mapping ( that is, during feasibility studies ) time limitations may prevent the use of the above roughness measuring techniques. The description of roughness will be limited to descriptive terms which should be based on two scales of observation: a) Small scale ( several centimetres ), and b) Intermediate The descriptive i) Rough ii) Smooth, iv) Rough v) Smooth vi) viii) ix) vii) Rough Smooth, scale ( several terms are: ), stepped; metres ),

( or irregular stepped; stepped; ( or irregular undulating;

iii) Slickensided,

), undulating;

Slickensided,

undulating; ), planer; and

( or irregular planer; planer.

.

Slickensided,

should only be used if there 5.4.1 The term `slickensided' evidence of previous shear displacement along the discontinuity.

is clear

5.4.2 The intermediate scale of roughness is divided into three the small scale of undulating and planer, and degrees : stepped, roughness superimposed on the intermediate scale is also divided into three degrees, rough ( or irregular ), smooth, and slickensided. The direction of striations or slikensides should be noted as shear strength Roughness profiles typical of the nine classes may vary with direction. 11

IS : 11315( Part 4 ) - 1987 are illustrated in Fig. 4. [ The effective roughness angles ( i ) displayed by the nine categories of profile mean that in terms of shear strength, I > IT, > III, IV, > V, > VI, VlI, > VIII, > IX assuming that mineral coatings are entirely absent, or present in equal amounts. It is also evident that I > IV > VII, II > V > VIII, III > IX and VI > IX. Some of the inequalities are less certain. For example VII might be stronger than III. This would depend on whether or not dilation was inhibited. Around an underground excavation, dilation is usually inhibited by the stiffness of the surrounding rock mass. Beneath a rock slope, it may not be. ]

I

ROUGH

II

SMOOTH

111

SLICKENSIOED

4

-

STEPPED ROUGH IV

V

SMOOTH

/

VI

SLICKENSIDED -_

UNDULATING

111

ROUGH

SMOOTH ill

IX

SLICKENSIDED

PLANAR

FIG. 4 TYPICAL ROUGHNESS PROFILES AND SUGGESTED NOMENCLATURE, THE LENGTH OF EACH PROFILE IS IN THE RANGE 1 TO IO METRES. THE VERTICALAND HORIZONTAL SCALES ARE EQUAL 12

IS : 11315( Part 4 ) - 1987
5.4.3 There may also be a large scale waviness superimposed on the In such cases, these above small and intermediate scales of observation. characteristics should also be noted, that is smooth, undulating ( class V ) with large scale waviness 10 m wave length, 50 m amplitude. 5.4.4 The descriptions associated with persistence, that is, systematic sub-systematic, non systematic will obviously be of greatest importance in determining the relative importance of the above descriptions of roughness. 6. ESTIMATION OF SHEAR STRENGTH

6.1 The main purpose in describing the roughness of the walls of discontinuities is to facilitate the estimation of shear strength, in particular, in the case of unfilled discontinuities -where estimates may be quite accurate. 6.2 In crude terms, shear strength will consist of a maximum ( peak ) or minimum ( residual ) friction angle, or some intermediate angle ( depending upon the degree of previous shear displacement ) plus a contribution ( i ) due to large scale waviness, if this exists. thus T = where T = C$ = 7l = i = shear strength friction effective waviness angle ( peak or residual ( peak or residual stress, and ). ), ), ontan ($+i)

normal

( if present

6.2.1 The value of ( peak friction angle ) $p will depend on the value In the case of unfilled joints, & of on and on the degree of roughness. values generally range from 30 to 70" and commonly average about 45". In the case of joints having vertical or very steep steps, or less than 100 percent persistence, there will also be a cohesion ( c ) to add to the above value of & for example profiles I, II and III ( see Fig. 4 ). 6.2.2 The value of residual friction angle, & depends on degree of In the absence weathering of discontinuity walls and on the rock type. of weathering, & usually varies from 25 to 35, and is most commonly around 30". In the case of strongly weathered walls, the value may fall to around 15", even in the absence of actual clay fillings. A method of estimating & is based on the ratio between the Schmidt hammer rebound ( r ) obtained on the weathered rock wall and the rebound ( Y ) obtained on the unweathered rock. 13

IS : 11315( Part 4 ) - 1987 6.2.3 Values $p =
where JRC JCS = joint of $p can be estimated

JRC loglo

( >+
JE
0n

using the following

formula:

9r

roughness

coefficient,

and

= joint-wall

compression

strength.

The method of application is illustrated in Fig. 5. Firstly, the measured roughness profiles are. matched with the three sets given at the top of Fig. 5, to obtain an estimate of the appropriate JRC value. ( More ) detailed profiles are given in Fig. 6 to facilitate this quantification. Secondly, the discotinutiy walls are tested with a Schmidt hammer to estimate JCS and I&. Note that in Fig. 5, & has been assumed as 30" The above method is a surprisingly accurate and cheap in every case. method of estimating &,. 6.2.4 Since peak shear strength is mobilized after relatively small displacements, it may not be realistic to add the large scale wavinees For most practical purposes, & can be angle ( i ) to I his estimate of 4p. regarded as the maximum value for a joint of 100 percent persistence. However, & is not mobilized until relatively large displacements have occurred, which generally makes the large scale waviness angle ( i ) a In the case of completely planer realistic addition to shear strength. discontinuities or discontinuities that have sheared to the extent that no further dilation is possible, then 4 r will be the only shear strength component left, and will represent the absolute minimum shear strength for that discontinuity. 6.2.5 The above method for estimating the JRC value of a measured Objective methods of analysing roughness profile is obviously subjective. profiles are compass and disc-clinometer method and photogrammetric method. As described under notes under 4.2.4, the method of analyzing compass and disc-clinometer readings results in a dilation curve which is a plot of roughness ( i ) angles versus shear displacement. These ( i ) angles are added to &, to estimate the shear strength for displacements intermediate between peak and residual strength.

14

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS : 11315( Part 4 ) - 1987

TYPICAL ROUGHNESS 1 f---I

PROFILES FOR JRC RANGE
o-2

2

I----------------------I

2-L

3

---I

4-6

4

I---

6-6

6

+----------I

8-10

6

r

A

to-12

7

t_

4-q

12-M

6

t-_

_lL-16

g

j--./w-~

16-18

10

WT

16-20

0 I-:

:

!

!

5 !

' ! ! ! !

1Ocm Scale 1

FIG. 6

ROUGHNESSPROFILE AND CORRESPONDING RANGE OF JRC VALUES ASSOCIATEDWITH EACH ONE

17

INTERNATIONAL
Base

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS )

Units
QUANTITY
UNIT
SYMBOL m ks S A K

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

cd mol

bpplementary QUANTITY
Plane angle

Units
UNIT radian steradian
SYMBOL

rad
ST

Solid angle

Derived Units QU ANTlTY
Force Energy Power FIUX Flux density Frequency Electric Pressure, conductance force stress Electromotive UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal
SYMBOL

DEBYNITION I 1 1 1 1 1 N = J = W=lJ/s 1 V.s 1 Wb/ms 1 c/s (s-s) 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/m' T = S = V = 1 kg.m/s* 1 N.m

N

J
W Wb T HZ s `J Pa

1 Wb = 1 Hz =

1 Pa =

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 1375 I 36 24 99 2 18 43 I 3 16 41 r41 24 42 ( 41 25 19

Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : l/l 4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113

TWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6'34: g2" i! BOMBAY 400093 Branch Offices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur. 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 2 63 49 I Peenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road, 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 38 49 56 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road T. T. Nagar, 667 16
BHOPAL 462003

Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5315. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L., N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005

5 36 27 23 1083 6 { 6 21 ( 21 6 7 34 98 68 82 23 66 71 32 76 92 05 37

Patliputra Industrial Estate. PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/l 421. Universitv P.O.. Palayam TRIVANDRUM 695035 Inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar,
PUNE 411005 is at 5 Chowringhse is at Novelty Approach, Chambers, *Saks Office in Calcutta Street, Calcutta 700072 *Sales Office Bombay 400007

2 51 71 5 24 35

P. 0. Princep 27 68 00 Grant Road, S!3 65 28

in Bombay

Printed at Printograph.

New Delhi. IndIe

