**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 6616 (1982) : Specification for Ballasts for High 
Pressure Mercury Vapour Lamps [ETD 23: Electrical Lamps and 
their Auxiliaries] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18:6616-1982 

(RcafTirmed 2006) 



Indian Standard 



SPECIFICATION FOR 

BALLASTS FOR HIGH PRESSURE 

MERCURY VAPOUR LAMPS 

(First Revision) 

Fourth Reprint AUGUST 2007 
(Including Amendment No 1) 

UDC 621.327.534.2.032.4 



©Copyright 1983 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEWOELHI 110002 

Cr8 January \9V^ 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MARCH 2002 

TO 

IS 6616 : 1982 SPECIFICATION FOR BALLASTS FOR 

HIGH PRESSURE MERCURY VAPOUR LAMPS 

( First Revision ) 

( Page 16, clause 9.12.3, line 3 ) — Delete Ihe word 'rise' Ixjfbre the word 
'does not'. 



^ ^^ ^■' ^ Anklta Art Printers Ph.: 26814834, 41406468 



IS : 6616 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

BALLASTS FOR HIGH PRESSURE 

MERCURY VAPOUR LAMPS 

( First Revision ) 

Electric Lamps and Accessories Sectional Committee, ETDC 23 

Chairman Representing 

Dr S. R. Das National Test House, Calcutta 

Membeis 

Shri G. Bhattacharya ( Alternate to 
Dr S. R. Das) 
Shri G. K. Aithal Bajaj Elcctricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. K. Katre ( Alternate) 
Shri S. R. Anand Sylvania & Lax man Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri G. W. Patwardhan ( Alternate) 
Shri R. S. Arora Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New 

Delhi 
Shri S. Krishna ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. S. Chart (Ironipton Ci reaves Ltd, Bombay 

ShriR. Das Gupta [Alternate) 
Shri P. K. Ghatterjee Electric Lamp ManuTacturers' (India) Pvt Ltd, 

Calcutta 
Shri M. M. Bandhyopadhyay 
( Alternate ) 
Chief Engineer ( Electrical)-! Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 
Surveyor op Works I ( Elec ) 
( Alternatt ) 
Deputy Director Central Elect-itity Authority, New Delhi 

Deputy General Manager Posts & Telegraphs Department (Ministry o. 

C'ommunications ) 
Divisional Engineer ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. N. Dhingra The Miniature Bulb Industries (India) Pvt Ltd, 

Dchra Dun 
Shri V. S. CnniBnAR ( Alternate) 
Shri A. N. Ghosh The Development Commissioner, Small Scale 

Industries, New Delhi 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



® Ciwvrifyht 1983 

nifRFAU OI INDIAN SIANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri p. Saran Gupta Auto Lamps Ltd, Faridabad 

Shrx S. C. Khsra {Alternate) 
Joint Director Standard Railway Board, Ministry of Railwayd 

( Electrical) -4, RDSO 

Assistant Dbsion Engineer 
( Elec )-Dl, RDSO ( Alternate ) 
Cdr M. M. Kaila Naval Headquarters, Ministry of Defence 

Lt G. K. Dhawan ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. L. Kesvani Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 

Shri D. D. Rajdev ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Col S. S. Mohanty Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Maj V. B. Deshmukh ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. P. G. Pai Electric Lamps and Component Manufacturers* 

Association of India, Bangalore 

Shri J. B. Saxena ( Alternate) 
Shri H. C. Pandey Directorate of Technical Development & Production 

( Air ), Ministry of Defence 

Shri J. M. Rev^alliwar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. V. S, Rao Bombay Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking, 

Bombay 

Shri K. Kamat ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Rastogi Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri A. Augustine ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. V. S. Rau The Bengal Electric Lamp Works Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri K. K. Rohatoi Binay Elcctricals & Appliances Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri S. Bhattagharya ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. P. Rohtaoi Piadip Lamp Works, Patna 

Shri A jit K. Rohatgi ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Roy Ohoudhary Pcico Electronics & Elcctricals Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. Albert ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Sarma National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri V. K. Sood Mysore Lamps Works Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri P. N. Srinivasan PNS Lighting Design & Consultancy, Bangalore 

Shri V. C. Verma Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dbanbad 

Shri B. K. Sharan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. P. Sachdev, Director General, IS I ( Ex^officio Member ) 



Director ( Elec tech ) 



Secretary 

Shri Sukh Bir Singh 

Assistant Director ( Elec tech), ISI 



IS : 6616 -1982 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 

BALLASTS FOR HIGH PRESSURE 

MERCURY VAPOUR LAMPS 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 20 August 1982, after the draft finalized by the 
Electric Lamps and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Electrotcchnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is intended to cover inductive type ballasts associated 
with high pressure mercury vapour lamps covered by various parts of 
IS : 9900-1981*. 

0.3 In order to obtain satisfactory performance of high pressure mercury 
vapour (HPMV) lamps and their associated ballasts, it is necessary for cer- 
tain features of their design to be properly co-ordinated. Therefore, it is 
essential that their specifications be written in terms of measurements made 
against some common reference baseline which should be reasonably perma- 
nent and reproducible. 

0.3.1 Such reference baseline is fulfilled by special or selected inductive 
type ballasts which are called reference ballasts. These ballasts may be used 
for testing ordinary ballasts and for selecting reference lamps. 

0.3.2 Moreover, the testing of ballasts for HPMV lamps presents parti- 
cular difficulties which require a proper definition of testing methods. This 
testing will, in general, be made with reference lamps and, in particular, by 
comparing results obtained on such lamps with these ballasts and with the 
reference ballasts. -- 

0.4 Because of the special characteristics of HPMV lamps, two ranges of 
supply voltage variation had to be considered. Whenever, safety is involved, 
the classical range of variation from 90 percent to 1 10 percent of the rated 

* Specification for high pressure mercury vapour lamps: 
Part 1 Requirements and test, 
Part II Standard lamp data sheets^ 
Part in Dimenilons of lamp caps, 
Part IV 'Go* and *No-Go' gauges oflamp caps. 



IS: 6616-1982 

supply voltage is retained. But for certain clauses where only operational 
conditions are concerned, a somewhat smaller range from 92 to 106 percent 
of the rated value has been considered. 

0.5 In the relation between ballast and luminaire, a new concept has been 
introduced, the rated maximum operating temperature t^ of a winding 
which must not be exceeded in order to achieve sufficient ballast life. For 
the time being, this method is an alternative to the fixed temperature limits 
as specified in this specification (see 9.12 and Appendix E). 

0.6 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from lEC Pub 
262 (1969) 'Ballasts for high pressure mercury vapour lamps published 
by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should 
be the same as that of t^e specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers ballasts of inductive type for use up to 250 V 
alternating current supply at 50 Hz, associated with high pressure mercury 
vapour lamps covered by various parts of IS : 9900-19811. 

1.2 Relevant clauses of this standard ( for example, thermal endurance 
tests for windings ) apply also to ballasts which form an integral part of a 
luminaire and which cannot be tested separately. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

2.1 Ballast — A device connected between the supply and one or more dis- 
charge lamps, which serves mainly to limit the lamp ( s ) current to the 
required value. 

It may also include means for transforming the supply voltage and 
arrangements to correct the power factor and suppress ratio interference. 

•Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revistd). 
fSpccification for high pressure mercury vapour lamps : 

Part I Rcquircnrjents and test, 

Part II Standard lamp data sheets, 

Part III Dimensions of lamp caps. 

Part IV * Go * and * No»Go * gauges of lamp caps. 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

2.1.1 Independent Ballast — A ballast consisting of one or more elements 
so designed that it ( or they ) can be mounted separately outside a lighting 
fitting aind without an additional enclosure. 

2.1.2 Integral Ballast — A ballast exclusively designed to be built into a 
lighting fitting, a box, an enclosure or the like, 

2.1.3 Drip-Proof Ballast —- A. ballast intended to withstand drops of 
water falling in a substantially vertical direction when the ballast is placed 
as in normal use ( for example, for use under a surface from which conden- 
sate may drip ). 

2.2 Reference Lamp — A lamp selected for testing ballasts which, when 
associated with a reference ballast under the conditions specified in Appen- 
dices C and D of this standard, has electrical characteristics which are close 
to the values given in Appendix A within the limits defined in Appendix C. 

2.3 Reference Ballast — - A special inductive ballast designed for the purpose 
of providing comparison standard for use in testing ballasts, and for the 
selection of reference lamps. It is essentially characterized by a stable 
voltage-to-current ratio, which is relatively uninfluenced by variations in 
current, temperature and magnetic surroundings, as outlined in this standard 
( see Appendix B ). 

2.4 Calibration Current ( of a Reference Ballast ) — The value of the current 
on which the calibration and control of the ballast are based. 

Note — Such a current should closely approximate the nominal running current of 
the lamp for which the ballast is intended. 

2.5 Supply Voltage — The voltage applied to the complete circuit of 
lamp(s) and ballast. 

2.6 Working Voltage — The highest voltage, across any insulation, which 
may occur m open circuit conditions or during lamp's operation. 

2.7 Rated Voltage — The declared voltage(s) of the supply on which the 
ballast is intended to be used. 

2.8 Rated Maximum Operating Temperature ( of a Winding ) -^ The opera- 
ting temperature of ballast winding ( symbol /w ) which gives an expectancy 
of 10 years' continuous service at that temperature. 

2.9 Rated Temperature Rise ( of a Winding ) — The declared temperature 
rise of a winding ( symbol A t ) when tested in accordance with Appendix D 
under normal operating conditions at rated voltage and frequency. 

2.10 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove conformity with this standard. 
These arc intended to prove the general quality and design of a given type 
of ballast. 



18:6616-1982 

2.11 Acceptance Tests — Tests carried out on samples taken from a lot for 
the purpose of acceptance of the lot. 

2.12 Routine Tests — Tests carried out on all ballasts to check requirements 
which are likely to vary during production. 

3. CONSTRUCTION 

3.1 Ballasts shall be mechanically robust and shall be so designed and 
constructed as to minimize the effects of atmospheric moisture and of 
temperature changes during use. 

34.1 An independent ballast to be installed in the base compartment of 
street lighting columns shall be so designed that when correctly mounted in 
a column: 

a) any condensation falling on it shall not reach the terminals or 
leads, 

b) there are no cavities on the exterior where moisture can collect, 
and 

c) the terminals or loads shall be readily accessible and identifiable. 

3.2 All exposed metal parts shall either be constructed of non-ferrous 
material or shall be adequately protected against rusting. 

3.3 Fixing — Adequate robust means of fixing shall be provided. 

4. TERMINALS FOR EXTERNAL WIRING 

4.1 When terminals are provided, they shall comply with the following 
requirements: 

a) Terminals shall permit the connection of conductors with cross 
sectional areas as follows: 



Rated Watte 
W 

801 
125 J 


ige 


Cross Sectional Area of Conductor 
mm^ 

0-75 to 2-5 


250" 

400 

700 


9 


l-5to4'0 


1000, 







b) Terminals shall be fixed in such a way that they cannot work 
loose when the clamping screws are tightened or loosened. Termi- 
nals may be protected against loosening by two fixing screws or 
by a suitable locking device but covering with sealing compounds 
is not deemed to be sufficient protection. 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

c) Tcriniiials shall be designed that the core of the conductor is held 
between two metal surfaces: 

1) under adequate pressure so that the conductor cannot slip out 
when the screw is tightened; 

2) without damage to the conductor, that is, without showing 
deep incisions or shearing; and 

3) without special preparation, such as soldering of the strands of 
the conductor, use of cable lugs, formation of eyelets, etc. 

d) The terminal screws shall have an ISO metric thread or a thread 
comparable in pitch and mechanical strength and shall not serve 
to fix any other component. 

e) Any terminal for external wiring shall be so located that when the 
connection of the conductors is correctly made: 

1) there is no risk of accidental contact between live parts of 
opposite polarity or between such parts and accessible metal 
parts; and 

2) the wires can be easily introduced and connected and the cover, 
if any, can be fixed without risk of danrvage to the wires. 

4.2 When terminals other than screw type, such as pin type terminals are 
used for the ballast they shall be so designed that it is possible to make 
rigid connection with the help of suitable clamps or clips s« that the clamps 
or clips do not slip out due to vibrations to which the lighting fittings in 
which such ballasts arc used are subjected in normal use. The clamps 
should be so designed that they shall allow the wire to be connected rigidly 
and such that part of the clamp holds the conductor of the wire rigidly 
whereas the grip is made firm also by holding the insulation of the wire in 
the extended portion of the clamp. The connections used shall be rigid 
without taking recourse to other methods, such as soldering of the wire and 
the clamps. When such connections are used th«y should be adequately 
covered by insulation sleeving so that they are not easily accessible. 

5. PROVISION FOR EARTHING 

5.1 The earthing terminals, if any, shall be of a type in which the conductor 
is secured by means of a screw, which shall not work loose in normal use; 
it shall be placed near to the main terminals and shall be clearly and indelibly 



marked with the symbol * I The earthing terminal shall comply 

with the requirements of 4. The metal of the earthing terminal shall be 
such that there is no danger of corrosion resulting from contact with the 
earthing conductor. The screw or the other parts of the earthing terminal 
shall be made of non-rusting material, and the contact surfaces shall be 



15:6616*1982 

bare metal. It shall not be possible to loosen the earthing terminal screw 
without the aid of a tool. 

6. CREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES 

6.1 Creepage distances and clearances shall not be less than the values given 
in Table 1, expressed in millimetres. 

Note — Creepage distances arc clearances shall not be less than the external surface 
of insulating material. 

6.1.1 The contribution to the creepage distance of any groove less than 
1 mm wide is limited to its width. 

6.1.2 Any air-gap of less than 1 mm is ignored in computing the total air 
path. 

6.1.3 A metallic enclosure shall have an insulating lining if, in the absence 
of such a lining, the creepage distance or clearance between live parts and 
the enclosure is smaller than the value prescribed above. 

TABLE 1 CREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES IN AIR 

( Claust 6.1 ) 

Creepage distance and clearance: 

a) Between live parts of different polarity 3 (2) mm 

b) Between live parts and accessible metal parts which are perma- 4 (2) mm 
nendy fixed to the auxiliary, including screws or devices for 

fixing covers or fixing the auxiliary to its support. 

Clearance! 

Between live parts and a flat supporting surface or a loose metal 6 mm 
cover, if any, if the construction does not ensure that the values 
under (b) above are maintained under the most unfavourable 
circumstances. 

Note — The values within brackets apply to creepage distances and clearances com- 
pletely protected against dirt. Completely sealcd-off or compound-filled distances arc 
not checked. 



7. PROTECTION AGAINST ELECTRIC SHOCK AND ACCIDENTAL 
CONTACTS 

7.1 The enclosures on independents ballasts shall have no opening giving 
access to live parts other than those necessary for the use and working of 
the auxiliary. 

In addition, independent ballasts shall be so constructed and enclosed 
that they are sufficiently protected against accidental contact with live parts 
when installed as in normal use. 

8 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

Lacquer or enamel is not deemed to be adequate protection or insula- 
tion for the purpose of this requirement. 

7.2 Parts providing protection against accidental contact shall have adequate 
mechanical strength and shall not work loose in normal use. It shall not be 
possible to remove them without the use of tools. 

Compliance with regard to the protection against accidental contact 
shall be checked by means of the standard test finger shown in 
IS: 1401-1970'' using an electrical contact indicator. The finger shall be 
applied in every possible position and, if necessary, with a force of 30 N. 

It is recommended that a voltage of not less than 40 V be used with 
an indicator lamp for the indication of electrical contact. 

8. MARKING 

8.1 The ballasts shall be provided with durable and legible marking as 
follows: 

a) Mark of Origin — This may take the fonn of a trade-mark, or the 
manufacturer's name or the name of the responsible vendor; 

b) Type designation; 

c) Rated supply voltage ( or voltages, if there are several ), current 
and rated frequency; 

d) Rated wattage of the lamp and, if necessary, the designation of 
the type or types of lamp for which the ballast is designed. If the 
ballast is to be used with more than one lamp, the number of 
lamps and their wattage shall be indicated; 



e^ Symbol for drip-proof, that is ( if applicable); 



f ) Symbol for independent ballast, that is f\ T\ ( if applicable); 




g) Terminals 

1) When a ballast has more than two terminals or leads, other 
than earthing terminal, they shall be identified clearly and 
their rated voltage indicated. This may be implemented by 
numbering, and/or lettering, and/or colouring of the terminals 
or leads; 



•Specification for acccisibility tcit probes (first revision ). 

9 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

2) The earthing terminal ( if any ) shall be clearly and durably 
identified; and 

h) Country of manufacture. 

8.1.1 The following additional marking shall be added if appropriate: 

a) Ballasts with a rated maximum operating temperature of a 
winding shall be marked with the claimed value following the 
symbol t^,* The values selected shall be multiples of 5. 

Note — Preferred values are 90*C, 105*C and 120^G. 

b) Ballasts with t^ marking may also be marked with the rated 
temperature rise of the winding following the symbol A t- 

Note — Preferred values are40'C, 55*C, 70''C and 85*C. 

8.1.2 The ballasts may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 

8.1.3 The use oi the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. The details of conditions under which the licence for the use of 
Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



9. TESTS 

9.0 Ballasts Designed to Operate at Various Supply Voltages— If a ballast 
is rated for more than one value of supply voltage, it shall comply with the 
relevant clauses of this specification at all voltages for which it is marked. 
In the case of a tapped ballast, it shall be tested using the appropriate 
tappings. 

9.1 Type Tests 

9.1.1 The manufacturer shall submit to the testing authority following 
samples of ballasts, preferably selected at random from regular production 
lots, together with relevant technical data as required: 

a) for ballasts without temperature marking : 5 samples 

b) for ballasts with temperature marking : 12 samples 

( of which 7 are for the endurance test and 5 are for checking 
the rated temperature rise ). 

9.1.2 Criteria for Approval — The testing authority shall issue a type 
approval certificate, if all the ballasts are found to comply with the require- 
ments of test. In case of failure in any test, testing authority shall call for 
fresh samples not exceeding twice the number of original samples and subject 
them to all the tests. If in repeat tests, no failure occurs, the tests shall be 
considered to have been satisfied. 

10 



18:6616-1982 

9.1.3 Any change is design, construction, manufacturing process or 
material used in a ballast of approved type, shall be brought to the notice 
of the authority who may, at its discretion, call for fresh samples embodying 
these changes. 

9.1.4 The following tests shall constitute type tests and shall be carried 
on all samples in the sequence given: 

a) Visual examination ( see 9.4 ); 

b) Test for creepage distances and clearances {see6)\ 

c) Protection against accidental contacts ( seel); 

d) Test of terminals {see 9.5 ); 

e) Moisture resistance and insulation ( see 9.6 ) ; 

f ) Test for power and current output ( see 9.7 ); 

g) Test for short-circuit current ( see 9.8 ); 
h) Test for open-circuit voltage ( see 9.9 ); 
j) Test for current wave-shape ( see 9.10 ); 

k) Test for protection against magnetic influence {see 9.11); 
m) Limitation of ballast heating ( see 9.12 ); 
n) Test for resistance to corrosion and brittleness ( see 9.13 ); 
p) Test for mechanical strength ( see 9.14 ) ; and 
q) Endurance test ( see 9.15 ). 

9.2 Acceptance Tests — The following shall constitute acceptance tests 
to be carried out on a number of samples selected at random from each 
lot: 

a) Visual examination ( see 9.4); 

b) Test for short-circuit current ( see 9.8 ); 

c) Insulation resistance ( dry ) test ( see 9.6.3 ); and 

d) High voltage test (j^^ 9.6.4). 

9.2.1 The sampling procedure and criteria of acceptance shall be subject 
to agreement between the supplier and the purchaser. In the absence of 
such an agreement the sampling procedure given in Appendix F may bo 
followed. 

9.3 Routine Tests -^ The following tests shall be carried out on all ballasts 
in the order given below: 

a) Visual examination ( see 9.4 ) ; and 

b) Insulation resistance ( dry ) test ( see 9.6.3 ). 

9.4 Visoal Examination — Visual examination of the ballast shall not reveal 
any damage to the ballast. 

11 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

9.5 Testing of Terminals — The terminals are tested by tightening and 
loosening ten times on a conductor of the largest cross-sectional area 
required with the torque specified in Table 2. Column 2 of Table 2 applies 
to screws without heads which do not protrude from the hole when tighte- 
ned and col 3 applies to the other screws. 





TABLE 2 


TORQUE TEST FOR TERMINALS 








( CInusfs 9. 


5 ^W 0-3.6 J .2) 




Nominal Diameter 




TOR(^UE 




OP THE i 


SCRFAV 


I 


A 


■- - -^ 






Screw Without 


Screw With 








Head 


Head 


(1) 






(2) 


(3) 


mm 






Nm 


Nm 


2-5 






0-2 


04 


•i 






0-25 


0-5 


• 3-5 






0-4 


0-8 


4 






0-7 


1-2 


5 






0-8 


2-0 


6 






— 


2*5 



9.4 Moisture Resistance and Insulation 

9.6.1 The ballast shall be moisture resistant. It shall not show any 
appreciable damage after being subjected to the moisture treatment described 
in D-3.7.1. 

9.6.2 Drip-proof ballasts sliall show no visible evidence of water having 
entered the ballast after being subjected to the test in D.3.7.2. 

9.6.3 Insulation shall be adequate: 

a) between live parts of different polarity which can be separated; 

b) between live parts and external parts including fixing screws. 

The insulation resistance, measured immediately after the moisture 
test under the conditions specified in D-3.7, shall be not less than 2 MQ. 

9.6.4 Immediately after the insulation resistance test, the ballast shall, in 
addition, withstand a voltage test made under the conditions specified 
in D-3.7.1 (b), the test voltage corresponding to the the value given below: 

Working Voltage Test Voltage 

Up to and including 250 V 2 000 V 

For the definition of working voltage see 2.6. However, for the 
insulation between live parts and external parts, the test voltage shall be 
based on the rated voltage of the ballast if this voltage is higher than the 
working voltage. 

12 



IS: 6616- 1982 

9.6.5 Inter-turn Insulation — {Applicable only to Ballasts without tw or 
without tm and A t marking) — Ballasts shall have adequate inter-turn 
insulation. Compliance is checked by submitting the windings for 1 min 
to a voltage equal to five times the voltage occurring in normal use and 
steady state, at not less than five times the rated frequency; the test voltage 
shall not, however, exceed the value 2 500 V. During the test there shall be 
no short circuit between turns. 

9.7 Test for Power and Current Output 

9J.1 The ballast shall limit the power and current delivered to a reference 
lamp to not less than 92*5 percent for the power and not more than 115 
percent for the current of the corresponding values delivered to the same 
lamp when operated with a reference ballast. Both the reference ballast 
and the ballast under test shall have the same rated frequency and each shall 
be operated at its rated voltage ( see D-3.3 ). 

9.7.2 For any other supply voltage between 92 percent* and 106 percent'"' 
of its rated value, the power delivered by the ballast to the reference lamp 
shall lie between the limits of 88 percent of the power delivered to the same 
lamp by the reference ballast when supplied at 92 percent of its rated 
voltage and the limit of 109 percent of the power delivered to the lamp by 
the reference ballast when supplied at 106 percent of its rated voltage. 

9.8 Test for Short-circuit Current — When the ballast is supplied at any 
voltage between 92 percent and 106 percent of its rated voltage^ the short- 
circuit current shall not exceed the values given in Table 3, when tested as 
described in D-3.4. 



TABLE 3 


MAXIMUM SHORT-CIRCUIT CURRENT 






( CUuse 9.8 ) 




Ballast Rating 




Maximum Short-Circuit 








Current 


(1) 






(2) 


W 






A 


80 






1-60 


125 






2-30 


250 






4-25 


400 






6-85 


700 






11-35 


1000 






15-75 



9.9 Test for Open-circuit Voltage (Minimum Voltage for Stable Opera- 
tion) — A ballast when operated at any voltage between 92 percent and 
106 percent of its rated voltage and at rated frequency shall provide a 
minimum open-circuit voltage of 198 V. 

- Note — The above requirement is not applicable for 200 V of the tapped ballasts. 
•These values arc under consideration. 

13 



18:6616-1982 

9.10 Test for Ciirreiit Wave-Shape 

9.10.1 Mains Current Wave-Shape — The wave-shape of the current 
passed in the steady state by a ballast associated with a reference lamp and 
supplied at rated voltage and rated frequency shall be such that the value 
of the harmonics shall not exceed: 



For 2n(i harmonic 


5 percent of fundamental 


„ 3rd 


9> 




25 


X -—^percent of fu 


„ 5th 


»l 




5 percent of fundamental 


., 7th 


»> 




3 


>» >» J9 


.. 9th 


>» 




2 


>» >> »> 


„ 11th 


ft 




2 


l» >» #> 


„ 13th 


» 


and above 


1 


•> >> f> 



If the requirement of the second harmonic is not met, a further test, 
with a new lamp, shall be carried out. 

NoTB 1 — In the fonniila of 3rd hannonic, X i* ^^^ power-factor of the complete 
circuit. 

NoTB 2 — Thete values are under coniideration. 

9.10.2 Lamp Operating Current Wave-Shape — The maximum ratio of 
peak value to root-mean-square 9 rms value of the lamp operating current 
shall not exceed 1-9 at any value of supply voltage from 92 percent to 106 
percent of the rated voltage of the ballasts. 

9.11 Test for Protection Against Magnetic Influence — The running current 
of the ballast shall not be changed by more than 2 percent, when tested as 
described in D-3.1. 

9.12 Limitation of Ballast Heating 

9.12.1 Limitation of Ballast Heating for Ballasts Without Temperature 
Marking — When the ballast is tested in accordance with the requirements 
of D-3.5.1, the temperatures shall not exceed the appropriate values given' 
in Table 4. 

9.12.2 Limitation of Ballast Heating for Ballasts with Marking of Rated 
Maximum Operating Temperature or Rated Maximum Temperature and 
Rated Temperature- Rise — When the ballast is tested in accordance with the 
requirements of D-3.5.2, the temperatures shall not exceed the appropriate 
values in Table 4. 

14 



IS : 6616 - 1982 



TABLE 4 MAXIMUM TEMPERATURE UNDER TEST CONDITIONS FOR 

PRINCIPLE PARTS MEASURED AT OR REFERRED TO AN AMBIENT 

TEMPERATURE OF 25°C 

( Clausu 9.12.1, 9.12.2 and 9.\2,3 ) 
Part Maximum Temperature in °C 



At Rated At 1 10 Percent 

Voltage Rated Voltage 

(I) (2) (3) 

Windings ( ballait, transformer ) 

If /w is marked 

without A t marking 80 — 

with A t marking A / -♦- 25* — 

Uim is NOT marked 

paper interleaved — 95 

not separated by paper — 85 

Test hood ( on the outside ) ( built-in ballast ) — 85 

Case of independent ballast — 85 

Terminals for external wiring — 85 

Parts made of: 

wood-Elled phenolic mouldings — 110 

mineral-filled phenolic mouldings — 145 

urea moulding! — 90 

mel amine mouldings — 100 

laminated, resin bonded paper — 110 

rubber ~ 70 

thermoplastic materials — — t 

If materials or manufacturing methods are used other than those indicated in the table, 
these shall not be operated at temperatures higher than those which are proved to be 
pernliisible for these materials. 

*The differences between the values of /w and the temperature reached by the winding 
during the test gives an indication of the margin available for the thermal ambient 
immediately surrounding the ballast. 

tThc temperature of thermoplastic material, other than that used for the insulation of 
wiring, which provides protection against contact with live parts, is also determined. 

The maximum temperature of the thermoplastic material is used in the determination 
of the resistance to heat and fire. An appropriate test is under consideration. 



IS 



18:6616*1982 

9.12.3 For ambient temperature higher than 2S°C the maximum tempe- 
rature rise will go down correspondingly so that the maximum temperature 
rise does not exceed the values given in Table 4. 

9.12.4 After these heating tests and after cooling down, the ballast shall 
comply with the following conditions: 

a) the ballast marking shall still be legible; and 

b) the ballast shall withstand without damage a voltage test according 
to 9.6.4, the test vohage, however, being reduced lo the following 
values: 

Working Voltage Test Voltage 

Up to and including 250 V 1 500 V 

Note 1 — A test to detect short-circuited turns is under consideration. 

Note 2 — A test under abnormal conditions, corresponding to a short- 
circuit of the lamp, is under consideration. 

9.13 Test for Resistance to Corrosion and Brittleness — This test is intended 
to check the rust-protection offered to ferrous parts, the rusting of which 
may endanger the safety of the ballast. 

9.13.1 All grease shall be removed from the parts to be tested by immer- 
sion in carbon tetrachloride for 10 minutes. The parts shall then be 
immersed for 10 minutes in a 10 percent solution of ammonium chloride 
in water at a temperature of 27 ± 5**C. 

9.13.2 Without drying, but after shaking off drops of water, the parts 
shall be placed for 10 minutes at a temperature of 27 ± S^'C and at a 
relative humidity of 100 percent. 

9.13.3 After the samples have been dried out in an oven at a temperature 
of 100 ± S^'C, their surfaces shall show no sign of rust. 

Note — For small helical springs and the like, and for steel parts exposed to abra- 
sion, a layer of grease is deemed to provide sufficient rust protection. Such parts arc 
not subjected to the test. 

9.14 Test for Mechanical Strength ( for Independent Ballasts Only ) — The 

enclosure of independent ballasts shall have sufficient mechanical strength to 
allow them to withstand, without damage, the mechanical hazards resulting 
from the test specified in D-3.6. 

9.15 Endurance Test 

9.15.1 This test shall be applied only to ballasts which are marked with 
the rated maximum operating temperature t^,. 

9*15.2 This test may also be applied to ballasts which form an integral 
part of a luminaire and which cannot be tested separately, thereby enabling 
such integral ballasts to be marked with a t^ value. 

16 



IS : 661« - 1982 

9.15.3 The insulation and windings of ballasts shall withstand the thermal 
endurance test described in D«3.8, which is intended to control the value of 
the rated maximum operating temperature. 

9.15.4 The thermal conditions shall be adjusted so that the objective 
duration of the test shall preferably be either 15 or 30 days, although the 
manufaturer shall be free to adopt a longer test period at a lower temperature. 
If no indication is given the test shall be 30 days. 

9.15.5 The test shall be carried out on 7 new ballasts, which have not 
been subjected to proceeding tests. Thfcy shall not be used Cor further test- 
ing. After the test, when the ballasts have returned to room temperature, 
they shall satisfy the following requirements: 

a) The ballast shall start and operate a lamp normally; 

b) The watts loss of the ballast, when measured at nominal current, 
shall not have changed by more than 10 percent; 

c) The insulation resistance between the winding and the case 
measured at approximately 500 volts dc shall not be less than 
1 Mn; 

d) The ballast shall withstand a voltage test according to 9.8, the 
test voltage however should be twice the working voltage. 

9.15.6 The result of the test shall be considered to be satisfactory if at 
least 6 of the 7 ballasts satisfy these requirements. The test shall be consi- 
dered to be nagative if more than 2 ballasts fail the test. 

9.15.7 In the case of two failures, the test shall be repeated with 7 more 
ballasts and no failure of these ballasts shall be permitted. 



APPENDIX A 

{Clauses 2.2 and CAA) 

LAMP TYPES AND CHARACTERISTICS 
A-1. TYPES AND CHARACTERISTICS 

A-1.1 The following data relates to the lamp types covered by IS : 9900 
( Part II )- 198 1 ♦ . The electrical characteristics included in Table 5 apply to 
lamps operated with a reference ballast at an ambient temperature of 25i: 
5^C. 



^Specification for high pressure mercury vapour lamps: Part II standard lamp data 
sheets. 

17 



|S:661<-19t2 













{Clausi AA) 








Ratbd 

Wattao£ 




Ratbd Voltaob of 

Rbfeiuinge 

Ballast 


Arc Vc 


»LTAOE 

Tolerance 




Nominal 

RUNNINO 
CUKRINT 


Objective 


(1) 




(2) 


(3) 


(4J 




(5) 


w 




V 


V 


V 




A 


80 




220 


115 


± 15 




0-80 


125 




220 


125 


± 15 




215 


250 




220 


130 


± 15 




3.25 


400 




220 


135 


± 15 




3-25 


700 




220 


140 


± 15 




5-45 


1000 




220 


145 


± 15 




7-50 


NoTt — The nominal arc voltage at 
ballast maken. 


lamp terminals 


is given for 


th« 


; guidance of 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 2.3 ) 
REFERENCE BALLASTS 



B-1. MARKING 



B-1.1 The reference ballast shall be provided with durable and legible mar- 
king as follows: 

a) Fixed impedance reference ballasts: 
i) the words ''reference ballast"; 

ii) identification of the responsible vendor and/or manufacturer; 
iii) serial number; 

iv) lamp type, rated wattage and calibration current; and 
v) rated voltage and frequency. 

b) Adjustable impedance reference ballasts: 
i) the words "reference ballast"; 

ii) identification of the responsible vendor and/or manufacturer; 
iii) serial number; 

18 



IS : 6616 * 1982 

iv) rated voltagc(s) and frequciicy(ics); 

V) range of voltage/current ratios at rated frequcncy(ics); 

vi) calibration current(s); 
vii) maximum current per coil; and 
viii) connection diagram— if appropriate. 

B.2. CHARACTERISTICS 

B-2.1 Genaral Design — A reference ballast is a single, or combination of 
self-inductive coil(s)» with or without an l^itional resistor^ designed to 
give the operating characteristics shown in Table 6. 





TABLE 6 


REFERENCE BALLASTS CHARACTERISTICS 






( Clauses 3-2. 


.1 and B.2.2) 




Ballast 
Ratino 




Charactbristics at Rated Fre^^uency 


Rated 


Calibration 


Voltage/Current 


1 
Power-Factor 




Voltage 


Current 


lUcio 




(1) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


W 


V 


A 


ft (percent) 




80 


220 


0-80 


206 ± 0-5 


075 ± 0005 


125 


220 


l-lj 


134 ± 0-5 


0075 ± 0005 


250 


220 


2-13 


71 ±0-5 


0075 ± 0-005 


400 


220 


325 


45 ± 0-5 


0-075 db (H)OS 


700 


220 


5-40 


26-7 ± 0-5 


0004 ± 0-002 


1000 


220 


7-50 


18-5 ± 0-5 


0004 ± 0-002 



B-2.2 Voltage/Currenl Ratio — When the calibration current is passed 
through the ballast, it shall give .voltage/current ratio values as shown in 
Table 6. At any other current between 50 percent and 1 IS percent of the 
calibration current, a deviation of ± 4 percent from the impedance values 
in Table 6 is permissible. 

B-2J Magnetic Shielding or Magnetic Protection — The ballast shall be 
protected, for example by means of a suitable steel case, against magnetic 
influence, in such a way that its ratio of voltage to current for the cali- 
bration current shall not be changed more than 0*2 percent when a 12*5 mm 
thick plate of ordinary mild steel is placed 25 mm from a face of the ballast. 

Moreover, it shall be protected against mechanical damage. 
B-2.4 Temperature-Rise 

B-2.4.1 Reference Ballasts for 80 W and 125 W Lamps — When a refe- 
rence ballast is operated in an ambient air temperature between 20^C and 

19 



IS:6616-1982 

30**C at the appropriate calibration current, the steady temperature-rise ol 
the winding shall not exceed 25**C as determined by the change of resistance 
method. 

Any series or parallel resistor included in the ballast shall be in cir- 
cuit during the heating period, but during the resistance measurements to 
determine the temperature-rise any such resistors shall be excluded. 

B-2.4*2 Reference Ballasts for 250 W to 1 000 W Lamps — Reference 
ballasts for these higher wattage lamps which would comply with the ther- 
mal requirements above would necessarily be large and expensive. 

B-2A2.1 Furthermore, the variations of the power factor, due to the 
temperature-rise in normal use, have little influence on the performance of 
the higher wattage lamps. Suitably chosen production ballasts may, there- 
fore, be used provided they comply with the other clauses of this appendix. 



APPENDIX C 

{Clauses 2.2 and D-2 A A ) 
REFERENCE LAMPS 

C-1 CHARACTERISTICS 

C-1.1 A lamp which has been aged for at least 100 hours is considered to 
be a reference lamp if, when operated with an appropriate reference ballast 
under the standard supply conditions described below and in D-1.2, D-1.3 
and D-2.4, at an ambient temperature of 25 ± 5*C under the conditions 
specified below, lamp wattage, voltage and current do not deviate by more 
than 3 percent from the values in Table 5. 

C-2 OPERATION 

C-2.1 Reference lamps shall be operated in an ambient temperature of 25 ± 
5*^0 and in the position for which they are designed. Lamps which are 
designed to operate in any position shall be operated vertically with the 
cap upwards, for the purpose of this test. 

C-2.1.1 Reference lamps shall operate in conjuction with the appropriate 
reference ballast, for at least 30 minutes immediately before being used in 
any of the tests detailed in this specification which require the use of such a 
lamp. 

C-2.1.2 The characteristics of a reference lamp shall be verified immedia- 
tely before and after measurements involving it are made. 

20 



18:6616-1983 
C.3 WAVEFORM OF LAMP CURRENT 

C-3.1 The dc component of the operating current shall not exceed 3 percent 
of the rms value of the current after complete stabilization. 



APPEN DIX D 

( Clause 2.2 ) 
TESTS 



D-1. GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR TESTS 

D-I.l Ambient Temperature — All measurements shall be performed in a 
draught-free room at an ambient temperature within the range 20*C to 
30**C. 

D-1.2 Supply Voltage 

D-1.2.1 Supply Voltage and Frequency — The reference ballast shall have 
the same nominal frequency as the ballast under test. Unless otherwise 
specified each ballast shall be operated at its nominal frequency and at rated 
supply voltage. 

D-1.2.1. 1 When a ballast is marked for use on a range of supply 
voltage or different supply voltages, the most unfavourable voltage for 
which it is intended shall be choosen as the rated supply voltage. 

D-1.2.2 Stability of Supply Voltage and Frequency — The supply voltage 
and frequency shall be maintained constant within ± 05 percent. How- 
ever, during the actual measurement the voltage shall be adjusted to within 
± 0-2 percent of the specified rated test value. 

D-1.2.3 Supply Voltage Wave-Shape — The total harmonic content of the 
supply voltage shall not exceed 3 percent, the harmonic content being 
defined as the root-mcan-squarc ( rms ) sum of the individual harmonic 
components using the fundamental as 100 percent. 

D-1.2. 3.1 This implies that the source of supply shall have sufficient 
power and that the supply circuit shall have a sufficiently low impedance 
compared with the ballast impedance. 

D-1.3 Magnetic Effects — No magnetic object shall be allowed within 
25 mm of the face of the reference ballast or the ballast under test. 

D-1.4 Instrument Characteristics 

D-1.4.1 Potential Circuits — Potential circuits of instruments connected 
across the lamp shall not consume more than 3 percent of the nominal lamp 
;:urrcnt. 

21 



IS : 6616 * 1982 

D-1.4.2 Current Circuit — Instrumcat connected in series with the lamp 
shall have a sufficiently low impedance such that the whole voltage drop 
shall not exceed 2 percent of the lamp objective arc voltage. 

D-1.4.3 rms Measurements — Instruments shall be essentially free from 
errors due to wave-shape distortion. 

D-2, ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING REFERENCE 
BALLASTS AND SELECTING REFERENCE LAMPS 

D-2,0 General — The measurements shall not be made on the reference 
ballast until steady temperature conditions are reached. 

D-2.1 Measurements of Ratio of Voltage to Current — Figure 1 gives a 
typical testing circuit. If this circuit is used, no correction need be made 
for the current drawn by the voltmeter, provided that the resistance of the 
voltmeter complies with the requirements of D-1.4.1. 



SUPPLY 



REFERENCE 8ALLAST 

zz> 



— itti/ y y. 



<D-i 



Fig. 1 Recommended Circuit for Measurement of Voltage/ 
Current Ratio of the Reference Ballast 

D-2.1. 1 If the frequency (/) is not exactly the rated value (/« ), a 
correction to the measured voltage shall be applied in accordance with the 
following formula: 

Voltage at frequency /„ = voltage at frequency / x -y-. 



- Figure 2 gives a typical circuit for 
A suitable correction shall be made 



D-2.2 Measurement of Power Factor 

the determination of the power factor. 
for instrument losses. 

D-2.3 Checking of Protection Against Magnetic Influence — The steel plate 
referred to in B-2.3, shall have dimensions at least 25 mm greater than the 
corresponding projection of the enclosure and shall be placed in geometric 
symmetry to each surface as tested. 

D«2.4 Selection of Reference Lamps — Figure 3 gives a recommended 
circuit for selecting reference lamps. 



22 




IS : 6616 - 1982 

REFERENCE BALLAST 



SUPPLY 



Fig. 2 Recommcnded Circuit for Determination of 
Power-Factor of the Reference Ballast 



REFERENCE BALLAST 

■r 



SUPPLY 




Fig. 3 Recommended Circuit for Selection of Reference Lamps 

D-2.4.1 When stable burning conditions are reached, the current, voltage 
and power of the lamp shall be measured for compliance with Appendix C. 

D.2.4.2 When measuring the voltage or power of the lamp, the potential 
circuit of the instrument not in use shall be open. 

D-2.4.3 When measuring lamp watts, no correction shall be made for the 
wattmeter consumption ( the common connection being made on the lamp 
side of the current coil ). 

Note — The reference to ihc absence of a corrcciion for the consumption of the 
voltage cucuit of the wattmeter arises from an empirical observation which shows that 
in most cases, at the same supply voltage, the said load compensates approximately 
for the reduction of the power con.<>umpiion of thr lamj;, caused by the parallel 
connection of the voltage circuit of the watimcter. 

D-2.4.4 If any doubts are felt on this point, it will always be possible to 
evaluate the compensation error by repeating the measurements with other 
values of the load in parallel with the lamp. This is done by adding resis- 
tances in parallel and by reading each time the power measured by the 
wattmeter. It is then possible to extrapolate the results obtained in order 
to determine the true wattage in the absence of any parallel load. 



23 



IS : 6616 • 1982 

D.3. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING BALLASTS 
OTHER THAN REFERENCE BALLAST 

D-3.1 Checking of Protection Against Magnetic Influence ~- The test is 
made on the ballast in normal operation with a lamp. 

D-3.1.1 A steel plate I mm thick and of length and breadth greater than 
those of the ballast under test, is successively moved close to each face of 
the latter. This plate is brought into contact with the face of the ballast 
used for fixing, but it is held at a spacing of 1 mm from the other faces. 
During this operation, the current absorbed by the ballast at rated voltage 
is measured. 

D-3.2 Determination of Current Wave-Shape — The harmonic components 
of the supply current shall be determined by means of a selective voltmeter 
or wave analyser and resistor /?, as shown in Fig. 4. The selective volt- 
meter or wave analayser should ensure that measurements being made on 
any given harmonic are not significantly affected by any other harmonic. 

D-3.2.1 The peak value of the lamp current shall be determined by means 
of a calibrated cathode-ray oscilloscope across resistor R^. 

D.3.2.2 In either case, /?i or /?, shall be in accordance with the require- 
ments of D.1.4,2. 

D-3.2.3 When checking the influence of a variation of the supply voltage, 
care should be taken that this variation be made progressively. 

D-3.2.4 Care shall be taken to ensure a sufiiciently low impedance of the 
supply for the different frequencies involved. 

D-3.3 Power and Current Supplied to the Lamp — The tests shall be carried 
out with a circuit shown in Fig. 4. Switch 5, is in the up position and 
switch Si successively operates the lamp for the reference ballast and the 
ballast under test. 

D-3.3.1 When checking the influence of a variation of the supply voltage, 
care should be taken that this variation is made progressively. 

D-3.4 Short Circuit Test — The test circuit shown in Fig. 4 shall be used 
with switch Si in the up position and switch S^ in the down position. 

D.3.5 Temperature-Rise Test 

D-3.5.1 Ballast without Temperature Marking — Ballasts shall be tested 
under normal conditions in accordance with the following details at 1*1 
times the rated supply voltage and at rated frequency, with appropriate 
lamps, until steady temperature-rises are attained. 

Lamps shall be considered appropriate if they take, under the pres- 
cribed test conditions, a current sufficiently close to the current a reference 

24 



IS : 6616 - 1982 




1 ballast under irst 4 reference lamp 

2 reference ballast 5 caihnde-ray osrilloscopr 

3 wave analyzer 

Note — When measuring lamp wattage, no correction shall bo made for the watt- 
meter consumption. 

Instruments not in use arc to be short-circuited, or switched off. 

A method for securing rapid switching of the lamp from one ballatt to the other 
is under consideration. 

Fio. 4 Circuit for Testing Ballasts for High-Pressure 
Mercury Vapour Lamps 



25 



18:6616-1982 

lamp would take. The lamps shall be placed in such a way that the heat 
generated by them does not contribute to the temperature-rise of the 
ballast. 

Temperatures are measured on windings by the resistance method and 
in all other cases by means of thermocouples. 

D-3.5.2 Ballast with t^ Marking — - Ballasts shall be tested under normal 
conditions in accordance with the following details, with appropriate lamps, 
until steady temperature rises are attained. 

The test is carried out at rated voltage at first and when steady 
temperature conditions have been achieved the temperature rise(s) of the 
winding(s) are measured. The voltage is then raised to 1, 1 times its 
nominal value in order to determine the temperature rises of the other 
elements of the ballasts. 

Other test conditions remain the same as for ballasts without tempe- 
rature marking ( see D-3.5.1 ). 

D-3.5.3 Built-in Ballasts — Ballasts shall be tested in either the test hood 
shown in Figure 5, or the test box shown in Figure 6. The manufacturer 
shall declare which alternative is to be used. 

The ballasts shall be mounted in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions (if any ). 

In the case of the test hood and in the absence of any instructions, 
the ballast shall be fixed centrally and directly against the supporting surface 
of the hood, using all fixing holes which are coincident up to a maximum 
of four. During the test, the whole assembly shall be freely supported the 
ballast being pendant. If the test box is used, the ballast shall be mounted 
on a matt black wooden board, 20 mm thick, and covered with the test box. 
There shall be a distance of at least 10 mm between each wall of the test 
box and the ballast. 

D-3.5.4 Independent Ballasts — These shall be tested without a test hood 
in a test corner consisting of three matt black walls at least 1 5 mm thick 
and shall be so placed as to imitate the ceiling of a room. The ballast shall 
be secured to the ceiling of the test corner as close as possible to the walls, 
and the ceiling shall extend at least 25 cm beyond the other sides of the 
ballast. 

D-3.6 Testing of Mechanical Strength of Independent Ballasts 

D-3.6.1 Ballasts Cased in Insulation Material — The test is made with the 
impact test apparatus shown in Fig. 7. The pendulum consists of a steel 
tube with an external diameter of 9 mm and a thickness of 0*5 mm. It is 
suspended in such a way that it swings only in a vertical plane. A hammer 

26 



IS : 6616 . 1981 



with a mass of 150 g is rigidly fixed to the lower end, with its axis 1 m 
below the axis of suspension. The striking element of the hammer is a 
hemispherical face made of hornbeam and having a radius of 10 mm. 



BSD 



BALLAST- 



50MIN 




OZDZ 



11 



If 



X"! ! 



.A 



» I 

I 
I 
I 



-L.( JL — --i I 



T 

25 



e 



25 



I «= / + 100 mm, but at least 50 mm 
// fc A 4. 5 to 10 mm, but at least 50 mm 
5 = ^ + 10 to 20 mm, but at least 80 mm 

NoTi — The hood consists of 1 mm thick iron sheet painted white, iniide and out- 
lidc. 

All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 5 Hood for Heating Test 
27 



>:6«16-1982 



■ OPENING? ON ALL SIDES 




a 

130 
250 
300 





Dimensions (mm) 


b 


c 


130 


I')0 


250 


300 


450 


500 



25 
35 



Note — The out«jr housincr consists of 1 nun thick galvanized sheet, painted white, 
inside and outside. 

Fig. 6 Tisr Box f or Hlating Tkst 

D-3.6.1.1 The support for the sample is such that: 

a) the sample can be so placed that the point of impact lies in a 
vertical plane through the suspension axis of the pendulum; 

b) the sample can be turned round an axis perpendicular to the 
support; 

c) the sample can be turned round a vertical axis; and 

d) the sample can be moved horizontally and vertically. 

C-3.6.1.2 The sample is mounted on the support as in normal use, 
cable entries are left open, fixing screws of covers arc tightened with two- 
thirds of the torque indicated in Table 2. 

D-3.6.1,3 The sample is so placed that the point of impact lies in a 
vertical plane through the axis of the pendulum. 

D-3.6.1.4 The hammer falls from a height of 15 cm, measured vertically 
between the point of impact on sample and the nose of hammer at the point 
of release. 



28 



IS: 6616 -1982 




HEIGHT OF FALL 

L 



^SUPPORT 



Fig. 7 Impact Test Apparatus 



D-3.6.1.5 Ten blows are applied to points evenly distributed over the 
sample. 

After the test, the sample shall show no cracks or other damage within 
the meaning of this specification. 

Cracks will only be considered as faults if they are visible to the 
naked eye. Provided that the protection against accidental contact is not 
affected, small pieces may be detached without causing rejection. 

29 



1^:6(16-1962 

D-3.6.2 Ballasts Cased in Metal — Auxiliaries with metal enclosures are 
first subjected to the test of D-3.6.1, the hammer Falling from a height of 
27 cm. 

In addition, they are then subjected to the following test: 

A test finger (see IS : 1401-1970* ), but not flexible, is pressed per- 
pendicularly with a force of 50 N on different points of the enclosure. 

After these tests, the samples shall no damage within the meaning of 
the specification. 

Damage to paint and small dents which do not influence crcepagc 
distances or clearances arc neglected. 

D-3J Moisture Resistance and Insuhitioii 

D-3J.1 The ballast under test shall be brought to a temperature 
within rc of the ambient temperature, which shall be between 35X and 
40**C. It shall then be placed in a moisture treatment box, containing air 
with a relative humidity of 95 ± 2 percent and left there for 48 hours, 
ensuring that the temperature variation does not exceed ± 5°C. 

Cable entries, if any, shall be left open. If knock-outs are provided 
one of them shall be removed. The ballast shall be mounted in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions ( if any ). 

D-3.7.1.1 Before the insulation test, visible drops of water shall be 
removed by means of blotting paper. 

The insulation resistance shall be measured with a dc voltage of 
apporoximately 500 V, 1 min after application of the voltage. Ballasts 
having an insulating cover or envelope shall be wrapped with tinfoil. The 
insulation resistance is then measured. 

i) between live parts of different polarity which can be separated; 

ii) between live parts and all external metal parts including the tinfoil 
wrapping of external parts of insulating material. 

The voltage test is made with an appropriate ac voltage ( see 9.8) at 
rated frequency for 1 min, between the same parts as specified above. 
Initially, not more than half the specified voltage is applied, the voltage is 
then raised rapidly to the prescribed value. 

No flashover or breakdown shall occur during the test. 

Note —Glow discharge produced during the test but without a drop in voltage is 
neglected. 

D-3.7*2 Drip-proof test — Drip-proof ballasts shall be subjected for 5 min 
to artificial rain falling vertically from a height of 2 m from above the top 
of the ballast and at a rate of approximately 3 mm per minute. 

^Specification for accessibility tcsu probes {first revision). 

30 



18:6616-1982 

D-3.8 Thermal Endurance Test for Windings — The test shall be carried out 
in an appropriate oven ( Fig. 8 shows a suggested design of oven ). 

According to practical experience, a uniform and stable temperature 
can be achieved in two ways: 

a) by an oven which is not provided with a good thermal insulation; 
and ^ 

b) by a very good thermal insulation of the ballasts so that they 
themselves provided ( most of) the heat needed for the test. 

The description underneath refers to the '*oven method": 

i) when the **self-heating method", and 

b) is used, the current through the ballast shall be kept constant. 

The ballast shall function electrically in a manner similar to that in 
normal use and in the case of capacitors or other components which should 
not be subjected to the test, these shall be disconnected and reconnected 
again in circuit, but outside the oven. Other components which do not 
influence the operating conditions of the windings may be removed. 

In the case of ballasts which form an integral part of ii luminaire, it 
may be necessary to use special high temperature luminaire wiring, and any 
part of the luminaire structure which is not essential to the test may be 
removed in order to keep the physical size of the integrated ballast/luminaire 
part within reasonable limits. 

Note — In the cases when it is necetsary to disconnect capacitors or other components 
which should not be subjected to the test it is recommended that the manufacturer sup- 
plies special ballast with these parts removed and any necessary additional connections 
brought out from the ballait. 

In general, to obtain normal operating conditions, the ballast shall be 
tested with the appropriate lamps, but for certain inductive type ballasts 
the lamps may be replaced by equivalent resistances adjusted to maintain 
the mean value of current through the ballast. The lamps or the equivalent 
resistances shall be mounted outside the oven. The ballast shall be earthed. 

D-3.8.2 Before the test, the following shall be measured and checked; 

a) normal starting and operation of the lamp by the ballast; 

b) the resistance of each winding at the ambient temperature; and 

c) watts loss of the windings at nominal current. 

The batch of 7 ballasts shall then be placed in the oven and the rated 
voltage applied to the circuits. 

D-3.8.3 The oven thermostats are then adjusted in such a way that the 
internal temperature of the oven attains a value such that the temperature 
of hottest winding in the ballast is approximately equal to the objective 
value given in Table 7 below: 

31 



ISt661«.1983 




32 





IS:6(U.1982 


TABLE 7 


OBJECTIVE TEST TEMPERATURE 




( Clause D.3.8.3 ) 


Maximum Rated 

Opbratino 
Temperature t^ 


Objective Test Temperature in *C 
FOR Test Period of 

... ,„ . „ , A, ... 


15 days 30 days 


90 


176 163 


105 


200 185 


120 


223 207 



Note 1 — If /w values of 125''G and 130*C arc required, then, provisionally, tfte 
constant 4 500 may be used in the formula. A change in this constant for /« values 
greater than 120*'G is under consideration ( see Appendix E ). 

Note 2 — Values of tw greater than 130*G and the con5tant(s) required are under 
consideration {see Appendix E ). 

D-3,8.4 After 4 h, the actual temperature of winding is determined by 
the "increase in resistance" method and, if necessary, the oven thermostats 
are readjusted as close as possible to the objective test temperature. 

D-3.8.5 The winding temperatures are measured against after 24 hours 
and the final test period for any ballast is determined from the curve given 
in Fig 8. The permissible difference between the actual temperature of the 
hottest winding of any of the ballasts under test and the objective value 
shall be such that the final test period is not less than 10 days for an 
objective life of 1 5 days, not more than 60 days for an objective life of 
30 days. 

Note — No attempt should be made to bold constant the winding temperature after 
the measurement at 24 h. Only the ambient air temperature should be held constant 
by the thermostatic control. 

Thereafter, a daily reading of the air temperature in the oven shall be 
taken to ensure that the thermostats are maintaining the correct value to 
within ± 2*C. 

D-3.8.6 The test period for each ballast commences from the time the 
ballast is connected to the supply. At the end of its test, the relevant 
ballast i$ disconnected from the supply but it is not removed from the oven 
until the test on the other 6 ballasts have been completed. 

The objective test temperatures given in Table 7 should correspond 
to a working life of 10 years continuously at temperature l^. 

They are calculated on the basis of the following formula: 

Log L - log Lo + 4 500 (-^r- ^) 

33 



IS : 6616 - 1982 



300 




10 



12 



U 



16 



34 



42 4« SO 



Fig. 9 



IS 20 22 24 26 26 30 

test duration in days 
Relation Betwfkn Winding Temperature and Test Duration 



where: 

L a= objective test life in days 

Lo »= 3 652 days ( 10 years) 

T = theoretical test temperature in K 

Tw -^ rated maximum operating temperature in K 

The constant 4 500 has been established empirically. 



APPENDIX E 

( Clauses 0.5, D-3.8.3 and Tabic 7 ) 

BALLAST ENDURANCE TESTING 

E-1. INTRODUCTION 

E-l.l The intention of this appendix is to stimulate member countries 
further to investigate ballast endurahce testing, based on the /«, concept, 
and in particular to determine the constant(s) required, \r\ the formula 
relating test life and actual ballast life, for t^ values greater than 120*C. 

34 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

E-2- THEORETICAL BASIS 

E-2.1 The present life versus temperature relationship for insulation system 
of ballasts is based on the following equation: 

T 
L== Ke 

where: 

L = life of the insulation system in days 

T = temperature of the insulation in K 

D = constant which is related to the insulation material 

e = base of naparian logs — 2-718 

K = equation constant which depends upon the units shown. 

If an insulation system is tested at two different temperatures^ it will 
give two different lives and then two equations can be written thus: 

D 

r 

L^Ke 
Lo « Ke ~ 

where: 

L = theoretical test life in days 

Lo - 3 652 days ( 10 years ) 

T t=s theoretical test temperature in K 

Tw = rated maximum operating temperature in K 



then: 



D 
T 
L Ke 

Tw 
Ke 



and taking log 10 of both sides: 



I log £ - log JLo « -jr- loj e - 1^ log e 
33 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

Since log e is also a constant, it can be included with D ( the material 
constant ) to give a new constant P — /) log e 

and therefore: log L ^ log Lo + P [-i ^\ 

The value of the constant P which has been adopted empirically is 
4 500 for t„ temperatures up to and including 120'C. 

E-3. BASIC MATERIAL TESTS 

E-3.1 The temperature classifications of enamelled winding wires are fre- 
quently based on IS : 5825-1970*, and A.I.E.E. 57 twisted pair tests and 
curves which are published by wire manufacturers. The standard wire 
diameter for this test is 08 mm. Samples prepared in a specified manner 
arc tested in an oven at various temperatures for the time taken for break- 
down between wires. The test voltage is 1 000 V. The inverse absolute 
temperature is plotted against time on a logarithmic scale and the curve is 
extrapolated to 20 000 h. The corresponding temperature is taken as the 
thermal classification of the enamelled wire. 

The data produced by various wire manufacturers do not agree very 
closely, but the slopes ( constant P ) of the curves for insulation materials 
classified in IS : 1271-1958. Classification of Materials for the Insulation of 
Electrical Machinery and Apparatus in Relation to their Thermal Stability 
in Service ( for example Class A, etc. ), correspond fairly well with these 
given for /„, in lEC ballast specifications. However, the classification 
according to twisted pair tests is based upon a 20 000 h life ( 2*4 years ) and 
if, for example, the line for a typical Class E ( 120*C ) insulation is extra- 
polated from 20 000 h to 87000 h ( 10 years ), the temperature is 98'C, that 
is lower than Class A. 

Moreover, in an endurance test on twisted pairs, the wire is at a 
uniform temperature, whereas where a wound component is tested there is 
a hot spot in the winding which may have a temperature of 10*C higher 
than the average temperature upon which the test is based. 

These A.I.E.E. twisted wire tests show different constants depending 
on the insulation used. These constants are not necessarily the same when 
the wires are used in a ballast. 

E^. MATERIALS IN BALLASTS 

E-4.1 The basic material tests show that different constants are required for 
different insulation classes. When using these same materials in ballasts, it 
is to be expected that other constants will apply. The ballast constants 

*Guide for evaluation of thermal endurance of enamelled wires, 

36 



IS : 6616 - 1982 

will take into account not only the winding wire characteristic* but also the 
characteristics of other materials included, the ballast construction and the 
different testing methods. 

From the previous considerations and the results of the linuted 
number of tests which have been carried out, it would appear that to pass 
a r„ ■» 120°C test, a ballast must be wound with a wire rated 155°C, that 
is a polyester enamelled wire. Similarly, a r,^ « ISS'^C ballast would need 
a I8(rc wire ( polyestcr-imide ). 

Accordingly, the curves shown in Figure 8, have slopes ( constants P) 
corresponding to those of insulating enamels two classes higher, by the 
twisted pair test, than the iy, marked temperatures of ISO^'C and ISS'^C. 

It is Mi€v«d that the /„; test temperatures derived from these curves 
arc sufficiently conservative to allow for differences in materials and 
construction of ballasts. 

They are submitted for trial. Much more testing is necessary and 
when more results are available the curves may need to be adjusted. 

E-5. ENDURANCE TESTING PERIOD 

E-5.1 At the present time a 15 day or 30 day testing period is permitted, at 
the manufacturer's choice, and is related to the constant of 4 500. If this 
constant changes to a higher value, the testing sensitivity and accuracy is 
reduced and a longer testing time is necessary. It may be necessary, there- 
fore in the light of future experience, to consider abandoning the 15 day 
testing period and to introduce another alternative period longer than 
30 days. 

APPENDIX F 

(Clause 9.2.1) 
SAMPLING PROCEDURE FOR ACCEPTANCE PURPOSE 

F\. LOT 

F-l.l In any consignment, all the ballasts of the same make, model and type 
and manufactured under similar condition of production shall be grouped 
together to constitute a lot. 

F.2 SELECTION OF SAMPLES 

F-2.1 The number of ballasts to be selected at random from a lot shall 
depend on the size of the lot and shall correspond to the value specified in 
col 2 of Table 8 for the various sizes referred to in col L All the ballasts 
shall be subjected to the acceptance tests specified in 9.2. 

37 



IS:<616<198] 

F-2.1.1 If required for repeat tests ( see F-3.2 ) additional number of 
samples of ballasts shall also be selected at random as given in col 3 of 
Table 8. 





TABLE • SAMPLING PLAN 








(Clauses F-2.1, 


, F.2.I.1 


and F-3.1 ) 






Lot Sizb 


^1 


^v. 


(^1+A".) 


Ci 


c. 


I 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


5M00 


10 


20 


30 





3 


101-200 


13 


26 


S9 





5 


201-300 


20 


40 


60 


1 


5 


301-500 


25 


50 


75 


I 


6 


501-800 


35 


70 


105 


2 


7 


801-1 300 


50 


100 


150 


3 


10 


1 301 and aborc 


75 


150 


225 


5 


12 



Note — The plan recommended in this tabic assures that lots with defectives 4 per- 
cent or lets would be accepted most of the time, and lots with defectives 25 percent and 
above would be rejected most of the time. The exact consumer's risk depends on the 
lot size and it would be minimum when the lot size is maximum. 



F.3 CRITERION FOR CONFORMITY 

F-3.1 The lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of 
acceptance tests if the number of failures in the ^rst sample is less than or 
equal to acceptance number Ci given in col 5 of Table 8. If the number 
of failures is greater than or equal to the rejection number C, as given in 
col 6 of Table 8, the lot shall be considered as not conforming to the 
requirements of the acceptance test. 

F-3.J If the number of failures is between C| and C, a further sample of 
N2 ballasts shall be selected and subjected to the acceptance tests. If the 
number of failures in the two samples combined is less than C^ the lot shall 
be considered as conforming to the requirements of acceptance tests or 
otherwise not. 



38 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 1 0002 

Telephones: 232301 31 , 23233375. 23239402 Fax: 91 +01 1 23239399. 23239382 

E - Mail : info@bis.org. in website : http://www.bis.org.in 

Central Laboratory: Telephone 

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV. Sahibabad Industrial Area. SAHIBABAD 201010 277 0032 

Regional Offices: 

Central : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 1 1 0002 2323 761 7 

•Eastern : 1/14 CITSchemeVIIM. V.I. P. Road, Kankurgachi.KOLKATA 700054 23378662 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 1 60022 260 9285 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus. IV Cross Road. CHENNAI 6001 13 22541984 

tWestern: Manakalaya, E9, MIDC, Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, 2832 9295 
Andheri (East), MUMBAI 400093 

Brancti Offices: 

Pushpak', Nurnfiohamed Shaikh Marg. Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 560 1348 

PeenyalndustrialArea, I''' Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur Road, BANGALORE 8394955 

Commercial-cum-Office Complex, 0pp. Dushera Maidan, Arera Colony, 242 3452 

Bittan Market. BHOPAL462016 

62-63, Ganga Nagar, Unit VI, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 240 3139 

5*^ Floor. Kovai Towers, 44 Bala Sundaram Road, COIMBATORE 641018 221 0141 

SCO 21 , Sector 1 2, Faridabad 1 2 1 007 229 21 75 

Savitri Complex, 116 G.T Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 286 1498 

53/5 Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, Apurba SInha Path, 245 6508 

GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8-56C, L.N. Gupta Marg. Nampally Station Road, HYDERABAD 500001 2320 1084 

Prithavl Raj Road. Opposite Bharat Overseas Bank, C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 222 3282 

11/418 B, San/odaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 223 3012 

Sethi Bhawan, 2'^ Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 261 892S 

LUCKNOW 226001 

H. No. 15, Sector-3, PARWANOO. Distt. Solan (HP) 173220 235436 

PlotNoA-20-21, InstitutionalArea, Sector62. Goutam Budh Nagar, NOIDA201307 2402206 

Patliputra Industrial Estate. PATNA 80001 3 226 2808 

Plot Nos. 657-660, Market Yard, Gultkdi, PUNE 411037 2427 4804 

"Sahajanand House" 3*^ Floor, Bhaktinagar Circle. 80 Feet Road, 237 8251 

RAJKOT 360002 
TC. No. 2/275 (1 & 2), Near Food Corporation of India, Kesavadasapuram-Ulloor Road. 

Kesavadasapuram, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695004 255 7914 

1* Floor, Udyog Bhavan, VUDA, Siripuram Junction, VISHAKHAPATNAM-03 271 2833 



*Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, PO. Princep Street, KOLKATA 700072 
tSales Office (WRO) Plot No. E-9. MIDC, Rd No. 8, Behind Telephone Exchange, 
Andheri (East), Mumbai-400 0093 



2355 3243 



2832 9295 



Ankita Art PHnters Ph.: 26814834, 41406468 



