**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11852-2 (2001) : Automotive Vehicles - Brakes and Braking 
Systems^ Part 2: General Functions and Features [TED 4: 
Automotive Braking Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



is 11852 (Part 2): 2001 

Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — BRAKES AND 
BRAKING SYSTEMS 

PART 2 GENERAL FUNCTIONS AND FEATURES 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 43.040.40 



€-> BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MAR(J 
NEW DELHI 110002 



April 20()\ Price Croup 5 



Automotive F^raking Systems Sectional Committee, TLD 4 



FORHWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Fiureau of Indian Standards, alter the draft fmali/etl 
hy the Automotive Braking Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transpoit Fngineering 
Division Council. 

I his standard on brakes and braking systems which was earlier issued in eight parts, has now been revised and 
issued in nine parts which are as under: 

Part 1 Terminology; 

Part 2 (jeneral functions and features; 

Part 3 Performance requirements and evaluation; 

Part 4 Compressed air and air assisted brakes Special requirements; 

Part 5 Compressed air and air assisted brakes — Pressure test connections; 

Part 6 Vacuum braking systems — Special requirements; 

Part 7 Inertia dynamometer test method for brake linings; 

Part 8 Test procedures; and 

Pai1 9 Requirements for vehicles equipped with anti-lock braking devices. 

IS 1 1852 (Part 7) : 1995 'Automotive vehicles Recommendations for brakes and brakiiiL! systems: Part 1 
model test report' has been withdrawn in this revision and has been replaced with a |)arl ciuering 'Inertia 
dynamometer test methods for brake linings'. Part 9 covering the requirements for vehicles equipped with anti- 
lock braking devices has been added. 

This standard is mainly based on EFiC directives 71/320, 74/132, 75/524, 79/489, 85/647, S8 194 and 91/422 
EEC relating to the braking devices of certain categories of motor vehicles and of their trailers. 

However apart from the changes made from HHC directives to suit the Indian conditions, the nomenclature of 
some of the tests and categories of vehicles have also been changed which are as under: 

EEC Directives Indian StumUinls 

Category 'O' Vehicle (Category 'T' Vehicle 

Type 'O' test Type 'P' test 

Type I test Type T' test 

Type II test Type^H' test 



AMENDMENT NO- 1 NOVEMBER 2003 

TO 

IS 11852 ( PART 2) : 2001 AUTOMOTIVE 

VEHICLES —BRAKES AND BRAKING SYSTEMS 

PART 2 GENERAL FUNCTIONS AND FEATURES 

( First Revision ) 

( Page 7, clause 4.2.2.13 ) — Substitute the following for the existing 
clause: 

*4.2,2.13 Trailers of category T4, if fitted with anti-kKk braking devices shall 
be in accordance with IS 1 1 852 (Part 9)/ 



( TED 4 ) 

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 11852 (Part 2): 2001 

Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — BRAKES AND 
BRAKING SYSTEMS 

PART 2 GENERAL FUNCTIONS AND FEATURES 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the description of various 
categories of vehicles dealt with in other parts of this 
standard and gives various functions and features of 
the braking systems including braking system of all 
types of trailers. 

1.2 This standard is not applicable to the following 
types of vehicles: 

a) Agricultural tractors and power tillers, 

b) Earth-moving machinery, 

c) Construction equipment vehicles, 

d) Vehicles moving on rails, 

e) Two wheelers, 

Three wheelers, and 
g) Vehicles with design speed not exceeding 
25 km/h. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject 
to revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 



IS No. 
8654 : 1986 

9211 : 1979 



11852 

(Parti): 2001 
(Part 3) : 2001 

(Part 8) : 2001 
(Part 9) : 2001 



me 

Automotive hydraulic brake fluid — 
heavy duty {first revision) 
Denominations and definitions of 
weights of road vehicles (under 
revision) 

Automotive vehicles — Brakes and 
braking systems: 
Terminology (first revision) 
Performance requirements and evalu- 
ation (first revision) 
Test procedure (first revision) 
Requirements for vehicles equipped 
with anti-lock braking devices 



3 DEFINITIONS AND CATEGORY OF 
VEHICLES 

3.1 Vehicle 

For the purposes of this standard 'vehicle* means any 
motor vehicle and its trailer (wherever applicable) 
falling within one of the categories listed below and 
intended for use on the road, such vehicle being with 
or without body work, having at least four wheels and 
a maximum design speed exceeding 25 km/h, and its 
trailers (wherever applicable), with the exception of 
vehicles as per 1.2 above. 

3.1.1 Category M — Motor vehicles used for carrying 
passengers and having at least four wheels. 

Category Ml — Vehicles used for cairying passengers 
and comprising not more than eight seats in addition 
to the driver's seat. 

Category M2 — Vehicles used for carrying passen- 
gers, comprising more than eight seats in addition to 
the driver's seat and having a maximum mass not 
exceeding 5 t. 

Category M3 — Vehicles used for carrying passen- 
gers, comprising more than eight seats in addition to 
the driver's seat and having a maximum mass 
exceeding 5 t. 

3.1.2 Category N — Motor vehicles used for carrying 
goods and having at least four wheels. 

Category Nl — Vehicles used for carrying goods and 
having a maximum mass not exceeding 3.5 t. 

Category N2 — Vehicles used for carrying goods 
and having a maximum mass exceeding 3.5 1 but not 
exceeding 12 t. 

Category N3 — Vehicles used for carrying goods and 
having a maximum mass exceeding 12 1. 

3.13 Category T — Trailers (including semi-trailers). 

Category Tl — Trailers with a maximum mass not 
exceeding 0.75 t. 

Category T2 — Trailers with a maximum mass 
exceeding 0.75 1 but not exceeding 3.5 t. 



1 



IS 1 18S2 (Part 2): 2001 



Category T3 — Trailers with a maximum mass 
exceeding 3,5 t but not exceeding 10 t. 

Category T4 — Trailers with a maximum mass 
exceeding 10 t. 

3.1.4 While classifying the vehicles into the above 
categories the following shall apply: 

a) Articulated category M vehicles made up of 
two nonseparable but articulated units shall 
be considered to be a single vehicles. 

b) In the case of a category M or N towing 
vehicle designed to be coupled to a semi- 
trailer, the maximum mass to be taken into 
consideration when classifying that vehicle 
shall be the mass of the towing vehicle in 
running order plus the maximum mass 
transferred to the towing vehicle by the semi- 
trailer in static condition and where appro- 
priate, the maximum mass of the towing 
vehicle's own load. 

c) In the case of category N vehicles, the equip- 
ment and fittings of the certain special 
vehicles not intended for carrying passengers 
(such as, crane vehicles, workshop vehicles, 
construction equipment vehicles, etc) shall 
be considered to be goods. 

d) The maximum mass to be taken into consi- 
deration when classifying a category T semi- 
trailer shall be the mass transmitted to the 
ground by the axle or axles of the semi-trailer 
in static condition when coupled to the towing 
vehicle and laden with a maximum load. 

3.2 Type of vehicle with respect to the braking 
systems — means vehicles which do not differ in such 
essential respects as: 

3.2.1 In the case of motor vehicles: 

a) vehicle category as defmed in 2.1, 

b) maximum mass as defmed in 2.3, 

c) distribution of mass among the axles, 

d) maximum design speed, 

e) different types of braking system with par- 
ticular reference to the presence or otherwise 
of systems for braking a trailer. 

number and arrangement of the axles, 

g) engine type, 

h) number and ratios of gears, 

j) ratio(s) of rear drive axle(s); and 

k) tyre dimensions. 

3.2.2 In the case of trailers: 

a) vehicle category as defmed in 2.1, 

b) maximum mass as defmed in 2.3, 



c) distribution of mass among the axles, . 

d) different types of braking systems, 

e) number and arrangement of the axles, and 

f) tyre dimensions. 

3.3 Laden Vehicle 

Means, except where otherwise stated, a vehicle loaded 
to its maximum mass. 

3.4 Unladen Vehicle 

3.4.1 Completely Built Vehicle 

Means the vehicle in the kerb weight condition as 
defmed in IS 9211 to which weight not exceeding 
180 kg is added. 

3.4.2 Incompletely Built Vehicle 

Incompletely built vehicles (such as, drive away 
chassis) unladen vehicle means unladen vehicle weight 
as specified by the vehicle manufacturer to represent 
fully built vehicle to which weight not exceeding 1 80 
kg is added. In the absence of such a specification, 
the values given in table under 9.7 of IS 1 1 852 (Part 8) 
shall apply. 

3.5 Maximum Mass 

Means, the maximum mass stated by the vehicle 
manufacturer to be technically permissible. 

4 FUNCTIONS AND FEATURES OF BRAKING 
SYSTEMS 

4.1 General 

4.1.1 Braking System 

The braking system, as defmed in IS 1 1852 (Part 1), 
shall be so designed, constructed and fitted as to enable 
the vehicle in normal use, despite the vibration to 
which it may be subjected, to comply with the 
requirements specified in 4.1.2 and 4.2. It shall also 
be able to resist the corrosion and aging phenomenon 
to which it is exposed. 

4.1.2 Functions of the Braking System 

The braking system shall fulfill the following 
conditions. 

4.1.2.1 Service braking system 

The service braking system shall enable the driver to 
decelerate and/or halt the vehicle safely, speedily and 
effectively, whatever may be its speed and load on any 
up or down gradient. It shall be possible to graduate 
this braking action. The driver shall be able to achieve 
this braking action from his driving seat without 
removing his hands from the steering control. 



IS 11852 (Part 2): 2001 



4.1.2.2 Secondary braking system 

The secondary braking system shall make it possible 
to decelerate and/or halt the vehicle within a 
reasonable distance in the event of the failure of the 
service braking. It shall be possible to graduate this 
braking action. The driver shall be able to obtain this 
braking action from his driving seat while keeping at 
least one hand on the steering control. For the purposes 
of these requirements, it is assumed that not more than 
one failure of the service braking system can occur at 
one time. 

4.1.2.3 Parking braking system 

The parking braking system shall enable the vehicle 
to be held stationary on a level road or on an up or 
down gradient even in the absence of the driver, the 
working parts being then held in the locked position 
by a purely mechanical system. The driver shall be 
able to achieve this braking action from his driver seat, 
except in the case of a trailer, to the requirements 
of 4.2.2.10. The trailer brake and the parking brake 
of the towing vehicle may be operated simultaneously, 
provided that the driver is able to check that the 
parking brake performance of the vehicle combination, 
obtained by the purely mechanical action of the 
parking system, is sufficient. 

4.1.3 Pneumatic Connections Between Motor Vehicles 
and Trailers 

4.1.3.1 In the case of a braking system operate by 
compressed air, the penumatic link with the trailer 
shall be of the type with two or more lines. However, 
in all cases, all the requirements of this standard shall 
be satisfied by the use of only two lines. The devices 
coupling the pneumatic system of the towing vehicle 
to the trailer shall shut off automatically when the 
coupling is disconnected. In the case of articulated 
vehicle combinations, the flexible hoses shall be a part 
of the towing vehicle. In all other cases, the flexible 
hoses shall be a part of the trailer. 

4.2 Characteristics of Braking System 
4.2.1 Vehicles of Categories M and N 

4.2.1.1 The braking systems with which a vehicle is 
equipped shall satisfy the requirements laid down for 
the service, secondary and parking brakes. 

4.2.1.2 The systems providing service, secondary and 
parking braking may have common components, 
provided that they fulfill the following conditions: 

a) There shall be at least two controls, indepen- 
dent of each other and readily accessible to 
the driver from the driving scat. This 
requirement shall be met even when the 
driver is wearing a safety belt; 



b) The control of the service braking system 
shall be independent of the control of the 
parking braking system; 

c) Where the service and secondary braking 
system have the same control, the effective- 
ness of the linkage between that control and 
the various components of the transmission 
systems shall not be liable to diminish afler 
a certain period of use; 

d) Where the service and secondary braking 
systems have the same control, the parking 
braking system shall be so designed that it 
can be actuated by the driver even while 
wearing a safety belt when the vehicle is in 
motion with at least one hand on steering 
wheel. The action shall be graduated. 

e) In the event of a breakage of any component 
other than the brakes or the components in 
(g) or of any other failure of the service 
braking system (malfunction, partial or total 
exhaustion of an energy reserve), the secon- 
dary braking system or that part of the service 
braking system which is not affected by the 
failure shall be able to decelerate and 
bring the vehicle to a halt in the conditions 
prescribed for secondary braking; 

f) In particular, where the secondary braking 
system and the service braking system have 
a common control and common transmission: 
i) Where the service braking system is ac- 
tuated by the muscular energy of the 
driver assisted by one or more energy 
reserves, the secondary braking system 
shall be capable of ensuring the pre- 
scribed degree of secondary braking even 
in the event of failure of that assistance, 
by muscular energy of the driver assisted 
by the energy reserves, if any, which are 
unaffected by the failure, the force ap- 
plied to the control not exceeding the 
prescribed maximum value. 

ii) Where the force for the service braking 
and transmission depend exclusively on 
the use of an energy reserve controlled 
by the driver, there shall be at least two 
completely independent energy reserves, 
each provided with its own independent 
transmission; each of them may act on 
the brakes of only two or more wheels 
so selected as to be capable of ensuring 
by themselves the prescribed degree of 
secondary braking without endangering 
the stability of the vehicle during brak- 
ing. In addition, each of these energy 
reserve shall be fitted with a warning: 
device as defined in 4.2.1.13. 



IS 11852 (Part 2): 2001 



g) Certain parts, such as the pedal and its 
bearing, the master cylinder and its piston(s) 
(hydraulic systems), the control valve 
(hydraulic and/or pneumatic systems), the 
linkage between the pedal and the master 
cylinder or the control valve, the brake 
cylinders and their pistons (hydraulic and/or 
pneumatic systems) and the lever and cam 
assemblies of brakes, shall not be regarded 
as liable to breakage if they are adequately 
dimensioned and readily accessible for 
maintenance, and exhibit safety features at 
least equal to those prescribed for other 
essential components, (such as the steering 
linkage), of the vehicle. Where the failure of 
any such part would make it impossible to 
brake the vehicle with a performance at least 
equal to that prescribed for the secondary 
braking, that part shall be made of metal or 
of a material with equivalent characteristics 
and shall not be subjected to significant 
distortion in the normal operation of the 
braking systems. 

4.2.1.3 Where there are separate controls for the 
service and secondary braking systems, simultaneous 
actuation of the two controls shall not render both the 
service and secondary braking systems inoperative, 
either when both braking systems are in good working 
order or when one of them is faulty. 

4.2.1.4 In the event of failure in a part of the trans- 
mission of the service brake, the following conditions 
shall be met: 

a) A sufficient number of wheels shall still be 
braked by actuation of the service braking 
system/controls, whatever the vehicle load 
may be; 

b) These wheels shall be so selected that the 
residual performance of the service braking 
system satisfies the requirements laid down 
in 4.1.4 of IS 11852 (Part 3). 

c) However, the above requirements shall not 
apply to towing vehicles for semi-trailers 
when the transmission of the service braking 
system of the semi-trailer is independent of 
that of the towing vehicle. 

4.2.1.5 Where use is made of energy other than the 
muscular energy of the driver, there need not be more 
than one source of such other energy (hydraulic pump, 
air compressor, vacuum pump, etc), but that means 
by which the device constituting that source is driven 
shall be as safe as practicable. 

4.2.1.5.1 In the event of failure in any one part of the 
transmission of the vehicle's braking system, supply to 



the part not affected by the failure shall continue to be 
ensured where this is required for the purpose of halting 
the vehicle with the degree of effectiveness prescribed 
for secondary braking. This condition shall be met by 
means of devices which can be easily actuated when 
the vehicle is stationary, or by automatic means. 

4.2.1 5.2 Furthermore, storage devices located down- 
circuit of this device shall be such that in the event of 
a failure in the energy supply, after four full-stroke 
actuations of the service brake control under the 
conditions laid down in 2.2 of IS 1 1852 (Part 4), it 
is still possible to halt the vehicle at the fifth appli- 
cation with the degree of effectiveness prescribed for 
secondary braking. 

4.2.1.6 The requirements of 4.2.1.2, 4.2.1.4 
and 4.2.1.5 shall be met without the use of any 
automatic system of a kind such that its ineffectiveness 
might pass unnoticed because the parts which are 
normally in an 'at rest* position are actuated only in 
the event of failure of the braking system. 

4.2.1.7 The service braking system shall act on all the 
wheels of the vehicle. 

4.2.1.8 The action of the service braking system shall 
be appropriately distributed among the axles. In the 
case of vehicles with more than two axles, in order to 
avoid wheel-locking or glazing of the brake linings, 
the brake force on certain axles may be reduced to 
zero automatically when carrying a much reduced load, 
provided that the vehicle meets all the performance 
requirements prescribed in IS 1 1852 (Part 3). 

4.2.1.9 The action of the service braking system shall 
be distributed between the wheels of the same axle 
symmetrically in relation to the longitudinal median 
plane of the vehicle. In the case of pneumatic brakes, 
minor variation in pressure between left and right 
side of brake actuator may be permitted provided 
directional stability of the vehicle is not affected. 

4.2.1.10 The service, secondary and parking braking 
system shall act on braking surfaces permanently 
connected to the wheels through components of 
adequate strength. It shall not be possible to disconnect 
the braking surface from the wheels. However, in the 
case of parking braking system (such as, transmission 
brakes) such disconnection from the braking surface 
shall be permitted provided that it is only momentary; 
for instance, during a change of gear in the use of 
multi-speed axle and both the service braking and 
secondary braking systems continue to operate with 
the prescribed degree of effectiveness. In addition, any 
such disconnection shall be permitted in the case of 
the parking braking system provided that is controlled 
exclusively by the driver from his driving seat by a 
system which cannot be actuated by a leak. 



IS 11852 (Part 2): 2001 



4.2.1.11 Wear on the brakes shall be easily compen- 
sated by means of a system of manual or automatic 
adjustment. In addition, the control and components 
of the transmission and of the brakes shall possess a 
reserve of travel and, where necessary, suitable means 
of compensations such that, when the brakes become 
heated or when the brake linings have reached a certain 
degree of wear, effective braking is ensured without 
immediate adjustment being necessary. 

a) Wear adjustment shall be automatic for the 
service brakes. However the fitting of 
automatic adjustment devices shall be 
optional for off-road vehicles of categories 
N2 and N3 and for rear brakes of vehicles of 
categories Ml and Nl. Automatic wear 
adjustment devices shall be such that after 
heating followed by cooling of brakes, 
effective braking is still ensured. In particular, 
the vehicle shall remain capable of normal 
running after conducting the tests as per 3.3 
and 3.4 of IS 11852 (Part 3). 

b) It shall be possible to easily check this wear 
on the service brake linings, from the outside 
or the underside of the vehicle, utilizing only 
the tools or equipment normally supplied with 
the vehicle, for instance, by the provision of 
appropriate inspection holes or by some other 
means. Alternatively, acoustical or optical 
devices warning the driver at his driving 
position when lining replacement is necessary 
are acceptable. The removal of front and/or 
rear wheels is permitted for this purpose on 
category Ml and Nl vehicles only. 

4.2.1.12 In hydraulic braking systems the conditions 
given below shall be met: 

a) The filling ports of the fluid reservoirs shall 
be readily accessible; in addition, the 
containers of reserve fluid shall be so made 
that the level of the reserve fluid can be easily 
checked without the containers having to be 
opened. Where this last condition is not 
fulfilled, a red tell-tale lamp shall warn the 
driver when the reserve fluid falls to a level 
liable to cause a failure of the braking system. 
The tell-tale lamp shall be visible even by 
day light, the satisfactory functioning of 
which shall be easily verifiable by the driver. 

b) The failure of a part of a hydraulic trans- 
mission system shall be signaled to the driver 
by a device comprising a red tell-tale lamp 
lighting up immediately on actuation of the 
control and remaining lit as long as the failure 
persists and the ignition (start) switch is in 
the **on" (run) position. However, a system 



comprising a red tell-tale lamp lighting up 
when the level of the fluid in its reservoirs 
falls below the value specified by the 
manufacturer is permissible. The tell-tale 
lamp shall be visible even by day light. The 
lamp shall be such that it enables the driver 
to verify its satisfactory performance from the 
driving seat. The failure of a component of 
the system shall not entail total loss of effective- 
ness of the braking system in question, 
c) The type of fluid to be used in the hydraulic 
transmission braking systems shall comply 
with IS 8654. The relevant information 
indicating the type of fluid used shall be 
affixed in a visible position in indelible form 
close to the filling ports of the fluid reservoirs. 
Additional information, if any, may also be 
provided by the manufacturers. 

4.2.1.13 Any vehicle fitted with a service brake 
actuated by an energy reservoir shall, where the 
prescribed secondary braking performance cannot be 
obtained by means of this brake without the use of 
stored energy, be provided with a warning device — in 
addition to a pressure gauge. This warning device shall 
give an optical and/or acoustic signal when the stored 
energy in any part of the system falls to a value at 
which, without recharging of the reservoir and 
irrespective of the load conditions of the vehicle, it is 
possible to apply the service brake control for a fifth 
time after four full brake actuation with closely 
adjusted brakes and obtain the prescribed secondary 
braking performance (without faults in the service 
brake transmission device and with the brakes adjusted 
as closely as possible). The warning device shall be 
directly and permanently connected to the circuit. 
When the engine is running under normal operating 
conditions and there are no faults in the braking 
system, the warning system shall give no signal except 
during the time required for charging the energy 
reservoir(s) after start-up of the engine. 

4.2.1.14 When an auxiliary energy source is essential 
for the operation of any braking system, the energy 
reserve shall be such as to ensure that .should the engine 
stop, or failure of energy source, the braking perfor- 
mance remains sufficient to bring the vehicle to a halt 
in the prescribed conditions. In addition, if the 
muscular energy supplied by the driver to the parking 
braking system is reinforced by some aid, the appli- 
cation and release of the parking braking shall be 
ensured in the event of failure of that aid, if necessary 
by using a reserve of energy independent of that 
normally supplying such aid. This reserve of energy 
may be that intended for the service braking. The 
expression 'actuation* also covers the action of 
releasing. 



IS 11852 (Part 2): 2001 



4.2.1.15 In the case of a motor vehicle to which the 
coupling of a trailer equipped with a brake controlled 
by the driver of the towing vehicle is authorized, the 
service braking system of the towing vehicle shall be 
fitted with a device so designed that if the trailer 
braking system should fail, or the air supply line (or 
such other type of connection as may be adopted) 
between the towing vehicle and trailer should break, 
it shall still be possible to brake the towing vehicle 
with the effectiveness prescribed for the secondary 
braking. It is accordingly prescribed, in particular, that 
this device be fitted to the towing vehicle. 

4.2.1 .16 The auxiliary equipment shall draw its energy 
only in such a way that its operation, even in the event 
of damage to the energy source, cannot cause the 
reserves of energy feeding the braking systems to fall 
below the level indicated in 4.2.1.13. 

4.2.1.17 Where the trailer belongs to category T3 or 
T4 the service braking system shall'be of a continuous 
or semi-continuous type. 

4.2.1.18 In the case of a vehicle authorized to draw a 
category T3 or T4 trailer, the braking systems shall 
satisfy the following conditions: 

a) When the secondary braking system of the 
towing vehicle is actuated, there shall also 
be a graduated braking action on the trailer. 

b) Should the service braking system of the 
towing vehicle fail, and if this device is made 
up of at least two independent sections, the 
section or sections not affected by this failure 
shall be able to partially or fully actuate the 
trailer brakes. It shall be possible to graduate 
such braking action. If this operation is 
achieved by a valve which is normally at rest, 
then such a valve may only be incorporated 
if its correct functioning can easily be checked 
by the driver either from within the cabin or 
from outside the vehicle, without the use of 
tools. 

c) In the case of a break or leak in one of the air 
supply lines (or in such other type of connec- 
tions as may be adopted), it shall be possible 
for the driver to fully or partially actuate 
trailer brakes, by means either of the service 
braking control or of the secondary braking 
control or of the parking braking control, 
unless the break or leak automatically causes 
the trailer to be braked with the performance 
specified in 4.3,2 of IS I l852(Part 3). 

4.2.1.19 In the case of a two-line air supply system, 
the requirement in 4.2.1.18(c) above shall be 
considered to be met if the following conditions are 
fulfilled: 



a) When the designated brake control of the 
controls mentioned in 4.2.1.18(c) above is 
fully actuated, the pressure in the supply line 
shall fall to 1.5 bar within the following two 
seconds of its actuation. 

b) When the supply line is evacuated at the rate 
of at least I bar/s, the automatic braking of 
the trailer shall start to operate before the 
pressure in the supply line falls to 2 bar. 

4.2.1.20 The vehicles in category M3 and N4 shall 
satisfy the type H test (down hill behaviour test) as 
described in 3.4 of IS 11852 (Part 3). 

4.2.1.21 In the case of a pneumatic service braking 
system comprising two or more independent sections, 
any leakage between those sections at or down- 
stream of the control shall be continuously vented to 
atmosphere. 

4.2.1.22 Anti-lock braking devices, if fitted on motor 
vehicle, shall be in accordance with IS 1 1852 (Part 9). 

NOTE — It is recommended that anti-lock braking devices fitted 
on N3 vehicles authorized to tow category T4 trailers and M3 
vehicles shall be of category I as specified in IS 1 1852 (Part 9). 

4.2.1.23 In the case of a motor vehicle authorized to 
tow a trailer of category T3 or T4, the service braking 
system of the trailer may only be operated in 
conjunction with the service, secondary or parking 
braking system of the towing vehicle. 

4.2.2 Vehicles of Category T 

4.2.2.1 Trailers of category Tl need not be fitted with 
a service braking system. However, if trailers of this 
category are equipped with a service braking system 
this shall comply with the same requirements as those 
of category T2. 

4.2.2.2 Every trailer of category T2 shall be fitted with 
a service braking system either of the continuous or 
semi-continuous type or of the inertia (over run) type. 
The latter type shall be authorized only for trailers 
other than semi-trailers. 

4.2.2.3 Every trailer of category T3 or T4 shall be 
fitted with a service braking system of the continuous 
or semi-continuous type. 

4.2.2.4 The service braking system shall act on all the 
wheels of the trailer. 

4.2.2.5 The action of the service braking system shall 
be suitably distributed among the axles. 

4.2.2.6 The action of every braking system shall be 
distributed between the wheels of each axle symmetri- 
cally in relation to the longitudinal median plane of 
the vehicle. 

4.2.2.7 The braking surfaces required to attain the 



IS 11852 (Part 2) : 2001 



prescribed degree of effectiveness shall be in constant 
contact with the wheels, either rigidly or through 
components not liable to failure. 

4.2.2.8 Wear on the brake shall be easily compensated 
by a systcni of manual or automatic adjustment. In 
addition, the control and the components of the 
transmission and of the brakes shall possess a reserve 
of travel and, if necessary, suitable means of compen- 
sation such that, when the brakes become heated or 
when the brake linings have reached a certain degree 
of wear, eftectivc braking is ensured without immediate 
adjustment being necessary. 

4.2.2.8.1 Wear adjustment shall be automatic for 
service brakes. However, the fitting of automatic 
adjustment device shall be optional for off-road 
vehicles of Categories Tl and T2. Automatic wear 
adjustment systems, if provided, shall be such that after 
heating followed by cooling of the brakes, effective 
braking is still ensured. In particular, it shall remain 
capable of normal running after the tests conducted 
in accordance with 3.3 (Type F test) and 3.4 (Type H 
test) of IS 1 1852 (Part 3). 

4.2.2.8.2 It shall be possible to easily check this wear 
on service brake linings, from the outside or underside 
of the vehicle, utilizing only the tools or equipment 
normally supplied with the vehicle; for instance, by 
the provision of appropriate inspection holes or by 
some other means. 

4.2.2.9 The braking systems shall be such that the 
trailer is stopped automatically if the coupling 
separates while the trailer is in motion. However, this 



requirement shall not apply to trailers with a maximum 
weight not exceeding 1.5 t provided that the trailers 
are fitted, in addition to the main coupling, with a 
secondary coupling (chain, cable, etc) which, in the 
event of separation of the main coupling, can stop the 
drabber from touching the ground and provide some 
residual steering action on the trailer. 

4.2.2.10 On trailers of T2, T3, T4 categories which 
are required to be fitted with a service braking system, 
parking braking shall be ensured even when the trailer 
is separated from the towing vehicle. It shall be 
possible for a person standing on the ground to actuate 
the parking braking system. However, in the case of a 
trailer used for the carriage of passengers, it shall be 
possible to actuate this brake from inside the trailer. 
The expression *actuate' also covers the action of 
releasing. 

4.2.2.11 If the trailer is fitted with a system enabling 
compressed air actuation of the braking system, other 
than the parking braking system, to be cut out, the 
first-nientioned device shall be so designed and 
constructed that it is positively restored to the 'at rest' 
position immediately on the resumption of the supply 
of compressed air to the trailer, 

4.2.2.12 Trailers of categories T3 and T4 fitted with a 
two-line air supply system shall satisfy the conditions 
specified in 4.2.1.18(c) above. 

4.2.2.13 Trailers of category T4 shall be fitted with 
anti-lock braking devices in accordance with 
IS 11852 (Part 9). 



IS 11852 (Part 2): 2001 



ANNEX A 

{Foreword) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 



Chainnan 



SiiRiR.C.SrTHi 



Automotive Braking System Sectional Committee, TED 4 

Representing 
VRDE, Ahmcdnagar 



Members 

SliRlN. KURUPPAIAH 

Shki K. Senthil Kumar (Alternates to 
Shri R.C. Sethi) 
Shri Vuay Kumar 

Shri Rajesh Goyal {Alternate) 
Shri R. R. G. Mkkon 
Shri B. Gh(jsh 

Shri M. S. Ogai h {Alternate) 
SiiRiT. M. Balaramak 

ShriC. Y. DESHPAnovAAltemate) 
Shri V. S. Vcnkatesak 

Shri K. N. Balaji {Alternate) 
Shri H. Chandiramam 

Shri R. M. Kamtkar {Alternate) 
Shri D. G. Shirkl 

Shri V. R. JalciAONKar {Alternate) 
Shri D. K. Shukuv 

Shri D. Chattlrjee (^//ema/e) 
Shri Dim^h Tyagi 

Shri D. DcKiRA {Alternate) 
ShriS.Vlkkatatiish 

Shri S. Jaya Kumar (/4//^/7i<i/e) 
Shri S. Ramaswamy 

DRV.G.NAiKM//e/7i<i/e) 
ShriHarjitSinuh 

Shri R. K. Jain {Alternate) 
Shri J. S. Khadilkar 

Shri Vinod R. Kuucarm {Alternate) 
Shri V. R. Marathe 

Shri P. V. Bw\Ki3»£.{Altemate) 
Shri R. S:va Kumar 
Shri 1. V. Rao 

Shri Deepak Sav^xar {Alternate) 
Shri V. C. Matiiur 

Shri B. N. Das {Alternate) 
Shri K. V. Rami Redoy 
Shri M. K. Mishra 

Shri R. G. KAREMOR£(.4//enKi/e) 
Shri V. R. Kuucarm 

Shri S. Ramanathan {Alternate) 
Shri S. N. Srikivasak 

Shri V. Murucjan {Alternate) 
Shri V. Ramakrishkak 

Shri S. M. Iqbal {Alternate) 
S»iri Veenu Maitiur 

Shri Y. V. Nagaraj {Alternate) 
Shri P. D. Joshi 

Shri C. M. Mehta {Alternate) 
Shri L. S. Jayaraman 

Shri V. R. Janardhakam {Alternate 1) 

Shri K. N. Ravi {Alternate II) 



Allied Nippon Ltd, New Delhi 

Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 

Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Brakes India Ltd, Chennai 

Bajaj Tempo Ltd, Pune 

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Vehicles), Jabalpur 

Daewoo Motors India Ltd, Dadri 

Eicher Motors Ltd, Pithampur 

Hindustan Composites Ltd, Mumbai 

HMT Ltd (Tractor Division), Pinjore 

Kalyani Brakes Ltd, Pune 

Kinetic Engineering Ltd, Pune 

Mahindra & Mahindre Ltd, Nasik 
Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon 

Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Department of Heavy Industries, 

New Delhi 
Ministry of Surface Transport, New Delhi 
Oixlnance Factory Board, Calcutta 

Pal-Peugeot Ltd, Dombivli (East), Thane 

Premier Automobiles Ltd, Mumbai 

Rane Brake Liningi Ltd, Chennai 

Royal EnfieM Motors, Chennai 

Scooter India Ltd, Kanpur 

Sundram Brake Linings Lid, Chennai 



(Continued on page 9) 



IS 11852 (Part 2): 2001 



( Continued from pa^fe H ) 

Members 

Shri S. Sulvamam 

Shri Manohar M. H\in,\.{Aliemaie) 

SHRI S. R. AciARHARI 

Shri V. R. Paluskar 

Shri (i. R. Nagabhushan {Alternate) 
Shri M. N. Muramkrishna 
Shri Anion FRrinsi [Hr.N 

Shri Paui.raj Kdwik (Alternate) 

SHRIS.C. YoMiZAWA 

Shri B. Sarkar (Alternate) 

ShRIA. R.CiUlATl, 

Director & Hcad(THl)) 



Representing 

Sundram Clayton Ltd, Chcnnai 

Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Chandigarh 
TELCO, Punc 

TVS Suzuki Ltd, Hosur 
Volvo India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Yamaha Motor Escorts Ltd, Faridabad 

Director General, BIS [Ex-officio Member) 



Member-Secretary 

Shri A. K. Nagpal 

Director (TED), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along wiih amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
*B1S Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. TED 4 (231). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affccled 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters : 



Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 
Telephones : 323 0131, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan» 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110 002 

Eastern : 1/14 C I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. R Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700 054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 
Southern : C. I. T Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 



Western 



Branches 



r323 
\323 



323 76 17 
323 38 41 



r337H4 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,3.37 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 



Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBA14()0093 



J 235 02 16,235 04 42 
\235 15 19,235 23 15 

r832 92 95. 832 78 58 
1.832 78 91,832 78 92 



AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



{•rinled at : Prabhal Offset Prejis, New Dclhi-2 



