IS 13436 : 1992
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

%T7& wF5

SENSITIVE ANEMOMETER -

SPECIFICATION

UDC 551'508'5

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK August 1992

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

MARO Rice Groap 1

Meteorological

Instruments

Sectional Committee,

LM 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft tinalizcd by the Meteorological Instruments Sectional Committee had been approvtd by the Light Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The accurate `measurement of wind speed has assumed significance not only in the field of metccrological observations end practices bet also in the field of industry, pollution control, nonconventional energy studies, etc. The simple and common method of measuring the wind speed near the grcund is by measuring the run of wind for a fixed interval of time using a cup counter anemcmeter ( IS 5912 : 1970 ). Besides, there are also remote sensing electrical anemometers extensively used at aeronautical meteorological stations to measure the wind speed near runway locations ( 1s 6871 : 1971 ). The wind speed can also be fed to a recorders for obtaining a continuous record for research purposes ( IS 8754 : 1978 1. This standard has been prepared to formulate guidelines for the manufacture of a simple and portable anemometer for accurate measurement of wind speed. The need for such portable and handy type of anemometer has been felt for a considerable period of time. The formulation of an Indian Standard Specification for the instrument has become necessary in the interests of standardization and quality of the production of such instruments.
This standard has been prepared to guide the manufacture of sensitive measure the wind speed more accurately and display the same digitally The test of all such equipments made in the operating a press button. certification after manufacture will in future be the responsibility Department.

anemometers which can on a small window by country and their initial of India Meteorological

Jn the formulation of this standard due consideration down by the World Meteorological Organization, Geneva available in this country.

has been given to the requirements laid In addition to the special conditions

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)' the number

of significant places retained value in this standard.

in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified

IS 13436: 1992

Indian Standard
SENSITIVE ANEMOMETER 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for the sensitive Anemometer based on the principle of interrupting light path between an JR source and a sensor to generate pulses proportional in number to wind speed. 2 DESCRIPTION 2.1 Based on the photoelectric sensing, versions of anemometers are described: a) Portable hand wind speed. held with digital display two of

SPECIFICATION

In field type anemometer, the IR emitter/sensor, amplifier and connector are housed inside the main body. The connecting cables terminating on a connector pass through the tubular holder. 3 MATERIAL 3.1 The material used for the fabrication of the equipment shall be such that it may withstand continuous exposure in the open and have a long life extending over a number of years. Suitable materials are suggested in 3.2 but the use of such material is not obligatory, provided the alternative material satisfies the tolerance limits specified under 7.3. 3.2 Component a) Main body, bearing block, holder, spacers, chopper wheel b) Spindle c) Cup assembly, Battery compartment, window cover 4 DIMENSIONS 4.1 The dimensions of the cups and the body can be arrived at keeping in mind the important functional characteristics: 1) Low starting speed, of the wind hous'ng, field Brass

b) Mast mounting type suitable for permanent installation in the field. This type consists of a wind sensor mounted on a supporting mast assembly and electrically connected by cables to wind speed indicator analogue) with a ( digital or recorder as an option. 2.2 The anemometer is cup type and consists of The cups are integrally a ~-CUP rotor assembly. assembly in durable moulded into a single weather resistant plastic. The cup assembly is attached to a bearing mounted spindle at the top of the instrument with the help of a threaded cap. The other end of the spindle carries a chopper wheel with slots which rotates freely in When the a slotted infrared emitter/detector. cups rotate the IR sensor generates pulses proportional TV the wind speed, In portable hand held anemometer, these pulses are shaped, counted in a digital counter and displayed on a suitable display. A presss button on/off switch is provided on the main body of the anemometer to energize or de-energize the sensor and associated electronics. In mast mounting type anemometer, these pulses generated by the IR sensor are processed through suitable electronic circuitry to give suitable digital display at a remote place and also an analogue output suitable for indication as well as recording In standard recording devices. In both type of anemometers, an accuralc crystal oscillator provides the necessary time base ( two seconds ) to gate the counters. the IR 2.3 In portable type anemometer, emitter/sensor, pulse shaping and counting circuitry, time base, display module are housed in a hardy body. A suitable window with protcctivc transparent cover is provided for viewing the display. On top of the body the bearing block carrying the spindle is fixed. At the bottom a battery compartment ic litted to accommodate pencil ccIls or rechargeable cells.

Stainless Suitable

steel plastic

2) Minimum interference from the anemometer 3) Aesthetics, 4) Weather 5 GENERAL and resistance.

REQUIREMENTS

5.1 Each of three rotor cups ~1~~11 bc scmiconical in shape with beaded reinforced cdgcs. 5.2 The sensor housing shall be weather proof. Ali the KBs should be on glass cpc xy cc Inminates and suitably tropicalized. 5.3 The main spindle shalt rotate in two h,i'l bearings one at the top and other at tllc, bcitcom. The bearings shall be adequatcl!, cneiose~f ;!:ral protected fi on? dul;t and moisture. Thrh irtbric:Lnt used ~1~11 ho clock oil or similar I tlhricant. 5.4 The range ol` :;ncmomctcr d1::Jl O-99.9 km/h with a rcsolutlon of 0 I km/h the hand held anemometer. 5.5 The withstand 1 field anemometer should gusts up to 200 km/h. be nb!c
ho

in

LO

IS 13436 : 1992 6 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH
jl rue Speed Tolerance

6.1 The workmanship of the anemometer shall be such that the cups start rotating at wind speed not exceeding 1 km/h. The rotation of cup assembly shall be smooth and free from friction. The shaft shall be straight. The bearings shall be adequately lubricated with fine light lubricants like clock oil and protected from weather. All the electrical connections and PCBs shall be adequately tropicalized. Main body, bearing clock and the holder shall be painted from outside with weather resistant durable paint with appropriate undercoats. All other brass parts shall be well plated. 7 TEST AND TOLERANCES

Up to 20 km/h Over 20 up to 100 km/h

f l/2 km & 2% of reading

7.4 The cup rotor shall begin to resolve from rest in a wind speed not exceeding 1 km/h. 8 MARKING AND PACKING 8.1 Each anemometer shall bear the following inscription engraved or labelled ( metal labels ) neatly and legibly at a prominent and convenient place.
a>

Name of the instrument;

7.1 The cup rotor assembly shall be accurately balanced with the spindle held in horizontal position in a draught fret room, the cups shall not show any bias to any particular position. 7.2 To ensure sufficient freedom of all the ball bearings, the cups when set revolving at o,le revolution per second for 30 seconds in the direction they would normally rotate in wind, shall continue to rotate for at least 10 seconds before coming to rest. This test shall be conducted in draught free room. 7.3 The anemometer shall be such that when calibrated in a wind tunnel the speeds indicated by it will agree with the true speed in the wind tunnel within the following limits.

b) Serial number and year of make; c) Maker's
trade-mark; name, and initials or recognized

Range with units. 8.2 The anemometer shall be packed in a suit:lbly designed wooden box in such a way that the cup rotor assembly is free from any packing stress. Alternately th:: anemometer may also be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 9 TESTING AND INSPECTION

9.1 Each anemometer shall be tested individually for conformity to all the requirements of this specification.

I

Standard Mark
Standards

I

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licencc for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

I

I

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of harmonious development of the activities of standardization, goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, types or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. LM 21 (0051 ) Amendments Issued Since Publicat ion
~-

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone ( 33101 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, t 37 86 26, 37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40,

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

I

53 38 23 43, 84

Southern W ester

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

600113

235 02 16, 235 04 42, 235 15 19, 235 23 15 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 632 78 58, 632 78 92

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI,
LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURM.

BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATGRE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India

