November 2010 


IS 15906 : 2010 
(Reaffirmed 2016) 


Wee Waa (Reaffirmed 2021) 


yfadra Seg À UR GI AAT 


Indian Standard 


MEASUREMENT OF MERCURY LEVEL 
IN FLUORESCENT LAMPS 


ICS 29.140.30 


© BIS 2010 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


Price Group 4 


Electrical Lamps and Their Auxiliaries Sectional Committee, ETD 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Electrical 
Lamps and Their Auxiliaries Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 


The method of measurement of mercury level covered under this standard is based on atomic absorption 
spectrophotometer due to ease of operation, cost effectiveness and precession requirements. 


The need of formulating this standard has been realized considering manufacturing potential and demand in the 
country to measure mercury contents available in fluorescent lamps. This may ease safe disposal of fluorescent 
lamps due to hazardous nature of availability of excess mercury contents. 


This standard is based on IEC Doc: 34A/1230/NP ‘Measurement of mercury level in fluorescent lamps’ issued 
by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) based on Japanese Standard. 


In the formulation of this standard, necessary assistance has been taken from IS 12041 : 1987 ‘Method for 
determination of mercury by atomic absorption spectrophotometer’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15906 : 2010 


Indian Standard 


MEASUREMENT OF MERCURY LEVEL 
IN FLUORESCENT LAMPS 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the quantitative analysis 
procedure for mercury contents in fluorescent lamps. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards are necessary adjuncts to this 
standard: 


IS No. Title 
264 : 1976 Nitric acid (second revision) 
265 : 1993 Hydrochloric acid (fourth revision) 
266 : 1993 Sulphuric acid (third revision) 
1473 : 2004 Methods of chemical analysis of 
manganese ores (first revision) 
5760 : 1998 Argon, compressed and liquid — 


Specification (second revision) 


3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Amount of mercury measured in accordance with 
this standard should be expressed by 2 significant 
digits. 

3.2 Measurements should be repeated 3 times or more, 
and the average should be calculated. 


3.3 Blank test should be done before sample is treated 
in order to confirm the blank value has no influence to 
the sample measurement value. 


4 SAMPLE PREPARATION 


4.1 Mercury in fluorescent lamps exists in three states 
as followings: 


a) Vapor in a lamp; 
b) Liquid metal or as an oxygen compound; and 
c) Amalgam. 


Recently, although some of the lamps are filled with 
amalgam in order to put mercury in a lamp accurately, 
there are also many fluorescent lamps filled with metal 
mercury. 


At the determination of total amount of mercury in a 
fluorescent lamp there is no need to consider about 
vapour mercury in a lamp, because the amount of 
vapour mercury is small in view of mercury vapour 
pressure at room temperature. 


The total amount of mercury is determined by 
measuring the amount of metal mercury, oxidized 
mercury and amalgam. 


Metal mercury and oxidized mercury easily dissolve in 
nitric acid, however some kinds of amalgams (for 
example, Ti/Hg, Bi/Pb/Sn/Hg, etc) cannot be dissolved 
in nitric acid completely. So another acid should be mixed. 


This procedure includes a method to dissolve metal 
mercury and oxidized mercury (see 4.1), and a method 
to dissolve some kinds of amalgams (see 4.2). 


Total amount of mercury is calculated by adding the 
measured values of metal mercury, oxidized mercury 
and amalgam. 


4.2 Procedure for Dissolving Metal Mercury and 
Oxidized Mercury in a Fluorescent Lamp 


4.2.1 Instruments 


a) Syringe; 
b) Beaker, volumetric flask, pipette; 
c) Paper filter, filter glide; 


d) File, scissors, hammer, pincher, rubber tube, 
Ni/Cr wire for heater and a power supply 
burner for glasswork and glass rod; and 


e) Hot plate. 
4.2.2 Reagents 


4.2.2.1 Nitric acid — Nitric acid specified in IS 264 or 
that at least equal there to in quality should be used. In 
the following procedure nitric acid refers to this. 


4.2.2.2 Water — Distilled water or ion-exchange water 
should be used. Water refers to distilled water or ion- 
exchange water from here onwards. 


4.2.2.3 Nitric acid (1 + 1) — Same volumes of nitric 
acid and water are mixed. 


4.2.3 Sampling Procedure 


Fluorescent lamp without amalgam should be treated 
by method given in 4.2.3.1 or 4.2.3.2. 


Fluorescent lamp with amalgam should be treated by 
method given in 4.2.3.2. 


4.2.3.1 Mercury decomposition in a lamp bulb, through 
pouring nitric acid in the lamp bulb. 


a) Remove base (only one side) and break the 
tip of exhaust tube. 

b) Pour proper amount of diluted nitric acid into 
the lamp (for example, 30 ml via 40 W lamp) 
(see Note 1 and Fig. 1); 


IS 15906 : 2010 


c) 


d) 


e) 


8) 


h) 


Rinse the inside of lamp thoroughly until no 
more phosphor comes off. When the solution 
is spilled, stop the procedure and start from 
another lamp. Lay the lamp on a hot plate and 
heat the solution up to 80 to 100°C and keep 
for 40 min. At this point, mercury in the lamp 
is completely dissolved. 

Cut the bulb at the position of about 30 mm 
from the end of the bulb. The solution is 
poured into a beaker. 

Pour 20 ml of diluted nitric acid into the lamp 
and pour the solution into the beaker 
mentioned before. After that, rinse the lamp 
inside of the lamp with about 20 ml of water. 
The water must be added to the solution 
mentioned before. 

Cut the bulb at the position of about 30 mm 
from the opposite end of the bulb. Rinse the 
inside of the bulb sufficiently (see Note 2). 
Remove filaments and inner leads from the 2 
electrode parts. Rinse 2 electrode parts with 
5 ml of nitric acid (1 + 1) and small amount 
of water. Put them into the beaker mentioned 
before. 

The solution is filtered with filter paper and 
is moved to a volumetric flask. Rinse filter 


Syringe 


HNO, (1+1)30mi 


Lamp 
===") 


Fic. 1 INJECTION OF NITRIC ACID WITH SYRINGE 


paper with water thoroughly and add water 
to marked line of a volumetric flask to make 
the test solution (see Note 3). 


NOTES 

1 By using the pressure difference between atmosphere 
and inside of the lamp, diluted nitric acid can easily be 
sucked into the lamp through a rubber tube between 
the lamp and the beaker, after cut-off the tip (see Fig. 2). 
2 A negative error could occur when the rinsing of inside 
of the lamp is poor. 

3 This sample solution can be stored for a week. 
However, diluted test solutions should be measured on 
the same day. 


4.2.3.2 Mercury decomposition in a beaker through 
breaking the lamp bulb. 


a) 
b) 


c) 


d) 


Lamp 


Remove the base and base cement completely 
with a knife. 


Make a scar on near the end of the tube with 
a file. 


Make red heated glass rod or Ni/Cr wire 
contact with the scar in order to make clack 
and let the lamp bulb leak to atmospheric 
pressure. 

Take out amalgams from the inside of the 
tube. And dissolve them in accordance with 
the method given in 4.3. 


Rubber tube 


Cut of point 


HNO, (141)30mI 


Fic. 2 INJECTION oF NITRIC ACID BY SUCTION 


e) 


8) 


h) 


J) 


Wet all of inside of the bulb with water in 
order to prevent splash mercury with 
phosphor when the bulb is broken into pieces. 
Collect the water in a beaker. 


Break bulb into pieces inside a thick plastic 
bag by beating the bulb from outside the 
plastic bag with a hammer, or break the bulb 
inside a beaker with pincers. (In order to 
prevent the plastic bag from breaking, use 
pincher can be used to make broken pieces 
smaller instead of beating with hammer 
repeatedly.) 

Move pieces of the bulb into a beaker and 
rinse inside the plastic bag with water (see 
Fig. 3). 

Add about 30 ml of half diluted nitric acid 
into the beaker. Wash the pieces of bulb with 
pipette until no more phosphor coming off 
from the pieces. Heat the beaker on a hot plate 
and keep at about 80°C for more than an hour. 


After cooling to room temperature the sample 
solution, the solution is filtered with filter 
paper and is moved to a volumetric flask. 
Rinse filter paper with water thoroughly and 
add water to marked line of a volumetric flask 
to make the test solution (see Notes). 

NOTES 


1 This sample solution can be stored for a week. 
However, diluted test solutions should be measured on 
the same day. 


Hammer 


Fluorescent lamp leaked to the atmosphere 
(bases and cement are removed) 


IS 15906 : 2010 


2 The amount of dilute depends on the shape of the 
lamp, since the mercury content of the lamp tube with 
the amalgam extracted is very small, the amount of 
dilute should be small as possible. 


3 Supernatant solution can be available, when No. 5 
filter is used for filtration. 


4.3 Decomposition of Mercury Amalgams 
4.3.1 In the Case of Titanium Amalgam 


Example of titanium amalgam equipped in a 
fluorescent lamp is shown in Fig. 4. 


4.3.1.1 Glassware 


a) Round-bottomed flask, beaker; and 
b) Reflux condenser. 


4.3.1.2 Reagent 


a) Sulphuric acid — Sulphuric acid specified in 
IS 266 or that at least equal there to in quality 
must be used. In the following procedure 
sulphuric acid refers to this. 

b) Sulphuric acid (1 + 1) — Same volume of 
sulphuric acid and water are mixed. 

c) Nitric acid (1 + 1) — Same volume of nitric 
acid and water are mixed. 


4.3.1.3 Decomposition of titanium amalgam 


Take out amalgam with metal ring from inside of a 
lamp (see 4.2.3.2), and put it in a round-bottomed flask. 
Connect a reflux condenser to a round-bottomed flask 


Plastic bag 


Fic. 3 EXAMPLE OF THE WAY FOR LAMP DESTRACTION 


IS 15906 : 2010 


and cool them by flowing water. Then add 10 ml of equipped in a fluorescent lamp is show in Fig. 5. 
sulfuric acid (1 + 1) and heat mildly for about 30 min. 

Add 5 ml of nitric acid (1 + 1) and heat until some HO 

salts formed have completely dissolved and cool it a) Beaker; and 

down. b) Watch glass. 


4.3.2 In the Case of Amalgam Pellet and Amalgam 4.3.2.2 Reagent 


Mesh 
a) Hydrochloric acid — Hydrochloric acid 


An example of amalgam pellets and amalgam mesh specified in IS 265 has to be used; and 


Glass bulb 


Filament 


Metal ling 


The inside : Titanium amalgam 
(Tix Hg) 
The outside :Getter (ZrAl) 


Base 


Fic. 4 EXAMPLE OF TITANIUM AMALGAM EQUIPPED IN A FLUORESCENT LAMP ELECTRODE PORTION 


Sub- amalgam 


Fluorescent lamp 


Electrode 


Sub- amalgam 


Main- amalgam 


Fic. 5 AN EXAMPLE OF AMALGAM PELLETS AND AMALGAM MESH EQUIPPED IN A FLUORESCENT LAMP 


4 


b) Aqua regia — Concentric nitric acid is mixed 
with three times concentric hydrochloric acid. 


4.3.2.3 Decomposition of amalgam pellet 


a) Take out the fluorescent lamp carefully from 
the plastic housing; 


b) Let the fluorescent lamp leak slowly 
(see 5.1.3.2). Take out the amalgam pellet and 
the amalgam mesh from the fluorescent lamp; 


c) Putthem into a beaker and add 10 ml of aqua 
regia; 

d) Heat for 90 min at 80°C; and 

e) After cooling to room temperature the sample 
solution, the solution is filtered with filter 
paper and is moved to a volumetric flask. 
Rinse filter paper with water thoroughly and 
add water to marked line of a volumetric flask 
to make the test solution. 
NOTE — When the solution contains Bi, deposition of 
Bi may occur in accordance with a drop of acidity. Add 


aqua regia to make acid concentration more than 10wt 
percent so that precipitation of salt does not occur. 


5 MEASUREMENT 


Reducing vapourization atomic 


absorption 


IS 15906 : 2010 


spectrometry or ICP atomic emission spectrometry is 
used. 


5.1 Reducing Vaporization Atomic Absorption 
Spectrometry 


5.1.1 Abstract 


The atomic vapour of mercury is produced with the 
use of tin (II) chloride as a reducing agent and the 
mercury vapour is send to the absorption cell. The 
absorbance of 253.7nm line in UV region is measured 
to determine the concentration of mercury in the test 
solution containing mercury and phosphor. Pre- 
treatment with the use of potassium permanganate can 
be omitted as the lamp does not contain organic 
compounds. 


5.1.2 Instrument and Glassware 


a) Atomic absorption spectrometer — The 
instrument which gives atomic absorption 
signal and precision suitable for an aimed 
determination range. 


b) Volumetric flask, pipette 


One of atomic absorption spectrometer system diagram 
(see Fig. 6) indicates as following: 


H F 


vessel for reduction 

B — drying tube 

C — flowmeter 

D — absorption cell 

E — air pump 

F — recorder 

G — mercury hollow cathode lamp or mercury lamp 
H — detector of atomic absorption spectrometer 

I — mercury eliminating device 


Fic. 6 EXAMPLE OF CONSTRUCTION OF CLOSED-TYPE CIRCULATING DEVICE 


IS 15906 : 2010 


5.1.3 Reagent 
a) 


Sulphuric acid (1 + 1) — Same volume of 
sulphuric acid and water are mixed. (not 
containing mercury more than | ugHg/ml). 

Tin (II) chloride solution — Take 10 g or tin 
(II) chloride dehydrate. Add 60 ml of sulphuric 
acid (1 + 20), dissolve it while heating and 
agitating. After cooling, add water to make total 
100 ml. The solution can be stored for a week. 


b) 


c) 
d) 


Magnesium perchlorate — For drying agent. 


Mercury standard solution (1 000 ugHg/ml) 
— For the solution for calibration line, 
mercury standard solution should be diluted 
on the day of measurement. 

e) Potassium permanganate solution (5 percent) 
— Dissolve 5 g of potassium permanganate 
specified in IS 1473 in 100 ml of sulphuric 
acid (1 + 5). 


5.1.4 Operation 
a) 


Take a suitable amount of sample in a 
reduction vessel (see Note 1). 

b) Add sulphuric acid (1 + 1) and water to make 
appropriate volume (see Note 2). 

Add quickly tin (II) chloride solution, and set 
the vessel in the apparatus. 


c) 
d) Run the air pump with the optimum flow rate 
and read the value indicated at the wavelength 
of 253.7 nm. 

Find the amount of mercury on the calibration 
line, and calculate the concentration of total 
mercury. 


e) 


NOTES 

1 Take 1 ml or more of the sample solution in order to 
prevent the error larger. 

2 This solution should be measured quickly in order 
not to make the measurement of mercury content lower 
than the actual value. 


Indicated value 
bh © © 
O oO O 


N 
O 


0.1 


0.2 


5.1.5 Calibration Line 


Three or more kinds of solutions which are different 
in the concentration of mercury, are prepared for 
calibration line (see Fig. 7). Using those solutions, the 
relation calibration line between indicated value and 
concentration value is prepared to make a calibration 
line. By using this calibration graph, the concentration 
of mercury in the test solution corresponding to the 
indicated value ratio is obtained. 


NOTE — Open-type aerating device can also be used (see 
Fig. 8). 


5.2 ICP — Atomic Emission Spectrometry 
5.2.1 Abstract 


After dissolving mercury by using nitric acid or mixed 
acid (nitric acid and other acid) insoluble components 
are removed by filtering. Appropriately diluted sample 
solution is sprayed into plasma and the intensity of 
atomic emission of mercury is measured. 


5.2.2 Instrument and Glassware 


a) ICP — Atomic emission spectrometer — The 
instrument which gives light emission intensity 
with suitable sensitivity and stability in aimed 
measurement and concentration range. 


b) Gas — For the Ar gas, equivalent in IS 5760 
has to be used. 
c) Glassware — Clean beaker and volumetric 
flask. 
An example of ICP-AES is shown in Fig. 9. 
5.2.3 Reagent 
a) Water — The water should be ion exchange 
water or ion exchange distillation water must 
be used. 
b) Mercury standard solution (1 000 ugHg/ml) 


— For the solution for calibration line, 


0.3 0.4 0.5 


Amount of mercury (ug) 


FIG. 7 CALIBRATION LINE 


6 


IS 15906 : 2010 


vessel for reduction 
B — drying tube 


A C — flowmeter 
D — absorption cell 
E — air pump 


F — recorder 

G — mercury hollow cathode lamp or mercury lamp 
H — detector of atomic absorption spectrometer 

I — mercury eliminating device 


Fic. 8 EXAMPLE OF CONSTRUCTION OF OPEN-T YPE AERATING DEVICE 


Outlet slit 


Detector 
concave mirror 


Plane diffraction 
grating 


ve mirror i 
concave o Light source 


Inlet slit 
Vacuum pump 


FIG. 9 SPECTROPHOTOMETRY PART USING SEQUENTIAL TYPE SPECTROSCOPE (AN EXAMPLE) 


7 


IS 15906 : 2010 


mercury standard solution should be diluted 
on the day of measurement. 


5.2.4 Setting of Measuring Conditions 


Plasma output, photometric height, flow rate of carrier 
gas, etc are varied to set the optimized conditions. 


There is a possibility of memory effect when low 
mercury concentration sample is measured after high 
mercury concentration sample. To avoid memory 
effect, concentration of mercury in the solution or rinse 
time with no memory effect should be confirmed. 


5.2.5 Quantitative Analysis 


a) Select the mercury analytical line at 
wavelength of 194.2 nm for measuring light 
emission intensity. When spectral interference 
is found not to exist, the analytical line at 
253.7 nm or the other spectral line may be 
used. 


b) As the co-existing elements in the sample 
solution could have spectral interference on 
the mercury analytical line, mercury spectral 
line without spectral interference should be 
selected by scanning around the mercury 
analytical line with spraying sample solution 
into the plasma. 


c) To avoid the effect of phosphor matrix 
standard additional method should be used. 
Atleast four solutions are sampled by an equal 
amount from test solution to prepare one kind 
of solution wherein mercury element is not 
added and at least three kinds of solutions 
wherein mercury element is added 
respectively at different concentration. 


Light emission intensity 


d) 


The solutions are sprayed into plasma and the 
intensity of atomic emission of mercury is 
measured. The relation curve between the 
light emission intensity of mercury element 
in the test solution is obtained from the 
intercept of the axis of abscissa 
(concentration) of Fig. 10. Calculate the 
amount of mercury in the fluorescent lamp 
with the following formula: 


W=Ax Cx V/1 000 
where 


W = amount of mercury in fluorescent 
lamp in mg; 


A 


C = mercury concentration of test 
solution in ugHg/ml; and 


dilution rate; 


V = amount of test solution in ml. 


NOTES 


1 As the line spectrum and continuous spectrum by a 
plasma composing component and a coexisting element 
are occasionally superimposed with each other for the 
analytical line as spectral interference, to select the 
analytical line with no spectral interference should be 
recommended. When the spectral interference exists, 
the degree of the interference calculated as the 
concentration of mercury should be less than 1/100 of 
the concentration of mercury of the test solution by 
using synthetic matrix solution. 


2 This method can be applied only to the case of no 
spectral interference, or where the background and the 
spectral interference are regularly corrected, and the 
calibration line between the light emission intensity and 
the concentration keeps good straightness to the low 
concentration area. 


Additional concentration to sampled test 
solution 


Concentration of mercury element 


Fic. 10 METHOD FOR OBTAINING CONCENTRATION BY STANDARD ADDITIONAL METHOD 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 23 (6109). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 60 3843 
60 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 

FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 

NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 

Laser Typeset by Sunshine Graphics 


