атт Ah IS 16700 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Фс At elt saat Ar 
GUAT "чат % Т9 


(чест FRAT ) 


Criteria for Structural Safety of 
Tall Concrete Buildings 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.080.40 


© BIS 2023 


UR AH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


ee HAH чач, 9 TRL BS AHL AMT, AE Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2023 Price Group 12 


Special Structures Sectional Committee, СЕР 38 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Special Structures Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


The large scale urbanization in the country and shortage of land in urban areas for accommodating the vast 
population migrating thereto, is being addressed through vertical developments in the form of tall buildings. This 
standard has been formulated to comprehensively address the special issues associated with the design of 
reinforced concrete tall buildings, whose design is governed not just by structural safety aspects, but also by 
serviceability aspects, especially under the conditions of wind effects. This standard has therefore been formulated 
to cover these aspects relating to reinforced concrete buildings of height greater than 50 m, but less than or equal 
to 250 m. 


This standard provides prescriptive requirements for design of reinforced concrete tall buildings. The following 
salient aspects, which are based on the prescriptive approach, are addressed in this standard: 


a) Structural systems that can be adopted in tall building; 

b) General requirements including;(1) height limitations of different structural systems, (2) elevation and 
plan aspect ratios, (3) lateral drift, (4) storey stiffness and strength, (5) density of buildings, (6) modes of 
vibration, (7) floor systems, (8) materials, and (9) progressive collapse mechanism; 

c) Wind and seismic effects:(1) load combinations, and (2) acceptable serviceability criteria for lateral 
accelerations; 

d) Methods of structural analysis to be adopted, and section properties (in cracked and uncracked states) of 
reinforced concrete member to be considered in analysis; 

e) Structural design aspects for various applicable structural systems; 

f) Issues to be considered in design of foundations; and 

g) Systems needed for structural health monitoring. 


This standard provides procedure for approval of buildings that do not conform to the prescriptive requirements 
of this standard. 


The committee responsible for the formulation of this standard has taken into consideration the views of users, 
engineers, architects, builders and technologists, and has related the standard to the practices followed in the 
country in this field. Also, due consideration has been given to the coordination of this standard with the 
corresponding international standards prevailing in different regions of the world. 


In this revision, the following changes have been incorporated: 


a) Systems with structural walls at core have been dropped. All structural wall systems should have well 
distributed walls; 

b) The wind return period of wind for natural drift under wind conditions has been revised; 

c) Requirements for maximum vertical acceleration of floors have been dropped; 

d) Maximum horizontal acceleration requirement has been revised for residential buildings; 

e) A new expression for estimating the approximate fundamental natural period of buildings over 50 m has 
been provided; 

f) Load combination has been specified considering P-A effects; 

g) Ап ехргеѕѕіоп for interstorey drift stability coefficient Ө has been introduced; 

h) The minimum requirement for transverse reinforcement in structural walls has been revised; and 

j) The procedure for approval of buildings that do not conform to the prescriptive requirements of this 
standard has been revised in Annex B. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 16700 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


CRITERIA FOR STRUCTURAL SAFETY OF TALL CONCRETE 
BUILDINGS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


11 This standard covers the following design 
aspects of reinforced concrete (RC) buildings of 
height greater than 50 m, but less than or equal 
to 250 m. Generally, this standard is based on 
prescriptive approach and covers the following 
design aspects of tall buildings: 


a) Selection of appropriate structural system; 

b) Geometric proportioning of the building; 

c) Integrity of structural system; 

d) Resistance to wind and earthquake effects; 
and 

e) Other special considerations related to tall 
buildings. 


1.2 This standard is not applicable for tall buildings 
located in the near-field of seismogenic faults. For 
the purposes of this standard, near-field is taken 
as 10 km (shortest distance) from a seismogenic 
fault. 


For buildings located within 10 km (shortest 
distance) of seismogenic faults, more rigorous 
approach is needed to proportion, analyze, design, 
detail and construct such buildings. The prescriptive 
requirements mentioned in this standard shall be 
used for proportioning such buildings, but more 
stringent specifications may be specified by the 
client/owner of the building or by the tall building 
committee appointed by the local authority 
administering the building project. 


1.3 This standard is applicable only for buildings 
that house 20 000 or fewer persons. 


1.4 This standard may also be used for design of 
buildings of height equal to or less than 50 m. The 
provisions of this standard will add value to the 
design of such buildings. However, this standard is 
not applicable for design of buildings of height more 
than 250 m. 


1.5 This standard addresses the following typical 
structural systems of tall concrete buildings: 


a) Structural wall systems; 

b) Moment frame systems; 

с) Moment frame — Structural wall systems; 

d) Structural wall — Flat slab floor systems with 
perimeter moment frame; 

e) Structural wall — Framed tube systems; 

f) Framed-tube system; 


g) Tube-in-tube system; 

h) Multiple tube system; 

j) Hybrid system; and 

k) Any of the above with additional framing 
systems, for example, outrigger trusses, belt 
trusses and braced frames. 


1.6 This standard shall be read along with all Indian 
Standards relevant to design and construction of 
buildings and structures. In case of conflict, clauses 
given in this standard shall be applicable. 


1.7 For buildings that do not conform to the 
prescriptive requirements of this standard, a more 
rigorous procedure is necessary for design and 
review. The general procedure to be adopted is given 
in Annex B to proportion, analyze, design, detail, 
gain approval and construct such buildings. 
Performance objectives or procedures more 
stringent than those specified in Annex B may be 
specified by the client and/or owner of the building 
or by the tall building committee appointed by the 
local authority administering the building project. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the edition indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent edition of these standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Building Height — The difference in levels 
between the base level of a building, at which inertia 
forces generated in the structure are transferred to 
the foundation, which then transfers these forces to 
the ground, and the highest level of a building, 
which is the roof of the topmost level which is 
structurally integral and continuous with the floor 
below (see also 4). 


3.2 Connecting Structure — A structure that links 
two or more towers, except at the podium levels. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


NOTE — There are two distinctive types of connecting 
structures with each one requiring a different structural 
treatment, namely, (a) the connecting structure having the 
role of transferring gravity loads only and with no 
participation in the role of resisting the lateral loads on 
either of the towers; and (b) the connecting structure 
participating in the lateral load resisting structural system, 
where the two towers act together when one or both towers 
is subjected to lateral loads due to the interaction provided 
by the connecting tower. 


3.3 Core — An assembly of Structural walls 
coupled with link elements and offering lateral 
stiffness in two orthogonal directions. 


3.4 Coupled Structural Wall Building — A 
building comprising of structural walls linked by 
in-plane beam elements, wherein the vertical and 
lateral loads are resisted by these structural walls, 
through axial load, in-plane bending moment and 
shear force, and the coupling action created by push- 
pull in the wall elements by framing action provided 
by link beams. 


3.5 Frame Building — A building comprising 
beams and columns, wherein the vertical and lateral 
loads are resisted by these elements through 
moment-frame action. 


3.6 Gravity Columns — Vertical members that are 
intended to carry primarily the vertical loads arising 
out of the dead and imposed loads on the building, 
and do not participate in the lateral load resisting 
system. Such columns shall be capable primarily of 
carrying the gravity loads and additional induced 
loads while complying with the relative lateral 
deformation effects imposed on them during lateral 
earthquake shaking. 


3.7 Key Elements — The element such that its 
failure would cause the collapse of more than a 
limited area close to it. The limited area may be 
taken equal to 70 m° or 15 percent of the area of the 
storey, whichever is lesser. If key elements exist, it 
is preferable to modify the layout so that the key 
element is avoided. 


3.8 Linking Beams (also called Coupling 
Beams) — Horizontal members spanning two 
(vertical) structural walls. 


3.9 Mixed Building or Hybrid Building — А 
building in which select primary elements resisting 
vertical and/or lateral loads comprise more than one 
material; composite elements comprising structural 
steel and reinforced concrete are common examples. 


3.10 Multi-Tower Structures Linked by Podium — 
Two or more towers above a common podium 
structure that are not separated by a movement joint 


at the podium level. 


3.11 Natural Period — The time taken (in seconds) 
by the structure to complete one cycle of oscillation 
in its natural mode of oscillation. 


3.12 Structural Systems and Sub-Systems 


3.12.1 Structural Wall System — А structural 
system comprising of inter-connected structural 
walls, wherein the vertical and lateral loads are 
resisted by the walls through axial load, in-plane 
bending moment and shear force. The wall elements 
are configured by a combination of structural wall 
elements connected integrally to a floor diaphragm. 
The wall elements form the primary lateral load 
resisting structural system for the building, and 
resist the loads imposed on them through axial, shear 
and flexural actions, and through coupling actions 
offered by the connecting link elements if provided. 


3.12.2 Moment Frame System — A structural 
system comprising (beam-column) frames and 
resisting the vertical and lateral loads. 


3.12.3 Moment Frame-Structural Wall System — A 
structural system comprising (beam-column) frames 
and structural walls resisting the vertical and lateral 
loads. The relative share of the lateral load resisted 
between these systems is dependent on their relative 
lateral stiffnesses. 


3.12.4 Structural Wall System with Flat Slab Floor 
System — A structural system comprising structural 
walls, a beam-less floor system, and columns 
resisting the vertical and lateral loads. The relative 
share of the lateral load resisted between these 
systems is dependent on their relative lateral 
stiffnesses. 


3.12.5 Core and Outrigger Structural System — A 
structural system comprising wall element(s) and 
perimeter columns, resisting the vertical and lateral 
loads. Essentially, the perimeter columns are for 
resisting gravity loads only. The core structure is 
connected to select perimeter column element(s) 
(often termed outrigger columns) by beam elements, 
known as outriggers, at discrete floor locations 
along the height of the building. This type of 
structure is an extension of the core structure, to 
enhance the lateral stiffness for taller structures, 
which mobilizes the perimeter columns, and offers 
increased leverage for push pull-action through the 
framing action offered by the deep beam(s) 
connecting the core to the outrigger columns. The 
global lateral stiffness is sensitive to: flexural 
stiffness of the core element, the flexural stiffness of 
the outrigger element(s) and the axial stiffness of the 
outrigger column(s). 


3.12.6 Core, Outrigger and Belt Wall System — A 
structural system, which is an extension to the core 
and outrigger structure to enhance the lateral 
stiffness further, where the outrigger column(s) is 
linked to the adjacent columns by deep beam 
elements (often known as belt truss), typically at the 
same level as the outrigger elements. The sharing of 
loads between multiple columns has the dual 
function of enhancing the axial stiffness and 
mobilizing greater number of gravity columns to 
counteract the induced tension loads generated by 
the overall lateral loads. 


3.12.7 Framed-Tube System — A structural system 
comprising closely spaced columns and deep beams 
in the perimeter frame for efficient tube action. The 
internal vertical elements, comprising core or 
columns are primarily utilized to resist gravity loads 
only. Effective utilization of the perimeter of the 
building maximizes the overall stiffness for a given 
building plan shape; this system is effective for very 
tall buildings. 


3.12.8 Tube-in-Tube System — A structural system, 
which is an extension of the tube structure, where 
there is an internal tube, often a core element, 
supplementing the external perimeter described as 
the tube structure above, to enhance the overall 
lateral global stiffness. Just as the tube structure, 
typically, even this system is suited for very tall 
buildings. 


3.12.9 Multiple-Tube System — A structural system, 
which is an extension of the tube structure and/or the 
tube-in-tube structure, where the architectural plan 
of the tower facilitates multiple tubes to be 
connected together, to enhance the lateral stiffness 
of the structure. Just as the tube structure and the 
tube-in-tube structure, typically, this suited is 
reserved for very tall buildings. 


3.13 Super Tall Building — A building of height 
greater than 250 m. 


3.14 Tall Building — A building of height greater 
than 50 m, but less than or equal to 250 m. 


3.15 Transfer Structure — A structure, comprising 
of horizontal deep beams, trusses or thick slabs that 
transfers load actions and supports vertical elements 
above to vertical elements below that are not aligned 
with each other, through flexural and shear actions. 
Alternatively, it can be a trussed structure that fulfils 
the task through axial actions in the truss members. 


4 SYMBOLS 
For the purpose of this standard, the following letter 


symbols shall have the meaning indicated against 
each; where other symbols are used, they are 


IS 16700 : 2023 


explained at appropriate places. All dimensions are 
in metres (m), loads in Newton (N), stresses in mega 
Pascal (MPa) and time in second (s), unless 
otherwise specified. 


a -– Major axis of elliptic plan shape of the 
building 

Ac — Cracked area of section 

Ag — Gross area of section 

b  — Minor axis of elliptic plan shape of the 
building 

hi =  Inter-storey height of i" floor in the 
building 

I, = Clear span of coupling beam 

В — Smaller plan dimension of the 


building at its base 
В. — Width of tower above podium level 


D — Dimension of the building in plan 
along the considered direction of 
earthquake shaking 


а  -— Overall depth of coupling beam 
H — Building height from its base to roof 
level, 


a) excluding the height of basement 
storeys, if basement walls are 
connected with the ground floor 
slab or basement walls are fitted 
between the building columns, but 


b 


ma 


including the height of basement 
storeys, if basement walls are not 
connected with the ground floor 
slab and basement walls are not 
fitted between the building 


columns 
H, — Height of tower above podium level 
hy — Unsupported height of structural wall 
Iet — Effective or cracked moment of 


inertia of section 


I, — Gross moment of inertia of section 

L  — Larger plan dimension of the building 
at its base 

Lı — Length of the tower above podium 
level 

Мі — Factored bending moment at a cross- 
section in a vertical member of the 
building 

Pa —  Factored axial load at a 
cross-section in the vertical member 
of the building 


IS 16700 : 2023 


Pa —  Factored pure axial load capacity (at 
M, = 0) of a vertical member of the 
building 

Ta — Approximate fundamental translational 


lateral natural period 


Ama. = Maximum relative lateral 
displacement within the storey 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
5.1 Elevation 


5.1.1 Height Limit for Structural Systems 


The maximum building height (in m) shall not 


exceed values given in Table 1 for buildings with 
different structural systems. 


5.1.2 Slenderness Ratio 


The maximum values of the ratio of height to 
minimum base width B shall not exceed values 
given in Table 2. 


5.1.3 Aerodynamic Effects 


Elevation profile, façade features of the building, 
and plan shape of the building shall be such as to 
attract minimum wind drag effects. Effects of 
features such as sharp corners, projected balconies, 
etc, shall be considered in design. 


Table 1 Maximum Values of Height H above Top of Base Level of Buildings with Different Structural 
Systems, in metres 


(Clause 5.1.1) 


851 No. Seismic 


Structural System 
J 


Zones | | 
Moment Structural Wall Structural Wall + Structural Wall + Structural 
Frame Well Moment Perimeter Frame Wall + 
Distributed Frame Ка 
Tube?) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
1) У МА 120 150 150 180 
11) IV NA 150 200 200 225 
iil) Ш 60 200 225 225 250 
iv) П 80 250 250 250 250 


Structural walls are considered to be well-distributed when structural walls that are outside of the соге are capable of carrying at least 25 


percent of the lateral loads. 


2 This includes systems covered under 1.5 (g), 1.5 (h) and 1.5 (k). 


Table 2 Maximum Slenderness Ratio (H1/B1) 
(Clause 5.1.2) 


SINo. Seismic 


Structural System 


Zones ^ А > 
Moment Structural Wall Structural Wall + Structural Wall + Structural 
Frame Well Distributed Moment Perimeter Frame Wall + 
Frame Framed 
Tube! * 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) У МА 8 8 9 9 
ii) IV NA 8 8 9 9 
iii) Ш 4 8 8 9 10 
iv) П 5 9 9 10 10 


D This includes systems covered under 1.5 (g), 1.5 (h) and 1.5 (k). 


5.2 Plan 
5.2.1 Plan Geometry 


5.2.1.1 The plan shall preferably be rectangular 
(including square) or elliptical (including circular). 
In buildings with said plan geometries, structural 
members participate efficiently in resisting lateral 
loads without causing additional effects arising out 
of re-entrant corners and others. 


5.2.2 Plan Aspect Ratio 


The maximum plan aspect ratio (L/B) of the 
overall building shall not exceed 5.0. In case of an L 
shaped building, Le and B, shall refer to the 
respective length and width of each leg of the 
building. 


5.3 Storey Stiffness and Strength 


Parameters influencing stiffness and strength of the 
building should be so proportioned, that the 
following are maintained: 


a) Lateral stiffness of any storey shall not be 
less than 70 percent of that of the storey 
above. 


b) Lateral strength of any storey shall not be less 
than 90 percent that of the storey above. 


5.4 Deformations 
5.4.1 Lateral Drift 


When design lateral forces are applied on the 
building, the maximum inter-storey lateral drift ratio 
(Ama/hi) under serviceability loads (including wind 
load with return period of 20 years), which is 
estimated based on the sectional properties for 
serviceability loads mentioned in 7.2, shall be 
limited to 1/500. Total drift at the topmost usable 
floor shall be limited to H/500. For a single storey 
the drift limit may be relaxed to h;/400. For design 
earthquake force, the maximum inter-story drift 
shall be hj/250. 


5.5 Natural Modes of Vibration 


5.5.1 The natural period of fundamental torsional 
mode of vibration shall not exceed 0.9 times the 
smaller of the natural periods of the fundamental 
translational modes of vibration in each of the 
orthogonal directions in plan. 


5.5.2 The fundamental translational natural 
periodin any of the two horizontal plan directions, 


IS 16700 : 2023 


shall not exceed 8s, considering sectional properties 
as per Table 5 corresponding to serviceability loads. 


5.6 Floor Systems 
5.6.1 Material 


All floor slabs shall be cast in-situ. For precast floor 
systems a minimum structural topping of 75 mm 
concrete with reinforcing mesh shall be used in 
seismic zones III, IV and У, but can be reduced to 
50 mm in seismic zone II. 


5.6.2 Openings 


5.6.2.1 Openings in floor diaphragm shall not be 
permitted along any floor diaphragm edge, unless 
perimeter members are shown to have stability and 
adequate strength. 


5.6.2.2 The maximum area of openings in any floor 
diaphragm shall not exceed 30 percent of the plan 
area of diaphragm. Transfer of lateral forces from 
diaphragm to lateral load resisting vertical elements 
shall be ensured using collector elements, if 
required. 


5.6.2.3 At any storey, the minimum width of floor 
slab along any section after deduction of openings 
shall not be less than 5 m, if there is no perimeter 
beam. Further, the cumulative width of the slab at 
any location shall preferably not be less than 50 
percent of the floor width. 


5.6.3 Natural Frequency of Floor System 


The natural vertical vibration frequency of any floor 
system shall not be less than 3 Hz without 
demonstration of acceptability using rational 
procedures. 


5.7 Materials 


5.7.1 Concrete 


5.7.1.1 The minimum grade of concrete shall be 
M 30. 


5.7.1.2 The maximum grade of concrete shall be 
М 70. When higher grades are required, the designer 
shall ensure through experimentation that such 
concretes shall have at least a minimum crushing 
strain in compression of 0.002. See Annex C for 
detailed specifications of higher grades of concrete 


5.7.2 Reinforcing Steel 


5.7.21 Reinforcing Steel shall conform to 
provisions of IS 13920. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


5.7.2.3 Lapping of longitudinal bars shall be avoided 
in RC columns and walls that form a part of the 
lateral load resisting system; when diameter of bars 
is 20 mm or higher; mechanical couplers as per 
IS 16172 shall be used to extend bars. 


5.8 Progressive Collapse 


Following are general guidelines to avoid 
progressive collapse of structure. 


5.8.1 Possibilities of progressive collapse shall be 
precluded by: 


a) selecting structural systems that are 
appropriate for ensuring structural 
integrity; 

b) adopting rigorous structural investigations 
that verify acceptable structural behaviour, 
even when select critical members do not 
play their intended role; and 

с) providing adequate redundancy апа 
integrity to the structure. 


5.8.2 Requirements of Key Elements 


5.8.2.1 Key elements are members, joints or other 
components, whose failure would result in a 
disproportionate deterioration of the building and 
whose presence is vital to ensure ductile behaviour 
of the building. Vertical and lateral resistance of key 
elements shall be improved in many ways, including 
by the use of higher partial safety factors for loads 
and materials, to ensure that they do not yield before 
the designated ductile elements. 


5.8.2.2 Elements adjoining key elements and 
capable of providing an alternative load transfer 
path, shall be suitably designed and detailed. 


6 LOADS AND LOAD COMBINATIONS 


6.1 The loads and load combinations specified in 
IS 875 (Parts 1 to 5), IS 456, 151893 (Part 1) and 
IS 13920 shall be applicable for tall buildings also. 
In addition, requirements given in subsequent 
clauses shall be applicable. 


6.2 Wind Effects 


6.2.1 For buildings (a) with height greater than 
150 m, or (b) with complexities in plan or elevation 
geometry, or (c) sited on complex topography with 


group effect or interference effect (existing and 
future potential), or (d) whose natural period is 
greater than 5 s, wind effects shall be determined by 
site-specific wind tunnel studies. 


6.2.2 Site-Specific Wind Tunnel Studies 


6.2.2.1 When wind tunnels studies result in higher 
storey shears and overturning moments than those 
calculated at based on IS 875 (Part 3), the results of 
wind tunnel studies may be used in design. 


6.2.2.2 When wind tunnel studies result in lower 
story shears and moments than those calculated 
based on IS 875 (Part 3). 


a) The minimum design wind base shear shall 
be at least 70 percent of that derived based 
on IS 875 (Part 3), and 

b) The relative distribution of storey shears 
shall be as obtained from wind tunnel 
studies. 


6.2.2.3 When wind tunnel studies indicate torsional 
motion, structural system of the building should be 
modified suitably to mitigate the torsional effects, so 
as to bring the torsional velocity below 0.003 rad/s 
for 10 year return period. 


6.2.2.4 The damping ratio considered shall not be 
greater than 2 percent of critical for concrete 
buildings. 


6.2.3 Lateral Acceleration 


From serviceability considerations, under standard 
wind loads with return period of 10 years, the 
maximum structural peak combined horizontal 
acceleration амахіп the building for along and across 
wind actions at any floor level shall not exceed 
values given in Table 3, without or with the use of 
wind dampers in the building. 


Table 3 Permissible Peak Combined 


Acceleration 
(Clause 6.2.3) 
SI No. Building Maximum Peak 
Use Combined 
Acceleration, amax 
m/s? 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Residential 0.18 
il) Mercantile 0.25 


6.3 Seismic Effects 


6.3.1 Vertical shaking shall be 
simultaneously with horizontal shaking for tall 
buildings in seismic zone V. 


considered 


6.3.2 For buildings in seismic zone V, deterministic 
site-specific design spectra may preferably be 
estimated and used in design. When site-specific 
investigations result in higher hazard estimation, 
site-specific investigation results shall be used. 


6.3.3 Design base shear coefficient of a building 
under design lateral forces, shall not be taken less 
than that given in Table 4. 


6.3.4 Approximate Fundamental Natural Period 


For buildings of height 50 m and more, the 
fundamental period, T (in sec) for a structure shall 
be determined by accounting for all structural 
properties and inherent stiffness of the building 
through rigorously validated structural analysis 
procedures. The fundamental period shall however 


IS 16700 : 2023 


period T, (in s) of oscillation, estimated by following 
expression: 


Т„= 0.0644 Н? for concrete moment resisting 
frame systems; and 

Т„= 0.0672 Н? for all other concrete structural 
systems 


7 STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS 
7.1 Software 


Structural analysis shall be carried out using 
standard 3-D computer model using well- 
established structural analysis software. 


7.2 Considerations 


Computer modelling shall consider the following: 


a) Rigid end offsets of linear members in the 
joint region, when centerline modelling is 
adopted; 

b) Floor diaphragm flexibility, as applicable; 

c) Cracked cross sectional area properties as per 
Table 6; and 


d) The load combination for the initial analysis 


not exceed the value obtained from the considering P-A effects shall be taken as: 

approximate fundamental translational natural 1.2 DL + 0.5 IL +1.5 EL/WL. 

Table 4 Minimum Design Base Shear Coefficient (Percent of Seismic Weight) 
(Clause 6.3.3) 
SI No. Building Seismic Zone 

height, Н —_—$———_— Ff 

П Ш ГУ У 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

1) H < 120m 0.7 1.1 1.6 2.4 
il) Н > 200m 0.5 0.75 1.25 1.75 


NOTE — For buildings of intermediate height in the range 120 m to 200 m, linear interpolation shall be used. 


Table 5 Cracked Section Properties of RC members 
(Clauses 5.5.2,7.3.6, 8.1.3.2.1 and 7.2) 


SI No. Structural Serviceability Design Strength Design 
Element 
Cross- Moment of Inertia Cross- Moment of Inertia 
Sectional Sectional 
Area Area 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) Slabs 1.0A, 0.351; 1.00А, 0.25 І, 
11) Beams 1.0 А, 0.71, 1.00 А, 0.35 І, 
iii) Columns 1.0 Ag 0.9 Iz 1.00 A, 0.70 Ig 
iv) Walls 1.0 Ag 0.9 1, 1.00 A, 0.70 Ig 


IS 16700 : 2023 


7.3 Modelling 


7.3.1 Modelling of buildings shall follow a simple 
approach, which reflects the distribution of mass and 
stiffness properties to properly account for all 
significant inertial forces under seismic actions and 
deformation shapes. 


7.3.2 Analytical model of a building shall reflect the 
true behaviour of its members as well of the whole 
structure. One can adopt lumped modelling that is 
frame element modelling, distributed modelling that 
is finite element modelling or a combination of the 
two. 


7.3.3 In-plane stiffness of floor slabs shall be 
modelled, unless it is demonstrated that it is 
extremely stiff and sufficiently strong to remain 
elastic under seismic actions. See IS 1893 (Part 1) to 
identify when a floor slab may be considered to be 
extremely stiff in its own plane. 


7.3.4 In moment frame buildings, when buildings 
with unreinforced masonry infill panels contribute 
to storey lateral stiffness, their effect shall be 
modelled as equivalent diagonal struts as рег 
relevant provisions of IS 1893 (Part 1). 


7.3.5 The analytical model for performing dynamic 
analysis of buildings with irregular configuration 
shall adequately represent irregularities in the 
configuration of the building. 


7.3.6 Cracked sectional properties shall be used 
when representing concrete elements as per Table 5. 


7.3.7 In reinforced concrete buildings, lateral 
deflections resulting from unfactored lateral loads 
shall be estimated using section properties intended 
for use with unfactored lateral loads, and lateral 
deflections resulting from factored lateral loads 
using section properties intended for use with 
factored lateral loads. 


7.3.8 Buildings may be considered to be fixed at 
their bases for determining lateral effects on 
buildings. When modelling flexibility of 
foundations, reference shall be made to 8 and 9. 


When foundation flexibility is included in linear 
analysis, load-deformation characteristics of 
foundation-soil system shall be accounted for by 
equivalent linear stiffness, using soil properties that 
are consistent with soil strain levels associated with 
the design forces. A 50 percent increase and 
decrease in stiffness shall be incorporated in 
dynamic analysis, unless smaller variation can be 
justified; the largest value of response shall be used 
in the raft design. 


7.3.9 Second order deformation effects (P-A effects) 
shall be considered. 


7.3.10 The flexibility of the building shall be such 
that the inter-storey drift stability coefficient 
satisfies: 


= < 02 
Vihj_1R 7 ; 


where 


Pi = total design vertical load at level 1; 
Ai = design storey drift at level i; 

Vi = design shear force at level i; 

hi. = storey height below level 1; and 

R = response reduction factor. 


7.3.11 Stiffness of frames with flat slabs as 
horizontal members (that is, slab-column frames) 
shall be ignored in lateral load resistance, in all 
Seismic zones. These shall be designed as gravity 
elements for deformation compatibility. 


7.3.12 The model used in structural analysis of solid, 
coupled, perforated or punched structural walls shall 
represent stiffness, strength and deformation 
capacities of structural wall, structural wall 
segments and coupling beams ог spandrel 
connections between structural walls. Stiffness of 
coupling beams and spandrel connections shall 
capture aspect ratio of these coupling beam and 
spandrel connections, extent of cracking anticipated, 
and reinforcement provided in them. 


7.3.13 Effects shall be considered of construction 
sequence in buildings taller than 150 m. 


7.3.14 Tower(s) connected by a podium shall be 
modelled separately and integrally. 


7.4 Building Movements 


For buildings taller than 150 m, and for buildings 
taller than 100 m with mass asymmetry, analysis 
shall be carried out for both vertical and horizontal 
long-term building movements. 


7.4.1 Measures shall be taken in concrete and 
composite buildings to minimize adverse effects of 
shrinkage, creep, temperature variation and 
foundation settlement during the design life of the 
building (not less than 30 years). 


7.4.2 Non-structural elements, such as curtain walls, 
cladding, partitions and finishes and service 
installations (for example, elevators, vertical pipes, 
ducts and cables), shall be required to withstand 
long-term movements of the building and associated 
differential effects. 


7.4.3 Details of connections of non-structural 
elements with the structural elements of the building 
shall be planned, such that their relative movements 
are allowed without causing distress to both 
structural and non-structural elements. 


7.4.4 Appropriate vertical compensation and sway 
compensation shall be accounted for during 
construction to minimize long term building 
movements for concrete and composite structures. 


7.4.5 In gravity load analysis, internal forces shall be 
considered, which are developed due to differential 
vertical movement of vertical structural elements, 
due to shrinkage, creep, temperature, foundation 
settlement and construction compensation. In any 
case the total shrinkage strain of concrete shall not 
exceed 0.04 percent. 


7.4.6 To calculate the effect of creep and shrinkage, 
selected strain prediction models of concrete shall be 
based on established principles of mechanics 
elaborated in specialist literature. 


8 STRUCTURAL DESIGN 
8.1 General Requirements 
8.1.1 Method of Design 


Limit state design method (as given in IS 456) shall 
be used in the design of RC members. 


8.1.2 Staircase 


Staircases built integrally with the structural system 
of the building and not confined by structural walls, 
shall be included in the three-dimensional structural 
model, and its elements designed as per forces 
induced in them under various load combinations. 
Alternately, a sliding joint may be provided. 


8.1.3 Multiple Tall Buildings connected with a 
Common Podium 


8.1.3.1 This section deals with requirements for the 
following tall buildings with podium: 


a) Tall building with single tower and podium 
(see Fig. 1A); and 

b) Tall building with multiple towers and 
common podium (see Fig. 1B). 


8.1.3.2 Modelling 
8.1.3.2.1 Sensitivity analyses 
a) As part of collapse prevention evaluation, 


two sets of backstay sensitivity analyses 
shall be carried out using upper-bound and 


IS 16700 : 2023 


lower-bound cracked section properties of 
floor diaphragms апа the stiffness 
parameters for those diaphragms and 
perimeter walls of podium and below the 
level of the backstay are given in Table 6. 
These analyses shall be in addition to those 
required to be carried out using other 
cracked section properties described in 7.2. 


Table 6 Stiffness Parameters 
[Clause 8.1.3.2.1] 


Sl Stiffness Values to be Adopted 
No. Parameter ИК 
Оррег- Lower- 
Bound Bound 
@) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Legg 11, 0.5 0.15 


ш “AGIA, 0.5 0.15 


b) Besides that of the floor diaphragms, 
flexibility of following structural elements 
in the structural analysis with appropriate 
modification to their stiffness: 


1) Perimeter walls and their foundation 
supports; and 


2) Foundation supports under the tower 
lateral load resisting system. 


8.1.3.3 Buildings with multiple towers 
8.1.3.3.1 Backstay 


Backstay transfers the forces from lateral load- 
resisting elements in the tower to additional 
structural elements provided within the podium and 
the basement, typically through one or more floor 
diaphragms. Lateral load resistance in the podium 
levels with assured force transfer path through floor 
diaphragms at these levels, helps the tall building to 
resist lateral overturning forces. This component of 
overturning resistance, referred as the backstay 
effect (also called shear reversal), is critical because 
shear force changes direction within the podium 
levels, and the same lateral load-resisting element 
helps resist the changing shear force. 


The following shall be considered: 


a) In estimating backstay effects, two lateral 
load paths shall be considered (see Fig. 2), 
namely: 


1) Direct load path — where overturning 
resistance is provided by the tower core 
elements and foundation directly 
beneath the tower; and 


IS 16700 : 2023 


2) Backstay load path — where 
overturning resistance provided by 
in-plane forces in the backstay elements 
(lower floor diaphragm and perimeter 
walls). 


In some tall buildings, backstay effects may 
not be considered. These include the 
following configurations: 


1) Buildings without below grade levels 
or buildings without significantly 
increased lateral load resisting systems 
at the base; 


2) Buildings that extend below grade, but 
have structural separations between the 


STRUCTURAL 
WALL 


1B MULTIPLE TOWER 


3) 


superstructure and the podium 
portions of the building, and that 


accommodate lateral load 
deformations without transfer of 
lateral forces from superstructure 


portion to podium portion; and 


Buildings with perimeter basement 
walls, where the walls are located 
directly below the lateral load resisting 
elements of the superstructure above. 
Here, there may be a marked change in 
lateral strength and stiffness at this 
level, but lateral forces will not be 
transferred through the floor 
diaphragms. 


STRUCTURAL WALL 


RETAINING WALL 


STRUCTURAL WALL 


RETAINING WALL 


Ес. 1 TALL BUILDINGS WITH PODIUMS, CORE STRUCTURAL WALL AND BELOW-GRADE PERIMETER 


RETAINING WALL 


b) Backstay floor 


с) 


diaphragms shall Бе 
modelled considering their in-plane and 
out-of-plane floor flexibility. Any large 
discontinuity present in the slab shall be 
modelled. 


In direct load path case, vertical stiffness 
shall be considered of the piles, foundation 
and supporting soil. 


d) In backstay load path case, relative stiffness 


е) 


shall be considered of floor diaphragms апа 
perimeter walls, along with vertical in-plane 
rocking stiffness of soil below the walls. 
Also, horizontal pressure imposed by soil on 
retaining walls shall be considered. Axial 
stiffness of elements (representing backstay) 
along load path shall be reduced to account 
for cracking, bond slip, interface slip and 
other such effects. 


In tall buildings with backstay diaphragms, 
collector elements shall be provided 
(see Fig. 2), which are capable of 
transferring forces from the lateral load- 
resisting system of the tower to the 
additional elements providing Ше 
resistance and in turn to those forces of the 
podium. Such collector elements shall be 
provided for transferring lateral forces 
originating in the other portions of the 
structure. 


The backstay diaphragms shall be designed 
in accordance with the following: 


1) They shall be designed for the 
maximum of forces derived from 
sensitivity analysis. 


2) When the lateral force resisting system 
of a tall building has plan irregularity as 
per Table 5 of IS 1893 (Part 1) of 
Type I (torsion irregularity), Type II 
(re-entrant corners) and Type IV (out of 
plane offsets), and vertical irregularity 
as per Table 6 of IS 1893 (Part 1) of 
Type IV (in-plane discontinuity of 
vertical elements resisting lateral 
forces), seismic forces shall Бе 
amplified by a factor of 1.5 in the design 
of: 


i) Connections of diaphragms to 
vertical elements and to collectors; 
and 

ii) Collectors and their connections, 

including connections to vertical 


IS 16700 : 2023 


elements, of the seismic forces 
resisting system. 


g) When the lateral force resisting system 
of a tall building has plan irregularity of 
Type Ш (diaphragm discontinuity) as 
per Table 5 of IS 1893 (Part 1) at the 
backstay diaphragm levels, collector 
elements and their connections to 
vertical elements shall be designed to 
resist seismic forces amplified by an 
over-strength factor of 2.5. 


h) Backstay diaphragm floor shall be at 
least 150 mm thick, with double mesh 
reinforcement not less than 0.25 percent 
of cross section area in each direction 
(including both layers of reinforcement 
steel). 


j) Adequate measures shall be taken to 
prevent shear sliding failure at 
connections of diaphragm to structural 
walls; here, the inclination of the strut 
shall be taken as 45°. Additional 
reinforcements shall be provided to 
resist the shear force at the interface 
between diaphragm апа structural 
walls. 


8.1.3.3.2 Structural walls 


a) Structural walls shown in Fig. 2 can sustain 


b) All peripheral columns 


plastic hinges at the level of the backstay 
diaphragm also. Such walls shall also be 
designed and detailed for plastic hinge 
development at that level. 


of the tower 
(irrespective of whether they are gravity 
columns or not) shall be provided with 
confinement reinforcements throughout the 
storeys adjoining (above and below) the 
backstay diaphragm level, as per the 
requirements of IS 13920. 


8.1.3.3.3 Towers connected by common podium 


When buildings have two or more towers, they shall 
be designed considering the following: 


a) Such buildings shall be modelled as separate 


b 


wm 


towers as well as integral towers. The 
podium shall be designed based on the worst 
of the two results. 


The estimation of natural period (for 
calculation of base shear) shall be based on 
individual building model. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


Force path 2 :backstay 


Force path 1: foundation 
overturning underneath 
tower core wall 


ELEVATION 


= 


TOWER CORE 
WALL 


COLLECTOR 


TOWER CORE WALL 


COLLECTOR STEEL 


MAIN BACKSTAY DIAPHRAGM 
GRADE LEVEL 


SUBTERRANEAN LEVELS 
FOUNDATION 


a) Path 1: Direct load path through tower elements, and 
b) Path 2: Indirect load path through backstay elements 


FIG. 2 LOAD PATHS IN LATERAL OVERTURNING RESISTANCE OF TALL BUILDINGS WITH PODIUMS 


c) In the integral tower modelling: 


1)Directional effects for all worst 
possibilities (that is, tower shaking in the 
same and in the opposite directions) 
should be considered in the design load 
combinations; and 


2) Equivalent static seismic forces can be 
used, provided they are scaled to match 
base overturning moments obtained from 
response spectrum analysis. 


d) Where significant changes occur to mass or 
stiffness between the floors, the floor 
diaphragms of upper and lower levels shall 
be modelled to capture: 


1) Diaphragm forces. Equivalent beam 
approach, finite element approach or 
strut and tie approach may be adopted 
to model the diaphragms. 


2 


МУ 


Potential cracking іп the diaphragm by 
considering an upper bound and a lower 
bound axial stiffness. The lower and 
upper bound values of axial and flexural 
stiffnesses given in Table 6 for 
sensitivity analysis, may be considered 
for the cracked section properties, to 
arrive at the design level earthquake 
demand on the RC diaphragms. 


е) 


5 


h 


wa 


wm 


aD) 


k 


— 


Plan irregularities of Туре I (torsion 
irregularity) and Type Ш (diaphragm 
discontinuity) as per Table 5 of 
IS 1893 (Part 1), shall not be present in the 
first topmost connected floor and the first 
floor of the tower above the connected floor. 


Vertical irregularities of Type I (soft story) 
as per Table 6 of IS 1893 (Part 1) shall not 
be present in the first connected level and the 
level above it. 


Topmost slab between the towers of 
connected podium shall be at least 150 mm 
thick with double mesh reinforcements not 
less than 0.25 percent of cross-sectional area 
in each direction. 


Peripheral columns of the tower shall be 
provided with confinement reinforcements 
as per IS 13920 at the first connected level 
and a level above. 


Structural walls of the tower shall be 
provided with boundary elements as per 
IS 13920 at the uppermost connected level 
and a level above. 


A transfer structure shall not be provided at 
the first connected floor. 


8.2 Ductility 


Not-withstanding any of the clauses of this standard, 
the designer shall take all measures to ensure that the 
building has: 
a) sufficient ductility capacity; 
b)acceptable energy dissipation mechanism; 
and 
с) desirable sequence of initiation of ductile 
behaviour in members. 


8.3 Frame Buildings 


Frame structure for seismic design shall have at least 
two planar frames with minimum 3 bays in the 
direction where the lateral load resistance is 
provided by the moment frames. 


8.4 Moment Frame — Structural Wall Systems 


8.4.1 Frame structural wall systems shall be 
designed as dual systems as per IS 1893 (Part 1). 


8.4.2 In a moment frame-structural wall system, the 
moment frame shall comply with the requirements 
of 8.3, and the structural wall with the requirements 
of 8.5. In addition, the moment frames and 
structural walls shall comply with the requirements 
of IS 13920. 


8.4.3 Special requirements for Seismic Zone ТУ and 
Seismic Zone V 


Special moment frame and shear walls shall not be 
discontinued in lower storeys and supported on less 
stiff and brittle elements. 


8.5 Structural Wall Systems 


8.5.1The thickness of structural wall shall not be less 
than 160 mm or h;/20, whichever is larger. 


8.5.2 Opening in structural walls and the associated 
coupling beams shall meet the following 
requirements: 


a) For walls, when the opening size is less than 
800 mm or one-third length of wall, 
whichever is lesser, in height or length, the 
influence of the opening may not be taken 
into account in the overall stiffness of the 
building. 


b) For beams, the opening size shall be less 
than one-third of the height or length of 
beam and location of the opening shall be 
such that the top and bottom one-third of 
height of the coupling beam is not disturbed. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


c) In either case, all four sides of the opening 
shall be strengthened with additional 
reinforcements, and shall comply with 
requirements of IS 13920. Diameter of 
reinforcement bars иеа in this 
reinforcement shall not be less than 12 mm. 


8.5.3 Gravity columns in structural wall buildings 
shall be designed as per requirements of deformation 
compatibility on non-seismic members given in 
IS 1893 (Part 1). 


8.5.4 Beams carrying predominant vertical load 
shall not be supported on coupling beams. Also, 
columns or structural walls carrying predominant 
vertical load shall not be supported on coupling 
beam. 


8.5.5 In a structural wall system, the structural wall 
shall comply with the requirements of IS 13920. 


8.5.6 Concentrated gravity loads applied on the wall 
above the design flexural section shall be assumed 
to be distributed over a width equal to the bearing 
width, plus a width on each side that increases at a 
slope of 2 vertical to 1 horizontal down to the design 
section, but 


a) not greater than е 
concentrated loads; and 

b) not extending beyond the edges of the wall 
panel. 


spacing of the 


8.5.7 Design of coupling beam shall comply with 
requirements of IS 13920, unless it can be shown 
that loss of stiffness and strength of the coupling 
beams will not impair the vertical load carrying 
ability of the structure, the egress from the structure, 
or the integrity of non-structural components and 
their connections to the structure. 


8.5.8 The nominal design shear stress shall be 
limited to Tomax in structural walls that do not 
sustain tensile axial stress under апу load 
combination, while the nominal design shear stress 
shall be limited to 0.5 Тстах in structural walls 
under tension in any load combination and coupling 
beams in structural walls under factored design 
loads, where Tc,max is as per Table 20 in IS 456. 


8.5.9 The amount and distribution of the minimum 
reinforcement in structural walls shall be as per 
IS 13920. 


8.5.10 At locations where yielding of longitudinal 
reinforcements is likely to occur as a result of lateral 
displacement, development length of longitudinal 
reinforcement shall be 1.25 times the values 
calculated for the bar yielded in tension, that is at a 
stress level of fy. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


8.5.11 The maximum longitudinal reinforcement 
ratio in coupling beam shall be as given in Table 7. 


Table 7 Maximum Longitudinal Reinforcement 
in Coupling Beams 


(Each at top and bottom surface) 


(Clause 8.5.11) 


SI No. Span to Maximum 
Depth Ratio Reinforcement 
Percent 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) ЫР < 1.0 0.6 
ii) 1.0 < L/D < 2.0 1.2 
iii) 2.0 < L/D 1.5 


8.5.12 Requirements for Each Storey Resisting 
more than 35 percent of Design Base Shear 


Structural wall with a height-to-length ratio greater 
than 1.0 may be removed in any storey above, if it 
accounts for less than one-third of the storey shear 
strength. Further, the resulting structural system 
must not have any torsional irregularity as per 
IS 1893 (Part 1). 


8.5.13 Special Requirements for Seismic Zones IV 
and V 


a) Structural walls shall be continuous to the 
base without being transferred in plane or out 
of plane at any level; 


b) The minimum longitudinal reinforcement in 
structural walls shall not be less than 
0.4 percent of gross cross-sectional area; 


c) The minimum transverse reinforcement in 
Structural walls shall not be less than 
0.25 percent of gross cross-sectional area; 


d) The reinforcements shall be distributed in 
two curtains in each direction; 


e) Structural walls shall be fully embedded and 
anchored at their base in adequate basements 
or foundations, so that the wall does not rock. 
In this respect, walls supported by slabs or 
beams are not permitted; and 


f) All openings in structural walls shall 
preferably be aligned vertically. Random 


openings, arranged irregularly, shall not be 
permitted in coupled walls, unless their 
influence is insignificant. 


8.6 Flat Slab — Structural Wall Systems 


8.6.1 In structures with flat slab system as gravity 
load carrying system, structural walls shall carry all 
lateral loads on the building, and column strips of 
the flat slab system shall not be included in the 
lateral load resisting system. All requirements 
related to structures with flat slabs mentioned in 
IS 1893 (Part 1) shall be met with. 


8.7 Framed Tube System, Tube-in-Tube System 
and Multiple Tube System 


8.7.1 The plan shape of a tube-in-tube system shall 
be regular with a length to width ratio not more 
than 2 and, the inner tube shall be centered with the 
outer tube. 


8.7.2 Reentrant corners and sharp changes to tubular 

form should be avoided. 

8.7.3 Column spacing of framed tube shall 
preferably be not more than 5 m. 

8.7.4 In a framed-tube system: 


a) Area of corner column shall be 1 to 2 times 
that of internal column; and 


b) Height to width ratio of the opening shall be 
similar to ratio of storey height to column 
spacing. 


8.7.5 Due consideration shall be given to shear lag 
effects in the design of tube structures. 


8.7.6 In seismic zones Ш, IV and V: 
a) Single span frame shall not be adopted; and 


b) Axial compression ratio of columns shall be 
as per IS 13920. 


8.7.7 Beams carrying predominantly gravity load 
shall be directly supported on columns or on walls 
and not on frame beams. 


8.7.8 The minimum requirements for reinforcement 
bar diameters in beams of moment frames of 
framed-tube structures are given in Table 8. 


Table 8 Reinforcement Requirements in Beams 
(Clause 8.7.8) 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


SI Reinforcement Seismic Zone 


No. Type 0—4 
II Ш, IV 
and V 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Stirrup >8 >10 
diameter 
il) Stirrup < 150 < 100 
spacing 
iii) Main >16 >16 
(longitudinal) 
reinforcements 
9 FOUNDATIONS 


9.1 Load paths and mechanisms shall be ensured 
explicitly for transferring vertical and lateral loads 
between structure and soil system underneath. 


9.2 A factor of safety of 1.5 shall be provided 
against overturning and sliding under, 
(a) unfactored design wind load, gravity load and 
other permanent imposed load; and (b) 2.5 times 
design earthquake load, unfactored gravity load and 
other permanent imposed load. 


9.3 Geotechnical Investigations 


All geotechnical investigations needed to establish 
the safety of the building shall be conducted 
including for liquefaction potential analysis, and 
estimation of soil spring constants and modulus of 
subgrade reaction. 


9.3.1 For geotechnical investigations, IS 1892 shall 
be referred. 


9.4 Depth of Foundation 


The embedded depth of the building shall be at least 
1/15 of height of building for raft foundation and 
1/20 of the height of building for pile and piled raft 
foundation (excluding pile length). But, this 
requirement may be relaxed, 


a) when the foundation rests on hard rock; or 

b) when there is no uplift under any portion of 
the raft in any service load combination, 
and provided the minimum competent 
founding strata requirement is fulfilled. 


9.5 Podium and basement roof slab shall be capable 
of transferring in-plane shear from the tower to the 
foundation. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


9.6 Expansion Joints shall preferably be avoided in 
basements of tall buildings. If provided such joints 
shall be suitably detailed for water tightness. 


9.7 Modelling of Soil 


9.7.1 While modelling raft foundations through 
spring constant or modulus of sub-grade reaction, 
zoned spring constants or zoned modulus of 
sub-grade reaction shall be utilized for design, at 
least for the case of (dead load + live load) condition. 
For design of rafts for buildings taller than 150 m, a 
soil-structure interaction study shall be conducted, 
using actual column loads and column locations to 
obtain the zoned spring constants. 


9.7.2 For piled raft foundations designed with 
settlement reducing piles, soil-structure interaction 
study shall be conducted with actual column loads 
and column locations. This analysis shall be 
conducted at a minimum for combinations of 
following loads: 


a) Dead, 

b) Live, 

c) Wind in X-direction, 

d) Wind in Y-direction, 

e) Seismic in X-direction, and 
f) Seismic in Y-direction. 


where 


X and Y are orthogonal axes in plan. 
9.8 Settlements of Foundations 


9.8.1 Maximum vertical settlement of raft or piled 
raft foundations under gravity loads shall comply 
with requirements of IS 1904 and IS 12070. The 
maximum vertical settlement is limited to 125 mm 
in raft or raft-pile foundation subject to maximum 
angular distortion of raft not exceeding 1/500, and 
50 mm in rock. 


10 RECOMMENDATIONS 
STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS 


FOR NON- 


The non-structural elements (NSEs) of tall buildings 
shall comply with all relevant existing national 
standards and guidelines as laid down by the various 
statutory and non-statutory bodies as well as the 
client/owner of the building. In addition, 
specifications laid down in 10.1, 10.2 and 10.3 shall 
be applicable for: 


a) Planning, design and construction of NSEs 
of new tall buildings; and 

b) Re-planning, assessment and retrofitting of 
NSEs of existing tall buildings. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


The specifications laid down in 10.1, 10.2 and 10.3 
shall govern over similar clauses given in the 
prevalent relevant Indian standards. 


10.1 Design Strategy 


NSEs shall be classified into three types depending 
on their earthquake behaviour, namely: 


a) Acceleration-sensitive NSEs; 

b) Deformation-sensitive NSEs; and 

c) Acceleration-and-deformation-sensitive 
NSEs. 


NSEs in tall buildings shall be protected against the 
effects mentioned above. Major NSEs shall be 
protected based on engineered calculations as per 
clauses given in this section. 


10.2 Design Guidelines — Acceleration-Sensitive 
NSEs 


The design lateral force F, for the design of 
acceleration-sensitive NSEs shall be calculated as: 


хуа 
њ=2(1+2) 2210, 
h/ Ry 
where 


= Seismic zone factor [as defined in 
IS 1893 (Part 1)]; 


importance factor of the NSE (see 


Table 9); 


component response modification factor 


(see Table 10); 


component amplification factor (see 


Table 10); 


W =weight of the NSE; 
= height of point of attachment of the NSE 


h 


Table 9 Proposed Importance Factors 


Sl 
No. 
(1) 
1) 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


above top; and 
overall height of the building. 


(Clause 10.2) 
NSE 


(2) 
Component containing 
hazardous contents 
Life safety component required 
to function after an earthquake 
(for example, fire protection 
sprinklers 
system) 
Storage racks in structures open 
to the public 


All other components 


Table 10 Coefficients ap and Rp of Architectural, Mechanical and Electrical NSEs 
(Clause 10.2) 


SI No. NSE Б E 
(1) (2) G) 4 
i) Architectural Component or Element: 
a) Interior non-structural walls and partitions: 
1) Plain (unreinforced) masonry walls 1.0 1.5 
2) All other walls and partitions 1.0 1.5 
b) Cantilever elements (unbraced or braced to structural frame below its center of 
mass) 
1) Parapets and cantilever interior non-structural walls 2:3 2:5 


2) Chimneys and stacks where laterally supported by structures 2.5 2.5 


c) Cantilever elements (braced to structural frame above its center of mass): 
1) Parapets 1.0 2.5 
2) Chimneys and stacks 1.0 2.5 
3) Exterior non-structural walls 1.0 2.5 
d) Exterior non-structural wall elements and connections: 
1) Wall element 1.0 2.5 
2) Body of wall panel connection 1.0 2.5 
3) Fasteners of the connecting system 1.25 1.0 


Ip 


(3) 


2.5 


2.0 


Table 10 (Continued) 


IS 16700 : 2023 


SI No. NSE р А 
(1) (2) G) 4 
e) Veneer: 
1) High deformability elements and attachments 1.0 2.5 
2) Low deformability and attachments 1.0 1.5 
f) Penthouses (except when framed by and extension of the building 2.5 3.5 
frame) 
g) All ceilings 1.0 2.5 
h) Storage cabinets and laboratory equipment 1.0 2.5 
j) Access floors: 
1) Special access floors 1.0 2.5 
2) All other 1.0 1.5 
k) Appendages and ornamentations 2d ?Л 
m) Signs and billboards 22°. 02.9, 
n) Other rigid components: 
1) High deformability elements and attachments 10 3.5 
2) Limited deformability elements and attachments 10 2.5 
3) Low deformability elements and attachments 10 1.5 
р) Other flexible components: 
1) High deformability elements and attachments 2:35- 3.9 
2) Limited deformability elements and attachments 2Ә;--2Ә 
3) Low deformability elements and attachments 25 15 
ii) Mechanical and Electrical Component/Element: 
a) General mechanical: 
1) Boilers and furnaces 1.0 2.5 
2) Pressure vessels on skirts and free-standing 2:93 23 
3) Stacks 25 25 
4) Cantilevered chimneys 2.5 2.5 
5) Others 10 2.5 
b) Manufacturing and process machinery: 
1) General 10 2.5 
2) Conveyors (non-personnel) 25 2.5 
с) Piping systems: 
1) High deformability elements and attachments 10 2.5 
2) Limited deformability elements and attachments 10 2.5 
3) Low deformability elements and attachments 10 1.5 
d) HVAC system equipment: 
1) Vibration isolated 25 2.5 
2) Non-vibration isolated 10 2.5 
3) Mounted in-line with ductwork 10 2.5 
4) Other 10 2.5 
e) Elevator components 10 2.5 
f) Escalator components 10 2.5 
g) Trussed towers (free-standing or guyed) 23° 2:5, 


IS 16700 : 2023 


Table 10 (Concluded) 


SI No. NSE р А 
(1) (2) (3) WW 

h) General electrical: 
1) Distributed systems (bus ducts, conduit, cable tray) 25 1.0 
2) Equipment 50 1.5 
j) Lighting fixtures 1.0 1.5 


10.3 Design Guidelines — Displacement-Sensitive 
NSEs 


a) Displacement-sensitive NSEs connected to 
buildings at multiple levels of the same 
building or of adjacent buildings, and their 
supports on the structural elements (SE), 
shall be designed to allow the relative 
displacements imposed at the ends by the 
load effects imposed on the NSE. 


b) This imposed relative displacement can 
arise out of strong earthquake shaking, 
thermal conditions in the SE and NSE, creep 
of materials, imposed live loads, etc. In such 
cases, the relative displacement imposed by 
each of these effects shall be cumulated to 
arrive at the design relative displacement, A. 
The effects of earthquake shaking shall be 
estimated using earthquake demand given 
by equation given in 10.2. 


c 


ми 


NSE shall be designed to accommodate 
design relative displacement, A determined 
by linear static or linear equivalent static 
analysis of the building structure subjected 
to load effects mentioned above. 


d) Flexibility or clearance of at least the design 
relative displacement shall be provided: 


1) within the NSE, if both supports on the 
SE offer restraints against relative 
translation between the SE and the 
NSE; or 

at the unrestrained support, if one of the 
supports on the SE offers no restraint 
against relative translation between the 
SE and the NSE, and the other does. 


2 


— 


е) For NSE supported between two levels of 
the same building, or between two different 
buildings or between a building and the 
ground, or between building and another 
system (like ап electric pole or 
communication antenna tower), the design 
relative displacement, A shall be estimated 
as below: 


1) Design horizontal and vertical relative 
displacements Ax and Ay, respectively, 


between two levels of the same building 
(building A), one at height л, and other 
at height л, from base of the building at 
which the NSE is supported 
consecutively, shall be estimated as: 


Ay = 1.2(d2% — 52%) 
Ay = 12(621 — 677) 


where 64% and 54%, and 64% and d4Y, 
are the design horizontal and vertical 
displacements, respectively, at levels 
7л and 72 of the building A (at height 
hz; and һә from the base of the 
building) under the application of the 
load effects mentioned in this standard; 
and 


2 


МУ 


Design horizontal and vertical relative 
displacements Ay andAy, respectively, 
between two levels on two adjoining 
buildings or two adjoining parts of the 
same building, one on the first building 
(Building A) at height л, from its base 
and other on the second building 
(Building В) at height h,2 from its base, 
at which the NSE is supported 
consecutively, shall be estimated as: 


Ay = [dz + [52 
Ay = |E | + | & | 


where 62% and 6 8X, and ӨЛҮ and 52Ү, 
are the design horizontal and vertical 
displacements, respectively, at level 71 
(at height h,1) of building A and at level 
72 (at height Л„) of building B, 
respectively, at which the two ends of 
the NSE are supported. 


11 MONITORING DEFORMATIONS 
BUILDINGS 


IN 


11.1 Earthquake Shaking 


All tall buildings in seismic zone V and tall 
buildings exceeding 150 m in seismic zone HI and 
IV shall be instrumented with tri-axial 
accelerometers to capture translational and twisting 


behavior of buildings during strong earthquake 
shaking. 


11.2 Wind Oscillations 


Buildings over 150 m in height may be instrumented 
with anemometers and accelerometers to measure 
wind speed, acceleration and direction on top of the 
buildings. 


11.3 Foundation Settlement and Pressure 
Measurement 


11.3.1 Permanent settlement markers (at corners and 


IS 16700 : 2023 


center) shall be provided at raft top level and 
referenced to a permanent benchmark. Records of 
settlement shall be maintained till completion of the 
building and preferably even after completion. 


11.3.2 Raft or piled-raft shall be instrumented for 
monitoring long-term pressure imposed by soil on 
the raft, at appropriate number (at least 5) of pressure 
pads below the raft. Alternatively, piles can be 
instrumented with strain gauges at their top to 
measure the load on them. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


IS No. 


IS 456 : 2000 


IS 875 


(Part 1) : 1987 


(Part 2) : 1987 
(Part 3) : 2015 
(Part 4) : 2021 


(Part 5) : 1987 


IS 1892 : 2021 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 


2016 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 
Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for buildings 
and structures: 


Dead loads — Unit weights of 


building material апа stored 


materials (second revision) 


Imposed loads (second revision) 
Wind loads (third revision) 
Snow loads (third revision) 


Special loads and load combinations 
(second revision) 


Subsurface investigation for 
foundations — Code of practice 


(second revision) 


Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures: Part 1 General 


20 


IS No. 


IS 1904 : 2021 


IS 4926 : 2003 


IS 9103 : 1999 


IS 12070 : 1987 


IS 13920 : 2016 


IS 16172 : 2014 


Title 


provisions and buildings (sixth 


revision) 


General requirements for design and 
construction of foundations in soils 
— Code of practice (fourth revision) 


Ready-mixed concrete — Code of 
practice (second revision) 


Concrete admixtures 


Specification (first revision) 


Design and construction of shallow 
foundations on rocks — Code of 
practice 


Ductile design and detailing of 


reinforced concrete structures 


subjected to seismic forces (first 


revision) 
Reinforcement couplers for 
mechanical splices of bars in 


concrete — Specification 


IS 16700 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword and Clause 1.7) 


GUIDELINES FOR BUILDING AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION FOR APPROVAL 
PROCESS FOR DESIGN OF CONCRETE TALL BUILDINGS NOT CONFORMING TO THE 
PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS OF THIS STANDARD 


B-1 GENERAL 


B-1.1 This Annex provides a process for the design 
and approval of concrete tall buildings that are not in 
conformance of the prescriptive requirements of this 
standard, to ensure acceptable performance of such 
buildings under gravity, wind, seismic and other 
pertinent load conditions. 


Every concrete tall building not conforming to the 
prescriptive requirements shall go through the 
process of being reviewed by a structural design 
review (SDR) panel as described in this Annex. 


The process described in this Annex may also be 
used for concrete buildings that are not categorized 
as tall, at the discretion of the Building Authority 
Having Jurisdiction (ВАНЈ) over the project. 


B-1.2 Concrete tall buildings that are not in 
conformance of the prescriptive requirements of 
this standard and are addressed by this Annex 
include: 


a) Buildings with heights exceeding the 
maximum prescribed limits in this 
standard in general and for the 
respective structural system; 


b) Buildings taller than 50 m with heights 
not exceeding the maximum prescribed 
limits in this standard but which have 
structural irregularities as defined in 
IS 1893 (Part 1) or in this standard; 


c) Complex buildings with structural 
features such as coupled towers, 
split-levels, significant gravity 


transfers, and structural systems not 
addressed by this standard; 


d) Base-isolated structures and structures 
with energy dissipating systems; and 


e) Buildings not meeting the requirements 
stipulated in this standard. 


B-1.3 A generic checklist for identifying tall 


21 


buildings not conforming to the prescriptive 
requirements is given in Table 11. This checklist is 
by no means a comprehensive list and may be 
revised as deemed fit by the ВАН] and to suit the 
particulars of a given project. 


B-1.4 Every state/major city shall identify and 
maintain a list of experts qualified to perform the 
role of structural design reviewer and serve on a 
SDR panel. Further, it shall constitute a panel of 
appropriately qualified experts to review tall 
buildings not conforming to the prescriptive 
requirements designated as such by the ВАН] as per 
the process described in this Annex. The 
states/major cities that are unable to constitute such 
panels locally shall establish procedures to empanel 
experts from elsewhere or shall alternatively not 
permit the approval of buildings not conforming to 
the prescriptive requirements. 


Every state/major city, in tandem with national 
building authorities, shall develop and maintain a 
publicly accessible database of submissions to and 
results of SDRs completed. Requirements for 
submission to the database shall be published to 
every applicant for a SDR panel review. 


B-1.5 Тһе — engineer-of-record’s submission 
materials to the SDR panel for shall meet the 
requirements as stipulated in B-3 of this Annex. 


B-1.6 The SDR panel shall issue a decision whether 
to grant permission for the project under review to 
proceed into the Construction Document phase 
upon final review of the materials described in B-3 
at the end of the design development phase. The 
construction document phase of a project shall not 
commence until permission to proceed as described 
has been issued by the SDR panel. 


B-1.7 The technical documents submitted for review 
and results of each SDR shall be put into a 
state/major city tall building database after the 
completion of the process. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


Table 11 Generic Format for Checklist for Code Exceedance of Buildings 
(Clause B-1.3) 
[If any of the queries (i) to (xiv), returns ‘Yes’ as an answer, the building will need to go through SDR panel 


review process. If any of the queries (xv) to (xxix), returns ‘No’ as an answer, the building will need to go through 
SDR panel review process. ] 


SI №. | Reference Description Code Compliance 
to Clause 
Yes No NA 
i) 1.1 Is building height greater than 250 m tall? 
ii) 12 Is the building located less than 10 km (shortest distance) 
А away from any seismogenic fault? 
iii) 1.5 Does the building house more than 20 000 occupants? 
iv) 315 Does the building have any transfer structure in the lateral load 
А resisting system? 
у) 51 Does the building's: structural system exceed the height 
restrictions specified in Table 1? 
vi) 51 Does the building's slenderness ratio exceed the requirements 
` specified in Table 2? 
vii) 5.1 Structural walls are not well distributed 
viii) 5.2 Does the building exceed plan aspect ratio? 
ix) Is the lateral translational stiffness of any storey less than 
5.3 70 percent of the lateral translational stiffness of the storey 
above? 
Is the lateral translational strength of any storey more than that 
x) 5.4 
of the story above? 
xi) 54 Is the inter-storey elastic lateral drift ratio at any level in 
exceedance of the specified limits? 
xii) 5.5.1 Is the first or second natural mode of vibration a torsional 
mode? 
xiii) 5.5.2 Is the fundamental translational lateral natural period in 
exceedance of specified limits? 
xiv) 5.6.1 For a precast floor system, is the structural topping thickness 
ВЕ provided less than that specified requirements? 
xv) 5.6 Are floor openings, if any, in conformance to size and location 
requirements as per 5.6.2? 
xvi) 5.7 Is minimum structural concrete greater or equal to grade M30? 
xvii) 62 Are wind tunnel studies in conformance with specified 
requirements? 
xviii) 63 In seismic zones IV and | V, is the design based оп 
deterministic site specific design spectra? 
xix) 72 Is the design based on cracked section properties, as noted in 
Table 5? 
xx) 7.3 Is the stability coefficient less than or equal to 0.20? 
xxi) 8.1 For project with multiple towers connected with a single 
podium, are the requirements specified in 8.1.3 satisfied? 
xxii) Where moment frame — structural wall system is provided in 
8.4 seismic zone IV and V, are the special moment frames and 
shear walls continuous? 
xxiii) 8.5 Where structural wall system is provided: 
а) Is the minimum wall thickness 160 mm of h;/20, 
whichever larger? 


22 


IS 16700 : 2023 


b) Are all openings per requirements of 8.5.2? 


c) Are the nominal design shear stresses in structural 
walls within the specified limits of 8.5.8? 


d) Is the longitudinal reinforcement ratio in Coupling 
Beam less than the limits specified in Table 8? 


e) For projects in seismic zones VI and V, are the 
requirements of 8.5.14 satisfied? 


Where flat slab-structural wall system is provided, do the 


requirements of 9.4? 


XXiV 
i 8.6 structural walls carry all lateral loads without any contribution 
from the column strips of flat slab system? 
xxv) 8.7 Where framed tube or tube-in-tube or multiple tube system is 
provided: 
a) Is the plan shape of the system regular? 
b) Is length to width ratio less than or equal to 2? 
xxvi) 93 Is the geotechnical investigation completed as per the 
requirements of 9.3.1? 
xxvii) 9.4 Is the minimum depth of foundation provided as per the 


B-2 STRUCTURAL DESIGN REVIEWER AND 
EXPERT REVIEW PANEL 


B-2.1 Structural Design Reviewer 


The structural design reviewer is а structural 
engineer empaneled with the local authority having 
jurisdiction authority responsible for issuing permits 
who is appointed to review the specialized aspects 
of the project and related analysis and design 
procedures. The structural design reviewer is 
independent of and distinct from the expert review 
panel. The structural design reviewer shall perform 
all the tasks mentioned herein of a peer reviewer 
including meeting with the engineer of record and 
with the building authority’s inspection staff as the 
need arises throughout the design process, providing 
the building authority with a report of its findings 
after completion of their work. Review by the 
structural design reviewer is not intended to replace 
quality assurance measures ordinarily exercised by 
the engineer of record in the structural design of a 
building. Responsibility for the structural design 
remains solely with the engineer of record, and the 
burden to demonstrate building performance 
conformance with the requirements of this standard 
resides solely with the engineer of record. The 
responsibility for conducting the structural plan 
check review resides with the building authority, the 
owner/developer and any plan review consultants 
they choose to engage. 


B-2.1.1 Qualifications and Selection of Structural 
Design Reviewer 


The structural design reviewer shall be a recognized 
expert in field of structural engineering and must 
have proven experience in field of tall building 
design. The reviewer’s team shall possess required 
depth in the fields of earthquake engineering, 


23 


performance-based earthquake engineering, non- 
linear response history analysis, building design, 
earthquake ground motion, geotechnical 
engineering, geological engineering, and other areas 
of knowledge and experience relevant to the project. 
The structural design reviewer shall be selected by 
the project owner/developer from a project-specific 
list provided by the building authority. The 
structural design reviewer shall bear no conflict of 
interest with respect to the project and shall not be 
considered part of the design team for the project. 
The responsibility of the structural design reviewer 
is to assist the building authority in ensuring 
compliance of the structural design with the 
performance standards as implicit in this standard. 
While the structural design reviewer contracts with 
the project owner/developer, his responsibility is to 
the building authority. The structural design 
reviewer shall be registered as a licensed structural 
engineer qualified to design buildings of unlimited 
height in at least one city of the country of seismic 
zone III or higher. The structural design reviewer 
shall direct all written communication to the 
building authority. 


B-2.1.2 Administration of Structural Design Review 


The project owner/developer is responsible for the 
payment of fees and other expenses for the 
professional services of the structural design 
reviewer. The structural design reviewer shall 
provide to the building authority a written copy of a 
proposed scope of work of its contract with the 
project owner/developer. The proposed scope of 
services in the contract and any changes proposed to 
be made thereto shall be approved by the building 
authority. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


B-2.1.3 Scope of Structural Design Review Services 


The scope of services for the structural design 
reviewer shall be defined by the building authority 
to provide required expertise to supplement its own 
review. This scope of services may include, but shall 
not be limited to, review of the following: 


a) Basis of design, and 
acceptance criteria; 

b) Mathematical modelling and simulation; 

c) Lateral loads performance goals; 

d) Foundations; 

e) Interpretation of results of analyses; 

f) Member selection and design; 

g) Detail concepts and design; 

h) Construction documents, including 
drawings, calculations and specifications; 

j) Isolators and energy dissipation devices 
including testing requirements and quality 
control procedures; 

k) Design of special foundation or earth 
retaining systems; and 

m) Design of critical non-structural elements. 


methodology 


The structural design reviewer shall be engaged as 
early in the structural design phase as practicable. 
This affords the structural design reviewer an 
opportunity to evaluate fundamental design 
decisions, which could disrupt design development 
if addressed later in the design phase. Early in the 
design process, the engineer of record and the 
structural design reviewer shall jointly establish the 
frequency and timing of review milestones, and the 
degree to which the engineer of record anticipates 
the design will be developed for each milestone. The 
structural design reviewer shall provide written 
comments to the engineer of record, and the 
engineer of record shall prepare written responses 
thereto. The structural design reviewer shall 
maintain a log that summarizes the structural design 
reviewer’s comments, engineer of record responses 
to comments, and resolution of comments. The 
structural design reviewer shall make the log 
available to the engineer of record as requested. The 
structural design reviewer may also issue interim 
reports as appropriate relative to the scope and 
project requirements. At the conclusion of the 
review the structural design reviewer shall submit to 
the building authority a written report that references 
the scope of the review, includes the comment log 
and supporting documents, and indicates the 
professional opinions of the structural design 
reviewer regarding the design’s general 
conformance to the requirements of this standard. 


B-2.1.4 Dispute Resolution 


The engineer of record and the structural design 
reviewer shall attempt to develop a consensus on 


24 


each issue raised by the structural design reviewer. 
If the engineer of record and the structural design 
reviewer are unable to resolve particular comments, 
the structural design reviewer shall report the 
impasse to the building authority. The authority, as 
building official, shall make final decisions 
concerning all permits. The building authority, 
should the need arise, may address differences of 
opinion between the engineer of record and the 
structural design reviewer in whatever method it 
deems appropriate. The building authority also may 
engage additional outside experts to assist in issue 
resolution. 


B-2.2 Structural Design Review (SDR) Panel 


The SDR panel for a project is the group of 
structural engineers and pertinent subject experts 
empaneled by the BAHJ responsible for issuing 
permits to review buildings not conforming to the 
prescriptive requirements and specialized aspects of 
the project and related analysis and design 
procedures. The SDR panel shall perform all the 
tasks mentioned in this Annex in the capacity of a 
peer review group including meeting with the 
engineer-of-record and with the building authority’s 
inspection staff as the need arises throughout the 
design process, providing ће BAHJ with reports of 
its findings at various stages in the design process as 
agreed, and after completion of its work. Review by 
the SDR panel is not intended to replace quality 
assurance measures ordinarily exercised by the 
engineer-of-record in the structural design of a 
building. Responsibility for the structural design 
remains solely with the engineer-of-record, and the 
burden to demonstrate building performance 
conformance with the requirements of this standard, 
including this Annex, resides solely with the 
Engineer-of-Record. The responsibility for 
conducting the structural plan check review resides 
with the BAHJ and any additional plan review 
consultants the owner/developer might choose to 
engage. 


B-2.1.1 Qualifications and Selection of Structural 
Design Review (SDR) Panel Members 


Each structural design reviewer selected to serve on 
a SDR panel shall be a recognized expert in a 
pertinent field of structural engineering and must 
have proven experience related to tall building 
design. The panel members shall possess theoretical 
depth and practical experience in the fields of 
earthquake engineering, performance-based 
earthquake engineering, non-linear response history 
analysis, building design, earthquake ground motion 
development, geotechnical engineering, geological 
engineering, wind engineering, and other areas of 
knowledge and experience as appropriate and 
relevant to the project. 


The recommended make-up of a typical SDR 
panel shall be as follows: 


a) Two practicing structural engineers 
recognized as subject experts in analysis and 
design of tall buildings, who have designed 
at least 10 buildings of height 150 m or 
greater; The engineers shall be licensed to 
practice structural engineering in a state 
with equal or greater seismic, wind and 
geotechnical conditions to those of the 
project under review. 


b) One academic expert in structural 
engineering recognized as subject expert in 
analysis and design of tall buildings 
(including earthquake and/or wind 
engineering as appropriate to the project). 

c) One practicing geotechnical engineer or 
academic recognized as subject expert in 
geotechnical issues of tall buildings and, if 
applicable, ground motions. 


d) One or more specialists in wind design, base 
isolation and damper design, wind design, 
special construction techniques or materials 
as appropriate for the project. 


One of the two structural engineers on the panel 
shall be nominated as the chairperson of the panel 
and shall serve as the point of contact for the panel. 


Each SDR panel member shall be selected by the 
project owner/developer from a project-specific list 
provided by the BAHJ. The structural design review 
panel members shall bear no conflict of interest with 
respect to the project and shall not be considered 
part of the design team for the project. The 
responsibility of the SDR panel is to assist the BAHJ 
in ensuring compliance of the structural design with 
the performance intent implicit in this standard. 
While each structural design review panel member 
contracts with the project owner/developer, his/her 
responsibility is to the BAHJ. The SDR panel shall 
direct all written communication to the BAHJ and 
copy the building owner/developer and engineer-of- 
record. 


All written communication from the SDR panel 
shall bear the names and signatures of the panel 
members. 


B-2.1.2 Administration of Structural Design Review 
(SDR) 


The project owner/developer is responsible for the 
payment of fees and other expenses for the 
professional services of the SDR panel members. 
The SDR panel shall provide the BAHJ with a 
written copy of a proposed scope of work from its 
contract with the project owner/developer. The 


25 


IS 16700 : 2023 


proposed scope of services in the contract and any 
changes proposed to be made thereto shall be 
approved by the BAHJ. 


B-2.1.3 Scope of Structural Design Review 
Panel’s Services 


The scope of services for the SDR panel shall be 
defined by the ВАН] to provide required expertise 
to supplement its own review. This scope of review 
services is described in more detail in B-3, B-4, and 
В-5. 


The SDR panel shall be engaged as early in the 
structural design phase as practicable. This affords 
the SDR panel the opportunity to evaluate 
fundamental design decisions, which could disrupt 
design development if addressed later in the design 
process. Early in the design process, the engineer- 
of-record and the SDR panel shall jointly establish 
the frequency and timing of review milestones, and 
the degree to which the епріпеег-оЁ-гесога 
anticipates the design will be developed for each 
milestone. The milestones and timing shall be 
developed keeping in mind the necessity of 
establishing the viability of the project’s structure 
and the need for the panel to issue a letter of 
permission for the project’s design to proceed into 
the construction document phase as described in 
B-1.6. The SDR panel shall provide written 
comments to the engineer-of-record, and the 
Engineer-of-Record shall prepare written responses 
thereto. The SDR panel shall maintain a log that 
summarizes its comments, engineer-of-record 
responses to comments, and resolution of 
comments. The SDR panel shall make the log 
available to the engineer-of-record as requested. The 
structural design review panel may also issue 
interim reports as appropriate relative to the scope 
and project requirements. At the conclusion of the 
review at the end of the design development phase, 
the SDR panel shall submit to the BAHJ a written 
report that references the scope of the review, 
includes the comment log апі supporting 
documents, and indicates the professional opinions 
of the SDR panel regarding the design’s general 
conformance to the requirements and intent of this 
standard. It shall also indicate the fitness of the 
project to move into the construction document 
phase. 


It is expected that most of the SDR panel’s work will 
be completed by the end of the design development 
phase and the issuance of the panel’s permission for 
the design team to proceed into the construction 
document phase of design. Depending on the 
specifics of the project, selected members of the 
SDR panel may be required to stay involved through 
the construction document and construction phases 
as defined in the panel’s scope-of-work. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


B-2.1.4 Dispute Resolution 


The engineer-of-record and the SDR panel shall 
attempt to develop a consensus on each issue raised 
by the SDR panel. If the engineer-of-record and the 
SDR panel are unable to resolve particular 
comments, the SDR panel shall report the impasse 
to the BAHJ. The authority, as building official, 
shall make final decisions concerning all permits. 
The ВАН], should the need arise, may address 
differences of opinion between the engineer-of- 
record and the SDR panel in whatever method it 
deems appropriate. The BAHJ also may engage 
additional outside experts to assist in issue 
resolution. 


B-3 SUBMITTALS FOR REVIEW ТО SDR 
PANEL 


B-3.1 The engineer-of-record shall submit the 
following documents to the SDR panel during the 
review culminating in final versions satisfactorily 
addressing the SDR panel comments at the end of 
the design development phase in connection with 
obtaining the panel’s permission to proceed into the 
construction document phase: 


a) Design basis report; 

b) Mathematical modeling for static, 
dynamic, linear and nonlinear analyses; 

c) Lateral loads and performance goals; 

d) Ground motion selection for various 
hazard levels and design checks; 

e) Foundations — Selection and design; 

f) Interpretation of results of analyses; 

g) Member selection and design; 

h) Key detail concepts and design; 

j) Construction documents, including 
drawings, calculations, and specifications; 

k) Isolators and energy dissipation devices 
including testing requirements and quality 
control procedures; 

m) Wind engineering and wind-tunnel study 
requirements and results; 

n) Design of special foundation or earth 
retaining systems; and 

p) Design of critical non-structural elements. 


B-3.1.1 Design Basis Report for Tall Buildings not 
Conforming to the Prescriptive Requirements 


The design basis report for the tall buildings not 
conforming to the prescriptive requirements shall 
include all key building data and design parameters 
as well as design methodology and acceptance 
criteria. The report shall specify how and to what 
degree the building exceeds prescribed limits as 
given in B-3.1 and propose effective safety control 
technical measures to ensure the reliability of the 
seismic and wind designs, strengthening measures 
for the entire structure or for weak parts, proposed 


26 


performance objectives and technical measures to 
efficiently ensure strength and the stability of the 
buildings not conforming to the prescriptive 
requirements. 


B-4 GENERAL FOCUS OF 
STRUCTURAL DESIGN REVIEW (SDR) 


THE 


B-4.1 The focus of the SDR panel review process 
is safety of the structure and satisfaction of 
equivalent performance to the intent of this 
prescriptive standard’s requirements particularly 
under lateral load conditions. Items focused on will 
include but not be limited to: 


a) Structural concept and basis for the 
building’s gravity and lateral load design 
including all building data and design 
parameters; 


b) Geotechnical investigation 
foundation design strategy; 


results and 


c) Wind design concept and performance 
objectives; 

d) Seismic design concept and performance 
objectives for the building structure in 
seismic zone Ш and above; 


e) Special measures for weak/critical areas; 


f) Engineering evaluation of the overall 
calculations and calculations of 
weak/critical areas; and 


g) Other project specific conditions such as use 
of base isolation and/or energy dissipation 
devices, or which might affect structural 
safety. 


B-4.2 For buildings with overly complicated 
structural systems, or unusual structural types 
(including roofs) where there is no design basis for 
reference, the overall structural model or models of 
key portions of the structure shall be selected at the 
SDR panel’s discretion for scaled testing to study 
seismic performance. 


B-5 DESIGN APPROACH FOR BUILDINGS 
NOT CONFORMING TO THE 
PRESCRIPTIVE REQUIREMENTS 
UNDERGOING SDR PANELREVIEW 


B-5.1 Design Team Actions for Building 
Structures not Conforming to the Prescriptive 
Requirements 


The following design actions are recommended: 


a) Satisfy all requirements of applicable 
codes for structures not conforming to the 
prescriptive requirements; 

b) Identify key elements 
weakness critical areas; 


and areas of 
design key 


с) 


а 


) 


е) 


В-5.2 


elements and areas of potential weakness 
and critical areas to higher standard (for 
example, with over-strength factors or 
using earthquake forces from higher 
earthquake hazard events in load 
combinations; 

In seismic zone III and above, ensure that 
the key elements and critical areas do not 
fail before other members achieve required 
levels of ductility and structure behaves as 
intended; 

Perform special analytical studies and/or 
tests as appropriate to address unique 
aspects of the structure (for example, 
model special joints with sufficiently 
sophisticated finite element software, 
perform creep and shrinkage column or 
wall differential shortening studies, 
construction sequence modeling, etc); 
Perform wind tunnel studies апа 
incorporate results as required by this 
standard; and 

Perform linear dynamic response spectrum 
or time history analyses for all buildings 
not conforming to the prescriptive 
requirements in seismic zone III and 
higher. 

Models and 


Structural Analytical 


Calculation Results 


a) Determine the validity and reliability of 


b 


c 


МУ 


МУ 


calculation results, pay attention to any 
difference between analysis assumptions 
and actual conditions (including the 
distinctions between rigid diaphragms, 
flexible diaphragms, and multiple rigid 
diaphragms), and determine unfavorable 
situations in the structure based on variation 
of force distribution throughout the structure 
and the location and distribution of 
maximum story drift; 

The total seismic shear and the ratio of 
seismic shear on each floor to the 
cumulative representative gravity load at 
that floor should meet limit in the IS 1893 
and the shall be increased 
appropriately for seismic zones III, ТУ and 
V. If the total seismic shear force at the 
bottom of the structure is too small and 
needs adjustment, then the shear force on all 
the floors above should be adjusted 
appropriately; and 

Linear dynamic response spectrum analysis 
shall be performed for all buildings not 
conforming to the prescriptive requirements 


limit 


27 


IS 16700 : 2023 


in seismic zones Ш and above and 


time-history analyses shall be performed as 
per the requirements of IS 1893 (Part 1) and 
shall capture site specific and higher mode 
effects in determining design level 
earthquake force demands. The restraint 
conditions in the time history analysis shall 
be same as those in response spectrum 
analyses. Dynamic analyses performed shall 
satisfy following requirements: 


1) Linear analysis shall be performed 
for code design level earthquakes; 


2) Nonlinear time history analysis shall 
be performed for design basis 
earthquake (475 year return period- 
DBE) and maximum considered 
earthquake (2 500 year return period- 
MCE) performance evaluation for all 
buildings not conforming to the 
prescriptive requirements exceeding 
height limits for the structure type, 
for base-isolated structures, for 
structures with energy dissipating 
devices, for structures not addressed 
by this standard and for complex 
structures deemed to require it at the 
discretion of the SDR panel; 


3) Duration of ground motion shall be at 
least five (5) times fundamental 
lateral translational natural period of 
building; 

4) Bi-directional combination of pairs of 
ground motions shall be performed; 


5) Cracked section properties shall be 
used in both linear and non-linear 
analyses. In linear response spectrum 
analyses and time-history analyses, 
damping shall be taken as 5 percent. 
In nonlinear analyses, appropriate 
values of inherent damping shall be 


utilized backed by suitable 
references; 
6) Time history analysis shall be 


performed using recorded ground 
motions of past earthquakes 
corresponding to similar magnitudes, 
fault distances and fault mechanisms 
as design event for the subject 
project; 


7) At least three pairs of appropriate 
horizontal ground motions shall be 
used. Spectral matching may be 
adopted at the natural period of the 
building to select ground motions that 


IS 16700 : 2023 


simulate the design event; 


8) The maximum response from at least 
three linear time history analyses 
shall be used for design and 
performance verification at the code 
design hazard level, and 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 5.7.1.2) 


9) Nonlinear time history analyses, where 
required to be performed, shall serve to 
confirm building behavior as described 
in the design basis report. Inter-storey 
drift at any storey shall not exceed three 
percent in the MCE event at any 
location. 


SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONCRETE IN TALL CONCRETE BUILDINGS 


C-1 specifications of using concrete in tall concrete 
buildings are as follows: 


a) Concrete required for tall buildings shall 


b 


с 


а 


ми 


) 


wm 


preferably be sourced from ready-mixed 
concrete facility, either from a site-based 
captive plant or from a nearby commercial 
RMC plant. 


The minimum grade of concrete shall be 
M 30. In view of the twin advantages of 
high-strength concrete in reducing the 
section sizes and percentage of steel 
reinforcement in structural elements, such 
concrete with grades ranging from M 45 to 
M 70 shall be used, wherever essential. Prior 
to starting construction, specified properties 
shall be verified through prior laboratory 
testing. When higher grades are required, 
the designer shall ensure through testing that 
such concretes shall have a minimum 
crushing strain in compression of 0.002 0. 
Grades higher than M 70 (up to M 100) shall 
be used with utmost caution under the 
guidance and supervision of a recognized 
subject expert in concrete technology with 
appropriate values for parameters of 
modulus of elasticity, shrinkage, creep and 
durability. 


Concrete grade shall be specified for 28 days 
compressive strength. However, depending 
upon the application requirements, the 
56 days or 90 days strength may be specified 
and it shall be ensured that the concrete 
develops the requisite strength at specified 
days before predominant loads are imposed 
on it. 


Selection of different ingredients as well as 
mix proportioning is critical. The contractor 
and/or ready-mixed concrete producer shall 
demonstrate by conducting laboratory and 
field trials that the specified properties of 


28 


е 


wm 


concrete at specified ages are achievable 
with the mix proportions and ingredients 
proposed. This needs to be done prior to the 
commencement of the project. 


Considering the durability and sustainability 
advantages, along with OPC, the use of 
quick reacting ultrafine materials such as 
silica fume, ultrafine GGBS or ultrafine fly 
ash conforming to relevant codes shall be 
permitted, provided the permissible 
replacement limits specified in relevant 
codes are not exceeded and the specified 
properties of concrete are obtained at 
specified ages. With a view to compensate 
loss of early strengths while using fly ash 
and GGBS, the use of silica fume, ultra-fine 
GGBS, etc shall be permitted, provided 
these materials conform to the requirements 
of relevant codes for silica fume and GGBS. 
While the chemical admixtures shall 
conform to the requirements of IS 9103, the 
compatibility issues between the cement, 
supplementary cementitious materials 
(SCM) and chemical admixture shall be 
resolved satisfactorily beforehand through 
laboratory trials. 


High strength concretes are quite sensitive 
to changes in properties of ingredients, 
variations in mix proportions and testing 
procedures. Hence, special efforts shall be 
taken to enforce strict quality assurance 
(QA) and quality control (QC) during 
production and testing of such concrete. The 
contractor/RMC producer supplying 
concrete shall provide a detailed QA and QC 
Plan. The owner or its representatives shall 
approve it and devise measures to monitor 
the strict implementation of the QA and QC 
plan. Concrete obtained from the plant 
certified under Ready-Mixed Concrete Plant 
Certification Scheme shall be preferred 
(see IS 4926). 


g) For 


h) 


aD) 


k 


Ya 


high-strength concrete, the static 
modulus of elasticity (MoE) derived from 
calculations based on compressive strength 
may vary significantly from the tested 
values. Hence, the MoE value of the 
specified concrete mix assumed in design 
shall be verified through tests on samples 
taken from concrete produced from batching 
plant for field trials. 


The concrete used in massive гай 
foundations, thick shear walls and columns, 
deep beams, etc., shall be designed to 
appropriately control the evolution of high 
heat of hydration. The design of such 
concrete shall be done in such a manner that 
the peak temperature in concrete shall not 
exceed 70 °C and that the thermal gradient 
within the concrete mass does not exceed 
20 °C. While appropriately designed mock 
trials shall be conducted prior to actual 
concreting to demonstrate that these 
parameters аге satisfied, temperature 
monitoring shall be done їп structural 
elements containing mass concrete by 
installing adequate number of temperature 
sensors to record temperature data on a 
continuous basis to verify that the 
temperature rise and thermal gradients are 
within the specified limits. 


With a view to overcoming the explosive 
spalling tendency of high strength concrete 
subjected to fire, higher fire endurance in 
concrete shall be achieved by providing 
bent ties at 135° back into the concrete core 
and with closer tie spacing (say, at 
0.75 times that required for 
normal-strength concrete under non-ductile 
detailing). To further mitigate the adverse 
effects of fire on high strength concrete, the 
concrete shall contain polypropylene fibres 
needed to minimize spalling shall be about 
0.1 percent to 0.15 percent by volume of 
concrete. 


Concrete used in tall building construction 
shall be durable. For ensuring long-term 
durability, concrete shall satisfy Ше 
following test criteria: 


1) Rapid chloride ion permeability test in: 


i) Foundations — Not 
1 000 Coulamb; and 


тоге ап 


29 


IS 16700 : 2023 


ii) Superstructure — Not more than 
1 500 Coulamb. 


2) Water penetration test in: 


i) Foundations — 15 mm, Max; and 
п) Superstructure — 20 mm, Max. 


m) Effective steps shall be taken in the design 


of high strength concrete having low 
water-cementitious materials ratio 
(for example, less than 0.3) to guard against 
the adverse effects of autogenous 
shrinkage. Measures suggested in specialist 
literature shall be adopted and got approved 
by the engineer-in-charge. The total 
shrinkage stain of concrete shall not exceed 
0.04 percent. 


n) The grades of concrete used in slabs and 


р) 


q 


Ка 


beams shall not be less than 70 percent of 
that used in columns and walls in contact. 
When grade of concrete used in columns is 
different from that used in beams and slabs 
beyond the above limit, concrete used in 
columns and walls shall be used in the 
beam-column joints also; in such a case, 
puddling of concrete shall be done in such a 
way that column concrete is placed in the 
beam/slab at column location for a 
minimum of 0.6 m from face of column. 
This concrete shall be well integrated with 
the beam/slab concrete. 


Batching, mixing, transporting, placing and 
control procedures for high strength 
concrete are essentially similar to 
procedures used for normal-strength 
concretes. Special care is however essential 
to ensure that variations in the properties of 
the ingredients used in concrete are 
minimal and that strict controls measures 
are exercised during the production of high 
strength concrete. 


high strength concrete usually do not exhibit 
much bleeding; hence adequate measures 
shall be taken to protect the green concrete 
so as to avoid plastic shrinkage cracking. 
Curing shall begin immediately after 
finishing and shall continue for a minimum 
period of 10 days. In view of the use of low 
water-cementitious materials ratio in such 
concrete, water curing shall be preferred. 


IS 16700 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Special Structures Sectional Committee, CED 38 


Organization 


VMS Consulants Private Limited, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Assystem Stup Consultants Limited, Mumbai 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineers Association of India, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Food Corporation of India, New Delhi 


Gammon Engineers and Contractors Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


GE Power India Private Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural 


New Delhi 


Engineers, 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 


30 


Representative(s) 
Ms ALPA SHETH (Chairperson) 
DR DEVDAS MENON (Former Chairperson) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR ANIMESH DAS 


SHRI A. K. RAJDEV 
SHRI SAUROBH KUMAR (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR RAJEEV GOEL 
SHRI G. K. SAHU (Alternate) 


DR S. PARIVALLAL 
DR AMAR PRAKASH (Alternate I) 
DR В. ARUN SUNDARAM (Alternate ЇЇ) 
DR Р. HARIKRISHNA (Alternate П) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAJANJI SRIVASTAVA 
DR SUDIP PAUL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SANJAY ARORA 


SHRI MANOJ MITTAL 
SHRI AMAN DEEP GARG (Alternate) 


SHRI N. Р. RAJAMANE 


DR RAVI SINHA 
DR SIDDHARTHA GHOSH 


DR DIPTI RANJAN SAHOO 
DR A. К. JAIN (Alternate) 


DR SUDHIR MISRA 
DR NIHAR RANJAN PATRA (Alternate) 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Society for Structural Engineers, Mumbai 


Invictus Consultancy Services, Mumbai 


Institute for Steel Development & Growth, Kolkata 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


М. М. Dastur Company Private Limited, Kolkata 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


National Institute of Technology Karnataka, 
Surathkal 

National Disaster Management Authority, 
New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Limited, New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, 
Mumbai 


Paharpur Cooling Tower Limited, Kolkata 


Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 


Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, 


Nagpur 


VMS Consulants Private Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity [C-401, Greenfield tower CHS, 
Kadamwadi, Vakola Santacruz (east), Mumbai] 


31 


IS 16700 : 2023 


Representative(s) 
DR A. MEHAR PRASAD 
DR C. У. R. Murty (Alternate I) 
DR ARUL JAYACHANDRAN (Alternate П) 
DR AMLAN К. SENGUPTA (Alternate IID) 


DR PRAMOD KUMAR GUPTA 
DR М. A. IQBAL (Alternate) 


DR MOHUA CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI HEMANT VADALKAR 


SHRI A. S. OUNDHAKAR 


SHRI АВІЛТ GUHA 
SHRI P. L. RAO (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI TATHAGATA DASGUPTA 
SHRI KALYAN GOSWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI J. К. JHA 
SHRI ABHINAV BHARAT JHA (Alternate) 


DR B. В. JAYALEKSHMI 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIR. P. MISHRA 
SHRI NAND KISHOR RAM (Alternate) 


SHRI Н. К. RAMKUMAR 
DR PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI G. PRABHAKAR 


SHRI SANTANU CHATTERJEE 
SHRI RAJAT BHAUMIK (Alternate) 


PROF MAHESH TANDON 
SHRI VINAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR О. R. JAISWAL 
DR RATNESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


ER EJAZ KHAN 


SHRI V. N. HEGGADE 


IS 16700 : 2023 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (36 old Sneh Nagar, Wardha 
Road Nagpur) 


In Personal Capacity (Block 2, Flat 2A, Rani 
Meyyammai Towers, MRC Nagar, RA Puram, 
Chennai) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR L. К. JAIN 


DR V. KALYANARAMAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) (REPRESENTING 
DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Tall Buildings Subcommittee, CED 38:5 


Organization 
VMS Consultants Private Limited, Mumbai 
Buro Happold, Mumbai 
С К Narayana Rao Architects, Chennai 
CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Indian Association for 
New Delhi 


Structural Engineers, 
Institute for Steel Development & Growth, Kolkata 


Larsen & Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


RECI Engineering, Mumbai 


32 


Representative(s) 
Ms ALPA SHETH (Convener) 
SHRI ANIL HIRA 
SHRIC. N. SRINIVASAN 


DR ACHAL MITTAL 
SHRI SIDDHARTH BEHERA (Alternate) 


DR P. HARIKRISHNA 
SHRIG RAMESH BABU (Alternate I) 
DR KEERTHANA М. (Alternate П) 


DR ALOK GOYAL 
DR RAVI SINHA (Alternate) 


DR DIPTI RANJAN SAHOO 
DR С.У. В. MURTY 
DR А. МЕНЕЕ PRASAD (Alternate I) 
DR 5. ARUL JAYACHANDRAN (Alternate П) 
DR S. Т. G. RAGHUKANT (Alternate Ш) 
SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI АВІЛТ GUHA 


SHRIP. L. RAO (Alternate) 


SHRI S.VEERAMANI 
SHRI SOMARAJU (Alternate) 


SHRI С. PRABHAKAR 


SHRI RANJITH CHANDUNNI 


Organization 


RWDI Limited, Thiruvananthpuram 
Skidmore Owings and Merrill, Mumbai 
Steel Authority of Indian Limited, New Delhi 


Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology, 
Surat 


Urban Shaastra Smart Build Private Limited, 
Chennai 


VMS Consultants Private Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity [Zst Floor, 45 Casa Luna 
Building, L. J. Road No. 1, Mahim (W), Mumbai] 


In Personal Capacity (Block 2, Flat 2a, Rani 
Meyyammai Towers, Mrc Nagar, Ra Puram, 
Chennai) 


In Personal Capacity (Plot 9, 102, Novajyot, Telecom 
Nagar, Gachibowli, Hyderabad) 


IS 16700 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


DR SURESH KUMAR 
SHRI NEVILLE MATHIAS 
REPRESENTATIVE 


PROF SHAILESH GANDHI 


SHRI BHARAT ТНЕЈ 


SHRI EJAZ KHAN 


SHRI JAYDEEP W AGH 


DR V. KALYANARAMAN 


PROF V. S. RAJU 


Composition of Drafting Committee under CED 38:5 


Organization 


VMS Consultants Private Limited, Mumbai 


Buro Happold, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, 
Chennai 


RECI Engineering, Mumbai 


33 


Representative(s) 


Ms ALPA SHETH 


SHRI ANIL HIRA 


DRC. V. R. MURTY 


SHRI RANJITH CHANDUNNI 


(Continued from second cover) 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: 


ACI 318-14 Building code requirements for structural concrete, American Concrete Institute 


ASCE 07-16 Minimum design loads for buildings and other structures, American Society of Civil 
Engineers 


ASCE 41-17 Seismic evaluation and retrofit of existing buildings, American Society of Civil Engineers 
EUROCODE 2 EN 1992-1-1 Design of concrete structures, European Committee for Standardization 
FEMA 369-2001-NEHRP Recommended provisions and commentary for seismic regulations for new 
buildings and other structures 


JGJ 3 - 2010 Technical specifications for concrete structures of tall buildings, Ministry of Housing and 
Urban-Rural Development People’s Republic of China 


NZS 3101.1 The design of concrete structures, New Zealand Standards 
PEER/ATC 72-1 Modelling and acceptance criteria for seismic design and analysis of tall buildings 


AB-058 - 2008 San Francisco building code administrative bulletin — Procedures for seismic 
instrumentation of new buildings 


AB - 082 - 2018 San Francisco building code administrative bulletin — Guidelines and procedures for 
structural design review 


AB-083 - 2008 San Francisco building code administrative bulletin — Requirements and guidelines 
for the seismic design of new tall buildings using non-prescriptive seismic design procedures 


Technical notes on expert panel review of seismic fortification of code-exceeding high-rise buildings 
[Version 2015.05] (Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Department, People’s Republic of China) 


An alternative procedure for seismic analysis and design of tall buildings located in the Los Angeles 
region (2020 Edition); Los Angeles Tall Building Structural Design Council 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 38 (20094). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


