Waa HTA IS 16524 : 2017 
Indian Standard Se e ae 


Jai N ota tat wont faria 
aen — tifa afear 


Physical Security System in 
Banks/Financial Institutions — 
Code of Practice 


ICS 03.060, 13.310 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF Fo, 9 FGM WAL At, ae fereit-110002 
aie cet >% MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2017 Price Group 5 


Security Equipments Sectional Committee, MED 24 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Security 
Equipments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


The physical security system of a bank is a function of various factors like threat perception, location, construction, 
installed security measures, quality of security equipment and devices. This standard attempts to take a 
comprehensive view of the related factors and specify minimum measures to ensure desirable functioning of the 
system. 


This standard is intended to be a guideline and the provisions herein should be subservient to all applicable rules 
and regulations and policies, unless otherwise mandated by a competent regulatory authority. 


The following are the basic features of the standard: 


a) This standard is intended to function as a general guideline to enhance the security measures in banks 
engaged in retail banking activities. It is intended to complement the requirements specified by the 
regulatory authorities. 

b) The standard takes a comprehensive view of the various factors that contribute to the level of physical 
security system of a bank/financial institution and attempts to describe the minimum security arrangements 
required to strengthen such factors. 

c) It outlines the basic measures that are required at an organizational level including the need for a Security 
Manual that should outline the security policies of the organization. 

d) At the branch level, the standard outlines the factors to be considered for location of a branch and 
constructional requirements of the building and basic internal layout of the branch. 

e) Itrecommends measures to be taken during non-banking hours like opening and closing of a branch and 
working beyond the normal office timings. 

f) The standard recommends clear guidelines for procurement of security equipment under various practical 
situations. The guidelines are designed to ensure that the required quality of security equipment is assured 
in all conditions. 

g) The requirements of security audits and records to be maintained have also been outlined. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, should be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16524 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


PHYSICAL SECURITY SYSTEM IN BANKS/FINANCIAL 
INSTITUTIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard recommends practices to be followed 
for ensuring physical security in banks and financial 
institutions. 


1.2 This standard does not cover internet banking or 
information security. 


2 OBJECTIVE 


2.1 The principal objective of this code of practice is 
to prescribe minimum security measures to be instituted 
by all banks and financial institutions for the purpose 
of, 


a) creating and maintaining a secured 
environment to facilitate safe banking 
transactions, 

b) promoting security awareness among 
management and staff in all banks and 
financial institutions, 

c) minimize crimes and reduce losses, 

d) assisting investigating agencies, and 

e) building customer confidence and 

organisational image. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions should apply: 


a) Branch — Any operating unit of a Bank or 
Financial Institution dealing with receipt and 
disbursal of cash and /or storage of valuables 
on behalf of its customers, 

b) Branch heads — The senior most official of 
the branch, under whose administrative 
authority the Branch functions, 

c) Organization — Any organisation classified 
as a bank or a financial institution as per the 
law of the land, 

d) Security devices — Any device employed to 
enhance the security measures through 
warning signals or generating evidence, 

e) Security equipment— Any product employed 
to store and protect currency and other 
valuables in the custody of a branch, 

f) Security manual — A documented physical 
security policy and procedures manual as 
described in 4.1, and 


g) Top management — The management of the 
organisation, or any person or group of 
persons representing the management to 
execute a specific task. 


4 ORGANISATIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES 
4.1 Security Manual 


4.1.1 Every organisation should have a documented 
security policy and procedure manual which should be 
approved at the highest level of the organisation and 
implemented at all appropriate levels of the 
organisation. 


4.1.2 The security manual should provide the basis of 
a security programme, appropriate to the scale of 
operation of the organisation. It should be the 
responsibility of the top management of the organisation 
to ensure successful implementation of the security 
programme. 


4.1.3 The security manual should be formulated on 
basis of the Plan-Do-Check-Act principle and should, 
to the extent possible, follow the structure of 
management system standards. 


4.2 Security Programme 


4.2.1 The security programme should address, at least, 
the following: 


a) procedure for risk categorisation of branches; 

b) procedure for installing security programme, 
devices and equipment appropriate to the risk 
categorisation levels at various functional 
units of the organisation; 

c) procedure for deployment of security 
personnel in accordance to its risk 
categorisation; 

d) the responsibilities and authorities of the 
personnel involved in implementing the 
security programme at appropriate levels of 
the organisation; 

e) procedure for providing initial and periodic 
training to security staff and other employees 
about the organisation’s security policy, 
general security measures and specific 
responsibilities appropriate to his/her level; 

f) procedures for safekeeping of all currency, 
negotiable instruments, and other valuable 
items, whether owned by the organisation or 
by its customers; 


IS 16524 : 2017 


g) procedures for ensuring security of strong 
rooms/vaults; 

h) special security measures to be taken during 
off-days or holidays 

j) procedures for preserving evidence and 
assisting in identification of persons 
committing acts of robbery or burglary; 

k) procedures for comprehensive periodic 
auditing of all aspects of security equipment 
installed at the organisation; and 

m) procedures for maintenance of appropriate 
records at various functional levels on 
implementation, administration and 
effectiveness of the security programme. 


4.3 Designation of Responsible Officer 


4.3.1 Every organisation should have a security 
department headed by a chief security officer with 
defined responsibilities and authorities. 


4.3.2 Depending upon the organisational structure, 
zonal and/or regional security officers may also be 
appointed with appropriate authorities to implement the 
security policy of the organisation. 


4.3.3 It should be the primary responsibility of the 
branch head to ensure appropriate measures in the 
branch under his authority, in accordance to the security 
programme. The nomination of an alternate official to 
look after the day to day security activities of the branch 
may also be considered wherever necessary. 


5 LOCATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE 
5.1 Location 


The following measures should be ensured while 
deciding about the location of a branch and the 
operational infrastructure therein: 


a) Branch should not be located in an isolated 
and/or vulnerable place. 

b) Branch should not be located in a crime prone 
area. The security officer of the bank and the 
local police should be consulted to assess the 
crime proneness of a locality and their views 
should be taken in to account. 


c) Branch should be located as near to the police 
station as possible. 

d) During site selection, the possibility of any 
easements within or adjacent to the facility 
that could affect the security of personnel or 
assets should be examined. 

e) Consideration should be given to potential and 
perceived threats. 


f) Susceptibility of the area to natural calamities 
should also be considered. 


5.2 Constructional Requirements 
5.2.1 General 


a) The design, layout and site location of 
buildings should facilitate natural surveillance 
by police and the public from the surrounding 
area (for example, from nearby roadways or 
other buildings) unless this approach is 
deemed undesirable by organisational 
safeguarding strategies. 

b) Structurally strong building should be selected 
for locating branches. Old dilapidated 
buildings which may infringe on security 
requirements should not be used, even 
temporarily. 

c) It should be ensured that windows do not 
directly open into areas having direct access 
to the strong rooms, storage facilities or 
sections dealing with liquid assets. 

d) Where windows are unavoidable, they shall 
be fitted with strong grills embedded into the 
walls with strong steel rods, angles or flat bars. 
The grill should be so designed as to deny 
access by human hand through it. 

e) Irrespective of the location or design of the 
branches, the strong rooms should be built in 
accordance to the relevant Indian Standard and 
in strict conformance to the guidelines issued 
by RBI. 

f) RCC construction for strong rooms should be 
as per relevant IS Specifications. 


g) In cases where strong rooms as per 
specifications cannot be made available, 
TRTL safes should be made available. 

h) Future operational requirements should be 
considered while constructing the branch. 


5.2.2 Entry/Exit 


a) Inaddition to the wooden doors, the entrance 
at the front should have rolling shutters and 
collapsible grills. 

b) Rolling shutter should have floor embedded 
central lock with slots made of steel. There 
should be no gap between the lock lever and 
the hook of the door. 


c) Hanging locks should not be used on the 
rolling shutter in place of the latch embedded 
locks. 


6 SECURITY MEASURES 
6.1 Risk Categorization 


6.1.1 Every branch should be assessed for its exposure 
to risk and categorized appropriately. 


6.1.2 The security measures installed in a branch should 
be appropriate to its risk categorization and in 
accordance to guidelines made available by the 
appropriate authorities. 


6.2 Primary In-built Measures 


6.2.1 All branches should invariably ensure the 
following primary security arrangements: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) 


There should be only one entrance to a branch. 
The entrance should be situated at a place 
easily noticeable by a substantial part of the 
employees working in the branch. 


Ifthere are more than one entrance to a branch, 
only one entrance should be used and all other 
entrances should be securely closed from 
inside. It should not be possible to gain access 
through these entrances without raising an 
alarm or drawing attention of persons present 
in the working area. 
The doors and grills should have separate 
locking devices. 
Strong and good quality locks with minimum 
8 levers should be used. Locks with long arms 
should not be used as these are more amenable 
to break-in attempts. 
Perimeter lighting should provide sufficient 
illumination in and around facilities to allow 
the detection and observation of people 
approaching the facility, discourage 
opportunistic criminal activity, address any 
other security threats that may apply and 
support surveillance features. 

Emergency power must be provided in the 

branch and particularly for the security 

devices. 

The strong room facilities should include the 

following: 

1) Fire alarm security system; 

2) Intrusion detection security systems; 

3) Twenty four hour monitored surveillance 
cameras (CCTVs); with recording backup 
arrangements 

4) Secured locks and keys to avoid 
duplication; 

5) Secured safes and storage equipments; 
and 

6) Adequate access control system. 


6.3 Essential Measures 


6.3.1 


Every branch should have the following 


security arrangements: 


a) 


Entrance door should be fitted with a grill gate, 
shutter with central lock. 


IS 16524 : 2017 


b) CCTV surveillance. 
c) Appropriate types of fire extinguishers at 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


k) 


m 


har] 


n) 


important places, including server/UPS 
rooms. 

Integrated intruder alarm system with sensors 
and auto-dialler connected to the emergency 
responders. 


UPS system should have a separate circuit, 
independent of the usual electrical circuit of 
the branch. 

Emergency lights and inverters or generator 
sets should be installed to ensure that lights 
come on automatically in case of power 
failure. 

Every branch should be provided with a B 
Class strong room. Where, a B Class strong 
room cannot be provided for unavoidable 
reasons, the safe room should be suitably 
provided with grills. 

Armed Guards should be posted in accordance 
to the risk categorization of the branch. 
Important phone numbers like police, fire, 
hospital, bank officials, etc, should be 
displayed at prominent places. 

Adequate insurance cover for cash and 
valuables is to be obtained for an amount more 
than the combined value of the market value 
of the gold kept at the branch and cash, 
generally kept at the branch. 

Procedures for opening, closing and accessing 
the bank after working hours should be rigidly 
followed. 

Accumulation or dumping of furniture, files 
or any other objects should not be permitted 
to happen in a manner so as to constitute a 
potential fire hazard and/or provide cover to 
intruders. 


6.4 Desirable Additional Measures 


In addition to the measures described in 6.1 to 6.3, it is 
desirable that every branch should also take the 
following additional measures: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Security guards of nearby shopping, 
residential complexes, etc, may be enlisted to 
keep an eye on the branch at night and on 
holidays. 

The local police authorities may be requested 
to include the branch under the police beat 
system. 

Adequate perimeter lighting may be provided 
at the front rear and sides preferably on all 
exposed sides of the branch premises. 


During the weekends and holidays, the branch 


IS 16524 : 2017 


head or any other designated staff should visit 
the branch premises at staggered timings to 
ensure the security of the premises. 


7 OPENING, CLOSING AND ACCESING THE 
BRANCH AFTER WORKING HOURS 


The security manual of an organization shall document 
the procedures to be followed for opening and closing 
a branch as well as for accessing the branch after normal 
working hours, both by employees as well as customers. 


7.1 Opening the Branch 


7.1.1 Every branch should nominate an officer to open 
the branch for starting the services. The documented 
procedure should be strictly followed by the branch. 


The nominated officer should, in addition to any other 
responsibility outlined in the organisation’s procedures, 
ensure that the following actions are taken: 


a) Examine the premises from the outside to 
check whether any attempt to break in to the 
branch has been made. 


b) After opening the main entrance, the security 
alarm should be switched on in the day mode. 

c) While cleaning of the premises is carried out 
before the working hours under the 
supervision of the nominated officer/ 
employee, it should be ensured that entry into 
the branch is not allowed to customers. 

d) The cleaning of the branch should be done 
only by authorised personnel. In cases where 
outside agencies have been contracted to do 
the housekeeping functions, the concerned 
person(s) should be issued with proper identity 
document by the branch head. 

e) Cleaning should be done under the supervision 
of nominated employees/branch head. 

f) If any staff member is allowed entry during 
this time, it should be ensured that he is 
identified properly. The collapsible gate 
should be closed and locked immediately after 
he enters. 


7.2 Closing the Branch 


a) Ensure that the Security alarm and CCTV are 
switched on and functional. 


b) Check that all doors, windows, strong rooms, 
storages are properly closed/ locked/ bolted 
in strict accordance to the procedures outlined 
in the security manual. 


c) Each branch should have a check-list of 
security points to be verified. The check-points 
should be verified and authenticated by a 
responsible officer nominated by the branch 
head. 


d) Check that all electrical connections, except 
the UPS, are switched off. 

e) Check that all table drawers and almirahs are 
locked. 

f) Operational guidelines on dual control of keys 
should be strictly adhered to. 


7.3 Access after Working Hours 


Access to the branch premises after working hours 
should be avoided. In situations where it becomes 
unavoidable, all following precautions should be taken 
to ensure the security of the branch: 


a) After the banking hours, all entrances will be 
closed and secured from inside. 

b) Ifany customer is in the banking hall after the 
close of the business hours, they should be 
attended to as expeditiously as possible. 

c) Entry of outsiders after working hours should 
be allowed only after obtaining permission 
from the branch head. Under no 
circumstances, the authority should be 
delegated to the guard, watchman, or attender. 

d) Whenever a customer is allowed to enter the 
premises before or after business hours, care 
should be taken to identify the person seeking 
entry in to the premises. The collapsible gate 
should be closed and locked immediately after 
he enters. Similarly, the collapsible gate 
should be closed and locked immediately after 
he leaves the premises. 

e) Incase the branch is functioning after normal 
working hours, the branch head should ensure 
that at least two or more staff members are 
present. 


f) Strangers or customers whose identities are 
not properly known should not be entertained 
to stay back during lunch hours or after 
working hours. 


8 POST-INCIDENT ACTIONS 


In the event of an attempted or successful burglary or 
robbery attempt, every branch should take the following 
actions: 


a) Immediately report to the law enforcement 
agencies. 

b) Report to the authorities as specified in the 
security manual. 

c) Under these circumstances, the branch 
entrance should not be opened until directions 
of the branch head/regional head/security 
officer are received. 

d) Care must be taken not to touch anything and 
not to allow anybody into the branch. 


e) In case of BIS certified product then the 
communication should be sent to the nearest 
BIS office requesting them to carry out the 
necessary investigation for the conformity 
requirement of the standard and take suitable 
action. 

f) Inthe event of any recorded evidence that the 
equipment was actually burgled in less than 
its certified resistance time, an online 
complaint should be registered with BIS 
giving necessary details of the burgled 
equipment. This should be followed up with 
a written communication to the appropriate 
authority in BIS, with a request to conduct a 
suitable enquiry about the particular 
consignment/control unit of which the burgled 
equipment was a part. 

NOTE — Possible course of action in case of non-BIS certified 
equipment needs to be explored because similar investigative 


actions and consequent corrective measures may not at all be 
possible in such cases. 


9 SECURITY EQUIPMENT 
9.1 Procurement (General) 


9.1.1 Security equipment plays a vital role in enhancing 
security of banking operations, both during banking 
and non-banking hours. It is therefore imperative that 
the security equipment installed in branches must be 
procured and installed according to strict time tested 
norms that accrue the maximum benefits and safeguard 
to the organization. 


9.1.2 Only BIS certified security equipment should be 
procured for all products where an IS Specification 
exists. 


9.2 Procurement of BIS Certified Security 
Equipment 


9.2.1 At the time of procurement, the procuring 
authority should confirm whether the manufacturer 
holds a valid BIS certification marks licence with 
respect to the product, type, variety intended to be 
supplied. 


9.2.2 The purchasing authority should familiarise itself 
with the benefits of BIS Certification and the ways and 
means to avail of such benefits. 


9.2.3 The purchasing department should familiarise 
itself with the general requirements of the BIS 
certification scheme for operation of a licence and, in 
case of any observed deviation by the supplier, should 
immediately bring it to the notice of the nearest BIS 
office and seek their guidance. 


9.2.4 A list of Indian Standard Specifications related 
to Security Equipment is given at Annex A. 


IS 16524 : 2017 


9.3 Procurement of Uncertified Security Equipment 


9.3.1 In cases where it may be essential to procure a 
type of product that may not be covered under the 
relevant Indian Standard, proper justifications may be 
recorded for using such a product. 


9.3.2 Before finalising the procurement of such a 
product, the organisation should appoint a panel of 
experts to prepare the product specifications and test 
methods in line with the relevant Indian Standard for 
the product. The members of the Panel should be well 
versed with the engineering aspects of the product. 


9.3.3 While formulating the specification, the panel 
should ensure that dilution of quality parameters vis- 
a-vis the existing Indian standard is not permitted. 


9.3.4 No product should be procured unless the 
manufacturer has demonstrated complete conformance 
to the specification prepared by the panel. 


9.4 In absence of Specification 


9.4.1 Where no Indian Standard exists for a product, 
possibility of urgently formulating an Indian standard 
or adopting other international standard may be 
explored. Failing that, the procedure outlined at 9.3 may 
be followed. 


9.5 Procurement of Equipment Certified According 
to Specifications other than Indian Standard 
Specifications 


9.5.1 Where the necessity is felt to procure products 
conforming to some other standards bodies like EN or 
UL, the necessity of such action should be recorded. 


9.5.2 While taking the decision it should be kept in 
mind that quality parameters of other standards may 
not necessarily suit the conditions arising in India. 
Accordingly, the suitability of product conforming to 
other standard specification over the Indian standard 
specification should be examined and recorded. 


9.5.3 While procuring such a product, it should be 
ensured that, 


a) the quality is certified by an agency appointed 
or approved for the purpose by the concerned 
standards formulating body; and 

b) the certifying agency accepts responsibility of 
quality. 


10 PRE-SUPPLY/POST-SUPPLY QUALITY 
CHECK 


10.1 A proper and effective conformity assessment of 
physical security equipment is not possible without 
systematic, destructive testing. In case of BIS certified 
products, this is taken care of by the third party quality 
assessment provided by BIS. 


IS 16524 : 2017 


10.2 Considering the nature of the product and its usage, 
any corrective action becomes extremely difficult after 
installation of the equipment. Therefore, wherever, in 
the opinion of the organisation, extra-precaution is 
deemed necessary, it would be desirable to work out a 
methodology to institute checks during or immediately 
after supply. 


10.3 The most effective way to install such a check 
would be through the BIS certification mechanism. It 
would be advisable to arrive at a sampling and 
assessment method, at the organisational level, in 
consultation with BIS. 


10.4 For non-BIS certified products, a suitable scheme 
may be installed where a pre-supply inspection may be 
done by an agency appointed by the Bank. 


10.5 A well thought-out pre or post-supply quality check 
mechanism, will provide additional confidence to all 
concerned as well as act as a deterrent to production of 
sub-standard material. 


11 MAINTENANCE OF 
EQUIPMENT 


SECURITY 


11.1 Physical security equipment should not normally 
require periodic maintenance. However, as and when 
maintenance or repair are called for the following 
precautions should be observed: 


a) All repair and maintenance activities should 
be undertaken strictly as per the terms of the 
contract between the bank and the supplier of 
the equipment. 

b) Before the supplier’s representative is allowed 
access to the equipment in need of repair or 
maintenance, the equipment should be 
emptied and the contents should be stored in 
an alternate facility. The acts of emptying and 
storing should be done as per the policy of 
the concerned bank. 

c) After the repair /maintenance is completed, it 
should be verified that the equipment meets 
all its original quality and supply 
requirements. No alteration in the locking 
system or construction of the equipment 
should be permitted. Where a replacement of 
lock is called for, an identical lock only should 
be used. 

d) Wherever the equipment is fitted with a 
combination lock, immediately after the 
maintenance activity, the combination should 
be changed. 


e) All such activities should be recorded in detail. 


12 SECURITY DEVICES 


12.1 Security devices should be installed as specified 
in the security manual of the organization. 


12.2 Each device should be tested periodically to ensure 
its readiness in the event of necessity. 


12.3 While procuring any security device utility features 
should always be given preference over other features 
which may not contribute significantly to enhancing 
security. 


12.4 While procuring security devices, enquiries should 
be made with other branches and/or other organisations 
about the on-spot performance history of such devices. 
Brands or devices having a history of frequent break- 
downs or requiring frequent maintenance or poor after- 
sales service record should not be considered for 
procurement. 


13 TRAINING 


13.1 Every organisation should provide appropriate 
training to its personnel on security measures. The 
training should be appropriate to the responsibilities 
and authorities of the persons concerned. 


13.2 In the event of a trained person assuming different 
or higher responsibilities, it should be the responsibility 
of the top management to provide him/her fresh training 
appropriate to the new responsibility. This may not be 
necessary where the concerned person has already 
received the required training within a reasonable 
period immediately preceding the change. 


13.3 Security measures should be a part of the induction 
training curricula for all classes of employees. 


13.4 Specific guidelines containing Do’s and Don’t s 
in the event of any security related incident should be 
made available to employees on training. 


13.5 Mock exercises should be conducted to ensure 
that employees are familiar with the actions required 
to be taken in emergencies. The frequency of such 
exercise should be decided in accordance to the security 
policy of the organisation. 


13.6 Security training should at least cover the 
following: 


a) Importance of security measures; 


b) Features and structure of the security 
programme installed in the organisation; 


c) Knowledge about functioning of the security 
systems and devices; 

d) Actions to be taken in the event of robbery or 
burglary; 

e) Criteria of a good witness; 

f) Actions to be taken to preserve evidence; 

g) Dealing with threatening messages and 
kidnappings; and 

h) Measures to be taken in the event of a fire 
outbreak. 


14 SECURITY AUDIT 


14.1 At the time of opening or relocating a branch, a 
preliminary security audit and risk categorisation should 
invariably be done and actions to be taken accordingly. 


14.2 Subsequently, every operating branch should be 
subjected to a multi-tier security audit in the following 


manner: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


An internal security audit of every branch 
should be conducted periodically by a senior 
employee of the branch. The purpose of this 
audit should be to verify whether all security 
norms, as applicable to the branch, are being 
observed. In the event of detection of a 
deviation, the matter should be immediately 
brought to the notice of the branch head and 
appropriate actions should be taken. The 
matter should be appropriately recorded. 

An external security audit should be 
conducted periodically by a security officer. 
The purpose of this audit should be to examine 
the security status of the branch vis-à-vis the 
organisational policy and security 
categorisation of the branch. The report of the 
internal audit should be considered and 
verified while conducting this audit. 

The organization should provide check-list 
and report proforma for both the audits and 
the audits should be strictly conducted and 
reported accordingly. 

At least once every three years, every branch 
should be audited for re-assessment of its risk 


IS 16524 : 2017 


categorisation. 


e) In addition, the organisation may institute 
audits and/or conduct re-assessment of risk 
categorisation as and when deemed necessary. 


f) Periodicity of the audits should be as 
determined by the top management. 


15 RECORDS 


15.1 Every organization should maintain relevant 
records with respect to the following, in accordance to 
the documentation policy of the organization: 


a) Incidences of robbery or burglary; 

b) Type of security devices the bank or financial 
institution has installed; 

c) Frequency of maintenance of its security 
devices; 


d) Training of its management and staff on 
security issues; 


e) Security classification of branches; 


f) Branch-wise records of security training of the 
staff employed; and 


g) Reports of security audits and consequent 
action taken report. 


15.2 The records maintained should adequately address 
the following: 


a) Bank and financial institution internal 
management information system; 

b) Requirements of regulatory authorities; and 

c) Audit requirements. 


IS 16524 : 2017 


IS No. 
550 


(Part 1) : 2003 

(Part 2) : 2005 

(Part 3) : 2005 
1046 : 1992 
5244 : 1991 
7152 : 1992 
11188 

(Part 1) : 1991 

(Part 2) : 1991 


(Part 3) : 1991 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 9.2.4) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 
Safes: 


Specification (fourth revision) 

Tests for burglary resistance (fourth 
revision) 

Tests for fire resistance (fourth 
revision) 

Cash boxes — Specifications (third 
revision) 

Safe deposit locker cabinets — 
Specification (second revision) 
Book room doors — Specifications 
(first revision) 

Vault (strong room) doors: 
Specification (first revision) 

Part 2 Test for burglary resistance 
(first revision) 

Tests for fire resistance (first revision) 


IS No. 
12187 : 1987 


14203 


14387 : 


14505 : 


14512: 


14561 


14562: 


15369 : 


: 1999 


2005 


1998 


1998 


: 2007 


1998 


2003 


oo Title 
Specification for coffers 


Fire resisting record protection 
cabinet — Specification (first 
revision) 

Vaults — Air ventilators — Speci- 
fications (first revision) 

Fire resisting magnetic media 
protection cabinets — Specification 
Safe cum safe deposit lockers — 
Specification 

Fire resisting (insulating) filing 
cabinets — Specification (first 
revision) 

Fire resisting computer media 
protection cabinets — Specification 
Code of practice for construction of 
vault (strong room) 


IS 16524 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Security Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 24 


Organization 
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai 


ARAI, Pune 


Bank of India, Mumbai 


Central Bank of India, Mumbai 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
Emtac Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 
Godrej & Boyce Mfg. Co. Ltd, Mumbai 


Guardwell Industries Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Gunnebo India Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Overseas Bank, Chennai 

Indian Banks Association, Mumbai 

Insurance Regulatory & Development, Hyderabad 
Methodex Systems Ltd, New Delhi 


Ministry of Civil Supplies & Disposal, New Delhi 


Punjab National Bank, New Delhi 


Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai 


Sherni Enterprises, Pune 


Shriram Institute For Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Consultancy Services, New Delhi 


Representative (s) 
SHRI S. VENKATACHALAM (Chairman) 


SHRI A.V MANNIKAR 
Suri M. SREENIVASULU (Alternate) 


CAPTAIN L.K SINGH 
CAPTAIN VIRINDER Minuas (Alternate) 


CAPTAIN S KANNAN 
Lr-Cpr Vinop Sunotra (Alternate) 


Dr Suvir SINGHDR Rasiv KUMAR 
SHRI P. SENGUPTA 


SHRI PRAsHANT H. CHOUTHKANTHIWAR 
Sarı MEHERNOSH B. PiTHAWALA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANTHONY L TuscANo 
Suri Jonn DMELLO (Alternate) 


SHRI S. GANGOPADHYAY 
Suri AtisH Kumar SeN (Alternate) 


Capt M. P. SIVAN 
SHRI V. RAMCHANDRAN 
Suri T. S. NAIK 


Suri S. K. SINGH 
SHRI SAMEER SAXENA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR 
Suri SHLOK Buarpwal (Alternate) 


CAPTAIN S. P. SINGH 
CAPTAIN DEEPAK SAGAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. NANDAN 
Suet O. P. PirLAaNI (Alternate) 


SHRI FAROKH KUTAR 
Surimati ARTI Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr TARSAME SINGH SIEN 
Dr R.K. Rama (Alternate) 


SHRI AJIT MENON 
Sarı R.K. RacHavan (Alternate) 


The Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion Council, Mumbai Suri Konar Dosni 


Union Bank of India, Mumbai 


Voice, New Delhi 


Suri VuAY Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri R. RAJARAM 
Sarı Manos M K Matt (Alternate) 


Suri M.A.U. KHAN 


In personal capacity (Plot No. 41, Block No. 5, Mehta Cottage, SHRI A.G. NARAVANE 
Dr Raut Road, Shivaji Park, Dadar, Mumbai 400 028) 


BIS Directorate General 


Suri T.V. Sincu, Scientist ‘F’ and Head (MED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms KHUSHBOO KUMARI 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 24 (1394). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


