NAT HA IS 17158 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


WRATH ATAR TA FOTO 
STAT A ch WARU EATA CHT 
AMA Sie Went A AU SS 


Guide for Type of Measurement, 
Choice of Location and Type of 
Instruments for Underground 
Power House 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2019 


weds Ae Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR UI, 9 TEE TH HM, ay Reef 110002 


A et MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2019 Price Group 2 


Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee, WRD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic 
Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


This Indian standard deals with the type of measurements recommended in underground caverns specifically 
power house of river valley projects. To overcome the problem of scarcity of space and to accommodate 
strategically important structures use of underground space for the purpose of construction of power house in 
river valley projects is increasing day by day. Excavation of earth changes natural state of equilibrium around the 
excavated zone and creates instability of rock mass locally. To establish the state of equilibrium support system 
is designed and erected. Rock/soil being the natural material its response to changed stress regime is not easy 
to predict. Incomplete knowledge of complex earth environment and design of structure on simple assumption 
like homogeneous and isotropic earth are the main factors which make the role of instrumentation crucial. 
Instrumentations provide quantitative measurement of parameters which are helpful in assessing behavior of rock 
mass during the entire life span of Structure. 


Role of instrumentation is essential in all three stages of a project that is, pre-construction, during construction 
and post construction phase. The objective of instrumentation is different during these three stages of project. 
During pre-construction stage instrumentation provides quantitative measure of physical parameters required for 
designing of structure. During construction it helps in controlling design parameters and to assess the adequacy 
of support system and requirement of additional support. Any deviation from predicted behavior (behavior of 
rock mass observed through instrumentation) also gives indication for improvement for designing of structures 
in future. Under construction stage, instrumentation also helps to settle legal issues arising due to construction 
activities of underground openings. Role of instrumentation during post construction fulfills safety aspects and 
indicates any instability taking place well in advance thereby giving time to take remedial measures, before any 
failure to take place. 


Planning instrumentation programme for underground power house is a crucial issue which requires technical as 
well as administrative support. Planning instrumentation poses very fundamental questions, which needs to be 
understood by a designer very well. As what is to be measured, where is to be measured, which type of instrument is 
to be selected. At the same time finalization of specification of instruments should also be done judiciously. Since, 
over specification may increase the cost of instruments whereas under specification may not serve the purpose of 
instrumentation. Robust and good quality instruments of long term reliability should be selected for installation 
since replacement of instruments at later stage would not be possible. Successful instrumentation programme 
is achieved only if every step in planning and execution is taken judiciously. Availability and installation of 
instruments in pace with construction activity also a necessity of successful instrumentation programme. Planning 
and implementation of instrumentation programme requires the association of designer of structure, geotechnical 
experts and construction engineers responsible for construction activities. Preservation of instruments during 
construction activity should be done on top priority basis. 


In this code an effort is made to indicate the type of measurement generally recommended in underground 
openings. Suitable instruments for these measurements in different environment have been suggested. Purpose of 
different measurements has also been discussed. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17158 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


GUIDE FOR TYPE OF MEASUREMENT, CHOICE OF 
LOCATION AND TYPE OF INSTRUMENTS FOR 
UNDERGROUND POWER HOUSE 


1 SCOPE 


This standard indicates the types of measurements 
need to be done in underground openings specifically 
in power house of river valley projects. Type of 
measurements to be done has been recommended 
and its role in assessing the stability of structure has 
also been discussed. Criteria of choice and location of 
measuring instrument are also indicated. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
13946: 1994 Determination of rock stress — 
Code of practice 
Part 1 Using hydraulic fracturing 
technique 
Part 2 Using USBM type drill hole 
deformation gauge 
Part 3 Using a CSIR or CSIRO type cell 
with 9 or 12 strain gauges 
Part 4 Using flat jack technique 
7436 (Part 2) Guide for types of measurement for 
: 1997 structures in river valley projects 
and criteria for choice and location 
of measuring instruments 
4967 : 1968 Recommendations for seismic 
instrumentation for river valley 
projects 


3 TYPE OF MEASUREMENT 


3.1 Measurement of Displacement 


It is the most important measurement done in 
underground openings. Virgin state of stress gets 
disturbed whenever excavation is done. Readjustment 
of stress in the vicinity of excavation manifests in form 


of displacement of rock strata. This displacement is 
an indication of strain developed due to excavation 
(change of stress field). Based on the nature of in situ 
stress at a location convergence movement (movement 
inside the cavity) or divergence movement (movement 
outside the cavity) is observed after excavation. Since 
in most of the cases component of vertical stress is 
more than horizontal stress, displacement towards 
inside the cavity (convergence) is expected. In case 
component of horizontal stress is more due to high 
tectonic stress than the vertical stress then divergence 
movement of walls of cavity is expected. Magnitude 
and rate of displacement observed at certain location is 
an indication of elastic or non-elastic behavior of rock 
mass. Displacement measurements should be done on 
long term basis after construction of opening also. So 
that measurement of time dependent deformations may 
also be done. 


Displacement measurement can be done by using 
instruments given in 3.2 and 3.3. 


3.2 Multipoint Borehole Extensometer 


Multipoint borehole extensometer (MPBX) is the most 
efficient and reliable instrument for measurement of 
displacements. Displacement of rock strata at different 
depth can be measured by use of this instrument. 
This instrument is installed in a borehole of suitable 
diameter. In hard rock, expansion cell or groutable 
type anchor may be selected for installation, but in 
case rock is fractured, groutable type anchors should 
be selected. Anchors are fixed at different depth and 
through connecting rods and attached with head of 
instrument which is fixed at the mouth of borehole. 
End of these rods may be connected with sensors to 
observe the data remotely or displacement may be 
measured with the help of micrometer if location of 
instrument is accessible. A number of anchors may be 
fixed at different depth (limited to size of borehole) 
to observe displacement taking place from different 
depth. Generally three point MPBX are used in view 
to keep a compromise between borehole size (diameter 
of borehole) and number of depth point which are 
required for measurement. Deepest anchor should be 
fixed preferably in undisturbed zone. If the location of 
instrument is accessible during the monitoring period, 
a mechanical instrument shall suffice the purpose. 
A remotely observed instrument should be selected 


IS 17158 : 2019 


if location of instrument is not accessible during the 
monitoring period. On the basis of working principal 
or type of sensors attached with anchors, MPBX 
are classified as hydraulic, pneumatic, electrical/ 
electronics, optical and fibre optics based. There 
are no sensors attached with connecting rods in case 
of mechanical MPBX. Observed displacement is 
measured by using micrometer. Location of mechanical 
MPBX should be accessible during monitoring period. 


3.3 Tape Extensometer 


This is the simplest and most economical instrument 
for measurement of displacement in underground 
openings. Displacement measurement is done by fixing 
grouted studs on opposite walls of cavity or on walls 
and crown of cavity. The studs may be fixed to suitable 
depth. Distance between two studs measured by tape 
extensometer to assess the convergence or divergence 
of walls of cavity with time. This method has following 
limitation: 


a) Relative movement between the two locations on 
opposite wall is known but exact movement of 
any wall in isolation may not be ascertained. 


b) Depth of origin point of displacement or depth of 
discontinuity which is cause of movement may 
not be known by this method. 


c) During the observation of data (distance 
measurement by tape extensometer) vehicle or 
manpower movement is stopped. 


d) Location of studs should be accessible during 
observation period. 


e) Regular calibration of tape extensometer is very 
important during the period of measurements. 
Systematic errors in measurements are avoided by 
regular calibration of instruments. 


f) There is a limitation to accuracy and resolution 
achieved during observation since it is a 
mechanical instrument. 


3.4 Geodetic Measurement 


This is a fast method of observation of displacement 
of walls of underground cavities. Geodetic Targets 
of suitable type like reflexive targets, bi-reflexive 
are installed permanently on the walls and crown 
of cavity. Targets are fixed on groutable anchors 
fixed at suitable depth. The targets may be fixed on 
convergence bolt in case of mounting on shotcrete or 
on steel support system. Measurement of distance/ 
angle by using electronic distance measuring device 
/ theodolite /total station system, from fixed location 
gives indication of movement of wall of cavity. Various 
advanced techniques like LASER, LIDAR and radar 
interferometry are also in use for taking convergence 
measurements in underground openings. Accuracy 
of convergence measurement under this category 
depends on employed techniques, characteristic of 


reference datum and measuring point. Advantage of 
these advance survey techniques is the capability of 
automatic and continuous monitoring. This also enables 
to set warning levels. 


Like measurements done by tape extensometers depth 
of origin point of displacement may not be known by 
this method also. Advantage of this method is that 
during measurement no movement of vehicles or 
persons is affected and there is no need to access the 
location of the targets. 


3.5 Measurement of Joint Spacing at the Surface of 
Excavation 


Movement across the cracks developed at the excavated 
surface, or joints/fissures exposed at the surface of 
excavation may be measured by using surface joint 
meter (non embedded type). Embedded type joint 
meters are used in concrete gravity dams. Mechanical 
type or remote (electrical or v-w type) type joint 
meters may be installed to monitor movement across 
the joint. These are also called convergence meters by 
some manufacturers. Joint meters (tri axial) capable of 
measuring displacements in three orthogonal directions 
should be preferred to measure nature of movement 
completely. Displacement across the joint at excavated 
surface is an indication of movement taking place along 
the joints at depth. 


3.6 Instrumented Rock Bolts 


These are used to observe longitudinal strain of rock 
bolts due to load exerted by rock mass. Rock bolt with 
inbuilt strain meters are installed for this purpose. Strain 
observed is an indication of acting load on rock mass. 
Acting load may also be used to calculate longitudinal 
displacement of rock mass within elastic limit of rock 
mass. 


4 MEASUREMENT OF PORE PRESSURE 


Pore pressure at suitable depth below the wall of 
cavity may be measured by installation of piezometer 
at required depth in a borehole of suitable diameter. 
Measurement of pore pressure by installation of 
piezometer in dam is done to assess the effectiveness 
of drainage system. Whereas, measurement of 
pore pressure beneath the wall of cavities is done 
to know the state of effective stress around the 
excavation. Since increase of pore pressure reduces 
the effective stress and thereby increases the chances 
of shear failure of rock mass. Piezometers are 
used for measurement of pore pressure at required 
depth beneath the surface of underground cavities. 
Piezometers are available in different forms which 
are to be used in different environment and based on 
working principle namely, hydraulic piezometers, 
twin tube piezometers, open stand pipe piezometers, 
electrical resistance piezometers, push in piezometers 
and V-w type piezometers. Stand pipe Piezometers 


also known as Casagrande piezometers, are used to 
measure pore pressure in vertical holes. Twin tube 
piezometers also called pneumatic piezometers, are 
used to measure pore water pressure in saturated 
soil. Push in piezometer is used to monitor pressure 
of shallow ground water and soil vapours. In 
underground openings mostly below the ground level, 
electric piezometers and v-w type piezometers are 
used to measure pore pressure in rock mass. Electric 
piezometers and v-w type piezometers are useful since 
measurement may be taken from remote location. 
Multiple piezometers may be installed in a single hole 
at different depth for observation of pore pressure at 
respective depth. 


4.1 Measurement of Rock Temperature 


Measurement of rock temperature is essential in 
underground openings in case of shear zones and hot 
water zones. Measurement of temperature helps in 
understanding the state of thermal stress of rock mass. 
High rock temperature is an indication of active tectonic 
forces in the area. Increase in temperature causes rock 
mass to expand and thereby increases compressive 
stress in rock mass. Measurement of temperature 
is also important to make temperature correction 
in the response of transducers which are sensitive 
to temperature and used for measurement of other 
parameters. Measurement of rock temperature is also 
essential to ensure the effective working of manpower 
and machines and to provide effective ventilation 
system during construction phase of underground 
cavities. Measurement of rock temperature is done by 
remotely monitored temperature meter. Temperature 
meters based on resistance, vibrating wire and fiber 
optics principle may be used for measurement of rock 
temperature. 


4.2 Measurement of Stress 


Stress at a point in rock mass depends on weight of 
overlying material, geological structures, tectonic 
forces and residual and thermal stress present there. 
Due to this complex nature estimation of in situ 
stress in rock at a point and its spatial variation is not 
possible. Measurement of in situ stress is an important 
parameter for design and construction of underground 
opening (underground power house). Knowledge 
of in situ stress before excavation is essential for 
design of underground power house. The shape, size, 
orientation, layout and design of support system are to 
be decided on the basis of4 magnitude and direction of 
principal components of stress. Detailed information 
on various methods of in situ stress measurements are 
available in IS 13946 (Part 1, Part 2, Part 3 and 
Part 4). These stress measurement techniques are for 
measurement of absolute stress at a location. Repeated 
use of any technique at certain location gives the 
change in stress. 


IS 17158 : 2019 


5 MEASUREMENT OF SEISMICITY 


Seismicity of project area should be monitored by 
installation of micro-seismic networks as per IS 4967 
in case of underground power house also as it is 
recommended in case of a large concrete and masonry 
dam. Though there is no requirement of installation of 
strong motion accelerographs in case of underground 
power house. 


6 MEASUREMENTS TO BE DONE ON 
SUPPORT SYSTEM OF UNDERGROUND 
OPENINGS 


6.1 Measurement of Load on Support System 


Load cells are used for measurement of load on support 
system that is rock bolts, cable anchors and tendons, 
and structural members like ribs. Monitoring of load 
cell gives change in load on cable anchor/rock bolt 
etc. after installation of load cell. A decrease in load 
on rock bolt / cable anchor indicates anchor failure or 
failure of anchorage whereas an excessive increase is 
an indication to take remedial action. Load cell suitable 
for measurement of tensile load are provided with a 
central hole to accommodate anchor bolt / cable anchor. 
Whereas, to monitor compressive load the load cell is 
provided with inbuilt solid centre plate mounted on end 
faces of load sensing elements. A load cell consists of 
3 or 6 load sensing elements should be preferred since, 
it is capable of measuring eccentric load. An average 
of sensing elements gives the applied load. Load cell 
data is useful for correlation with the data of multipoint 
borehole extensometer if installed adjacent to load cell. 
Various type of load cells based on operating principals 
and suitable in different environment are available 
that is, strain gauge load cell, piezoelectric load cell, 
hydraulic load cell, pneumatic load cell, geomechanical 
load cells and v-w type load cells. 


6.2 Measurement of Strain in Support System 


Measurement of strain developed in support system 
is done to know the state of developed stress in ribs, 
steel liners, pressure shafts and wye sections etc. 
Unless strain values are converted to stress it carries 
no relevance. The strain gauges are directly attached 
to the surface of structure or are embedded within 
the structure for measurement of strain. As in dams 
strain gages are embedded in concrete to monitor 
the development of strain in blocks. Generally strain 
meters are installed on the surface of steel support 
system in underground openings. Embedded type 
strain gages are used in concrete lining of underground 
openings for measurement of strain. Most commonly 
used mechanical strain gauge is a portable gauge with 
dial indicators suitable for surface mounting. At some 
places curvometers designed to monitor the change 
in curvature of a straight and curved beam at a given 
point have also been used. For the purpose of remote 


IS 17158 : 2019 


monitoring or the place where surface of support would 
be covered, surface mounted electrical resistance strain 
gauges or vibrating wire type strain meters are used. 
Surface mounted strain meters are available as bonded 
or weldable type. 


6.3 Measurement of Stress in Shotcrete 


Shotcrete stress cells are designed to measure radial 
and tangential stress in shotcrete lining in underground 
openings. Shotcrete stress cell provides the significant 
data for assessment of required thickness and 
stability of shotcrete lining in NATM (New Austrian 
Tunneling Methods). Stress cells are used to observe 
the change in stress taking place after installation of 
cell. Stress cells are sensitive to temperature change. 
Temperature compensation factor should be applied 
in each measurement. Shotcrete stress cell based on 
resistance and v-w technology are available in market 
generally. 


6.4 Measurement of Stress in Concrete Lining 


In the similar way stress developed in concrete lining if 
provided in underground opening may be measured by 
using concrete stress cells which are similar to shotcrete 
stress cells. Dimensions of Concrete stress cell may 
differ from shotcrete stress cell though principal of 
measurement is same in both the cases. Measurement 
of tensile stress is not possible by use of concrete stress 
cells. 


6.5 Measurement of Earth Pressure 


Earth pressure at the face of structural elements is 
measured by embedded or contact earth pressure cell. 
Earth pressure cells are seldom used in underground 
cavities specifically in underground power house. 


7 CRITERIA SELECTION OF LOCATION OF 
INSTALLATION OF INSTRUMENTS 


There is no simple rule which can determine the 
number of instruments, type of instrument and location 
where instruments should be installed. Selection of 
instruments should be done on the basis of required 
measurement which meaningfully defined the rock 
response. Though selection of remote versus mechanical 
instruments is decided on the fact that whether location 
of instrument would be accessible during monitoring 
or not. During construction both mechanical and 
remote instrument may be installed with a view that 
mechanical instruments would be monitored till the 
location is accessible. Though remote instruments shall 
serve the purpose during operation phase of project 
also. Selection of location of instruments should be 


decided by designer of cavity in consultation with 
geotechnical expert. In general instruments should be 
installed in weak zones like shear or fault zones, zones 
of expected high stress concentration; hot water zones 
etc. zones of high water ingress and at junction of 
cavities. F.E.M. analysis also indicates location of weak 
zones / high stress concentration to be encountered 
during excavation. Generally instruments are installed 
in sections in underground openings. In one section 
instruments are installed at location like centre line of 
crown, spring lines and suitable locations on both walls 
of cavity. Convergence measurement on these locations 
and measurement of load (on rock bolts) on these 
locations should be done. Pore pressure measurement 
on these locations at suitable depth should be done. 
Additionally, piezometers should be installed in zones of 
high water ingress. It is recommended that 2-3 sections 
should selected in 50 meter long cavity. Instruments 
to monitor some specific response parameter may be 
decided by the designer of structure. For cavities of 
longer lengths number of sections should be increased 
proportionately depending on geological conditions. 
Keeping in view the low survival rate of instruments 
and very high cost of replacement of instruments at a 
later stage, it is always beneficial to install some extra 
instruments. 


8 GENERAL 
INSTRUMENTS 


CHARACTERISTICS OF 


Selected instruments should have characteristics as 
given in 6.1.8 of IS 7436 (Part 2). 


9 DATA TO BE PRESERVED 


Following data should be preserved for interpretation 
of instrumentation data and for repair and maintenance 
work of instruments in due course of time: 

a) Excavation sequence of underground opening; 

b) Details of major support system installed in 
underground opening; 

c) Installation reports of instruments comprising 
type of instrument, location of instrument, initial 
data of instrument, colour codes of wires attached 
to different sensors, test reports and calibration 
curves of instruments etc; 

d) Data of drill holes (loggings) prepared before or 
during construction; 

e) Test results of laboratory testing of rock samples; 


f) Data of failure occurred during or after 


construction; and 


g) Details of drainage holes. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 16 (0681). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


