**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1106 (1986): Distilled water glass bottles [CHD 10: 
Glassware] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 666-171 : 621-798-147 : 663634 |S , UOtf&UMtMED 



Indian Standard 
SPECIFICATION FOR DISTILLED WATER GLASS BOTTLES 

( First Revision ) 



ec 

CO 

o 

U 



E 
E 
o 
a 

15 

c 
o 

o 
© 
CO 



o 
U 

CO 
«0 
CO 

5 



1. Scope — Lays down the requirements for distilled water glass bottles. 

2. Terminology 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions as given in IS : 1382-1981 'Glossary of terms 
relating to glass and glassware ( first revision )' and IS : 6654-1982 'Glossary of terms relating to 
glass containers ( first revision )' shall apply. 

3. Nominal Capacity — - The bottle shall be of 750 ml nominal capacity. 

4. Material — The bottles shall be manufactured either from colourless glass or glass with 
a slight tinge of colour. 

5. Capacity and Mass — The nominal capacity, capacity at filling level, brimful capacity and the 
mass of the bottles shall be as follows: 

Nominal Capacity at Brimful Mass, 

Capacity Filling Level Capacity Max 

ml ml ml g 

750 750 ±10 767 ±10 454 

6. General Requirements 

6.1 The bottle shall be free from blisters, cracks, mould marks, stones and chippings and as far as 
possible shall be free from bubbles, cords, seeds and other visible defects. The glass shall be 
transparent. 

6.2 The bottles shall be well formed with the distribution of glass all over the walls and the base, 
avoiding any wedge bottom and, particularly thin sections in the walls. 

7. Tests 

7.1 Alkalinity Test — The bottles shall satisfy the requirements as given in Appendix A. 

7.2 Verticality Test — A vertical line through the centre of the circle formed by the inside 
neck opening shall pass through the centre of the circle described by the widest diameter at the 
bottom of the bottle. The variation in verticality when tested according to the method given 
in Appendix B shall not exceed 16 mm. 

7.3 Thermal Shock Test— -The bottle shall be subjected to thermal shock test as laid down 
in IS : 11930-1986 'Method of thermal shock test for glass containers 1 . The temperature differential 
( *i - t%) shall be43°C. 

8. Packaging — The bottle shall be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 

9. Marking — Each bottle shall be permanently and legibly marked with the maker's name or his 
registered trade-mark. 

9.1 Certification Marking — Details available with the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Adopted 26 November 1986 



© October, 1987 BIS 



Or 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 NOVEMBER 2005 

TO 

IS 1106 : 1986 SPECIFICATION FOR DISTILLED 

WATER GLASS BOTTLES 

( First Revision ) 

( Page U clause 6.2 ) — Insert the following at the end: 
6.3 Bottle Washing 

All bottles shall be thoroughly cleaned immediately before filling by 
automatic/semi-automatic washing machines. Washing shall be accomplished 
by prerinse and final rinse. For final rinse dechlorinated potable water shall be 
used. Bottles should be thoroughly drained, sterilized and dried after final rinse 
so that strength and purity of content is not affected after filling. Water jets in 
the washing machine should be so designed and jet pressure so maintained as to 
thoroughly rinse the whole internal and external surface area of the bottles. 
Wash water in the bottle washer should be thoroughly drained and changed 
frequently to prevent algal growth. 

6.3.1 Wherever second hand bottles are being used, all the bottles should be prc- 
washed prior to feeding to the bottle washer. This should be done in the 
following manner: 

a) Pre-rinse first soaking in a tank to remove labels and other extraneous 
matter. 

b) Rinse in the second tank with hot water around 60°C and 3 percent 
caustic solution at 60°C using brushes to clean the interior and 
exterior of bottles thoroughly. 

c) Final rinse in the third tank with potable water. 

d) Feed the bottles to bottle washer. ' 

( Page 1 , clause 9.1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

'9.1 BIS Certification Mark 

Each bottle may also be marked with the Standard Maik. 

9.1.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of Bureau of 
Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under wliich the licence for the use of Standard Mark 
may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau 
of Indian Standards. * 

(CHD 10) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



1S: 1106-1986 

APPENDIX A 

( Clause 7.1 ) 

TEST FOR ALKALINITY 

A-1. Apparatus 

A-1.1 Erlenmeyer Flask — of resistant glass and of 250 ml capacity. 

A-1.2 Mortar — a suitable mortar made of steel. 

A-1. 3 Test Sieves — - two, one 600 ^m IS Sieve and the other 425 /*m IS Sieve [see IS : 460 
( Part 1 ) - 1985 'Specification for test sieves : Part 1 Wire cloth test sieves ( third revision )']- 

A-2. Reagents 

A-2.1 Quality of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals shall be employed in 
the test, and distilled water [see IS: 1070-1977 'Water for general laboratory use [second 
revision )'] shall be used where the use of water as a reagent is intended. 

Note — 'Pure chemicals' shall mean chemicals that do not contain impurities which affect the results of 
analysis. 

A-2.2 The following reagents are required. 

A-2.2. 1 Standard hydrochloric acid — 01 N. 

A-2.2. 2 Ethyl alcohol or rectified spirit — 95 percent by volume [conforming to IS: 323-1959 
'Rectified spirit ( revised )' ]. 

A-2. 2.3 Standard sodium hydroxide solution — 0"05 N. 

A-2. 2. 4 Methyl red indicator — Dissolve 0"04 g of methyl red in 75 ml ethyl alcohol or rectified 
spirit. Add 1"5 ml of standard sodium hydroxide solution or a quantity sufficient to ensure that 
the colour of the solution corresponds to pH 5*2 and then dilute to 100 ml with water. 

A-2. 2. 5 Test solution — Add 04 ml of standard hydrochloric acid and 04 ml of methyl red 
indicator to 100 ml of water. The colour of the solution should be pink. Boil the solution 
for some time in an Erlenmeyer flask which has been previously tested in accordance with the test 
given in A-3.1. 

A-3. Testing of Erlenmeyer Flask 

A-3.1 Boil the test solution in Erlenmeyer flask (see A-2.2. 5 ) and while boiling transfer to the 
Erlenmeyer flask to be tested. Place the flask quickly in a bath of boiling water so that the level of 
the solution contained in it is below the level of the water in the bath. Continue boiling for one 
hour and at the end of this period observe the colour of the solution. Reject the flask if any change 
of colour of the test solution has taken place. 

A-3. 1.1 Erlenmeyer flasks which have once passed the test ( see A-3.1 ) may fail to do so after 
prolonged storage, in such a case, they should be washed with a 5 percent (w/v) solution of 
gtacial acetic acid followed by a wash with water until free from acid before use. 

A-4. Procedure 

A-4.1 Crush the two glass bottles selected for this test ( see A-1.2 ), such that the crushed glass 
completely passes through 600 /xm IS Sieve but fails to pass through 425 urn IS Sieve. Spread the 
crushed glass on a glazed paper and pass a magnet over them to remove any particles of iron 
which may have been introduced during crushing. Weigh accurately 5 g of the crushed glass, 
wash free from dust by repeated washing with ethyl alcohol or rectified spirit and dry at 100 ± 2°C. 
Transfer the clean, dry crushed glass to the Erlenmeyer flask ( see A-3.1 ) and treat with 100 ml of 
a fresh portion of the boiling test solution. Place the flask quickly in a bath of boiling water 
so that the level of the solution contained in it is below the level of the water in the bath. 
Continue boiling for 30 minutes. Titrate the solution without filtering to the original pink colour 
with standard hydrochloric acid. 

A-4.1. 1 The glass bottles shall be taken to have satisfied the test if not more than 3 ml 0*01 N 
hydrochloric acid are required for the titration. 



IS: 1106 -1986 



APPENDIX B 

( Clause 7.2 ) 

TEST FOR VERTICALITY OF BOTTLES 



B-0. General 



B-0.1 This test determines the combined effect of the offset of mouth with the body and mouth being 
at an angle of the body. 

B-1. Assembly 

B-1.1 Assembly for the determination of vertically shall be as shown in Fig. 1. 




DIAL INDICATOR 



SHAFT 



V-BLOCK 



GRUB 
SCREW 




HAROENED PIECE 
BASE PLATE 



FIG. 1 ASSEMBLY FOR TESTING VERTICALITY OF BOTTLE 



B-2. Procedure 



B-2.1 Fill the bottle with water in order to give in more stability and place it on its base on the flat 
plate having a pillar bolted to it at right angles. Adjust the 'V block mounted on the pillar 
In such a manner that it is in contact with the outer diameter of the bottle at about the middle. 
Adjust the dial indicator fitted to the pillar so that its measuring point comes in contact with 
the outer edge of the neck of the bottle. Rotate the bottle, keeping the body always in contact with 
the - V' block. Note down the maximum deflection on the indicator. 

B-2. 1.1 Half of the total deflection shown by an indicator shall be the variation in 
vertical ity. 



IS:1106-19M 

EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard was first issued in 1957 and was reaffirmed in 1978. This revision gives the 
requirements for distilled water bottles. 

In the present standard, the nominal size of the bottle has been specified as 750 ml in place 
of 560 ml as this size of bottle is commonly used. Also the requirements pertaining to capacity 
at filling level, brimful capacity and the mass of the bottles has been incorporated in the standard. 
The 1957 version of the standard had felt the need of inclusion of bursting pressure test and this 
question was discussed in detail and it was felt by the committee responsible for preparing this 
standard that there was no need of specifying the internal pressure resistance test. The verticality 
test and thermal shock test have been laid down in this version of the standard. The sampling 
clause has been deleted from the revision as it is planned to prepare a separate Indian Standard 
on sampling criteria for glass containers and a reference will be made of this standard when 
available. 

This standard does not cater for the bottles for medicinal purposes. 



Printed at tya* Indlft Printing Pros, Khurla. India 



