(Reaffirmed 2002)

IS : 5432 - 1982

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF'TERMS RELATING TO POWDER METALLURGY

( First Revision )
Powder Metallurgical Materials and Products Sectional Committee, SMDC 30
Chairman DR R. VIJAYARAQHAVA~ Bhabha Atomic

Repre.wnting
Research Centre, Bombay

Manbus
SERI V. G. DATE (Alternate to Dr R. Vijayaraghavan ) SERI S. L. N. AQRARYULU SHRI N. MAITRA ( Alternate ) SERI S. BANERJEE SHRI S. K. BASU SHRI R. BANERJEE ( Altcrnatc ) DR R. D. BHARQAVA SHRI ANOOP S~XENA (Altematc) SH~I P. G. BHA~T SHRI B. G. BEATT ( Altsrnats ) SHRI M. K. BHATTAWARAYYA SERI R. N. PAWI, ( Altcsnats) SHRI A. M. BISWAS Snar K. L. BARUI ( Alternate ) SERI A. K DUTTA SHRI N. T. GEORQE Ministry of Defence ( R&D ), New Delhi

Ministry of Defence ( DGOF ) Indian Oxygen Ltd, Calcutta Assotex Engineering Industries Ltd, Bombay Flexicons Ltd, Bombay Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) National Test House, Calcutta Tata Engineering & pow{Eehedpur Metallurgy Hyderabad

+ Locomotive
Association

Co of

Ltd, India,

India Hard Metals Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. C. MITTAL ( Alternate) Mahindra Sintered Products Ltd, Pune SHRI B. M. KATARIA DR K. D. KRISRNANAND (Ahernat6) The Metal Powder Company Ltd, Thirumangalam SHRI K. KESAVAN Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd SERI U. M~HAN RAO DR P. R. KRISHNAMTJRTHY ( Alternate )

SHW T. R. GUPTA

SHRI S. K. A~RAWAL ( Ahnats

)

INDIAN

Q Copyright 1983 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any meana except with written ermission of the If publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright un ar the said Act

IS:!.+l32-1982 ( Contiflucd from page 1 )
Mmbers DR M. NA~ESWARA RAO SRRI S. N. JHA (Altern&) SHRI K. P_+W~A~A~.ATXY SHRI T. RAMASUBRAMANIAN
SHRI R. ~&AXABTASWAX~Y

RCpWSC?ltillg Misbra Dbatu Nigam Ltd, Hyderabad Asbok Leyland Ltd, Madras
(&YMtt)

SFIRI Y. H. RAUT ( Altcrnatc) DR N. R. SANJANA Sandvik Asia Ltd, Pune DR R. M. PARDESEI ( Alternate ) Kbosla Metal Powders Pvt Ltd, Pune SHRI ANIL R. SHAH SE-RI B. H. SEIZTTY( Altcnuzte ) SHRI M. J. SEXHAN! National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), Jamsbedpur SHRI J. P. TIW~RI ( Altern&) Central Electrochemical Research Institute SHRI R. SRINIVA~AN ( CSIR ), Karaikudi SRRI P. V. VASUBE~A RAO ( Alternate ) SHRI R. SRF&~ASA~ Widia ( India ) Ltd, Bangalore SHRI K. SADANANDA ( Alternate ) SHRI C. R. RAMA RAO, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficie Mmbrr ) Director ( Strut 19.Met ) Secreiary SHRI S. D. CHOUDERY Deputy Director (Metals), IS1 >

Directorate General of New Delhi

Technical

Development,

IS:5432

- 1982

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO POWDER METALLURGY

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15 December 1982, after the draft finalized by the Powder Metallurgical Materials and Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1969. This has now been revised to up-date it and bring it in line with the standards prevalent in other countries. Definitions of a number of new terms have been included and those of existing terms have been modified in the light of current usage. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been sought from the draft International Standard ISO/DIS 3252 `Powder Metallurgy Vocabulary', issued by the International Organization for Standardization.

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard powder metallurgy. 2. DEFINITIONS A Acicular Needle shaped. defines various terms commonly used in the field of

Activated Sintering - The sintering process during which the rate of sintering is accelerated by addition of a substance to the powder or under the influence of the sintering atmosphere. Agglomerate Several particles adhering together. when

Angle of Repose - The basal angle of a pile formed by a powder freely poured under specified conditions on to a horizontal surface. 3

IS:5432 - 1982
Angular Sharp-edged or roughly polyhedral. of a powder obtained by free of

Apparent Density -- Mass of unit volume pouring under specified conditions.

Atomized Powder - A powder produced by mechanical molten metal or alloy into discrete particles. B

dispersion

Binder - A substance added to powder to increase the green strength of a compact which is expelled before or during sintering; also a metallic phase that has a lower melting point than the other phases of a sintered material for imparting strength on the sintered part during service. Blank-A dimensions Blending composition. compact or shape. or pre-sintered intermingling d, sintered of powders on the surface object of unfinished

The thorough

of the same nominal of a sintered particles object

Blistering - The formation of blisters as a result of intensive evolution of gas. Bridging - Formation direction of flow. of arches

of keyed or jammed C

across the

Carbonyl Powder-A decomposition of a metal

metal carbonyl.

powder

produced

by

the

thermal

Cemented Carbide - A sintered material characterized by high hardness and styength, comprising carbides of refractory materials as the main component bonded together with a metallic phase. Germet - Sintered material containing at least one non-metallic phase generally Closed Pore-A compact. pore not at least one metaIlic of a ceramic nature. with the phase and of the

communicating

surface

Closed Porosity - The ratio of the volume volume of the porous object.

of closed pores to obtain

to the total a specific

Coining - The final pressing of a sintered compact surface configuration accompanied by densification. Communicating closed. Pores Inter-connected A powder

pores; they may be open or by mechanical disinteg-

Comminuted Powder ration of solid metal.

produced

4

IS : 5432 - 1982 Compact An as-formed object pressed from powder. as a function of

Compactibility Curve -A plot of green density compacting pressure applied under specified conditions.

Compacting-A process in which a powder held in a container is subjected to an external pressure to produce a compact of prescribed shape and dimensions. Composite Powder - A powder or more different materials. Compressibility conditions. Ability in which each particle to be compacted of the consists of one

of a powder

under specified powder before

Compression Ratio -- The ratio of the volume and after compaction under specified conditions. Core Rod compact. A member of a

die set that forms the inner profile of the D

Dendritic De-Waxing

-

Branched

shape. of additive ( binder or lubricant water up the to charge vapour confining a die. ). in the space gas in

The removal

Dew Point - The temperature at which the begins to condense at atmospheric pressure. Die-A member of the die set that which the powder is formed. Die-Fill The quantity of powder makes required

Die-Insert Die-Set production

A replaceable

liner for a die. members used in the press for the to in

An assembly of tooling of powder compacts.

Dope - A substance added in small quantity to a metallic powder prevent or control recrystallisation or grain growth during sintering. Double-Action Pressing - A method by which a die between opposing moving punches. E Ejection -An after completion Electrolytic operation by which of pressing. A powder a compact produced 5 is pushed out from a powder is pressed

a die

Powder

by electrolytic

deposition.

IS:5432-1982 Elutriation - Classification of a powder particles relative to a rising fluid. effected by movement of the

End Capping - The partial or complete separation of a compact into two or more portions by cracks which originate near the edges of the punch faces and proceed diagonally into the compact. Endothermic Gks - A reducing gas atmosphere used in sintering and. produced by the reaction of a hydrocarbon fuel gas and air over a catalyst It is low in carbondioxide and with the aid of an external heat source. water vapour with relatively large percentage of hydrogen and carbon monoxide. Maximum combustibles are approximately 60 percent. Exothermic Gas-A reducing gas atmosphere used in sintering and produced by partial or complete combustion of a hydrocarbon fuel gas and air. Maximum combustibles are approximately 25 percent. Explosive application of powder in a die by rapid Compacting - The compaction of pressure by utilizing the energy of an explosive charge. F Fibrous threads. Having the appearance of regularly whose thickness to or irregularly shaped to of

Flaky - Flat or scale like particles the other dimensions. Floating pressing. Flowability dimensions. Die A die that

is small compared

is able

move freely in the direction

Ability

of a powder

to flow through through

an orifice of specified a funnel of specified

Flow Rate'The rate of flow of a powder shape and finish. G Grain Size Average size of grains

in sintered

materials.

Granular

Equi-dimensional To render -

and non-spherical. flowable by agglomerating smaller

Granulation particles. Green Green Green

a powder

Compact Density Strength

Compact Apparent

made by cold pressing. density of a compact. strength metal of a compact. material used as an

Mechanical of

Grit - Anglllar particles abrasive or cleaning agent.

or ceramic

6

.,
IS : 5432 - 1982 Growth -An increase during sintering. in dimensions H Hard Metal Heavy cma. Metal See Cemented Carbide. alloy having a density above 16.5 g/ of a compact which may occur

A tungsten-based

High Energy CompactingCompacting in a die by quick energy release ( impact energy ) to drive the punch~at a speed in the order of a few tens of metres/second. Hot Isostatic Pressing ( HIP ) - The pressing of a powder, compact or sintered object by subjecting it at elevated temperature to nominally equal pressure from all directions. Hot Pressing temperature. The pressing of a powder or a compact at elevated

Hydrogen Loss - The relative loss in mass of metal powder or compact caused by heating in an atmosphere of purified hydrogen under specified conditions. I Impregnation - The process usually with a lubricant. of filling the pores of a sintered with compact a metal

Infiltration - Permeation of a green or sintered compact or alloy of lower melting point by capillary action. Irregular Isostatic subjecting Lacking symmetry.

Pressing - The pressing of a powder or a compact it to nominally equal pressure from all directions.

by

Lamination-The formation of a defect structure in a compact or in a sintered object,

in the form of a layered or the defect itself. phase

Liquid Phase Sintering -. Sintering in the presence of a liquid formed by the lower melting point constituent in a mix. Loose Sintering Sintering of uncompacted powder.

Lubricant -- A substance added to a powder to reduce the between particles and between the compact and the tool surfaces. 7

friction

IS : 5432 - 1982 M containing a relatively Master Alloy Powder - An alloyed powder high concentration of one or more elements that may be difficult to introduce in their elemental state to produce final composition with uniform distribution after sintering. Milling-The mechanical treatment of material as in the ball mill to produce particles, to alter their size or shape or to coat one component of a powder mix with another. Mould - A container cast as a slurry. Multiple Die-set each pressing cycle. Multiple compacts in which powder A tool set that is loosely packed and sintered or on

produces

two or more compacts or

Pressing - A method are pressed simultaneously

of pressing whereby two in separate die cavities.

more

N
Nodular Rounded irregular shape. 0 Open Pore A pore communicating with the surface. of the open pores to the total

Open Porosity - The ratio of the volume volume of the object. P

Packing Material - Any material in which compacts are embedded separate and protect them during pre-sintering or sintering.

to

unit of powder that cannot readily be subdivided by the Particle -A usual separation process, a minute part of matter. A powder particle may consist of one crystallite or more. - The statistical relation Particle Size Distribution and particle size for a powder of any size fraction. Pore object. An inherent or induced cavity within between quantity an

a particle

or within

Pore Former -- A substance includetl in a powder volatilizes during sintering and thereby produces a interlocking porosity in the finished compact. Porosity - The ratio of the volume of the porous object. of all the pores

or mixture which desired degree of to the total volume

8

IS : 5432 - 1982
Powder - An assembly of discrete particles with a maximum dimensions of 1000 microns. Extrusion - Shaping of a compact by extrusion the powder and an organic vehicle through a die.

Powder

of a paste of

Powder

sintered or sintered change of shape.
Powder

Forging

-

Densification by hot forging of an unsintered, prepreform made from powder with an accompanying

Metallurgy - The art and science of making, forming and treating metal powders and products made from such powders with or without the addition of non-metallic powders, the products being essentially made without melting the major constituent. Rolling - A process in which the powder is introduced between a pair of rotating rolls which cause the powder to be compacted into a cotinuous coherent strip. Powder Pre-Alloyed Powder -

An alloyed powder usually made by atomiza-

tion of a melt.
Preform - A blank intended to be subjected to hot or cold mechanical forming and densification. Pre-Sintering - The heating of a compact at a temperature below the final sintering temperature usually to increase the ease of handling or shaping the compact. Sintering -

Pressure

pressure.
Punch

Sintering

with

simultaneous

application

of

( Plunger ) - A member of the die-assembly the die to compact the powder in the die cavity. R

which moves into

Radial

Crushing

diametral
Reaction Reduced

Strength - The breaking strength determined by the compressive force, of an unsintered or sintered hollow cylinder.

Sintering - A process in which at least two constituents of a powder mixture react during sintering. Powder -

metal compound.
Re-Pressing Relative

A powder produced

by chemical

reduction object

of a

- The application of pressure to a sintered for the purpose of improving the physical properties.

usually

Density -The ratio usually expressed as a percentage of the density of a porous object to the density of the material of the same composition in the non-porous state. 9

IS : 5432 - 1982

S
Sedimentation - Classification of powder a still fluid under controlled conditions. Segregation - The undesirable of a powder mixture. Shrinkage-A sintering. decrease separation effected of by the rate of fall in constituents during

one or more

in dimensions

of a compact

occuring

Sieve Analysis - Particle size distribution usually expressed as the weight percent retained upon each of a series of standard sieves of decreasing aperture size and the percentage passed through the sieve of the finest size. Sieve Fraction -Portion of a powder composed of particles two given size limits. It may be expressed in terms of weight, or numerical frequency. method by which a powder Single Action Pressing -A a die between one fixed and one moving punch. Sinter Forging --Powder forging using sintered preform. by thermal treatment that between volume, in

is pressed

Sintering -Bonding of a powder or a compact below the melting point of the major constituent. Split Die or Segment Die - A die made are separated to remove the compact. Specific Surface mass of powder. Spheroidal Area The total surface

in two or more

segments

area of the powder

per unit

Roughly

spherical. powder produced by comminution being ejected

Sponge Powder of a metal sponge. Spring Back from the die. Solid Density Sweating -The of a compact. -

A porous reduced in dimensions

Increase

of a compact

after

Theoretical exudation

density of the material. of a liquid T phase during a thermal treatment

Tap Density -The density of powder obtained container is tapped under specified conditions. 10

after

the

powder

I,

IS : 5432 - 1982

U Uniaxial Pressing - To press a powder applied pressure is along a single axis. V SinterGqg - Sintering of a compact carried out under a ow pressure of the order, of 1 torr. f Vibro-Compacting - Compaction of a powder `in,' a mould by the application of vibration energy. Void SeePore. Vacuum minimum in such a manner that the

w
Withdraw&l P~o&%s - hn operation by which a die descends over a fixed lower punch to facilitate romoval of the compact. " ._., I ?, , ' `, >I j I i.: ; ,' ,j ,`I / s

INDIAN ON POWDER

STANDARDS

METALLURGICAL

METERIALS

AND

PRODUCTS

IS: 4848-1968 4841 (Part 4842;1968 4848-1981 4857- 1968 5432-1969 5434-1969 5461-1969 5642-1970 5644-1981 5652-1981 7438- 1974 7505- 1974 7506-1974 7512-1974 8367-1977 8368-1977 8369-1977 8370-1977 8392-1977 8484-1977 8485-1977 8871-1978 8876-1978 10035-1981 Methods for determination of flow rate of powders for powder metallurgical purposes of density of sintered metallic I )-1968 Method for determination materials, Part I Method for transverse testing of hard metals Method for determination of apparent density of powders for powder metallurgical purposes ( JirJt r&&t ) Method for determination of compressibility of ductile metal powders Glossary of terms relating to powder metallurgy Method for determination of specific area of powdered ore sample Method for sieve analysis of metal powders Method for determination of interlocking porosity of sintered powder metal structural parts and oil impregnated bearings Method for determination of hydrogen loss of copper, tungsten and iron powders ( jrst rerhion ) Method for rock-well ( A scale) hardness test for hard metals (jr~# rrvtin) Method of test for acid insoluble content of copper and iron powders Cobalt powder Nickel powder Method for the determination of average particle size of metal powders by fisher subsieve sizer Metallic tin powder Tungsten carbide powder Titanium carbide powder Iron powders for powder metallurgical applications Tungsten powder Metal powders for welding electrodes Copper powder for powder metallurglcal applications Methods for determination of tap density of metallic powders Method for the determination of residue on chlorination of tungsten metal powders Bronze powder for metallic filter applications

