IS 12966 (Part 2) : 1990 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR GALLERIES AND OTHER OPENINGS IN DAMS
PART 2 STRUCTURAL DESIGN

UDC 627'8'068 : 624'04

0

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG . Price Group 4

NEW DELHI February I99 1

Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow ) Sectional Committee, RVD 9

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 22 February 1990, after the draft finalized by the Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow ) Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. A large number of galleries and other openings are provided in practically all modern high dams. The galleries are required for access, grouting, inspection, drainage and for the operation of gates. Other major openings include sluices, temporary diversion conduits, river outlets and penstock openings. In addition there are openings for stairwells, shafts, air vents; drainage holes etc. To enable the designing of gallery it is necessary to determine the general stress field to which the opening is subjected and subsequently to analyse the local alteration in it due to the particular shape of the opening. In this standard only small openings such as foundation gallery, inspection gallery, adit to gallery etc have been considered. The openings such as sluices, penstocks and other similar openings have been excluded from this standard. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding of numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 12966 ( Part 2 ) : 1990

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEFORGALLERIES ANDOTHEROPENINGSINDAMS
PART 2 STRUCTURAL DESIGN

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down method of determining reinforcement around openings in solid gravity dams constructed either in concrete or in masonry, and are applicable to openings which can be analysed as two dimensional problems. 1.2 The design of openings which are large in comparison with the size of the dam is not considered in this standard. If d is the maximum cross-sectional dimension of the gallery of the opening, it is considered large when either of the following is complied with : a) d 2 6m,or b) concrete or masonry cover any where around it is less than d. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The following Indian Standards are necessary adjunct to this standard:
IS No. Title

the most significant stresses in the structure under consideration. 3.4 Diversion Conduit A conduit used for the temporary diversion of water from the reservoir. 3.5 Drainage Hole Openings for ensuring proper drainage of the structure. 3.6 Gate Gallery Gallery, made in a dam, to provide access to and room for, the mechanical equipment required for the operation of gates in outlet conduits or powerpenstocks, etc. 3.7 Penstock Opening Openings for pipes which convey water from intake to turbine in hydroelectric schemes. 3.8 Plumbline Shaft A shaft located in a dam in order to make observations of the deflection of the dam with respect to the base. 3.9 Reservoir Empty Condition The condition in which no water load is assumed to be present on upstream side of the dam. 3.10 Reservoir Full Condition The condition in which the water level is at F.R.L. on upstream side of the dam. 3.11 Stair Well A vertical opening provided in the body of the dam to accommodate staircase. 3.12 Total Tension Integral of the tensile stress normal to the section from the boundary, of zero tensile stress. 3.13 Transverse Gallery

456 : 1978 457 : 1957

Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third revision )

Code of practice for general construction of plain and reinforced concrete for dams and other massive structures Glossary of terms relating to river 4410 ( Part 8) : 1968 valley projects: Part 8 Dams and dam sections 6512: 1984 8605 : 1977 Criteria for design of solid gravity dams ( first revision ) Code of practice for construction of masonry in dams

3 TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Air Vent An opening provided for the entry/escape of air. 3.2 Boundary Stress The normal stress on a plane perpendicular to a free boundary. 3.3 Critical Load A loading condition which will produce maximum or

A gallery in the direction perpendicular to that of longitudinal axis of the dam. 3.14 Uniaxial Stress Field If a thin plate is loaded by forces applied ai the boundary only in one direction a state of uniaxial stress field is said to exist.

IS 12966 ( Part 2 ) : 1990 4 SYMBOLS 4.1 For the purpose of this code and unless otherwise defined in the text, the following letter symbols shall have the meaning indicated against each:
A, a b F A B r r,O 9,0e 7, CT x CT, 0,". Q = = = = = = = = = = = = =

6.2 The analysis has to be conducted in two stages: a) Determination of overall stress field in the centre of openings, aud b) Detailed determination of the stress distribution around openings and determination of total tension therefrom. 6.3 Overall Stress Field The stress field at the center line of the opening is determined by one of the following methods. 6.3.1 Approximate Analytical Method "Gravity Method of Analysis", which assumes linear distribution of vertical stresses on horizontal planes, is generally used. The method provides a two-dimensional solution and idealizes the dam as composed of a number of vertical elements, each of which carries its load to the foundation without any transfer of the load to adjacent vertical elements. The shear stress distribution is parabolic and horizontal stress distribution is cubic. This method is used to determine, for each loading combination ( see IS 65 12 : 1984 ), the normal stresses on horizontal and vertical planes. The details of the method are given in Annex A. 6.4 Stress Distribution Around Openings Distribution of stress field due to opening is generally determined by one of the following methods. 6.4.1 Theory of Elasticity Where a closed form analytical solution is available it may be used for analysis. 6.4.1.1 Circular openings For a circular hole of radius `rO' in an infinite plate subjected to uniform uniaxial stress ( p ) in the vertical direction, using polar co-ordinates ( r, 8 ), the stress coefficients are given by :

Cross-sectional area of steel in tension Semi-major axis of elliptic openings Semi-minor axis of elliptic opening Total tensile force across the section Height of rectangular opening Width of rectangular opening Radius of circle Polar co-ordinates Radial and tangential normal stresses in polar co-ordinates Shear stress in polar co-ordinates Normal stress on vertical plane Normal stress on horizontal plane Normal stress on horizontal plane at the upstream/downstream face of the dam (calculated by stability analysis at the level of consideration ) Shear stress on xy plane at the upstream face of dam Shear stress on xy plane at the downstream face of dam Pressure (water + silt, if any )at the u/s face of dam at the level of consideration Pressure (water + silt, if any)at the d/s face of dam at the level of consideration Total base width of the dam at the level of consideration Distance of centre of gallery from toe Total horizontal force at the level of consideration Total vertical force at the level of considemtion Total moment about c.g. of the Section of the base of dam i.e. middle of the Section assuming the dam base as 1 m wide strip.

7*u `Iti P, Pd T
X cp

ZZ = = = =
= =

cw

=

CM

=

;

= $+)-;(l+

F)

cos28

5 MATERIALS 5.1 Concrete Plain and reinforced concrete shall conform to IS 456 : 1978. Mass concrete shall conform to IS 457 : 1957, 5.2 Masonry Stone masonry shall conform to IS 8605 : 1977. 6 BASIS OF DESIGN 6.1 Openings in structure develop a discontinuity in the stress field and may develop zones of tensile stress and high compressive stress and in general weaken the structure. Reinforcement, has, therefore, to be provided in many cases. where 8 = angle from the crown as shown in Fig. 2. At a distance of ( \/3 - 1) r from the crown the tensile stress reduces to zero and then charges to compressive. If the distance is approximately assumed as O-5rOand stress distribution taken as linear, total tension at top and bottom works out to approximately 025 pro for which reinforcement shall be provided in the absence of more detailed analysis, Along the contour the normal stress coefficient is given by: -

(33
P

= (1 - 2 cos 20)

IS 12966 ( Part 2 ) : 1990
RESERVOIR WATER LEVEL t-z-=: = =A_ -----_ -_--__ _fT--L--1 I v == 3 _

1A

VERTICAL

CROSS

SECTION

ml

Poxz-l+

=YX

Y

MOMENTS

19

HORIZONTAL

CROSS

SECTION

FIG.1 6.4.1.2 Elliptic openings

SIGN CONVENTION FOR THE FORCES ACHNGON THE DAM SECTION

6.4.2 Stress Coefficients Stress coefficient for rectangular openings of various width and height ratio, for normal stress perpendicular to the centre line of opening, due to uniform stress fields parallel to or perpendicular to the line, can be obtained from the curves given in Fig, 3 and 4. 6.4.3 Photoelastic Method For more complex forms and load conditions photoelastic method is preferred. Numerous applications of photoelastic method have been made in the design of various types of openings required in Civil, Mechanical and Aeronautical structures. Using photoelastic method extensive work has been done to obtain stress distribution around openings of various shapes such as square, :ectangular with semi-circular roof and rectangular. The data is available for the following cases : 1. Openings in uniform uniaxial compressive stress field. 2. Openings in uniform bi-axial stress field. 3. Square openings close to a free boundary.

For elliptic opening with major and minor axes 2a and 2b, in a plate, subjected to uniform uniaxial stress field (p) tangential stress coefficient along the contour is given by: (J, -_=
P

sin28 + 2Ksin20 - Kz cos2c) sin26 + Kz cos20
P

where K = a

b

For 8 = 0, 5

= 1 and for 8 = '

c
FIG. 2 STRESSES INCIRCULAR OPENINGI DUETO UNIFORM UNIAXIAL STRESS 3

6.4.4 Finite Element Method Finite element method has been used for obta:ning elastic-plastic analysis of openings. This method is

IS 12966 (Part 2) : 1990

particularly useful in investigation of the behaviour of openings in non-linear range and to study the propagation of cracks near the openings.

Concrete c>

is assumed to behave as a linear and elastic material. Tension upto the values permitted in IS 6512 : 1984 may be allowed. Gallery reinforcement is required if tension exceeds these permissible values; and

.

4 Total tensile force is taken by steel reinforcement.
9 PERMISSIBLE
STRESSES 9.1 The permissible stresses for reinforcement shall be taken in accordance with the relevant standards. 10 DESIGN OF REINFORCEMENT 10.1 The following design procedure will apply to both concrete and masonry dams. In case of masonry dams, a portion around an opening which is reinforced is .constructed in concrete. The thickness of concrete around vertical openings like air vents is generally 300 mm. For other opening, the thickness varies from 750 mm to 1 500 mm. The design procedure will be identical with that for a concrete dam; the assumption is that the masonry and concrete behave as one mass. 10.2 The procedure for the design of reinforcement will be as follows:
D/A

a) Locate the centre of the opening on a cross-section of the dam; b) Determine prevalent stress field in the dam section at that location in the absence of the opening ( SEC 6.3 ) c) Determine the stress distribution along the plane considered for design subjected to uniform stress field arrived at in (b) above ( see 6.4 ); d) Compute the total tensile force across the plane considered for design ( see 10.3 ); e) Compute area of steel reinforcement ( see 10.4 ); f) Details of the reinforcement ( see 10.5 ). 10.3 Computation
of Total Tension

NOTE - For design purposes the normal stress on rhe centerline parallel to the stress field direction may be considered to be indcpendent of B. For ox 7 0 the tensile area = 0'149 A. (T" is the normal stress perpendicular to Y-axis. D is the distance from the boundary of the opening along the Y-axis. GULAR

CURVE FOR STRESSCOEFFKIEWS FOR F&TANOPENING DUE ro UNFORM STRESS FIELD PERPENDICULAR TO THE LINE UNDER CONSIDERATION

FIG. 3

7 LOADING

CONDITIONS

7.1 Critical Loads

required

The important loads that are to be considered for the determination of overall stress field are dead load, reservoir and tail-water loads, earthquake forces, uplift pressure, earth and silt pressure, ice-pressure, wind pressure and wave pressure. Designs should be based on the most adverse combination of probable load conditions and include those loads having a reasonable probability of simultaneously occurrence. The gallarics and other openings in gravity dams shall be designed for the load combination listed in IS 65 12 : 1984, Load combination B, C, E, F and G, shall, however, be analysed without uplift. 7.2 Typical planes considered for analysis - For some simplified cases critical loads and sections are indicated in Table 1.
8 ASSUMPTIONS IN DESIGN

The total tension is determined by integrating the area under tension along a particular section. 10.4 Computation
of Area of Steel Reinforcement

After obtaining the total tension for section under consideration for the opening, for the critical loading condition, the area of steel is calculated by dividing the total tension (F ) by allowable stress (o,,) that is

8.1 Following assumptions have been made in carry-

10.5 Detailing of Reinforcement Typical reinforcement details are shown in Fig. 5. The reinforcement bars must be straight as far as possible and enchored in a zone of compressive stress. The bars will generally be put up horiiontally above the roof of the gallery and vertically on the sides. Diagonal bars are necessary at the corners. The spacing of bars 4

ing out the design: a) The minimum distance of the boundary from the face of opening is two and half the width of the opening; b) The problem is treated as plane stress problem;

IS 12966 ( Part 2 ) : 1990

100 t

04

O-6

O-6

1-O

l-2 0/A

1-L

l-6

l-6

2.0

2-2

2.4

NOTE - am is the normal stress perpen&cular

to Y-axis. D is the distance from the boundary

of the opening along the Y-axis.

FIG. 4

CURVE FOR STRESS COEFFICIENTS FOR RECTANGULAR OPENING DUE TOUNIFORM STRESS FIELD PARALLEL TO THE LINEUNDER CONSIDERATION

Table 1 Critical Loads and Sections

Type of Openings / (1)
Longitudinal u/s Third

Critical LoadingConditionfor Opening Locatedat
Middle Third (3) Reservoir empty or full d/s Third (4) Reservoir full \

Planes
Considered for Analysis

(2)
Reservoir empty

(5)
Vertical section perpen dicular to the longitudinal axis of dam Horizontal section through the opening Vertical section parallel to longitudinal axis of dam

Vertical

Reservoir full

Reservoir full

do

Transverse

Reservoir empty

Reservoir empty or full

do

IS 12966 ( Part 2 ) : 1990 generally should not be less than 15 cm centre to centre and not greater than 30 cm. The minimum clear cover shall be 15 cm for the reinforcement. The minimum diameter of reinforcement bars shall be 16 mm for main reinforcement and 12 mm for distribution. Other details of reinforcement must follow IS 456 : 1978. 10.6 Relaxation in Design Criteria Any change in the reinforcement around galleries as computed by the procedure indicated in 10.2 above can be made if indicated otherwise through the studies carried out by finite element and/or photoelastic methods. 11 SPECIAL CASES 11.1 Opening Close to Surface In some cases, openings may have to be provided close to the face of the dam or near the face of a block. In such cases, the results obtained for normal openings discussed above are not applicable. Photoelastic method or finite element method should be used to obtain stress fields in such cases. 11.2 Multiple Openings necessary to provide a number of separate outlets through a dam. In a series of such openings in a single horizontal plane, the clear spacing aa sk
It is frequently

between these openings should be more than two times the width of opening. The average compression on the unbroken portions of a horizontal section containing these openings is equal to the total force on this section, divided by the net area. The distribution of this stress is unknown. A safe design should result if the average compression does not exceed the allowable compressive stress and if reinforcement is provided as for a single opening. 11.2.1 If the clear space between two openings is less than twice the width of openings, the horizontal reinforcement shall be made continuous. Such close spacing should be avoided as far as possible. For high dams, with high working compressive stresses the widest practicable spacing of openings should be adopted. 11.3 Three-Dimensional Openings, Intersections, etc At the intersection of two or more openings, the state of stress is three-dimensional and the two dimensional procedure described above is not applicable. For a detailed analysis, three-dimensional investigations should be carried out. However, for gallery intersec-. tion, it should be generally adequate to double the main reinforcement provided at top and bottom on all the sides of intersection for a distance equal to the width of the gallery. A typical arrangement at gallery intersection is illustrated in Fig. 6. /

FIG. 5

TYPICAL REINFORCEMENT PLACEMENT POSITION AROUND A RECTANGULAR GALLERY 6 .

IS 12966 ( Part 2 ) : 1990

04 FOR REINFORCEMENT DETAIL SEE FIG.
X-X

D-D LONGITUDINAL I II r-l REINFORCEMENT GALLERY OF MAIN

II

A 14

r

MAIN

REINFORCEMENT X-GALLERY

OF

T
B

I
B

1
L

L

LONGITUDINAL REINFORCE OF X-GALLERY X-GALLERY GALLERY

MEN1

IIr
II

-

LONGITUDINAL

II

Il.1

I

I+
II

I

L MAIN REINFORCEMENT OF MAIN GALLERY

9

DETAIL
NOTE - Double tbemain reinforcement

X-X
at top and bottom of gallery in the zone abed, B is width of gallery.

FE.

6

TYPICAL F~EI~ORCEMENT PLACEMENT POSITION FOR T JUN~IONFOR F~EC~ANGULAR GALLERIES

7

IS 12966 ( Part 2 ) : 1990

ANNEX A (Clause 6.3.1)
APPROXIMATE ANALYTICAL METHOD

The overall stress field ox and oY in the dam Section along a line passing through the centre of opening for various conditions as stipulated is IS -65 12 : 1984 is calculated as under: i) Normal Stress (3Y
oy = a + bx

4
XYU

+-

T2

'xyd

1
'xyd

6 a -cp_T2 ay

4 a d, __ _Txyd T a y a" T ay 6 +T3

a5 _=
aY

6 T3 ay

XY*

where,

a
b

= Oy.3
=

1

Oyli- Oyd
T

+Where, aT ay
2'xyd

3 a + - T2 -ay T2 ay xyU

'xyd

ii)

Shear Stress
`5 =7

7xy, 5yx a, + b,x + c,x2
'Sxyd

whersy `1
b,

YX

=

= tan@" + tan+,

=
=

-$
3 -T
-

3+

+ zxyu +

>

," a

= - (P, -P,) tan@" (ro* -

c1

=

2. q

+ TsxY" + ltxyd >

=

zXYU
`5

=
=

@, (oyll- P,) tan
pd> tan od
ox

vd

@yd -

a a ay `vd = tan+, ( -oyd - ro*) + ay a = rc +k, tan$y+k2tan$d

' tan@d$day + :ZP
2

Pd)

iii)

Normal Stress

(T= = a2 + b,x + czx2 + d,x3

where,
a2 = aI tan+d +Pd

b, = b, tan ed + -

aa,

a ay %

= r, + k3 tanQU + k, tan@, -- :
2

CP

C2

=

cl

ay .l ab tan f$, + - ___! 2 ay ac ay ac --A JY are calculatedBs below:

k, = 4

p,-

G2ZW

-F3

CM

d2=---r 3

i

k, =;2ZW-+pd--

12 T3

CM

aa ab The terms 1 ,$ay ay

k, =-$iN+~2L'W-+,

k, = -+I4

-f

ZW +;p,

NOTE -- Refer Fig. 1 for reference * To be omitted if no tail wata

.

Standard Mark of the Bureau of Indian The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder.

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications ). Revision of Indian Standards reproduced in free use, in the type or grade BIS.

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference: Dot : No. RVD 9 ( 2764) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

( 331 01 1375 31

Eastern

: l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol.

Maniktola

37 86 62

Northern Southern Western

160036 600113

53 38 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus.

MADRAS

: RiIanakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHIJBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR PATNA. SRINAGAR. ,THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India

