( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS : 4124 - 1981

Indian (First

Standard Revision)

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO POWDERS

Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, BDC 19
Chairman DR M. PANCHOLI A-15123 Vasant Vihar New Delhi 110057 Members Sum P. N. A~ORA SHRI S. N. Aa0a.k Srim S. KUMAR ( Alternate ) Representing All India Wire Netting Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Shalimar Wires & Industries Ltd, Hooghly

SHRI M. M. BAHAL Tata-Robins-Fraser Ltd, Jamshedpur LT COL C. A. RODRIGUES ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta Sm S. K. BANERTEE SHRI P. R. D";4s ( Alternate ) SHRI R. K. CHOURARIA srnu HAsMumi c. SHAH Da P. C. JAIN SHRIJ. N. BOHRA ( Alternate ) DR P. T. JOHN S~lu N. K. K-RI SHR~ A. R. A. KRISHNAN SHIU B. K. Smcm ( Alternate ) SHRIJ. MENDONSA Sm C. P. SOOD ( Alternate ) Jeetmull Jaichandlall ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta Standard Wire Products, Bombay National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR), New Delhi In personal .Nehru Associated Ministry of All capacity ( Type ZZZ .No. 749 3awaharlal University Qrts, L&r&hand, New Delhi ) Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay Defence

India Instrument Manufacturers' & Dealers' Association ( Bombay Region ), Bombay

SHRIR. V. RZWTHIDEVAN Snm S. B. Sum ( Altmnute ) SHRIA. V. S. R. A. SASTRY SHRI M. N. BALICA ( Alternate )

Central Water Commission, New Delhi Associated Instrument Ltd, New Delhi Manufacturers ( India ) Pvt

( Continued on page 2 ) 0 INDIAN This publication is protected Co&right 1982 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and of copyright under the said Act.

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement

IS : 4124 - 1981
( Continued from page Members SHRI c. s. slL4RMA SHRI C. M. P. SINHA

1)
Refiesenting

Cement Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi All India Instrument Manufacturers & Dealers SHRI c. P. SooD Association ( Delhi Region), Delhi Cement Research Institute of India, New Delhi DR V. V. S~JBBA RAO National Mineral Development Corporation, New SHRIG.V. thRRAMANyA Delhi SHRI S. K. VELINGKER ( Altcrnatc tee1 Authority of India, New Delhi B SUPERINTENDENT SRI A. K. SEN ( Altemafc ) Director General, IS1 ( E.+q&%o Member) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI C. K. BEBARTA Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Methods Other Than Sieving Subcommittee, BDC 192
COfWlt7

DR BH V. RAMANAWRTIW Members SHRI B. H. BAJINA SERI K. C. BANERJEE Smu S. K. Griosx ( A&mate ) SHRI J. N. BOHRA Da P. T. JOHN %iP.x B. S. KEDARE SHRI R. S. MANI ( Aitma& ) SHRI S. L. MUICI-IERJEE SI-IRI V. C. PANCHAMWA SHRI RAM SINGH

Indian

Institute

of

Tropical

Meteorology,

Pune

Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Gujarat State Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, P. 0. Sindri National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi In personal capacity ( Qr .No. 749, Tj$e IZZ, Jawaharlal .Nehru University Quarters, Uttara Khand, .New Delhi ) Standard Batteries Ltd, Bombay

Inchek Tyres Ltd, Calcutta Kamani Metallic Oxides Pvt Ltd, Bombay Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), Chandigarh Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay &3PRESENTATMZ Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay REPRESENTATIVR All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, ~PRRSENTATIVR Calcutta Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) Pvt &RI A.V.S.R. SASTRI Ltd, New Delhi \ SHRI suBIiAs SnAmM ( Alternate )

IS : 4124 - 1981

Indian (First
0.

Standard Revision)

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO POWDERS

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Various terms relating to powders in engineering industry have been used so far with varying interpretations. A need to rationalize them has been felt for long. This standard covers definitions of several terms commonly used in metallic and non-metallic powder industry. 0.3 This standard was first published in 1967 with the intention of obviating ambiguity and confusion arising out of varying individual interpretations of different terms used for powders in engineering industry. It is being revised to include definitions of certain additional terms whose inclusion has become essential, and also to modify definitions of certain terms in line with international practice. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers definitions of terms relating to powders. 2. GENERAL 2.1 Particle A discrete element of material regardless of its size.

2.2 Powder - Discrete particles of dry material with a maximum dimension of 1 000 pm. 3. TYPES OF POWDER 3.1 Atomized Powder - Powder produced by the dispersion of molten metal or other material by spraying under conditions such that the material in finely divided form soldifies as powder. 3.2 Calcined Powder-Powder produced 3 or modified by roasting.

IS : 4124 - 1981 3.3 Carbonyl Powder-Metal powder produced by the thermal decomposition of a metal carbonyl, generally nickel or iron, or a combination of both. 3.4 Crystallized Powder Powder produced by crystallization.

3.5 Disintegrated Powder ( Comminuted Powder ) - Material reduced to powder by such means as attrition, impact, crushing, grinding, rolling or hammering. 3.6 Electrolytic Powder - Powder produced by electrolytic precipitation or by the pulverization of an electrodeposit. 3.7 Fumed Powder-Powder recovered from fume.

3.8 Hydrogen Reduced Powder-Powder produced by the hydrogen reduction of a metallic oxide or any other compound. 3.9 Milled Powder Powder modified or mixed in a mill. Powder occurring naturally. Powder produced by chemical precipita-

3.10 Natural Powder 3.11 Precipitated tion. 4. PARTICLE

Powder SIZE -

*4.1 Agglomerate *4.2 Aggregate

Several

particles

adhering

together.

-Assemblage

of particles

which are loosely coherent.

4.3 Centrifugal Classification ( Centrifugal Elutriation, Centrifugal Sedimentation ) - Processes as defined in 4.6 and 4.20 in which separation is accelerated by means of centrifugal force. 4.4 CIassi6cation or density. Grading in accordance with particle size, shape

4.5 Dust - Particulate material which is or has been airborne and which passes a 75+m IS Sieve. 4.6 Elutriation - Classification rising fluid ( see also 4.3 ). effected by movement relative to a

*In paint industry, the term `agglomerate' is given a broader meaning to include all clusters of particles, however joined together. The term `aggregate' is used for particles rigidly joined together by sintering, cementing, etc.

4

IS : 4124 - 1981 4.7 Equivalent Free-Falling Diameter - Diameter of a sphere which has the same density and the same free-falling velocity in a given fluid as the particle. 4.8 Equivalent Surface Diameter-Diameter the same effective surface as the particle, when conditions. of a sphere which has determined under stated

4.9 Equivalent Volume Diameter-Diameter of a sphere which has the same effective volume as the particle, when determined under stated conditions. 4.10 Fines ( Undersize ) - That portion through the apertures of a stated sieve. 4.11 Flocculates Loosely bound of the charge which has passed

clusters

of particles

easily

dispersed.

4.12 Free-Falling Velocity - Velocity of fall of a particle through a still fluid at which the effective weight of the particle is balanced by the drag exerted by the fluid on the particle. 4.13 Fume - Cloud of airborne particles, generally condensation of vapours or from a chemical reaction. 4.14 Grading Separation of a powder into visible, arising from

fractions. of natural or industrial

4.15 Grit - Hard particles, usually origin retained on 75-pm IS Sieve. 4.16 Oversize-That through the apertures portion of the of a stated sieve.

mineral,

charge

which

has failed

to pass

4.17 Particle Size - The smallest sieve aperture through which a particle will pass, if presented in the most favourable attitude for the purpose of sieving. 4.18 Projected Diameter - Diameter of a circle area as the projected profile of the particle. which has the same

4.19 Reynolds Number - Dimmensionless parameter which defines the flow pattern of a fluid surrounding a particle, calculated from the following formula : 5

IS : 4124 - 1981 R, where, R,
V

vdp =-=17

vd *

d P

77
V

=Reynolds number, =mean velocity in m/s, =diameter of spherical particle in m, =density of fluid in kg/m3, =absolute ( dynamic ) viscosity in Pa. s, and = kinematic viscosity in m*/s.

4.20 Sedimentation - Classification effected by rate of fall in a still fluid, usually under laboratory conditions ( see also 4.3 ). 4.21 Settling - Classification effected by rate of fall in a fluid which may have a horizontal component of velocity. 4.22 Sieving ( Screening ) - The process of separating a mixture particles according to their size by means of one or more sieves. 4.23 Size Distribution -Distribution of size fractiohs of

in a powder.

4.24 Size Fraction-The portion of the charge which passes through one sieve and is retained by another or by the receiver. 4.25 Size Range Lower and upper limits of particle size of a powder.

4.26 Smoke - Visible cloud of airborne particles derived from combustion, or from other chemical reaction; mainly smaller than 1 pm. 4.27 Stokes Diameter - Equivalent free-falling diameter within the range of validity of Stokes Law, that is for which the Reynolds number is less than O-2. 4.28 Stokes Law - Equation by means of which the free-falling velocity attained by a particle under viscous flow conditions may be calculated. The free-falling velocity can be calculated from the equation given below:
V

=d*g (U-P> 1%
=free-falling velocity in m/s, =stokes diameter of particle in m, = gravitational acceleration in m/s*, =density of particle in kg/ma, =density of fluid in kg/mJ, and =absolute ( dynamic ) viscosity in Pa.s. 6

where

IS : 4124 - 1981 5. PARTICLE 5.1 Acicular 5.2 Angular 5.3 Crystalline 5.4 Dendritic 5.5 Fibrous SHAPE Needle-shaped. Sharp-edged or having roughly polyhedral shape. Of geometric shape, freely developed in a fluid medium. Having a branched crystalline shape. Regularly or irregularly thread-like. ) Plate-like.

5.6 Flaky ( Lame&r 5.7 Granular shape. 5.8 Irregular 5.9 Nodular -

Having an approximately equi-dimensional but irregular Lacking any symmetry. Having a rounded irregular shape. Globule-shaped.

5.10 Spherical 6. POWDER

PROPERTIES

6.1 Adsorption Surface Area - Surface area of a powder calculated from data obtained from a stated adsorption method. 6.2 Angle of Repose - Angle to the horizontal assumed by the surface of a naturally formed heap of powder at rest, obtained by pouring from a height. 6.3 Apparent Particle Density - Mass of a particle divided by the volume of the particle excluding open pores but including closed pores. 6.4 Apparent Powder Density-Mass of the powder divided by the volume occupied by the powder under stated conditions. 6.5 Bulk Density poured conditions. Apparent powder density under stated freely-

6.6 Calculated Surface Area-Surface area of a powder calculated from the measured size of its constituent particles determined by a stated method. 6.7 closed particle. Pore Cavity not communicating with the surface of a

IS : 4124 - 1981 6.8 Compressibility - Ability of a powder to be corn ressed, as defined by the compression ratio determined under stated testi g g conditions. 6.9 Compression Ratio - Ratio of the volume occupied by a loose powder to the volume of the compact made from it under stated pressure conditions. 6.10 Decrepitation due to internal forces, 6.11 6.12 Disperse Dispersion The Break-down in size of the particles generally induced by heating. act of preparing a uniform distributed suspension. particles. by the of a powder

If

A fluid containing

6.13 Effective Particle Density - Mass of a particle divided volume of the particle including open and closed pores.

6.14 Filling Weight-Weight of powder contained in a receptacle of stated dimensions, when this has been filled under stated conditions applied to processing. 6.15 Flowability - Properties of a powder to flow under stated conditions. which determine its ability

6.16 Friability - Tendency for the particles of a powder to breakdown in size during storage and handling under the influence of light physical forces. 6.17 Grindability mechanical means - Ease with which a powder under stated conditions. may be cornminuted by

6.18 Loading Weight - Weight of powder contained in a receptacle of stated dimensions, when this has been filled under stated conditions applied to packaging. 6.19 Open Pore Cavity communicating Ratio with the surface of a particle.

6.20 Particle Porosity volume of the particle.

of the volume

of open pores to the total

6.21 Permeability - Facility with which a porous mass, for example, powder bed or compact, permits the passage of a fluid. 6.22 Permeability Surface Area - Surface area of a powder from the permeability of a powder bed under stated conditions. 8 calculated

a

IS : 4124 - 1981 6.23 Powder Porosity - Ratio of the volume of voids plus the volume of open pores to the total volume occupied by the powder. 6.24 Specifx Surface - Surface area of the particles in a unit mass of powder determined under stated conditions. It is generally expressed as cm*/g up to a value of 10 000 and as m*/g for higher values. 6.25 Suspension Distribution of particles in a fluid ( see also 6.12).

6.26 Tap Density - Apparent powder density of a powder bed formed in a container of stated dimensions, when a stated amount of the powder is vibrated or tapped under stated conditions. 6.27 True Density - Mass of a particle particle excluding open and closed pores. 6.23 Void 7. POWDER Space between particles. PROCESSING divided by the volume of the

7.1 Binder - Materials added in solid or liquid form to a powder to improve the strength of a compact. 7.2 Bridging - Formation the direction of flow. 7.3 Briquette Compacted of arches of keyed or jammed solid mass of particles particles across

( fuel industry ).

7.4 Cold Pressing ture.

Operation of pressing carried out at room tempera-

7.5 Compact - Coherent predetermined form prepared by compressing powder in a mould or die. i 7.6 Dewaxing - Heat treatment to remove, without decomposition, the wax or lubricant from a compact. 7.7 Expansion - Increase in size of a compact. It is expressed as a percentage of the final volume or stated final linear dimension. 7.8 Green Compact Compact intended for sintering or other treatment. density of a green compact before any

7.9 Green Density - Apparent sintering or other treatment. 7.10 Hot Pressing sintering.

Operation of pressing carried out with simultaneous

9

IS : 4124 - 1981 7.11 Lubricant ( For Compaction ) - Material added in solid or liquid form to a powder to assist movement of the particles during compaction. 7.12 Pellet A small compact ( chemical industry ).

7.13 Presintering - Heat treatment carried out at a temperature below the final sintering temperature to strengthen a compact. 7.14 Pressed Density-Apparent 7.15 Pressing or die. Compaction density of a compact.

of a powder under pressure in a mould

7.16 Recovery Factor ( Non-metallic ) [ Spring Factor (Metallic ) ] Change of dimensions in a compact on ejection from the die or mould. 7.17 Shrinkage-Reduction in size of a compact on sintering. It is expressed as a percentage of the final volume or stated linear dimension. 7.18 Sintered Compact Green compact after sintering.

7.19 Sintering - Bonding by means of heat of particles in a mass of powder or a compact. 7.20 Tablet A small compact ( pharmaceutical industry ).

7.21 Test Block - Compact whose properties are used for assessing the quality of the powder. 7.22 Warm Pressing - Operation of pressing carried out above room temperature and below sintering temperature.

10

