Rd US IS 13268 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


stitt victor — Rma 


( TETT TRUAT ) 


Demineralization Plant — Guidelines 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.060.25 
© BIS 2023 
SIRE gier S9RT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF HAM, 9 FR SITE AH AMT, Ay elt - 110002 
S MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in | www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 8 


Water Quality for Industrial Purposes, CHD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Water Quality for Industrial Purposes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


Demineralized water is required for a wide range of industries involving production of chemicals, 
pharmaceuticals, fertilizers, steel, power, etc. Besides its other uses, the major use of demineralized water is as 
toiler feed water in boilers, ranging from low pressure to supercritical pressure. With the advent of high pressure 
and super-critical pressure boilers, the quality of demineralized water has acquired greater importance. This makes 
it essential to develop and make available the required specification for the guidance of users to procure and install 
efficient and economical system for production of demineralized water. 


The specification for demineralization plant varies from one place to other depending upon the source of water 
available, ionic load of water, treated water quality desired, regenerant availability, etc. These factors are to be 
taken into account for proper selection of demineralization plant, and to develop their detailed specifications. 


This standard was first published in 1992. In this first revision, the following modifications were incorporated: 


a) References, ICS No. have been updated; and 
b) Other editorial changes have been done to bring the standard in the latest style and format of Indian 
Standards. 


The composition of committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is listed in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. 


IS 13268 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
DEMINERALIZATION PLANT — GUIDELINES 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 
1.1 This standard covers the following: 


a) The basic details of demineralization plant; 


b) Brief guidelines for framing the 
specification of demineralization plant; 


c) Brief details of various systems currently in 
use for production of demineralized water; 
and 


d) The various considerations required for 
making the buyers specification complete in 
all respects. 


1.2 Attempts have been made to expose the buyers 
to different systems of demineralization plant, so 
that it may be easier for them to compare and select 
the best possible system suiting their particular 
requirements. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, which constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publications, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 252 : Caustic soda — Specification 
2013 (fourth revision) 
IS 265 Hydrochloric acid — Specification 


2021 (fourth revision) 


3 FACTORS FOR 
SPECIFICATION 


DRAWING UP 


3.1 The following factors are to be kept in view, 
before drawing up the specification for 
demineralization plant: 


a) The source of water (river water, well water, 
etc) available for treatment; 


b) Quality of treated water; 
c) End-use of demineralized water; 


d) The availability of regenerants in the vicinity 
of the proposed plant; 


e) Disposal of regeneration wastes; and 


f) The availability of utilities, such as steam, 
instrument air, etc. 


32 Quality of Feed Water 


3.2.1 The quality of water to be treated plays an 
important role in drawing up the specifications. The 
system has to be designed to process raw water 
available from different sources, such as rivers, tube 
wells, rivulets, wells, ponds, lakes, etc. 


3.2.2 The first step is to make a detailed analysis of 
raw water for various parameters including organics, 
colour, suspended solids, iron, manganese besides 
other dissolved solids. The analysis of raw water 
shall be carried out throughout the year to determine 
its profile variations with the change of seasons. 
Records of analysis of at least 2 years shall be made 
available before fixing up the treated water quality. 
Sufficient margin in various constituents of water 
may be kept in order to take care of variations in the 
coming years based on yearly seasonal variations in 
water analysis. The tubewell water composition 
does not vary much with the season, so in that case, 
it becomes easier to fix up the design parameters of 
water analysis; but in surface water, fluctuations are 
quite high, so it becomes difficult to arrive at the 
designed analysis. However, a proper assessment 
has to be made for fixing up designed water analysis. 


3.2.3 The next is to properly pretreat the raw water 
to obtain water suitable for feeding into 
demineralization plant as the ion exchange resin 
used in demineralization plant are susceptible to 
various constituents commonly present in water 
including iron, manganese, colour, suspended 
solids, residual chlorine, etc. The feed water for 
demineralization plant shall be free from chlorine, 
organics, iron, manganese, suspended solids within 
2 mg/l to 3 mg/l. It shall also be free from oil and 
grease to ensure long life of the ion exchange resins. 
All these considerations have to be kept in view in 
the design of a demineralization plant. 


3.3 Regenerant Chemicals 


The availability of regenerant chemicals in the 
neighborhood of demineralization plant also plays a 
decisive role for fixing the guidelines. It is 
economical to make use of chemicals available 
in nearby areas for regeneration of various ion 


IS 13268 : 2023 


exchange resins. This will also lead to substantial 
savings in storage capacity of chemicals in the plant 
due to their availability at a short notice. Regenerant 
chemicals like hydrochloric acid (see IS 265) and 
pure caustic soda (see IS 252) used shall conform to 
the relevant Indian Standards. 


3.4 Disposal of Regeneration Wastes 


The disposal of regeneration wastes plays an 
important role. The toxicity, acidity and alkalinity of 
the waste water have to be within the specified 
limits. These are strictly monitored vis-a-vis 
pollution control and environmental protection 
measures. Normally, the pH of effluents of 
demineralization plant varies depending upon the 
regeneration of cation or anion. In case of cation 
regeneration, the waste acid comes to drain, 
whereas, in case of anion, the waste alkali is drained. 
On mixing of both acidic and alkaline wastes the 
effluent gets neutralized to a certain extent. 
However, it is essential to ensure full neutralization 
to about pH 7.5 before the disposal off as plant 
effluent. 


3.5 Utility and Cost 


3.5.1 Proper assessment of -the availability of 
utilities is imperative before putting up the plant. 
Depending upon the availability, the complete scope 
of demineralization plant can be developed. In some 
cases heating of regenerant is required, for which 
arrangement for steam is to be made; otherwise 
electrical heating is to be resorted to. Besides this, 
compressed air may be required for operating 
various instruments/mechanical equipment. If the 
existing infrastructure does not include 
arrangements for supply of compressed air, the same 
are to be provided in plants specification. 


3.5.2 The type of operation, namely, automatic, 
semi-automatic or manual has got a major bearing 
on the cost of the plant. In some cases only manual 
operation is preferred; whereas in other cases 
semi-auto or auto operation is being considered. In 
case semi-auto operation is desired, proper care has 
to be taken in developing the specification because 
this greatly depends upon many process sequences. 


3.5.3 The process sequence adopted for the plant, 
requires special attention as it makes the plant 
operation more economical. 


4 BASIC PARAMETERS 


4.1 Considerable importance is to be given for 
determination of the basic parameters so as to get a 
plant suiting the requirements of the client. 


4.1.1 Buyer specification consists of the following: 
a) Design; 
b) Engineering; 
c) Procurement; 
d) Transportation; 
e) Storage; 
f) Erection; and 


g) Commissioning of all the work including 
mechanical - electrical, instrumentation 
besides civil work. 


NOTE — Sometimes civil work is excluded from the 
scope and included in the scope of main civil contractor 
who executes civil work for the entire plant including 
demineralization plant. It becomes advantageous to 
adopt this, as the complete responsibility lies with a 
single civil contractor, following the same norms for the 
complete factory. It has got certain disadvantages as well 
because increased co-ordination is needed between 
demineralization plant supplier and civil contractor to 
complete the civil work in time so that the erection work 
of the demineralization plant is started as scheduled. 
Hence, it is preferred to have one source responsible for 
demineralization plant supply in all respects including 
civil works. 


4.1.2 The specification shall clearly give the 
minimum, normal, and maximum flow rates desired 
for the system. The flow and number of streams 
required largely depend on the requirement of 
demineralized water in the end use in other plants 
which has to be assessed prior to framing the 
specifications. The number of streams are also to be 
clearly identified as it makes a big cost impact in the 
plant. Sometimes, it is preferred to have 100 percent 
spare stream, whereas in other cases, no spare 
stream is desired as it is being compensated by 
creating a large capacity for storing treated water. 
The single stream demineralization plant is designed 
with higher capacity to get extra water for storage to 
take care of any extreme urgency. However, it is 
definitely preferable to go in for a minimum of two 
streams. One can go for any number of streams, but 
then the cost of the plant would increase with 
increase in number of the streams. Therefore, an 
optimum balance has to be struck for fixing the 
number of streams for a given end use. 


4.1.3 The header system shall also be clearly marked 
in the plant specification. Sometimes, it is desirable 
to have a single header system, whereas in other 
cases, separate headers for each stream are favoured. 
In some cases, a mixed approach is being adopted 
having both single header, and separate headers for 
some of the process fluid streams. Single header 
system is having certain flexibility, as any unit of 


this stream can be easily connected to other unit or 
the other stream. So single header system is 
commonly preferred. Some clients do prefer 
individual streams but the cost implications require 
to be looked into seriously. 


4.2 Storage Capacity 


The storage capacities for the feed water tank, 
degassed water tank, demineralized water tank and 
acid and alkali tank are also to be predetermined, and 
clearly defined in the specification of 
demineralization plant. 


4.2.1 Feed Water Tank 


The feed water tank capacity largely depends upon 
the availability of feed water, chances of failure of 
feeding system, fluctuations in the pressure, and 
flow of feed water. But in most of the cases, this tank 
acts as a buffer tank, and is not provided with more 
than 2 hours to 3 hours capacity which is just 
sufficient to provide suction to the feed water pump, 
so as to maintain constant pressure to the 
demineralization plant systems. 


4.2.2 Degassed Water Tank 


The capacity of degassed water tank largely depends 
upon the frequency of the regeneration of ion 
exchange resins, waste water used in the 
regeneration and extra capacity desired for 
emergency in the plant. All these factors shall be 
kept in view while evolving the minimum capacity 
of degassed water tank so that it covers all the 
contingencies in the plant. Normally it is sized at 
half an hour pumping capacity of degassed water 


pump. 
4.2.3 Demineralized Water Tank 


The capacity of the demineralized water tank greatly 
varies from one client to the other. The capacity is 
normally fixed on the basis of exigencies occurring 
in the plant, the variations in use of demineralized 
water in downstream plants, use of demineralized 
water for regeneration, etc. Normally, in power 
plants clients prefer to have the storage capacity for 
16 h to 24 h , but in other plants it is being kept for 
4hto8h However, there is no strict rule for it as 
this entirely depends upon the client's requirements. 


4.2.4 Acid and Alkali Tank 


The storage capacities of acid and alkali tanks 
required for regenerations are also to be clearly 
indicated in the specification. These capacities are 
dependent upon the consideration of the time it takes 
to procure the chemicals at plant site. Where it may 


IS 13268 : 2023 


take 10 days to 15 days for obtaining the 
chemicals, it becomes advisable to go in for at least 
one month's storage at the plant site. In normal 
cases, where a tanker of acid or alkali is expected 
within 4 days to 6 days time, storage capacity of a 
minimum of 15 days may be desirable. Wherever 
the regenerant chemicals are available in the plant, 
a limited storage of 3 days to 4 days only may be 
considered. 


5 FEED WATER 


5.1 Before developing a system and fixing 
specifications for demineralization plant, the source 
of feed water and its availability has got to be 
established. Sometimes, water is available in the 
form of filtered water after proper chlorination, 
coagulation, flocculation, clarification and filtration. 
The filtered water is being directly fed to the feed 
water tank followed by ion exchangers for 
production of demineralized water. However, it 
becomes essential to establish water quality, which 
shall be free from colour, organics, etc. In case of 
any colour, organics or free chlorine, the water has 
to be treated with active carbon to take care of minor 
quantities of contaminants coming in feed water. In 
case of unfiltered water, the active carbon filters are 
to be preceded by filters for which pressure sand 
filters are normally used; sometimes dual media 
filter having sand and anthracite are also used. 


5.2 For dechlorination, sometimes sodium sulphite 
is used, which is dosed in feed water before 
filtration. Sometimes the system is having only one 
dosing pot, where solid sodium sulphite is added 
along with water to make solution. The solution thus 
prepared is dosed at a desired rate under pressure 
before filtration. In other situation, a solution 
preparation tank with agitator is provided. The 
solution is dosed to feed water by means of sulphite 
dosing pump. 


6 DEMINERALIZATION SYSTEM 


6.1 There are different kinds of systems for 
treatment of water in order to get demineralized 
water. Nowadays, as the cost of regenerant chemical 
is high, it is advisable to select an economical 
system to reduce recurring cost on chemicals. 
Systems in operation are described in brief to guide 
the buyers in selecting a viable and stable 
demineralization water plant. 


6.1.1 Cation exchanger unit having strong 
acidic-cation exchange resin followed by anion 
exchange unit having strong basic anion exchange 
resin without any degasser system in between. This 
system is prepared for water having less alkalinity 
of 100 ppm and capable of giving demineralized 


IS 13268 : 2023 


water suitable for low pressure and to a certain limit 
for medium pressure boilers. Beside, this system can 
come handy also for industries using demineralized 
water for processing. In this system, both cocurrent 
and countercurrent techniques can be adopted 
depending upon the quality of feed water, but 
countercurrent technique is more economical 
(see Fig. 1). 


6.1.2 Cation exchanger unit hiving strong 
acidic-cation exchange resin followed by degasser 
system having degasser tower, and degassed water 
tank followed by strong basic anion exchanger. This 
system gives demineralized water for low pressure, 
and to a certain limit for medium pressure boilers as 
well. Here also, both cocurrent and countercurrent 
regeneration techniques can be used depending upon 
the quality of feed water but countercurrent 
technique is more economical. This system is 
suitable for water having moderate alkalinity of 
about 250 mg/l alkalinity. Here also strong basic 
anion exchange resin of Type 1 or Type 2 is used 
depending upon the requirement of silica leakage 
(see Fig. 2). 


6.1.3 Cation exchanger unit having strong 
acidic-cation exchange resin, followed by anion 
exchanger unit having strong basic anion exchange 
resin, followed by mixed bed exchanger unit, having 
a mixture of strong acidic-cation exchange resin, 
and strong basic anion exchange resin Type 1. This 
system gives improved quality demineralized water, 
sometimes called polished water because of the use 
of mixed bed exchanger unit which is also named as 
polishing unit because of its basic role to polish 
(refine) the demineralized water. Here also, 
cocurrent or countercurrent regeneration techniques 
can be adopted for both cation and anion exchanger, 
but for mixed bed exchanger it is always preferable 
to adopt cocurrent regeneration. This system gives 
demineralized water of high purity, which is 
required for use in medium pressure, high pressure 
boilers and other chemical processing industries 
where purity of water is of major concern. The 
system is suitable for water having alkalinity less 
than 100 ppm. Here also in anion exchanger, strong 
basic anion exchange resin of Type 1 or Type 2 can 
be used depending upon silica leakage (see Fig. 3). 


6.1.4 Cation exchanger unit having strong 
acidic-cation exchange resin followed by degasser 
system having degasser tower and degassed water 


tank followed by anion exchanger unit having strong 
basic anion exchange resin followed by mixed bed 
exchanger unit having a mixture of strong 
acidic- cation exchange resin and strong basic anion 
exchange resin of Type 1. Here also both kinds of 
regeneration techniques as in 5.1.3 can be used 
depending upon the quality of demineralized water 
desired except for mixed bed unit. The system yields 
demineralized water of high purity which is useful 
for medium and high pressure boilers. This system 
is suitable for water having moderate alkalinity of 
250 ppm. Use of Type 1 or Type 2 strong basic anion 
exchange resin in system depends greatly upon 
leakage of silica from the system (see Fig. 4). 


6.1.5 The cation exchanger unit in the systems 
described above may further be split into a system 
consisting of weak acid cation exchanger unit 
having weak acidic-cation exchange resin, followed 
by strong acid cation exchanger unit having strong 
acidic-cation exchange resin. This system is more 
useful for water having high alkalinity of more than 
300 ppm and high hardness of more than 300 ppm. 
The modified systems are commonly adopted to 
conserve the regenerant chemicals. Here, the 
regeneration is adopted in thoroughfare manner 
involving passing of regenerant from one unit to the 
other unit in series. Normally, the regeneration is 
being done from strong acid cation resin to weak 
acid cation resin by adopting cocurrent thoroughfare 
technique, that is, using both the regeneration in 
cocurrent manner in series or using countercurrent 
thoroughfare regenerations technique involving 
countercurrent regeneration of strong acid cation 
exchanger in series with cocurrent regeneration of 
weak acid cation resin (see Fig. 5). 


6.1.6 The anion exchanger unit in the above .systems 
can also contain two separate anion exchangers 
involving weak base anion exchanger followed by 
strong base anion exchanger. This system is also 
used to conserve the regenerant chemicals and to 
make the plant more economical by adopting either 
cocurrent thoroughfare technique, involving 
regeneration of both weak base and strong base 
anion unit in cocurrent manner in series or 
countercurrent thoroughfare technique with 
countercurrent regeneration of strong base anion 
exchange resin with cocurrent regeneration of weak 
base anion exchange resin in series is adopted. The 
system is used when the water is having a high 
amount of chlorides and sulphates (see Fig. 6). 


IS 13268 : 2023 


geet, 
ERR: Filtered raw water SBA Strong base anion unit 
SAC Strong acid cation unit DMH Demineralized water 


Fig. 1 Frow DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF A 
TDEMINER ATLIZATION Pra NT 


FRW 
SAC 
| DMW 
FRW Filtered raw water SBA Strong base anion unit 
SAC Strong acid cation unit DMW Demineralized water 


DT  Degasser tower 
Fic. 2 FLOW DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT UF A 
DEMINERALIZATION PLANT WITH A DEGASSER TOWER 


IS 13268 : 2023 


FRW 


DMW 


FRW Filtered raw water SBA Strong base anion unit 
SAC Strong acid cation unit MB Mixed bed unit 
DMW Demineralized water 
Fic. 3 FLow DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF A DEMINERALIZED 


PLANT WITH A MiXED BED UNIT 


FRW 
SBA 
DMW 
FRW Filtered raw water SBA Strong base anion unit 
SAC Strong acid cation unit MB Mixed bed unit 


DT  Degasser tower DMW  Demineralized water 


Fia. 4 FLow DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT of A DEMINERALIZATION 
PLANT WITH A DEGASSER AND A MIXED BED UNIT 


FRW Filtered raw water 
WAC Weak acid cation unit 


SAC Strong acid cation unit DMW Demineralized water 
OT | Degaàsser tower 


Fic. 5 FLOW DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF A DEMINERALIZATION 
PLANT WITH AgWEAK ACID CATION AND A MIxep BED Unit 


SBA Strong base anion unit 
MB Mixed bed unit 


FRW 


SAC 


FRW Filtered raw water 
SAC Strong acid cation unit 
DT Degasser tower 

WBA Weak base anion unit 


IS 13268 : 2023 


DMW 


SBA Strong base anion unit 
MB Mixed bed unit 
DMW Demineralized water 


Fic. 6 FLow DIAGRAM SHOWING THE ARRANGEMENT OF A DEMINERALIZATION 
PLANT WIIH A WEAK BASE ANION AND A MIXED BED UNIT 


6.1.7 In the systems given in 6.1.1 and 6.1.2, 
sometimes it becomes desirable to go in for weak 
base anion exchanger in place of strong base anion 
exchanger specially in cases where silica removal is 
not so critical from the feed water. 


6.1.8 In the system given in 6.1.1 to 6.1.6 for strong 
base exchanger, sometimes Type 2 strong base 
anion exchange resin is used in place of Type 1 
strong base anion exchange resin. This system is 
useful when silica leakage desired in the 
demineralized water is slightly higher. 


6.1.9 The system sometimes necessitates make use 
of two mixed bed exchanger unit in series, that is, 
one mixed bed unit followed by an other mixed bed 
unit in place of only one mixed bed unit. Such 
systems are normally employed to get highly pure 
demineralized water which is suitable for high 
pressure or super-critical pressure boilers or in cases 
where highly refined water is required. 


6.1.10 The cation exchanger unit in the system given 
in 5.1.2 may also be selected in two separate cation 
exchanger units, each having strong acid cation 
exchange resin where the regeneration is made by 
countercurrent technique for second cation 
exchanger unit and the thoroughfare manner in 
series with first cation exchanger unit. This process 
becomes more advantageous than one single 
exchanger, as it takes care of any extra leakage 
coming from the first cation exchanger and thereby 
gives much better treated water than in single 
exchanger unit. This system becomes more useful 
with higher dissolved solids in feed water. 


6.2 Any one of the above described systems can be 
selected for including in the specifications by client. 
However, analysis of water and economics of the 
process play the decisive role. As is evident from 
above, the regeneration technique plays an 
important role for achieving the desired quality of 
demineralized water. Depending upon the mode of 
regeneration, performance of exchangers varies. So 
it becomes important to fix the mode of regeneration 
in the specifications itself by the client. 


6.3 The minimum depth of resin used in the above 
exchangers shall not be less than 91.5 cm (3 feet). 


7 EQUIPMENT 


7.1 The equipment details constitute an important 
criterion to be given in the specification. Basic 
parameters for each and every equipment are to be 
given in the specification. 


7.1.1 Pressure Sand Filters 


7.1.1.1 The pressure sand filters shall be either of 
vertical or horizontal type which is to be clearly 
mentioned in the requirement. Normally, vertical 
sand filters are preferred except in cases, where 
higher flow is required. The flow for the filters may 
clearly be established so as to cover the requirement 
of demineralized water, waste water for regeneration 
of exchangers, and filtered water for backwashing 
the filters. Backwashing operation is adopted for 
cleaning the filter bed, and to make the bed loose, 
for reducing pressure drop while running the plant. 
The backwashing of filters is done by either filtered 
water alone or by air and filtered water together or 


IS 13268 : 2023 


independently. The desired mode of backwashing is 
to be clearly specified in the specification. 


The storage tank shall be located either over ground 
at a desired height to get the sufficient pressure for 
backwashing or on the ground level. In the latter 
case, extra pumps (1.5 kg/cm?) are required for 
backwashing the filters. Air requirement for 
backwashing should always be met by the rotary air 
blowers. Services air of 3 kg/cm? to 6 kg/cm? 
pressure shall never be used for air scouring as it will 
churn up the filter media. For provision of filtered 
water tank, its elevations, specification of filtered 
water pumps and air blowers shall clearly be 
stipulated to get the complete system. The guarantee 
of the filtered water coming out of filter shall be 
given in the specification based on which filter is 
designed. In general, turbidity is specified for filter 
design and water - outlet of filter shall contain 
turbidity less than 2 NTU. 


7.1.1.2 The material of construction of filter is to be 
given clearly. The void space above the packed bed 
may be mentioned which is normally kept about 
50 percent of the packed height. 


7.1.1.3 The standard design specification are as 
follows: 


a) Air blown — 0.4 kg/cm? to 0.5 kg/cm? air 
discharge pressure 0.015 m?/m? s to 
0.025 m?m? s of filter bed area 
(air requirement); 


b) Backwash pump — 1.5 kg/cm? discharge 
pressure at 10 l/m? sec of filter bed area 
(backwash requirement); 


c) Filter pump — 3 to 4 kg/cm? discharge 
pressure, 1.3 to 4.1 Um? sec of bed area 
(filtration rate); and 


d) Filter media - Fine sand: (30 cm): 


Grade — 0.45 mm to 0.5 mm; Coarse sand: 
25 cm; 


Grade — 0.8 mm to 1.2 mm; Fine pebbles: 
10 em; 


Grade — 3 mm to 6 mm; Medium 
pebbles: 10 cm; 


Grade — 6 mm to 12 mm; Coarse 
pebbles: 20 cm; and 


Grade — 12 mm to 25 mm. 


7.1.2 Active Carbon Filter 


The active carbon filter, wherever desired, is to be 
installed after pressure sand filters which consist of 
active carbon packing capable for dechlorination, 
de-oiling and de-coloration along with removal of 
traces of iron and organics. The grade of active 
carbon to be used for the purpose shall also be 
mentioned. The mode of backwashing these filters 
with filtered water is also to be mentioned. Here also 
a similar arrangement for backwashing as given 
above for the pressure sand filters is to be given. 
Normally arrangement for backwash of active 
carbon filter, and pressure sand filters are common, 
as at no stage simultaneously backwash of both 
active carbon filter and pressure filter is expected. 
Even, if it so happens, backwashing of the units can 
be easily staggered. The guarantee of the quality of 
treated water shall be incorporated in the 
specification. The quality parameters of the treated 
water shall conform to limits as follows: turbidity 
(< 1 NTU), chlorine (< 0.01 mg/l), and iron 
(< 0.01 mg/l). The material of construction of the 
body and lining, if any, is to be specified. Normally, 
epoxy lining is preferred on inside surface. The void 
space above the packed bed may be specified which 
is kept about 50 percent of packed bed. 


Design specification 


3 m minimum 
12 m maximum 
6 m normal; and 


a) Activated carbon 
bed depth 


b) Contact time of 15 minutes minimum 
water with activated 30 minutes normal 
carbon 


7.1.3 Exchanger Unit 


The details of the exchanger units are to be clearly 
specified keeping in view the requirements of the 
client. These also include the required number of 
inspection windows, number of manholes and other 
mechanical requirements. The internal arrangement 
of the exchanger is to be left to the bidders as it 
depends upon the type of system adopted by them 
either header lateral system or strainer on bed plate 
system for proper collection and distribution of 
water uniformly through exchanger bed. The 
minimum, normal, and maximum flow through 
exchanger may clearly be specified. The void space 
above the packed resin bed may clearly be 
mentioned, which is normally kept about 75 percent 
of the resin depth for cation and anion exchangers, 


whereas for mixed bed it is preferable to keep 
minimum 100 percent of the mixed bed resin depth 
for expansion. The quality of treated water 
guaranteed as coming out of each exchanger may be 
given in the specification based on which 
exchangers are to be designed. Normally for cation 
exchangers there shall be leakage of some sodium 
ions which depends upon the regeneration level of 
the exchanger. For cation exchangers, the leakage of 
hardness is considered nil and sodium leakage is 
being permitted normally in the range of 1 mg/l to 
2 mg/l. The term regeneration level refers to the 
amount of regenerant chemical used for the 
regeneration of exchanger resin. For anion 
exchangers there is some leakage of chloride ion and 
silica ion, depending upon the type of anion 
exchange resin used in the system. With any leakage 
of sodium ion from cation exchanger, there is a 
resultant increase in leakage of anion thereby 
increasing conductivity and silica content of 
demineralized water. The conductivity and desired 
silica content of treated water coming out of anion 
exchanger shall be clearly defined in the 
specification for design, so that optimum 
regeneration level can be selected both for cation 
and anion exchanger units. The guaranteed water 
quality desired from mixed bed unit shall also be 
clearly defined in the specification so that the unit 
may be designed accordingly. 


7.1.4 Degasser Tower 


The degasser tower requirement may also be clearly 
defined with respect to its flow rate, type of packing 
(stainless steel or glazed ceramic), etc. The 
guaranteed water quality coming out of degasser 
shall also be clearly given for which carbon dioxide 
shall be normally in the range of 4 mg/l to 8 mg/l as 
calcium carbonate. Necessary manhole, hand hole, 
etc, may be clearly spelled out to facilitate easy 
maintenance. Tower is normally placed on some 
height to give a gravity flow to degassed water tank 
placed below it, where degassed water coming out 
of the tower is collected and fed to downstream 
systems, and other uses in the plant. The degassed 
water tank inside is normally lined with acid and 
alkaline resistant tiles to prevent hardness and silica 
pick up from the walls by the acidic water. 
Normally, degasser water system is kept common 
for the streams, but sometimes installations may be 
required stream-wise which is to be clearly indicated 
in the specification. The number of air blowers 
required for the degasser tower shall be mentioned 
which is normally kept two for each tower. The 
number of degassed water pumps may also be 
clearly specified, so that the bidders arc able to give 
the same type of system. Sometimes pumps are 


IS 13268 : 2023 


designed for 50 percent capacity only whereas in 
other case it is preferable to have pump capacity of 
100 percent. The main consideration is the 
economics of the recurring cost of the plant. 


8 ACID HANDLING SYSTEM 


8.1 The details of acid handling system and 
regeneration equipment desired for the system shall 
be mentioned in the specification. The details of acid 
storage tank capacity requirement has been given in 
4.2.4. Normally, sulphuric acid or hydrochloric acid 
is used for regeneration of the cation exchange resin. 
The acid supply to plant is made by road tanker. In 
cases, where requirement is very large, provision of 
rail tanker is also made in addition to road tanker. As 
the sulphuric acid is much more dangerous, extra 
precautions are to be taken for its handling. Acid 
tankers are sometimes preferred to be placed on 
height, so as to get the gravity flow from the acid 
tanker to acid storage tank in demineralization plant. 
The transfer of acid from acid tanker to acid storage 
tank is being done normally by pumps, but 
sometimes this transfer is also effected by 
pressurizing the tanker by air. In this case, the acid 
tanker shall be capable of withholding that much air 
pressure, as otherwise it would lead to failure of tank 
causing a serious accident. The material of acid 
transfer pumps are to be suitably selected depending 
upon the type of acid used. Separate regeneration 
equipment are required for use with sulphuric acid 
and hydrochloric acid, respectively. Generally, 
polypropylene pumps are used for hydrochloric acid 
series and stainless steel pumps for sulphuric acid 
series. 


8.1.1 Regeneration Equipment 


8.1.1.1 In case of sulphuric acid, the acid storage 
tanks shall be fully guarded to avoid contact of moist 
air with stored acid, for which silica gel breather 
shall be provided. In addition, proper seal shall also 
be included in overflow line to act as a vacuum 
breaker. Acid from storage tank is withdrawn either 
by gravity or by pumps and sent to acid day tank or 
to acid measuring tank, depending upon the - 
requirement. The acid measuring tanks are given 
separately for each exchanger (cation exchanger or 
mixed bed exchanger) as the requirement of each is 
different. Sometimes, the acid is fed directly to ion 
exchanger units with the help of acid dosing pumps. 
The online dilution of acid is done by providing a 
mixing tee, but extra precaution is to be taken in 
choosing suitable material of construction of mixing 
tee (normally stainless steel for sulphuric acid 
series), to avoid frequent failures due to the 
corrosive action of acid and heat of dilution acid 


IS 13268 : 2023 


which is required to be diluted from 98 percent 
to desired regenerant concentration ranging from 
1.5 percent to 5 percent. Separate acid dosing 
pumps are required for cation unit and mixed bed 
unit. The acid from each acid measuring tank 
which are normally put on sufficient elevation, is 
taken by gravity to acid dilution tanks placed at 
ground level where the concentration is reduced to 
about 20 percent to 30 percent. This dilute acid at 
the desired concentration is taken with the help of 
water ejector to different exchangers for further 
online dilution used for regeneration. Acid 
concentration is very important for regeneration of 
cation exchanger because the presence of more 
hardness in water leads to precipitation of calcium 
sulphate during regeneration, thereby leading to 
imperfect regeneration. 


8.1.1.2 In case of hydrochloric acid storage tank, 
proper precautions shall be taken to avoid 
hydrochloric acid vapour going out of the tank to the 
surroundings, for which fume absorbers shall be 
provided. Acid from storage tank is transferred in 
similar fashion as in the case of sulphuric acid 
mentioned in 8.1.1.1. The on-line dilution is done by 
water ejector (normally ebonite ejector for 
hydrochloric acid series) for getting desired 
concentration of regenerant concentration to about 
3 percent to 5 percent. Sufficient care has to be taken 
to control the acid fume in the plant area by 
providing -fume absorbers wherever necessary. 
Here also, separate acid measuring tanks for 
different exchanger units are to be provided. 
Information is also to be provided on the material 
required for construction of equipment to handle 
acid. 


9 NEUTRALIZATION SYSTEM 


9.1 Neutralization system is another important 
aspect particularly in the perspective of pollution 
control measures. All the waste waters coming out 
during regeneration of exchangers are required to be 
collected in a pit which is to be neutralized before 
discharge. Normally two sections in neutralizing pit 
are provided, each section being capable of holding 
total waste water coming out of all exchangers at a 
time. Sometimes, the neutralization pit is designed 
to take up either 12 hours or 24 hours collections of 
waste water coming out during regeneration of 
exchangers but this will add to the cost of plants as 
the pits require a suitable lining over RCC structure 
to handle acid/alkali. Proper pumping and 
recirculating arrangement for effluent mixing are 
also to be provided. Sometimes, additional air grid 
is provided in the pit for thorough mixing of 
alkali/acid for complete neutralization. Proper 


10 


specifications are to be developed for this system 
suiting client's requirement. Lime is normally used 
for neutralization for which lime preparation tank 
and feeding arrangement by gravity shall also be 
included in the specifications. Otherwise, proper 
acid/alkali mixing is to be specified in the 
specifications. 


9.2 The details of alkali handling system and 
regeneration equipment desired for the system shall 
be clearly mentioned in the specifications. Details of 
alkali storage tank are given in 4.2.4. Normally only 
caustic soda is used for regeneration of anion 
exchange resin in anion and mixed bed exchanger 
units, but sometimes ammonia is also used for 
regeneration of weak base anion exchange resin 
specially, in the nitrogenous fertilizer plant 
producing ammonia. 


9.2.1 Ammonia solution (10 percent) is preferred to 
be stored in the storage tank, which shall be properly 
sealed to avoid any vapour of ammonia escaping 
into atmosphere. This solution is fed to exchanger 
with the help of pump or water ejector to get the final 
concentration of ammonia (about 4 percent) 
required for regeneration of exchanger. 


9.2.2 The caustic soda solution tanks details have 
been given in 4.2.4, which shall be part of the 
specification, but the tanks shall be provided with air 
breather to avoid carbon dioxide intake from 
atmosphere which could lead to formation of sodium 
carbonate. Proper sealing, therefore, is also to be 
provided. 


The alkali tank normally stores caustic lye solution 
(about 40 percent to 47 percent) coming by tanker 
(road or rail) depending upon the requirement of 
alkali in the plant. The alkali pumps are used for 
transfer of alkali solution from the tanker to storage 
tank, from where, it is transferred to alkali day or 
alkali measuring tank by gravity or by alkali transfer 
pumps depending upon the elevation of the tank. 
The alkali day tank is designed for storing alkali 
required for regeneration of various exchangers in a 
day. The alkali measuring tanks are separately 
provided for anion exchange resin of anion and 
mixed bed exchanger units. The transfer of alkali 
from measuring tank to anion exchanger can be done 
either by alkali dosing pumps with on-line dilution 
by alkali ejector to achieve desired concentration of 
alkali solution for regeneration which normally 
ranges from 2 percent to 5 percent. But for 
regeneration of alkali to mixed bed unit the alkali 
ejector is used to get the desired alkali solution 
concentration in the range of 4 percent to 5 percent. 
Use of alkali dosing pumps is also preferred 


specially in case where pressure drop expected is 
high, such as in thoroughfare regeneration system. 


Sometimes, it becomes difficult to get lye solution 
in the vicinity of the plant then alternate 
arrangement of preparing alkali solution is to be 
made at the site by getting solid alkali in the form of 
flakes or solid. For this purpose, a separate alkali 
solution preparation tank has to be provided 
equipped with proper stirring arrangement. In 
addition, the alkali transfer pumps are required for 
transferring alkali solution prepared in the tank, 
which shall also be used for recirculation of alkali 
solution in the tank for proper mixing of solid to 
prepare the solution. At least one caustic preparation 
solution tank shall be included in the specification to 
take care of any extreme emergency, in case lye 
solution is not made available due to some reasons 
beyond control. 


10 GENERAL AND CONSTRUCTIONAL 
FEATURES 


It is essential to describe general and constructional 
features of various equipment in the specification, 
including the mode of their operation, location of the 
plant, etc. 


10.1 General Features 


These cover (a) mode of operation (b) location of the 
plant, (c) type of instrumentation desired, and (d) 
electrical system requirement, etc. 


10.1.1 Mode of Operation 


10.1.1.1 For small plants, manual operation is 
preferred, as the operation of the small size valves 
does not pose any problem. Further, with the 
instruction, the total cost of the plant goes up, which 
discourages recourse to sophistication in small 
plants. Nowadays, due to operational difficulties and 
to minimize the recurring cost, the labor cost is to be 
reduced, which encourages one to go in for 
semi-auto and auto operation of the plant. The mode 
of operation, therefore, has to be clearly specified. 


10.1.1.2 Semi-auto operation includes the operation 
of various valves through selector switches located 
in the control panel so that the operators can operate 
the plant from the control panel. Sometimes 
semi-auto operation includes stopping of the plant 
during service run by the selector switch, and 
thereafter the regeneration is to be carried out by 
means of sequence timer or programme logic 
controller. This system requires a lot of precision, 
maintenance, workmanship, reliability, and 
smoothness in operation of various instruments and 


11 


IS 13268 : 2023 


valves. Although, such kind of system is becoming 
popular, one has to consider beforehand the factors 
mentioned earlier. Complete auto operation is not at 
all desirable in India because of the large variation 
in night and day temperature. However, still, some 
client prefer to go in for automatic plants. Naturally, 
success will depend upon the regular maintenance of 
various instruments and auto valves in operation. 


10.1.2 Location of the Plant 


This becomes an important factor for the total cost 
of the plant. In power sector it is normally preferable 
to go in for completely covered plant but in other 
chemical industries, including fertilizers, trends 
have set in to go in for open plants. The open plant 
is more economical compared to a covered plant, but 
there are some operational hazards which may have 
to be faced by the operators during monsoon, 
winters, and summers. In case, the plant is made 
semi-auto type it really becomes advantageous to go 
in for open plant, as frequent visit of operators to 
field is avoided. However, ultimately the choice 
between open and covered plant remains with the 
client. But the type (open or covered) must be 
included in the specification. 


10.1.3 Instrumentation 


Nowadays, more and more on-line instruments are 
included in the plants. This gives instantaneous 
analysis of water at various stages of the plant. More 
and more instruments are there in semi-auto and 
auto plants to control the regeneration and service 
run. 


10.1.3.1 In filters, most of the time manual operation 
is preferred but in some cases auto operation is 
selected. In case of auto operation, any high pressure 
drop across the bed leads to automatic backwashing 
followed by rinsing of the filter before putting for 
service run. For detection of pressure drop across the 
bed, differential pressure indicator alarm is used, 
which is connected with operation of service and 
backwash valves of the filter. Further, flow indicator 
integrator on individual filters are required besides 
recorder. Sometimes, in manual plant, use of only 
water meter in the feed line is preferred. In case of 
auto or semi-auto operation, the valves included for 
operation are pneumatically operated gate valves 
and only in some cases, where instrument air is not 
available, motorized valves are used. Inlet and outlet 
of the individual filters have pressure gauges which 
depend upon client’s requirement. However, outlet 
pressure gauge is definitely required to assess the 
pressure drop across the bed, but inlet pressure 
gauge can be avoided. 


IS 13268 : 2023 


10.1.3.2 The exchangers are required to have more 
instrumentation particularly in auto and semi-auto 
plants. It is desirable to have flow indicator in the 
inlet. Sometimes, only one flow indicator is 
provided in the inlet with a water meter in the outlet 
to assess the total quantity of water coming out 
during service run or in between two regenerations. 
Sometimes, differential pressure indicator is also 
provided to assess the pressure drop across the bed, 
otherwise only pressure gauges are provided in inlet 
and outlet pipes. The cation exchange unit is 
required to have sodium in indicating meter to 
indicate the leakage of cations, for which one probe 
is put in the outlet of the exchanger. The anion 
exchanger unit is provided with conductivity 
indicator to assess the conductivity, and even 
sometimes with silica analyser to estimate the silica 
content in the treated water. In some cases, even 
on-line, pH meter is provided in the outlet of the 
unit, but normally pH is measured in the laboratory 
only. The mixed bed exchangers have conductivity 
meter, silica analyser, pH meter to give the 
indications of quality of treated water. Sometimes, 
only a conductivity indicator is provided and rest of 
the measurements are carried in the laboratory. 
Besides above, pneumatic control valves are 
provided for each operation on the exchangers, 
sometimes motor operated valves are selected in 
place of pneumatic type specially at the place where 
instrument air is not available for use. In case, auto 
or semi-auto operation of the plant is not envisaged, 
most of the instruments on exchangers can be 
discarded, except flow indicator, and integrator 
which are needed in all circumstances. 


10.1.3.3 On regeneration side, handling of acid, 
alkali tanks and their feeding systems are involved. 
Here also, a good instrumentation is required for 
auto and semi-auto plants. The instrumentation 
depends upon the type of operation for feeding 
regenerant to exchangers. The tanks shall have level 
switches, so that proper levels in various tanks can 
be maintained. The system shall be provided with 
sufficient pneumatic or motorized control valves, 
besides the auto operation of pumps or blowers 
wherever necessary. Various stages of operation are 
better controlled by the timers which have to be set 
in advance during operation of the plant. Nowadays, 
use of programme logic control is also adopted for 
these systems, where the programme of operation is 
set in advance. The basic requirements of the 
instruments in the system shall be given in the 
specification, based on which the system shall be 
designed for operation. 


10.1.3.4 Some instruments are required for inlet and 
outlet pipelines to and from the battery limits of the 


12 


plant Normally, on water incoming lines 
instruments contain pressure indicators, recorders, 
pressure switch, etc. Sometimes use of water meter 
is made only for recording total water flow to the 
plant, specially in case of manual plants. For treated 
water line, many online instruments are needed, 
such as pressure indicator, flow indicator/recorder, 
conductivity indicator, pH indicator/recorder, silica 
analyser recorder, sodium analyser, recorder, 
chloride analyzer recorder, etc, depending upon the 
requirement. In normal plants, even the outgoing 
line has minimum flow indicator and pressure 
indicator. For the neutral effluent line, it becomes 
essential to provide at least a pH indicator to assess 
the pH of the effluent of the plant, which has to be 
neutral before disposal. However, specific 
instruments on various lines cannot be listed their 
installation varies from plant to plant. All the same, 
requirements of these instruments are to be clearly 
mentioned in the specification. 


10.1.3.5 Instrument control panel 


The details of instrument control panel may clearly 
be given in the specification so that all necessary 
instruments are provided on the panel. The 
requirement of enunciations for alarms may clearly 
be mentioned in the specification. The control panel 
varies according to the system adopted. But this 
leads to requirement of air conditioned room for 
satisfactory performance of instruments 
incorporating integrated circuits, relays and solid 
state system provided in control circuits. 


10.1.4 Electrical System 


Requirements of electrical system are to be broadly 
converted in the specification so that the plant can 
accordingly be designed. Sometimes, only high 
voltage power is available which calls for provision 
of a step down transformer in the system which shall 
be mentioned in the specification. The specification 
of control centres, switches, and location of push 
buttons may clearly be mentioned in detail so that 
these items are provided in the plant accordingly. 


10.2 Constructional Features 


The important constructional features of the various 
tanks, exchangers may be mentioned in the 
specification, so that the system is designed 
accordingly. The aspects covered include the 
material of construction, and general features of the 
tanks, exchangers, etc. 


10.2.1 Filters 


As the filters contain feed water and no acid/alkali is 
coming in contact, only mild steel vessels are 


required. Sometimes epoxy or bitumen lining is 
desired so that iron pick up from the vessel is 
minimized. The filters have proper arrangements for 
collection and distribution of water so that no 
channeling occurs inside the packed bed. The basic 
details may only be mentioned to enable the 
designer of the plant to meet the proper performance 
and guaranteed requirements. 


10.2.2 Exchanger Vessels 


All the exchangers require some kind of protective 
inner lining over mild steel to protect it from 
corrosive liquids. Normally, rubber lining or eborite 
lining is suggested, but now, use of FRP or 
polymethane is also recommended. Proper 
distribution of water and regenerants are to be 
provided inside the vessel so that, it is uniformly 
distributed all over the packed bed. In smaller 
diameter vessels, only one distributor is enough for 
putting both water and regenerant but in other cases 
it is preferable to have separate water and regenerant 
distributors. For collection of the treated water, good 
system is required for which lateral header system 
or bed support system is provided. As the collector 
system works as distribution system during back- 
washing of the vessels, it requires special design. In 
case of countercurrent regeneration, the regenerant 
flows from bottom, so the collection system which 
requires a good arrangement for uniform 
distribution throughout the bed. In this case, a 
middle collector is also provided for discharging the 
water coming during the regeneration. In mixed bed 
exchangers also, similar kind of arrangement is 
made. However, the details of constructional 
features are to be left to the system designer to be 
worked out on the basic requirement and treated 
water guarantee at different stages. 


10.2.2.1 Back-wash outlet strainers 


Strainers of stainless steel or PVC Construction are 
installed in the back-wash outlet of exchanger to 
prevent resin loss during back-wash operation. 


10.2.2.2 Resin traps 


Resin traps are installed at the treated water outlet of 
each exchanger to cater the resin leaks through leaky 
strainers or loosened strainers in the collecting 
system during service runs. 


10.2.3 Water Storage Tanks 


RCC tanks are used with bitumen lining for feed 


13 


IS 13268 : 2023 


water storage In case of degassed water tank, acidic 
water from degasser tower is stored, so proper 
lining is desired from inside. Normally, rubber 
lining is suggested for this purpose but nowadays, 
FRP lining is also suggested. In case of 
demineralized water tank or polished water tank, 
lining becomes essential from inside to avoid 
corrosion and iron pick up in the treated water. In 
some cases, only epoxy lining is suggested from 
inside but in other ‘cases rubber lining is also 
recommended. The neutralization pit for storing 
waste water during regeneration is normally made 
of RCC with suitable lining from inside. Epoxy, 
acid-alkali resistant titles and bricks suitably joined 
are also used. The details of such lining are to be 
clearly marked in the specification. 


10.2.4 Regenerant Tanks 


For concentrated sulphuric acid only mild steel tanks 
are to be used, whereas dilute sulphuric acid shall 
require stainless steel tanks or some special lined 
tanks particularly where it is getting diluted as heat 
evolved in those tanks is quite high; suitable 
corrosive resistance lining material is used for 
sustaining the temperature rise. Teflon lining for 
such tanks shall be ideal, but due to its limited 
availability, special rubber lining is suggested, 
which is to be properly maintained during operation. 
The temperature of the solution is never allowed to 
go beyond 70 °C to 80 °C to protect the lining. 


In case of hydrochloric acid FRP lining or rubber 
lining for inside surface is quite useful. In case of 
caustic soda or sodium carbonate sometimes no 
lining for inside surface is provided, but it is 
advisable to give some lining to avoid ingress of 
extra iron from the vessel. These linings may be of 
epoxy, rubber or FRP, which is to be clearly spelt 
out in the specification. 


10.2.5 Others 


For pressure vessels, dished ends are to be provided; 
for some atmospheric tanks also dished end bottoms 
are required. For horizontal cylindrical tank like 
degassed water tank, large size acid/alkali tanks, etc, 
also dished ends are required. Proper breather seals, 
etc, are required in various tanks to check the 
harmful vapours escaping out, and also to check the 
ingress of moisture. Suitable on-line traps are also 
desired to check the loss of various packings in case 
of any damage in collection system during 
operation. 


IS 13268 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Water Quality for Industrial Purpose Sectional Committee, CHD 13 


Organization 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, Thiruchirapali 


CII- Triveni Water Institute 


Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute, Sharanpur 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, 
Bhavnagar 


CECRI, Karaikudi 


Chennai Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Chennai 


Consumer education and Research Centre, 


Ahmedabad 
Delhi Jal Board 


Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, New 
Delhi 


Department of Science and Technology, 
New Delhi 


Grasim Industries Limited, Nagda 


Indian Chemical Council 


Indian Farmers Fertilizer 


Allahabad 


Cooperative Limited, 


Representative(s) 
SHRI K. P. BHATTACHARYYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI SHIVAYYANAMATH S. 


SHRI T. K. DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR 
K. ANANDA BABU (Alternate) 


SHRI KAPIL K. NARULA 
DR SIPIKA CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


DR NEELAM NIGAM 
SHRIMATI POOJA MEHROTRA (Alternate) 


DR C. MURALIDHARAN 
DR K. SRI BALA KAMESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI NAZIMUDDIN 
SHRI VISHAL GANDHI (Alternate) 


DR NITIN ENDLAY 
DR SANJAY TYAGI (Alternate) 


DR SOUMYA HALDAR 
DR D. N. SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


DR S. VASUDEVAN 
DR R. MALINI (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHANKAR 


MS ANINDITA MEHTA 
Ms DOLLY JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 


SHRI T. S. G. NARAYANAN 
SHRI UDAY SINGH MINA (Alternate) 


DR NEELIMA ALAM 
DR SANJAI KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. N. SASTRY 
SHRI ALOK SINGH (Alternate) 


DR MRITUNJAY CHAUBEY 
SHRI KEDAR OKE (Alternate) 


SHRI GORAKH SINGH 
SHRI K. S. S. MOORTHY (Alternate) 


Organization 


Ion Exchange India Limited, Mumbai 


Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Chandrapur 


Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation , New Delhi 


Ministry of Urban Development 
Alleviation, New Delhi 


and Poverty 


National Environment Engineering Research Institute, 
Nagpur 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Padarsh Pharmaceuticals Private Limited, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


The Energy and Resource Institute, New Delhi 


The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


Water and Steam Chemistry Division, BARC Facilities, 
Kalpakkam 


In Personal Capacity (307, Dwarka Palace, Nipania opp 
to Samar Park Colony Indore -452010) 


In Personal Capacity (5/4, Veer apt Sector 13 Rohini 
Delhi-110085) 


In Personal Capacity (6/66, 5th Street, Ahemed Colony, 
Woraiyur, Tiruchirapalli- 620003) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 13268 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SACHIN SAHA 
DR RENU SARAPH (Alternate I) 
SHRI ANIL K. KHERA (Alternate ID) 


SHRI V. P. GHODMARE 
SHRI RAJESH DATTATRAYA CHIVANE (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJASEKHAR 
SHRI SUMIT PRIYADARSHI (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
MS CHAITRA DEVOOR (Alternate) 


SHRI G. K. KHADSE 
DR V. ATUL MALDHURE (Alternate) 


SHRI. L. K. NAYAK 
SHRI ANKIT VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI MUNEESH CHADDA 
SHRI MAHON MANOHAR KHANDEKAR (Alternate) 


DR VIVEK NARAYAN SINGH 
DR JAGDISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANSHUMAN 
DR SUNEEL PANDEY (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GUPTA (Alternate) 


DR B. ANUPKUMAR DIRECTOR 


SHRI R. S. BAGHEL 


SHRI D. K. JAIN 


DR A. LAWRENCE 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 13 (21061). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central | : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern ` : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


