IS 2705 ( Part 4 ) : 1992 ( Realtiicd 1997 )I ( Reaffirmed 2002 )
g?Tvfhm

Indian Stundard

CURRENT TRANSFORMERS-SPECIFICATION
PART 4 PROTECTIVE CURRENT TRANSFORMERS SPECIAL PURPOSE APPLICATIONS ( FOR

Second Revision )
Third Reprint FEBRUARY 1999

UDC 621.314.2i4.8:621.314.228

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 Price Groop 3 MARG

BHAVAN,

NEW DELHI
August 1992

Instrument Transformers Sectional Committee, ETD 34

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 4 ) was adopted by the Bureau of lndian Standards, after the draft finalized by the. Instrument Transformers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. This standard was first published in 1964 and revised in 1981. This revision has been undertaken to bring it in line with the latest developments at the international level. Indian Standards on current transformers have been published in four parts: Part 1 General requirements, Part 2 Part 4 Measuring current transformers, Protective current transformers for special purpose applications. Part 3 Protective current transformers, and

This standard applies to protective current transformers intended for use in balanced protective schemes, for example, biased differential protection, restricted earth-fault protection and distance measuring protection, where the required characteristics of the current transformers cannot be conveniently expressed in terms of accuracy class, accuracy limit factor and rated burden. Some more information on these transformers is given in Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a lest or analysis. shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 2705 ( Part 4 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

CURRENT TRANSFORMERSPART 4

SPECIFICATION
FOR

PROTECTIVE CURRENT TRANSFORMERS SPECIAL PURPOSE APPLICATIONS (

Second Revision )
where VL is the minimum knee-point voltage in volts, K is a parameterto be specified by the purchaser which depends on the system fault level and the characteristics of the relay intended to be used, is the rated secondary current of the current transformer (or the secondary current as derived from a specified turns ratio and primary current), is the resistance of the secondary winding corrected to 75OC is the impedance of the secondary circuit as specified by the purchaser. In the above formula, the purchaser shall specify the values of `K', `1&' and `Rb'. The value of `Rd' shall be to the discretion of the manufacturer.
NOTE-It is recognized that for certain special requirements, a limitation on the value of `R,' may be required. In such cases, the purchaser may specify a maximum value for `R,' at 79X. In other cases, the choice of `R,' should be left to the manufacturer.

1 SCOPE This standard ( Part 4 ) gives requirements and test for protective current transformers for special purpose applications such as balanced protective systems and distance protection schemes. It also applies to protective cores of multi-core current transformers for such applications. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following, definitions shall apply in addition to those covered in Part 1 and Part 2 of this standard. 2.1 Knee-Point Voltage of rated frequency applied to of the current transformer, all open circuited, which when causes the exciting current to

That sinusoidal voltage the secondary terminals other windings being increased by 10 percent, increase by 50 percent. 2.1.1 Rated Knee-Point

Voltage

The minimum knee-point voltage specified on which the performance of the current transformer is based. 2.2 Turns Ratio The ratio between the number of turns on the secondary winding and the number of turns on the secondary. 3 DESIGNATION AND CIIARACTERISTICS

3.1.3 Maximum Exciting Current, at the rated kneepoint voltage or at any specified fraction of the rated knee-point voltage. 4 REQUIREMENTS 4.1 The error in turns ratio shall not exceed percent. f 0.25

3.0 Protective current transformers for special purpose applications shall be designated `Glass PS'. 3.1 Class PS current transformers are of low reactance (seeAnnexAofPart3ofthisstandard )and their performance shall be specified in terms of the following characteristics. 3.1.1 Turns Ratio, which shall be numerically same as the rated transformation ratio. the

4.2 The knee-point voltage shall not be less than the specified rated knee-point voltage. 4.3 The exciting current(s) shall not be greater than the specified value(s) required in accordance with 3.1.3. 4.4 When specified, the resistance of the secondary winding, corrected to 75OC, shall not be greater than the specified value. 5 MARKING Every current transformer shall be indelibly marked with the following information, in addition to that required by Part 1 of this standard: a) A reference to this standard, b) Class designation, 1

NOTE -Turns ratio may also be specitied separately in rrjation to a specified rated primary current.

3.1.2 Minimum Knee-Point Voltage (VJ, specified in accordance with a formula of the type: vk = K. 1, (R, + RJ

IS2705(Pnrt4):1992
I

c) Secondary winding resistance at 75oC, d) Rated knee-point voltage in volts, and e) Maximumexcitingcurrent at ratedknee-point voltage, or at the specified fraction thereof. 6TEsTs 6.0 All Class Ps currenttransformersshall be subject to the routine tests as given in 6.1 to 6.3, in addition to the type and routine tests given in Fart 1 of this
SttlUfiMd.

than 50 percent. The voltageshall thenbe reduced to the values corresponding to the specified percentages of the knee-point voltage and the exciting current shall be measured at each such voltage. The exciting currents at the knee-point voltage and the specified percentages thereof shall not exceed the specified bmits. 6.2 Secondety Winding Resistance The resistance of the secondary winding shall be measuredand the value, when corrected to 75OCshall not exceed the value specified (if any). 6.3 Turns Ratio The turns ratio shall be determined and shall not differ from the specified ratio by more than f 02.5 percent. For the method of measurementof turns mtio, see Annex B.

6.1 Knee-Point VoItaga rrndExciting Cunrnt A sinusoidal voltage at rated frequency equal to the rated knee-point voltage shall be applied to the secondary terminals, all other windings being opencircuited and the exciting current shall be measured. The voltage shall then be increased by 10 percent and the exciting current shall not increase by more

2

IS 2705( Part 4):1992

ANNEX A
( Foreword )
NOTES ON PROTECTIVE CURRENT TRANSFORMERS FOR SPECIAL PURPOSE APPLICATIONS A-l Protective current transformers covered in this standard are intended mainly for use in applications where the required characteristics of the current transformers cannot be I conveniently expressed in the terms used for Class SP, 1OP and 15P current transformers. The knee-point voltage, exciting current(s) and secondary winding resistance are so dependent on the protective gear involved and the requirements are so numerous and varied that useful guidance in the application of current transformers cannot be given in this Annex. However, the manufacturers of the protective gearstipulate the requirements in terms of minimum knee-point voltage and maximum excitingcurrent and it should beensured that current transformers with adequate knee-point voltage are supplied. The exciting current should not exceed the valuestipulated, otherwise it will affect the primary fault settings of the protection scheme. A-2 It should be noted that as the turns ratio errOr is limited, transformers of this class are suitable for protective schemes requiring close balance of the secondary currents from different phases or circuits. Such current transformels should be so designed that balance is maintained within the protective system when maximum through-fault current is flowing through the primary windings of tht current transformer used for this system, that is, `stability of the protection should be assured, whether in the transientorinthesteadystate,uptothemaximumthroughfault current which can be passed in service through their primary windings. A-3 Current Transformers of class PS type are of low reactance and this may be established in any of the ways described below. A-4 All class type PS current transformers are deemed to be of the low reactance if: a) The core is of the jointless ring type (including spirally wound cores).

b) The secondary turv are substantially evenly

distributed along the whole length of the magnetic circuit except that a circumferential spacing which does not exceed 20 mm on the outer periphery or which subtends an angle between radii not exceeding 30 degree, whichever is greater, is permissible between the two et& of the winding.

4

The primary conductor(s) passes through the approximate centre of the core aperture or is approximately evenly distributed along the whole length of the magnetic circuit. meet the requirementsof design, consist of at last four parallel connected coils, evenly distributed along with whole length of the magnetic circuit, eat+ coil occupying one quadrant.

d) Flux equalizing windings, where employed to

Such an arrangementensures substantially even flux distribution within the core irrespective of the presence of stray flux which may result from such conditions as the close proximity of the returnprimary conductor. A-5 Atematively, any current transformer may be shown to be of low-reactance by a type test comprising the determination of the composite error of the current transformer by the direct test in accordance with 7.1.2.1 of Part3 of this standardand comparing it to the composite error determined by the indirect test in accordancewith7.1.2.2ofPart3ofthisstandard. Ifthe composite errorobtained by the direct test is less than 1.3 times the error obtained by the indirect test, the currenttransformershall be accepted as of low reactance. However, since in the case of Class PS current transformers,there is no `ratedburden and accuracy limit current, the burden and primary current for the direct test, and the voltage to be applied to the secondary winding for the.indirect test, should be agreed between the manufacturerand the purchaser.

IS2705(Part4):

1992

ANNEX B ( Clause 6.3 )
RECOMMENDED METHODS OF DETERMINATION OF TURNS RATIO B-l METHOD 1 B-l.1 There is no simple and positive method of measuring turns ratio on a completed current transformer. This is due to the fact that the actual transformation ratio (for the measurement of which there is readily available equipment) differs from the rated transformation ratio by an amount which depends upon the following three factors:
a) The difference between the turns ratio and the rated transformation-ratio, b) The core exciting current, and c) The currents which flow in stray capacitances associated with the windings. B-l.2 In power frequency current transformers with less than about 1000 turns in either or both winding, only factors (a) and (b) need normally be considered. The usual method is to measure the current error at about the rated primary current with as low a value of non-inductive burden as possible. In some instances, however, it may be difficult to decide whether this error is due the core exciting current or in part to an error in turns ratio. In such circumstances, the following method is applicable. In the equivalent circuit of such a current transformer, shown in Fig. 1 the core exciting current 1, is non-linear with respect to the core magnetic flux, and hence with respect to E,, the voltage induced in the secondary winding. However, if in a num~oerof testsE, is maintained constant, thenZc will also be constant. Thus, if the actual transformation ratio& is measured with two values of burden, Z,, and Z,, so that the value where E, = voltage induced in secondary I, = secondary current 2` = leakage impedance z, = burden (in ohm) N= I I number of turns in primary winding winding = actual primary current in test with burden& C actual primary current in test with burden$, NI = number of turns in secondary
Pl

winding winding

of secondary

ic;; = actual transformation ratio in test with burden Z b2 x.2 = actual transformation ratio in test with burden Zb2

B-l.3 Since many current transformer testing sets are scaled, so that the more convenient quantity `E.=' is obtained in place of the actual transformation ratio. it is preferable to reduce the above equation to a form which is consistent with EC.
Furthermore, this form of the equation is simplified if there is a two-to-one relationship between $, and Zp2. Thus, when-Zp2 = 2Jp,, and if EC* = percentage current error in test with I 1, and percentage current error in test with &. the percentage error in the turns ratio E is approximately equal to EC, - UC2 if EC, and 2kC2 are small compared with 100.

EC2 =

Es= Is (Z*+
remains constant,

ZJ

then the turns ratio is given by:

B-l.4 It is, therefore, convenient to carry out the test using rated current and minimum external burden in one test, and half rated current and such additional external burden as would double the total burden for the othertest. The leakage impedance of the secondary winding of a current transformers is not easily
S!

-IP

1

IV'Z

-

1s

S

P2

52

CIRCUTFORIHEDETHWLNA-~IONOFTLJRNSRATIO(C~RRFSTTRANSFORMERS FIG. 1 E!QUWALENT HAVING

FEWERTHAN &'PROXIMATELY1~kS)
4

IS 2705 ( Pnrt 4 ) : 1992 measured, but except for unusually shaped current transformers, it is sufficient to use the resistance alone ofthe secondary windingto obtain satisfactory results. B-l.5 In power frequency current transformers with more thanabout 1OOOtumsineitherwinding,allofthe three factors (a), (b) and (c) given in B-l.1 have to be considered, the equivalent of such a current transformer may be shown in Fig. 2. El.6 If E, is kept constant, as is required for the tests with different values of secondary current for each burden, the voltage across say, C, (Fig. 2) is kept constant by a link between appropriate points on primary and secondary circuits, then the currents flowing in each stray capacitance will be constant. These capacitance current will, together, cause a current to flow in the primary circuit which may be considered as Zein parallel with Is, so that Z, may be regarded as part of the exciting current. The results of tests carried out as before will be valid. B-2 METEOD 2 where B-2.1 Another usual method is to measure the current error at about the rated primary current with as low a value of non-inductive burden as possible. The relationship between this error and the turns ratio error depends on the magnitude of the component of exciting current affecting the error. In many designs, the current error measured under these conditions, with the turns ratio equal to the rated transformation ratio, is much less than the error due tua one-turn error of the secondary winding and there is no ditficulty in deciding whether the turns ratio is within the specified limits. Y= A= R= B= current error with burden R, lower value of external burden in ohms, resistance of the secondary winding, higher value of external burden in ohms, and current error with burdenA.
NOTE -A poshive amen1 error at zero burden indicates 8 negative turns ratio error and vice-versa.

In some instances, however, it may be difficult to decide whether a certain value of measured current error is due wholly to the error component of the excitingcurrentorinparttoanerrorinturnsmtio.This doubt can be dispelled by measuring the current error with two or three values of non-inductive burden. Those errors are then plotted against the corresponding values of total burden, that is, including that due to the secondary winding resistance, and extrapolated to zero burden to give the error in turns ratio. B-2.2 In the majority of cases, it will be sufficiently accurate to assume a linear relationship between current error and total burden and to calculate the current error corresponding to zero burden (assumed to approximate to the turns ratio error) from measurements of current error at two low values of burden only, as follows: Turns ratio error (approximatelv) = v

P2

I%. 2 EOUIVALENT Cnrcurr Fan niu

DETERMINAnoN

OF Tums 1 ooo

Rmo m)

( CuRRwr

~RANSFO-

HAVING MORE `MAN hFROXlMA~Y

5

Burejlu of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofhdian StandardsAct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'.

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 3841 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26, 337 86 62 I 60 38 43 60 20 25 I 23502 16,2350442 235 15 19,235 23 15 8329295,8327858 8327891,8327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADAEIAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at New lndm Printing Press, Khujs,

India

