( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 8413 ( Part II ) - 1982

Indian Standard
REQUIREMENTS FOR BIOLOGKAL TREATMENT AND EQUIPMENT
PART II ACTIVATED SLUDGE PROCESS ITS MODIFICATIONS AND

Public

Health
Chairman

Engineering

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

BDC

40

Representing National Environmental Engineering Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur Research

DR B. B. SUNDARESAN

Members ADVISER ( PHE ) DR S. R. SUKLA ( Alternate ) SHRI N. S. BHAIRVAN Ministry of Works & Housing

Engineering Department, Public Health Government of Kerala, Trivandrum U. P. Jal Nigam, Lucknow SHRI 0. P. BISHNOI SHRI S. S. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI R. C. P. CHAUDHARY Department of Health, Government of West CHIEF ENGINEER Bengal, Calcutta SHRI T. N. CHATTER~EE ( Alternate ) Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi CHIEF ENGINEER ( WATER ) SRRI JAI NARAIN ( Alternate ) Geo-Miller & Co, Calcutta SHRI D. K. CHOUDHURY SHRI D. R. MALL ( Alternate ) Calc;tt;u~;tropolitan Development Authority, SHRI S. K. DASGUPTA a SHRI S. J. DUTTA ( Alternate ) M TJN I c I P A L Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, DEPUTY Bombay COMMISSIONER HYDRAULIC ENGINEER ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENGINEER ( SEWERAGE ) ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI B. R. N. GUPTA SHRI K. V. KaIsHNanxnaTHy ( Alternate ) Department, Health Engineering Public SHRI D. R. JAGANNATH Rao Government of Madhya Pradesh, Bhopal SHRI M. G. VAIDYA ( Alternate) ( Continued on page 2 ) Q INDIAN Copyrzght 1982 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 8413 ( Part

II) - 1982

( Continuedfmn page1 )
Members SRRI R. KRISHNASWAMY Regresenting Tamil Nadu Water Supply & Drainage Board, Madras SHRI S. A. JAGDESAN ( Alternate ) The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. Y. MADAN SHRI C. E. S. RAO ( Alternate ) Paterson Engineering Co ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. R. MAJU~XDER Indian Chemical Manufacturers Association, SHRI L. S. MEHTA Bombay SHRI R. K. SHUXLA (Alternate) Central Board for Prevention and Control of MEMBER-SECRETARY Water Pollution ( Ministry of Works & Housing ) DR K. R. RANGANATIXAN(Alternate ) Health Engineering Public Department, SHRI A. R. MIR Government of Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar SHRI G. M. KANTH ( Alternate) M. P. State Prevention and Control of Water SHRI D. V. S. MURTHY Pollution Board, Bhopal SRRI V. S. BANSAL (Alternate) Hydraulic & General Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. S. NAIK SHRI D. R. KENKRE ( AZternate ) Hindustan Dorr Oliver Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. NATARAJAN SHRI B. M. RAHUL ( Alternate ) Institution of Public Health Engineers India, SRRI S. K. NEOCX Calcutta SHRI D. K. GHOSH ( Alternate ) Indian Water Works Association, Bombay SHRI M. M. PATEL National Environmental Engineering Research SHRI V. RAMAN Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, New SHRI Y. K. RANGARAJU Delhi SHRI A. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) Health Engineering Public Department, REPRESENTATIVE Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Directorate General of Technical Development, REPRESENTATIVE New Delhi Engineering Department, Health Public REPRESENTATIVE Government of Haryana, Chandigarh SHRI K. K. GANDHI ( Alternate ) Works & Electric Public Department, SHRI P. V. SOMA~ERHAR Government of Karnataka, Bangalore All India Institute of Hygirne & Public Health, PROF S. SURHA Rno Calcutta SHRI A. V. RAO ( Altarnate ) The Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta SHRI S. A. SWA&lY Candy Filters (India) Ltd, Bombay SIIRI P. S. TENDOLXAR SERI C. L. SAS~RI ( Alternate ) ( Continuedon page 18 )

2

IS : 8413 (Part

II) - 1982

Indian Standard
REQUIREMENTS FOR BIOLOGICAL TREATMENT AND EQUIPMENT
PART II ACTIVATED SLUDGE PROCESS ITS MODIFICATIONS AND

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 January 1982, after the draft finalized by the Public Health Engineering Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The biological waste water treatment processes remove non-settlable suspended and dissolved organic solids from a liquid stream and convert putrescible organic matter, which can support biological life, into stable and innocuous end products. 0.3 The activated sludge process is an aerobic: ! biological sewage treatment system for biological stabilization of organic matter. Synthesis of the waste organics results in build up of microbial mass in the system to maintain the proper food to micro-organism ratio to ensure optimum operation. Aerobic conditions must be maintained in the aeration tank. Microbial growth in the mixed liquor is maintained in the declining or endogenous phase to ensure good settling characteristics of biological floes. The aeration tanks could be designed either as a plug flow system or as a complete mixed biological reactor.

0.3.1 The essential units of an activated

sludge process

are:

4 Primary settling tank, b) Aeration tank, cl Final settling tank, 4 Return sludge recycling e) Excess sludge removal

equipment, equipment.

and

0.3.2 The commonly used pretreatment units are screens and grit channels. But they are not essential in all cases. The decision to adopt them in any particular waste water treatment system is governed by several factors among which are the quantity of floating material, 3

IS : 8413 ( Part IL ) - 1982 inorganic grit and the concentration of suspended organic matters. However, in the case of extended aeration systems and where aerobic stabilization of excess activated sludge is practised, primary sedimentation unit is omitted. 0.3.3 Recommended loading rates for different activated into consideration are gi-,ien in Appendix A taking climatological conditions in the country. sludge systems the tropical

0.4 This standard has been prepared in two parts. Part I deals with trickling filters, while Part II deals with activated sludge process and its modifications. 0.5 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international coordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance The number of significant places retained in the with IS : Z-1960*. rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II ) covers the requirements constructional requirements of conventional activated its modifications, namely: for equipment and sludge process and

4 Conventional system, b) High-rate system, cl Extended aeration system, and 4 Contact stabilization system.
2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

2.1 Activated Sludge - Mass of micro-organisms, flocculated and easily settlable, metabolizing organic material in a waste in activated sludge This is obtained in settling tanks after aeration and is aeration tank. returned to the aeration tank for maintaining adequate concentration of micro-organisms.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

4

1s : 8413 ( Part II) - 1982 2.2 Activated Sludge Process - X biological sewage treatment process in which a mixture of sewage and activated sludge is agitated and aerated. The activated sludge is subsequently separated from the treated sewage ( mixed liquor ) by sedimentation, and allowed to go waste The treated sewage overflows the or returned to the process as needed. weir of the settling tank in which separation from the sludge takes place. 2.3 Aerated Lagoons or Ponds treatment pond in which mechanical supplement the oxygen supply. A natural or artificial waste water or diffused-air aeration is used to

of the activated 2.4 Contact Stabilization Process - A modification sludge process in which raw waste water is aerated with a high concentration of activated sludge for a short period, usually less than 60 min, to obtain BOD removal by absorption. The solids are subsequently removed by sedimentation and transferred to a stabilization tank where aeration is continued further to oxidize and condition them before their reintroduction to the raw waste water flow. 2.5 Conventional Activated Sludge Process - An aerobic biological treatment system in which the pre-settled sewage is aerated with return sludge in an aeration tank for a sufficient period of time to produce a well settling sludge and clarified supernatant in the secondary settling tank. 2.6 Diffused Air Aeration passed through a diffuser. -Aeration produced in liquids by air

2.7 Extended Aeration - A modification of the conventional sludge process which provides for aerobic sludge digestion within the aeration system. The concept envisages stabilization of organic matter under aerobic conditions and disposal of the end products into the air as gases and with the plant effluent as finely divided suspended matter and soluble matter. 2.8 High Rate System _-An activated sludge process which is operated at a high rate of loading and short aeration period resulting in dispersed growth of micro-organisms leading to a poorly clarified effluent and a partial treatment of sewage. 2.9 Activated Sludge LoadingThe mass (in kg ) of biochemical oxygen demand ( BOD ) in the applied liquid per unit volume of aeration capacity or per unit mass ( in kg ) activated sludge per day. 2.10 Mixed Liquor aeration tank. A mixture of activated sludge and sewage in the

5

IS : 8413 ( Part II) - 1982 2.11 Mixed Liquor Suspended Solids ( MLSS ) - Suspended the mixed liquor at an instant of time taken as an approximate of microbial mass concentration in the biological reactor. solids in measure

2.12 Mixed Liquor Volatile Suspended Solids ( MLVSS ) - The volatile fraction of the MLSS, considered to be a better representation of microbial mass. 2.13 Mechanical or Surface Aeration

a) The mixing, by mechanical means, of sewage and activated sludge in the aeration tank of the activated sludge process, to bring fresh surfaces of liquid into contact with the atmosphere. b) The introduction mechanical action of atmospheric oxygen into a liquid of paddle or spray mechanisms. by the

2.14 Permeability Rating - The number of cubic metres per minute of free air which will pass through one square metre of dry diffuser surface at 50 mm differential pressure under dry conditions at a temperature of 20�C. sludge returned from the secondary 2.15 Return Sludge -Activated settling tank/clarifier to the aeration tank directly or after reaeration. 2.16 Sludge Retention Time ( SRT ) -Time for which flocculated micro-organisms are under aeration is referred to as sludge retention time. It is the ratio of biological solids in the aeration tank to the solids wasted from the system per day. SRT is theoretically correlated with the organic loading. When Food/Micro-organisms ( F/M ) is high, SRT is low and vice-versa. 2.17 Waste or Excess Sludge - Excess activated sludge resulting from the growth of microbial mass in the aeration tank, wasted from the underflow or secondary settling tank. 3. MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION PRACTICES methods of

3.1 The materials used for component parts and the construction to be adopted shall be as given in Table 1. 4. CONSTRUCTION

4.1 Aeration Tank - The volume of the aeration tank is worked out on the basis of loading rates and the VSS to be maintained in the system as per Appendix A. 6

IS : 8413 ( Part II) - 1982 4.1.1 For plants treating 400 m3/h, the total aeration tank volume required shall be divided among two or more units capable of independent operation.
4.1.2 Two types of aeration aeration, namely, (a) diffused surface aeration tanks. tanks are built depending aeration tanks, and ( b) on the type of mechanical or

4.1.3 Diffused aeration tanks are again subdivided into three types, namely, ( a ) ridge and furrow tanks, ( b ) spiral flow tanks, and ( c) combination of the two. 4.1.4 The ratio of length to width shall generally exceed 5 to 1 in order to reduce short circuiting. In small plants, tanks may be built as straightthrough units. In large plants, they may be built as continuous flow channels with longitudinal around-the-end baffles. 4.1.5 Liquid not less than surface aerator exceed 3-O m. depth in diffuser and mechanically aerated tanks shall be 3 m and not more than 5 m. Liquid depth for normal having power less than 20 kW without draft tube shall not

4.1.6 For diffused aeration, two or three transverse baffles spaced out not less than 15 m apart may be provided in each aeration tank to reduce short circuiting. 4.1.7 Point velocities in aeration channels shall be more than Deflectors at the surface and fillets O-15 m/s to avoid settling of sludge. at the bottom and rounding of corners may be provided to help in maintaining circulation and to prevent formation of unaerated pockets and short circuiting. 4.1.8 The effective diffuser percent or more than 15 percent tanks. For the ridge and furrow nor more than 25 percent of the 4.1.9 A minimum free board area provided shall not be less than 5 of the tank bottom area for spiral flow tanks it shall not be less than 15 percent tank bottom area. of 0% m is recommended. But the outlet should

4.1.10 Inlet parts may or may not be submerged. preferably be over a weir.

4.1.11 Inlets and outlets shall be suitably equipped with valves, gates, stop planks, weirs and other devices to permit controlling the flow to any unit and to maintain a reasonably constant water level. The hydraulic properties of the system shall permit the maximum instantaneous hydraulic load to be carried with any single unit of service.

7

IS : 8413 ( Part II) - 1982
TABLE 1 MATERIALS AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION OF AERATION CHAMBER ( Clause 3.1 ) SL
NO. 9 PARTICULAR MATERIAL REFTO INDIAN

STANDARD

Civil works

ii)

Motors, starters, time switches and electrode switches Turn table Gears Cover for main gear Base for main gear Worm gear housing

iii) iv) v) vi) vii)

IS IS IS IS IS IS b) Brick masonry IS c) Stone masonry IS IS IS IS IS IS High grade cast iron IS a) Steel IS b) Aluminium bronze a) Epoxy coated mild steel IS IS b) Cast iron IS Cast iron IS Cast iron a) Reinforced concrete or plain

: 456-1978r : 3370 ( Part : 3370 (Part : 3370 ( Part : 3370 ( Part : 2212-1962s : 1597 ( Part : 1597 (Part : 325-19780 : 996-1964r" : 1766-1973rr : 1822-1967rs : 210-1978rs : 1570-196114 : 305-1961rs : 226-1975rs : 210-1978's : 210-1978r* : 210-1978rs

I )-1965s II)-1965a III )-I9674 IV )-19676 I )-1967' II)-1967*

aCode of practice for plain and reinforced concrete ( third rcuision ). `Code of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liquids: Part I General requirements. *Code of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liquids: Part II Reinforced concrete structures. %ode of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liquids: Part III Prestressed concrete structures. %ode of practice for concrete structures for the storage of liquids: Part IV Design tables. `Code of practice for brickwork. `Code of practice for construction of stone masonry: Part I Rubble stone masonry. *Code of practice for construction of stone masonry: Part II Ashlar masonry. Yjpecification for three-phase induction motors (fourth revision ) . r%pecification for single-phase small ac and universal electric motors ( mised ). %pecilication for time switches (,l;rrt revision ). r'Specification for ac motor starters of voltage not exceeding 1000 volts (jrst revision). `YSpecification for grey iron castings ( third revision ). `"Schedules for wrought steels for general engineering purposes. %pecification for aluminium bronze ingots and castings ( raked). Yjpecification for structural steel ( standard quality ) (jfth revision ). ( Continued )

8

IS : 8413 ( Part II ) - 1982

TABLE

1

MATERIALS AND OF AERATION

METHODS CHAMBER

OF CONSTRUCTION - Confd

SL

PARTlCULAR

REP TO INDIAN STANDARD

No.
viii) ix) x) xi) xii) xiii) xiv) Bearing balls Weirs Feed weli Gauge Deflector Diffusers Gates Scrapers (fabricated sheets ) Shaft Floats High carbon steel Mild steel and plastic Mild steel Mild step1 Plastic Plastic Ceramics Cast iron, steel a) Mild steel b) Alloy steel Cold finished steel Plastic (polyethylene, PVC, glass fibre inforced polyester Steel IS IS IS IS : 2898-1976" : 226-1975lO : 226-197518 : 226-1975" : 3042-1965'* : 226-1975" : 226-197518 : 1570-196119 : 1570-19611* -

xv)
xvi) xvii)

IS IS IS IS IS re)

xviii)

Channels

IS : 3954-196620

"Specification 1'Specification %pecification l%chedules for sOSpecification

for structural steel ( standard quality ) (jfth reuision ). for steel balls for rolling bearings (Jut revision ). for single faced sluice gates ( 200 to 1200 mm size ). wrought steels for general engineering purposes. for hot rolled steel channel sections for general engineering

purposes.

4.1.12 Channels and pipes carrying liquid with solids in suspension, to and from the areation tank, shall be designed to maintain a minimum velocity of 0.6 m/s.
4.1.13 The difference in water surface between primary settling tank and aeration tank and final, settling tank shall be at Ieast 0.15 m at maximum rate of flow after accounting for the frictional losses between the two units. 4.1.14 Measuring devices shall be installed the aeration chamber can be measured. be measured. in such a way that inflow to Return sludge shall also

IS : 8413 ( Part II ) - 1982 4.2 Aeration Equipment

4.2.1 The function of the equipment is to provide aeration and mixing. Three methods stated below are commonly employed ( see Appendix B ): a) Compressed b) Mechanical c) Compressed air diffused ( including aeration, surface system ) aeration, aeration. and

air with mechanical

4.2.2 General sketches of various types of aerators are shown in Fig. 1 to 6. The capacity of the aeration equipment for transfer of oxygen should be related to the amount of BOD removed and the quantity of VSS maintained in the system. 4.2.3 Supporting data shall be provided by the designer to show that the equipment is capable of transferring the required amount of oxygen in aeration tank similar to the one adopted in the design, either in the form of oxygen transfer characteristic curves or long term performance data of plants operated under similar conditions. 4.2.4 The aeration equipment shall maintain at least 1 mg/litre of dissolved oxygen under all the conditions of loading in the aeration zone. A minimum of 1.5 mg/litre should be maintained in extended aeration activated sludge process. 4.2.5 The aeration tions given in 4.1.7. equipment shall be able to meet the recommendar-

FIG. 1 DIFFUSED AIR ACTIVATED-SLUDGP SYSTEMS - RIDGE AND FURROWS

FIG. 2 DIFFUSED AIR ACTIVATED SLUCGESYSTEM - SPIRALFLOW

10

IS : 8413 ( Part II ) - 1982

III
FIG. 3 MECHANICAL ACTIVATED-SLUDGE SYSTEM

FIG. 4 SURFACE SYSTEM - IMPELLER DRAFT TUBE TYPE ACTIVATED SLUDGE TANK

FIG. 5 SURFACE SYSTEM-BRUSH ACTIVATED SLUDGE TANK

FIG. 6 PADDLE-WHEEL ACTIVATED-SLUDGE TANK WITH DIFFUSED AIR

4.2.6 In the case of compressed air aeration the air diffusion system shall be capable of delivering 1.5 times the design requirement. 4.2.7 Porous ceramic diffusers shall have a permeability rating of 12 to 24. The corresponding pore diameter shall be 0.3 mm and 0.5 mm respectively. A diffuser made of some other material should have a comparable permeability. 11

IS : 8413 ( Part II) - 1982 4.2.8 In the case of air supply equipment shall be provided.
to porous diffuser, suitable cleaning

4.2.9 The air-blowers may be positive displacement type or centrifugal type. Reciprocating piston compressors are not suitable. For large capacities, centrifugal blowers should be preferred, as discharge can be varied by throttling. 4.2.10 All air mains shall be so located of liquid in case of air pressure failure. 4.2.11 Mechanical of equal capacity. conditions should recommended. as to prevent back syphonage

aerators shall be in multiple units, preferably The oxygen transfer capacity under standard A standby aeration unit is also be specified.

4.2.12 The pressure at the blower shall be not less than 1.25 times the head of sewage in the aeration tank. For a 5 m depth of liquid in the aeration tank, the delivery pressure of the blower shall be 0.04 to 0,065 MPa. 4.2.13 In the case of fan/cone type aerator, the conical body and the fan blades shall be made of mild steel plate (see IS : 226-1975" ) not less The fan blades, the vertical cylindrical draft ring, than 3 mm thick. forming part of the aerator and the air-lock ring, if provided shall be made of not less than 5 mm thick plate of the same material. 4.2.13.1 Fan blades shall be of either mild steel or alloy steel. The fan blades shall be correctly shaped and welded properly to the fan body, so as to withstand the forces generated by the resistance of the liquid, when the fan is switched on, with the top of the fan (excluding the fan blades) just immersed under the liquid in which it is to work. 4.2.13.2 The suspension ring shall be made of mild steel flat bar and shall be securely welded to the fan blades. 4.2.14 The motors used for driving surface aerators, shall be totally enclosed fan cooled squirrel cage induction motors conforming to IS : 325-19787. In case motors are to be mounted vertically, a canopy The starting characteristics of the motor should suit should be provided. the aerators, and special requirements, if any, should be ascertained from the aerator manufacturers.

4.2.15 Starters shall be direct-on-line or star-delta oil immersed type in accordance with the requirements of the Electric Supply Undertaking.
*Specification for structural steel (standard quality ) (/ijfh revision). $Specification for three-phase inductions motors (fourth revirion). 12

IS : 8413 (Part They should have under-iroltage and thermal button operated stopping arrangements. 4.3 Final Settling IS : 10261-1982". 4.4 Return Tank-The final overload relays,

II ) - 1982 and push

settling

tank

shall

conform

to

Sludge Recycling

Equipment

4.4.1 The capacity of the return sludge recycling system shall be based on the MLSS concentration to be maintained in the aeration tank and the expected suspended solid concentration in the return sludge. 4.4.2 The return sludge pumping capacity shall be equal to 100 percent of the amount computed to satisfy 4.4.1. In addition, adequate standby shall be provided. 4.4.3 A positive suction shall be provided. 100 mm in to prevent

4.4.4 The suction and delivery lines shall be at least diameter. A minimum velocity of 0.6 m/s shall be maintained sedimentation.

4.5 Excess Sludge Removal - Waste activated sludge may be discharged to primary tanks, concentration tanks, aerobic or anaerobic In the digestion tanks, or any practicable units for further treatment. case of extended aeration systems, it can be directly dried on sludge drying beds with or without prior treatment.

*Requirements for settling tank ( Clarifier equipment ) for waste water treatment. 13

APPENDIX
RECOMMENDED
Type of System

A
ACTIVATED
Slua'ge Retention Time Air Requirement per kg BOD, M3

( CZauses 0.3.3 and 4.1 )
LOADING RATES FOR DIFFERENT SLUDGE TREATMENT SYSTEMS
~---_h-___ Loading

G:

Sl No.

kg BODj Removed kg MLSS per day

kg BODS Removed kg MLVSS per day (4) 0'35-0.85 1.90-2'5 0.2-O-4 0.5-l `0 (5) 1500-3 000 500-l 000 3 000-8 000 a) 1 000-3 000 b) 3 000-6 000

rc = y 5; R

$

(1)
$
ii) iii)

(2)
Conventional A.S.P. High rate A.S.P. Extended aeration A.S.P. ( completely mixed ) Contact stabilization A.S.P. 1 TU kd where

(3) 0.3-0.7 1.5-2'0 0.1-0.2 0.4-0.8

(6)
3-15

(7) 40 to 100 25 to 50 100 to 135

i)

iv)

Less than 3 More than 10 preferably 20 to 30 3-15

50 to 75

.

sRT=

U = process loading, kg BOD removed/kg VSS/day; Y = yield coefficient, mg VSS/mg BOD removed; and kd = specific micro-organism decay rate, per day. NoTE-I~ places where winter period of time, during that period.
temperature falls below 15"C, the loading rates should be increased for an extended

IS : 8413 ( Part

II ) - 1982

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.2.1 )
TYPES B-l. OF AERATORS AERATOR

B
EMPLOYED

COMMONLY ( FIG. 7 )

IMPINGEMENT

B-l.1 The impingement aerator employs a water stream air lifted from the aeration tanks as a shearing device for air bubbles discharged from The control variables are the impingement liquor flow, a large orifice. air flow and the location of the water nozzle relative to the air orifice. The necessity of air filter is usually eliminated.

!
B-2. SPARGERS

AIR

-----_)

FIG. 7 ( FIG. 8 )

IMPINGER

B-2.1 The sparger is a controlled air release device consisting of a specially designed, cross-ribbed casting arrangement to release air through a cluster of four high velocity short tube orifices in a concentrated, properly located air pattern. A unique turbulence develops as the concentrated air lift column above each sparger reacts with the above the orifice cluster, the surrounding liquor, and a short distance chain line larger bubbles are broken into a cloud of small bubbles.
B-3. B-3.1 MECHANICAL The mechanical OR SURFACE AERATORS three types: in a

aerators

are of the following

a) An impeller which induces flow across the blades resulting vortex action and a surface local spray ( surface aerator ), 15

IS : 8413 ( Part II) - 1982
b) A surface impeller with drzft tube from drawn and spread over the surface, and c) Vortair entrainment aerator.
AIR BUBBLES

which

the liquid

is

AIR

FIG.

8

SPARGER

B-3.1.1 Surface Aerator - The surface aerator consists of a circular, flat plate with vertical/horizontal blades extending radially from the periphery of the plate towards the corner. The plate is rotated in a horizontal plane a short distance below the normal water surface. When the aeruLor is started in operation, the top of the plate is cleared of water, and a hydraulic jump is formed and air is entrained by the blades of the turbine. B-3.1.2 Impeller Draft Tube Ty$e Asrafor - This aerator comprises an open ended conical shell formed from steel plate to the inner face of which are attached a number of specially shaped blades. The inner edges of the blades are welded to a steel ring positioned well clear of liquid moment and into the ring of the weatherproof gearhead. The upper tip of the cone is located several centimetres above water level and The seal is formed by the below the cone is a stationary uptake tube. spigot end of the uptake tube entering an annular air lock chamber in the inlet skirt of the revolving cone.
The uptake tube is positioned in the middle of the aeration tank and is usually 600 to 900 mm in diameter, the lower end terminating in a bell mouth which is supported several centimetres above the floor of the channel by means of three adjustable feet. B-3.1.3 Vortair Entrainment Aerator - This device is for the use of a specially designed turbine located a short distance below the liquid surface. The oxygen entrainment from atmospheric air takes place due to two basic hydraulic phenomena that occur when the turbine is rotated 16

IS : 8413 ( Part II ) - 1982
at a proper speed. First the radial discharge from the turbine issuing slightly below the normal liquid level produces a peripheral hydraulic Secondly, a hydrodynamic condition is set up inside the turbine, jump. so that air is drawn into the flow issuing from the turbine. Under proper submergence conditions, for any given turbine diameters and speed, the top plate of the turbine becomes entirely free of liquid. Under these conditions, air is sucked down first from the top plate of the turbine due to region of low pressure behind each of the radial blades. The high velocity water issuing radially from the turbine entrains air from the masses of air behind each of the radial blades, and thus the flow issuing is full of air bubbles.

17

IS : 8413 ( Part II ) - 1982
( Continued from page 2 ) Members SRRI V. VARADARAJAN Representing Madras Metropolitan Board, Madras Water Supply and Sewerage

SHRI S. DAIVAMANI ( Alternate ) Director SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

General, IS1 ( Ex-oj'icio Member)

Secretary SRRI A. K. AVASTHY Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

Waste

Water

Treatment

Equipmeat

Subcommittee,

BDC 40 : 2

CO?ZVL??lL7

Da B. B. SUNDARESAN

National Environmental Institute, Nagpur

Engineering

Research

Members SHRI S. K. GADIXARI (Alternate to Dr B. B. Sundaresan ) Institution of Public Health Engineers India, Sum R. R. BA~RI Calcutta SHRI S. K. NEO~I ( Alternate ) Department, Health Engineering Public SZIRI N. S. BHAIRAVAN Government of Kerala, Trivandrum SHRI S. P. JAMES ( Alternate ) Kerala State Board for Prevention and Control of SERI S. BHOOTALINQAM Water Pollution, Trivandrum SRRI J. D. JOYSIXGH ( Alternate ) Uttar Pradesh Jal Nigam, Lucknow SHRI 0. P. BISHNOI SHRI S. S. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Haryana State Board for Prevention and Control CHAIR&IAN of Water Pollution, Chandigarh MEMBER-SECRETARY ( Alternate ) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, CHIEF ENGINEER ( SEWERAGE ) Bombay DEPUTY CHIEF ENGINEER ( SEWERAGE ) ( Alternate ) and Environmental Central Public Health SHRI M. M. DATTA Engineering Organization, NCW Delhi DR I. RAI)IIARRISIINAN ( Alternate ) The Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. Y. MAI)AN SXRI C. E. S. RAO ( Alternate ) Victoria Jubliee Technical Institute, Bombay PHOF B. L. MAHABAL SRRI R. V. S. MURTHY (Alternate ) Geo-Miller & Co Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI U. C. MANICAD SIIRI D. K. CHAUDHURY ( Alternate ) Central Board for the Prevention and Control of MEMBER-SECRETARY Water Pollution, New Delhi DR K. R. RANQANATHAN ( Alternate) ( Continued on page 19 )

18

IS : 8413 ( Part II ) - 1982
( Continuedfrom page 18~ Members
SHRI D. V. S. MURTHY SHRI S. S. NAIE

R+nzscnting M. P. State Prevention and Control of Water Pollution Board, Bhopal Hydraulic & General Engineers Pvt Ltd, Bombay Hindustan Engineers Dorr-Oliver India Limited, Ltd, Bombay New Delhi

SHRI R. NATARAJAN SHRI B. M. RAHUL (Alternate

SHRI D. R. KENKRE ( Alternate )
)

DRN.RAJASEKEARAN
DR K. RUDRAPPA SRI-R. N. TIWARI

.
(Alternate)

' Pennwalt India Limited, Bombay
EIMCO-KCP Ltd, Madras

SHRI V.SATYAM~R~~I

SERI T. STJBRAHMANYAM ( Alternate ) Candy Filters ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. L. SASTRI SRRI D. B. PARMAR ( Alternate ) All India Institute of Hygiene & Public PROX S. SUBHA RAO SBRI A. V. RAO ( Alternate)

%

Calcutta

Health,

19

INTERNATIONAL

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

(SI UNlTS)

QUANTITY

UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

SYMBOL

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance
Supplementary QUANTITY Units

m kg s A K cd mol

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL

Plane angle Solid angle
Derived Units

rad sr

QUANTITY

UNIT

SYMBOL

DEI-INITION

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

N

1N

=

J w
Wb T HZ s V Pa

1J
1w 1 Wb 1T 1 Hz 1s 1v I Pa

=
= = = = = -

1 kg.m/s* 1 N.m 1 J/s 1 V.s 1 Wb/ms 1 c/s (s-1) 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/ma

