IS 12209 : 1993 IS0 7130 1981

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

( oriyu g;i*eT~ )

Indian

Standard

EARTH-MOVING MACHINERY - GUIDE TO PROCEDURE FOR OPERATOR TRAINING ( First Revision )

UDC

621'878/`879

: 004'24

@I BIS 1993 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 4 ZAFAR MARG

September 1993

Bulk Handling

Systems and Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

HMD 7

.

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 7130 : 1981 `Earth-moving machinery issued by International Organization for Standardization Guide to procedure for operator training', ( IS0 ) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of Bulk Handling Systems and Equipment Sectional Committee ( HMD 7 ) and approval of the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard revision. was first published in 1987. IS0 7130 : 1981 has been adop?ed during this

The text of IS0 standard has been approved for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those used in `International Standard' appear referring Indian Standards. Accordingly, wherever the words to this standard, they should be read as `Indian Standard'. In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along wiih their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated:
International Standard Correspondkg Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence

IS0 6165 IS0
6750

IS 12138 : 1993 Earth-moving machinery types - Vocabulary ( first revision )

-

Basic

Identical Technically equivalent

IS 10280 : 1982 Guidelines for format and contents of manuals for earth moving equipment

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of IS0 4510 `Earth-moving machinery - Maintenance and adjustment tools' and IS0 6405 `Earth-moving machinery Symbols - Operator controls and others' referred in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard.

IS 12209 : 1993 IS0 7130 : 1981

Indian Standard
EARTH-MOVING MACHINERY - GUIDE TO PROCEDURE FOR OPERATOR TRAINING

( First Revision )

0

Introduction

In preparing this guide it has been assumed that the candidates for basic operator training will be without any significant operational experience with the types of machine specified, and that candidates for more advanced training will previously have received training to the standard included in the basic training syllabus. Proper selection of potential operators is essential if training is not to be wasted on unsuitable candidates. Earth-moving machinery operation is arduous, skilful work, often carried out in poor site conditions and a high degree of aptitude and enthusiasm is required. Candidates must be medically fit, sufficiently robust physically, and' well-coordinated with good reflexes.

ciples to competent operation of the most sophisticated machines. Whilst the actual content of a programme may be adjusted to suit individual conditions, the sequence of development should be observed. For practical machine operator training it is desirable that no more than two trainees per machine are under instruction at any one time, with a maximum of three machines under supervision by each instructor. Wherever practicable, and particularly during the first few hours of training, it is desirable that one instructor should be allocated to each machine. During the first four hours of practical machine operation, however, one instructor should not be expected to supervise more than four trainees using two machines.

3.2

Safety

1

Scope

and field

of application

This International Standard specifies the nature of operator training appropriate for earth-moving machinery. It does not specify any procedure for proficiency or assessment of competence of an operator's ability, since these factors are usually covered by local and national procedures and regulations. It does not specify who is responsible for the training. It applies to machines as defined in IS0 6165.

Throughout the training it must continually be emphasized that one of the MOST IMPORTANT aspects of machine operation and servicing is SAFETY (see 6, 4.1 and 6.2.15).

3.3
3.3.1

Stages of training
General basic training

2

References

IS0 4510, Earth-moving machinery - Maintenance and adjustment tools IS0 6165, Earth-moving Vocabulaw. machinery Basic types -

The objective is to impart to the trainee operator the essential knowledge and skills fundamental to correct machine operation. It should include : the principles of starting and stopping; the maintenance of basic mechanisms such as engine, transmission, etc.: basic dimensional data such as length, width, mass, ground bearing pressure, speed, etc.: an appreciation of the factors affecting machine productivity; the interpretation of diagrams and load charts; significance and use of operator instruction manuals; operation of basic machines, for example small dumpers, wheeled and crawler machines in basic applications (see 4.1 to 4.3). 3.3.2 Operator's training record book

IS0 6405, Earth-moving machinery controk and others.

Symbols -

Operator

IS0 6756, Earth-moving machinery Operation and maintenance - Guide to the format and content of manuals.

3 3.1

Structure General

of training

programmes

This book may be issued to all operators on completion of the general basic training course. Details of further training courses and site operational experience should subsequently be entered bee clause 5). 3.3.3 Advanced training for specialized groups of

machines
This training is only to be given after successful completion of general basic training. It covers the operation of specific machines within a group (see 6.1 to 6.3).

The content of each individual training programme should be integrated within the scope of all the programmes to provide a sequence of operational development from elementary prin-

IS 12209 IS0 7130

: 1993 : 1981

3.3.4

courses

Specializbd "in field" conversion .

or "retraining"

4.2

Typical content
a) Use of operator instruction, lubrication and safety manuals (see IS0 67501. b) Development of ability to use fully the relevant information shown in diagrams and symbols (see IS0 6405). c) Basic dimensional data, for example, mass, ground pressure, speed, etc. d) Actual machine operation in basic applications, including an appreciation of the factors involved in maximising machine productivity. e) Use of load charts related to machine capability and stability. f) Operator maintenance of items such as engine, transmission, cooling system, lubrication, battery, tyres, tracks, brakes, etc., including use of tools (see IS0 4510) and maintenance and lubrication manuals (see IS0 6750). g) Starting and stopping, indicating precautions.

This training is to give experienced operators, who have completed advanced training for a machine group, further training to enable them to transfer from one type of machine to another within that group. Normally this training will be carried out on 5construction sites (see clause 7). 3.3.5 Refresher courses

These courses are given on site or at a training centre as appropriate to operational circumstances, so that an operator may be kept up to date with developments of machines and improvements and changes'in operating techniques. Also to retrain operators who have not used a particular machine for some time (see clause 71. 3.3.6 Record of training course completion

A certificate specifying the content may be issued on successful completion of any training course (see clause 8 and annex).

IMPORTANT
The further development of an operator's abilities can only be achieved from the experience gained by working during normal site operations and under adequate supervision. This is a continuing process and most training experience must of necessity fall within this activity. No specific programme is included in this guide since it must depend upon local conditions and requirements. However, the content of 6.2.14 is typical of the scope for operator further development guidance during site productive employment. h) Purpose and use of instruments on dashboard and elsewhere. jr Principles and use of air and hydraulic control systems relative to operator's responsibilities. k) Operator's general duties and particularly the limits of those duties in machine assembly and dismantling, changing equipment, maintenance and servicing, etc. I) Correct and safe practices to ensure accident-free operation. ml Daily "walk-around" inspection to cover specified in operator manual (see IS0 67501. items

4

General basic training

This syllabus specifies the minimum training to develop the necessary basic operational skills for earth-moving machines and the maintenance of their basic mechanisms. Appreciation of essential technical quantities and terms and the significance of information in operator instruction manuals is included. The training content should be suitably balanced between lectures/demonstrations and practical work in the workshop and under suitable site conditions. The actual training methods or training aids to be used are not specified in this guide, due to variations in local conditions and availability of equipment.

4.3

Duration

and location

of course

The time indicated is a minimum and is for the training of literate and receptive candidates. Wherever possible, and for less literate persons (particularly those not familiar with the language of instruction) the course length should be increased as necessary. The course should be carried out at an established training centre, or under adequate supervision on a manufacturer's or contractor's test or construction site. The training syllabus content and course duration should be related to the trainees' educational background. The minimum instruction duration should preferably be not less than 46 h but whenever necessary this should be increased as appropriate. The course should include sufficient classroom work to cover the level of technical competence needed, and the remainder of the instruction should be carried out on actual machines. This practical instruction can be undertaken either at a training establishment or on a suitably selected operational site.

4.1

Safe operation

Safety practices and accident prevention must be a constant feature of all basic and advanced instruction. Safety should be given priority during training in operator skills, and particular care must be taken to discourage the adoption of "unsafe" habits during initial training. Emphasis should be given to operator manual safety messages and data, and attention drawn to safety signs and symbols on the machine, especially where recognized IS0 and/or other symbols are used. The significance of structural (for example, ROPS) safety devices and visual and audible alarms, including the importance of their remaining fully intact and operational at all times should be fully explained. Correct use of hand and other signals should be included.

.

IS IS0

12209 7130

: 1993 : 1981

5

Operator's

training

record

book

b) c) d) e)

group 6. excavators; group C, loaders; group D, dumpers; group E, tractor scrapers; group F, graders;

When an operator has completed a general basic course he may be issued with a training record book which will serve as a record of his future experience in operating the various groups of earth-moving machinery. The book will be in two sections, the first for entry of details of courses attended and the second will be a chronological record of opkrational experience. 5.1 Formal training courses

fj

g) group G, rollers/compactors (towed, self-propelled, single and multiple roll, both plain and vibratory, pneumatic tyred); h) group H, miscellaneous plant (courses to be scheduled as necessary for such items as trench diggers, etc.).

This section can be set out to record details of courses attended, together with the authorisation by the training supervisor and organization represented, or, alternatively, the section can consist of a series of blank pages to which formal certificates signed by the trainer(s) can be attached. 6.2 5.2 Chronological operational experience

Typical

training

content

for a machine

group

The purpose of this section of the book is to record types of machine actually operated by the individual on construction projects. The record should be set out as indicated in the annex and information inserted under the following headings :

The general content will cover the items included in 4.2 which are applicable to the particular machine group, but the instruction will be in the greater detail and depth necessitated by a specialized training programme. The minimum content is as follows.

6.2.1 a) b) cl name of employer; machine group; detail of machine (or machines) operated; 6.2.2

Introduction

to machine

Uses, general design features, data, functions and general limitations. Classroom work followed by machine review by inspection.

d) dates of commencement and termination of operation of a particular machine; e) signature of person responsible for training.

Operator's

controls

The following instruction should be included : a) description and use of the operator's controls;

6 Advanced machines

training

for specialized

groups

of

b) layout of the controls with respect to the operator at his post; c) identification of instrumentation.

This training is intended for operators who have achieved sufficient experience following completion of a general basic course, to acquire advanced level operator skills. A single course syllabus will only cover one of the groups of machines listed, other groups will be covered by courses of equivalent standard. The machines will be grouped in categories of general similarity. As for basic training (see 4.1) SAFE OPERATION shall be a constant feature during all training. Some elements of safe practices may only be fully appreciated by a trainee towards the end of his course, at which time these aspects should be reemphasized. Typical examples are shown in 6.2.15. 6.1 Groups

6.2.3

Commissioning,

starting and stopping

Include information regarding the different preliminary checks, the instructions and the safety controls that must precede putting a machine into operation such as : a) The checks and verifications to be performed prior to starting the machine, for example : fluid levels and inspection for leaks; loose, worn and missing parts;

The suggested groupings for the main types of earth-moving machines are as follows : a) group A, tractors (wheeled and crawler) including equipment, and general principles for towing scrapers, etc.;

removal of built-up material on tracks, axles and undercarriage;
tyre pressure and condition of tracks, and whilst walking around the machine ensure no person is in danger.

3

IS 12209

: 1993

IS0 7130 : 1981

b)

Sequential

order of operations of the controls;

to start the engine

:

-

emergency advice

operation; to be taken in case of brake or

-

position

.

on action etc.

steering temperatures

failure,

starting the engine at various ambient

and in adverse climatic conditions. WARNING : if jump starting,

safety precautions
i c) Sequential

in operator's

observe manual.

relevant

6.2.5 a)

Preparation
Operation

for mounting

of equipment

to be performed. tool ki:.

order of operations to halt machine;

to stop the machine

:
b) Use of operator's Precautions

-

operations operations

c) to park machine accumulators); (positions of controls bleed-off 6.2.6

to be taken.

and equipment,

and any necessary

pressure

Movement

of machine

between

work sites

such as for steering period of idling; operations

Driving on the road (example, a) tions with respect to construction b) Method of loading car. including

follow the traffic regulamachinery). on a road vehicle or

to stop engine;

and securing

railway platform safety locking. c) Methods

of handling

sling points, towing at-

6.2.4 Daily operation
Demonstrate the role of the different as follows operating controls and

tachment,

etc.

how to use them. a)

:
prior to operating the

6.2.7
a)

Special conditions
Precautions

of use

to be taken during cold weather: manual and relevant service operation;

Daily checks

to be performed

machine

:
position seat and adjust (if provided) steering col-

-

refer to manufacturer's regarding

-

bulletins and windows. Ensure entrance

cold weather

umn, clean compartment

-

refer to lubrication hydraulic

manual (see IS0 6750) regarding etc.; electrical equip-

and exit is free from obstruction;

lubricants, etc.);

fluids, coolants, (for example,

b)

instrumentation warm-up;

checks (oil pressure,

-

special

precautions motor,

ment,

starting

etc.); up machine. during hot and/or humid

systems checks (steering, Checks to be performed brakes, etc.). b) while operating the machine

operations Precautions

to warm to be

taken

:

weather. c) etc. Precautions to be taken for utilization in water, mud,

-

instrumentation function operator

checks; devices;

of warning

c)

d) safety warnings. operation

Precautions

to be taken

for

utilization

in dusty

at-

mospheres.

Advice

on efficient

:

e)

Precautions

to be taken for other special conditions, or corrosive atmospheres.

ior

-

example, selection steering; operation operation stopping operating of equipment; techniques; and parking; adjustment (i.e. dozer angle, etc.); b) of gears; 6.2.8

high altitude

Fuels, lubricants,

hydraulic fluids, coolants,

etc.

Instruction cluded a)

in the use of fuels, lubricants, lubrication

etc as specified in the

manufacturer's

manual (see IS0 6750) should be in-

-

:
specifications of the fuels, lubricants, hydraulic fluids,

coolants,

etc. to be used; and the importance of cleanliness, etc. (see

precautions 6750);

daily precautions

after work;

IS0

4

IS 12209
IS0 7130

: 1993
: 1981

c) dj
ing .

tank and circuit capacities in litres (gallons); follow manufacturer> instructions for pressure refuell-

6.2.14

Optimum

machine

performance

and output

6.2.9

Methods

of lubrication

and precautions

The following

instructions

should be included :

Guidance to indicate good practice to maximise machine productivity, with minimum operator uneconomic effort, and minimum fuel consumption and wear and tear, should be included at all stages of the instruction, taking account of the necessity to work safely. Preferably, a specific period of instruction should be given at the end of the course to emphasize operation for productivity to include for example : a) positioning of an excavator or similar machine to ensure minimum arc of swing (and, therefore, minimum cycle time); b) operation of tractor scrapers to take ground conditions and weather conditions hourly output and greatly reduce wear on operate with reduced bowl capacity in very conditions); full account of fit may improve the machine to wet and muddy

h daily reading of the hour meter (it is this operation which determines the time of the lubrication operations);
b) use of lubrication schedule in manufacturer's appropriate intervals (see IS0 6750); manual at

c) general recommendations regarding safety while lubricating a machine (for example, do not grease a machine which is not parked according to the manufacturer's instructions, take precautions to prevent fire); d) emphasize other precautions

:
flush before refilling;

-

avoid mixing lubricants,

cl development of proficiency in grading, rock ripping, operation on slopes (including transverse slopes) etc., necessity to observe caution where turning on side slopes; d) adjustment of tracks to take account of ground, movement per cycle, amount of slewing, etc. to achieve maximum output with minimum machine wear and operator fatigue; e) establish a proficiency standard to a recognised evaluation procedure.
6.2.15 Safety general

ensure the machine is level before filling sumps and tanks; oil should only be changed with the engine hot; fittings, breathers, oil

clean carefully all lubricating check windows, etc.; change/clean

all filters as appropriate;

check the condition of the sealing gaskets (do not forget to put them back); when an engine is drained clearly mark it so tha& it :s not operated before it is refilled.
6.2.10 Routine servicing of hydraulic and air systems

Re-emphasis at the end of the course in the observation safety by the operator, typical subjects being : a) regarding the machine wheels, parking, etc.); (for example, chocking

of

the

Emphasize precautions
6.2.11 Routine

specific to these systems.
maintenance

b) regarding the site (for example, do not work on a machine on a slope which is liable to collapse); c) do not undercuts; work under overhanging embankments or

and preventive

Include the maintenance operations and their frequency as specified in the manufacturer's maintenance manual (see IS0 6750). 6.2.12
al Field repairs and malfunctional problems

d) ensure buckets, blades and similar items are lowered to ground after completing the work; e)
f)

Repairs and adjustments which can be carried out with the operator's tool kit (see IS0 45101, refer to manufacturer's maintenance manual (see IS0 6750).
b) Location of troubles with particular reference to the classified information in the manufacturer's maintenance manual (see IS0 6750).

watch for trees and branches and high voltage lines;

ensure all safety devices are always intact and fully operational, including, for example, emergency brakes and steering, reverse alarms and seat belts; g) greasing and other servicing or repair work should not be carried out when the engine,is running;

6.2.13

Operator

identification

of parts

for routine

requirements Importance of accurate and intelligent use of the information the manufacturer's parts manual (see IS0 6750). in

h)
j)

identification

of safety signs and symbols;
of training and

one of the MOST IMPORTANTaspects machine operation is SAFETY.

5

IS 12209 IS0

: 1993

7130 : 1981

8.3

Duration

and location

of the training

course

re-train operators who have not used a particular machine for some time. c) The content of the courses should be selected from the syllabus contained in 6.2.1 to 6.2.15 inclusive, with the addition of such other subjects as may be appropriate in the circumstances. d) The duration should be adequate to cover the scope of training required.

The actual duration will depend upon the category and complication of the indivi&al machine, and wherever possible the course length should be increased as necessary. a) The course should include sufficient classroom work to cover the level of technical competence needed, and the remainder of the instruction should be carried out on actual machines. This practical instruction can be undertaken either at a training establishment or on a suitably selected operational site. b) The minimum instruction duration for this advanced training for most groups of machines, should preferably be not less than 70 h, subject to adjustment as appropriate.

i

8

Record of training

course completion

On successful completion of a course, a certificate may be issued. Where appropriate full details of the course may be recorded in the operator's training record book (see clause 5). Since in some countries statutory forms of certificate may already exist, this International Standard does not specify a format but it is suggested that the following minimum information should be included : a) b) certificate registration serial number, when applicable; operator's name and other identification;

7 Specialized "in field" conversion "retraining" courses and refresher courses

or

Training in these two areas would normally be given on site, but, for refresher courses in particular, it may be more convenient to base the instruction at a training centre. a) Conversion courses are to give operators experienced within a group of machines, training to'enable them to transfer from one type of machine to another within that group. b) Refresher courses are to enable an operator to be kept up to date with the development of machines and improvements and changes in operating techniques, also to

c) contents of course and machine group covered, where necessary specific types of machine should be indicated; d) durationof course, including dates of commencement and completion; e) authorisation signature.

6

IS 12209 : 1993
ISO 7130 : 1981

Annex Operator's training record book Chronological operational experience

Entries should be made in the columns shown, and the following procedure should be observed : Column 2 : The machine group letter should be stated (see 6.1) Column 3 : Make and size of each machine operated should preferably be inserted Column 6 : Brief details of anv relevant additional facts should be included Column 7 : The name of a senior individual within whose responsibility the operator has worked, and who could be approached when appropriate

7

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, 1nd i;t

Standard Mark
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed

Bureau of Iudian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ef Indian Shzndurdr Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
. Copyright

i

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS
Revision of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodica!ly; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Comments on this lndian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following Monthly Additions'. reference: Dot : No HMD 07 ( 0217 )
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi llOOD2 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Telegrams Common

: Manaksanstha

to

all

Offices )

Telephone 331 01 31 { 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 46 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 ( East )

235 15 19, C 632 92 95, 632 78,91,

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FAKIDABAD. GHAZlABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Prlntwell Printen, Aligarb, India

