WAT Wah IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


Kai unaa wae — 
EA 


aM 6 ina Wa 


Construction Project Management — 
Guidelines 


Part 6 Scope Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


© BIS 2015 


Rs AM SAR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM FH, 9 au AHL Art, ae fercil-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2015 Price Group 7 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 6) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A construction project is an endeavour undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 

b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 
procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 

c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off; 


d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the built 
facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time over-runs, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal 
is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial 
and other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and 
technical processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top 
management commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some 
of the public domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through 
appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for construction project management’. Part 1 General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This has been followed by publication of other parts as follows: 


Part 2 : 2013 on Time management 

Part 3 : 2015 on Cost management 

Part 4 : 2015 on Quality management 

Part 5 : 2013 on Health and safety management 
Part 8 : 2015 on Risk management 


The other parts of the standard are under formulation which will cover functions such as procurement management, 
communication management, human resource management, sustainability management and integration 
management. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGEMENT — 
GUIDELINES 
PART 6 SCOPE MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 6) covers guidelines for scope 
management aspects of construction project 
management. 


1.2 The scope management aspects regarding project 
formulation and appraisal up to the stage of preparation 
of preliminary proposals for financial approval are not 
covered in this standard. The scope of this standard, 
therefore, covers the stages subsequent to the stage of 
approval (when a decision to implement the project 
including its financing is taken) till commissioning and 
handing over of the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Part 1). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

7337 : 2010 Glossary of terms in project 
management (second revision) 

10400 : 2013 Glossary of terms in inventory 
management (second revision) 

15198 : 2014 Glossary of terms in human resource 
development (first revision) 

15883 Construction project management — 
Guidelines 

(Part 1): 2009 General 


(Part 2): 2013 Time management 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7337, IS 10400 and IS 15198 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


The project scope can be defined as the quantum of 
work that needs to be completed to deliver a product, 


service or a result with specified features and functions. 
It is the boundary ofa project within which all activities 
in the projects are required to be executed. The scope 
along with time, cost and quality form the four major 
considerations of any project. 


Since the scope forms the basis of a project defining 
boundaries of work, any ambiguity in scope leads to 
confusion and unnecessary work. To avoid this, the 
scope needs to be clearly defined, controlled and 
managed throughout the life cycle of the project. 


In project scope, the work quantum often includes 
provision for contingencies which could accommodate 
a permissible amount of variation that may arise during 
project execution. However, when the variation occurs 
beyond the permitted threshold, it would trigger a scope 
change which needs to be managed through scope 
management process. 


4.1 Need for Scope Management 


Scope of a project is derived from the deliverable 
description and assumptions defined in the project 
charter prepared during the formulation and appraisal 
stage. Scope management is the key process to 
maintain quantum and extent of a project. It is needed 
to control the influence of any change in the associated 
activities of a project during its life-cycle. If scope is 
not managed, it would lead to uncontrolled scope 
variation which is to be prevented. A variation 
introduced without appropriate contractual binding 
with the stakeholders and implementation of the same 
without assessing/concluding the impact on baseline 
time/cost in the intermediate stage of project execution 
may derail the project success and cause cost/time over- 
run and associated contractual disputes. 


Scope management is essential to evaluate and manage 
the expectations of the key stakeholders of the project. 
The project scope may sometimes contain elements of 
implied requirements which may be interpreted 
differently by various stakeholders. Diligent 
documentation and peer review of the same can 
minimize omissions, mistakes and errors. However, 
the project team shall anticipate variance in perception 
of the implied requirements among the stakeholders 
which may result in dispute during the execution stage. 
Hence, there is a critical need for the process of scope 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


management for controlling any changes in scope to 
facilitate the smooth execution of a project. 


4.1.1 Scope Variation 


In a project, there is a likelihood of scope variation 
which refers to addition of new features, deletion of 
original features and/or adoption of items of works, 
specifications at variance with those originally 
contemplated. While some of these changes cannot be 
altogether avoided, efforts should be made to keep 
these to the minimum. They have to be incorporated 
after a defined process of impact analysis scrutinized 
and approved by an empowered authority. Scope 
variation can originate from several sources and are to 
be controlled through the process of scope 
management. 


4.1.2 Causes of Scope Variation 
Some of the common causes of scope variation include, 


a) inadequate data in the initial stage for 
preparing a well detailed project scope 
statement in the project initiation document; 


b) changes in requirements earlier specified by 
project stakeholders; and 


c) unanticipated external factors influencing the 
project requirements and assumptions. 


These should be taken care of to prevent avoidable 
scope change. 


4.2 Benefit of Scope Management 


Following are some of the benefit of adopting a formal 
scope management process in a project: 


a) Larger support in planning and controlling the 
project; 

b) All stakeholders arrive at a common 
understanding about what is to be done in the 
project and what is not to be done; 

c) Plays a vital role in listing out the expected 
deliverables; 

d) Avoids uncontrolled scope variation and 
hence associated time/cost over-runs, 
contractual disputes, etc. 


It is important to finalize and document the project 
scope baseline before entering to project construction 
stage to eliminate contractual disputes and to avoid 
wastage of time and cost. It is also important to manage 
assumptions and constraints of the project. 


4.3 Organizational 
Management 


Structure for Scope 


A specific team can be organized to carry out scope 
management work during different stages of a project. 


The team may be part of the project planning team 
reporting to the project manager. It may include the 
members involved in developing the project-charter 
in line with management objectives and key project 
selection criteria during appraisal stage. 


During scope planning and detailing stage, the team 
will have the responsibility to, 


a) identify and communicate with the key 
stakeholders and to compile their 
requirements; and 

b) define the scope and create document and 
preliminary break down structure of functions 
and activities of the project. 


During construction stage, the team will manage and 
control the variations in project requirements/ 
stakeholder expectations. As part of scope monitoring 
and control, any change request will have to go through 
a defined change-control-process to analyze the 
necessity and assess the cost/time impact of the change, 
evaluate other alternatives, if any. 


During commissioning and handing over stage of the 
project, the team will verify the scope of the deliverable 
with respect to the scope baseline. 


4.4 Methods and Processes for Scope Management 


The scope management process include the following 
steps: 


a) Scope planning; 

b) Scope detailing; 

c) Scope monitoring and change control; and 
d) Scope verification. 


5 SCOPE MANAGEMENT IN RELATION TO 
PROJECT STAGES 


5.1 General 


The scope management processes are to be carried out 
in all the stages of the project. Flow chart of scope 
management process is indicated in Table 1. While 
provisions relating to project formulation and appraisal 
stages are not covered in this standard, it is to note that 
during that stage, the scope identification needs to be 
done. 


5.2 Scope Management During Pre-construction 
Stage 


During the pre-construction stage of the project, the 
first two steps of scope management process namely 
scope planning and scope detailing shall be carried out. 
The project-charter prepared from the project appraisal 
team forms an important input for these steps. The steps 
start with stakeholder identification, collecting 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


Table 1 Tabulation of Scope Management Process 
(Clause 5.1) 


SI Project phases Scope Management Reguirements Outputs 
No. Process 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Pre-construction 1) Project charter / brief 
phase: 2) Constraints and assumptions i) Performance specification 
a) Scope planning 3) Deliverables ii) Scope statement 
4) Project features and functions iii) Scope management plan 
5) Stakeholder requirements 
1) Methodology i) WBS 
2) Constraints and assumptions ii) Technical specifications 
b) Scope detailing 3) Scope statement iii) Tender/concept drawings 
4) Project estimates and construction iv) Tender document (request for 
proposal) and bill of quantities 
ii) Construction phase 1) Scope baseline i) Deliverables validation 
Scope monitoring 2) Progress reports ii) Scope changes 
and control 3) As-built information iii) Corrective actions 
4) Change requests iv) Corrected time and cost baseline 
v) Revised drawings and BOQ 
iii) Completion and 1) Validated deliverables i) Formal acceptance 
handover 2) Project documentations ii) Project completion certificate 


Scope verification 


requirements, preparation of preliminary estimate, 
proposed construction methodology, creating a work 
break down structure (WBS), etc. Depending on the 
procurement/tendering strategy, the scope shall be 
defined by preparing technical specifications, drawings 
and bill of quantities as part of request for proposal 
document. The scope may also be defined only by 
providing detailed performance specifications along 
with conceptual drawings for the bidders to detail and 
finalize. 


5.3 Scope Management During Construction Stage 


During construction stage of the project the scope 
management process mainly involves control and 
monitoring of the scope. The monitoring and 
controlling shall be carried out in the intervals of 
weekly, fortnightly, monthly, etc, decided suitably as 
per project requirement. Since there is a possibility of 
variation in assumptions and project constraints 
anticipated during appraisal and pre-construction stage, 
it may be necessary to introduce changes by choice or 
due to circumstances. These changes are required to 
be controlled. So, during this stage of the project, the 
scope management mainly revolves around change 
control and their implementation. 


5.4 Scope Management During Commissioning and 
Handing Over Stage 


Before the handing over process can commence, the 
completed deliverables of the project will have to be 
verified and accepted against the updated scope 
baseline which is called scope verification. In case of 
as-built variations, new change-request, impact 


3) Joint inspection report 
4) T&C reports 


analysis and approval documentation shall be carried 
out to contractually close the same. 


6 SCOPE MANAGEMENT 


6.1 Scope Planning and Detailing 
6.1.1 Scope Planning 


The scope planning process starts immediately after 
appraisal stage of the project. During the appraisal 
stage, formal authorization is accorded to proceed with 
the project. The output from appraisal stage is a 
document called project charter or project brief which 
lists out the project objectives, feasibility reports, 
assumptions and expected constraints under which the 
project is authorized for implementation. 


The scope planning process shall include identifying 
and documenting the requirements from all relevant 
stakeholders of the project which may be functional 
or technical in nature. The compilation of the same 
shall be carried out through various techniques like 
interviews, facilitated workshops, questionnaires 
surveys, erecting prototypes, etc. This stage shall also 
involve detailed analysis of the product or the major 
project deliverables, alternative identification through 
value engineering, etc. The performance specifications 
of the product, broad level technical specifications and 
concepts shall be finalized in this stage. 


Scope planning process shall lead to the development 
of written scope statement and defined measurable 
parameters like number of beds in a hospital, number 
of seats in IT buildings, built up areas and number of 
car parks in a car parking, etc. It also describes the 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


various buildings, structures to be constructed, its 
functionalities and services, expected time schedule 
and milestones, etc, which shall form the basis of all 
future project decisions. This will help in confirming 
or developing common understanding of project scope 
among the stakeholders. As the project progresses, the 
scope statement may need to be revised or refined to 
reflect changes to the scope of the project. 


In this stage, a detailed scope management plan shall 
be drawn to lay down all necessary practices including 
technical and organizational interfaces pertaining to 
project scope. 


6.1.2 Scope Detailing 


The project scope statement from scope planning forms 
the input for scope detailing. The scope detailing 
involves subdividing the major project into 
deliverables and further into more manageable 
components in order to, 


a) improve accuracy of cost, time and resource 
estimates; 

b) define a baseline for deliverables measurement 
and control during construction stage; 

c) form organizational structure in line with 
project objectives; and 

d) facilitate clear roles and responsibility 
assignment. 


For scope detailing, the project is broken down and 
defined as various manageable components in terms 
of physical structure with details of specifications and 
functionalities. This breaking-down and detailing 
process shall be guided by the procurement and 
execution strategy of the project, such that the major 
elements are defined in the way the project is intended 
to be executed and captures the milestones forming 
the deliverable completions. The scope detailing 
process involves following major steps: 


1) Identifying the major elements of the project; 

2) Deciding, if adequate and workable cost and 
time can be developed at this level of detail 
for each element; 

3) Identifying consistent elements of the 
deliverable having tangible/verifiable results 
for performance measurement; and 

4) Verifying the correctness of the sub-division 
— in line with organizational breakdown 


structure, deliverable integration 
methodologies and product features and 
functions. 


The work break down structure remains the output of 
decomposition in scope detailing process. Refer 6.1.3 
of IS 15883 (Part 2) for various considerations in 
development of WBS of a project. 


All factors likely to affect the scope leading to effect 
on time, cost, quality, health and safety, etc, shall be 
considered. 


Detailed bill of quantity, pre-construction drawings, 
detailed technical specifications, methodology, safety 
requirements, etc for the project shall be the final output 
of scope detailing. Depending on procurement strategy, 
the same may be issued as tender documents after 
validated for clarity in the contractual interpretations 
to invite bids for construction stage of the project. 


Proper scope detailing is critical to the project success. 
When the scope detailing is inadequate, the probability 
of occurrence of cost over-run, time over-run and 
contractual disputes are most likely. It may lead to 
uncontrolled changes which can disrupt the project 
work flow, decrease morale and productivity of the 
work force. 


6.2 Scope Monitoring and Change Control 
6.2.1 General 


Scope monitoring shall be a continuous process during 
the design and construction stage of the project. During 
this stage, as the execution of work proceeds, the 
deliverables shall be continuously validated through 
regular inspections. Any normal variation within the 
permissible contingency, originally anticipated, shall 
be dealt with based on the relevant provisions. 
However, the scope of the project may require to be 
changed beyond the permissible threshold. This may 
be due to the assumptions and constraints anticipated 
during appraisal and pre-construction stage of project, 
getting materialized differently due to factors like, 


a) change in business needs as perceived during 
project formulation and appraisal stage; 

b) error or omission in project or deliverables 
definition; 

c) technology improvement; 

d) new legislation and regulation; 

e) change in material availability; and 

f) value engineering, design modification 
initiated during construction stage by 
specialist/experts who come on board only at 
this stage. 


In the event of such a requirement, a change in the 
project scope shall be introduced through a controlled 
process. 


6.2.2 Change Control Process 


Change control process is a way to manage the changes 
that may have to be introduced to the project scope 
during the life of a project. The change request can be 
initiated by any stakeholder of the project. However, 
the project manager, with concurrence of sponsor, shall 


be the sole approver of a change and unless approved 
by him, no change shall be introduced in a project scope. 
The project manager shall engage the domain specialist 
groups from within or outside the project team to analyze 
the necessity, cost implications and time impact of the 
change requested. The specialist group may seek 
information from other stakeholders of the project for 
evaluating the change request. Their analysis along with 
the recommendation for approval or rejection, actions 
that may require baseline revision, etc, shall be placed 
for appropriate decision to the project manager. The 
analysis shall also be based on the latest progress reports 
of the project providing information on scope 
performance such as which interim products have been 
completed and which have not. On approval of a change 
by the project manager, the project documents have to 
be suitably updated and baseline scope shall be suitably 
recast (see Fig. 1). Change control process is essential 
for successful project execution as it is closely interfaced 
with other processes of scope control, schedule/ time 
control, cost control. 


6.2.3 Change Request 


Change request may occur in many forms such as, oral 
or written, direct or indirect, externally or internally 
initiated, and legally mandated or optional. However, 
it shall be formalized into an action to initiate the 
change control process. In general a change request 
may be formalized by a project team member or a 
stakeholder upon considering the variance from the 
project objectives and/or constraints. Formalized 
change request would include descriptions of the 
change, components affected, business need, cost/time 
estimates, risk assessment, resource requirements and 
approval status. The templates used for such change 
request shall be developed depending on the specific 
needs of a project. Annex A and Annex B provide 
typical specimens of some of the change request forms. 
During design development, the specimen scope 
control sheet enclosed in Annex C may be used. The 
specimen change order register given in Annex D may 
be used for recording all the changes formally 
introduced through change control process. The roles 


Baseline Scope 


Review Change 
Request 


Update 
Documentation 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


and responsibilities in various stages of change control 
process is given in Table 2. 


6.2.4 Deliverable Validation and Variance Analysis 


The deliverable validation is a continuous quality 
control process which is carried out based on the 
technical specification set out in the defined scope of 
the project. The periodic inspection report prepared 
during the construction stage of the project along with 
documents prepared from as-built-survey shall be used 
for variance analysis. In variance analysis, any 
deviation in the project scope with respect to the 
baseline shall be identified. As part of scope control, 
the reasons for variance shall be identified and decision 
taken regarding need for corrective action. Through 
these steps in a project, any change in the feature, 
functionality and product description shall be 
controlled and monitored on regular basis. 


6.2.5 Periodicity for Scope Monitoring 


Apart from instances of change request, scope monitoring 
shall be done at pre-determined periodical intervals. 


6.3 Scope Verification 
6.3.1 General 


Scope verification is the process of formalizing 
acceptance of the completed project deliverables by 
the project stakeholders (sponsors, client, customer, 
etc) verification may be for entire project deliverables 
or for a part thereof. Verification shall be carried out 
only on validated deliverables, for example, those that 
have passed the quality control and quality assurance 
procedure of the project. In this process through an 
inspection which may be an audit, review or walk- 
through, the validated deliverables of the project shall 
be accepted or rejected by comparing them with the 
project requirements and acceptance criteria. If they 
are rejected they may be reworked upon by the project 
team. As stakeholders inspect project deliverables, they 
may also find defects or areas that have been 
overlooked. The inspection team may then record the 
problems associated with the deliverables as a snag 


Assess the Determine 
Impact Decision 


Fic. 1 OVERALL Process FLOW OF CHANGE CONTROL 


5 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


TABLE 2 Change Control Process Roles and Responsibilities 
(Clause 6.2.3) 


SI Steps Responsibility 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Change request 
identification team member or project sponsor form 
ii) Change request 1) 
assessment 2) 
Project manager and 3) 
Domain specialist group 
4) 
iii) Change request a) Project manager { 
analysis r 1) 
b) Domain specialist group | 
2) 
1) 
c) Project manager 
2) 
iv) Change request Project manager/ Project 
approval sponsor | 
v) Change request i) 


implementation ii) 
iii) 
iv) 


v) 


Project manager and project 
team 


that is to be attended. Sometimes, the as-built variation 
may be accepted by formalizing the deviation through 
a change request process. 


6.4 Post Construction Review and Documentation 


Post construction review shall be done analyzing the 
instances of scope changes and their impact, and shall 


Details 


4) 


Any project stakeholder, project Identify the need for a change and describe it on the project change request 


Immediately defer or reject change request if it is not a valid one 

For those change requests that are not deferred or rejected determine 
appropriate resources required to analyse the change request 

Perform a quick assessment of the potential impact, including an 
estimate of the costs and time scale for performing a detailed impact 
analysis 

Update the change request form 


Distribute the change request for analysis to specialist group members 


Analyse impact of change, including effort estimate and financial 
impact, within agreed time frame 

Accept for detailed analysis or recommend for deferment or rejection 
Collect, consolidate and document the analysis to evaluate the total 
impact 

Update the change request form to document the decision 


The changes with the impact matrix are scrutinized. The recommendation 
of the domain specialist group is considered before the final decision of 
acceptance or rejection of the change 


Update project management plans and procedures 

Communicate changes to the team 

Monitor progress according to updated project management plans 
Record completion of change request 

Close change request 


be documented and preserved for later reference. The 
documentation during closing out stage shall include 
all the scope variances, the reasoning behind the 
corrective action chosen and other types of lessons 
learned from scope control. This should become part 
of the historical database for the project and other 
projects of the performing organization. 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.2.3) 


CHANGE REQUEST FORM - SPECIMEN 1 


Project name: 

Project manager: 

Sponsor: 

Change request quick summary 


Proposed Change to: scope, schedule, cost, risk or 
complexity level, quality, contract administration, customer 
satisfaction, project management plans or procedures 


Project number: 
Change register entry: 
Date: 


Qualitative Impact on 
Project: 
Low, Medium, High 


Status: Open, Approved for analysis, 
Approved for implementation, 
Implemented, Deferred, Rejected, Closed 


Quick summary on change request focus area 


Design 
Changes in project design - Yes/No 


Change request identification 
Short description 
Requestor estimate of priority 


Raised by and date 
Further analysis? 


Change request assessment 
Detailed description 

Time scale for analysis 

Accepted for analysis by and Date 
Impact analysis 

Impact analysis 

Scope impact description 
Schedule impact description 

Cost impact description 

Impact of not implementing 


Procurement Construction 
Changes in procurement / Changes in construction methodologies - 
purchase (Material) Yes/No 

- Yes/No 


A brief summary of the proposed change 
The priority of the change request (critical, high, medium, low) 


Critical - Request is very urgent requiring immediate analysis. All project work halts 

High - Request is urgent requiring analysis before most project work can continue 

Medium - Request requires analysis before significant work towards the next project 
deliverable is completed 

Low - Request is not urgent but needs to be analyzed before the next project deliverable is 
complete 

The name of the originator of the request 

O Approved O Rejected O Deferred 

Name: 


(the person making this decision) 


A detailed description of the proposed change including justification and/or benefits 
Time period for performing the analysis 
The name of person who accepted for analysis 


A specification of all project elements to be modified as a result of the change 

A description of the scope of the change and any impacts to overall project scope 

A description of the schedule for the change and any impacts to overall project schedule 
A description of the costs for the change 

A description of the impact to the overall project of not implementing the change 


Alternatives 

Completion criteria for change request 
Estimated effort 

Estimated cost 

Impact level 


Analyzed priority of request 


Resources 

Estimates validated by and Date 
Analyzed by 

Final conclusion 

Decision 


Validation for decision 

Approved resources 

Approved cost 

Comments 

Change request decision signatures 


Project Manager: 


Identify alternatives 

A description of the completion criteria for the change 
An estimate of the effort to implement the change 

An estimate of the total cost of the change 


a) High - Major modification having a repercussion on the entire project 
b) Medium - Average modification having limited repercussions on the project 
c) Low - Anelementary modification having little potential impact on the project team 


and none outside it 

Factors to be considered in determining the impact level include: 

1. Impact on the initially planned main features of the solution (scope), 

2. Impact on the cost of the project, and 

3. Impact on the project end date or a major milestone 

The priority of the change request (critical, high, medium, low): 

Critical Change - Request is very urgent requiring immediate implementation 

High Change - Request is urgent requiring implementation before most project work can 

continue 

Medium Change - Request requires implementation before significant work towards the next 
project deliverable is completed 

- Request is not urgent but needs to be implemented before the next project 
deliverable is complete 

The number of resources required for the change 

The name of the person who validated the impact estimates 

The name of the person performing the impact analysis 


Low Change 


a) Approved for implementation 

b) Deferred 

c) Rejected 

A description of the reason for the decision 

The amount of the approved resources, if change is implemented 
The amount of the approved cost, if change is implemented 

Any additional comments 


Sponsor/Owner/Key Stakeholder: 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 6.2.3) 
CHANGE REQUEST FORM - SPECIMEN 2 
Project No. Date: Distribution: 
Client: 
Project: 


Subject (define of change): What? 
Identified by: Who? 
Reasons for change: Why? 


Discretionary 


Non-discretionary 


Cost implication: 


Time implication: 


Recommended action: 


Project manager 


Date 


Client decision reguired by: Date: 
Forwarded to client: Date: 
Client's decision: Date: 


Projected schedule and 
cost plan (budget) amended 


Project Manager 
on 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.2.3) 
TYPICAL DESIGN DEVELOPMENT SCOPE CONTROL SHEET 
Client name: 


Project name: 
Sheet No. 


Design team report 
Design brief section: 


Issue: 
Pages: 

Options considered: 

1. 

2. 

3. 
Recommendation: 
Cost plan item: 
Ref: 
Current cost: 
Effect of recommendation on costs/schedules: Increase/decrease 
Application for transfer of client contingency: Yes/No Amount: 
Architect/civil engineer/services engineer/ 
structural engineer: Date: 
Quantity surveyor: Date: 
Design team leader: Date: 
Client approval 
Design development/Client contingency transfer approved (delete as applicable) 

Position Signature Date 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 6.2.3) 
CHANGE ORDER REGISTER 
Project: Job Id: 
Client: File Reference: 


Request | Date 
ID 


Initiated | Description of Stakeholder/ | Stakeholder / 
by 


Stakeholder/| Stakeholder/ 
Sponsor 


Sponsor Sponsor Sponsor 
Decision Decision Decision Decision 
Required by | Obtained by Id No. 


ANNEX E 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 


In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, 
New Delhi) 


Aecom India Private Limited, Noida 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, New Delhi 
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

M.N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 


Army Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 
National Institute of Construction Management and Research, 


Mumbai 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


11 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR 
Suri S. SREEKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PAsricHa 
Suri SANJAY Soni (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr AchaL K. MITTAL 
Suri AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
Suri SANJEEV RAsTOGI (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEE 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHIEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


Suri JosE KURIAN 
Suri VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. Das 
Suri M. D. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


Suri D. M. KupTarKar 
Suri RAJENDRA SAWHNEY (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Suri RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHapua (Alternate) 


Pror B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr K. N. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. Naipu 
Suri R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Guna 
Suri GOBINDA PaL Cuoupuury (Alternate) 


Bric Manos KUMAR 
CoL M. K. Prasan (Alternate) 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. Rases (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. Dhawan (Alternate) 


SHRI R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. N. CuowpHarYy (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


Organization 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 
Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 
DR RANJEET MEHTA 
SHRI S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS SURA (Alternate) 


SHRI PAWAN CHOUDHARY 
Suri M. D. Josnı (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PAuL 
Suri Manos KUMAR MITTAL 


Lr Gen (Retp) Hari UNIYAL 
Suri O. P. Gost (Alternate) 

Dr Vanita AHUJA 

Suri R. P. LAHIRI 


Suri A. K. SHARMA 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri J. Roy Cuowbuury, Scientist F and Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
Suri SANJAY PANT 
Scientist E (Civil Engg), BIS 


and 


SHRI S. ARUN Kumar 
Scientist C (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 


In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, 
New Delhi) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 

NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay Khand-II, 
Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


12 


Representative(s) 


Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
Suri SANJEEV RAsTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI JosE KURIAN 
Suri VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. TRIPATHI 

SHRI S. MUKHERJEE 

Suri M. P. Napu 

SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 

Dr V. K. PAUL 

SHRI MANoJ Kumar MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


SHRI IFTIKHAR A. DRABU 


SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


SHRI KRISHNA Kant 


IS 15883 (Part 6) : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, Dr S. N. MANDAL 
IP. Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Suri A. K. SHARMA 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


Working Group on Scope Management, CED 29/P1/WG5 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Suri A. K. SHARMA (Convener) 
Patparganj, Delhi) 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi Suri SATISH UPADHYAY 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) SHRI CHANDRA PAL 
In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Patparganj, Delhi) 


13 


(Continued from second cover) 


Scope management of the projects is necessary to ensure avoiding delays, disputes, and other complexities. The 
foremost requirement is to clearly define the scope and boundaries of the project based on well thought out 
decisions in consonance with the exact requirements of the owner so that substantial changes in the scope at later 
stages are obviated. It should be done at the stage of approval by the Competent Authority and should dwell on 
the main objective of the project and its outer boundary beyond which the work cannot go, cover aspects relating 
to method of project cost estimation and escalation mechanism (for a long duration project) which can help in 
assessing the revised cost. While defining scope, relevant factors like objectives of the project, technology adoption, 
process engineering (in case of complex projects), procurement method (for example requiring competitive 
bidding and in special cases selective bidding), should also be stated. The deviation/increase in the scope of work 
as a result of owner’s requirements or emergencies, have to be distinguished from other normal deviations. 


This standard (Part 6) on scope management has been formulated with the aim to provide guidelines for completing 
the project within the defined scope. This standard is intended to cover aspects on scope management as part of 
construction project management including information regarding the applicable tools and techniques. It gives 
guidelines on scope planning, scope detailing, scope monitoring and control, and scope verification as part of the 
scope management process. Users of this standard are encouraged to employ suitable construction management 
software as an aid to implement provisions of this standard. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enguiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7908). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


