Sedis Arh IS 5230 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


Ue si A uu sd ( ets) 
Were ICD et chact aret ud — 
Aa fear 
(FAT qam) 


To and Fro (Jig Back) Movement 
Bi-Cable Ropeways — Code of 
Practice 


(Second Revision) 


ICS 45.100.77.140.65 


O BIS 2017 


ada res em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"IW FS, 9 Emme WAL Wn ae fereit-110002 
ig M a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2017 Price Group 6 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, 
MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard was first published in 1969 and first revision was done in 2003. This revision has been undertaken 
to incorporate modifications based on the technology being followed in the country. 


An aerial ropeway is a special form of transportation system where passengers/materials are carried using a 
tensioned wire rope supported above the ground. Aerial ropeways are particularly useful in regions where the 
facility in surmounting natural barriers gives them a great advantage over railways or roads, both of which may 
need the heavy civil engineering work to secure easy gradient. They are inexpensive to maintain; pollution free; 
environment friendly; does not affect aesthetics; their power demand is modest and they are not seriously affected 
by adverse climatic conditions. 


Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions ofthe statutory regulations wherever they are in 
force. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard 1s complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5230 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


TO AND FRO (JIG BACK) MOVEMENT BI-CABLE 
ROPEWAYS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the design and construction 
of the to and fro (jig back) movement bi-cable aerial 
ropeways for transportation of passengers and goods 
in separate cabins. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in the text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to IS 7649 shall apply. 


3.1 Jig Back Ropeway — In a ropeway when a single 
or cluster of chairs/cabins are placed together and the 
system follows a reversible movement, it is called to 
and fro or jig back system. Here the system moves from 
one station to another with a particular direction and 
on completion of the journey it reverses its direction 
of movement and the same cycle continues. 


The attachment of single or cluster of chairs/cabins with 
the rope is made on diametrically opposite sides ofthe 
carrying rope. 


3.2 Line — Route alignment of the ropeway between 
two terminals. 


3.3 Inspecting Authority — Competent Authority 
recognized by the statutory regulations to inspect the 
aerial ropeway installation and determine its 
acceptability or otherwise, on the basis of this standard 
and in compliance to prevailing statutory rules and 
regulations. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Guidelines for Design and Construction 


4.1.1 Each part of the ropeway equipment shall be 
designed and constructed in conformity with this 


standard. The quality ofthe materials to be used for its 
construction shall be as per the design. 


4.1.2 On the request of the supervising authorities or 
the purchaser, a certificate of a recognized (NABL/ 
statutory accredited) testing laboratory shall be supplied 
by the constructor as regards to the characteristics of 
material used and essential to the safety of the 
installation. 


4.2 Layout and Freeway 


4.2.1 The axis ofthe line in plan shall be straight. When 
it is not possible to obtain a straight line, the maximum 
deviation permitted shall be 0.3?. This effect shall not 
be cumulative. 


4.2.2 The lateral clearance ofthe cabin on line shall be 
determined taking into account the cabin dimensions 
as well as its lateral oscillations of maximum 12°. 
Obstacles which are not part of the installation shall 
have a minimum clearance of 1.5 m. 


4.2.3 All the towers shall be equipped with guides, 
which limit the transverse oscillations of the cabins 
towards the tower to 6? to 8?. For the maximum 
inclination permitted by a guide, no part of the vehicle 
shall touch the shoes or any other part of the trestle. 


4.2.4 The two tracks ofthe ropeway shall be so arranged 
that the minimum free space which separates vehicles 
inclined towards each other at 12? is at least 1 m, when 
the span of the rope is not greater than 300 m. As for 
longer spans, the clearance shall be increased by 0.2 m 
for each additional 100 m or part thereof. 


4.2.5 In the case of spans where the vehicles do not 
cross each other or in the case of an installation having 
only one track and with an endless haulage rope, the 
clearance measured in the horizontal direction between 
any other rope on opposite path and the vehicle 
oscillating through 12? in the direction ofthis rope shall 
be at least 1 m when the span of any other rope on the 
opposite path is not greater than 300 m As for longer 
spans, this clearance shall be increased by 0.2 m for 
each additional 100 m or part thereof. 


4.2.6 In the longitudinal direction, the vehicles shall 
be capable of free swinging by about 19? with reference 
to the vertical. 


IS 5230 : 2017 


4.2.7 The minimum vertical clearance between the 
space occupied by vehicle and the terrain lying below 
with obstacles existing over it, such as trees, rocks, snow 
drifts, etc, referred to the lowest outline of the vehicle 
shape and determined taking into account the most 
unfavourable conditions shall be at least 1.5 m when 
the place over which the vehicle passes 1s not accessible 
to the public. Where this is not possible, this vertical 
clearance shall be at least 2.5 m measured from the 
lowest part of the cabin after considering the 
longitudinal and transverse oscillation referred in 4.2.5 
and 4.2.6. 


4.2.8 When there are crossings with other 
communication paths or with overhead electric lines, a 
minimum clearance shall exist in order to take into 
account the requirements of 4.7. 


4.3 Maximum Speed 


4.3.1 The speed of the ropeway shall be determined in 
such a way that the safety of travel is ensured. In no 
case shall the maximum speed exceed the values given 
below: 


: 12 m/s in line and 
10 m/s over trestles 


a) Forattended cabins 


: 7 m/s in line and 
6 m/s over trestles 


b) Forunattended cabin 


4.3.2 The maximum braking capacity should be 
determined based on the maximum speed selected. This 
speed shall be such that all the energy contained in the 
vehicle and the corresponding wire ropes can be 
transformed into heat without any reduction in the 
braking effort or any damage to the brake. 


4.4 Capacity of Vehicles 
4.4.1 Capacity 


4.4.1.1 The calculation of the various elements shall 
be done taking into account the weight of 70 kg per 
passenger in the case of cabins with maximum 
capacity of 15 passengers and 65 kg per passenger in 
the case of cabins with capacity greater than 15 
passengers. In the case of ropeway transporting 
passengers for wintersports or climbing installations, 
these weights shall be increased by 10 kg per person 
to take into account supplementary equipment of the 
passengers. 


4.4.1.2 Each vehicle with a capacity of more than 15 
passengers shall be accompanied by a conductor. 


4.4.1.3 The area at the disposal ofthe each standing 
passenger shall be at least 0.22 m? up to 15 
passengers and 0.18 m? for each person above 15 
passengers. The minimum height inside the cabin 
shall be 2 m. 


4.5 Rope Guiding 


4.5.1 The permanency of the carrying wire rope on the 
shoes shall be ensured even under the most 
unfavourable conditions. The minimum load on the 
shoe shall be at least 50 percent greater than the force 
which would be necessary to unseat the rope taking 
into account a gust of wind, as per IS 875. 


4.5.2 The moving wire ropes shall be protected by 
guides, or any other devices, that in the case of 
transverse wind, these wire ropes conserve their normal 
position in the sheaves on which they are resting. In 
addition, the sheave, guide, or other devices shall be 
of such shape that the rope is prevented from any 
displacement that may result in entanglement of the 
wire rope. 


4.5.2.1 Ata level lower than that ofthe carriage bottom, 
a support for the haulage ropes, which might slip off, 
should be provided on the trestles. 


4.5.2.2 Where the moving cable is not supported on 
a sheave, it shall be generally supported by a roller 
train whose number depends on the total load exerted 
by the wire rope at the point under consideration. The 
permissible load for a roller without a soft material 
lining shall be 200 kgf and the maximum permissible 
angle of deflection shall be 2?30'. When the rollers 
are lined with soft lining, the value of the permissible 
load may be increased according to the quality of the 
material (for example, for good quality rubber lining, 
the maximum load in kgf can reach the value of 
4 x wire rope diameter x roller diameter where the 
diameters are expressed in cm). But in no case, shall 
the angle of deflection exceed 4°30’. In the case where 
the wire rope makes an arc of circumference of the 
sheave, the requirements of shall also be taken into 
account. All the rollers shall be mounted on rolling 
bearings. 


4.6 Rescue of Passengers Along the Line 


4.6.1 If the aerial ropeway passes over inaccessible 
terrain or if the height of the vehicles over the ground 
does not permit rescue of the passengers by direct 
descent by means of ladders or ropes, a relief cabin 
operated from a station shall be provided. 


4.6.2 In favourable conditions, upto 20 m, itis sufficient 
to provide ladders or equipment, which permits descent 
by rope. This equipment for descent shall be readily 
available in the cabin when no other means of safety of 
passenger is provided. 


4.7 Crossings 


4.7.1 The crossing of routes, roads, railways, waterways 
or other ropeways shall be avoided as far as possible. 
When it is not possible, the clearance shall be 


determined in such a manner that there 1s no danger for 
any vehicle using the various ways enumerated. 


4.7.2 The crossings and paralleling with railways, 
highways, cableways or overhead electric lines shall 
be so done that no mutual discomfort results either in 
the course of normal operation or rescue operation or 
during installation operations. Wherever the local 
conditions are favorable and the characteristics of the 
electric lines permit it, the overhead electric lines shall 
be replaced by underground cables. 


4.7.3 Long paralleling with electric overhead lines or 
contact lines shall be avoided, as far as possible. The 
distance of separation shall be determined in such a 
way that the safety of both installations 1s ensured. Any 
phenomenon of induction shall not in any way affect 
the continuity or integrity of the telephonic or safety 
systems on either of the installations. 


4.8 Dangerous Areas 


4.8.1 In the proximity of airports or in areas where 
aeroplanes fly at low altitude or land frequently, the 
route of the ropeways shall be adequately marked, 
taking into account any restriction imposed by the 
authority having jurisdiction over the airports. 


4.8.2 The areas exposed to the dangers of natural forces 
(avalanches, landslides, falling rocks, storms, 
earthquakes, etc.) shall be avoided as far as possible. 


4.8.3 If the dangers indicated in 4.8.2 exist, suitable 
protective devices shall be provided. 


4.9 Wind Action 


4.9.1 The wind forces and their effects (static and 
dynamic) shall be taken into account when designing 
ropeways. The provisions mentioned in IS 875 (Part 3) 
and in IS 802 (Part 1) shall be followed. 


4.9.2 In the calculation of wind action on the cables, 
the surface area to be considered shall be the diametric 
surface of the cable multiplied by the factor (C,,) given 
below: 


a) C,= 1.1 for snow bound areas, and 
b) C, «0.7 for areas not affected by snow. 


4.9.3 The uplift caused by the breeze/wind on the wire 
rope and the carrier shall be considered with the 
conditions specified in 4.5.1 are fully met. 


5 WIRE ROPES 


5.1 General 


5.1.1 As far as possible, all wire ropes shall be in single 
piece and shall be of non-rotating construction. Welded 
joints in the rope shall be spaced at least 6 times the 


IS 5230 : 2017 


pitch ofthe wire and their number in 500 m length shall 
not exceed the number of wires in the wire rope. 


5.1.2 Before the wire ropes are put into service, they 
shall be checked by a suitable non-destructive method 
like magneto inductive test, to ensure that the 
requirement given in 5.10 are fully met. Such tests shall 
be carried out periodically by any Government 
approved lab or test house accredited by NABL/ 
statutory regulations. 


5.1.3 Lubricants incorporated in the wire rope during 
manufacturing shall not exert any corrosive action on 
the material of the rope. Lubrication ofthe rope during 
service shall be done according to the specific 
requirements. 


5.1.4 Care shall be taken to avoid any twisting or 
kinking of the rope during unreeling the rope or in 
service. 


52 Carrying Wire Ropes 
5.2.1 Only full-locked coil ropes shall be used. 


5.2.2 The minimum braking strength of the wire rope 
atthe time of putting into service shall not be less than 
3.3 times the maximum axial load met with in service 
calculated for the most unfavourable condition or 
circumstances. 


5.2.3 When the effect due to braking of the vehicle 
does not exceed 15 percent of the maximum tension, 
this load may be neglected. For calculation purposes, 
the coefficient of friction between the wire ropes and 
the shoe in bronze or similar material can be taken equal 
to 0.10 for locked coil ropes and 0.15 for stranded wire 
ropes. For steel shoes, these coefficients shall be 
increased by 20 percent. For calculating the normal load 
to which the carrying wire ropes are subjected, the load 
on the rollers defined in 5.7.1 shall be taken into account 
in addition to the requirements of 5.3.2. 


5.3 Haulage and Ballast Wire Ropes 


5.3.1 Stranded wire ropes of fiber or solid plastic core 
are suitable. 


5.3.2 The minimum breaking strength of the haulage 
and ballast wire rope shall be at least 4.5 times the 
maximum tensile load met with in service. In the 
calculation of the maximum tensile load the most 
unfavourable combination of circumstances shall be 
taken into account. Loads due to atmospheric influence 
and due to wind may be neglected. 


5.4 Tensioning Ropes 


5.4.1 The tensioning ropes shall be ofthe ordinary lay 
type with a single layer of strands or have full locked 
coil type. Ropes of the Lang's lay type may be used 


IS 5230 : 2017 


only, if the rotation of either the counter-weights or the 
coupling to the carrying traction rope is prevented. 


5.4.2 The minimum breaking strength ofthe tensioning 
or regulating ropes shall be at least 5.5 times the 
maximum axial load in the rope during operation. 


5.5 Telephonic and Signal Wire Ropes 


5.5.1 The telephonic and signal wire ropes shall be of 
the stranded type and protected against corrosion. Wire 
rope of any other construction is permissible provided 
the safety of operation is ensured. 


5.5.2 The minimum breaking strength of the wire ropes 
shall be not less than 3.3 times the maximum axial load 
met within service. 


5.5.3 Care shall be taken to ensure that the telephonic 
and signal cables do not come into contact either with 
the vehicles or with the carrying-hauling rope even 
under the worst conditions of weather. Therefore, if 
these cables are connected with line trestles, the height 
of the support shall be so chosen as to avoid any 
interference between the cables and vehicles or 
carrying-hauling ropes which can affect the safety and 
regularity of operation. 


5.6 Auxiliary Wire Ropes 


5.6.1 The auxiliary wire ropes are generally stranded 
wire ropes. 


5.6.2 The minimum breaking strength of the rope shall 
be not less than 3.3 times the maximum tensile load 
met with in service. 


5.7 Loads on Sheaves, Drums and Saddles 
5.7.1 Normal Load 


5.7.1.1 The number of carriage rollers shall be such 
that the maximum load on any one of them does not 
exceed one-eightieth of the minimum tension for the 
carrying cable at the point considered. It is 
recommended that a ratio between the normal load in 
the cable produced by the vehicle and the minimum 
tension ofthe carrying cable not exceeding one-twelfth 
is adopted. 


5.7.1.2 For normal loads in moving wire ropes, the 
requirements of 4.5.2.2 shall be taken into account. 


5.7.2 Sheaves, Drums and Shoe 


The fixed drum to which the anchorage of carrying 
ropes are secured by friction shall have a diameter of 
not less than 65 times that of the wire rope and 1 000 
times that of the outer wires of the wire ropes. The 
wire rope should at least make three rounds ofthe drum 
and it should be served at least by two fasteners at the 
outlet, of which one assures the proper fixation and the 


second serves to check the slip of the wire rope, if any, 
and functions as the safety device. 


5.7.2.1 The diameter of the pulleys of the tensioning 
devices to which the carrying ropes fixed directly to 
the counter weights shall be at least 100 times that of 
the wire rope. 


5.7.2.2 The radius of the roller and returns for tensioning 
the wire ropes fixed directly to the counter weights shall 
be not less than 100 times that of the wire ropes and 
1 200 times that of the wires of the wire ropes. 


5.7.2.3 The diameter of deflection pulleys of stranded 
stretch wire rope shall be not less than 40 times that of 
the wire rope and at least 600 times that of the wire in 
the outer layer of the wire rope. These pulleys shall be 
provided with linings in leather, wood or any other 
relatively soft material. 


5.7.2.4 The diameter of the driving and return sheaves 
shall be not less than 80 times that of the hauling rope 
and at least 800 times that of the wires of the wire rope. 


5.7.2.5 The support saddles which support the carrying 
rope shall present such a profile that while passing the 
trestles any danger or sliding of vehicle is avoided. They 
have to ensure the equilibrium tension in the wire rope 
and to permit free displacement of the wire rope in the 
longitudinal direction when necessary, by making use 
of the rollers. The radius of curvature of saddle supports 
shall be at least 300 times that of the wire rope diameter. 


5.7.2.6 The radius of curvature of the saddle supports 
shall be adapted to the speed at the passing of the 
trestles. To this end, the following requirements shall 
be satisfied: 


P < 2 m/s? 
where 
V, = the speed over the trestles, in m/s; and 
R = the radius of curvature of saddle support, in 


m. 


Where necessary, the speed shall be reduced to bring 
the value to the permissible value computed as above 
while passing over the saddle. 


5.8 Splices and Rope Termination 


5.8.1 Experienced personnel shall make all splices. The 
length of a splice shall not be less than 1 300 times of 
the rope diameter. The distance between two contiguous 
splices shall not be less than 3 600 times the diameter 
of the rope. However, two additional splicing may be 
permitted in case of repair after an accident. 


5.8.2 Rope-socketing shall be done with utmost care. 
Only organizations which have experience in making 


of rope sockets shall be entrusted with this operation. 


5.9 Testing and Acceptance of Ropes 


5.9.1 Testing and acceptance of ropes shall conform to 
the relevant Indian Standards. 


5.10 Discarding Criteria for Ropes 


Generally a rope should be withdrawn from service 
when it is considered that: 


a) theloss of strength in the rope due to wear or 
corrosion or both is approaching one-sixth of 
the original strength; 

b) theloss of strength in the rope due to fatigue, 
surface embrittlement or cracked and broken 
wires of any kind is approaching one-tenth of 
the original strength; 

c) the outer wires have lost about one-third of 
their depth as result of any kind of 
deterioration; 

d) the outer wires are becoming loose and 
displaced for any reason; 

e) the rope has become kinked, distorted or 
damaged and the damaged piece cannot be 
removed; 

f) examination of the rope leaves any doubt as 
to its safety for reason whatsoever; and 

g) number of wires rupture in the rope exceed 
the limit specified in 8.1.6 of IS 3973. 


6 STATIONS 


6.1 General 


6.1.1 According to the climate of the area where the 
ropeways are situated, suitable shelters for passengers 
and personnel shall be provided at stations as agreed 
to between the manufacturer and the buyer. In every 
case, such shelter shall be conforming to local statutory 
regulation. 


6.1.2 The station machinery such as mechanical parts 
of the driving gear, electrical equipment, ropes and 
vehicles shall not be a source of danger to the 
passengers and ropeways personnel. 


6.1.3 The whole ofthe driving gear and ofthe return or 
deflection devices shall be protected against bad 
weather. In addition, care shall be taken to prevent the 
entrance to the machine room of unauthorized persons 
to avoid any possible accident to them. 


6.1.4 The ropeway operator shall be located, where he 
shall have the best possible view of the route. The 
controls and communicating devices shall be within 
the reach without his having to leave his position. 


6.1.4.1 The control panel shall be provided with the 


IS 5230 : 2017 


following: 


a) Speed indicator, 

b) Indicator showing the distance from any one 
of the terminal station, and 

c) Fault indicator. 


6.1.4.2 A speed control device which automatically 
stops the vehicle when the speed of the vehicle 
approaching the station has not been suitably reduced, 
shall be provided. 


6.1.5 Fire hazard shall be reduced as far as possible. 
Fire extinguishers as per local area regulations 
guaranteed to function effectively shall be kept ready 
in case of need and installed in places which are readily 
accessible. 


6.2 Driving and Braking 


6.2.1 The driving gear shall be provided with an 
emergency system fed by auxiliary power which shall 
be used only for rescue/evacuation operation. 


6.2.2 The speed of the system shall be maintained 
constant irrespective of any load conditions. To this 
end, the speed shall be regulated to +4 percent, 
whatever is the load. 


6.2.2.1 The main driver shall also regulate the speed of 
the system in such a way as to ensure at lower speed while 
entering the station and when necessary over the trestles. 


6.2.2.2 Starting of the system even under the most 
unfavourable conditions of load shall be guaranteed. 


6.2.2.3 In the event of power failure, passenger 
transportation shall be forbidden unless hundred 
percent power backup is provided. 


6.2.2.4 In the case of downward load, the driver itself 
shall exert a continuous braking action. 


6.2.3 Travel with the main motor shall be stopped 
automatically when any brake is on or if any safety 
device operates. 


6.2.4 Rope Adhesion on the Driving Sheave 


6.2.4.1 The friction coefficient (u) between the rope 
and the surface ofthe groove ofthe driving sheave are 
as follows: 


a) Groove without lining p = 0.07 
(cast iron or steel) 
b) Groove with leather lining p - 0.15 


c) Groove with rubber or similar p = 0.25 
material with high friction 
coefficient 

d) Groove with aluminum lining may also be 
used for which value of p to be agreed between 


IS 5230 : 2017 


the ropeway promoter and the Inspecting 
Authority. 
6.2.4.2 The contact angle of the rope on the driving 
sheave shall be such as to ensure that in the most 
unfavourable combination of circumstances the 
required power is transmitted to the rope. 


6.2.5 As far as possible, belts shall not be used for 
power transmission. However, in the case of small 
powers (less than 10 HP) use of V-belts shall be 
permitted provided at least four belts are used 
simultaneously for transmitting the power. 


6.2.6 Two different friction brakes with independent 
source of power shall be used in case of electric motor 
drive to cause both the normal stopping and emergency 
one. One of these brakes is called ‘service brake’ fitted 
on gearbox input shaft and the other is ‘emergency 
brake’, fitted on drive sheave. Each of such brakes shall 
be able to ensure the safe stopping of the installation’s 
motion under most unfavourable conditions of loading. 
In any case, the nominal average deceleration shall not 
exceed 0.5 m/s?. 


6.2.6.1 To avoid sudden braking with all the consequent 
and undesirable oscillation of vehicles, it is 
recommended that the braking effort should be 
proportionate to the load conditions of the line and 
applied in gradual manner. 


6.2.6.2 The emergency brake shall act directly on the 
driving sheave; springs shall induce its braking effort 
and its operation shall be carried out in a manner that 
its regular working can be automatically and constantly 
checked. This brake shall act automatically if the speed 
of the carrying- hauling rope exceeds the permitted 
value by 15 percent. It shall also be capable of being 
released manually. Emergency brake for ropeways on 
plain terrain may be deleted, if, the ropeways stops on 
its own without the application of an external brake. 


6.2.6.3 The ‘service brake’, besides ensuring the 
holding of the driving gear when the installation is 
stopped, shall work when the feeding power fails or in 
case of overload of the ropeway. Moreover, it shall also 
work automatically when the remote control stops are 
activated or when any safety device is operated 
(see 6.2.3). 


6.2.6.4 The factor of safety of all parts forming the 
brakes shall not be less than 5. 


6.3 Rope Tensioning and Anchorage Devices 


6.3.1 The spaces in which the counterweights travel 
(in pit or construction above the ground) shall be 
protected from water, snow, and ice and from any other 
material. It shall be ensured that the above elements do 
not accumulate inside these spaces. These spaces shall 
be provided with guard-rails in order to prevent the 


entrance of unauthorized persons. 


6.3.2 The mobility of the counterweights shall be 
ensured at all times. 


6.3.3 The travel of the counterweight shall be 
determined taking into account the maximum variation 
which may be due to the sag of each span, the 
surrounding temperature of the zone where the 
installation lies (minimum variation to be considered 
is 60°) and the elastic stretch of the rope. 


6.3.4 Where several tensioning ropes are laid in parallel, 
all the necessary precautions shall be taken in order to 
ensure uniform distribution of the tension among such 
ropes. 


6.3.5 In place of tension ropes, chains can be used. 
The safety factor shall be at least 7 in this case. Other 
systems are permissible subject to agreement 
between the ropeway promoter and the inspecting 
authority. 


6.3.6 The foundations of either tensioning devices in 
these of the anchorage shall have a factor of safety of 
1.5 in respect of shifting and over turning. Such factor 
of safety is to be calculated on the basis of a 
conventional assumption that these foundations are free, 
that is, there is no lateral movement of the earth. 


6.3.7 All foundations shall be in accordance with 
IS 4091. For the structural safety against sliding, 
overturning and for the footings at different levels 
provisions laid down in IS 1904 shall apply. The depth 
of footings and other provisions shall conform to the 
provisions laid down in the relevant Indian Standards 
depending on the type of foundation [see IS 1904, 
IS 1080, IS 2950, IS 11089, IS 9456, IS 2911 (Part 1/ 
Sec 1), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 2), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 3), 
IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 4), IS 2911 (Part 3)]. 


6.3.8 In all above application hydraulic tensioning 
system may also be used. 


6.4 Other Requirements 


6.4.1 In stations, the vehicles shall be guided in such a 
manner that at the entrance or exit of passengers no 
lateral unbalancing is produced. 


6.4.2 In terminal stations, current interrupters shall be 
provided at the end of the vehicle travel. 


6.4.3 Equipment meant for maneuvering of wire ropes 
and other mechanical and electrical equipment shall 
be provided in stations. 


6.4.4 The platforms shall be provided with parapets 
wherever it is necessary to avoid accidents to persons. 


6.4.5 Rope pulleys shall be manufactured from high 
quality cast iron, malleable cast iron or steel and shall 
be mounted on rolling bearings. 


7 TRESTLES 


7.1 Loads 


In designing trestles, the following stress values shall 
be taken into account: 


a) The weight of the trestle and the pressure 
exerted by the ropes; 

b) The whole of the stresses due to friction met 
with during the motion of the moving ropes 
and during the displacement of a stationary 
rope; 

c) Weight of the vehicles travelling with 
maximum load (considered conventionally 
static load); 

d) Wind load or snow load; and 


e) Load imposed by communication cable, if 
provided. 


7.1.2 The wind forces and their effects (static and 
dynamic) should be taken into account when designing 
ropeways. The provisions mentioned in IS 875 (Part 3), 
IS 802 (Part 1) shall be followed. Further, loads due to 
snow in accordance with IS 875 (Part 4) shall also be 
considered while designing ropeways. The ropeway 
design shall also consider seismic loads in accordance 
with IS 1893. In addition, other special loads in 
accordance with IS 875 (Part 5) shall also be considered 
while designing ropeway. 


7.2 Safety 


7.2.1 The metal parts of the trestle shall have a safety 
factor defined as the ratio of the ultimate strength of 
the metal to stress in the metal under the most 
unfavourable conditions of not less than 3.0 when the 
installation is in service. 


7.2.2 The trestle shall be analyzed and designed for 
various load combinations as per IS 802. The trestle 
foundation shall be either a shallow foundation or deep 
foundation or founded on rock anchors. These 
foundations shall be in accordance to 6.3.7. 


7.2.3 The elastic deformation of the trestles, in 
particular those due to torsion which happens during 
normal conditions of operation, shall not be such as to 
endanger the safety of the guides and the stability of 
the ropes. The maximum angle of deformation due to 
torsion shall be limited in such a manner that the ends 
of the shoes for supporting the carrying-hauling rope 
are not displaced by more than 20 percent of the wire 
rope diameter. 


7.3 Construction 


7.3.1 The number of trestles, their position, their height 
and their construction are determined by the 


IS 5230 : 2017 


requirements of the route and the layout. Wooden 
trestles or trestles which are guyed shall not be used. 


7.3.2 In case the trestles have metallic framework, 
the thickness of the open profile shape shall not be 
less than 5 mm while in the case of closed profile; 
it shall not be less than 2.5 mm. The interior of the 
latter shall be adequately protected against 
corrosion. 


7.3.3 The anchorage of the trestles on the concrete 
foundations or on the rock shall be carefully made. The 
anchor bolts of concrete foundations shall just be at 
least 300 mm above natural ground level. 


8 VEHICLES 


8.1 Factor of Safety 


For all components constituting the vehicles, the factor 
of safety shall be at least 5 under both static and dynamic 
conditions. 


8.2 Construction 


8.2.1 The vehicle shall be suspended in such a manner 
that whatever be the slope of the track, the cabin remains 
suspended in the vertical position. 


8.2.2 The vehicle shall be so designed that even when 
it is empty and under the wind pressure for which it is 
designed, the transversal inclination of the vehicle 
with the reference to the vertical does not exceed 
20 percent. 


8.2.3 All transparent panes used in the vehicle shall be 
of minimum 3 mm thickness and made of either safety 
glass, polycarbonate or acrylic sheet. 


8.2.4 It shall be ensured that the cabin door remains 
closed during travel and cannot be opened from inside 
by the passengers. 


8.2.5 The weight of the vehicle shall, as far as possible, 
be equally distributed on all the rollers of the carriage. 
The roller shall be lined with soft materials such as 
rubber/neoprene rubber/nylon and mounted on 
bearings. 


8.3 Brakes 


8.3.1 The vehicle shall be provided with an automatic 
carriage brake, which acts on the carrying rope or on a 
static rope called the brake rope in the case of breaking 
of a haulage or ballast rope. This brake shall be capable 
of manual operation by the operator also. It should also 
be capable of being disengaged by the operator after it 
has functioned. 


8.3.1.1 Vehicles may be designed without track brakes 
provided the following conditions are fully met: 


IS 5230 : 2017 


a) Irrespective of the gradient of the ropeway a 
ballast rope shall be provided; 

b) The factor of safety of the haul rope shall be 
maintained at least 20 percent higher than that 
adopted for haul ropes of systems with track 
brakes and it should not be less than 5.5; 

c) The haul rope should be tested by magneto- 
inductive method once every six weeks or 300 
working hours whichever is less. If after some 
period of use it is found that 50 percent of the 
replacement criteria of the rope has been met 
then the time gap between rope testing should 
be halved to 3 weeks or 150 h; 

d) The fixing of the carriage with the haul rope 
is done by a gripping mechanism designed 
with at least two independent elements acting 
simultaneously. The gripping mechanism shall 
not use the gravity effect of the weight of the 
carrier to achieve the gripping force; 

e) The griping elements are so designed that even 
with the complete failure of one of the 
elements the other should achieve a resistance 
to slipping equal to 150 percent of the sliding 
force of the loaded carrier at the steepest point 
of the ropeway line; 

f) The griping mechanism is so designed that its 
condition and status can be easily verified 
during daily checks; 

g) The gripping point of the carriers are to be 
moved along the rope by a distance ofat least 
the total distance covered by the griping 
mechanism or 1 m whichever is more. This 
shifting shall be done once in every three 
months period. The shifting should always be 
in the same direction along the rope; 

h) The depth of grooves of the carriage rollers 
to be maintained at least 40 percent of the 
nominal diameter ofthe track rope. Provision 
is also to be made to prevent build-up of dirt, 
dust etc. in the roller groove by providing 
scrapers etc; and 

j) At least two rope guides are provided in the 
carriage such that they extend beyond the 
underside of the track rope by a distance of 
half the diameter of the track rope. 


8.3.2 The braking effort shall be such that the value of 
deceleration produced is sufficient in all cases even 
under the most unfavourable conditions of loads and 
slope to ensure complete braking. 


8.3.3 The braking shall be such that even when the 
conditions of the brake are favourable to jolting of the 
vehicles under no load, the brake provided shall be such 
as to avoid any jolts. 


8.4 Lighting Equipment 
Each vehicle shall be provided with relief lights. 


9 COMMUNICATIONS, SAFETY CIRCUITS 
AND EARTHING OF METALLIC PARTS 


9.1 Communications 


9.1.1 The stations shall be linked to each other by 
telephone. At least one of the stations shall be linked 
up with the public network, wherever the latter exists. 


9.1.2 Communication facilities (telephone or wireless) 
shall be provided in the vehicle for communication with 
the driving station or with the second vehicle. Other 
safety devices shall be provided for help in case of the 
failure of the telephone. 


9.2 Safety Circuit 


9.2.1 All the safety devices along the length of line and 
in the stations shall be incorporated in the continuous 
circuit energized permanently so that when any one 
device fails or the signal line fails, the system 
automatically comes to a halt. 


9.2.2 The haulage ropes and the ballast ropes shall be 
isolated from the earth so that in case of brake or 
derailment, the shortcircuit produced, if these come in 
contact with earthen members, automatically brings the 
vehicle to stop and brake the installation. 


9.2.2.1 Alternatively suitable sensing devices or limit 
switches may be incorporated in the haul rope support 
arrangement such that any haul rope derailment or 
adverse positioning of the haul rope causes such sensors 
or limit switches to be activated and a stop signal 
generated to bring the system to a halt. 


9.3 Earthing 


9.3.1 All the metallic portions of the installation with 
an exception of auxiliary ropes, signal ropes, ballast 
and haulage ropes shall be directly earthed. 


9.3.2 The entire ropeways system shall be provided 
with suitable protection against lightning. 


10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


10.1.1 The cabins must be provided with door lock, 
which cannot be opened by the passengers. 


10.1.2 Two separate brakes shall be provided in the 
drive of ropeway system. One brake is provided on 
drive sheave. This will act as emergency brake. A 
second brake is provided on high speed shaft which 
will act as service brake. The brakes must come in 
operation automatically when: 


a) normal stop/emergency stop push button is 
pressed; 


b) the ropeway speed exceeds by 5 percent of 
the set speed; 

c) the tripping of drive motor due to actuation 
of line and station security devices; and 


d) incase of power failure. 


10.1.3 The vehicle shall be provided with an automatic 
carriage brake, which acts on the carrying rope or on a 
static rope called the brake rope in the case of breaking 
of haulage or ballast rope. This brake shall be capable 
of manual operation by the operator also. It should also 
be capable of being disengaged by the operator after it 
has functioned. Vehicles without track brakes may be 
designed without a track brake provided the conditions 
as laid down in 8.3.1.1 are fully met. 


IS 5230 : 2017 


10.1.4 Arrangement should be made so that the brakes 
can be released during emergency running of the 
system. 


10.1.5 Standby prime mover is required to run ropeway 
at slow speed, to rescue passengers from line in case 
of failure of main motor or power failure or DG set 
failure. 


10.1.6 Line safety devices must be installed on each 
trestle which immediately stop the ropeway in the 
unlikely event of rope derailment. 


10.1.7 Rope catcher must be provided in the roller 
batteries forming part of the saddles. 


10.1.8 Emergency push buttons must be provided at 
all stations to stop the ropeway. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
802 (Part1) : Code of practice for use of structural 
2015 steel in overhead transmission line 


towers: Part 1 Materials, loads and 
permissible stresses, 

Materials and loads 

Permissible stress 

Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for buildings 
and structures: Part 3 Wind loads 
Snow loads 

Special loads and load combinations 


(Sec 1) : 1995 
(Sec 2) : 1992 

875 (Part 3) : 
2015 


(Part 4) : 1987 
(Part 5) : 1987 


1030 : 1998 Carbon steel castings for general 
engineering purposes 

1080 : 1985 Code of practice for design and 
construction of shallow foundations 
in soils (other than raft, ring and shell) 

1089 (Part 2): Steel wire ropes for aerial ropeways 

1986 — Specification : Part 2 Track ropes 

1804 : 2004 Steel wire ropes — Fiber main cores 
— Specification 

1893 : 1984 Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures 

1904 : 1986 Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundations in soils 
General requirements 

2062 : 2011 Hot rolled medium and high tensile 


structural steel 


2911 (Part 1) Code of practice for design and 


IS No. Title 

construction of pile foundations: 
Part 1 Concrete piles, 

Driven cast in-situ concrete piles 
Bored cast in-situ piles 

Driven precast concrete piles 

Bored precast concrete piles 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 3 Under-reamed piles 

Code of practice for design and 


(Sec 1) : 2010 
(Sec 2) : 2010 
(Sec 3) : 2010 
(Sec 4) : 2010 

2911 (Part 3) : 
1980 


2950 (Part 1) : 


1981 construction of raft foundations: 
Part 1 Design 
3973 : 1984 Code of practice for the selection, 
installation and maintenance of wire 
ropes 
4091 : 1979 Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundation for 
transmission towers and poles 
7649 : 1975 Glossary of terms used in connection 
with aerial ropeways and cableways 
9456 : 1980 Code of practice for design and 
construction of conical and hyperbolic 
paraboloidal types of shell foundations 
IS 10891 Steel wire ropes for aerial ropeways: 
(Part 1) : 2001 Haulage ropes 
(Part 2) : 1986 Track ropes 
11089 : 1984 Code of practice for design and 
construction of ring foundation 
14329 : 1995 Malleable iron castings 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related 
Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 06 


Organization 


RITES Limited, Gurgaon 
Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research (CIMFR), Dhanbad 


Conveyor Ropeway Services Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Damodar Ropeways and Infra Ltd, Kolkata 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour Institute, 
(DGFASLI), Mumbai 

Elecon Engineering Co Ltd, Vallabh Vidyanagar 

Indian Association of Amusement Parks & Industry, New Delhi 

Mcnally Bharat Engineering Co Ltd, Kolkata 

MECON Limited, Ranchi 

Ministry of Shipping New Delhi 

National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, Hyderabad 

National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India (P) Ltd, New Delhi 


Polo amusement Park Ltd, Gurgaon 
Projects and Development India Ltd, Dhanbad 
Rail India Technical and Economic Services Ltd, (RITES), Gurgaon 


Ropeway and Resorts Pvt. Ltd, Kolkata 
Steel Authority of India Ltd (IPSS SECT), New Delhi 


USHA BRECO Limited, Ghaziabad 


In personal capacity (745/44, South Sinthi Road, Kolkata-700050) 


In personal capacity (F-7B, DDA MIG Flats, Hari Nagar, 
New Delhi-110006) 


Representative(s) 


Sarı Rasiv MILIND (Chairman) 


Suri DEBASIS BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA M. Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHAKRAVARTY 
Sarı KAMAL Kumar Bose (Alternate) 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


Suri D. B. Naik 
Suri VuAY Kumar K. (Alternate) 


Suri U. K. Das 
Sarı H. CuarrorApuvav ( Alternate) 


Suri C. S. SHAH 
Suri K. S. Kopia (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
Sarı BALWANT CHAWLA ( Alternate) 


SHRI SHYAMAL Kumar Das 
SHRI ASHOKE Kumar Bose (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GHosH 
SHRI JAIPAL SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri B. POIYAAMOZHI 
Suri D. J. Basu (Alternate) 


Suri B. CHANDRA 
Sarı R. M. R. Kramnatu (Alternate) 


Suri O. P. KALIA 
Sarı B. K. Buatracuarya (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE Kumar Guosu (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH CHAWLA 
SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI A. BHADRA 
Sarı N. C. Srivastava (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. KNRA 


Suri S. K. Bose 
Suri R. K. ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL 
Suri Manos PANwar (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. KARMAKAR 


SHRI S. C. GANDHI 


BIS Directorate General Suri A. Renca Rasan, Scientist *E' and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI A. K. MOHINDROO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


IS 5230 : 2017 


Panel 1 on Aerial Ropeways 


Organization Representative(s) 
RITES Limited, Gurgaon Suri A. BHADRA (Convener) 
CIMFR, Dhanbad Dr D. Basak 
Conveyor & Ropeway Services Pvt Ltd, Kolkata Suri K. K. Bose 
DGMS, Kolkata Suri D. B. Naik 
Damodar Ropeways and Infra Ltd, Kolkata SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (1465). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


