( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS:12035- 1986

Indian Standard
CODE OF SAFETY IN MlCROBlOLOGICAL LABORATORIES
Chemical
Chairman DR V. P. GUPTA Mem hers DR B. S. ATTRI SHRI R. B. DESAI SARI N. G. ASHAR ( Alternate) PHRI J. M. GAW SHRI P. R. G~AREKHAN Directorate Labour

Hazards

Sectional

Committee,

CDC

18

Representing General, Factory Advice Service Institutes, Bombay and

Department of Environment, New Delhi Indian Chemicals Manufacturers Association, Calcutta Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Indian Petrochemicals Ltd, Corporation Vadodara

DR S. K. MEETA (Alternatc) National Safety Council, Bombay SHRI K. C. GUPTA SHIZI K. C. SAKSENA ( Alternate ) Department of Explosives ( Ministry of Industrial Dn H. MUKHE~JE~ Development ), Nagpur SHRI A. S. GHO~IIAL ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay DR DEORI NANDAN Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd, Maharashtra SHRI 0. P. NAN~IA SHRI A. G. SHESHAN ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), Kanpur DR L. N. PANDEY DIL I. S. VI~NKATARAMANI ( Alternate ) He ilth, National Institute of Occupational Dlt D. .J. PAHIFII Ahmadabad Century Rayon, Kalyan DR K. V. RAMALINQAN SHI~IJ. J. ADEIA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Pune Da S. B. RAY SHRI D. I'. I~APU ( Alternate ) Excel Industries Limited, Bombay Sam DRIPPAK R. SIIAH SHRIMATI S. R. Vas~rr ( Alfernate ) Directorate General, Ordnance Factories, Ministry SERI D. K. DE SAI~KAR of Defrnce, Calcutta DR K. G. K ~IYAL ( Altcrnatz ) ( Cwrinucd on page 2 ) 0 BUREAU CapyrrEht 1987 STANDARDS

OF 1NDlAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1~57 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of thr publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS,12035 - 1986
( Continuedfrom jqe

I )
ReprWtlftfZg Natk;iokavrganic Chemicals Industries Ltd,

Members DR M. K. SAXENA

SHRI P. CRATTEIIJEE ( Alternate ) Industrial Toxicology Research Centre, Lucknow DR N. N. VISWANATHAN DR K. P. PANDYA ( Alternate ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-@cio Member ) SHRI SATISH CHANDEII, Director ( Chem ) Secretary SERI P. S. ARORA Joint Director ( Chem ), BIS

Laboratory

Chemical

Hazards

Subcommittee,

CDC

18

: 3

DR M. D. NAIR

Southern Petrochemicals Ltd, Madras

Industries

Corporation

SBRI G. BALAXALIAIX SHRI P. C. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Snm S. CHAKRAVOR~Y SHRJ S. K. DANQWAL (Alternate SHnI M. V. DESAI Snot A K. NANQIA ( Alternate ) SHRI D. DAS GUPTA SHRI P. R. KAMATII DR N~TYA NAND

Indian Institute of Petroleum,

Debra Dun &

Directorate General of Factory Advice Service Labour Institutes, Bombay `Atul Products Limited, Atul

Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd, Calcutta Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Central Drug Research Institute ( CSIR ), Lucknow Sarabhai M. Chemicals Pvt Ltd, Vadodara SERI J. K. PATWA Haffkine Institute for Training, Research & DR V. R. RAO Testing, Bombay Da A. K. BHATTACHAXYA ( Alternate 1 Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Pune DR S. B. RAY Hindustan Lever Limited, Bombay DR D. D. SANKOLKAR DR B. P. SEN ( Alternate ) Services, of Health General Directorate DR P. D. SETEI New Delhi Indian Oxygen Limited, Calcutta SHRI B. L. SEN Ciba-Geigy of India, Bombay SUB-MANAQER

IS:12035.1986

Indian Standard
CODE OF SAFETY IN MICROBIOLOGICAL LABORATORIES
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 August 1986, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 In microbiological laboratories, the special hazard is infection of laboratory staff and possible dissemination of inspection to the general population. Such a hazard cannot be adequately visualised in terms of <accidents' in the conventional sense. Laboratory infections can occur in the absence of any obvious accident, due to poor technique or poor laboratory discipline in the course of routine work. Accordingly, a special awareness of the `unseen hazard' in microbiological work is of great importance in safety. Apart from this, cuts with broken glass, bites and scratches by laboratory chemicals, explosion of gases and solvents, poisoning by chemicals and accidents involving electricity may occur in the microbiological laboratory. 0.2.1 The potential hazards of work recombinant DNA are as yet unclear. 0.3 This standard is one of a series laboratories'. The other standards IS : 4906-1968t and IS : 5931-1970$. involving of Indian published genetic engineering and

Standards on `safety in are IS : 4209-1966*, publications, Federal in

0.4 In the preparation of this code of safety, particular, have been freely consulted: Recombinant DNA research guidelines, ter 41 : 27902-27943, 1976. Classification of etilogic agents Centre for Disease Control, HEW, Atlanta 1974. Public

the following DHEW NIH

Regis-

on the basis of hazards,
Health Service, US Department of

*Code of safety for chemical laboratories. +Code of safety for radiochemical laboratory. fCode of safety for handling cryogenic liquids.

3

IS : 12035 - 1986 Pike ( R M ) and Richardson infections : experimental Public Health Association.

( J H ). Prevention of laboratory animals and cell cultures; American Washington DC 20005, 1979

Linnet ( E ) and Schrmidt ( N ). Diagnostic procedures for viral, rickettsial and chlamydial infections; American Public Health Association. Washington DC 20005, 1979 Philips ( G B ) and Hand ( Jr E ). Use of UV biological laboratories. Library of Congress Project ( P B No. 147043 ), 1960. radiation in microPubhcation Board

1. SCOPE 1.1 This code recommends safety for microbiological in research, teaching, hospital, pharmaceutical operations. laboratories and quality engaged control

1;l.l These guidelines are of a general nature and not comprehensive enough to cover specific problems of safety associated with all pathogens of every description or research in molecular biology. 1.1.2 Details standard. 2. MEANS 2.1 of fire and chemical hazards are not covered in this

OF LABORATORY

INFECTION in a microbiological such as blood, laboratory serum, are:

Some of the sources of infection

4 b)

Infected clinical faecal material.

specimens,

sputum and

Infective aerosols formed whenever the continuity of a liquid surface is broken as in simple withdrawal of a loop from a liquid culture; when a film of culture breaks in a loop; when a charged when a liquid is allowed to fall dropwise or loop is clamped; poured on to the surface of another liquid; when a liquid is pushed through a syringe with a loose needle; when a wet screw cap is opened on violent shaking; when a tube too full is spun in an when centrifuge accidents occur or on angle head centrifuge; breakage of cultures containing petri-dishes or tubes. Water of condensation in contact with agar surface Condensed water of inocculated petri-dishes. Dissemination petridish. of spores from a fungal culture in with growth. an unsealed

c) 4

e) Collapse of an ampoule of lyophilized
4

culture

while opening.

IS : 12035 - 1986 f) Contaminated work surfaces or fomites. laboratory specimen. kind. animals.

g) Excreta h) Tissues j) Accidents

of infected of autopsy

of the following

Infection may occur by accidental oral aspiration while mouth pipetting, accidental inocculation with syringe needles, broken glassware, inhalation of aerosols formed by spilling or spattering of infectious material, infection through minor cuts and abrasions or through intact mucous membranes, by ingestion while smoking, eating and drinking in the laboratory or through animal bites. Apart from the above accidents in the laboratory, an inadequately packed culture or clinical specimen meant for transport may break in transit and disseminate infection in the community. Careless disposal of infected material spells the same danger. 2.2 Potentially Hazardous Procedures hazardous situations are given below: a) Use of syringe autopsy; and needle containing b) Egg inocculation c) Animal and harvesting; Some infective of the material; potentially

d) Lyophilization - The apparatus can become contaminated. Upon opening the ampoules containing dried material, the environment may become contaminated; e) Centrifugntion; f) Pipetting. 3. RESPONSIBILITY 3.1 The best way to foster an attitude of safety is to have a formal safety organization headed by a safety officer, who will be responsible for drawing up safety codes, contingency plans of action in case of mishaps and for maintaining a detailed record of accidents, mishaps, etc. Adequate provisions of safety equipment, lockers, laundry facilities for laboratory clothing, adequate washing facilities, eating, drinking and rest rooms outside the laboratory should be provided. While safety is the responsibility of the managcment, success in this regard can only be achieved if the importance of the personal and individual responsibility of every staff member is stressed. Unsafe action endangers not only the laboratory worker alone, but his family and the community. 4. RTSK ASSESSMENT 4.1 The risk of acquiring an infection while handling causative agents in the laboratory cannot be easily quantified as the degree of hazard depends on a number of factors. Some agents such as Franci~ella tularensis are so 5 and

IS : 12035 - 1986
highly pathogenic that any procedure involving them may cause laboratory infections. On the other hand, organisms not normally considered to be pathogenic may cause infections under certain conditions. The safest procedure is to treat all organisms as pathogenic and treat them accordingly. While laboratory personnel may have a degree of immunity to endemically occuring pathogens, exotic pathogens should be handled with great care M. tuberculosis, B. anthracis, Francisella tularensis, Yersinia pestis, Brucellae, &uses, ricketsiae, chaloidiae and C. immitis shollld be handled only with adequate precautions. Special precautions should also be taken while handling material for which the risk is as yet not fully known such as hybrid bacterial mutant prepared by genetic engineering, and oncogenic viruses, 4.2 Special precautions are indicated age and pregnant women. 5. LABORATORY DESIGN for female workers of child bearing

5.1 Whenever indicated, special rooms should be set aside for microbiological work. The ventilation should be of the non-recirculation type. Air exhausted from the room should be freed from infectious material by passing it through high efficiency particulate filters. Air flow should be from areas of lesser risk to areas of greater risk, that is, from clean halls and corridors into microbiological laboratories and then vented through ductings fitted with filters. Laboratory design should be based on guidelines prescribed for various levels containment Pl-P-I ( see 11. I ). 6. RESTRICTED

ACCESS

tuberculosis laboratories and laboratories doing work on pathogenic viruses should be marked by the Biological Hazard Symbol and marked `Caution - Do not Enter Without Permission". No casual visitors or children below twelve years of age should be allowed to enter. 7. SAFETY EQUIPMENT

6.1 Areas of high risk, for example,

7.1 Personal Protective Equipment - Aprons, masks, gloves, goggles, safety pipetting devices must be provided and it must be ensured that personnel actually use them, bacteria, 7.2 Biological Safety Cabinets - For work with hazardous safety cabinets of the negative air pressure type should be used. The cabinet should have a glass partition, separating face and infective material or manipulations could be done through a glove-port in a sealed cabinet. The exhaust from the cabinet should be freed from infective material by suitably HEPA filters which must be checked periodically by DOP test for critical flow rates and changed if necessary. A laminar flow cabinet meant 6

IS:12035

- 1986

for the protection of material being handled is not the same as a safety cabinet meant for the protection of the operator. With hazardous bacteria, blending, etc, should be performed inside a centrifuyation, sonication, safety cabinet. 7.3 Work-Bench-The work-bench should be provided with a water-proof cover, which may be removed and soaked in a disinfectant solution if spillage occurs. Discard jars or trays with disinfectant should be provided at the work-bench to place infected pipettes, swabs, etc. 7.4 First Aid Kit - A first aid kit, peroidically inspected and maintained should be placed in an unlocked drawer and prominently labelled. 7.5 Washing Facilities - Foot-operated taps, adequate disinfectant solution and towels must be provided next to the work-bench. Shower facility should be provided for use when emerging from a room processing highly hazardous bacteria/or for an emergency use. 7.6 Animal House - Rooms where infected animals are kept should preferably be designed to maintain negative pressure with respect to the surrounding rooms and corridors. Air from the rooms should be exhausted through suitable HEPA filters without recirculation Special animal cages, designed for prevention of cross infection and hazard to personnel should be used. Cages should be autoclaved after use. 8. IMMUNIZATION

AND MEDICAL

RECORDS

8.1 The maintenance of optimal health is a primary precaution to avoid infection. All laboratory personnel should be immunised with all approved vaccines available A full course of inocculations should be administered if immunization was not done in childhood. Booster doses should be given at appropriate time intervals. Tuberculin negative staff should be rendered tuberculin positive with BCG. Regular X-raying should be done of personnel handling M tuberculosis. A medical record of immunizations, investigations, accidental exposure to pathogens, job related and other illnesses of personnel should be maintained.

9. TRAINING 9.1 Training

OF PERSONNEL

should be geared for developing an awareness of hazards involved, the necessary discipline and responsj bility needed for the laboratory worker. Untrained personnel and new recruits to a laboratory should be given clear instructions and directives with due regard t> safety.

7

IS:ii035-

1986 PROCEDURES and Discipline with safety regulations and observe prohibited in the laboratory. Label Food should not be stored in the stored.

10. LABORATORY 10.1 Personal

Hygiene

10.1.1 All staff must be familiar them. Eating, smoking and drinking is should not be moistened with tongue. same refrigerators in which cultures are

.

10.1.2 Protective clothing should be worn at all times within thelaboratory. They must be removed when leaving the work area. Protective clothing used for highly hazardous work should be autoclaved. 10.1.3 10.1.4 Pens, pencils, All accidents etc, should not be placed however on the work bench.

trivial should be reported.

10.2 Care of the Workplace - Before and after work, the work-bench should be suitably disinfected. Disinfectants, discard jars and disposal bins should be present. Workplace should be kept tidy as mistake and mishaps occur more frequently on an overcrowded bench. Tubes and containers should always be placed in racks or trays. If any spillage occurs, pour a phenolic disinfectant and allow to act for 10 minutes before cleaning. 10.3 Laboratory Techniques - All procedures should be performed gently without spillin g or splashing infective material on to the body, clothes or bench. All operations creating aerosols should be avoided. 10.3.1 Infected disinfectant. material should be discarded in a jar or tray of

10.3.2 A charged loop may be drawn from the cooler to the hotter part of the flame to avoid spluttering. Alternately, the loop may be dipped in A rubber disinfectant before flaming. 0 ra 1 pipetting should be avoided. teat or safety pipetting devices should be used. The transfer to a liquid medium should be done by allowing fluid to gently run down along the wall of the container. The residual fluid should not be expelled. 10.3.3 While fitted tightly. handling infective material in syringes, needle must bc

10.3.4 Centrifugation should bc unbreakable tubes should be used. brim. In case of accident, close the for aerosol to settle ( 10 minutes ) cultures with sporulating organisms highly infectious pathogens should

done after careful balancing. Preferably, The tubes should not be filled up to the lid and switch off the centrifuge and wait before attempting to disinfect. All plate should be sealed. All work involving be carried out in the biosafety hoods.

IS:12035 10.4 Disposal of Contaminated Materials

- 1986

10.4.1 Contaminated materials should be suitably autoclaved possible. The autoclave should be readily accessible to prevent port of contaminated material through corridors and rooms. 10.4.2 Glassware should be kept submerged autoclave. As far as possible disposable syringes, should be employed for highly infectious material.

wherever the trans-

in disinfectant prior to needles and plastic ware

10.4.3 Animal carcasses, tissues and excreta should be handled with great care. Small animals should be autoclaved in metal containers before Larger animals should be wrapped in plastic and incinerated. discarding. Animal autopsies should be carried out on stainless steel trays which should be autoclaved after use. 10.5 Decontamination - Heat is the most effective means of sterilization. Autoclave and hot-air-oven ( at least 160% ) are basic requirements of a laboratory handling infectious material. Delicate instruments, plastics and other articles that cannot withstand heat can be disinfected with chemical germicides. Ethylene oxide ( ET0 ) can be employed as fairly effective. However, its use needs special care because at room temperature it is highly flammable. 30.5.1 Ultraviolet Light - When used for decontamination of surface or atmosphere, it should be ensured to be fuctioning adequately. The output of germicidal wavelengths can be checked with meters. Their size, number and prior spacing are important factors to be taken into account. 10.5.2 Autoclaves - should also be monitored for flaws, Brown's tubes, Bowie Dick tapes ( chemicals indicator ) or spores of B. Stearothermophilus (Biological indicator ) may be used. Autoclaves should not be operated by untrained personnel. 10.5.3 All equipment like water baths, liquid nitrogen containers, centrifuges, etc should by disinfected before being sent out for repairs. 10.5.4 For decontamination of rooms, fumigation with vapourised formaldehyde has been in extensive use. It is very effective at temperatures above 25�C and in relative humidity of 70 percent. 1 ml of 37 percent formaldehyde per cubic metre of space for 8-10 hours is the recommended concentration. Beta-propiolactone ( BPL ) has also been employed for decontamination of rooms. However, there are problems associated with BPL use and it being a carcinogen there are gross limitations for its use. 10.6 Postal Regulations - For packing for transport must be strictly followed. of cultures and clinical specimens

IS:12035

- 1986 OF CONTAlNMENT
agents have laboratory for

11. LEVELS

11.1 Four levels of containment

depending upon the infectious Level Pl requires only standard been spelt in this code. practices with work performed on open benches. Level P2 requires decontamination

laboratory with limited access with facility of equipment and discarding of materials.

Level P3 requires in addition higher levels of containment and stringent regulations, such as use of biological safety cabinets, controlled air flow, etc. Level P4 requires that the laboratory be situated in a separate building or in a controlled area of a building with air locks and maximum safety cabinets.

11.1.1 Laboratories undertaking work that requires P 3 and P 4 levels of containment should display biological hazard sign on the entrance,

NO. 1 MARCH 2002 TO IS 12035:1986 CODE OF SAFETY IN MICROBIOLOGICAL LABORATORIES
[Page 4, clause 2.l(b), lines 5 and 6 ] -- Delete the words `when a liquid is pushed through a syringe with a loose needle;'

AMENDMENT

( Page 7, clause 7.5) -- Insert the following at the end: `Provision must be available for treating contaminated water before disposal.' ( Page 8, clause 10.3.2, line 3 ) -- Substitute `Oral pipetting should not be permitted'~or `Oral pipetting should be avoided'. ( Page 8, clause 10.3.3) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: `10.3.3 While handling infective material in disposable syringes, needle must be fitted tightly.' ( Page 9, clause possible'. 10.4.2, line 2 ) -- Substitute `Only' for `As far as

(CHD7)

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

