IS : 5878 ( Part 111) - 1972 ( Reaffirmed 2000 )

h&an

Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS
PART III UNDERGROUND EXCAVATION SOFT STRATA

IN

( Third Reprint APRIL 1990 )

UDC

624.191.2:624.133

@ Copuright 1973 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Cr 5

July 1973

IS : 5878 ( Part III -)- 1972

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS
PART III UNDERGROUND EXCAVATION SOFT STRATA
Systems Sectional Chairman
SHRI P. M. MANE

IN

Water

Conductor

Committee,

BDC

58

Ramalayam, Pedder Road, Bombay 26 Members
SHRI K. BASANNA SHKI N. M. CHAKRAVORTY CHIEF CONSTRUCTION ENGINEER SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER ( TECHNICAL/CIVIL ) ( Al&nale CHIEF ENGINEER ( CIVIL ) SUPERINTENDING E k G I NE E R ( CIVIL AND INvE~T~AT~~N
CIRCLE) (f&mate) CHIEF ENGINEER (CIVIL) CHIEF ENGINEER ( IRRIGATION )

Representing
Public Works Department, Government of Mysore Damodar Valley Corporation, Dhanbad Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras ) Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board, Hyderabad

Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu

SHRI J. WALTER ( Alternate) Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( HCD ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR( PH-I ) ( Alternate ) Irrigation & Power Department, Government DIRECTOR,LRIPRI Puniab SHRI H. L. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Assam State Electricity Board, Shillong SHRI P. N. DU~TA Beas Designs Organization, Nanaal Township SHRI 0. P. DATTA SHRI .J. S. SINGHOTA ( Alternate ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. G. GANDHI SARI M. S. DEWAN ( Alternate) Alokudyog Cement Service, New Delhi SHRI K. C. GHOSAL SHRI A. K. BISWAS( Alternate) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI M S. JAIN Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SHRI I 0. KAPILA Irrigation & Power Department, Government SHRI L `,. KAPRE Mabarashtra
" _ _

of

of

( Continuedon page 2) @ BUREAU OF Co@ght INDIAN 1973 STANDARDS

of 1957) and This publication is rotected under the Zndian Copyriiht Act (XIV reproduction in who P e or in part,by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 5878 ( Part III ) - 1972
( Continucdfrompage Members SHRI Y. G. PATEL SHRI C. K. CHOKSHI SHRIA.R. RAICHUR SHRIS. RAMCHANDRAN
(

1) Representing Pate1 Engineering Alternate 1 Co Ltd, Bombay

\

' R. J. Shah and Co Ltd, Bombay
National Projects New Delhi Construction Corporation Ltd,

SHRIK. N. TANEJA( Alternate ) SHRIG. N. TANDON SHRI D. AJITHA SIMHA, Director ( Civ Engg )

Irrigation Department, Government Pradesh Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&o Member) Secretary SHRI G. RAMAN

of

Uttar

Deputy

Director SHRI 0.

( Civ Engg), VASUDEVAN

IS1

Assistant

Director

( Civ Engg ), IS1

Panel Convener SHRI B. S. KAPRE

for Construction

of Tunnels,,BDC

58 : P2

Irrigation & Power Maharashtra

Department,

Government

of

Members Pate1 Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. K. CHOKSHI Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi DEPU~ DIRECTOR ( PH-I ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI M. S. DEWAN Alokudyog Cement Service, New Delhi SHRI K. C. GHOSAL SHRIA. K. BISWAS ( Alternate ) R. J. Shah and Co Ltd, Bombay SHRIA. R. RAICHUR Indian Hume Pipe Co Ltd, Dehradun SHRIG. L. RAMASWAMIAH SHRI S. A. VIJAYAKEERTI (Altcmat~) Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum SHRIK. SHAMARAO SHRI A. S. NARAYNAN ( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar SHRI G. N. TANPON Pradesh

2

PS : 5878( Part III ) - 1972

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION OF TUNNELS
PART 11-l UNDERGROUND EXCAVATION SOFT STRATA IN

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part III ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 December 1972, after the draft finalized by the Water Conductor Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil-Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The constrllction of tunnels involves a large number of problems. Because of the great longitudinal extent of the work many different kinds of conditions are encountered which for maximum economy should be treated differently. This standard covers recommendations for. the assistance and guidance of the engineers engaged on projects where This standard should, however, tunnellin'g through soft strata is involved. be used with caution since, due to the very nature of the work, it is not possible to lay down detailed specifications to cover each and every possible case. The discretion of the engineer-in-charge would be required in many cases. 0.3 This standard is being standard are as follows: Part I Part II Section Section Section Part IV Part V Part VI Part VII Precision published in out parts. Other parts of this

survey and setting excavation and blasting lighting,

Underground 1 Drilling

in rock

2 Ventilation,

mucking

and dewatering inclined tunnels,

11 shafts

3 Tunnelling method for steeply and underground power houses Tunnel Concrete supports lining

Steel lining Grouting 3

1s : 5878 ( Part III ) - 1972 0.3.1 This part covers the special prol)lcms involved in the underground c,scavation in xc,fr strata and should 1~ read along with Part II of this standard as tllc problems common to both types are not dealt with in this part. The sections of Part II de;rling with ventilation, mucking, lighting, dcwatering and methods for steeply inclined tunnels and shafts shall apply to this part equally.

/

0.4 This standard is one of a series of Indian Other standards published so far in the series are: IS: 4081-1967 tions IS : 4137-1967 IS : 4756-1968 Safety code for blasting

Standards

on tunnels. opera-

and related in compressed work

drilling air

Safety code for working Safety code for tunnelling

IS : 4330 ( Part II )-I968 Code of practice for conveying water: Part II Geometric design

design

of tunnels of tunnels

IS : 4830 ( Part III )-1X3 Code of practice for design conveying water: Part III Hydraulic design

IS : 4880 ( Part I\' )-I963 Code of practice for design of tunnels conveying lvater: Part IV Structural design of concrete lining in rock IS: 4330 ( Part VI )-I971 Code of practice for conveying water: Part VI Tunnel supports 0.5 For the purpose of docidin g whether a particular standard is complied with, Lhc final value, observed or ing the result of a test or analysiq, shall be rounded off IS : 2-1X0*. The number of significant places retained value should be the same as that of the specified value design of tunnels

requirement ~of this calculated, expressin accordance with in the rounded off in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This startdnrd ( Part III ) deals with the special problems of underground excavation in soft strata generally. This standard, however, does not cover the innumerable specific problems that arise in the case of excavation in anhydrite rocks, high temperature rocks or in highly swelling and squeezing conditions.

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose ___~.__._ -____of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

*Rules for rounding off nunm ical values ( revised).

4

b : 58% ( Part III ) - 1972 2.1 Adft number A tunnel or open cut driven from of working faces of the main tunnel. the surface to add portion to the of the

of removal of the lower 2.2 Benching - The operation tunnel profile after the top heading has been excavated.

2.3 Cover - Cover on a tunnel in any direction is the distance from the tunnel profile to the outermost rock surface in that direction. However, where the thickness of the overburden is sizeable, its equivalent ( reduced to the same density as rock ) weight may also be reckoned provided that the rock cover is more than three times the diameter of the tunnel. 2.4, Cut - The group of holes fired first in a round free faces for the succeeding shots. NOTE-This definition applies only to drilling patterns. device for producing detonation by a safety f&e or by electricity. in a high explosive 2.5 Detonator -A charge and initiated to provide additional

2.6 Dr$f"t -A horizontal tunnel usualiy of a small cross-section and length, driven either from surface for exploration purpose or from an underground face for any purpose. 2.7 Drill Carriage - A vehicle on which one or more drill booms are mounted to permit the drills to be 1)rought easily to their work site and to be remov.ed before blasting. 2.8 Qrilling Pattern -It is an arrangement sho\ving location, direction and de th of the holes drilled into the face of a tunnel. f & 2,9:Easer'-1King of holci drilled around cut holes and fired after cut holes> . 2.10 Explosive - Any mixture or chcrnic:al compound \vhich is capable of producing an explosion by its o\vn enrrgy. This includes black powder, dynamite, nitroglycerine compounds, fulminate or explosive substance having explosive power equal to or greater than black powder. 2.11 Heading - The face of the tunnel where actual tunnclling operations However, wllen it is prefixed by ` top ' or ` bottom' it arc in progress. denotes a part section of tlic tunnc:l cxcavatcd in ac.lvLmcc in lint of the intended tunnel. 2.12 High Explosive -- AII cxplosiv~ wlrich erpMcs with tlctouation and detonates at velocities varying from about 1 500 to 7 500 m/s and produces large volume of gases at exceptionally high pressure. 2.13 Jumbo - .I nrobile platlorm with nun&r of ~lccks uicd at the head_ c,l'sul)ports, ing of large tunnels for drillin, ~1aud nlso 1.01scalitn;, roofc~ctio~l gunitiug, sholcrc-ting etc. 5

1S : 5878 ( Pati IlI ) - 1972 2.14 Mucking - The operation after the blast has taken place.

of removal

of the blasted

stoneslmateriai the lines which of the the

2.15 Overbreak - The portion the intended profile. 2.16 Primer Cartridge detonator has been inserted. The

which gets excavated explosive cartridge

beyond into

operation to remove 2.17 Scaling -An blasted surface, after the blasting is over.

all loose bits of rock from

is a strata of soft rocks, usually sedimentary or 2.18 Soft Strata -It metamorphic, which are jointed and faulted, and which require supports to be installed within a very short period of excavation, but which cannot be easily excavated by hand tools. are defined 2;19 Soils -These support immediately after and/or be excavated by hand tools. 2.20 Stemming - Insert material and the outer end of the shot hole. 2.21 Stoping underground 2.22 Trimmer the excavation 3. GENERAL 3.1 The practice of turlnclliug in soft strata will vary with the softness of the strata, sub-soil water conditions and the facilities available for construcThe choice of tunnclling method to bc adopted would depend upon tion. the response of the strata to the technique adopted, which in turn would depend upon the geornctry and area of the tunnel sections also. Various tunnelling methods in vogue for soft strata may be classified into the following three main catcgorics: ( h owever, there would be cases falling between any two of the categories and these cannot be defined ). wllere reasonable bridging period is a) Firm aground - GI.ollud the conventional supports. available for inslallillg This type includes soft and ?;traMicd rocks, such as sand stone, shales, cetncntcd sand and gravel aud hard clays. where bridging period is so short that b) Soft Ground - Ground conventional supports cannot be illstalled. In SWIIC cases of this type it may be possible to iucrcase the bridging time by methods like shotcretillg. Tllis type includes soft or squeezing clay, 6 - Operations face. as disintegrated rocks which require during underground excavation and can packed between excavation the explosive by drilling fired charge from an

for overhead

- `tloks at the periphery its final outline.

of an excavation,

to give

1s : 5878 ( Part III ) - 1972 damp sand, certain types of gravels or soft earth, of decomposed and/or treacherous rocks.
Running

some formations

which requires special Ground - This is the ground It may be highly treatment before excavation can be done. crushed rock, dry sand and gravel, water bearing sand or gravel, silts and muds.
3.2 Location

tunnel

of Portals - Preliminary face consists of mainly the following

work items:

required

to establish

a

a) Open excavation from the bottom

in overburded and rock or excavation of shaft of which the tunnel excavation can start. of surface water areas. compressors, pumps, water and its drainage by

b) Arrangement for collection gravity or pumping. d) Erection of winching

c) Access roads or rail tracks to mucking and hauling e) Establishment of a field workshop, lines, ventilation fans ducts, etc.

equipment.

3.3 The face from where a tunnel satrts has to be decided with reference to the rock cover. The minimum cover with which tunnel can be started depends on the type and structure of rock mass, the size and shape of the tunnel and the pressure of the water in case of hydro-tunnels. 3.3.1 The length up to which it is economical to adopt an open cut in preference to a tunnel depends on the cost of underground and open excavation and the cost of protective works and maintenance involved. In some cases, However, where adequate' rock and cover sections are
very high.

3.3.2

the cost of protective works in open cuts becomes open excavation has to be continued up to a point Under such circumstances cut cover is available. found more suitable: the excavation of the tunnel of tunnel its face shall be marked in accordance with

3.3.3 Before taking up established and alignment IS: 5878 ( Part X)-1971*. 4. TUNNELLING

METHODS

IN FIRM

GROUND

4.1 The methods of excavation of the tunnel depend on the size and shape of the tunnel, the equipment available and the condition of the formation and the extent of the supports necessary and overall economics. With the development of mechanical tunnelling machines, known generally
*Code of practice for construction of tunnels: Part I Precision survey and setting out.

7

fS:!i878(l'artIIl)-1972
by the name follows: of mole, the two principal methods of excavation are as

a) Traditional b) Excavation

methods,

that is, by drilling machines.

and blasting.

by tunnelling

4.2 Traditional Methods - The common methods are given in 4.2.1 to 4.2.4. The technique of tunnelling in soft strata will depend on many factors like size and shape of the tunnel, softness, bridging period ( standwhether it is intact, stratified, up time ), and th e nature of the strata moderately jointed, blocky and seamy, crushed, squeezing and swelling type, dry or water bearing, etc. However, the excavation shall be suitably supported with temporary wooden supports or permanent steel supports, depending .upon the type of strata, the size and shape of the tunnel and the tunnelling method adopted. Sometime, the techniques of rock bolting and shotcreting are employed, individually or in conjunction with each other to support the excavated sections, depending upon the type of strata. 4.2.1 Full Face - This method may be found suitable for strata where bridging period is long enough to permit ventilation, mucking and supporting and is recommended for tunnels of small size. 4.2.2 To! Heading and Benching - This method is recommended in the case of tunnels where full face ~method is not suitable. The heading may be excavated and supported, if necessary to full length or part length of the tunnel before benching is started. 4.2.2.1 TOP hi L!i!ig Roy be carried ahead of the convenient lcngtb, `I`hc heading may have the full width and may be carried down to the springing line. bench by a of tile , tunnel

4.2.2.2 Where
tunnel length length.

bad roof conditions or the diameter is large

are known to exist in most of the heading may be excavated to full for soft

4.2.3 Bottom Heading strata, unless the strata

and Stoping - This method is not suitable is stabilized by special treatment.

4.2.4 Drift Method - In the cast of large size tunnels in soft rock, the method of driving stnall sized tunnels in the face either as a pilot tunnel, or as side and top drifts, is recommended to enable placement of supports prior to the excavation of the bore. 4.2.4.1 Wall plate drijl - Both heading and benching or methods may sometimes have to be supplemented by. drifts at the spring line, advanced beyond the headin g face to receive These drifts may be driven where the rock `is so bad that advance can be made per pull in the heading. The purpose 8 top heading each side ou wall plates.
only a short

is to permit

IS: 5878 ( Part III) -1972
US(: of wall plates of sufficient Icngth to support the top ribs when subscquct!t bencfl blast is taken. Tile purpose of holding the ribs in heading until the side ribs in the bench blast are installed will also served by providing projecting cantilever lxams horizontally above springing line and secured to the ribs in the previous advance.

the
the be the

4.2.4.2 side drz~t-- The side drift method of attack may be employed in a large size tunnel through bed rock which requires support before mucking. The ` rib, wall plate and post ` type of support may be used. A drift may be driven ahead at each side at subgrade ih which the posts and wall plates may be erected. If' the strata permits, full face operation may then be carried out and the roof ribs may be quickly erected ( before mucking ) over the exposed wall plates already erected in advance in the

side drifts.

In case ground conditions -do not permit free operations, multiple drift method shall have to be adopted. 4.2.4.3 Multiple drljit r@hod -- This method which is a combination of side drifts and top drift may be frequently employed to get through crushed rock in fault zones which may behave like earth, even if the rock is compacted enough to require light blasting. There aie two different methods as below for achieving this: a) A crown drift is made first and supported by two vertical posts (to be removed" later) and a segment of the steel ribs which would form a part of the ultimate steel ribs. Drifts on either side of the central drift are then made and supported by steel rib segments such that these segments along with the" segment over the central top drift would form a complete semicirc~e above the springing. Where the unnel section is large, the above method may be adopted with five segments instead of three as in the above procedure. Benching would then follow the heading done in three or five segments by multiple drifts. b) A side drift may be driven through the zone at subgrade on each side. A side support in steel or concrete should be constructed in each drift, with adequate provisions for drainage. Should the height of the side walls be too great to build the concrete wall in a single lift, another side drift may be driven immediately above and the concrete side walls carried on up to spring line as shown in Fig. 1. A top centre drift may be then driven through, with the roof support sufficiently above the proposed position of the main tunnel ribs to provide s~ace for crown bars over the ribs. A short section of the drift roof should be blocked on the crown bars and the drift side posts removed. The top drift may be widened out by means of short shots to connect with the roofs of the side drifts. The main arch ribs may be erected on the steel posts or concreted side walls, lagged apd packed. The 9

IS : 5878~( Part III ) - 1972
crown bars supporting the roof members of the top centre drifts should be securely blocked to the ribs, whereupon the next

The support for the main tunnel may advance should be made. usually in two piece form be the ` continuous rib ' twe, The type of although it may be made of more than two pieces. support for the drifts may be the two piece ` continuous r-lb' or the ' rib and post ' type.

(OPERATION

No.51

-DRY PACW
(OPERATION ~0.1)

DRAIN

INTER LINEid

L

DESIGN CONCRETE LINE

FIG. 1

MULTIPLE

DRIFT METHOD

5. TIJNNELLING

METHODS

IN SOFT AND RUNNING

GROUND

5.1 Farepoling Method - In the case of soils, either dry or saturated, which require almost instantaneous support, drihing and blastin is never
required. in Fig. 2. 5.1.1 such as become timber Forepoling method is the traditional method and is iYlustrated

In the case of running ground, .that is material with no cohesion, clean sand or gravel, or highly crushed rock which flows out it may necessary to hold up the face by breast boards ( that is horizontal pieces blocking the face, just ahead of the steel supports ). 10

IS : 5878 ( Part III ) - 1972

CUT

OF POINT'

L SPILES
RUNNING GROUND

FIG. 2

DIAGRAM OF FOREPOLING METHOD OF SUPPORTING

5.1.2 The boards which are driven ahead to scrpport the ground ahead of the last rib are known as ` spiles ' These may-be of timber or of steel. The forepoles act as cantilevers and carry the WC Gght of t!le ground until their forward ends are supported by the steel rib. 5.1.3 The spiles should be installed as far around the periphery as The soil should IX excavated out after removing the breast necessary. boards and the new rib erected in position. breast boards may then be again refixed on the face. The forepoles should be inserted in such a way that they fan out tangentially from the last rib. In such cases they will not interfere with the tunnel section and it will not be necessary to cut them. They may be embedded in the initial concrete; or the overhanging forepoles may be cut out, If possible, and the process repeated. In such cases the supports should be usually at GO0 to 900 mm spacing. 5.2 Tunnelling with Liner Plates -This method may be generally employed for driving steel lined small-section drifts or headings on medium soft ground. It may also be adopted for small cross-section drifts even in running ground when combined with compressed air working. The first liner plate should be placed at the crown segment in a prc-excavated cavity at the top and two adjacent liner plates being bolted to it one in each side after the hole has been sufficiently widened. These plates should Abe temporarily supported by trench jacks or by carefully tightened props. The arch section should be then gradually widened down to the springing line and the'liner plate ring so obtained should be wedged outward from wall plates or wall beams placed at the grooves. 5.2.1 The combination liner plate method with stiffener rings. may be used in very large tunnels in

11

