Rara HAF IS 16168 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


fada Pearl a stated 
ima & artes agia 


Guidelines for Infrared 
Thermography Inspection of 
Electrical Installations 


ICS 19.100 


© BIS 2014 


qma AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 FIM AHL AP, as feeei-110002 
Velie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2014 Price Group 3 


Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD 21 


FOREWORD 


This standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Non-destructive 
Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard provides the general guiding procedures for the quantitative and qualititative inspection of electrical 
installations, by the application of thermal imaging. By the adoption of thermal imaging a complete temperature 
map of surface of the object is attained. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
values should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16168 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR INFRARED THERMOGRAPHY 
INSPECTION OF ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard gives the guidelines on the 
application of infrared thermography technique for 
qualitative and quantitative inspection of electrical 
installations. It outlines the recommended procedures 
for the inspection and lists the responsibilities of the 
end user and thermographer. 


1.2 This standard is not limited to any specific electrical 
installation or component but is intended to be a general 
guide based on which detail procedures should be 
prepared. The standard also highlights the contents that 
should appear in the document prepared after infrared 
examination of electrical equipment/installation. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standard are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard is 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying 
the most recent edition of the standard indicated below. 


IS No. 
13805 : 2004 


Title 
General standards for qualification 
and certification of non-destructive 
testing personnel (first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 Thermographer — The person who inspects the 
electrical installations using infrared thermography 
technique. 


3.2 Thermal Image — An image showing the 
temperature distribution over a surface area. 


3.3 Evaluation — Determination of whether a relevant 
pattern/indication is acceptable or not acceptable. 


3.4 Interpretation — The determination of whether 
patterns/indications are relevant or non-relevant. 


3.5 Reference Standard — n—a material or object 
for which all relevant chemical and physical 
characteristics are known and measurable, used as a 
comparison for, or standardization of, equipment or 
instruments used for non-destructive testing 
standardization instrument. 


3.6 Standard — a) A physical reference used as a 


basis for comparison or calibration; and b) a concept 
that has been established by authority, custom, or 
agreement to serve as a model or rule in the 
measurement of quality or the establishment of a 
practice or procedure. 


3.7 Background Radiation — All radiation received 
by the infrared sensing device that is not emitted by 
the specified area of the surface being examined. 


3.8 Blackbody — An ideal thermal radiator 
(emissivity = 1.0) that emits and absorbs all of the 
available thermal radiation at a given temperature. 


3.9 Emissivity — The ratio of the radiance of a body 
at a given temperature to the corresponding radiance 
of a blackbody at the same temperature. 


3.10 Field of View (FOV) — The angular dimensions 
of the cone/pyramid that define the object space imaged 
by the system. 


3.11 Infrared Thermographer — The person 
qualified or trained to use infrared imaging radiometer/ 
infrared thermography (see 3.15). 


3.12 Reflected Temperature — The temperature of 
the energy incident upon and eflected from the 
measurement surface of a specimen. 


3.13 Thermal Resolution — The smallest or minimum 
temperature difference that can be measured by an 
infrared sensor/device. 


3.14 Thermogram — A visual grey scale/colour 
image which provides a map of the temperature 
distribution/profile on the surface of an object or scene. 


3.15 Thermography, Infrared — The process of 
displaying the variations in temperature over the 
surface of an object or a scene by measuring the 
variations in infrared radiance using a suitable IR 
sensing system/device. 


3.16 Transmittance — The ratio of the radiant flux 
transmitted through a body to that incident upon it. 


4 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


4.1 It is well realized by the industries that the best 
way to prevent outages is to identify incipient faults at 
an early stage so that component failure can be 
predicted and major break downs averted in time. 
Temperature is considered as one of the effective 


IS 16168 : 2014 


precursor to the health of a component and key to 
successful plant maintenance. The magnitude and 
distribution of the temperature are indicators of 
departure from normal/acceptable performance. 


4.1.1 Thermography is one of the advanced non- 
destructive testing method based on the detection/ 
mapping of temperature on surface and finding wide 
application in the field of condition monitoring. 
Thermography is well suited for application of 
condition management because it quickly locates hot 
spots and determines the severity of the problem and 
how soon the equipment should be repaired. 


4.1.2 Thus, periodic monitoring through infrared 
thermography has become an indispensable tool in 
electrical industries. In electrical equipment such as 
bus bar systems, transmission lines, transformers, 
battery sets, circuit breakers, switch boards, power and 
lighting distribution equipment, disconnects, 
generation equipment etc., temperature variations (rise) 
are usually created by an increase in resistance caused 
by loose or corroded connections, short circuits, 
overloads, load imbalances or faulty, mismatched or 
improperly installed components. 


4.1.3 The unique advantages of thermography are: 
(a) non contact nature, (b) real time capability, 
(c) ability to provide full field images that helps in 
visualizing the process and the effects, and (d) its direct 
applicability to engineering components. However, 
interpretation of thermal images requires skill and 
adequate knowledge of infrared physics. 


4.1.4 It should be highlighted that infrared 
thermography provides the information about the 
equipment scanned at that time. Interpretation of the 
data with respect to integrity of the equipment or 
recommendations for predictive maintenance/ 
condition management requires adequate technical 
knowledge and skills which this standard does not 
purport to address. It is also emphasized that 
performing infrared thermography is not corrective / 
remedial in nature by itself, and by itself does not assure 
proper/normal operation. 


5 BACKGROUND 


5.1 Principle of Infrared Thermography 


Thermal imaging or thermography is the mapping of 
temperature profiles on the surface of the object or 
component. It makes use of the infrared band of the 
electromagnetic spectrum. Any body above absolute 
zero emits electromagnetic radiation. At ambient 
temperatures and above, these radiations are 
predominantly in the infrared band of the 
lectromagnetic spectrum. Using an infrared detector it 


is possible to convert these IR radiation into electrical 
signals which can then be displayed on a monitor as a 
grey level image or colour image in which different 
grey levels or colours represent different temperature 
range. Thus a complete surface temperature map of 
the object can be obtained in a non-contact way. With 
appropriate calibration, it is also possible to get the 
absolute temperature values of any point on the surface 
of the object. Infrared refers to a region of the 
electromagnetic spectrum between the visible and 
microwave. The IR spectrum extends from 0.75 mm 
to 1000 mm. However for practical applications it is 
the 1-15 mm band which is used. The properties of 
infrared radiations are similar to other electromagnetic 
radiation such as light. They travel in straight lines; 
propagate in vacuum as well as in liquids, solids and 
gases. They can be optically focused and directed by 
mirrors and lenses. The laws of geometrical optics are 
valid for these also. The energy and intensity of infrared 
radiation emitted by an object primarily depends on 
its temperature and can be calculated using the 
analytical tools such as Wein’s law, Planck’s law and 
Stefan Boltzmann law. 


5.2 Techniques in Infrared Thermography 


5.2.1 IR Imaging Basically Exploits the non- 
equilibrium thermal state within a material for the 
detection of defects. This non-equilibrium state can 
be achieved through the use of sources which can heat 
or cool the body. Such sources can be located within 
the material itself or can be external to it. Thus, two 
approaches or techniques are generally recognized in 
thermal NDE — (a) passive, and (b) active. 


Passive technique involves applications where the 
material already contains its own internal source of 
heat. Majority of the condition monitoring applications 
where the component themselves get heated up due to 
a variety of reasons fall under this category. 


5.2.2 Active techniques involve the application of an 
external thermal perturbation (heating or cooling) to 
the object as a whole or of a small area of interest within 
the object. While both heating and cooling can be 
applied, it is heating, which is generally preferred. A 
variety of stimulation sources have been used such as 
hot air guns, incandescent and flash lamps, lasers, 
plasma arcs, inductive heating, heating strips, etc. 


For this particular application it is the passive technique 
that is adopted for the inspection of the electrical 
installations. The current passing through the 
component generates heat following the equation 1 
which in turn results in thermal anomalies in the faulty 
components. 


H=PR (1) 


6 INSPECTION PERSONNEL 


6.1 The personnel deployed for inspection shall have 
necessary technical qualifications and experience with 
adequate and sound knowledge on inspection 
technique, and capability to interpret the observed 
temperature patterns specified in IS 13805. 


6.1.1 The inspector should have adequate knowledge 
and shall comply with all the safety precautions and 
procedures stipulated by the end user and or competent 
electrical authorities especially when examination of 
live systems are involved. 


The inspector shall use an appropriate thermal imaging 
system with adequate capabilities to meet the 
examination requirements. 


The thermography personnel shall not touch any 
electrical equipment open/remove any covers etc. 


The end user is primarily responsible for (a) ensuring 
compliance to all safety procedures, and (b) consequences 
of all actions resulting of application/non-application of 
thermal imaging experimental data acquired and 
interpreted by the thermographer. 


7 EQUIPMENT 


7.1 The right choice of infrared camera with appropriate 
accessories and filters is essential for successfully 
carrying out the inspection of electrical installations. 


7.2 Spectral Range 


7.2.1 Infrared cameras are available in short 
wavelength (2-6 microns) and long wavelength (7-14 
microns) band. Both short wavelength and long 
wavelength systems can be used for inspection of 
electrical installations but long wavelength systems are 
preferred for more accurate results. 


7.3 Lens 


7.3.1 Lens selected should match the intended 
applications. IR camera usually has 25° or 20° lens 
fitted with the instrument. This lens is satisfactory for 
many applications. Telephoto lens is also preferred 
when less target area such as high voltage switch and 
distribution components are encountered. 


7.4 Calibration 


The infrared camera which is used for the inspection 
of electrical installations need to be calibrated and 
calibration should be traceable to International/Indian 
Standard. 


8 INSPECTION PRACTICE 


8.1 Check List 


To avoid unnecessary delays and better inspection 


IS 16168 : 2014 


practice, thermographers should equip themselves with 
the following: 


When setting out for a thermographic survey of a 
substation, it is recommended to follow the current 
path. This ensures that no connections and equipment 
will be overlooked. 


A copy of the checklists from the previous survey or if 
it is the first time application generate a check list. 


8.2 Safety Related Documentation 


8.2.1 A customized emissivity table, preferably created 
by the thermographer based on the materials likely to 
be encountered during the survey. 


8.2.2 Black tape for determining unknown surface 
emissivity. Clamp type ammeter for current 
measurement. 


8.2.3 Adequate battery resources, for example, spare 
batteries for infrared camera and digital camera. 


8.2.4 Spare image store capacity, namely an additional 
flash memory card. 


All necessary personal protective equipment required 
for the task. 


9 PROCEDURE 


9.1 Obtain the parameters such as load, ambient 
temperature, relative humidity, wind speed before the 
inspection of the electrical component/installation. 


9.2 Ensure that all authorizations such as for access 
etc, necessary are available. 


9.3 Ensure the power supply to the thermal imaging 
system either directly from the mains or using the 
battery pack. In case of the battery pack, ensure that 
the batteries are charged and loaded. 


9.4 Make all the necessary inter connections and 
ensure it. 


9.5 Insert the formatted flash card into the disk drive. 
9.6 Switch on the thermal imaging equipment. 


9.7 Perform a calibration test(s), to ensure that all 
measurements are within the manufacturers’ standard 
specifications for accuracy. 


9.8 Ensure that the equipment to be examined is under 
adequate load. Allowing sufficient time if equipment 
is energized recently. 


9.9 Focus the thermal imaging system on the object 
under investigation. The infrared camera should be 
focused such that the 80 percent of region of interest 
is covered in field of view. 


9.10 Load the parameters such as emissivity, ambient 


IS 16168 : 2014 


temperature and relative humidity as inputs in the 
camera software. 


9.11 Acquire the thermal image of the object and save 
it in the flash/hard. 


9.12 Analyze the thermal images using appropriate 
thermal imaging software. 


9.13 Record the results, analyze and report as per the 
format approved. 


9.14 The infrared thermographer shall document any 
exceptions found during examination. 


9.15 The inspection personnel shall repeat if necessary 
ambiguous patterns and also, when requested by the 
end user, re-examine each abnormal pattern after repair 
to assure that its operating temperature is normal and 
the potential problem corrected. 


10 FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE THE 
TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT 


10.1 Emissivity 


Emissivity is important parameter to measure the 
absolute temperature of the component. Emissivity of 
a particular surface can be obtained from the emissivity 
reference tables. Target emissivity values can be 
obtained using the black tape. 


10.2 Ambient Temperature 


The ambient temperature influences the temperature 
values being investigated. Ambient temperature is 
determined and fed in the camera before thermal 
measurements are attempted. 


10.3 Relative Humidity 


Relative humidity is a parameter which influences the 
temperature measurement particularly when the 
distance between the object and infrared camera is 
greater than 500 m. For object distance greater than 
the 500 m the correction factor for relative humidity 
should be considered to avoid inaccurate values in the 
temperature measurement. 


10.4 Loading 


Since 3-phase systems are very common in electrical 
utilities, it is easy to compare the three phases directly 
with each other, for example cables, breakers, 
insulators. An even load per phase should result in a 
uniform temperature pattern for all three phases. A fault 
may be suspected in case the temperature of one phase 
differs considerably from that of the two remaining 
ones when the load is evenly distributed. 


10.5 Wind 


Almost all the electrical installations inspection has to 
be carried out outdoor. During the outdoor 
measurements wind factor is to be taken into account 
since it causes a cooling effect on the component that 
is inspected. Thus during the inspection of components 
the wind factor can influence and temperature 
measurement done using thermography may not be 
accurate. Table 1 gives the correction factor for the 
various wind speed. 


Table 1 Correction Factor for Various Wind 
Speeds (These are Indicative Values Only and 
Accurate Values Depend on Location and Other 
Factors. Actual Values are Best Obtained 
Through Experimentation) 


(Clause 10.5) 


Wind Speed 
(m/s) 


Correction Factor 


CADNMNRWNK 
N 
S 
an 


2.54 


10.6 Rain 


Rain is an important factor that influences on the 
temperature measurement. Rain causes cooling effect 
on electrical component which is inspected. Thus, 
thermography results may not be satisfactory and 
accurate. 


10.7 Solar Reflection 


Solar reflections mislead the thermographer as a 
hotspot on the component. To overcome the solar 
reflection appropriate filters or viewing angles need 
to be used. 


10.8 Magnetic Fields 


Strong magnetic fields are produced when high electric 
currents pass through the component. The magnetic 
fields affect the display unit and causes distortion in 
the thermal image. This problem is specially 
encountered when scanning live 230 kV transformers 
at short distances. This can be solved by increasing 
the scanner object distance or use a “‘mu-metal’ shield 
to negate the disturbing magnetic field. 


11 INTERPRETATION OF THE THERMAL 
IMAGES 


11.1 For the interpretation of the thermal images, the 
thermographer shall know the following information: 


11.1.1 Shall have the required knowledge about the 
component that is inspected to understand the 
temperature distribution on the component. 


11.1.2 Shall have the knowledge of the load and the 
current flow path in the inspected component 


11.1.3 Shall ascertain the environmental conditions in 
which the inspection has to be carried and the influence 
of these physical parameters on the temperature 
measurement. 


11.1.4 Shall have knowledge of the component surface 
and its condition for ascertaining the emissivity value. 
Accurate temperature measurement of a component is 
possible only when appropriate emissivity value is fed. 


12 CLASSIFICATION OF FAULTS 


12.1 Once a faulty connection is detected, corrective 
measures are recommended. In order to recommend 
the best possible repair action, the following criteria 
should be evaluated: 


12.1.1 Load during thermal measurement. 
12.1.2 Even or fluctuating load. 
12.1.3 Expected future loading situation. 


12.1.4 Is the overheating measured directly on the 
faculty spot or indirectly through conducted heat 
caused by some fault inside the apparatus? 


12.2 Assessing the severity of electrical fault 
temperatures and recommendation (see Table 2) (these 
are indicative and can vary from component to 
component shall be arrived based on discussion with 
end user and criticality of components). 


12.3 Frequency and Timing of IRT Inspection 


12.3.1 The frequency of electrical inspections depends 
upon a number of factors. These are: 


a) the age and condition of the electrical system, 


Procedure No. 
Date: 


Organization Carrying Out Inspection 


IS 16168 : 2014 


b) electrical system loading, 

c) the degree of redundancy of plant and 
equipment, 

d) the cost of electrical failure to the business, 
and 


e) seasonal and production loading. 


Table 2 Classification of Faults 
(Clause 12.2) 


Fault Temperature Recommendations 
Category Rise 
1 >50C Must be repaired immediately 
2 25-50 C Repair at the earliest opportunity 
3 10-25°C Investigate during next scheduled 
maintenance activity 
4 <l0C Record and continue to monitor 


12.4 Initial IRT surveys will almost always result in 
the identification of more electrical anomalies than 
subsequent surveys because the rate of fault 
identification and rectification is always greater than 
the rate at which new faults develop. Finally, inspection 
frequencies should also reflect the time between the 
thermal visibility of a fault and component failure, as 
this will vary depending on the component, the nature 
of the fault and factors that may moderate or exacerbate 
or fault condition. 


Inspection frequency and components shall be arrived 
at based on necessity and mutual discussions between 
end user and inspection personnel. 


13 REPORTING THE RESULTS 


13.1 Before the actual thermographic inspection is 
performed, the inspection agency shall submit detailed 
procedures that shall be approved by the end-user in 
accordance with Annex A. After the inspection all 
documented details shall be provided as report. A 
typical procedure format of report page is given below. 


Report No. 


IS 16168 : 2014 


Building ID 
IR Image No. Photo Image No. 
IR IMAGE PHOTO 


Survey Details 
Plant Description Ambient Relative 
Temperature: Humidity: 


Plant ID: | Emissivity: | Distance: 


Location: Time: Equipment 
Details 


Analysis Details 
Image Point 


Point Description Image Point Temp. Temp Diff (Amb). 
Point 1 


Point 2 


Point 3 


Point 4 


Comments/Notes : 

Fault Cause: 
Recommendations: 

Special remarks/observations 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 13.1) 
REPORTING THE RESULTS 


Essential equations that may be required during the inspection, interpretation and reporting of the temperature 
measurement using infrared thermography technique. 


== 2 
A Tran load — A T measured (Iran load/T measured) 


2 
Trn load = Tambient + (T measured _ Tambient) (Lian toag! measured) 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 21 (5044). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


