UDC 66.063.8

: 006,76

(

First Reprint OCTOBER

1997 )

IS : 9522 - 1980
( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard CODE OF PRACTICE FOR AGITATOR EQUIPMENT 1. Scope _ ~3~s dawn the nents of agitatorequipment.
jrive and bearing

standard recommended capacities of agitator equ.ipment and general roquireIt also provides guidelines an the selection of Impeller, power assessment, arrangemonts and shaft design. shall be

3. Nomenclature - For the purpose of this standard the different parts of agitator equipment They are numbered fcu identification in Fig. 1. designated as given in the following table.

1.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 3. Terminology -

Shell Shell cover Vessel flange Agitator shaft Impeller Impeller hub Rigid coupling Flexible coupling Stuffing box Stuffing gland Packing Thrust bearing Roller bearing Drive, mounting For the purpose of this standard

15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28.

Gear box Motor Draft tube Baffles Mechanical seal Lantern ring Bearing housing Sparger pipe Headers Jacket Heating coil Half tubes (limpet Manhole Vessel supports definitions

coils)

the following

shall apply. other parts such as

3.1 Agitator
3.2 3.3

- The assembly consisting of impeller, impeller shaft and drive including gland, and bearing used in conjunction with the above. /mpe//er Propeller The actual element which imparts movement essentially to the charge (fluid).

A high speed impeller

which

imparts axial thrust to the fluid.

3.4 Turbine - An impeller with essentially constant blade angle with respect to a vertical plane, over its entire length or over finite sections, having blades either vertical or set at an angle less than 90" with the vertical. 3.5 Paddle - An impeller with four or fewer impeller to vessel diameter ratio. blades, horizontal or vertical, and essentially having a higt

3.6 Anchor -

Basically a paddle type impeller which with a small clearance. Baffle An element

is profiled to sweep

the wall of the containing

vesse

3.7 3.8 3.9 3.10 3.11

fixed inside the vessel tc impede which is arranged

swirl. by the impeller

OraLIght Tube Filling Ratio Swirling Vortex -

A tubular fitting

to direct the liquid flow produced

The ratio of liquid depth in the vessel to vessel diameter. rotation of liquid about a fixed axis. by swirling.

The continuous A depression

in the surface of a liquid produced

3.12 Fully Baffled Condition - A condition when any further increase in baffling causes no significanl increase in power consumption ; this may be considered as a state where the liquid swirl in the vessel has become negligibly small and when all the power input to the impeller expended to create turbulence. 4. Recommended Capacities and Vessel SizesThe capacities and the corresponding vessel diameters are shown in Table 1. The vessel diameter shown against each capacity are selected so as to obtain an approximate filling ratio of I.0 for vessels with torispherical bottorn ends. However, depending an the filling ratio requirement for a specific application and ather process considerations, the vessel diameters may be suitably selected.
Adopted 30 May 1980 ~0 November 1980, BIS

Gr5

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

IS : 9522 - 1980

-cl
26

FIG. 1 AGITATOR ASSEMBLY

5. General Requirements of Mixing Equipment -The given below mainly relate to vertical vessels only. 2

general requirements of the mixing equipment

IS : 9522 - 1980
TABLE 1 CAPACITIES AND (Clause Nominal Capacity Litres (1) 250 400 630 (750) 1 000 (1 250) 1 600 (2 000) 2 500 (3 200) 4 000 (5 000) 6 300 (8 000) 10000 Note-Values given in the brackets VESSEL 4) Vessel Outside mm (2) 700 800 1 000 Diameter DIAMETERS

-

1 000 1 200
(1 300) 1 400 (1 500) 1 600 (1 700) 1 800 (2 000) 2100 (2 300) 2 400

are second preference values.

5.1 Filling Ratio - Filling ratio normally varies between 0.5 and 1.5 and a value approximately equal to 1.0 is suitable for most of the applications. However, in some applications like dispersing gas in a liquid, a filling ratio of about 2.0 may be sometimes necessary in order to maintain a sufficiently long period of contact between gas and liquid. Normally for the same agitating effect, the power consumption per unit volume increases as the filling ratio departs from unity. 5.2 Shape of the Vesse/Vertical cylindrical vessels with dished bottoms are usually chosen for the mixing operation but use of cylindrical vessels with-flat or shallow coned-bottoms is not uncommon. The significance of the bottom shape of the vessel increases as the filling ratio reduces, and other things being The flat bottomed and equal vessels with dished bottoms tend to be economical in power consumption. cone-bottomed vessels have the disadvantage of low agitation efficiency in the corner formed between the wall and flat bottom in the former case and in the apex of the cone bottom in the latter case. In mixing applications like suspension of heavy solids in a liquid, the presence of the low agitation efficiency areas allows the settlement of the solids which is detrimental to the process requirements. In such cases, fillets should be inserted in the corners and in the apex to avoid the low agitation areas. 5.3 Roughness of Vesse/ Walls - Power consumption will be more in a rough walled vessel than a Even if the turbulence is the smooth walled vessel due to the increase in local turbulence at the walls. primary objective of the agitator, the local increase in turbulence at the walls is of little value and an Hence vessel walls should increase in turbulence when definitely required is best achieved by baffles. be as smooth as possible. 5.4 BafflesIn applications where turbulence is primary requisite, the baffles are used to promote turbulence. Baffles also allow the system to absorb relatively large amount of power where it is needed Four numbers of baffles are sufficient to achieve for effective mixing, avoiding vortex and swirling action. a fully baffled condition for vessels of diameter up to 2 500 mm and above which six number may be Baffles are straight flats and normally of width one-tenth of the vessel diameter. necessary. However, when the baffles are used in conjunction with a heating coil inside the vessel, the baffle width may be reduced to one-twelfth of the vessel diameter. The baffles should be mounted vertically and radially in a vessel at equal spacings leaving a clearance of one-third to one-fourih of the baffle width between the vessel walls and baffles to reduce and tendency for solid deposits to form in the corners between Baffles should normally extend up to vessel wall and baffles and to facilitate cleaning of the vessel. liquid surface with a small clearance at the bottom end between baffles and flat bottomed ends. 5.5 Draft Tube - The draft tube is a tubular fitting surrounding the impeller and part Draft tube is used to ensure a specific flow pattern to be set up in the fluid system The size and location of the draft tube shall be determined based on the mechanical Draft tubes are normally ance characteristics of the particular mixing application. with axial flow impellers. 6.6 Impellers agitating operations may be effected with any type of impellers. Use of an for a particular duty may result in high power consumption or be slow to achieve equipment of low cost, power consumption and efficiency are often of secondary required effect is produced, and in such cases choice of best impeller is not 3 of the impeller shaft. for effective mixing. and mixing performused in conjunction

5.6.1 Essentially most impeller which is not best the required results. For importance provided the

IS : 9522 - 1980
critical. Problems which are likely to require much power or equipment, or to be specially difficult or critical for any reason should be investigated on an appropriate experimental scale and are to be scaled up (see 7). 5.6.2 Type of impellers The impellers are classified into the following types : Marine type of

a) b)

Propellers - Propellers are high speed impellers impellers are most common in use and their shapes

oi the axial flow type. and contours vary widely.

Turbines -This type of impellers cover a wide variety of impellers which have nothing in common in regard to design, direction of discharge or character of flow. Impellers of this type which are in common use are flat blade, disc and blade, pitched blade, curved blade, tilted blade and shrouded types. Paddles and helix. The common types of impellers in this category are flat, paddle, anchor, plate, flow gate high

cl
d)
5.6.3 impellers

High shear impellers - High shear impellers may be briefly velocity impellers suitable for application like emulsification in common usz) are shown are given in Table 2. in Fig. 2.

characterized as low and homogenization. The general clescription

Some of the impellers and their applications

of these

2A

Propeller

2B Propeller

with

Draft Tube

2C Disc with

Blades (Turbine)

L
!

I

2D Flat Paddle

2E Anchor

&
I

J

2F Plate Paddle

1-1
2G Gate FIG. 2 TYPES OF IMPELLERS 2H Vaned Disc (Turbine)

4

IS : 9522 - 1980

TABLE

2

IMPELLERS

IN COMMON

USE

(Clause 5.6.3)
Type of Impeller (1) Propeller Description (2) Wide variety in form, possible form simple twisted arms to properly formed marine propellers. NO standardization of pitch or number of blades between manufacturers. Marine tyoe propellers are usually less than 1/4th of the vessel diameter. -Propeller with draft tube Propeller fitted below end of draft tube. the draft tube. Top above or below the or iust inside the lower Baffles may be fitted in of draft tube may be just standing liquid level. Applications similar to those of simple propeller, but more positive turnover of liquid and its flow through the impeller is ensured which is advantageous in wetting out some solids and mixing some immiscible liquids. By suitable location of the top level of the draft tube, a pouring action which will drown floating solids is achieved. -Generally moderately fast running agitator and versatile. Particularly suitable for high intensities of agitation and high power inputs. Recommended for applications where gas dispersion combined with intense agitation is required. _ Genya$$w speed ,agitat?l capable of proof agltatlon, htgh rntensltres especially when baffled. --A large low speed agitator, useful where the wa!l film must be disturbed like in heat transfer to viscous liquids from jacket, or where build up of solids on the wall is likely, as in crystallization. At low speeds has a very gentle action and will prevent caking in the bottom of vessel without vigorous agitation elsewhere. Widely used in enamelled equipment. Similar applications to those of flat paddle, but allows more clearance for heating coils, fittings, etc, in the vessel. Where the depth of the plate is large relative to liquid depth, vertical movement of the liquid is less than that of a paddle of equivalent power. A large .low speed agitator of similar applications to those of anchor, but normally allows more clearance for coils and internal fittings in the vessel. It does not have the close sweeping effect of an anchor on the vessel walls and boss. A small or moderately sized high speed agitator, limited usually to gas dispersion. The gas is fed under the centre of the disc. The power consumption without gas flow will be much higher than when gas is on, and drive shop'ld be adequate to cover the gasless condition. Application (3) Basically high speed agitator but operates over wide speed range. Mass flow is vertical and little circumferential. Economical on power. Suitable for duties where agitation is .not very intense and unsuitable for high viscosities. Much used for relatively small scale blending operations.

Turbine

Flat disc with blades attached to periphery. Similar effects are produced with the same number of blades directly attached to a boss. Overall diameter of the impeller is usually 1/3rd of the vessel diameter.

Flat paddle

Single flat blade (two arms) usually about 2/3rd of the vessel diameter.

Anchor

Agitator following closely the contour of the vessel normally with a clearance of 25 mm to 40 mm between impeller and vessel wall.

Plate

A square or rectangular plate bisected by the shaft on which it is mounted. Length usually 1/3rd to l/2 of that of vessel diameter.

Gate

An assembly of horizontal and vertical strips sometimes with diagonal bracing. Normally of length approaching vessel diameter and of depth about l/2 to 3/4th of overall length. ~.

Vaned disc

A circular disc, usually 1/6th to l/2 of vessel diameter with radial vanes 1/6th to 1/24th of disc diameter deep on its underside.

6. Guidelines 6.1 Agitation following three
a)

for the Selection

of Impeller

and Scaling
the primary

Up with one or more of the

In all applications of agitation, physical processes :

effects are concerned

Mass transfer; and liquids or gases.
5

b) Heat transfer; c) Dispersion

of solids,

IS : 9522 - 1980
Agitation does not directly affect the chemical reaction, if involved, but the rate of chemical reaction taking place may be influenced by one or more of the above primary effects. The factors which influence the rate and degree of mixing as well as the efficiency are classified as follows: a) Characteristics c) of impeller Its shape, speed, dimensions, Densities, viscosities and position in the vessel. which

b) Physical properties

of the fluids -

and physical

states.

Vessel configuration - Shape and dimensions may be immersed in the fluid.

of the containing

vessel and of any fittings

6.2 Although agitation is concerned with obtaining the primary effects mentioned above, it is not easy to specify the exact circumstances needed to achieve them efficiently. This is because of the fact that the physical prop&ies of the materials being processed are themselves the main factors which determine the choice of impeller and because these physical properties of the fluids vary widely. 6.3 All agitators impart kinetic energy to the fluids in the form of general mass flow and turbulence. Different mixing problems require different proportions of these two forms of kinetic energy at different levels of intensity. Characteristics required for various operations are given in Table 3.

TABLE

3

CHARACTERISTICS

REQUIRED

FOR

SPECIFIC

OPERATIONS

Duty Direction (1) Heat transfer: a) to jacket b) to coil Circumferential Circumferential tical

Mass

Flow Quantity (3)

Turbulence

Recommended Basis for `Scaling-Up' (5)

(2)

(4)

and little ver-

Large Large

Low Low

Suspending

solids: Vertical Vertical Vertical Small Moderate Large Low Moderate Moderate high

a) Light solids b) Medium solids c) Heavy solids

or

Blending

miscible

liquids

:
Vertical ential Vertical ential Vertical ential and and and little little little circumfercircumfercircumferSmall Small Moderate Moderate Moderate Moderate Constant tip speed

a) Thin liquids b) Medium c) Viscous liquids liquids

Mixing

immiscible

liquids

:
Vertical Vertical Vertical

a) Thin liquids b) Medium liquids c) Viscous liquids

*

Moderate Moderate Small

High High High

Constant power per unit volume

Emulsifying

liquid

mixtures

:
Vertical Vertical Vertical Large Large Moderate High to very high High High Constant power per unit volume

a) Thin liquids. b) Medium liquids c) Viscous liquids

Dispersing

gases in liquids

Vertical

Large

High

_.
Mixing pastes Vertical and circumferential Moderate Moderate

Constant power per unit volume Constant power per unit volume

Dispersing

agglomerated

solids

Vertical

and circumferential

Large

Moderate high

or

Constant power per unit volume

6

IS : 9522 - 1980
6.4 General Considerations for Selection of Impellers

6.4.1

The following considerations shall be borne in mind for the power selection of the impeller.

6.4.1 .l Baffles - Baffles have the effect of reducing mass flow and increasing turbulence. The formation of vortex is prevented as circumferential flow is suppressed. They are useful where the application requires high turbulence and capable of absorbing high power at relatively low speeds of rotation. 6.4.1.2 Speed of rotation - The tip speeds of all impellers are nearly same for the same agitating effects except in the case of propellers and anchors. Consequently, for a given effect, smaller agitator needs to be run at higher speeds and if small agitators are desired the effects of higher speed on erosion, bearing wear, gland difficulties, vibration and allied effects should be tolerated. 6.4.1.3 Impeller size - For the same vessel a large agitator operating at low speed products relatively more mass flow and less turbulence than a smaller but geometrically similar agitator which operates at high speeds and transmits the same power. 6.4.1.4 Number of impellers - Large filling ratios are not recommended but where used should in general have one impeller for each vessel diameter of liquid depth. 6.4.1.5 Power and viscositymixing effect. Power level required increased with viscosity of liquid for the same

6.4.1.6 Impeller speed and viscosity viscosity increases. 6.4.1.7 Immiscible liquids kept near the interface.

In general it is better to use large impellers at lower speeds as

In agitating immiscible liquids initially in two layers, the impeller must be

6.4.1.6 Gas dispersion - Gases to be dispersed in liquids by mechanical agitation should be fed from underneath the centre of the impeller. 6.5 Selection tif Impeller Type - The specific characteristics of commonly used impellers with and without baffles are described in Table 4. Having selected the required conditions for a specific operation from Table 3, the suitable impeller to achieve these conditions may be identified from Table 4. 6.5.1 Practical limitations of impellers - The following not be overlooked in selection and design of impellers: a) practical limitations regarding impellers should

It is difficult to construct anchors to operate at high speeds ( that is greater than a tip speed of 300 metres per miwe ) or to make anchors for vessels exceed 2 800 mm diameter.

b) Gate type impellers are not usually desirable for mixing in vessels of less than 1 800 mm diameter. The extra application compared with an anchor or flat paddle is not worthwhile. c) Propellers and other high speed impellers should not be used in high viscosity liquids for general agitation, since their effect rapidly falls with distance from the impeller and causing excessive power loss. d) The various impellers referred below generally should not be used with viscosities exceeding the value shown against them : Flat paddle Turbine Propeller Plate Vaned disc Anchor Gate 7. Scaling Up 1 Xl06 2x105 3X103 5x105 5x103 7x105 CP CP CP CP CP CP

1 x106 CP

7.1 For scaling up the results obtained on experimental basis, the same liquid should be used in the small and large scale vessels and also the vessels and impellers should be geometrically similar. The two typical bases used for scaling up the experimental results are: a) Constant impeller tip speed, and

b) Constant power input per unit volume. 7

IS : 9522 - 1980
TABLE 4 CHOICE OF IMPELLERS ( C/ause 6.5 ) Direction of Mass Flow

I

Baffles

I

Impeller (3)

I

Turbulence (4) Moderate High Very high

Mass

Flow

Remarks (6)

(5) Small Moderate to large Very large

fertical

Yes

Paddle

Turbine

Propeller (with or without draft tube)

1 High

1 Moderate to large

I

Plate

Moderate High Very high

Small Moderate to large Large

I------

-l

I Mass

flow

in-

Propeller Vertical and little cumferential cir-

Low

Small to moderate

No

I I-I----------i~l~l
I

I

I Moderate

I
I

I Moderate to large

I
I

I

I
I

Propeller and draft tube

Low Moderate

Moderate Moderate

to large

I
I

Paddle

Vertical ential

and

circumfer-

-No

I

I

I

Low Moderate

Small

I Moderate to very large

Turbine

I

I

I

I
I

Low Moderate

Small Moderate to large

Plate

Low Moderate

Small Moderate to very 1~

Anchor Circumferential No Gate

Low Moderate

Small to moderate Large to very large

I

I
I

Low Moderate

I

Small to moderate Moderate to very large

I
I

-

It is considered that no general choice may be made between the above two bases of scaling UP The duties, however, may be divided between and that each type of duty should be dealt with individually. these two methods on the following general principles: a) Where the duty demands a similar flow recommended, and pattern with similar velocities, constant tip speed is

b) Where the duty requires vigorous liquid movement, recommended.

constant power input per unit volume is
volume.

7.2 If the category cannot be decided, it is safer to use the basis of constant power per unit 7.3 For specific operations, the recommended basis for scaling up is given in Table on Power Assessment 3.

8. Guidelines

3.1 The power required for agitation shall be considered mainly based on the following two aspects: a) The power required under normal operating conditions, and b) The power need t(4 :over start-up conditions and peak loads. 8

IS : 9522 - 1980
8.2 The power required under normal operating conditions constitutes the sum of: a) The power required by the impeller under normal operating conditions, b) Gland losses and c) Losses in the driving system. 8.2.1 Power required by the impeller under normal operating conditions - The power required by the impeller may be computed based on the physical properties of fluids involved, size and shape of vessel, type, size and speed of impeller and nature of fittings involved in the vessel. The actual method of computation of power required by the impeller is not covered by this standard. 8.2.2 Gland tosses - It is found in practice that the power loss in gland varies from less than O-3 kW for the small impeller shafts up to 3 kW for the larger. Where no relevant experience is available, as a rough approximation the gland losses may be taken as 10 percent of the agitator power consumption, or 0.3 kW, whichever is greater. 8.2.3 Drive loss - The power loss in a gear box is a function of the rated power capacity of the gear box. Operation at low loads causes a considerable drop in efficiency due to lower working temperature. It is, therefore, usual to allow 20 percent of the maximum input rating as the gear box and V-belt drive loss. Where no gear box is used 5 percent of the horse power required by the agitator may be taken as losses in drive. 8.3 Power Needed to Cover up, Start up and Peak LoadsFactors like the presence of cold lubricant

in the gear box at the time of starting, the possibility of solid settling out, addition of new materials into the vessels during operation which exists only during starting or during unusual operation conditions

may need additional power from the motor to cope up. Hence, the calculated power needed under normal operating conditions shall be suitably augmented while arriving at the motor capacity to ensure that the motor is capable of dealing with the heaviest loads likely to occur during start up and unusual operating conditions in practice. 9. Drive and Bearing Arrangements 9.1 Drive - All impellers should be independently driven by a standard electric motor of the vertically or horizontally mounted type. For speed reduction, a V-belt drive from the motor to the gear box is recommended to enable standard gear box ratios to be used, and to give some degree of flexibility in
impeller speeds after installation. For impellers operating at high speeds the required speed reduction may be obtained by a V-belt drive alone. Where the agitator shaft passes through a stuffing box or a seal, the drive shoutd be mounted on a rigid body fixed to the top of the vessel to minimize differential Wherever V-belt drive is used the driving motor itself should be mounted on slide rails so movement. thz ; adjustments may be made to the V-belt drive for small speed adjustments. Alternatively gear boxes fitted with a hinged-motor mounting on top for this purpose shall be used. 9.2

Gear Box -

The size of the gear box should be at least equivalent

to the rating of the motor being used

and should

be 24 hour rating type.

9.3 Couplings and BearingsThe economical method of supporting the impeller shaft would be to use a gear box carrying bearing to acccmmodate the bending and thrust loads of the impeller shafts, the impeller shaft being rigidly coupled to the output shaft of the gear box. This arrangement is quite suitable for use with shaft passing through stuffing box designed for low pressure duties or where a steady bearing is fitted inside the vessel. However, for installations with long impeller shafts, or where the load is such that bearings are required on the shaft, or where deep stuffing boxes have to be used like in high pressure agitator vessels like auto-claws, it is preferable io fit bearings on the shaft immediately above the stuffing box and a steady bearing inside the vessel below the stuffing box. In such cases the impeller shaft shall be connected to the gear box by a flexible coupling. Coupling between the gear output and impeller shafts may be of any conventional design. For corrosive service it is preferable to arrange couplings between drive and impeller shaft, outside the vessel, even though this entails longer shafts and may necessitate additional bearings. 9.4 Glands and BushesGland should be easily accessible for removal of packing and repacking and where lantern rings are provided, care should be taken to see that they do not operate as a bearing. fn high temperature service the gland should be raised sufficiently high above the vessel for ease of cooling. Normally no bearing bush is necessary for pressure application up to 20 kg/cm? and where the impeller shaft is robust with its bearings fitted near enough to the stuffing box. For high pressure service or where particularly high standard the gland, a bush in the base of the stuffing box is desirable. of performance is demanded from

Mechanical seals may be used in place of the glands in the agitator vessels. However, when mechanical seals are employed correct alignment and rigidity of the shaft shall be ensured for the proper functioning of the seals. 9

IS : 9522 - 1980
10. Mechanical Design 10.1 Design of vessels, flanges
unfired pressure vessels'. and others shall be made in accordance with IS : 2825-1969 `Code for

10.2 Guidelines for the Design of Agitator Shaft - The stresses that would be included in the agitator shafts are considerably higher than the design torque at normal operating conditions may induce due to various reasons mentioned below. To avoid functional damage and to ensure satisfactory service, the shaft should be designed based on the criteria given below, using the appropriate design formulae.
conventional types of electric motors, the starting torque is To avnid undue distortion in the shaft due to starting torque, the shaft should be designed to resist 2i times the motor rated torque as pure torque without exceeding the safe working stress of the shaft material. 10.2.1 Starting torque During starting

more than the full load rated motor torque.

10.2.2 Stalling of impeller - There is also a possibility of the impeller being checked in situations like In such stalled conditions the impeller shaft should addition of materials into the vessel by tipping bags. not fail before the overload protection of the motor operated. A method of design, found successful, is to make the shaft sufficiently strong to withstand, without exceeding the yield stress of the material, the stresses which would be set up if the agitator blades were jammed at a point 75 percent of its length The torque prevailing under stalled conditions may be taken as I.5 times and 2.5 times from the shaft. Low speed impellers, well the motor rated torque for shafts of light duty and heavy duty respectively. clear off from vessel walls or baffles, and in vessels where no solids are charged or precipitated and where the application needs less power input per unit volume are called light duty applications and the rest are high duty applications. 10.2.3 Fouling in stalled conditions - The shafts should be designed so as to be rigid enough and should not deflect to an extent as to cause fouling of the vessel walls, baffles or any other internal fittings when jammed. 10.2.4 Balancing -The tolerance on straightness of shafts, symmetry of the impeller and general accuracy need to be progressively tightened as speeds and power increase. Static balancing is recommended for shaft and impeller assemblies over 2.5 metres long and operating above 100 rpm, and dynamic balancing for shaft and impeller assemblies over 3.7 metres long and operating above 150 rpm. shaft, normally should not run within 30 10.2.5 Critical speed -The but when dynamically balanced this limit may be reduced to 15 percent. percent of its critical speed,

10.2.6 Shaft sizes -To avoid the use of irrational and innumerable shaft sizes and to avoid difficulties in procuring associated parts like bearings, bushes and seals, shaft diameters should be in accordance with IS : 3132-I 965 `Recommendation for shaft diameters for chemical equipment.'

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

Agitator equipments are widely used in chemical and process industries for operations like blending, dissolution, precipitation, extraction and dispersion. The subject of mixing has been one of the most Moreover, there difficult of the unit operations of chemical engineering to submit to scientific analysis. is little published information concerning the selection of impellers for economical operation and power calculations. Due to the facts mentioned above the scope of this standard has been limited mostly to recommendatory nature. This Code gives the various features of the agitator equipment of impellers, and other design features. The recommended capacities of preferred numbers in accordance and gives guidance on the selection

of vessels given in this Code are based on the R5 and RIO series with IS : 1076-1967 `Preferred numbers (first revision)`.

In the aspect of mechanical design, only guidelines for the impeller shaft are given. For the design of vessels, flanges and others, Indian Standard Code for unfired pressure vessels (IS : 2825-1969) shall apply. In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance No. 9 of Engineering Equipment Users' Association, London. 10 Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India has been derived from the Handbook

