IS 4410 ( Part I ) : 1891
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS
PART 1 IRRIGATION PRACTICES

( First Revision)

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December 199 1

Price Croup 3

Terminology

Relating to River Valley Projects Sectional

Committee,

RVD 2

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) ( First Revision > wzs eecpted by the Bureau cf Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Terminolcgy Relating to River Valley Projects Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. A large number of Indian Standards have already been published covering various aspects of river valley projects and some more similar slandaidsare in the process of formulation. These standards include technical terms and precise definitions for such terms are required for avoiding embiguity in their interpretation. To achieve this aim, the Sectional Committee is bringing out Indian Standards Glossary of Terms Relating to River Valley Projects ( IS 4410 ) ; being published in parts. This standard ( Part 1 ) covers definitions of terms commonly occuring in the limited field of irrigation practices, for example, types of crops, areas and water requirements. This standard was first published in 1967. This revision has been prepared in the light of the experience gained during the last 24 years in the use of this standard. In this revision additional terms have been added besides modifying some of the terms so as to bring it in line with latest technology. In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among standards and practices, prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practice in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving considerable assistance from multilingual technical dictionary on irrigation and drainage published by International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage ( ICID ) and many other sources.

IS 4410 (Partl):l!m

Indian Standard

GLOSSARYOFTERMSRELATINGTO RIVERVALLEYPROJECTS
PART 1 ( 1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 1 ) covers definition of terms commonly occurring in the limited field of irrigation practice, for example, types of crops, areas and water requirements. 2 GENERAL TERMS IRRIGATION PRACTICES

First Revision )
3.5 Kharif Crops Those crops which are cultivated in the monsoon season. The following are the principal kharif crops: Maize, rice, small millets, pegom, peas, groundnut, cotton, tobacco, sesame and sannhemp. 3.6 Mixed Crpo Where more than one crop is raised on the same field in the same season simultaneously, without any definite row arrangement such as gram and wheat. 3.7 Monocropping
It is the practice of raising a single crop in an area in a crop year or period.

2.1 Closure Period The period when the canal is closed for regular maintenance, repairs and other purposes. .2.2 Cropping Intensity The percentage of the total crop area during a crop year or season to the culturable command area. 2.3 Crop Rotation The sequence during a year or period of years in which different crops are grown (or planned) in the same land. -2.4 Cropping Pattern Yearly sequence and spacious the crops in a given area. -3 TERMS RELATING CROPS 3.1 Annual Crops Crops which complete their life cycle from to seed within one year. 3.2 Canal Irrigated Crop A crop which is raised predominantly irrigation. -3.3 Cash Crops A high value marketable crop such as sugarcane, tobacco and plantation jute, spices, fruits, crops. -3.4 Drylaod Crops The crops which do not normally require irrigation because the prevailing quantity and incidence of the local rainfall is suitable and sufficient for cultivation. 1 on canal seed arrangement OF of

3.8 Multiple Cropping It is the practice of growing more than one crop in an area in a crop year. 3.9 Overlapping Crop or removed

An old crop which is harvested after sowing of the new crop.

TO TYPES

3.10 Perennial Crops Crops which last several crop years like plantation or orchard crops. 3.11 Rabi Crops Those crops which are cultivated in the winter season. The following are the principal Rabi crops: Wheat, barley, gram, peas, potatoes, tobacco and linseed. 3.12 Relay Cropping Seeding/planting of the succeeding crop after flowering and before the harvest of the standing crop. 3.13 Single Crop Raising of only one crop in one season. 3.14 Summer Crop Often represents an intermediate ( third ) crop between the Rabi and Kharif crops. mustard,

IS4410(Partl):l!Nl 3.15 Well Jrrigated Crop A crop which is raised on by well irrigation. 4.10 Border Strip Irrigation Method 3.16 Wetland Crop Crop which grows in standing water during most part of its life cycle. 4 TERMS RELATING TO IRRIGATION It is controlled surface flooding irrigation method where the field to be irrigated is divided into narrow strips by long parallel low bunds or levees along the general slope of land which shall normally be sufficiently gentle and each strip of land is irrigated by admitting a stream of water at the upper end. 4.11 Check Basin Method The method consists of applying water to an area which is prepared level or nearly level and divided into basins or compartment, usually of rectangular shape with bunds. A supply channel is aligned on the upper edge of the area, and the laterals are dug in between two check basins. 4.12 Coefficient of Uniformity ( UC ) period equals the period between first and last irrigation to raise a crop.

4.1 Actual Evspotranspiration Evapotranspiration from a particular crop under the given moisture and climate conditions. 4.2 Alkali Soil A soil that contains sufficient exchangeable sodium to interfere with the growth of most of crop plants. The ESP is generally more than 15 and ECF less than 4 decisiemens per metre. The soil pH is higher than 8'2 except in systems with chloride and sulphate anions. 4.3 Alkaline Soil Any soil having pH greater than 7. 4.4 Application Efficiency ( AE )
It

It is the ratio of average depth of irrigation water infiltrated into the soil minus the average deviation from this average depth divided by the average infiltrated water. 4.13 Consumptive Use, Consumptive Water Use

is the ratio of the average depth of the irrigation water stored in the root zone to the average depth of irrigation water applied.

4.5 Application Efficiency of Low Quarter ( AELQ 1 It is the ratio of the average low quarter depth of irrigation water infiltrated and stored in the root zone to the average depth of irrigation water applied. The average low quarter depth infiltrated is the average of the lowest onefourth of the measured or estimated values each value represents an equal area of the field. 4.6 Area Assessed
Th~~rea

The quantity of water cosumed in evaporation transpiration and metabolic processes during crops growth, including water consumed by accompanying weed growths. It is expressed in water-depth units per unit area, also called Consumptive Water Use or Evapotranspiration. 4.14 Consumptive Use Efficiency The ratio of consumptive water use by crop and the soil moisture stored in the root zone of the soil during the crop growth period. 4.15 Conveyance The movement of water from its source through the main or secondary canals or conduits to the tertiary or distributory offtakes. 4.16 Conveyance Losses or Tranrmlssion Losses

irrigated on which water rate have been

.

4.7 Available Soil Moisture ( ASM ) It is the difference at any given time between the actual moisture content in the root zone soil and the wilting point. 4.8 Available Soil Moisture Capacity Total amount of available soil moisture in the crop root zone that can be held by a soil for use by plants. Usually considered to be the moisture held between field capacity and wilting point. 4.9 Base Period The number is rackoned. of days over which duty of water determined or measured. Base 2

Losses of water in transit from the source of supply to the point of field turn out whether in natural channels or in artificial ones, such as canals, distributaries or watercourses. They comprise evaporation from the water surface, seepage and incidental transpiration by vegetation growing in or along the canals network. These also include the operation losses in the canal system. 4.17 Crop Water Requirement The total water needed for evapotranspiration from planting to harvest for a given crop in a specific climate regime, when adequate soil

IS441O(Part1):199l water is maintained, by rainfall and/or irrigation so that it does not limit plant growth or crop yield. 4.18 Colturable Command Area area less the non4.30 Division Structure

A structure in the conveyance system that divides the flow into two or more canals or conducts, or both. 4.31 Drip/Trickle Irrigation

commanded The gross culturable land. 4.19 Cultnrable

Irrigable Area

It comprises the application of water in drops close to the plant. The entire space between the plants is not watered. 4.32 Duty or Duty of Water The relation between the area irrigated, or to be irrigated, and the quantity of water used, or required, to irrigate it for the purpose of maturing its crop. Duty is stated as area per unit area of flow. 4.33 Dutv of a Well The average annual area of land irrigated by well for maturing a crop. 4.34 Effective Rainfall The portion of rainfall that replenishes the water availability in the crop root zone. 4.35 Estimated Evapotranspiration An estimate of evapotranspiration by means of standard formulae using climatic factors 4.36 Evapotranspiration

The culturable command area less the area not available for irrigation due to high relief or other reasons. 4.20 Culturable Lift Irrigation Area The culturable command area irrigated only by lift irrigation. 4.21 Curve of Demand A graph showing chronologically the amout of water needed for irrigation at various times during a crop season. 4.22 Curve of Supply A graph showing chronologically the quantity of water available for irrigation during a time period from a given source. 4.23 Daily Consumptive Use It is the consumptive a day. use of water by a crop in that can be

4.24 Deep Percolation Loss It is the amount of water that percolates ward below the crop root zone. 4.25 Delta It is the quantity of irrigation water expressed in depth units over the irrigated area. It is stated with reference to the place at which it is measured or reckoned, that is, delta at farm, delta at out-let, head of watercourses, or lateral head, delta at distributary head, delta at head of main canal. 4.26 Design Duty of Water Duty of water assumed in a irrigation for designing capacities of channels. 4.27 Distribution Efficiency
It is the measure

down-

See 4.13. 4.37 Evaporation Evaporation is the physical process by which a liquid is transformed into a gaseous state. In agriculture, it is the total water vapour loss It from a given area over a given time period. may be expressed as the total or the mean rate in units of depth or volume per unit area, for the period concerned' 4.38 Farm Irrigation Eiliciency The percentage of the water consumed by crops in a farm to the water made available at the farm gate . 4.39 Farm Losses Losses of water on the farm due to uneven distrib ution, evaporation and percolation into the subsoil due to over irrigation. These include to surface run-off and deep percolation. 4.40 Farm Field Inlet A structure field. which supplies water to a farm

project

water distribution

of uniformity over a field.

of irrigation

4.28 Distributary or Tertiary Canal or conduit taking water from the conveyance system and supply it to one tertiary unit. 4.29 Diversion Stractare The structure that diverts water from the water sources and supplies it to the irrigation system.

4.41 Field Application The application the field. 3 of water from the field inlet to

IS4410( Part 1):1991 4.42Field Application Efficiency
The field application efficiency is made up of two parts ( 1 > the efficiency of water transport system in the field and ( 2 ) the efficiency with It is, by definition, which the water is applied. the relation between the quantity of water furnished at the field inlet and the quantity of water needed to maintain the soil moisture above some target level required for the crop. 4.43 Field Capacity ( FC ) The moisture remaining in a soil following wetting and natural drainage until free drainage has practically ceased. 4.44 Field Channel Channel usually taking water from the watercourse and supplying it to one or more forms or fields. 4.45 Field Irrigation Requirements The requirements of irrigation water for at the diversion point of supply channel. 4.46 Flow Irrigated Area Area which can be irrigated from the source water, by flow under gravity alone. 4.47 Furrow Irrigation It is a method of applying water to crops sown in rows through furrows. 4.48 Gross Command Area The total geographical area which can normally be commanded or serviced from a irrigation project without consideration of water supplies available for irrigation. 4.49 Hydraulic Conductivity The rate of flow of water in litres/day through unit cross-section of soil under unit hydraulic gradient at a specified temperature. 4.50 Infiltration The downward entry of water from into the soil. 4.51 Infiitration Rate The rate at which a soil, in a given condition a given time can take in water. 4.52 Intensity of Irrigation The percentage of total area of normally irrigatotal culturable ted crops in a year to command area. 4.53 Irrigation The supply of water raising crops. at the surface of crops 4.54 Irrigated Area The area to which applied. irrigation water has been

4.55 Irrigation Method The manner in which irrigation to the land for raising a crop. 4.56 Irrigation Return Flow It is the leakage or seepage or boWof water from irrigation works, namely, canals and dams or regenerated flow from fields which could be used for irrigation areas downstream. 4.57 Irrigation System It includes storage and diversion structure, main canal, distributory minors, water courses, field channels, and allied structures including head regulator, cross drainage works and control structures. 4.58 Irrigation Water Requirement The amount of crop water requirement that is not provided by effective rainfall, utilisation of stored soil moisture or upward flow of water to the root zone from a saturated zone. 4.59 Irrigation Works The works related to storage, diversion, conveyance and delivery of irrigation supplies to the project command. 4.60 Leaching The process of removal of soIuble salts in the soil by the passing water through it. 4.61 Leaching Requirements A fraction of the water entering the soil that must pass through the root zone in order to prevent soil salinity from exceeding a specified value. Leaching requirement is used primarily under steady state or long time average conditions. 4.62 Lift Irrigated Area That area where the level is too high to allow irrigation by gravity flow, but which can be irrigated by lifting water to the necessary level at some point in the supply system. 4.63 Lift Irrigation It is the method of irrigation in which the water is lifted with mechanical or manual means. 4.64 Main Canal Principal canal for the conveyance of water supplied to the branch canal/distributary 4.65 Management Allowed Deficit ( MAD ) time It is the desired soil moisture deficit at the of irrigation. 4 water is applied

by artificial

means for

IS 4410 ( Part 1 ) : 1991 4.66 Mnlcbing Covering the soil with any material such as straw, plant residues or plastic film to reduce the evaporation from soil surface and/or to protect plant roots from extremely low or high temperatures. 4.61 Net Water Requirement The consumptive use requirements minus the effective rainfall. 4.68 Nominal Duty or Normal Duty The duty sanctioned irrigation department. as per the schedule of an of crops infiltrated in the quarter of the area receiving the least water equals some predetermined value of the soil moisture deficit ( SMD ). 4.78 Potential Evapotranspiration

Evapotranspiration from a particular crop with optimal plant density and soil fertility growing in a well-watered soil ( soil water not limiting plant growth at any time ) under large field conditions and typical weather situation. 4.79 Potential Evaporation

4.69 Non-beneficial Consumptive Use non-crop consumed by native The water vegetation, evaporated from bare and ideal land surfaces and from water surfaces. 4.70 Non-perennial Area The area which irrigation. does not receive perennial

The evaporation from a given surface when all surface atmospheric interfaces are wet ( saturated ), so that there is no restriction due to either biological control or soil water content on the water vapour loss from the surface area. primarily on Its magnitude will depend atmospheric conditions and surface albedo, but it will also vary with the geometric characteristics of the surface. These characteristic vegetative roughness and ( aerodynamic structure and density ) are governed by the type of vegetation present, its health and stage of growth. 4.80 Potential Transpiration The amount of water transpired by a green crop of about the same colour as grass, which completely covers the ground and which has an adequate supply of water. 4.81 Pre-Sowing Irrigation

4.71 Outlet Command Area The area, in irrigation practice, for distribution of water from an outlet. It is the area that can be served by an individual outlet. 4.72 Outlet or Turnout A structure that supplies water to a block in which different farmers use the flow in rotation. 4.73 Overall Irrigation Efficiency of the System

Water application to a field before sowing of a crop to provide the required moisture in the soil for germination of the seed. 4.82 Reference Crop Evapotranspiration The evapotranspiration from a given welladopted crop selected for comparative purposes under given weather conditions and with adequate fetch ( sufficient to make boundary effects relatively unimportant ) and for a standardised watering regime appropriate for this crop and the region concerned. 4.83 Reservoir Storage Efficiency ( Es ) It is the ratio of the volume of water released from the reservoir for irrigation, to the volume of water received in the storage reservoir ( surface or underground ) for irrigation. 4.84 Ring/Basin Method of Irrigation It consists of applying water in level basins either of rectangular or circular shape, generally made around each tree or group of trees. 4.85 Rosteriag of Channels It is the sequencing of water delivery in different channels as a part of regulation.

It is the ratio of the average depth of irrigation water which is beneficially used to the average from depth of irrigation water supplied the headwork. 4.74 Pancboama A written statement executed by canal authority in presence of and witnessed by the irrigators or members of water committee of the concerned canal system against an offender found misusing, wasting or taking water unauthorizedly. 4.75 Peak Period Consumptive Use the

It is the average daily water used during period of highest consumptive use. 4.76 Perennial Irrigated Area

The area served by a perennial canal. 4.77 Potential Application Quarter ( PELQ ) Efficiency of Low

It is the low quarter application efficiency ( PELQ ) obtainable with a given irrigation system when the depth of irrigation water

5

IS 4410 ( Part 1) : 1991

4.86 Rotational Distribution ( Varabandi, Osrabandi )

Water

Supply

on to the field surface by gravity from the head to the tailend. 4.95 Surface Irrigation Method It is the application of water by surface method such as wild flooding, border strip, check basis, and furrows for raising crops. 4.96 Transpiration It is the process of release of water vapour to the atmosphere from aerial organs of the plant mainly through deep stomats. 4.97 Unit Irrigation Efficiency ( Eu )

It is a time table of water supply to individual fields from a particular outlet during one rotation. 4.87 Saline Alkali Soil A Soil containing suBcient exchangeable sodium and soluble salts to interfere with the growth of most crop plant and containing appreciable quantities of soluble salts. The ESP is more than 15, ECE is more than 4 Mhos/ds and soil pH may or may not be 8'2. 4.88 Saline Soil A non-alkali soil containing such large proportion of chloride and sulphate anions as may interfere with the growth of plants. The ECE is more than 4 Mhos/ds, ESP is less than 15 and soil pH less than 8'2. 4.89 Soil Moisture
It is the

It is the ratio of the volume of irrigation water used in evapotranspiration in the specified irrigated area, plus that necessary to maintain a favourable sal concentration in the soil solution, to the volume of water delivered to the area. 4.98 Water Conveyance Efficiency ( EC )

water

occuring in the voids

of soil

mantle. 4.90 Soil Moisture Content
It

It is the ratio of the volume of water delivered by an open or closed conveyance system to the volume of water delivered to the conveyance system at the supply source. 4.99 Water Use Efficiency ( WUE ) It is defined as the marketable crop produced consumed in evapounit of water per transpiration. 4.100 Wild Flooding It is a method of irrigation flooding of the area. 4.101 Wilting Point ( WP ) It is the moisture content of the soil below which plants can no longer extract moisture at a rate sufficient for its growth. 5 TERMS RELATING TO CLIMATE INFLUENCING IRRIGATION 5.1 Arid Climate or regions having not enough rainfall ( usually less than 250 mm ) to support vegetation. 5.2 Agricultural Drought Continuous ( period of) dry weather causing serious moisture deficits, for crop growth. `. by uncontrolled

is usually defined as the quantity of water present in the soil, expressed either as the weight of water per unit weight of dry soil or the volume of water per unit volume of bulk soil. 4.91 Soil Moisture De&it ( SMD )

It is the difference between and the actual soil moisture soil at any given time. It water required to bring the zone to field capacity. 4.92 Sprinkler Irrigation

the field capacity in the root zone is the amount of soil in the root

The method of applying water over the land by spraying it under pressure. This is often done by rotating sprinkler heads with one or more nozzles or by using perforated pipes. 4.93 Sub-Surface Irrigation This is the method of applying water to crops below the ground surface through porous tiles or similar other material. This can also be done through low level open ditches. It is generally applicable to layered soil. 4.94 Surface Irrigation Method of irrigation where the water flows

6

Standard Mark Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Irdian Standards. The use of the Standard
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules

