**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10810-8 (1984): Method of test for cables. Part 8: 
Breaking strength and elongation at break for impregnated 
paper insulation [ETD 9: Power Cables] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 62V315-211 :62V3i5-6U'64:620-i72-24 { Rrst Reprint August 1997) |S : 10810 ( Part 8 ) - 1984 



Indian Standard 
METHODS OF TEST FOR CABLES 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



PART 8 BREAKINGSTRENGTH AND ELONGATION AT BREAK 
FOR IMPREGNATED PAPER INSULATION 



1. Scope — Covers the method for determining breathing strength and elongation at break of 
impregnated paper insulation taken from a completed electric cable. 

2. Significance — During the process of manufacture and during installation, electric cables are 
unavoidably subjected to mechanical stresses, particularly bending. Impregnated paper insulation 
in the cable is also subjected to these stresses and strains. This test is carried out to determine 
the resistance to pull of paper and the percentage elongation the paper undergoes before fracture. 

3. TerminQlogy — As given in 3 of IS : 10810 ( Part 7 )-1984 ' Methods of test for cables : Part 7 
Tensile strength and elongation at break of thermoplastic and elastomeric insulation and sheath ' 
and the following. 

3.1 Braaking Load — The load at which a test specimen fractures. 

3.2 Breaking Strength — It is computed from breaking load in newtons per millimetre thickness and 
specified width of the test specimen. 

3-3 Percentage Elongation at Break — The increase in gauge length of a tensile test specimen at 
fracture, expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length, 

4. Apparatus 

4.1 Tensile Testing Machine — The machine shall be automatic. It shall have the capacity to meet 
the requirement of this test and shall have the rate of separation of jaws as specified in 8.1, The 
grips shall be such as to firmly hold the test specimen. The elongation may be measured manually 
or with an automatic device. 

4.2 Micrometer — A flat faced micrometer capable of measuring thickness to the nearest O'OOI mm. 

4.3 Precision Dial Micrometer — This instrument is provided with two parallel plane faces between 
which the paper can be placed for measurement. One of the faces should be capable of movement 
in^ direction perpendicular to the other, which is fixed. The movable face or pressure foot should 
be circular. The fixed face or anvil should also be circular and of such size that the whole area of 
the pressure foot Is in contact with the anvil In the zero position. 

To ensure that the pressure between the faces is uniform within the limits given, the use of a 
dead weight rather than a spring is preferred. 

The instrument should be calibrated in accordance with the procedure detailed in Appendix 
A and should conform to the following: 



Characteristics 

Diameter of pressure foot 

Area of pressure foot 

Pressure exerted by pressure foot 

Repeatability of measurement 
( standard deviation ) 

Indication error 



Error of parallelism of pressure foot and 
anvil 



Value 

16 ± 0"5 mm 

200 mm2 ( Nominal value ) 

100 ± lOkN/m* 

0002 5 mm or 05 percent whichever Is 
greater 

± 002 5 mm or 0*5 percent whichever 
is greater 

0*005 mm or 1 percent whichever is 
greater 



Adopted 14 March 1984 



© June 1985, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 10810 (Part 8) -1984 

5. Material — No material other than the test specimen is required for performing this test, 

6. Test Specimen 

6.1 The core sample shall be taken from the cable after first removing at least 300 mm length of 
cable from the end. Crease free impregnated paper tapes shall be taken from completed cable and 
not less than 250 mm long pieces shall be taken from these tapes. If width of the tapes is more 
than 15 mm then test specimen of 15 mm width shall be cut from these strips. If the width is less 
than 15 mm, then the whole strip shall be used as test specimen. 

6-2 Number of Specimens — Six, 

7. Conditioning — All the specimens shall be conditioned for 24 ± 1 hour at a relative humidity 
of 65 ± 2 percent and temperature of 27 ± 2°C. 

8. Procedure 

8.1 After conditioning the specimens, compound shall be removed and the thickness of each 
specimen measured to the nearest 001 mm. The specimen shall then be tested in a tensi^e 
testing machine, keeping the distance between grips at 200 ± 20 mm. The gauge length shall be 
measured accurately and noted. The load shall then be applied gradually and uniformly till the 
specimen fractures. The rate of separation of the jaws of the machine shall be 20 to 30 mm per 
minute. 

8.2 The load and the distance ( separation ) between the grips when the specimen breaks shall be 
noted. 

9. Tabulation of Observations 



Description 



Symbol Unit 



Observed Values 
12 3 4 5 



Width of specimen 
Thickness of specimen 
Gauge length 
Separation at break 
Load at break 



W mm 

T mm 

Gi mm 

Gs mm 

F N 



ID. Calculation 

Q Q 

10.1 €Iongation at break, percent = — ~ — - x 100 

F 15 

10.2 Breaking strength in N/mm of thickness, for a width of 15 mm "^ y^m 

10.3 The maximum and minimum of the six values are to be discarded and the average of the 
remaining four is considered as test result. 

11. Report 

11.1 Breaking Strength and Elongation Test on Impregnated Paper: 
Cable Type 

Batch No./Lot No. 
Cable No./Drum No. 

11.2 Reference Specification 



Test 



Observed Value 



Specified Value 



Breaking strength ( N/mm of thickness ) 
far a width of 15 mm 

Elongation at break, percent 



11.3 Conclusion — The specimen meets/does not meet the requirements of the specification. 

2 



18:10810 (Pari 8) -1984 

APPENDIX A 

{ Clause 4.3 ) 

CALIBRATION OF THE INSTRUMENT 

A-0. General 

A-0.1 For instruments in frequent use, the calibration should be checked daily for repeatability and 
accuracy and monthly for parallelism and foot pressure. 

A-0.2 For very thin paper, it is necessary to check the instrument at the same temperature at which 
it is to be used. 

A-0.3 If the instrument is not within the tolerances for any test, it should be corrected before 
succeeding tests are done. 

A*0.4 Checking should be carried out as described in A-1 to A-4. 

A-1. Planarity of Foot and Anvil — The pressure foot and anvil should be carefully wiped and 
parted slightly so that the gap can be seen against a bright light. The gap should be quite even 
when observed in two directions at right angles, 

A-2. Pressure Exerted by the Foot — Any suitable means of checking its accuracy and uniformity 
may be used. 

A-3. Repeatability of Measurement and Determination of Indication Error 

A-3,1 Set the instrument correctly at zero before commencing. 

A-*3.2 Use a set of feeler gauges of different thicknesses which have previously been checked. 

A-3.3 Insert these individually between the anvil and the pressure foot and note the corresponding 
reading on the scale. 

A-3.4 Check the Instrument at approximately 10, 30, 50, 70 and 90 percent of the full scale reading 
and, m particular, the range of normal working. 

A-3.5 A series of at least five readings should be taken at the zero position followed by at least five 
readings on each feeler gauge and finally a further set of at least five readings at the zero position. 

A-3.6 The instrument should not be reset to zero during the procedure. 

A-3.7 For each check point on the scale: 

a) repeatability of measurement is the standard deviation of the five or more readings taken, 
and 

b) indication error is the difference between the mean of the five or more readings and the 
feeler gauge thickness. 

A-4. Parallelism of Foot and Anvil 

A-4.1 Insert a feeler gauge on the edge at one side of the pressure foot and note the thickness 
shown on the scale. 

A-4.2 Insert the same feeler gauge on the edge of the opposite side and note again the thickness on 
the scale. 

A-4.3 Repeat the procedure at right angles to the original position. 

A-4.4 Repeat the procedure with other gauges at approximately 10, 30, 50, 70 and 90 percent of the 
full scale reading, and check in particular the range of normal working. 

A-4.5 The error of parallelism is defined as half the square root of the sum of the squares of the 
difference between the opposite readings at the ends of the two perpendicular diameters, that is: 



where 



d\ and c/a are the differences between the measurements at two opposite points of the 
same diameters. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



