( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS:4601

(Part

II)-1968

Indian Standard
NAVIGATION LIGHTS FOR LARGE SEA-GOING POWERLDRIVEN VESSELS
PART II
Marine Instruments

OIL LANTERNS
Committee, EDC 68

and Safety Aids Sectional

chailman CAPI! GUR~ARAN SINCEI Members

Re#ment ing
Directorate General of Shipping ( Ministryof Transport & Shipping), Borhbay

Ericson & Richards, Bombay CAPT S. B. AQA CAPS D. MUNQAT ( &tern& ) The Company of Master Mariners of India, Bombay Clrp~ P. ALEXANDER _ Cm P. S. VANCHISWAU ( Alternate ) CHIEF MECHANICAL ENQINEER, Inter Port Consultations Cell, Calcutta THE COMMISSIONERS IOR THE PORT OF CALCUTTA CHIEF MECHANICAL ENQINEER, BOMBIY PORT TRUST ( Alternate ) AFCO Ltd, Bombay SHRI V:G. DAMLE SHRI S. J. VOKES ( Alternate ) Indian Navy DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF WEAPONS POLICY AND TACTICS E. W. Stevens & Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI . E. GILL Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI $ GURURAJA The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay CAPT R: D. KORLI' CAPT D. A. BEALE ( Aftmate) Directorate General of Technical Development SHRI V. KRISHNAMURTHY ( Ministry of Industrial Development & Company Affairs ) The Indian National Steamship Owneti' Association, C~pr H. S. MAI$ Bombay Ahmed S. Moloobhoy & Sons, Bombay SRRI SIIAREEF MOLOOBHOY Hindustan Shipyard Ltd, Visakhapatnam SHRI_T. V. S. RAO . SHRI C. S. K. ANJANEYULU ( Altematc ) Siemens Engineering & Manufacturing Co of Indii DR E. SCHIXMEL SII~I 0. P. TALWAR ( Alternata ) Shaparia Dock & Steel Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. A. SFIAPAR~A SERI C. N. MISTRY ( Alternate) ( Cbntinucd on page 2 )

Ltd, Bouibay

IWDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI

IS:4601 (Part II)-1968 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members SHRI M. VELU SERI M. V. PATANKAR, Director ( Mech Engg ) Representing Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Ernakulam Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) Secretary SHRI K. S. SUBRAMANIAM Officer on Special Duty Navigational Instruments

( Mech Engg ), IS1
EDC 68

Subcommittee,

:4

m

P. S. VANoHISWAR Members

The Company of Master Mariners of India, Bombay

CAPT S. B. AQA SHRI C. L. BATRA SHRI J. E. GILL Cm R. D. KOHLI
SHRI

V. KRISHNAXURTHY

Ericson & Richards, Bombay All India Instrument Manufacturers & Dealers Association, Bombay E. W. Stevens & Co Ltd, Calcutta The Indian National Steamship Owners' Association, Bombay Directorate General of Technical Development (EL~2;t-y of Industrial Development & Company

Sachin Engineering Corporation, Bombay SHRI S. P. MARATHE SHRI N. S. KELKAR ( Alternate) Indian Navy CDs N. RADHAKRISENAN

2

IS:4601 (Part lI)-1968

Indians Standard
NAVIGATION LIGHTS FOR LARGE SEA-GOING POWER-DRIVEN VESSELS
PART II OIL LANTERNS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 April 1968, after the draft finalized by the Marine Instruments and Safety Aids Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Navigation lights are to be carried and exhibited by sea-going powerdriven vessels in all weathers from sunset to sunrise. These lights may also be exhibited from sunrise to sunset in restricted visrbility and in all other circumstances when it is deemed necessary. 0.3 This standard is one of a series of Indian for use on board large sea-going vessels. 0.4 This standard Collisions at Sea. is based on the International Standards on navigation lights

Regulations

for Preventing

0.5 This standard generally Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 addition general requirements going power-driven vessels is India under the,said Act and

incorporates the requirements under the and the rules made thereunder; and in and testing of navigation lights for large seasubject to the approval by the Government of Rules.

0.6 This standard is necessary since navigation lights have to be so fixed, positioned and screened that each of the light concerned is projected in the direction required by the International Regulations for Prevention of Collisions at Sea, and is not obstructed by fittings such as derricks housed vertically. 0.7 This standard is meant to act as guidance to shipbuilders, ship-owners and others concerned with the fitting and use of navigation lights. 0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance.with The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS:2-1960*. value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Rules for rounding OK numerical values ( revised ). 3

IS:4601 (Part II)-1968 1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard (Part II ) gives the specification for oil lanterns used as navigation lights, for masthead, stern and side lights by large sea-going powerdriven vessels. 2. TERMINOLOGY the definitions given in IS: 4601

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, ( Part I ) - 1968* shall apply. 3. COMPONENTS OIL LANTERNS OF NAVIGATION

LIGHTS

WITH of the following parts :

lights with oil lanterns shall consist 3.1 Navigation a) Lantern cases, b) Oil lamps, c) Dioptric lens, d) Colour slides (for side lights only j, and e) Reflectors. 4. LANTERN lantern CASE case shall be capable of keeping

Cl The out.

water

or water

spray

42 The lantern case shall be so constructed that the lamp can be inserted in the case with the chimney already in position on the lamp. The lantern case, the up-take of the lantern and lamp chimney shall be concentric. 4.3 The effective optic region of the dioptric lens shall not be obstructed by any projecting features like handle or other parts of the housing. However, the use of vertical rods to hold the top and bottom together is permissible. The breadth of the vertical rods, if placed in front of the lens, shall not exceed 6 mm. 4.4 The lamp shall be movable only laterally through the door opening in For this purpose, runner shall be provided on the bottom the lantern case. of the housing. The length and the spacing between the runner will depend on the size of the lamp. The door in the lantern case shall be provided with a suitable arrangement to secure the door in position. 4.5 The bottom of the lantern ing in air and for drainage case shall be provided with holes for drawThe ventilation of condensation water.
power-driven vessels: Part I Positioning and

*Navigation lights for large sea-going acreming of lights.

l8:4681 (Part ll)-1968
so provided shall be sufficient to ensure that a burner giving 12 candela will continue to burn in an even and satisfactory manner inside the case, in a still, warm atmosphere. The passages for the admission of air to the interior of the lantern shall have ample area and shall be so arranged that the flame shall not be extinguished or caused to smoke by wind or by the motion of a vessel in bad weather. 4.6 Lantern shall be tested for wind-proofness in a wind of at least 30 knots. 4.7 The height of the back of the lantern case shall not be less than 305 mm and the breadth of port and starboard lanterns shall not be less than 250 mm (see Fig. 1 ). 4.8 The lantern case shall be secured on its side only. If a tongue piece is used for securing lantern case to the screen board, the dimensions of the tongue piece shall be as given in Fig. 2. d 4.9 Material 4.9.1 The lantern case shall be made of copper, steel, aluminium alloy, or other non-corrodible metal. The thickness of the material used shall not be less than 0.63 mm. When steel is used, the lantern case shall be fabricated first and the whole unit galvanized. 4.9.2.-The tongue piece shall be made of malleable casting of non-ferrous material which shall not corrode under service conditions. The set-screws used for attaching the lantern case shall be Ml2 (see Fig. 2 ). 5. OILLAMP

The recom5.1 The lamp shall consist of a cistern, burner and chimney. mended shape of chimney and burner are shown in Fig. 3 and 4. cistern of the lamp shall be capable of containing 5.2 Cistern -The sufficient oil to last for 16 hours, in normal use. 5.2.1 The cistern shall be so placed in the lantern case, that it shall not intercept any of the rays that would otherwise fall on the lower half of the lens. 5.2.2 The base of the lamp shall be so constructed and fitted in the lantern case, that the lamp cannot be placed in, or shifted to an incorrect position. 5.2.3 The cistern for port and starboard lights shall not be inter-changeable. 5.2.4 The cistern shall be made of non-corrodible material and shall be leakproof. 5.3 Burner -The burner shall be either a duplex burner taking flat wicks at least 25 mm in width or a single wick burner taking a flat wick at least 32 mm in width. It shall be capable of giving a light having a candle power of at least 12 candela after burning for 2 hours, untrimmed, using an ordinary wick and oil.

xsr46o1 (PfwtII)-1968

p

250MN-)

-I

.

l-

0
No. SIDELIGHT
PORT

-

[II
0
FIO. 1

+ 305 MN

It-n
in millimetres.

J__il
I

All dimensions

SHAPE OF SIDE LIGHT PORT OIL LANTERN 6

IS:4601 (PartII)-1968
4

-

65 _I

2 -

Ml2 BOLTS
AI1 dimensions

in millimetr~~.

2
1
i'
130

Fra. 2

DIMENSIONS FOR TONGUE ON SCRI$ZN BOARD I

All dimaaiona

in millimetra.

FIG. 3

DI~N~IONSAND SIUPP OF CI&VEY

7

Single Vyick Burner

Double Wick Burner

Fxo.

4

REC~MF.NDED SHAPE OF SINGLE AND DOUBLE WICK BURNERS

-5.3.1 The burner shall be so placed that the vertical axis of the lens passes through a point at the middle of the after edge of the wick ( the forward wick, if a duplex burner ).
5.3.2 For side lights, the burner shall be so placed that the wick(s) are set at an angle of 112" 30' with the side of the lantern case, and so that a line draGn in this direction from the after edge of the wick (the forward wick, if a duplex burner) cuts the edge of the housing of the lens. 5.3.3 For masthead lanterns, the burner shall be So placed that the .wick( s) shall be parallel to-the back of the lantern case; further, the burner shall be so placed, that a horizontal line drawn from the centre of the after edge of the wick (the forward wick, if a duplex burner ), in a direction makii an angle of 112" 30' on either side with the plane of symmetry of the lantern shall cut the edge of the housing of the lens. 5.3.4 For stern lights, the burner shall be placed as in 5.3.3 and screening shall be as given in IS : 4601 (Part I ) - 1968*. 53.5 The burner shall be so placed that the effective visibility of the lantern Wils the requirements of ` Indian Standard specification for dioptric lens for navigation lights ' ( under @+diott ). 53.6 The burner shall be so registered that it cannot be placed in or shift to an incorrect position.
Navigation lights for large ata-going acreming of lights. power-driven vessels

_

: Part I Positioning

and

8

IS:4691

(Part

II)-1968

53.7 The distance from the centre of the after edge of the wick (the forward wick, if a duplex burner) to that part of the lantern against which the tongue of the screenboard presses should always be 125 mm. 5.4 Chimney-Unless the lantern case is-.of special form, designed to enable the burner to give at least 12 candela without the use of a chimney, a suitable glass chimney shall be fitted. 5.41 The chimney shall be of clear colourless glass, shall be of round ( not oval) section, shall be not less than 37 mm internal diameter at the top, and shall have an overall length of not less than 187 mm. In the commoner forms of chimney, the curvature of the glass between the bulge and the neck of the chimney shall be quite gradual. 6. DIOPTRIC LENS

6.1 Dioptric lens used with oil lanterns for navigation light shall be in accordance with ` Indian Standard specification for dioptric lens for navigation lights ' ( WI& jrejwution ). 7. COLOUR SLIDES

7.1 The colour slides for port and starboard side lights shall be in accordance with c Indian Standard specification for colour slides for navigation lights ' ( under pepamtion ).
8.

REFLEmORS

8.1 The lantern shall be fitted with a substantial metal reflector, silverplated and highly-polished. The surface of the reflector shall be part of a sphere having its centre at the optical centre of the lens. 8.2 The reflector shall not be so large as to intercept any of the direct rays which should Ml on the lens. 8.3 The reflectors shall not be so small that a line drawn from any part of the lens through the centre of the flame will fail to fall on its surface. 8.4 Reflectors for side and masthead lanterns shall not be interchangeable. 9. TESTING

9.1 All dimensions shall be checked for adherence to the minimum requirements of this standard. 9.2 The lights shall be tested according to the requirements of IS : 4601 (Part I)- 1968*. *Navigationlights for large sea-goingpower-driven veruels: screening of lights. 9
Part I Positioning

and

Is:4601 (Part II)-1969 9.2.1 Side lights shall be tested for a visibility of 3.219 km on a dark night with a clear atmosphere, with naked eye. 9.2.2 Masthead lights shzll be tested for a visibility of 8-047 km on a dark night with a clear atmosphere, with naked eye. 10. MARKING

10.1 The casings of navigation lights shall be marked with the manufacturer's number and type of light (see Fig. 1 ). 10.2 The lamp shall be marked with the same serial number of the manufacturer as on the lantern casing. 10.3 The cistern shall be marked with its capacity in litres. 10.4 Navigation Mark. lights may also be marked with the IS1 Certification

NOTE-The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on the products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, undb a we&ddined system of inspection, testing and quality control during product& in this ~ystesix,which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer, hasthe furrher- safeguard that the roducts as actually marketed are continuously chedlhd by ISI.for'conformity to the stan cp ard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processom, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

10

