( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS I 7440 ( Part III/Set 2 ) - 1977

Indian Standard
ESSENTIAL RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ANALOGUE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART III Section 2 Semiconductor
Chairman DR B. H. WADIA

OPERATIONAL

AMPLIFIER

Having Two Inputs and Two Outputs Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee, LTDC 10
Rqkesentinp Behram Wadia & Associates, Pune

Members Semiconductor Limited, Pune DR T. R. BHAT National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi DR G. C. JAIN DR Y. R. ANANTR PRASAD ( Alternate ) The Radio, Electronics & Television Manufacturers' SHRI S. KAPUR Association ( RETMA ), Bombay SRRIS. Y. PRATAK ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRIM. S. KRISHNAN KUMARI V. RATNAVATI ( Alternate ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute DR B. R. MARATRE ( CSIR ), Pilani DR W. S. KROKLE ( Alternate) Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( DepartSHRI G. B. MEEMAMS~ ment of Communications ), New Delhi Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI M. S. S. MURTHY SHRI Y. P. MADAN ( Alternate) Directorate of Technical Development Production SHRI R. C. PANDEY ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ) SHRI R. S. YADAV ( Alternate ) Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( RailSHRI L. R. PARTHASARATHI wav Board 1. Lucknow SHRI N. A. P.S.RAO (Alternate ) ' " Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI N. G. PHADNIS Electronics Corporation of Indta Limited ( DepartSHRI P. S. RAJU ment of Atomic Energy ), Hyderabad Ministry of Defence SARI P. K. RAO SHRI M. A, RANGANATH ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

@
INDIAN

Copytight 1977

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Acf ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS t 7440 ( Part III/Set 2 ) - 1977
( Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing SHRI B. S. GOVINDA RAO Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SIXRIR. V. RUSSIZL ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangalore SHRI K. R. SAVOOR Department of Electronics, New Delhi SHRI G. SoNI SHRI N. SRMIVASAN, Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&i0 Member ) Director ( Electronics )

SRRI P. N. ADII.EKAR Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI

Panel
Convener DR B. R. MARATHE Members

for Integrated

Circuits,

LTDC

10 : P6
Research Institute,

Central Electronics Pilani Semiconductors

Engineering

DRT.R.BHAT SHRI B. S. RAJU ( Alternate) SHRIR.R.IYER SHRI G. B. MEEMAMSI SHRIC.D.MURTHY

Limited,

Pune

SHRIV. A.PETHE
SHRIB.S.GOVINDARAO SHRI S.V. RUSSEL SHRI P.K. RAO SHRIR.VENKATARAMAN ( Alfernatc)

Philips India Limited, Bombay Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( Department of Communications ), New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd ( Department of Atomic Energy ), Hyderabad Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay Indian Telephone Industries Limited, Bangalore Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangalore

2

IS : 7440 ( Pad III/Set 2 ) - 1977

Indian Standard
ESSENTIAL RATINGS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF ANALOGUE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART III Section 2 OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER Outputs Having Two Inputs and Two

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part III/Section 2 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 20 April 1977, after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunications Division Council. 0.2 This standard (`Part III/Section 2 ) deals with the essential ratings and characteristics and other information to be specified for operational This standard should be amplifiers having two inputs and two outputs. used in conjunction with IS : 3700 ( Part I )-1972* and IS : 7440 ( Part I )19747 covering format and the general requirements. 0.3 The object of this standard is to specify clearly the properties of the device for the intended application and to facilitate comparison and choice It is anticipated that adoption of this standard between similar products. will ensure uniformity in the presentation of device data as well as certain minimum information on these essential ratings, characteristics and other parameters of the device covered. 9.3.1 While the lists of ratings and characteristics have been kept at their minimum, a manufacturer may always give additional information at his discretion. 0.4 This standard is based on the IEC Pub 147-IE ( 1973 ) Fifth supplement to Pub 147-1 ( 1972 ) `Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices and general principles of measuring methods, Part 1 Essential ratings and characteristics, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission.
*Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconducter integrated devices: circuits: Part I General

tEssentia1 ratings and characteristics format.

(Jrst rezision ).

of analogue

Part I General

3

`IS `t 7440 ( Part III/Set

2 ) - 1977

0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on semiconductor devices and integrated circuits. `A list of standards so far prepared in this series is given on page 12. 0.6 In reporting the results of measurements made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part IlI/Sec 2 ) covers essential ratings and characteristics and other information to be specified in the case ofoperational amplifiers having two inputs and two outputs. 2. ;H&M;;~OGY, GRAPHICAL SYMBOLS AND LETTER

2.1 The provisions of 2 of IS : 3700 ( Part I )-1972t 3. ASSIGNED TYPE NUMBER

shall apply. The

3.1 A type number shall be assigned for identitlcation of the device. number shall be prominently displayed on the device. 4. DF&CRIPTION OF THE INTEGRATED CIRCUIT

4.1 Information on the following, as required in IS : 3700 ( Part I)-1972?, shall be furnished: a) The category of the integrated circuit namely analogue integrated circuit; b) Function of the circuit - a general description of the function performed by the analogue integrated circuit; c) Technique used in the manufacture such as bipolar, MOS, film, etc; d) Constructional details such as monolithic, hybrid, etc; and e) Material , 5. OUTLINES 5.1 Details
L.nlatiion shall

thin

such as silicon. AND CONNECTIONS

'

of Outline and Encapsulation - The following inforbe given: a)' Reference to the outline covered in relevant part of 1S : 5000$ or an outline drawing showing essential dimensions and tolerances, location of terminals and other information;
devices: Part I Genera]

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). tEssentia1 ratings and characteristics of semiconductor (fir;t revision ). *Dimensions of semiconductor devices.

4

IS : 7440 ( Part b) Method of encapsulation;
C)

III/Set

2 ) - 1977

and should be

Marking ( the drawing of the case with the marking reproduced ). DIAGRAM AND TERMINAL CONNECTIONS

6. BLOCK

6-I The block diagram and the identification of the connections should be shown. When the encapsulation has metallic parts, any connection The connections to them from external terminals should be indicated. with any associated external electrical elements should also be stated. 6.2 As an additional information, the complete electrical diagram may be reproduced, including significant parasitic elements, but not necessarily with indications of the values of the circuit components. 7. RATINGS ( LIMITING VALUES)

following ratings for voltages and currents 7.1 Electrical Ratings -The shall be specified under conditions mentioned against each: a) Power Su/$dy Voltuga(s)

11 Maximum 2) Maximum

value(s) and polarities; permissible ripple on the supply voltage(s);

3) Maximum values of transients or spurious signals from the supplies for a specified time duration; 4) Maximum value of the permitted voltage between a common supply terminal and case or reference terminal, where appropriate; and 5) The sequence of the application of supply voltages, where appropriate. b) Porver Supply Current(s) 1) Maximum values, where appropriate; and 2) Maximum values for a specified duration conditions ), where appropriate. c) Input Terminal
Voltages

( external

fault

1) Maximum values, with respect to a common terminal, including bias voltages; and 2) Maximum value between input terminals. d) Outptit Terminal
Voltages

reference

1) Maximum values, with respect to a common terminal, including bias voltages; and 2) Maximum value between output terminals. 5

reference

IS t 7440 ( Part III/Set 2 ) - 1977
e) Input Terminal Currents Currents -

Maximum Maximum

values, values,

including including

bias bias to shall of

currents. f) Output Terminal currents.

g) Impedances - Maximum values which the circuit is connected, 7.2 Temperature be specified: Ratings -

for impedances of the supplies where appropriate. temperature ratings

The following

a) Operating Temperatures - Minimum and maximum values ambient or reference point operating temperature. b) Storage Temperatures - Minimum and maximum values.

7.3 Power Dissipation Ratings - Where appropriate, maximum value of power dissipation ratings over the' operating temperature range for given mounting conditions shall be stated. 7.4 Short Circuit Conditions duration of short circuit between ground shall be specified. - Where terminals appropriate, maximum or between terminals and shall be specified

7.5 Mechanical Ratings - The mechanical ratings in accordance with 9.1 of IS : 37C0 ( Part I )-1972*. 8. RECOMMENDED recommended temperature OPERATING CONDITIONS

8.1 The operating

operating conditions within the range of the following shall be stated:

specified

a) Poiver Supplies - The polarities, the values and tolerances for voltages or currents and for impedances. Wherever possible, the voltages should be chosen from the list of preferred values given in IS : 7440 ( Part I)-1974t. b) Supply Current(s) -Nominal c) Impedance appropriate. Maximum value(s). value(s) of the supplies, where

d) Input Terminals 1) Value(s) ofthe voltage(s) or current(s) signal or of the signal generator. 2) Value(s) of appropriate. the bias on the input or both of the input where
General General

terminals,

(first

*Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: Part I rezh ion) . tEssentia1 ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuits: Part I forma t .

6

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set 2 ) - 1977 e) Output Terminals 1) Nominal value(s) of the voltage(s) or current(s) the output signal and of the load impedance. 2) Value(s) of appropriate. the bias on the output or both of where

terminals,

f) External Elements - Value(s) and tolerance(s) for the external element(s) which shall be associated with the circuit. 8.1.1 The variation of the parameters specified in 8.1 ucrsustemperature should also be stated over the specified temperature range, where appropriate. 9. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS

characteristics shall be stated at the 9.0 General - The electrical reference point or ambient temperature of 25"C, the specific electrical conditions under which the device operates being also stated. 9.1 Power Consumption shall be stated. 9.2 Input stated: Characteristics Typical The value of the power consumption following characteristics shall be

- Minimum a) Input Admittances/Impedances specified values of: load impedance, measuring frequency, and input signal amplitude.

and maximum values for

b) Magnitude of Input Ofset Voltage and Current - Maximum values for specified values of source resistance, if they affect the values of these characteristics. value for zero or specified c) Input Bias Current - A maximum voltage in common mode. d) ( Equivalent ) Input Drift - Maximum value under specified conditions. e) Common Mode Rejection Ratio - It is defined as the ratio of input voltage range to the maximum change in input offset voltage over this range. Maximum and typical values at specified values supply voltage(s), output voltage with zero input signal in common mode, load and source impedances, frequency of the input signal, amplitude of input signal in common mode, and adjustment of the gain control ( if it exists ). 7

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set f)

2 ) - 1977 voltage which shall be applicable to obtain zero differential output following characteristics shall be

Ir@ut Offset Voltage-The between input terminals voltage. Characteristics

9.3 Output stated:

-The

a) Output Resistance - The resistance seen looking into either output terminals with differential output at zero. Minimum or maximum values or both for specified values of the following: 1) 3) 4) b) Supply voltages, impedance, and amplitude. signal 2) ' Source Output

Frequency,

Differential Output Voltage Swing - The peak differential output swing that may be obtained without clipping. Typical and minimum values for specified supply voltage and load resistance and, where appropriate, for a specified value of total distortion. (for Large minimum

c) Maximum Rate of Change of Di$eerential Output Voltage Signal Operation ) - Typical and, where appropriate, value(s) under specified conditions.

NOTE- The rise and/or fall time of the input pulse should be at least one order less compared to the slope time of the operational amplifier.

4

Output Common Mode Voltage terminals referred to ground.

Average

voltage

at the two output voltage to

Di$erential e> change in

Load Rejection - The ratio of input offset differential load current producing it. negative current

f)

Output Sink Current - The maximum supplied by each output.

that may be mode

d

Di$rential Distortion - AC unbalanced voltage in common output voltage produced by unsymetrical voltage swing. Characteristics and The following value

9.4 Forward Transfer tics shall be stated:

characterisfor specified

a) Open Loop Gain - Maximum values of the following:

minimum

1) 2)
3) 4) 5)

Supply

voltage(s), of the gain control of the output signal 8 ( if it exists ), and at which the gain is measured.

Frequency, Adjustment Amplitude Load and source impedance(s),

IS : 7440 ( Part III/Set 2 ) - 1977 b) Operation with Sinusoidal Signals - Maximum or minimum values or both for one or mdre of the following characteristics shall be .: .L` stated: 1) Frequency for which the open loop differential gain decreased by 3 dB from its low frequency value, and 2) Frequency for the unity gain. has

c) Di$erential Voltage Gain - The ratio of the change in differential output voltage to the change in differential input voltage producing it. 9.5 Noise stated. ( where appropriate )A `maximum value should be

NOTE - The noise should be specified in terms of noise factor or in terms of equivalent rms input voltage or current or both, for specified values of supply voltage(s), source resistance, frequency and bandwidth.

9.6 Interaction Between the Amplifier and the Supply Lines The following shall be stated for appropriate specified conditions -both for steady state and transient conditions: a) Maximum signal from the amplifier appearing on the supply lines ( where appropiate >, b) The transfer characteristic from the supplies referred to the input of the amplifier, and c) The impedance of the amplifier at the supply terminals ( where appropriate ). 9.7 Differential Step Response step response shall be specified in terms of the
td

9.7.1 The differential following: a) Delay time:
b) Slope

time:

tS ( tr or If )

trip d) Total response time: ttot
NOTE - For the purpose of essential characteristics parameters have to be stated ( ssc Fig. 1 ). The only three of these four

c) Ripple time:

typical

characteristic values of these parameters should be stated as and where appropriate as maximum value(s) under the following specified conditions:

1) Unity gain configuration, 2) Input and feedback resistance configuration is realized, 9 values with which unity
gain

IS : 7440 ( Part III/See 2 ) - 1977 3) Phase compensating conditions ( configuration and values of the compensating networks, if any ), and 4) Load conditions (configuration and values of the loading network ) . NOTE - The rise time of the input pulse should be at least one order less
to any of the response times of the operational amplifier.

compared

INPUT

I

RELATIVE OUTPUT 100% 90 %

OVERSHOOT

10 %

0%
--I

----f,tr IIIbi

t rlD(r I ftot
(r)
I

c-

L

c---

E = Specified percentage

of the final ( quiescent

) value.

FIG. 1

EXAMPLE OF RESPONSE TIMES OF LINEAR AMPLIFIERS value for be stated. the same specified

9.8 Overshoot Factors - Maximum conditions as the response times should 10

IS: 7440 ( Part III/Set

2 ) - 1977

9.9 Effects of Variation of Supply Voltage(s) and Temperature on - Where appropriate the effects of the Electrical Characteristics variation of supply voltage and temperature on the essential characteristics specified in 9.1 to 9.8 shall be stated over the recommended operating conditions of temperature and supply voltages as specified in 8. 10. MECHANICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND OTHER data required etc, should 1 )-lY72*. DATA

10.1 Mechanical characteristics and other mechanical design, assembly precautions, specified in 9.2 and 9.3 of IS : 3700 ( Part 11. ENVIRONMENTAL DATA

for the detailed be supplied as

11.1 Where appropriate, the relevant in accordance with IS : 6553-19717. 12. RELIABILITY DATA Under

environmental consideration.

data

shall be stated

13. CHARACTERISTICS

CURVES curves of the

13.1 Graphical representation of the relevant characteristic integrated circuits as given in 9.9, shall be provided. 14. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

14.1 A curve of the typical variation of input and output impedances or admittances versus frequency, the other specified conditions remaining unchanged shall also be given. 14.2 Any external elements to be "associated with the integrated should be referred to its terminals. These external elements appear in two distinct tables as follows: a) The first table should include the associated elements are specific to a function, or which determine an operation. b) The second table should include the associated elements serve as correcting elements. 14.2.1 Each table should include the following three columns: circuit should which
which

a) In the first column, the circuit terminals concerned should be identified. b) In the second column, the nature of the external elements concerned should be indicated ( for example: RC network ). c) In the third column, the resulting effect of the circuit together with the external element should be indicated.
*Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor (first revision ). tEnvironmenta1 requirements for semiconductor devices devioes: and integrated Part I General

circuits.

11

INDIAN STANDARDS ON SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
IS: Electrotecbnical vocabulary: Part VII Semiconductor Set 1 l-1970 General Set 2 j-1970 Diodes See 3 )-1970 Transistors Set 4 )-I969 Thyristors Set 5 )-1971 Integrated circuits and microelectronics 2032 ( Part VIII )-1965 Graphical symbols used in electrotechnology: Part VIII Semiconductor devices 3700 Essential ratings and characteristics of semiconductor devices: ( Part I )-1972 General (Jirst reoision ) ( Part II )-1972 Low power signal diodes (first revision ) ( Part III )-1973 Rectifier diodes (Jirst revision ) Low power small signal transistors ( Part IV )-1968 ( Part V )-1968 Power transistors ( Part VI )-1968 Switching transistors ( Part VII )-1970 Reverse blocking triode thyristors Voltage regulator and voltage reference diodes ( Part VIII )-1970 ( Part IX)-1972 Variable capacitance diodes 3715 Letter symbols for semiconductor devices: ( Part I )-1971 General aspects ( Part II )-1971 Diodes ( Part III )-1971 Transistors ( Part IV )-1971 Thyristors 4400 Methods of measurements on semiconductor devices: ( Part I )-1967 General ( Part II )-1967 Low power signal diodes ( Part III )-1968 Rectifier diodes ( Part VII )-1971 Reverse blocking triode thyristors ( Part VIII )-I970 Voltage regulator and voltage reference diodes ( Part IX ) Variable capacitance diodes ( Set 1 )-1974 For operating frequencies below 300 MHz ( Set 2 )-1974 For operation at frequency above 6 GHz 4411-1967 Code for designation of semiconductor devices 5000 Dimen'sions of semiconductor devices ( i ( ( (

1885 ( Part VII )

devices;

NOTE- Standards on dimensions of semiconductor devices are published leaf form ( individually priced ) and are supplied in an attractive binder separately ). So far 31 standards have been published.
5001

( priced

in loose

Guide for preparation of drawings of semiconductor devices and integrated circuits: ( Part I )-1969 Semiconductor devices ( Part II)-1973 Integrated circuits 5469 Code of practice for the use of semiconductor junction devices: ( Part I )-I969 Applicable to all devices ( Part II )-1973 Diodes ( Part III )-1973 Thyristors 6553-1971 Environment requirements for semiconductor devices and integrated circuits 7412-1964 Life testing semiconductor devices 7440 ( Part I )-1974 Essential ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuits: Part I General format and characteristics of analogue integrated 7440 ( Part II )-1974 Essential ratings circuits: Part II Telecommunication amplifiers audio, video and multichannel 7440 ( Part III/Set 1 )-1976 Essential ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuits: Part III Operational amplifier, Section 1 Having two inputs and one 7440 ( Part $%I'c 2 )-1977 Essential ratings and characteristics of analogue integrated circuts: Part III Operational analogue, Section 2 Having two inputs and two outputs 7441 (Part I )-1974 Essential ratings and characteristics of digital integrated circuits: Part I General format

