**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 4802 (1988) : Method for determination of colour fastness 
of textile materials to dry-cleaning [TXD 5: Chemical 
Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 4802 - 1988 

(Reaffirmed 2004) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 
FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 
TO DRY-CLEANING 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 677016-474 : 535-6852 : -648*28 



@ Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Gr 1 



November 1988 



IS : 4802 « 1988 



Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF COLOUR 
FASTNESS OF TEXTILE MATERIALS 
TO DRY-CLEANING 

( First Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was 
adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 
20 May 1988, after the draft finalized by the 
Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Textile Division 
Council. 

0.2 This standard was first published in 1968. 
It has been revised to align it with ISO 105/ 
D- 1 982 'Textiles - Tests for colour fastness D01 
Colour fastness to dry-cleaning*, issued by the 



International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) and to incorporate changes in line with 
other standards on colour fastness tests. 



0.3 In India, different solvents are used for dry- 
cleaning of textiles though perchloroethylene is 
considered as ideal for many of the textiles. 
Determination of colour fastness of such textiles 
to dry-cleaning is of considerable importance to 
the consumer. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes a method for deter- 
mination of colour fastness of textile materials 
of all kinds and in all forms to dry-cleaning. 

1.2 The test prescribed in this standard^ is not 
suitable for evaluation of the durability of textile 
finishes, nor it is intended for use in evaluating 
the resistance of colours to spot and stains re- 
moval procedures used by the dry-cleaners ( see 
Notes 1 and 2 ). 

Note 1 — This test covers colour fastness to dry- 
cleaning only; commercial dry-cleaning practice nor- 
mally involves other operations, such as water spotting, 
solvent spotting, steam pressing, etc, for which other 
standard test methods are available, if the full 'dry- 
cleanability' of the textile is to be assessed. 

Note 2 — The presence of absorbed water in either 
the fabric or dry-cleaning solution, or the presence of 
a detergent water in the dry-cleaning solution, has not 
been found to be a critical factor in assessing colour 
fastness. This test gives results which correlate satis- 
factorily with those obtained in commercial dry- 
cleaning. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 A specimen of the textile in contact with a 
cotton fabric bag together with non-corrodible 
steel discs is agitated in dry-cleaning solvent, 
then squeezed or centrifuged and dried in hot 
air. The change in colour of the specimen is 
assessed with the grey scale for change in colour. 
At the conclusion of the test, the discolouration 
of the solvent is also assessed by comparing the 
filtered solvent with unused solvent by trans- 
mitted light by means of grey scale for staining. 



3. SAMPLING 

3.1 Sample to determine conformity of a lot of 
coloured textile material to a specification shall 
be selected so as to be representative of the lot. 

3.2 Sample drawn in compliance with the rele- 
vant material specification or as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller to evaluate colour fast- 
ness of the material in the lot shall be held to be 
representative of the lot. 

4. PREPARATION OF TEST SPECIMEN 

4.1 If the textile to be tested is fabric, draw a 
test specimen of 10 X 4 cm size. 

4.2 If the material to be tested is yarn, knit or 
weave it into fabric and draw from it 10 x 4 cm 
test specimen or make a wick of parallel lengths 
10 cm long and about 0'5 cm in diameter, tied 
near both ends. 

4.3 If the textile to be tested is loose fibre, comb 
and compress enough of it to form a sheet 
10x4 cm. 

5. APPARATUS 

5.1 Suitable Mechanical Device — consisting 
of water bath containing a rotatable shaft which 
supports, radially, glass or stainless steel con- 
tainers (75 ± 5 mm diameter x 125 ± 10 mm 
high) approximately 550 ±50 ml capacity, the 
bottom of the containers being 45 ± 10 mm high 
from the centre of the shaft. The shaft/container 
assembly is rotated at a speed of 40 ± 2 min -1 . 



1 



IS : 4802 - 1988 



The temperature of the water bath is thermo- 
statically controlled to maintain the test solvent 

at 30 ± 2°C. 

Note — Other mechanical devices may also be used, 
provided the results are identical to those obtained by 
the apparatus described above. 

5.2 Glass or Stainless Steel Containers — 

75 ± 5 mm diameter, 125 ± 10 mm high and of 
550 ± 50 ml capacity, which shall be closed using 
solvent resistant gaskets. 

5.3 Non-Corrodible (Stainless) Steel Discs — 

30 ± 2 mm x 3 ± 0'5 mm, smooth and free from 
rough edges of mass 20 ± 2 g. 

5.4 Undyed Cotton 'Twill' Cloth — of mass 
per unit area 270 ± 70 g/m 2 , free from finishes 
and cut into samples 12 x 12 cm. 

5.5 Grey Scales — for evaluating change in 
colour and staining. 

5.6 Glass Tubes — of diameter 25 mm. 

6. REAGENTS 

6.1 Quality of Reagents — Unless otherwise 
specified, pure chemicals shall be employed in 
tests and distilled water shall be used where the 
use of water as a reagent is intended. 

Note — Pure chemicals shall mean chemicals that 
do not contain impurities which affect the test results. 

6.2 Perchloroethylene or Any Other Solvent 
Used for Dry-Gleaning 

Note — Perchloroethylene should be stored over 
anhydrous sodium carbonate to neutralize any hydro- 
chloric acid formed. 

7. PROCEDURE 

7.1 Prepare a bag with inside dimensions of 
10 x 10 cm using the undyed cotton twill cloth 
by sewing together two squares of this cloth 
around three sides. Place the specimen and 12 



steel discs inside the bag. 
convenient means. 



Close the bag by any 



7.2 Place the bag containing the specimen and 
the steel discs in the container and add 200 ml 
of the dry-cleaningsolvent at 30 ± 2°C. Treat the 
specimen for 30 min at 30 ± 2°C in the specified 
equipment ( see 5.1 ). 

7.3 Remove the bag from the container, with- 
draw the specimen, place it between absorbent 
paper or cloth and squeeze or centrifuge to re- 
move surplus solvent. Dry the specimen by 
hanging in air in shade at a temperature of 
60 =fc 5°C. 

7.4 Evaluate the change in colour of the treated 
test specimen with the grey scale ( see Notes 
under 7.5 ) ( see IS : 768 - 1982* ). 

7.5 At the conclusion of the test, filter the sol- 
vent remaining in the container through filter 
paper. Compare the colour of the filtered solvent 
with that of unused solvent in the glass tube 
placed in front of white card using transmitted 
light by means of grey scale for assessing staining 
(see IS : 769 - 1982f ). 

Note 1 — The treated test specimens should have 
cooled after drying and regained their normal moisture 
content before evaluation. 

Note 2 — In cases of doubt in the colour fastness 
ratings as assessed by an observer, the assessment 
should be done by at least three observers and the 
overall average rating should be reported. 

8. REPORT 

8.1 Report the numerical rating for change in 
colour of the test specimen and the numerical 
ratings for staining of the solvent. 

8.2 Report the solvent used for the test. 



•Method for evaluating change in colour (first 
revision ). 

tMethod for evaluating staining (first revision ). 



Printed at Saini Printers, Delhi, India 



