(Reaffirmed 2003)

18:29S-1989

Indian Standard
CODE FOR SEAWORTHY PACKAGING OF COTTON YARN AND CLOTH

( Third Revision)
Cotton and Cotton Products Sectional
Chainnan Ssmr A. SUBEAMANIAY MQabcrs Saar A. CEELLASAJ ( Alfmaf~ to Shri A. Subramaniam ) The SHBI T.V. A~?~TEu

Committee, Repmen f ing

TDC 2

Madura Chats Limited,

Madurai

Bombay Textile Research Association, Bomtmy Da N. BALA~UBEAUNIA* ( Alfti.----- 1 Naval Headquarters CAPTJ. M. L. BANSAL S&r HARDI~B ( Alfernafc ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) Snnr M. K. BARDHAN SRR~ B. P. SIZN( Alfmafe) Inspection Wing, Directorate General of Supplies SHRI A. T. BUAK & Disposal*. New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SH~X G. N: CHATTERJI Sasr R. GII~SR ( Affemfe ) Jaya Shree Textiles & Industries Ltd, Rishra SHRI A. K. DALM~A SHRI K. GOPINATR ( Ahnuts ) DIRECTOR or of Tamil Nadu, Madras HANDL~OMS & Government TEXTILES SHRI A. GHOSA National Test House, Calcutta Textiles Committee, Bombay SERI K. K. GOEL . \ *RI R. V. NANDRE~AB ( Alfemau ) The Millowners' Association, Bombay &RI R. N. JOSHI SHRI R. M. MERCHANT The Cotton Textiles Export Promotion Council, Bombay SHI~I GAUTAMBHAI S. NANAVATY The Ahmedabad Millowners' Association, Ahmadabad DE P. R. ROY ( Alfmufr ) SERI J. K. S. NICROLSON The East India Cotton Association Ltd, Bombay SHBI D. G. DAMLE ( Alfnnufe j Calico Mills, Ahmadabad SEBI C. K. PATEL (Confiniuduapugc2)
I

@ Co@rigk 1980
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyighf Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

X8 ; ,293 - 1980
( GJdinucd~om puga1) Members
SHRI T. ~~QABWAIW SHnr A. I. S. RAO

Southern India Millowners' Association, Coimbatore Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay
( Alternate)

The

Srrnr S. P.

GIXOSAL

SHRI T. V. RATN~M

.

SHRI UTTAM SIIWII SACHDEVA S~EI N. S. SHARMA
SARI V. N. SUBBA RAO Ds P. V. SESHADBI SH~I 0. P. BANSAL (Al&mate) DB V. SUNDAXAM

South India Textile Research Association, Coimbatore The Delhi Cloth 13 General Mills Co Ltd, Delhi The All India Federation of Co-operative Spinning Mills Ltd, Bombay Binny Limited, Madras National Textile Corporation Ltd, New Delhi Indian Council Delhi of Agricultural Research, New

DR V. G. MUNEHI ( Alternate ) SERI HAHXISEON N. UDANI SERX s. M. CEAxaABORTY, Director ( Tex )

Keshavlal Talalrchand ( Pvt ) Ltd. Bombay Director General, IS1 ( Ex-&icio Mrmba )

SEE1 0. P. KXuLr&AB Deputy Director (Ter ), ISI

Cotton and Cotton Products Subcommittee, TDC 2 : 1
coflomw Saxt C. K. PATEL Mcmb4rl SHRI A. P. ANANTB~IKRI~ENAN
SHRI A. T. BASAX SHRI D. K. NdxDY ( Altcrnafc) SHRI R. DEAI~MARAJAX
Snn1 R. N. Josnr PROF R. C. D. KdUSHIE SIII%IK. KRISIINAMUnTIiY

Calico Mills, Abmadabad
The Millowners' Association, Bombay

Inspection Wing, Directorate & Disposals, New Delhi Modi Spinning Modinacar &

General Mills

of Supplies Co Ltd,

Weaving

SHRI S. VENXATARAYAN ( Alternate ) Snnr GAUTAMBHAI S. NANAVATX The

The Millowzers' Association, Bombay The Technological Institute of Textiles, Bhiwani The Textile Corporation of Marathwada Ltd, Aurangabad

SHRI K. R. SITWALA (Alternate) SHRI MADHUKANT PBANLAL The
DR P. R. ROY ( Al&mate ) SH~I T. RAN~ASWAXY

Ahmadabad Ahmadabad
Ahmadabad

hlillowners'

Association

Ltd,

Millowners'

Association.

Ahmadabad The Southern Coimbatore India Millowners' Association,

( Cantinucd on page 11 )

2

IS : 293.1980

Indian Standard
CODE FOR SEAWORTHY PACKAGING OF COTTON YARN AND CLOTH

( Third Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Third Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 15th July 1980, after the draft finalized by the Cotton and Cotton Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 0.2 The standard, formulated in 1951, was revised in 1959 and 1967. The third revision has been made to bring it in line with the current mode of packing of cotton yam and cloth meant for export. 0.3 The details of the packing given in the standard do nor apply to cotton yarn and cloth intended for surf ports. In case goods are to be unloaded at surf ports, necessary provision for special packing of bales or cases shall be made. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the method of packing cotton yarn and cloth intended for export to ensure their safe transit. The requirements of packing materials used for making bags, bales, cases and cartons have also been specified. 2. PACKING MATERIALS used in packing cotton yarn 2.1 The requirements of packing materials and cloth are given in Table 1. 3. PACKING 3.1 Yarn PROCEDURE ) in Bales ( Hanks

3.1.1 The hanks shall be made into bundles of 2.27 kg/2*5kg or 4-54 kg/5kg. Two pieces of kraft paper of appropriate size shall be placed on top and bottom of the bundle. Each bundle shall be tied ( by cross tying ) at four or five places with cotton or jute twine while it is being pressed. 3

Is8293-1980
TABLE 1 REQUItiMENTS OF PACKING MATERIALS

( Churc 2.1 )

NE!
(1) 4
ii) iii) iv) v) vi) Kraft Wax Sulphite

MATERIAL
(2) paper paper Type film film paper Grade

REQUIREMENT (3) 2 of IS : 1397-19671 4 of IS : 3962-1967,

Cellulose Polyethylene Hessian

See IS : 5012-1968s Thickness-40 pm, Min (See Grade 123 of IS : 2508-1963)4 a) b) c) d) e) 229 305 380 435 540 g/m*] ' Set IS : 8569-1977s g/m = ) g/m* , g/m'J g/mat Se Note 1)

vii) viii) ix) x) xi)

HDPE Cotton Jute

Non-laminated twine plywood twine

fabric

See IS Ste IS:

: 6899-19736
2413-1963' Min

see IS : 1912.19758 (3 ply) Thickness5 mm, stc IS : 303-19i5B

Commercial Cartons

Made from corrugated fibre board of minimum 7 plies, See IS : 2771 ( Part I )-197710 case slats See class `A' Style 3 (b) of IS Width-40mm. Thickness-20 Slats shall treatment see IS Grade

xii) xiii)

Packing Wooden

: 1503-196711

Min mm, Mitt be given antitermite

niv;

Steel strips

( See Notes 2 and 3 )

: 1029-19701s
M'idfh, mm Afin Thichncss, mm

Min
1.2 0.9 0.45 g/m*) shall be as

a)

Yarn

in bags and and cloth cloth in bales in cases

Medium hledium Hard of hessian a coating of red

12.5 16 20 (540

b) Yarn c) Yarn agreed between

NOTE 1 -The NOTE2 -The NOTE 3 -The
in place

constructional particulars the buyer and the seller. steel strips shall be given

primer. straps may be used

high density of steel strips, if agreed

polyethylene, nylon or plastic between the buyer and seller.

( Confinued )

A

IS
TABLE -1 REQUIREMENTS OF PACKING MATERIALS -

I

293

l

1980

Cd d shall be in

materials used for packing NOTE 4 -The sound, clean and dry condition.

of cotton yarn and cloth

NOTE 5 - The overlaps of the different layers of packing materials shall be at least 10 cm. In case of the bale packing, the outermost Jayc r of hessian shall be such that it can be properly and securely stitched. lSpccification 3pecification 3specification 4Specificarion Qprcification "Specification textiles. `Specification *Specification OSpecification "`Specification 1'Specification I'Specification for krah paper. for waxed paper for general packing. for cellulose film. tbr low density polyethylene film. for jute fabrics used in the packing of textile products. for high density polyethylne (IIDPE) woven fabric for cotton twine. for country jute twine (fisf r&ion ). for plywood for general purposes (second r&rion). for corrugated fibre board boxes (first rroision). for wooden packing cases ( J%J~ rtion ). for hot rolled steel strips (baling) (first rsuision).

for packing

3.1.2

Make-UP of Bales-The

bale shall satisfy the following requirements: materials ( one layer each of ) is kraft hessian ( 305 g/m%) polyethylene film, in such a way that when the baIe is ( 380 g/m*) forms the outermost layer.
of

a) The sequence of packing paper, polyethylene film, and hessian ( 380 g/m* ) finally made up, hessian

NOTE - Cardboard strips, one each, shall be placed on top and bottom each bundle of hank, in case the count of yarn is 60s (9.8 tex) or finer.

b)

The lips of end wrapping piece of outer layer of hessian are stitched with two strands of jute twine with at least two stitches per decimetre. bale is bound by cross-hooping the steel strips, that is at right angles to both the length and the width of the bale. The straps nearest to the edges are approximately 10 cm away from the respective edges and other strips are equally spaced at approximately 13 cm from each other. The hoops are in tight condition when the bale is released from the press. Wooden slats of adequate length and strength are placed under the hoops at each of the 8 edges of the bale.
( Cones, Cheeses and Spools ) in Cases

Cl The

3.2 Yarn

3.2.1 Make-&h of Pieces - Each piece of cone, cheese or spool shall be wrapped in polyethylene bag ( except in case of grey yarn ) or kraft paper.

5

3.2.2

Make-Up

ofCase-The

case shall satisfy the following

requircinents: of) is kraft ( 229 g/m% ) the hessian cover

a) The sequence of packing materials ( one layer each paperlsulphite paper, polyethylene film and hessian in such a way that when the case is fully packed, forms the outer layer.

b) The outer layer is tucked to the sides of the case to fully the contents and the lid securely nailed to the case.

c) The case is bound with steel strips in such a way that at least three strips are positioned paralleled to the battens and at least two strips are positioned at right angles to the battens, the strips being in a tight condition. 3.3 Yarn ( Cones, Cheeses and Spools ) in Cartons 3.3.1 Make-@ of Pieces - Each piece of cone, cheese or spool shall be wrapped in polyethylene film ( except in case of grey yarn ) or kraft paper. A suitable number of such cones/ cheeses/ spools shall be packed in a carton. 3.3.2 Make-Up of Cartons- The cartons shall satisfy the following requirements: a) The sequence of packing materials ( one layer each of) is kraft paper and polyethylene film in such a way that the polyethylene film forms the outer layer. b) The outer layer is sealed at the overlap proof adhesive, with a suitable water-

c) The lid of carton is secured by means of an adhesive tape. d) The carton is covered with hessian ( 229 g/m2 ) all around and sewn with jute twine with at least 5 stitches per decimetre. 3.4 Yarn ( Cones, Cheeses or Spools ) in Bags 3.4.1 Make-U/? 0-f Pitices-Each piece of cone, cheese or spool shall be wrapped in polyethylene film ( except in the case of grey yarn ) or kraft paper. A suitable number of cones ( say 50 ) or cheeses/spools ( say 80 ) shall be packed in each bag. 3.4.2 ments: a) The sequence of the packing materials ( one layer of each of) is wax paper, polyethylene film and hessian ( 435 g/ma ) in such a way that when the bag is made up, the outermost layer is that of hessian. 6
Make-Up

of Bag The bag shall satisfy the following require-

3.4.2.1

Cone packing-

lS:293-1980
cone.

NOTE-Plywood pieces, one each, shall be placed on top and bottom of each

b) The bag is sewn with jute twine with at least 5 stitches per decimetre, and c) The bag is bound by two steel strips, the hoops positioned in cross wise direction. 3.4.2.2 ments: a) The sequence of packing materials ( one layer each of) is wax paper, polyethylene film and hessian ( 435 g/m2 ) in such a way that when the bag is made up, theoutermost layer is that of hessian. b) The bag metre. 3.5 Grey Cloth is sewn with jute twine with atleast 5 stitches per deciCheese packingThe

bag shall

satisfy

the following

require-

in Bales
of Pieces-

3.5.1 Make-Up to the appropriate 3.5.2 ments:
Make-Up

Each piece of cloth The bale shall

shall be plaited

or folded require-

size.
of Bales-

satisfy the following

a) The sequence of packing materials ( one layer each of) is kraft paper, polyethylene film or HDPE non-laminated fabric, hessian ( 305 g/m2 ), polyethylene film and hessian ( 380 g/m2 ) in such a way that when the bale is finally made up, the hessian ( 380 g/m2 ) forms the outermost layer. b) The lips of end wrapping with two strands of jute metre. piece of the outermost layer are stitched twine with at least two stitches per deci-

c) The bale is bound by steel strips parallel-hooped, that is with strips at right angles to the length of the bale in case the bale contains running length pieces. The strips nearest to the edges are 10 cm away from the respective edges and other strips are equally spaced at approximately 13 cm from each other at right angles to the length of the bale. or by steel strips, cross-hooped that is with strips at right angles to both the length and width of the bale where goods packed are in short length pieces such as dhotis, saris, bed sheets, pillow-cases and towels. The strips nearest to the edges are approximately 10 cm away from the respective edges. Other

The bale is bound

7

strips are equally spaced at approximately 13 cm from each other at right angles to the length of the bale and at approximately 25 cm from each other at right angles to the width of the bale. d) The hoops are in a tight condition when the bale is released from the press. Wooden slats of adequate length and strength are placed under the hoops at each of the 4 or 8 edges accordingly as the bale is parallel-hooped or cross-hooped. 3.6 Grey Cloth in Cases
3.6-l

appropriate

Make-U'

size,

of Pieces-

Each piece shall be plaited or folded to the

3.6.2 Make-Up of Case- The case shall satisfy the following requirements: a) The sequence of packing materials ( one layer each of ) is kraft paper/sulphite paper, polyethylene film and hessian ( 229 g/m* ) in such a way that when the case is fully packed, the hessian forms the outermost layer. b) The outermost layer is tucked to the sides of the case to fully cover the contents and the lid securely nailed to the case. c) The case is bound with steel strips in such a way that at least three strips are positioned parallel to the battens and at least two strips positioned at right angles to the battens, the strips being in a tight condition. 3.7 Grey Cloth in Batch Rolls 3.7.1 Make-Up of PiecesThe pieces shall be stitched end to end to form a continuous length of 300 to 400 m. The number of seams shall not be more than 3 or 4 as specified by the buyer. The cloth shall be wound on the mill board tubes ( having dimensions of 70 mm internal diameter x 6.35 or 9.5 mm wall thickness or as agreed ) using a batching machine. The two ends of the tube shall be closed with taper wooden blocks to provide strength and prevent crushing in. Two pieces of circular plywood having a thickness of 5 mm shall be placed at the two ends of the roll for protecting the edges of the cloth. 3.7.2 Make-Up of Rol!s- The rolls shall satisfy the following requirements: a) The sequence of the packing materials (one layer each of) is kraft paper, polyethylene film, hessian ( 380 g/m2 ), polyethylene film and hessian ( 540 g/m" ) in such a way that when the roll is finally made up, the Lessian (540 g/ma ) forms the outermost layer. 8

IS : 293 - 1980

b) cl

The overlapping with two strands mctre.

ends of the outermost layer are stitched together ofjute twine with at least two stitches per decidistances along

The roll is bound with steel strips placed at equal its length, approximately 25 cm from each other.
Cloth in Bales

3 3 Processed

or folded or 3.8.X' Make-Up of Pieces - Each piece shall be plaited wrapped on a cardboard or strawboard of suitable size and thickness. Each piece or bundle of pieces shall be wrapped in materials such as cellulose/polyethylene film/kraft paper/sulphite paper.
NOTE-

varieties

If agreed to between the buyer and the seller, of fabrics may be packed without any wrapping.

coarse

and

cheaper

3.8.2 Make-U'

of Balc-

The

bale

shall

satisfy

the following

require-

ments: a) The sequence of packing materials ( one layer paper, polyethylene film, hessian ( 305 g/m* ), and hessian ( 380 g/m* ) in such a way that finally made up, hessian ( 380 g/m2 ) forms the b) The bale 3.5.2.
NOTE-

each of) is kraft polyethylene film when the bale is outermost layer. in (b) and (c) of
piecer may

a!so satisfies

the requirements

given

be placed

To avoid steel strip marks on the cloth pieces, cardboard at the bottom and top of the bale next to the cloth pieces.

3.9 Processed

Cloth in Cases

3.9.1 Make-UP of Pieces3.9.2 Make-Up of Cases-

The pieces shall be made The cases shall satisfy

as given

in 3.8.1. require-

the following

ments: a) The sequence of packing materials ( one layer each of j is kraft paper/sulphite paper, polyethylene film and hessian ( 229 g/ma ) in such a way that when the case is finally packed, the hessian forms the outermost layer. b) The case shall also satisfy the requirements in 3.6.2. 3.10 Processed
Cloth in Cartons of Pieces-

given

in (b) and

(c)

3.10.1 Make-Up

The pieces shall be made

as given

in 3.8.1.

9

ISr233-.l!@o 3.10.2 Make-up of Carfons- The requirements: cartons shall satisfy the following

a) The sequence of packing materials ( one layer each of) is kraft paper and polyethylene film in such a way that the polyethylene film forms the outer layer. b) The outer layer is sealed at the overlap proof adhesive. with a suitable water-

c) The lid of carton is secured by means of an adhesive tape. d) The carton is covered with hessian ( 380 g/m' ) all around and the hessian is stitched with at least 5 stitches per decimetre. 4. GROSS MASS 4.1 The gross mass of the package shall not exceed as given below unless specific permission has been obtained from the concerned authorities: Bale Cases Cartons Bags 200 210 75 55 85 kg kg kg kg for cones, and kg for cheeses

5. MARKING 5.1 Each package ( bag, bale, wooden case or carton ) shall be marked with the following information: a) Name of the material; b) Quantity, in case of cloth; c) Count, in case of yarn; d) Gross mass and net mass; e) Manufacturers' name, initials or trade-mark, f) Any other information the law in force. 5.2 All the markings permissible. shall if any ; and

required by the buyer and the seller or by writing with hand being not

be stencilled,

5.3 The letters and figures shall be not less than 40 mm in height.

10

1s : 293 ~.l!wo

SHBI A.I.S.

Ssmr UTTAMSIN~HSACEDEVA
F .(IB. P. SEN

SHBI S. P. GEOSAL (Alternate)

RAO

Representing Office of the Textile Commissioner,
The ,"$i Mioirt:y Cloth of Defence Spinning and General

Bombay Mills Co Ltd,

( DC1 ) & Manufacturing Co Ltd,

SHRI D. R. YADAV ( Alkr~~c SHRI D. R. SHARXA

) The Century Bombay

SHUI K. G. SETHUB.UZ (Alkma&) Standard Mills Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. G. SEIXOP~ Maharashtra Cooperative Spinning SERI M. T. .%NOIiI tion, Bombay

Mills

Federa-

