NAT 1% IS 10027 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


van- Raat cht а эг Зет 
эїїх 650 alee Wal. A HA Әса 


Composite Units of Air-Break 
Switches and Rewirable Type 
Fuses for Voltages Not Exceeding 
650 V a.c. — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 29.120.40, 29.120.50 


© BIS 2018 


anda HIS эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, 4 {И - 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2018 Price Group 10 


Low Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee, ETD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Low Voltage Switchgear and Controlgear Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 


The objective of this standard is to define: 
a) The characteristics of the equipment; 
b) The conditions with which the equipment shall comply with reference to: 
1) operation and behaviour in normal service; 
2) operation and behaviour in case of specified abnormal conditions, for example, short-circuit; 
3) dielectric properties; 
c) The tests intended for confirming that these conditions have been met and the methods to be adopted for 
these tests; and 
d) The data to be marked on the equipment. 


The majority of the switches being manufactured in India are metal-clad switches. Switches with insulated 
enclosures are also available in large quantities. These switches and fuse combination units, incorporating 
particularly rewirable type fuses, are being manufactured in the small-scale sector, intended for domestic and 
similar installations. 


This standard was, therefore, brought out primarily to meet the requirements of the manufacturer and the users in 
respect of rewirable type switch-fuse units for current ratings not exceeding 100 A and of duty categories AC-21A 
and AC-21B. 


IS/IEC 60947 (Part 3) : 1999 ‘Low-voltage switchgear and controlgear: Part 3 Switches, disconnectors, switch 
disconnectors and fuse combination units’ had been published superseding IS 4064 (Part 1 and Part 2) : 1978. 
While revising IS 10027 : 2000, incorporating requirements contained in IS 60947 (Part 3) : 2012, the need for 
exclusively separate standard was maintained in view ofthe composite units and rewirable type fuses manufactured 
in small scale sector intended for domestic and similar installations. 


The first revision of this standard was originally published in 2000. The second revision has been taken up to keep 
pace with the latest technological developments and international practices. 


The major changes in this revision are: 
a) Temperature rise limit for silver or silver-faced contact parts has been modified (see Table 1); 
b) Temperature rise limit for fuse-carrier and base has been specified (see Table 1); 
c) Modification in the operating conditions (see 6.5); and 
d) Range for ambient air temperature, for which no correction is required, has been modified (see 8.2.5). 


In the use of this standard, references shall have to be made to IS 2086 : 1993 ‘Carriers and bases used in rewirable 
type electric fuses for voltage up to 650 V — Specification (third revision)’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2:1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


COMPOSITE UNITS OF AIR-BREAK 
SWITCHES AND REWIRABLE TYPE 
FUSES FOR VOLTAGES NOT EXCEEDING 
650 V a.c. — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 
TRCOFE IS No. Title 
1.1 This standard covers requirement for composite ІЅЛЕС 60529 Degrees of protection provided 
units of air-break switches and rewirable type electric : 2001 by enclosures (IP Code) 
fuses with rated current not exceeding 100A intended қурс 60947 Low-voltage switchgear and 
for system voltages not exceeding 650 V a.c. controlgear 
1.2 The switches incorporated in the composite units ге Part 1 : 2007 General rules ( first revision) 
intended for utilization category of AC-21A (frequent Part 3 : 2018 Switches, disconnectors, 
operation) and AC-21B (infrequent operation), Switehadiseonrcetors: and fise- 
1.3 The rewirable type fuses, incorporated in composite combination units (second 
units, shall conform to the requirements laid down in revision) 
IS 2086 : 1993. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


NOTES 
1 It shall however be recognized that this imposes no restriction 
on rewirable type fuse-combination of other categories of 
duties or composite units incorporating cartridge type fuses in 
which case reference shall be made to IS/IEC 60947 (Part 3). 
2 This standard shall cover only composite units incorporating: 
a) Air-break ‘on’ and ‘off’ switches of category AC-21A and 
AC-21B and for rated current not exceeding 100A, 
b) Rewirable type of fuses only, and 


c) Enclosure of metal-clad insulated types 


REFERENCES 


2.1 The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards listed below. 


IS No. Title 


IS 1885 (Part 17) Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 
: 1979 17 Switchgear and controlgear 
( first revision) 


IS 2086 : 1993 Carriers and bases used in 
rewirable type electric fuses 
for voltages up to 650V — 


Specification ( third revision) 


IS 11353: 1985 Guide for uniform system of 
marking and identification of 


conductors and apparatus terminals 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to those given in IS 1885 
(Part 17) : 1979 and IS/TEC 60947 (Part 1) : 2007 shall 


apply. 
3.1 Switch (Mechanical) 


A mechanical switching device capable of making, 
carrying and breaking current under normal circuit 
conditions which may include specified operating 
overload conditions and also carrying for a specified 
time currents under specified abnormal circuit 
conditions such, as those of short-circuit. 


NOTE — A switch may be capable of making, but not breaking 
short-circuit currents. 


3.2 Fuse-Combination Unit 


A combination of a mechanical switching device and 
one or more fuses in a composite unit, assembled 
by the manufacturer or in accordance with his 
instructions. 


3.3 Switch-Fuse 


A switch in which one or more poles have a fuse in 
series in a composite unit. 


3.4 Dependent Manual Operation (of a Mechanical 
Switching Device) 


An operation solely by means of directly applied 
manual energy such that the speed and force of the 
operation are dependent upon the action of the 
operator. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


3.5 Independent Manual Operation (of a Mechanical 
Switching Device) 


A stored energy operator where the energy originates 
from manual power, stored and released in one 
continuous operation, such that the speed and force 
of the operation are independent of the action of the 
operator. 


4 CHARACTERISTICS OF EQUIPMENT 


4.1 Summary of Characteristics 


The characteristics of the equipment shall be stated in 
terms of the following as applicable: 


a) Type of equipment (see 4.2) 

b) Rated quantities (see 4.3) 

c) Utilization category (see 4.3.7) 

d) Dependent manual operation (see 3.4) 
e) Independent manual operation (see 3.5) 
f) Degree of protection (see Annex C) 


4.2 Type of Equipment 
The equipment shall have the following details: 


a) Number of Poles — Either single pole with neutral, 
double pole or triple pole with neutral. 


b) Number of Positions — The equipment shall have 
only two positions, that is ‘on’ and ‘off’. 

c) Kind of Current — The equipment shall be 
designed for use in single-phase or three-phase 
a,c. systems of rated frequency of 50 Hz. 


4.3 Rated Quantities 


Rated qualities are assigned as indicated in 4.3.1 and 
4.3.2, but it is not necessary to establish all the rated 
quantities listed. 


4.3.1 Rated Voltages 
An equipment is defined by the following rated voltages. 


NOTE — Certain types of equipment may have more than one 
rated voltage or may have a rated voltage range. 


4.3.1.1 Rated operational voltages (Ue) 


A rated operational voltage of an equipment is a value 
of voltage which combined with a rated operational 
current, determines the application of the equipment 
and to which the relevant tests and the utilization 
categories are referred. 


For single pole equipment, the rated operational voltage 
is generally stated as the voltage across the pole. 


For multiple equipment, it is generally stated the 
voltage between phases. 
NOTES 


1 For certain devices and particular applications, a different 
method of stating Ue may apply; this should be stated in the 
relevant product standard: 


2 For multiple equipment for use on polyphase circuits, a 

distinction may be made between: 
a) Equipment for use in system where a single fault to earth 
will not cause the full phase to phase voltage to appear 
across a pole (that is unearthed and neutral earthed systems); 


b 


— 


Equipment for use in system where a single fault to earth 
will cause to full phase to phase voltage to appear across 
a pole (that is phase earthed systems); 


с 


— 


An equipment may be assigned a number of 
combinations of rated operational voltages and rated 
operational currents or powers for different duties and 
utilization categories; 

d) An equipment may be assigned a number of rated 
operational voltages and associated making and braking 
capacities for different duties and utilizations categories; and 


е 


— 


Attention is drawn to the fact that the operational 
voltages may differ from the working voltages of an 
equipment. 


4.3.1.2 Rated insulation voltage ( Ui ) 


The rated insulation voltage of an equipment is the 
value of voltage to which dielectric tests voltage and 
creepage distances are referred. 


In no case shall the maximum value of rated operational 
voltage exceed that of the rated insulation voltage. 
NOTE—For equipment not having a specified rated insulation 


voltage, the highest value of the rated operational voltage is 
considered to be the rated insulation voltage. 


4.3.1.3 Rated impulse withstand voltage (Ug) 

The peak value of art impulse voltage of prescribed 
form and polarity which the equipment is capable of 
withstanding without failure under specified conditions 


of test and to which the value of the clearances is referred. 


The rated impulse withstand voltage of an equipment 
shall be equal to or higher than the value stated for the 
transient over voltages occurring in the circuit in which 
the equipment is fitted. 


4.3.2 Currents 


An equipment is defined by the following currents: 


4.3.2.1 Conventional free air thermal current (T, ) 


The conventional free air thermal current is the 
maximum value of test current to be used for 
temperature rise tests of unenclosed equipment in free 
air as given in Table 1. 


The value of the conventional free air thermal current 

shall be at least equal to the maximum value of the 

rated operational current (see 4.3.2.3) of the unenclosed 

equipment. 

Free air is understood to be air under normal conditions 

reasonably free from draughts and external radiation. 
NOTES 


1 The current is not a rating and is not mandatorily marked on 
the equipment. 


2 An unenclosed equipment is an equipment supplied by the 
manufacturer without an enclosure or an equipment supplied 
by the manufacturer with an integral enclosure which is 
not normally intended to be the sole equipment protective 
enclosure. 


4.3.2.2 Conventional enclosed thermal current (T ) 


The conventional enclosed thermal current is the 
value of current stated by the manufacturer to be used 
for the temperature rise tests of the equipment when 
mounted in a specified enclosure. Such tests shall 
be in accordance with 6.3 and are mandatory if the 
equipment is described as enclosed equipment in the 
manufacturer’s catalogues and normally intended for 
use with one or more enclosures of specified type and 
size (see Note 2). 


The value of the conventional enclosed thermal current 
shall beat at least equal to the maximum value of the 
rated operational current (see 4.3.2.3) of the enclosed 
equipment, 


IS 10027 : 2018 


If the equipment is normally intended for use in 
unspecified enclosures, the test is not mandatory if 
the test for conventional free air thermal current (7, ) 
has been made. In this case, the manufacturer shall be 
prepared to give guidance on the value of enclosed 
thermal current or the derating factor. 


NOTES 


1. This current is not a rating and is not mandatorily marked on 
the equipment. 

2. The conventional enclosed thermal current value may be 
for unventilated equipment in which case the enclosure used 
for the test shall be of the size stated by the manufacturer as 
being the smallest that is applicable in service. Alternatively, 
the value may be for a ventilated equipment according to the 
manufacturer's data. 

3 An enclosed equipment is an equipment normally intended 
for use with a specified type and size of enclosure or intended 
for use with more than one type of enclosure. 


Table 1 Temperature Rise Limits 
( Clauses 4.3.2.1, 6.3, 8.3.2, and 8.5.6) 


SI. No. Type of Material and Temperature 
Description of Part Rise Limit 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Contact parts (main and auxiliary contacts): 
a) Copper: Uninterrupted duty 45K 
b) Silver or silver-faced (see Note 1) 70K 
c) All other metals or sintered metals (see Note 3) 
ii) Bare conductors (see Note 2) 
iii) Metallic parts acting as springs (see Note 4) 
iv) Metallic parts in contact with insulating materials (see Note 5) 
v) Terminals for external insulated connections 70 K (see Note 6) 
vi) Manual operating means (handles, levers, wheels, etc): 15 К 
a) Parts of metal 25K 
b) Parts of insulating material 
vii) Fuse carrier and base 55 K (see Note 7) 
NOTES 


1 The expression ‘silver-faced’ includes solid silver inserts as well as electrolytically deposited silver, provided that, in the latter case, 


the temperature rise requirement of 8.5.6 are satisfied. 


Contacts faced with other materials, the contact resistance of which is not significantly altered by oxidation, are treated as silver-faced 


contacts. 


2 Limited solely by the necessity of not causing any damage to adjacent parts. 


3 To be specified according to the properties of the metals used and limited by the necessity of not causing any damage to adjacent parts. 


4 The resulting temperature shall not reach a value such that the elasticity of the material is impaired. For pure copper, this implies a 


total temperature not exceeding 75°C. 


5 Limited solely by the necessity of not causing any damage to insulating materials. 


6 The temperature rise limit of 70 K is a value based on the conventional test of 8.3.2. An equipment used or tested under installation 
conditions may have connections the type, nature and disposition of which will not be the same as those adopted for the test; a different 
temperature rise of terminal may result and it may be rejected or accepted. 


7 The fuse-carrier and base shall be so designed and proportioned, that when they are carrying their rated current continuously in 
accordance with 9.6 of IS 2086 : 1993 in an ambient temperature not exceeding 40°C, the temperature rise of the carrier and base 


contacts does not exceed 55°C. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


4.3.2.3 Rated operational currents (I,) or rated 
operational powers 


A rated operational current of an equipment is stated 
by the manufacturer and takes into account the rated 
operational voltage (see 4.3.1.1), the rated frequency 
(see 4.3.3), the rated duty, the utilization categories and 
the type of protective enclosure, if appropriate. 


In the case of equipment for direct switching of 
individual motors, the indication of a rated operational 
current may be replaced or supplemented by an 
indication of the maximum rated power output, at the 
rated operational voltage considered, of the motor for 
which the equipment is intended. The manufacturer 
shall be prepared to state the relationship assumed 
between the operational current and the operational 
power, if any. 


For the purpose of this standard, the preferred values of 
rated current shall be 16, 32, 63 and 100A. 


4.3.2.4 Rated uninterrupted current (T. ) 


The rated uninterrupted current of an equipment is a 
value of current, stated by the manufacturer, which the 
equipment can carry in uninterrupted duty. 


4.3.3 Rated Frequency 


The supply frequency for which an equipment is 
designed and to which the other characteristic values 
correspond. 


For the purpose of this standard, the rated frequency 
shall be 50 Hz. 


4.3.4 Rated Making Capacity 


The rated making capacity of an equipment is a value 
of current, stated by the manufacturer, which the 
equipment can satisfactorily make under specified 
making conditions. 


The making conditions which shall be specified are: 
a) The applied voltage. and 
b) The characteristics of the test circuit. 


The rated making capacity is stated by reference to 
berated operational voltage and rated operational 
current, according to the relevant product standard. 


NOTES 


1 For a.c., rated making capacity is expressed by the rm.s. 
value of the symmetrical component of the current assumed to 
be constant. 

2 For a.c., the peak value of the current during the first 
half-cycles following the closing of the main contacts of 
the equipment may be appreciably greater than the peak 
value of the current under steady state condition used in the 
determination of making capacity, depending on the power 
factor of the circuit and the instant on the voltage wave when 
closing occurs. 

3 An equipment should be capable of closing on a current 
having the a.c. component equal to that which defines its 
rated making capacity, whatever the value of the inherent d.c. 
component, within the limits resulting from the power-factors 
indicated in the Indian Standard. 

The rated making capacity is stated by reference to the rated 
operational voltage and rated operational current and to the 
utilization category according to Table 2. 


4.3.4.1 For a.c. the making current is expressed by the 
r.m.s. value of the periodic component of the current. 
4.3.5 Rated Breaking Capacity 


The rated breaking capacity of an equipment is a 
value of current, stated by the manufacturer, which 
the equipment can satisfactorily break, under specified 
breaking conditions. 


The breaking conditions which shall be specified are: 
a) The characteristics of the test circuit, and 
b) The power frequency recovery voltage. 


Table 2 Verification of Rated Making and Breaking Capacities (see 8.5) 
Conditions for Making and Breaking Corresponding to 
the Various Utilization Categories 


( Clauses 4.3.4, 4.3.7 and 8.5.4) 


SI. No. Utilization Rated Operational Make-Break Number of 
Category Current ІЛ, U/U, Cosa Operating Cycles 
0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) АС-21А АП values 1.5 1.05 0.95 5 
апа АС-21В 
where, 


І =Making current, 
1, = Breaking current, 
I, = Rated operational current, 
U =Applied voltage, 
U, = Rated operational voltage, and 


U, = Power frequency recovery voltage. 


The rated breaking capacity is stated by reference to the 
rated operational voltage and rated operational current. 


An equipment shall be capable of breaking any value of 
current up to an including its rated breaking capacity. 


NOTES 


1 A switching device may have more than one rated breaking 
capacity, each corresponding to an operational voltage and a 
utilization category (AC -21 A or AC-21 B in this case). 


2 For a.c, the rated breaking capacity is expressed by the rm.s 


value of symmetrical component of the current. 


The rated breaking capacity is stated by reference to the 
rated operational voltage and rated operational current 
and to the utilization categories according to Table 3 
and 4.3.5. 


4.3.6 Rated Fused Short-Circuit Current 


The rated fused short-circuit current of the equipment 
is the value of prospective current, stated by the 
manufacturer, which the equipment can satisfactorily 
withstand until the fuse blows. 


The value of rated fused short-circuit current shall be 
as follows: 


Rated Current Fused Short-Circuit 


(A) Current (A) (r.m.s.) 
16 2 000 
32 4 000 
63 4 000 
100 4 000 


The standard power factor shall be 0.8 and the ratio 
between the peak and the r.m.s. value of current shall 
be 1.47. 


A power factor of 0.4 may be agreed to between the 
manufacturer and the user for special application, if 
necessary. 


4.3.7 Utilization Category 


The utilization categories define 
applications and are given in Table 3. 


the intended 


Each utilization category is characterized by the values 
of the current and voltages, expressed as multiples of 
the rated operational current and the rated operational 
voltage, as well as the power-factor of the circuit. The 
conditions for making and breaking given in Table 2, 
correspond in principle to the applications listed in 
Table 3. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


The designation of utilization categories is completed 
by the suffix A or B according to whether the intended 
applications require frequent or infrequent operations 
(see Table 3). 


Utilization categories with suffix B are appropriate for 
devices which, due to design or application, are only 
intended for infrequent operation. This could apply, 
for example, to disconnectors normally only operated 
to provide isolation for maintenance work or switching 
devices where the fuse link blade forms the moving 
contact. 


The utilization categories referred to in Table 2 and 
3 do not apply to an equipment normally used to 
start, accelerate and/or stop individual motors. The 
utilization categories for such an equipment are dealt 
with in Annex A of IS/TEC 60947 (Part 3) : 2012. 


4.3.8 Operational Performance 


Tests concerning the verification of the operational 
performance of an equipment are intended to verify 
that the equipment is capable of making and breaking 
without failure, the currents flowing in its main circuit 
for the intended use. 


The number of operating cycles and the test circuit 
parameters for the operational performance test for 
the various utilization categories are given in Tables 4 
and 4A. 


The test conditions are specified in 8.7.1. 


4.3.9 Durability 


NOTE — The term durability has been chosen instead of 
endurance in order to express the expectancy of the number 
of operating cycles which can be performed by the equipment 
before repair or replacement of parts. Moreover, the term 
endurance is also commonly used to cover operational 
performance as defined in 4.3.8 and it was deemed necessary 
not to use the term endurance in this standard in order to avoid 
confusion between the two concepts. 


4.3.9.1 Mechanical durability 


With respect to its resistance to mechanical wear, an 
equipment is characterized by the number, stated 
in 8.8.1, of this standard of no-load operating cycles 
(that is without current at the main contacts) which 
can be affected before it becomes necessary to 
service or replace any mechanical parts; however 
normal maintenance according to the manufacturer's 
instructions may be permitted for equipment designed 
to be maintained. 


Table 3 Utilization Categories 
( Clauses 4.3.5 and 4.3.7) 


SI. No. Nature of Current Frequent Operation Infrequent Operation Typical Applications 
(1) Q) (3) (4) (5) 
1) Alternating current AC-21A АС-21В Switching of resistive loads 


Including moderate overloads 


IS 10027 : 2018 


Table 4 Verification of Operational Performance Number 
of Operating Cycles Corresponding to 
the Rated Operational Current 


( Clauses 4.3.8, 4.3.9.2 and 8.7.1.1) 


SI. Rated Number of Number of Operating Cycles 
No. Operational Operating 
Current /, Cycles per h 1 
а.с. а.с. 
A Categories B Categories 
Without With Without With 
Current Current тош Сиггепї Сиггепї Шы 
а) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
i) 0<1<100 120 8 500 1500 000 1700 300 2 000 
Table 4 A Test Circuit Parameters for Table 4 
Utilization Rated Operational Making (Т) Breaking 
Category сатып 7 UJU, Cos a "m UJU, Cos a 
AC-21 A All values 1 1 0.95 1 1 0.95 
and AC-21B 
where, 
I = Making current, 


= Breaking current, 

= Rated operational current, 

= Voltage before make (applied voltage), 
Rated operational voltage, 


= Power frequency recovery voltage, 


For a.c. the making current is expressed by the r.m.s. value of the periodic component of the current. 


Each operating cycle consists of one closing operation 
followed by one opening operation. 


The equipment shall be mounted according to 
manufacturer’s instructions for the test. 


4.3.9.2 Electrical durability 


With respect to its resistance to electrical wear, an 
equipment is characterized by the number of on- 
load operating cycles corresponding to the service 
conditions given in 8.8.2 which can be made without 
repair or replacement. 


NOTE — Preferred number of no-load and on-load operating 
cycles are given in Table 4. 


5STANDARD CONDITIONS FOR OPERATION 
IN SERVICE 


5.1 Normal Service Condition 


Equipment complying with this standard shall be 
capable of operating under the standard conditions 
given in 5.1.1 to 5.1.4. For non-standard conditions in 
service (see Annex A). 


5.1.1 Ambient Air Temperature 


The ambient air temperature does not exceed 40°C 
and its average over a period of 24 h does not exceed 
+ 35°C. 


NOTE — Equipment intended to be used in ambient 
temperatures above +40°C (for example, in forges, boiler 
rooms, tropical countries or below —5°C shall be designed or 
used according to an agreement between manufacturer and 
user. Information given in the manufacturer’s catalogue may 
take the place of such an agreement. 


5.1.2 Altitude 


The altitude of the site of installation shall not exceed 
2 000 m. 


NOTE — For installations at higher altitudes, it is necessary to 
take into account the reduction of the dielectric strength and of 
the cooling effect of the air. Equipment so used shall be designed 
or used according to an agreement between manufacturer and 
user. Information given in the manufacturer’s catalogue may 
take the place of such an agreement 


5.1.3 Atmospheric Conditions 


The air is clean and its relative humidity does not 
exceed 50 percent at a maximum temperature of + 40°C. 


Higher relative humidities may be permitted at lower 
temperature, for example, 90 percent at + 20°C. Care 
shall be taken of moderate condensation which may 
occasionally occur due to variations in temperature. 


5.1.4 Condition of Installation 
The equipment is installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 


6 STANDARD 
CONSTRUCTION 


CONDITIONS FOR 


6.1 Mechanical Design 
6.1.1 General 


Materials shall be suitable for the particular 
application. The enclosed and the open positions of 
the equipment shall be definite and shall be clearly 
indicated either adjacent to the actuator or by the 
position of the latter. If symbols are used, ‘I’ and 
“О” shall be used to indicate the closed and open 
positions respectively. The position indicator shall be 
connected to the moving contacts in are liable way; 
the handle may form such an indicator, provided it 
cannot indicate the off position unless all the moving 
contacts are in the open position. 


The operation shall be independent manual. 


6.1.2 Operating Handle 


The operating handle of the equipment shall be 
insulated from the live parts for the rated insulation 
voltage. Moreover: 


a) If it is made of metal, it shall be capable of being 
satisfactorily connected to a protective conductor 
unless it is provided with additional reliable 
insulation; and 


b) Ifitis made of or completely covered by insulating 
material, arty internal metal parts, which might 


IS 10027 : 2018 


become accessible in the event of insulation 
damage, shall also be insulated from live parts 
for the rated insulation voltage or shall be capable 
of being satisfactorily connected to a protective 
conductor. 


6.1.3 Terminals 


6.1.3.1 Constructional requirements 


All parts of terminals which maintain contact and carry 
current shall be of metal having adequate mechanical 
strength. The use of aluminium conductors as well as 
copper conductors shall be taken into account. 


Terminal connections shall be such that the conductors 
may be connected by means of screws, springs or other 
equivalent means so as to ensure that the necessary 
contact pressure is maintained. 


Terminals shall be so constructed that the conductors 
can be clamped between suitable surface without any 
significant damage either to conductors or terminals. 


Terminals shall not allow the conductors to be displaced 
or be displaced themselves in a manner detrimental to 
the operation of equipment and the insulation voltage 
shall not be reduced below the rated values. 


Examples of terminals are given in Annex B. 


6.1.3.2 Connecting capacity 


The manufacturer shall state the type (rigid solid or 
stranded or flexible), the minimum and he maximum 
cross-sections of conductors for which the terminal is 
suitable and, if applicable, the number of conductors 
simultaneously connectable to the terminal. However, 
the maximum cross-section shall not be smaller than 
that stated in 8.3 for the temperature rise test and 
the terminal shall be suitable for conductors of the 
same type (rigid solid or stranded or flexible) at least 
2 sizes smaller, as given in the appropriate col of 
Table 5. 


Table 5 Standard Cross-Section of Aluminium and Copper Conductors 
Corresponding to the Rated Currents 


( Clauses 5.1.3.2 and 8.3.2 ) 


SI. No. Range of Test Aluminium Conductor Copper Conductor 
Current (A) Size (mm?) Size (mm?) 
а) (2) (3) (4) 
1) 8-12 1.5 1.5 
ii) 12-15 2.5 2.5 
iii) 15-20 4.0 2.5 
iv) 20-25 6 4.0 
v) 25-32 10 6.0 
vi) 32-50 16 10 
vii) 50-65 25 16 
viii) 65-85 35 25 
ix) 85-100 50 35 


IS 10027 : 2018 


Terminals for connection to external conductors shall 
be readily accessible during installation. 


Clamping screws and nuts shall not serve to fix any 
other component although they may hold the terminals 
in place or prevent them from turning. 


6.1.3.3 Additional requirements for equipment provided 
with a neutral pole 


When an equipment is provided with a pole intended 
only for connecting the neutral, this pole shall be clearly 
identified to that effect by the letter ‘N’ (see 6.1.3.5). 


Aswitched neutral pole shall break not before and shall 
make not after the other poles. 


For equipment having a value of conventional thermal 
current not exceeding 63 A, the value shall be identical 
for all poles. 


For higher conventional thermal current values, the 
neutral pole may have a value of conventional thermal 
current different from that of the other poles, but not less 
than half that value or 63 A, whichever is the higher. 


6.1.3.4 Connections 


Terminals for connection to external conductors shall be 
readily accessible during installation. Clamping screws 
and nuts shall not serve to other component although 
they may hold the terminals in place or prevent them 
from turning. 


6.1.3.5 Terminals identification and marking 


Terminals shall be clearly and permanently identified in 
accordance with IS 11353 : 1985. 


Terminals intended exclusively for the neutral 
conductor shall be identified by the letter ‘N’. 


6.1.4 Earthing 


6.1.4.1 The assembly comprising metallic chassis, 
framework and the fixed parts of the metal enclosures 
shall be provided with two separate earthing terminals. 
These terminals shall be proved over and above all 
other means provided for securing metallic enclosures 
(armour or other metallic covering) of current-carrying 
cables. 


6.1.4.2 The earthing terminals shall be readily 
accessible and so placed that the earth connection is 
maintained when the cover of any other movable parts 
is removed. 


6.1.4.3 The earthing terminals shall be of adequate size, 
be protected against corrosion and shall be metallically 
clean. Under no circumstances shall a movable metal 
part of the enclosure be insulated from the part carrying 
the earthing terminals when the movable part is in place. 


6.1.4.4 The earthing terminals shall be identified by 
means of the symbol marked in a legible and indelible 
manner on or adjacent to the terminals. 


6.2 Enclosures 


The enclosure seal be so arranged that, when it is 
opened, the terminals as well as all parts requiring 
maintenance, as prescribed by the manufacturer, are 
readily accessible. 


6.2.1 Sufficient space shall be left in the interior of 
the enclosure for the accommodation of external 
conductors from their point of entry into the enclosure 
as far as the terminal. 


6.2.2 The movable parts ofthe protective enclosure shall 
be firmly secured to the fixed parts by a device such 
that they cannot be accidentally loosened or detached 
owing to the effects of operation of the equipment. 


6.2.3 The enclosure of the unit shall be so designed as 
to allow the cover to open without the use of tools and 
the following requirements shall be fulfilled: 
a) It shall not be possible to open the cover unless the 
switch is in the ‘off’ position. 
b) With the cover of the enclosure open, means shall 
be provided so that: 
1) The fastening devices do not get lost; 
2) It is not possible to close the switch; and 
3) There is no possibility of accidental contact 
with the live parts. 


6.2.4 Degree of Protection 


Degree of protection as declared by the manufacturer 
shall be verified in accordance with Annex C. 


6.3 Temperature Rise 


The temperature rises of the several parts of an 
equipment, measured during the test carried out 
under the conditions specified in 8.3, shall not exceed 
the values specified in Table 1. The temperature rise 
limits given therein are applicable only if the ambient 
air temperature remains within the limits given in 
5.1.1. 


6.4 Dielectric Properties 

The equipment shall be capable dielectric tests specified 
in 8.4. 

6.5 Operating Conditions 


The equipment shall be operated in accordance with the 
manufacturer's instruction, if any. 


7 PRODUCT INFORMATION 


7.1 The following information shall be submitted by 
the manufacturer: 


Detailed drawing of the equipment indicating type and 
design of the equipment covering all parameters given 
at 6. 


7.2 Markings 


The equipment shall be marked in a durable manner 
with the data given below: 


a) Indication of the open and closed position. If 
symbols are used, they shall indicate the closed 
and open positions respectively as follows: 


І ON (Power) 
О Off (Power) 


The following data shall also be marked on the 
equipment but need not be visible from the front 
when the equipment is mounted. 


b) Manufacturer’s name or trade-mark; 
c) Type designation as per 6.1; 


d) Rated operational current (or rated power) at the 
rated operational voltage and utilization category 
(see 4.3.1, 4.3.2 and 4.3.4); 


e) Value (or range) of the rated frequency or the 
indication; 

f) Rewirable fuse type and maximum rated current; 

g) Ref to IS 10027 if certified by BIS; 

h) Degree of protection of enclosed equipment; 
The following terminals shall be identified: 

j) Line and load terminals; 

k) Neutral pole terminal, if applicable, by the letter ‘N’; 


The following data shall be made available in the 
manufacturer’s published information: 


m) Rated insulation voltage; and 
n) Rated fused short-circuit current. 


7.3 BIS Certification Marking 


The equipment may also be marked with Standard 
Mark. 


7.3.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 
and the Rules and Regulations made there under. The 
details of the conditions under which the licence for use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of 
Indian Standards. 


8 TESTS 


8.1 Kinds of Tests 
8.1.1 General 


Tests shall be made to prove compliance with the 
requirements laid down in this standard. 


Tests are as follows: 


a) Type tests which shall be made on representative 
samples of each particular equipment. 

b) Routine tests which shall be made on each 
individual piece of equipment manufactured to 
this standard. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


The above tests may consist of test sequence as required 
by purchaser or certifying authority. 


The tests shall be carried out by the manufacturer, at 
his works or at any suitable laboratory directed by 
purchaser /or certification authority. 


8.1.2 Type Tests 


Type tests are intended to verify compliance of the 
design of a given equipment with this standard. 


They may comprise, as appropriate, the verification of: 
a) Constructional requirements (6), 
b) Temperature rise (8.3), 
c) Dielectric properties (8.4), 
d) Making and breaking capacities (8.5), 
e) Rated fused short-circuit current (8.6), 
f) Mechanical durability (8.8.1), 
g) Electrical durability (8.8.2), 
h) Operational performance (8.7.1), and 
j) Degree of protection of enclosed equipment 
(Annex С). 
8.1.3 Acceptance Test 
They comprise all tests at 8.1.2 except the following: 
a) Rated fused short-circuit current (8.6), 
b) Operational performance (8.7.1), 
c) Electrical durability (8.8.2), and 
d) Degree of protection of enclosed equipment 
(Annex С). 
8.1.3 Routine Tests 
They comprise : 
a) Operation tests (8.9.1), and 
b) Dielectric test (8.9.2). 


8.1.5 Sampling Tests 


Sampling tests may also be carried out to verify 
specific properties or characteristics of an equipment, 
either on the manufacturer’s own initiative, or by 
agreement between manufacturer and user. The tests 
may comprise: 

a) Functional tests, and 

b) Dielectric tests. 


8.2 General Conditions of Test 


8.2.1 The equipment to be tested shall agree in all its 
essential details with the drawings of the type which it 
represents. Unless otherwise specified, each type test 
shall be carried out on an equipment in a clean and new 
condition. 


8.2.2 For the tests, the equipment shall be mounted 
and installed as indicated by the manufacturer. The 
details of the installation (type and size of enclosure, 


IS 10027 : 2018 


if any, size of conductor, etc.) shall be part of the 
test report. 


Unless otherwise stated, the test shall be made with the 
same kind of current (and, in the case of a.c. the same 
frequency and with the same number of phases) as in 
the intended service. 


If for convenience of testing, it appears desirable to 
increase the severity of a test (that is to adopt a higher 
rate of operation in order to reduce the duration of the 
test), this may be done only with the consent of the 
manufacturer. 
NOTE—Equipment under tests shall be mounted complete 
on its own support or an equivalent support and connected 


as in normal service, in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions and under the ambient conditions stated in 4.1.1. 


8.3 Verification of Temperature Rise Limits 


8.3.1 Ambient Air Temperature 


The ambient air temperature shall be measured during 
the last quarter of the test period by means of at least 
two thermometers or thermocouples equally distributed 
around the equipment at about half its height and 
at a distance of about 1 m from the equipment. The 
thermometers or thermocouples shall be protected 
against air currents heat radiation and indicating errors 
due to rapid temperature changes. 


8.3.2 Temperature Rise Tests of the Main Circuit 


The equipment shall be mounted approximately as 
under usual service conditions and shall be protected 
against undue external heating or cooling. 


When temperature rise tests are carried out on 
an enclosed equipment, no openings giving false 
ventilation shall be allowed. 


For equipment not supplied with an enclosure but 
intended to be used in an enclosure, the test for the 
rated current corresponding to an enclosed mounting 
shall be carried out in a chamber as stated by the 
manufacturer to be equivalent to the smallest enclosure 
that is applicable in service. 


It is permissible, before beginning the tests, to operate 
the fuse-combination unit a few times with or without 
load. 


The temperature rise is measured at the rated current. 
Tests shall be made at frequency between 45 and 62 Hz. 


Fuse-combination units shall be fitted with fuse-wire 
having a rated current equal to the rated current of the 
combination unit. 


The test shall be made over a period of time sufficient 
for the temperature rise to reach a steady-state value, 
but not exceeding 8 h. In practice, this condition is 
reached when the variation does not exceed 19С/һ. 
NOTE — In practice, to shorten the test, the current may be 


increased during the first part of the test; and may be reduced 
to the specified test current afterwards. 


10 


At the end of the test, the temperature rise of the 
different parts of the main circuit shall not exceed the 
values specified in Table 1, 


The connections shall be single-core, PVC insulated, 
aluminium cables or copper cables with cross-sectional 
areas as given in Table 5. 


In case of multipole equipment tested with a.c., the 
test shall be carried out with single-phase current, 
with all poles connected in series, but only as far as 
the errors resulting from magnetic influences can be 
neglected. 


The connections shall be in free air and spaced not less 
than the distance existing between the terminals. 


The minimum length of each temporary connection 
from terminal to terminal shall be: 


a) 1 m for cross-sections up so and including 
16 mm’; and 


b) 2 т for cross-sections larger than 16 mm". 


8.3.3 Measurement of the Temperature 


The temperature of the different parts shall be measured 
by means of the thermocouples at the nearest accessible 
position to the hottest spot. 


Good heat conductivity between the thermocouple 
and the surface of the part under test shall be ensured. 
The thermocouple wire and junction shall be such that 
they do not influence the temperature rise of the part 
under test. 


8.3.4 Temperature Rise of a Part 


The temperature rise of a part is the difference between 
the temperature of this part measured in accordancewith 
8.3.3 and the ambient air temperature measured in 
accordance with 8.3.1. 


8.3.5 Corrections 


If the ambient air temperature during the test is 
between +10°C and +40°C , no correction is necessary 
to take account of the ambient temperature during the 
test and the values of Table 1 are the limiting values 
of temperature rise. If the ambient air temperature 
during the test exceed +40°C or is lower than +10°C, 
the manufacturer and the user shall make a special 
agreement. 


8.4 Verification of Dielectric Properties 


8.4.1 Condition of the Equipment for Tests 


Dielectric tests shall be made on new equipment 
mounted approximately as under usual service 
conditions, including internal wiring, and in a dry 
condition. 


When the base of equipment is of insulating material, 
metallic parts shall be placed at all the fixing 
points in accordance with the conditions of normal 
installation of the equipment and these parts shall 


be considered as part of the frame of the equipment. 
When the equipment is in an insulating enclosure, 
the latter shall be covered by a metal foil connected 
to the frame. If the operating handle is metallic, it 
shall be connected to the frame; if it is of insulating 
material, it shall be covered by a metal foil connected 
to frame. 


Equipment not supplied with an enclosure but intended 
to be used in an enclosure shall be tested in an enclosure 
stated by the manufacturer to be equivalent to the 
smallest that is applicable in service. 


When the dielectric strength of the equipment is 
dependent upon the taping or leads or the use of special 
insulation, such taping or special insulation shall also 
be used during the tests. 


8.4.2 Application of the Test Voltage 
The test voltage shall be applied for one min as follows: 
a) With the contacts closed: 


1) Between all live parts of all poles connected 
together and the frame of the equipment; and 


2) Between each pole and all the other poles 
connected to the frame of the equipment. 
b) With the contacts open: 
1) Between all live parts of all poles connected 
together, and the frame of the equipment; and 


2) Between the terminals of one side connected 
together, and the terminals of the other side 
connected together. 


For the purpose of the above tests, an insulated neutral 
is to be considered as a pole of the equipment. 


8.4.3 Value of the Test Voltage 


The test voltage shall have a sinusoidal waveform, and 
a frequency between 45 Hz and 62 Hz. The source of 
the test voltage shall be capable of supplying a short- 
circuit current of at least 0.5A. 


Unless otherwise specified, the values of the test 
voltage shall be 2 000 V and 2 500 V respectively for 
240 V and 415 V rated equipment. 


8.5 Verification of Rated Making and Breaking 
Capacities 


8.5.1 Condition of the Apparatus for Tests 


The apparatus under test shall be mounted complete in 
its own enclosure and any apertures normally closed 
in service shall be closed for the test. For appratus 
not supplied with an enclosure but intended to be 
used in an enclosure, the test shall be carried out in an 
enclosure stated by the manufacturer to be equivalent 
to the smallest that is applicable in service. The 
operating mechanism shall be operated in a manner 
similar to that stated by the manufacturer as being 
normal. 


П 


IS 10027: 2018 


While carrying out the test, fuse-links shall be replaced 
by links of negligible impedance. 


8.5.2 Test Procedure 


The test circuit shall be as described in 8.5.3, The 
mechanical switching device shall be closed and 
opened 5 times with an interval of approximately 30 s 
between operations. 


During each make-break operating cycle, the 
equipment need only stay in the closed position for a 
period long enough to allow the switching operation 
to be completed and to enable the current value to 
be established and the moving parts of the switching 
device to come to rest. After each operating cycle, 
the recovery voltage shall be maintained for at least 
0.1 5. 


The test voltage and the load shall be applied to the 
appropriate terminals of the apparatus. For apparatus 
in which a moving contact remains connected to 
one of the terminals when the apparatus is in the 
open position, this test shall be repeated with the 
supply and load connections interchanged, unless the 
terminals are specifically and clearly, marked for load 
and supply. 


8.5.3 Test Circuit for the Verification of the Rated 
Making and Breaking Capacities 


Figures 1, 2 and 3 give the diagram of the circuits to be 
used for the tests. 


The resistances Ё and R, and the reactance / апа L, of 
the test circuit shall be adjusted to satisfy the specified 
test conditions. The resistors shall be air cored. They 
shall always be connected to the resistors and their 
values may be obtained by series coupling of individual 
reactors. Parallel connection of reactors is permitted 
when these reactors have practically the same time 
constant. 


The test circuit loads / and R, shall be connected on 
the load side of the apparatus, 


The prospective short-circuit current at the point of 
connection to the supply terminals of the apparatus 
shall be at least 10 times the value of the test current. 


All parts of the apparatus normally earthed in service, 
including its enclosure, shall be insulated from earth 
and connected to a point as indicated in Fig. 1, 2 and 3. 
This connection shall include a reliable device D (such 
as a fuse consisting of a copper wire of 0.1 mm diameter 
and not less than 50 mm length) for the detection of the 
fault current and, if necessary, a resistor limiting the 
value of the prospective fault current to about 100 A. 
Any artificial neutral shall be substantially inductive, 
and permit a prospective fault current of at least 
100 A. The test circuit shall be directly earthed at one 
point only and the position of this point shall be stated 
in the test report. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


SUPPLY 
ADJUSTABLE RESISTORS 


ADJUSTABLE REACTORS 
RESISTOR FOR LIMITING THE CURRENT IN DEVICE D 
DEVICE FOR DETECTION OF A FAULT CURRENT 


EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 


TEMPORARY CONNECTION FOR PROSPCTIVE 
CURRENT CALIBRATION 


TO CURRENT RECORDING OSCILLOSCOPES 
TO VOLTAGE RECORDING OSCILLOSCOPES 
VOLTMETER 


Fic. 1 DIAGRAM OF THE TEST CIRCUIT FOR 


SINGLE POLE EQUIPMENT ON SINGLE-PHASE а.с. 


12 


02, Os 


SUPPLY 
TO THE NEUTRAL POINT OR MID-POINT OF THE d.c.SUPPLY 
ADJUSTABLE RESISTORS 


ADJUSTABLE REACTORS 

RESISTORS FOR LIMITING THE CURRENT IN DEVICE D 
DEVICE FOR DETECTION OF A FAULT CURRENT 
EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 


TEMPORARY CONNECTION FOR PROSPCTIVE 
CURRENT CALIBRATION 


TO CURRENT RECORDING OSCILLOSCOPES 
TO VOLTAGE RECORDING OSCILLOSCOPES 
VOLTMETER 


Fic. 2 DIAGRAM OF THE TEST CIRCUIT FOR 
Two Роге EQUIPMENT ON SINGLE-PHASE а.с. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


5 SUPPLY 

N TO THE NEUTRAL POINT 

R,, R, ADJUSTABLE RESISTORS 
Lı, L> ADJUSTABLE REACTORS 


R3 RESISTOR FOR LIMITING THE CURRENT IN DEVICE D 
DEVICE FOR DETECTION OF A FAULT CURRENT 
A EQUIPMENT UNDER TEST 
B TEMPORARY CONNECTION FOR PROSPECTIVE CURRENT CALIBRATION 
O, TO CURRENT RECORDING OSCILLOSCOPES 
O2, Оз TO VOLTAGE RECORDING OSCILLOSCOPES 
V VOLTMETER 


Fic. 3 DIAGRAM OF THE TEST CIRCUIT FOR THREE POLE EQUIPMENT 
ON THREE-PHASE А.С. 


13 


IS 10027 : 2018 


For tests corresponding to utilization category 
“АС-21А or AC-21B’ it is not necessary to adjust 
the oscillatory frequency of the prospective transient 
recovery voltage. 


8.5.4 Test Quantities 


The tests shall be performed with values stated by the 
manufacturer in accordance with Table 2. 


The tests shall be taken as valid if the values recorded 
in the test report differ from the values specified only 
within the following tolerances: 


a) Current +5 percent 
b) Voltage + 5 percent 
c) Power-factor + 0.05 

d) Time-constant + 15 percent 


The tests shall be made at the rated frequency of the 
apparatus as far as the testing station permits. If this 
frequency cannot be obtained, the test shall be made at 
a frequency between 45 and 62 Hz. 


The power-factor shall be deemed to be the average of 
the cosines of the angles of phase displacement in all 
the phases, and the power-factor of any phase shall not 
vary from the average by more than 25 percent of that 
average. 


8.5.5 Behavior of the Apparatus During the Making 
and Breaking Tests 


The apparatus shall perform during the above tests 
in such a manner as not to endanger an operator or 
cause damage to adjacent equipment. There shall be 
no permanent arcing nor flashover between poles or 
phases, and the fine wire fuse shall remain intact. 


The apparatus shall remain mechanically operable and 
contact welding, such as to prevent an operation using 
normal operating means, is not permitted. 


8.5.6 Condition of the Apparatus after the Making and 
Breaking Tests 


After the tests made in accordance with 8.5.2, the 
apparatus shall be capable, without maintenance, of 
withstanding a voltage equal to twice its rated insulation 
voltage, applied as stated in 8.4.2. 


It shall be demonstrated immediately after the test that 
the mechanical switching device will close and open 
satisfactorily during a no-load close-open operation. 
NOTE — A closing operation is considered satisfactory when 
normal operation of the handle through its full stroke will close 
the contacts sufficiently for the mechanical switching device to 
be able to carry its rated current. 
The contacts shall be in suitable condition to carry the 
rated current. Where doubt exists, a temperature rise 
test shall be carried out on the same apparatus; the 
measured temperature rise shall not exceed by more 
than 10°C the values given in Table 1 or result in 
damage to adjacent parts. 


14 


8.6 Verification of the Rated Fused Short-Circuit 
Current 


8.6.1 Condition of the Apparatus for the Test 


The apparatus shall be in the condition specified in 
8.5.1 and the fuse-wire stated by the manufacturer shall 
be used. 


8.6.2 A first test shall be made on the apparatus, 
with the mechanical switching device in the closed 
position, connected in series with a fuse-wire of the 
rated maximum current and rated breaking capacity 
deemed suitable by the manufacturer for use with 
that equipment. A prospective current corresponding 
to the rated fused short-circuit current of the 
apparatus shall be applied. The current value is the 
r.m.s value determined from the prospective current 
oscillogram. 


A second test shall be made with new fuse-wire 
and the test circuit made live with the mechanical 
switching device open. The mechanical switching 
device shall be closed onto a prospective current 
corresponding to the rated fused short-circuit current 
of the apparatus. 


The recovery test shall be maintained for at least 
0.1 s after interruption of the test current by the 
fuses. 


Details of the fuse-wire used for the test shall be given 
in the test report. The type test with the specified fuse 
wire shall be deemed to cover the use of any other fuse 
wire of rated current not exceeding that of the fuse-wire 
used for the test. 


8.6.3 Test Circuit 
The provisions of 8.5.3 shall apply. 


The test circuit loads Г, апа R, are not included for the 
fused short-circuit current test. 


8.6.4 Test Quantities 


The test shall be made at the rated frequency of the 
apparatus as far as the testing station permits. If this 
frequency cannot be obtained, the tests shall be made at 
frequency between 45 and 62 Hz. 


The average value of the power-frequency recovery 
voltage shall be equal to a value corresponding to not 
less than 110 percent and not more than 115 percent 
of the rated voltage stated by the manufacturer. The 
power-factor of the circuit shall be in accordance 
with 4.3.6. Тһе rm.s. value of the a.c. component 
of the prospective current in any phase shall be 
equal to the specified value with a tolerance of 


15 
7% percent. 


8.6.5 Behaviour of the Apparatus During the Rated 
Fused Short-Circuit Current Test 


The apparatus shall behave as specified in 8.5.5. 


8.6.6 Condition of the Apparatus after the Rated Fused 
Short-Circuit Current Test 


After the test, the apparatus shall comply with the 
requirements of 8.5.6. The mechanical parts and the 
insulation of the apparatus shall be substantially in the 
same condition as before. 


8.7 Verification of the Mechanical Endurance 
8.7.1 Operational Performance Test 


8.7.1.1 Test values and conditions 


The test values are stated in Table 4 and 4A and 4.3.8 
according to the utilization category. The time interval 
between Table 4 operating cycles with current and 
without current and the sequential order of the tests 
shall be stated in the test report. 


During each make-break operating cycle, the equipment 
need only stay in the closed position for a period long 
enough to allow switching operation to be completed 
and to enable the current value to be established and 
the moving parts of the equipment to come to rest. 
After each operating cycle, the recovery voltage shall 
be maintained for at least 0.05s. 


For a.c. the power-factor of the test circuit shall be 
determined in accordance with 8.5.4. The values shall 
be in accordance with Table 4A and 4.3.8. 


8.7.1.2 Test circuit (see 8.5) 


8.7.1.3 Transient recovery voltage 


It is not necessary to adjust the transient recovery 
voltage. 


8.7.1.4 Behaviour of the equipment during the 
operational performance test 


The equipment shall perform during the above tests in 
such a manner as not to endanger an operator or cause 
damage to adjacent equipment. 


There shall be no permanent arcing or flash-over 
between poles or between poles and frame and no 
melting of the fuse in the detection circuit. 


The equipment shall remain mechanically operable, 
contact welding, such as to prevent an opening operation 
using normal operating means, is not permitted. 


Some wear on the mechanism and contacts is allowed 
provided that the equipment functions correctly. 


8.7.1.5 Condition of the equipment after the operational 
performance test 


It shall be demonstrated immediately after the test that 
the equipment will close and open satisfactorily during 
a no-load close and open operation. 


A closing operation is considered satisfactory when 
normal operation of the handle through its full stroke 
will close the contact efficiently for the equipment to be 
able to carry its rated operational current. 


15 


IS 10027 : 2018 


After the tests and without maintenance the equipment 
shall comply with the requirements of 8.4. 


The contacts shall be in a suitable condition to carry 
the rated operational current without maintenance and 
shall comply with the temperature-rise verification 
of 8.3. 


8.8 Durability (see 4.3.9) 


8.8.1 Mechanical Durability 


The mechanical durability test (see 4.3.9.1) where 
required, is made in accordance with the appropriate 
requirements of 8.7.1 except that for equipment 
suitable for isolation, the maximum value of leakage 
current shall not exceed 6 mA per pole for all utilization 
categories. 


The total number of operating cycles shall be as 
declared by the manufacturer. 


If not stated by the manufacturer, the total number of 
operating cycles shall be taken from Table 4. 
8.8.2 Electrical Durability 


The electrical durability test (see 4.3.9.2) where 
required, is made in accordance with the appropriate 
requirements of 8.7.1 except that for equipment 
suitable for the total number of operating cycles shall 
be as declared by the manufacturer. 


If not stated by the manufacturer, total number of 
operating cycles shall be taken from Table 4. 
8.9 Routine Tests 


8.9.1 Mechanical Operational Test 

A test shall be made to verify the correct mechanical 
operation of the equipment by five closing and opening 
operations. 

8.9.2 Dielectric Test 


The tests shall be carried out on dry and clean 
equipment. 


The value of the test voltage shall be in accordance 
with 8.4.3. 


The duration of each test may be reduced to 5s. 
The test voltage shall be applied as follows: 


Between poles with the main contacts closed (with 
the contacts open if there is a shunt circuit between 
poles), 


Between poles and the frame of the equipment with the 
main contacts closed, and 


Across the terminals of each pole with the main 
contacts open. 


The use of a metal foil, as specified in 8.4.1, is 
necessary. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 5.1) 


INFORMATION TO BE GIVEN BY THE USER WHEN CONDITIONS 
FOR OPERATION IN SERVICE DIFFER FROM THE STANDARD 


A-1 AMBIENT AIR TEMPERATURE 


A-1.1 The user shall state to the manufacturer the 
expected range of ambient air temperature if this 
temperature is lower than —5?C or higher than +40°C. 


A-2 ALTITUDE 


A-2.1 The user shall state to the manufacturer the 
altitude of the place of installation if it is more than 
2 000 m. 


A-3 ATMOSPHERIC CONDITIONS 


A-3.1 The user shall call the manufacturer’s attention 
in case the atmosphere in which the equipment is to 
be installed may have a relative humidity greater than 
the values specified in 5.1.3 or contain an abnormal 
amount of dust, acids, corrosive gases, etc. The same 
applies if the equipment is to be installed near the sea. 


A-4 CONDITIONS OF INSTALLATION 
A-4.1 The user shall call the manufacturer’s attention 


in case the equipment is to be fitted to a moving device, 
if its support is to be capable of assuming a sloping 


16 


position either permanently or temporarily (equipment 
fitted aboard ships), or if it is to be exposed in service 
to abnormal shocks or vibrations. 


A-5 CONNECTIONS 
APPARATUS 


WITH OTHER 


A-5.1 The user shall inform the manufacturer of the 
type and dimensions of electrical connections with 
other apparatus in order to enable him to provide 
enclosures and terminals meeting the conditions of 
installation and temperature rise prescribed by this 
standard, and also to enable him to provide space, 
where necessary, to spread out conductors within the 
enclosure. 


A-6 AUXILIARY CONTACTS 
A-6.1 The user shall specify the number and type of 


auxiliary contacts to be supplied to satisfy requirements, 
such as signaling, interlocking, etc. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 6.1.3.1) 
EXAMPLES OF TERMINALS 
D OPTIONAL 


DIRECT PRESSURE THROUGH SCREW HEAD 


D SEHR: OPTIONAL 


INDIRECT PRESSURE THROUGH INTERMEDIATE PART 


- FIXED PART 

- WASHER OR CLAMPING PLATE 
- ANTI-SPREAD DEVICE 

- CONDUCTOR SPACE 


NOTE - Examples shown here do not prohibit the conductor being divided either side of the screw. 


оош р 


Screw Terminal 
Screw-type ternllnal in which the conductor is clamped under the head of one or more screws. The clamping pressure may by 
applied directly by head of the screw or through an intermediate part, such as a washer, clamping plate or anti-spread device. 


Fic. 4 Screw TERMINALS 


17 


IS 10027 : 2018 


PART OF DEVICE PART OF DEVICE 

WITH CAVITY FOR WITH CAVITY FOR 

TERMINAL TERMINAL 
TERMINALS WITHOUT PRESSURE PLATE TERMINALS WITH PRESSURE PLATE 


TERMINALS WITH INDIRECT PRESSURE 


А - FIXED PART 
В - BODY OF THE CLAMPING UNIT 
D - CONDUCTOR SPACE 


Pillar terminal 

Screw-type terminal in which the conductor is inserted into a hole or cavity, where it is 
clamped under the shank of the screw or screws. The clamping pressure may be applied 
directly by the shank of the screw or through an intermediate part to which pressure is 
applied by the shank of the screw. 


Fic. 5 PILLAR TERMINALS 


IS 10027 : 2018 


A - Fixed part 

B - Washer or clamping plate 
C - Anti-spread Device 

D - Conductor space 

E - Stud 


NOTE -The part which retains the conductor in position may be of insulating material, provided the pressure necessary to 
clamp the conductor is not transmitted through the insulating material. 


Stud Terminal 
Screw type terminal in which the conductor is clamped under one or two unit. The clamping pressure may by applied directly by a 
suitablyshapednut or through an intermediate part, such as a washer, clamping plate or anti-spread device. 


Fic. 6 Stup TERMINAL 


19 


IS 10027 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 4.1, 6.2.4, 8.1.2 and 8.1.3 ) 


DEGREE OF PROTECTION OF ENCLOSED EQUIPMENT 


C-1 GENERAL 


This annex provides information for specifying the 
degree of protection for enclosed equipment hereinafter 
referred to as equipment. 


It also specifies type tests to check the degree of 
protection on the various types of enclosures of 
enclosed equipment. 


АП enclosed equipment is intended to provide 
protection as follows: 


a) Protection of persons against contact with live 
parts and against contact with moving parts (other 
than smooth rotating shafts and the like) inside the 
enclosure, and 


b) Protection of the equipment inside the enclosure 
against the ingress of solid foreign objects, and/or 


c) Protection of the equipment inside the enclosure 
against harmful ingress of water. 


This annex does not specify the protection of equipment 
against mechanical damage, risk of explosion or 
conditions such as moisture (produced for example, by 
condensation) corrosive vapours, fungus, or vermin. 
Internal barriers are considered for low-voltage 
switchgear and controlgear as part of the enclosure 
provided they meet at least the requirements of degree 
ІР2Х. 


A part or the whole mounted equipment may constitute 
a part or the whole of a barrier. 


The basic tests and conditions are given іп IS/IEC 
60529 : 2001 but specific tests and interpretations 
apply to openings such as drain holes and ventilating 
openings, etc. All openings of enclosed equipment shall 
comply with the IP Code assigned to this equipment. 


Drain holes are openings situated at the bottom of the 
enclosure and are intended to prevent the accumulation 
of water due to condensation and/or ingress of water 
into the enclosure. They shall comply with the basic 
requirements for openings and not be smaller than 
2.5 mm in diameter. 


C-2 DESIGNATION (CLASSIFICATION 
SYSTEM) 


The designation to indicate the degree of protection 
consists of the characteristics letters IP followed by 
two numerals (the ‘characteristic numerals’) indicating 
conformity with the conditions stated in Tables C1 and 
C2 respectively. The first numeral indicates the degree 
of protection described under items a) and b) and the 
second numeral, the degree of protection described 
under item c) of C-1. 


20 


Enclosures fitted with drain holes and/or ventilating 
openings shall satisfy the tests corresponding to their 
respective IP Code. 


The degree of protection shall apply to all normal 
conditions of use. 


Where the mounting of the equipment has an influence 
on the degree of protection, this shall be indicated by 
the manufacturer in his instructions for mounting or the 
like. 


C-2.1 Single Characteristic Numeral 


When it is required to indicate a class of protection by 
only one characteristic numeral, the omitted numeral 
shall be replaced by the letter X. For example ІРХ5 or 
ІР2Х. 


C-2.2 Supplementary Letters 


If required by the purchaser, supplier shall give 
additional information to be indicated by a 
supplementary letter or letters in the classification. In 
such cases, the product standard shall state clearly the 
additional conditions to be observed during tests for 
such a classification. 


The supplementary letters are as follows: 


W — (Placed immediately after the second 
characteristic numeral.) Equipment so designated is 
suitable for use under specific weather conditions 
and provision has been made for additional protective 
features or procedures. 


Both the specified weather conditions and the additional 
features or procedures shall be agreed between 
manufacturer and user. 


N — (Placed immediately after the second 
characteristic numeral.) Equipment so designated is 
suitable for use in environments where the particle 
size and the nature of the dust requires additional 
features to be added (for example for use in saw mills 
and quarries). 


Both the specified conditions and the additional features 
shall be agreed between manufacturer and user. 


L — (Placed immediately after the first characteristic 
numeral 2, 3 or 4) Equipment so identified has been 
tested to provide protection against ingress of solid 
objects exceeding 12.5 mm in diameter and against 
contact with live and moving parts by the standard 
test finger (see Fig. 7) in the case of first characteristic 
numeral 2, or a 2.5 mm diameter test probe in the case 
of characteristic numeral 3, or a 1 mm diameter test 
probe in the case of first characteristic numeral 4. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


Table C 1 Degrees of Protection Indicated by the First Characteristic Numeral 


51. No. First Characteristic Short Description Degree of Protection Definition Test Conditions. 
Numeral and Suffix (see C-3) Ref to 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) 1 Protected against solid objects Excludes solid objects exceeding 50 mm in C-7.1 
greater than 50 mm dia and protects against contact with live and 
moving parts by a large body surface such as a 
hand (but not against deliberate access) 
ii) 2L Protected against solid objects Excludes solid objects exceeding 12.5 mm in C-7.2 
greater than 12.5 mm and diameter and protects against contact with live 
against contact by standard test and moving parts by a standard test finger or 
finger similar objects not exceeding 80 mm in length 
iii) 3 Protected against solid objects Excludes solid objects exceeding 12.5 mm in C -7.3.1 
greater than 2.5 mm diameter or thickness 
iv) 3L Protected against solid objects Excludes solid objects exceeding 12.5 mm in C- 7.3.2 
greater than 12.5 mm and diameter and protects against contact with live 
against contact by 2.5 mm and moving parts by a 2.5 mm diameter test 
probe probe not exceeding 100 mm in length 
v) 4 Protected against solid objects Excludes solid objects exceeding 1.0 mm in C-7.4.1 
greater than 1.0 mm diameter or thickness 
vi) 4L Protects against solid objects Excludes solid objects exceeding 12.5 mm in C-7.4.2 


greater than 12.5 mm and 
against contact by 1.0 mm 


diameter and protects against contact with live 
and moving parts by a 1.0 mm diameter test 


probe 


probe not exceeding 100 mm in length 


NOTE — The short description given in col 2 should not be used to specify the form of protection. It should only be used as a brief 


description. 


C-2.3 Example of Designation 


IP 4 L 4 


Characteristic letters _ | 


Ist Characteristic numeral 
(see Table C 1) 


Supplementary letter 


2nd Characteristic numeral 
(see Table C 2) 


Equipment so designated provides protection against 
contacts with live and moving parts according to C-2.2 
supplementary letter L, against ingress of solid objects 
greater than 12.5 mm and against splashing water. 


C-3 DEGREE OF PROTECTION — FIRST 
CHARACTERISTIC NUMERAL 


The first characteristic numeral indicates the degree 
of protection provided by the equipment both to the 
persons and to the equipment inside the enclosure. 


Table Cl gives, in col 3, brief details of objects 
which will be excluded from the enclosure for each 
of the degrees of protection represented by the first 
characteristic numeral. 


21 


The term excluded implies that a part of the body or a 
tool or a wire held by a person, either will not enter the 
enclosure or, if it is permitted to enter, that adequate 
distance will be maintained between it and the live parts 
or dangerous moving parts (smooth rotating shafts and 
the like are not considered dangerous). 


NOTE—The definition for adequate distance is given іп C-6.1. 


Column 3 of Table C1 also indicates the minimum size 
of solid foreign bodies which will be excluded. 
NOTE — Equipment assigned a first characteristic numeral of 
1 to 4 will exclude both regularly and irregularly shaped solid 
objects provided that three mutually perpendicular dimensions 
of the object exceed the appropriate value in col 3. 
Compliance of enclosed equipment with a stated 
degree of protection implies that the enclosure will also 
comply with all lower degree of protection in Table СІ. 
In consequence, the tests establishing these degrees of 
protection need not be carried out. 


C-4 DEGREE OF PROTECTION — SECOND 
CHARACTERISTIC NUMERAL 


The second characteristic numeral indicates the degree 
of protection of enclosed equipment with respect to 
harmful ingress of water. 


Table С 2 gives, іп col 3, details of the type of protection 
provided by the enclosure for each of the degree of 
protection represented by the second characteristic 
numeral. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


| 


@75 


R2+0.05 


INSULATING MATERIAL 


HANDLE STOP PLATE /- CYLINDRICAL 
A-A B-B 


SECTION 


; SECTIONC-C 
X SPHERICAL“ R4 + 0.05 
CHAMFER ALL EDGES 
PART 3 PART 2 VIEW ON BACK SIDE PART 1 
Linear dimensions millmetres Material of finger : for-example heat-treated steel 
+10° 


Tolerance in dimensions without specificolerance 


0 0 
-10° onangles -10 


Both joints of this finger may be bent through an angle of 90 0 butin one and 
the same direction only. 


сй dimensions Using the pin and groove solution is only one of the possible approaches in order to 
0 limit the bending angle to 90°. For this reason dimensions and tolerances of these 
details are not given in the drawing. The actual design must ensure-a 90° bending 


up to 25 mm -0.05 
angle with a 0 to + 10° toierance. 


over 25 mm %0.2 


Fic. 7 STANDARD TEST FINGER 


22 


Compliance of an enclosure with a stated degree of 
protection implies that the enclosure will also comply 
with all lower degrees of protection in Table C 2. In 
consequence, the tests establishing these degrees of 
protection need not necessarily be carried out. 


C-5 MARKING 


The requirements for marking are specified in the 
relevant product standard, where applicable. 


C-6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTS 


The tests in this annex are type tests. 


All tests shall be made with the equipment in an 
unenergized state. 


The samples of equipment for each test shall be in 
a clean and new condition with all parts fitted and 
assembled as stated by the manufacturer for normal 
use. 


Additional requirements, if any, may be given in the 
relevant product standard, concerning, for example 

a) Number of samples; and 

b) Mounting and installation of samples. 


In the absence of such requirements, the manufacturer 
instruction shall apply. 


The interpretation of test results is given in C-7 
and C-8. 


C-6.1 Adequate Distance 


For the purpose of the following test clauses in this 
annex, the term ‘adequate distance’ has the following 
meaning: the test device (sphere, finger, wire, etc) does 
not touch live parts or moving parts other than non- 
dangerous parts such as smooth rotating shafts. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


C-7 TEST FOR FIRST CHARACTERISTIC NU- 
MERAL 


C-7.1 Test for First Numeral 1 


The test is made with a rigid sphere of 50 mm 
in diameter applied against the opening(s) of the 
equipment with a force of 50 N + 10 percent. 


The protection is satisfactory if the sphere does not 
pass through any opening and adequate distance is 
maintained to parts which are normally live in service 
or moving parts inside the enclosure. 


C-7.2 Test for First Numeral 2 


The test comprises two parts a) and b) which shall be 
effected as follows: 


a) Finger Test 


The test is made with a metal test finger as shown in 
Fig. 7. Both joints of this finger may be bent through 
an angle of 90° with respect to the axis of the finger, 
but in one and the same direction only. The finger 
is pushed without undue force (not more than 10 N 
against any openings in the enclosure, and if it enters, 
it is placed in the most unfavorable position within the 
equipment. 


The protection is satisfactory if adequate distance is 
maintained between the test finger and live or moving 
parts inside the enclosure. 


For this mechanical test, the internal moving parts may 
be operated slowly, where this is possible. 


A low-voltage supply (of not less than 40 V) in series 
with a suitable lamp may be connected between the 
test finger and the live parts inside the enclosure. 
Conducting parts covered only with varnish or paint, 
or protected by oxidation or by a similar process, shall 


Table C 2 Degrees of Protection Indicated by the Second Characteristic Numeral 


SI. No. First Characteristic Degree of Protection Test Conditions, 
Numeral and Suffix ~~. Reference to 
Short Description Definition 

(see C-3) 

() (2) (3) (4) (4) 

i) 1 Protected against dripping water Dripping water (vertically falling drops) shall C-8.1 
have no harmful effect 

li) 2 Protected against dripping water Vertically dripping water shall have no C-8.2 

when tilted up to 15° harmful effect when the enclosure is tilted at 

any angle up to 15° from its normal position. 

ш) 3 Protected against spraying water Water falling as a spray at an angle up to 60° С-8.3 
from the vertical shall һауе no harmful effect 

iv) 4 Protected against splashing water Water splashed against the enclosure from C-8.4 
any direction shall have no harmful effect 

v) 5 Protected against water jets Water projected by a nozzle against the C- 8.5 


enclosure from any direction shall have no 
harmful effect 


NOTE — The short description in col 2 should not be used to specify the form of protection. It should only be used as a brief description. 


IS 10027 : 2018 


be covered with a metal foil electrically connected to 

those parts which are normally live in service. 

The protection is satisfactory if the lamp does not light. 
b) Sphere Test 


The test is made with a rigid sphere of 12.5 mm in 
diameter applied to the openings of the enclosure with 
a force of 30 N + 10 percent. 


The protection is satisfactory if the sphere does not 
pass through any opening and adequate distance is 
maintained to live or moving parts inside the enclosure. 


C-7.3 Test for First Numeral 3 


C-7.3.1 Protection Against Ingress of Solid Foreign 
Objects 


The test is made with a straight rigid steel wire or rod 
of 2.5 mm diameter applied with a force of 3N + 10 
percent. The end of the wire or rod shall be free from 
burrs and at right angles to its length. 


The protection is satisfactory if the wire or rod cannot 
enter the enclosure. 


C-7.3.2 Protection Against Contacts with Live and 
Moving Parts 


The test is made with a straight rigid steel wire or rod 
of 2.5 mm diameter and 100 mm long with a force of 
3N + 10 percent. The end of the wire or rod shall be 
hemispherically shaped. 


The test is made with a rigid sphere of 12.5 mm in 
diameter applied to the openings of the enclosure with 
a force of 30 N + 10 percent. 


The protection is satisfactory if the sphere does not 
pass through any opening and adequate distance is 
maintained to live or moving parts inside the enclosure. 


In addition, the sphere test for first numeral 2 is to be 
affected. 


C-7.4 Test for First Numeral 4 


C-7.4.1 Protection Against Ingress of Solid Foreign 
Objects 


The test is made with a straight rigid steel wire of 1mm 
diameter applied with a force of IN + 10 percent. The 
end of the wire shall be free from burrs and at right 
angles to its length. 


The protection is satisfactory if the wire cannot enter 
the enclosure. 


C-7.4.2 Protection Against Contacts with Live and 
Moving Parts 


The test is made with a straight rigid steel wire or 1 mm 
diameter and 100 mm long with a force of IN + 10 
percent. The end of the wire shall be hemispherically 
shaped. 


24 


The protection is satisfactory if adequate distance 
is maintained with live and moving parts inside the 
enclosure. 


In addition, the sphere test for first numeral 2 is to be 
affected. 


C-8 TEST FOR SECOND CHARACTERISTIC 
NUMERAL 


The test shall be conducted with fresh water. 


For the condition of the equipment after the tests 
(see С-8.5). 


C-8.1 Test for Second Numeral 1 


The test is made by means of an apparatus the principle 
of which is shown in Fig. 9; the rate of discharge shall 
be reasonably uniform over the whole area of apparatus 
and shall produce a rainfall of between 3 mm and 5 mm 
of water per min (In the case of an apparatus according 
to Fig. 8, this corresponds to a fall in water level of 
3 mm to 5 mm per min). 


The equipment under test is placed in its normal 
operating position under the test apparatus, the base of 
which shall be larger than that of the equipment under 
test. Except for equipment designed for wall or ceiling 
mounting, the support for the equipment under test 
should be smaller than the base of the equipment. 


Equipment normally fixed to a wall or ceiling is fixed 
in its normal position of use to a wooden board having 
dimensions which are equal to those of that surface of 
the equipment which is in contact with the wall or ceiling 
when the equipment is mounted as in normal use. 


The duration of the test shall be 10 min. 


C-8.2 Test for Second Numeral 2 


The test apparatus.is the same as that specified in C-8.1 
and is adjusted to give the same rate of discharge. 


The equipment is tested for 2.5 min in each of four fixed 
positions of tilt. These positions are 15° either side of 
the vertical in two mutually perpendicular planes. 


The total duration of the test shall be 10 min. 


C-8.3 Test for Second Numeral 3 


The test shall be made using test apparatus such as 
is shown in Fig. 9, provided that the dimensions and 
shape of the equipment to be tested are such that it will 
fit within the radius of the oscillating tube as shown. 
Where this condition cannot be fulfilled, a hand-held 
spray device, as shown in Fig. 10, shall be used. 


a) Conditions when using test apparatus as in Fig. 9. 
The water pressure is adjusted to give a delivery 
rate of at least 10 l/min. 
Water pressure — 
approximately. 


80 kN/m? (0.8 bar) 


IS 10027 : 2018 


LAYERS OF SAND GRAVAL TO REGULATE FLOW OF 
WATER, THESE LAYERS BEING SEPATED BY METALLIC 
GAUZE AND BLOTTING PAPER 


АА SA 


A 
— =m 


алысы 


EQUIPMENT 
UNDER TEST 


Fic. 8 APPARATUS FOR THE VERIFICATION OF PROTECTION AGAINST DRIPPING WATER 


1000 max. 


EQUIPMENT 
UNDER TEST 


COUNTERWEIGHT 
Fic. 9 APPARATUS FOR THE VERIFICATION OF PROTECTION AGAINST SPRAYING AND SPLASHING WATER 


25 


IS 10027 : 2018 


b) 


MOVING SHIELD 


SPRAY NOZZLE 


Ал 
2 / 
/ 
EQUIPMENT 
UNDER TEST 


300-500 


121 Nos OF HOLES OF @ 0.5 
1 Мо OF HOLE AT THE CENTRE 


po 
FN 


D 
COUNTERWEIGHT ! 


PRESSURE 
GAUGE 


78° 


12X6° 30 


VIEWED ACCORDING TO ARROW A (WITH SHIELD REMOVED) 


12 Nos OF HOLES AT 30* PITCH AT 2 INNER CIRCLES 
24 Nos OF HOLES AT 15° PITCH AT 4 OUTER CIRCLES 


MOVING SHIELD - ALUMINIUM 
SPRAY NOZZLE - BRASS 


All Dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 10 HAND-HELD APPARATUS FOR THE VERIFICATION OF PROTECTION 
AGAINST SPRAYING AND SPLASHING WATER 


Method — The oscillating tube shall be provided 
with spray holes over an arc of 60? either side ofthe 
centre point and shall be fixed in a vertical position; 
the equipment tested is mounted on a turntable with 
a vertical axis and is located at approximately the 
centre point of the semi-circle. The turntable is 
rotating at a convenient speed so that all parts of 
the equipment are wetted during the test. 


The minimum test duration shall be 10 min. 


When it is not practicable to rotate the equipment 
on a turntable it shall be placed at the centre of 
the semi-circle and the tube shall be oscillated 
through an angle of 60? either side of the vertical 
position at a rate approximately 60°/s for 5 min. 
The equipment is then turned through a horizontal 
angle of 90? and the test continued for a further 
period of 5 min. 


Conditions when using test apparatus as in Fig. 10. 


The counter balanced shield shall be in place for 
this test. 


The water pressure is adjusted to give a delivery 
rate of 10 l/min + 0.5 1/min pressure approximately 
80-100 kN/m? (0.8 - 1.0 bar). 


26 


The test duration shall be 1 min/mn? of calculated 
surface area of the enclosure excluding any 
mounting surface) with a minimum duration of 
5 min. 

NOTE — For the purpose of this test, the surface area of the 
equipment is calculated with an accuracy of + 10 percent. 


C-8.4 Test for Second Numeral 4 


The conditions for deciding whether the apparatus of 
Fig. 9 or that of Fig. 10 should be used are the same as 
those stated in C-8.3. 


a) Using the apparatus of Fig. 9 


The oscillating tube shall have holes drilled over 
the whole 180? of the semi-circle. The test duration, 
rate of oscillation and water pressure are as given in 
C-8.3(a). 


The support for the equipment under test shall be 
perforated so as to avoid acting as a baffle and the 
equipment shall be sprayed from every direction by 
oscillating the tube to the limit of its travel in each 
direction. 


b) Using the apparatus of Fig. 10. 


The counter balanced shield is removed from the 
spray nozzle and the equipment is sprayed from all 
practicable direction. 


The rate of water delivery and the spraying time per 
unit area shall be as specified in C-8.3(b). 


C-8.5 State of the Equipment after the Tests 


After testing in accordance with the appropriate 
requirements of C-8.1 to C-8.4 the external surfaces 
should be dried, and then the equipment shall be 
inspected for ingress of water. 


The evaluation of? harmful ingress of water depends on 
the dimensions of the equipment, and it is not possible 
to establish a general method suitable for all types of 
enclosures. 


27 


IS 10027 : 2018 


For C-8.1 to C-8.4 if any water has entered, it shall not: 


a) Be sufficient to interfere with 
operation of the equipment; 


satisfactory 


b) Reach live parts or windings not designed to 
operate when wet; and 


c) Accumulate near the conduit hole (cable entry) or 
enter the cable. 


Where the water ingress could raise doubts as to 
the functioning of the equipment a dielectric test 
with reduced value shall be affected (for example, a 
minimum of 50 percent of the dielectric test voltage). 
If the equipment is provided with drain holes it shall be 
proved by inspection that any water which enters does 
not accumulate and that it drains away without doing 
any harm to the equipment. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: ETD 07 (11584). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
КОГКАТА 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


