**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 2597-4 (1970) : Code of Practice for the use of Electron 
Tubes, Part IV: Cathode-ray Tubes [LITD 4: Electron Tubes 
and Display Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS:2597 (Part IV) -1970 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART IV CATHODE-RAY TUBES 



UDC 62I-385'832 




© Cofyyright 1970 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI J 

Pri^t^^M^ •^«'> 1970 



ISs2597 (Part IV)* 1970 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART IV CATHODE-RAY TUBES 

Electron Tubes and Valves Sectional Committee, ETDC 39 

Chairman Represtnting 

Shbi C. R. Subramaniait Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Mitnbirs 

Dr S. S. S. Aoarwala Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

(CSIR),Pilani 
Db R. p. Wadhwa ( AlUmate ) 
Shri p. N. Dbobhakta Directorate General of Technical Development 

( Ministry of Industrial Development & Company 
Affairs ) 
Shbi Balbaj Bhanot (Mttmate ) 
DiBBCTOR, Elbotbioal EiToi- Naval Headquarters 

mtbbbiko 
Dirbgtor. EX.B0TBONIGS & Rapab Directorate General of Research & Development 

Dbvblopmbnt Establishmbnt ( Ministry of Defence ) 

Db R. R. Dutta Gupta Directorate General of Insp>ection ( Ministry of 

Defence ) 
Shbt R. S. Yadav ( AlUrnate ) 
Shbi B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shbi R. K. Jain Radio Electronic & Television Manufactui^rs* Asso- 

ciation ( RETMA ), Calcutta 
Shbi S. Y. Phatak ( AlternaU ) 
Shbi S. C. Majumdar Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ) 
Shbi J. S. Monqa AH India Radio Merchants* Association, Bombay 

Shbi V. J. Bhatt ( AlttmaU ) 

{ Bombay ) 
Shbi D. N. Ghaudhubi ( Alternate ) 

( Calcutta ) 
Shbi L. S. V. Easwab ( Alternate ) 
( Madras ) 
Pbov S. Sampatb In personal capacity ( Indian Institute of Techfiohgy^ 

Madras ) 
Shbi S. N. Sbn All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shbi K. T. Suabtbt Directorate of Technical Development & Production 

( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ) 
Shbi P. M. Sbankab Rao ( Alternate ) 

^(Coniimad wpageB) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI I 



I8t2S97 (Part IV). 1970 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART IV CATHODE-RAY TUBES 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part IV ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 March 1970, after the draft finalized by the Electron 
Tubes and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electro- 
technical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is intended to give general guidance to the designers of 
electronic equipment to be supplemented by data sheets from the valve 
manufacturers so that optimum efficiency, performance, life, etc, can be 
obtained. 

0.3 This standard deals with the additional aspects that are to be covered 
in the use of cathode-ray tubes, such as oscilloscopes, and radar display 
tubes. The general and other more common aspects have already been 
dealt in IS: 2597 (Part I)- 1964* which is a necessary adjunct to this 
standard. The provisions laid down in this standard are additional to and 
should be read in conjunction with IS: 2597 (Part I)-1964*. 

0.4 This standard is based, to a large extent, on B.S.CP 1005 : 1962 *Code 
of practice for the use of electronic valves ' issued by the British Standards 
Institution. 

0.5 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on codes of practice 
for the use of electronic valves and tubes. Other standards so far published 
in this series are: 

IS: 2597 (Part I)- 1964 Code of practice for the use of electronic 

valves: Part I Commercial receiving valves 
IS: 2597 (Part II). 1967 Code of practice for the use of electronic 

valves: Part II Special quality valves 
IS: 2597 (Part III) -1969 Code of practice for the use of electronic 
valves: Part III Transmitting and industrial valves 



1. SCOPE 

1,1 This standard (Part IV ) deals with the code of practice for the use of 
cathode-ray tubes used in cathode-ray oscilloscopes, radar display units, 
etc. 



*Code of practice for the use of electronic vaivei: Part I Commerctal recdvins valval* 

2 " ■ ■ 



ISs2597(PartIV)^1970 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions contained in IS: 1885 
( Part IV/Sec 1 ) - 1965* and IS : 2597 ( Part I ) - 1964t shall apply. 

3. DIMENSIONS 

3.1 Particular care should be taken to examine the manufacturer's pub- 
lished outline drawings and any notes thereon referring to variants of 
bulb contour, positions of h.t. connectors or side arms, position of grid 
aperture, etc. While designing the equipment, reliance should not be 
placed upon dimensions taken from individual tubes. 

4. RATINGS 

4.1 General — Cathode*ray tubes usually have minimum as well as 
maximum extra high tension ( e.h.t. ) voltage ratings; it does not follow that 
operation at the minimum rating will necessarily improve performance or 
life; frequently the reverse will occur. A low e.h.t. voltage may result in 
uneven brightness of the screen in the case of certain types of tubes and the 
quality of the focus may also be impaired. At reduced e.h.t. voltages the 
screen performance may deteriorate in life more rapidly although for the 
same cathode current the life of the cathode may be improved. It is, 
therefore, emphasized that the end use and recommendations of the 
manufacturers should be kept in view in the operation of cathode-fay tubes. 

4.2 Frequency Limitations — The performance of cathode-ray tubes is 
not independent of frequency. At high frequencies, special tubes pr circuits 
may be required and the manufacturer should be consulted. Theeffects of 
grid-cathode capacitance, deflection-plate capacitance and transit time 
become increasingly important at such frequencies. 

5. HEATER VOLTAGE REGULATIONS 

5.1 General — Cathode-ray tube heaters may be more critical tp voltage 
regulation than some other types of heaters and in consequence may require 
more mains tappings [see 3.4*2.2 of IS: 2597 (Part I).1964fJ. The 
manufacturers should be consulted for any particular recommendations. 

S«2 Series Operation — In general, cathode-ray tube heaters have thermal 
characteristics different from those of normal receiving valve heaters, and 
in case of series operated tubes a maximum surge voltage rating may be 
sp)ecified, or it may be ensured that the heater-current always falls within 
db2*5 percent of the published value when tubes with normal heater 
characteristics are employed and the series circuit is connected to the highest 

*Electrot«diiiicaI vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes and valves, Section I Receiving 
valves, 

tCode of practice for the use of ele<:tronic valves: Part I Ck>mmerc|al receiving valves. 



ISi2597(P«rtIV)-1970 

or lowest nominal mains voltage range. Particular care should be taken to 
see that the voltage surge does not exceed the maximum rated value during 
initial switching on, during the warm-up period, or in the event of the 
equipment being switched on soon after it has been switched off. 

6. MOUNTING 

6*1 Any desired angle of mounting may be adopted except that if the tube 
is mounted with screen upwards under conditions of excessive vibration the 
life may be shortened owing to loosened screen material falling on the 
cathode. 

6.1.1 The mounting of cathode-ray tubes should have some flexibility; no 
stresses should exist between the bulb and the neck or between the side 
arms and any part of the tube. It is desirable, particularly with magnetic- 
deflection tubes where the neck diameter is small compared with that of the 
bulb, the holder should in no way act as a support for the tube. 

6.2 The connections to cathode-ray tube holders or e.h.t. side connections 
should not only be flexible but also be of sufficient length to permit 
rotation of the tube and holder so that the trace can be oriented in the 
required axis. Any external conducting coating should never be left 
disconnected where it is specified that it should be earthed, and particular 
care should be taken that good contact is assured, especially under 
vibration. 

6.3 Adequate insulation should be provided between the tube and any 
auxiliary equipment, such as deflector coils; otherwise undesirable results 
due to leakage through the glass or due to electrostatic charges or 
discharges may arise. This precaution becomes increasingly important at 
higher operating voltages. 

6.4 Precautions for protection against stray electrostatic or magnetic fields, 
particularly the latter, are very important with cathode-ray tubes the 
operation of which is dependent upon the control of the exact position of 
an electron beam on the screen; this is of maximum significance in mobile 
equipment the calibration of which may be influenced even by the earth's 
field. Hence they should be positioned and/or shielded so that the 
deleterious effects of such fields are reduced to a minimum. 

6.4.1 The electron stream may be deflected or modulated by the stray 
fields from transformers, loudspeaker magnets, high potential componentqi 
and wiring thus adversely affecting the operation of controlling electrodes. 
Tubes with directly heated cathodes are particularly susceptible to such 
effects. 

7. HANDLING 

7*1 The precautions taken in manufacture reduce the possibility of 
spontaneous implosion to a minimum but any {^dditionid stress dut to 



iSs2597(Partiy}«l!»70 

inishandling contiderably increases the risk of implosion. Such implosion 
may occur immediately, or may be delayed. Particular care should be taken 
not to scratch any part of the cathode-ray tube bulb, particularly the view- 
ing face, as this will appreciably reduce the strength of the glass and may 
lead to implosion of the tube, often after a delay. 

7.2 Care should be taken to prevent bumping or striking the rim round the 
face of a tube having a metal cone as rough treatment may damage the glass- 
to-metal joint. When a tube is not in its equipment or original packing, it 
should be placed screen downwards on a soft pad of suitable material free 
from abrasive substances. Tubes with relatively small necks and large 
bulbs should be handled by the bulb end. When it is necessary to handle 
the tube by the neck, great care should be taken to avoid sideways leverage 
and the bulb should be supported when possible. 

7.3 In the case of tubes having metal cones, it is important to prevent, the 
cone coming into contact with a magnet and thus becoming permanently 
magnetized. A magnetized cone produces localized distortion of the picture 
edges. 

7.4 Attention is called to the fact that a high voltage charge may be 
carried by the external conducting coating on the glass bulb, even after a 
tube has been removed from equipment. Anyone handling such a tube 
may receive a shock, which while generally not dangerous to the person, 
might cause an involuntary reaction resulting in damage to the tubfe, which 
might, for example, be dropped. 

7.4.1 The external coating forms part of a capacitor which sl|puld be 
discharged by connecting it to the final anode terminal before lumdling. 
Further charges may build up while any strain remains in the dielectric 
and the above precaution is advisable before the tube is handled on each 
occasion. 

8. VENTILATION 

8»1 Elquipment should be so designed that adequate ventilation is provided 
to ensure safe bulb temperature under all conditions. For tub^ using 
electromagnetic deflection and focussing, special attention should be given 
to ventilation in the vicinity of the coils which may over-heat the neck with 
consequent risk of reduced tube life. Adequate ventilation of holders or 
side contacts becomes increasingly important at higher operating voltages 
as corona ionization may cause breakdown. 

9. CONTEQL GRID VOLTAGE 

9*1 The resistance between the control grid and cathode should be kept as 
tew as pdisible in conformity with the value specified by the manufacturer. ^ 
If unduly high values of grid resistance are used, the presence of grid 

'f ' ■ ■ 5 



ISs2597 (Part IV). 1970 

ciirrent due to leakage may produce a variation or in extrenie cases, a loss 
of brightness control. 

9.2 Cathode-ray tubes should not be used in any application which results 
in the production of positive grid current; normally no cathode-ray tubes 
should operate even instantaneously at a grid-cathode voltage more positive 
than — 1 V. In order to ensure that the above limitation is not exceeded, it 
may be necessary to include a low impedance diode in the circuit when a 
grid is pulsed for brightness modulation. 

9*3 Care should be taken in the design of circuits to ensure that there is 
ample negative bias available to cut-off the beam current, circuit design 
should take account of the regulation of the h.t. supply and of the upper 
limit of cut-off voltage for the tube. 

10. VOLTAGES ON ELECTRODES INTERMEDIATE IN 
POTENTIAL BETWEEN CATHODE AND FINAL ANODE 

10.1 These electrode voltages should be obtained either from a voltage 
divider with good regulation characteristics or direct from some other 
sources, the voltage of which is controllable within suitable limits. Series 
resistance can seldom be used for voltage dropping purposes because of the 
intermediate electrode currents which vary in polarity and also vary 
considerably in magnitude, particularly towards the more positive end of 
the grid modulation range. 

11. SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 
11.1 Cathode and Screen Protection 

11.1.1 At all times it is desirable to keep the brightness level and beam 
current to the lowest practicable value to obtain optimum life. This is 
particularly important when the tube is operated with a stationary or slow- 
moving spot; otherwise permanent damage may be done to the screen. 

11.1.2 Where the positive voltage on any electrode exceeds 2*0 kV a series 
limiting resistor should be inserted as close as possible to the electrode 
connection concerned and be of such a value that the transient short-circuit 
current does not exceed 100 mA on flashover; where the insertion of such a 
resistor may affect waveforms, as in deflector plate circuits in electrostatic 
tubes, a compromise value should be used after consultation with the- 
manufacturer. 

11.1.3 By a suitable choice of the time constants of the anode and grid 
( modulator ) supply networks, the bias voltage should be prevented from 
decreasing more rapidly than the anode voltage when the equipment is 
switched off. Conversely, at switching on, the anode voltage UK)ul4 be 
prevented firotn increasing more rapidly thaim the bias voltage. Inadditjion^ 



IS:2597 (Partly). 1970 

before current is drawn from the cathode, it is normally essential that 
deflection voltages should be applied to a tube. If these precautions are 
not observed, excessive current may cause burning of the screen or damage 
to the cathode. 

11.2 Trace Stability 

11,2«1 In tubes where measurements are made directly on the tube- 
screen face, the final anode should be earthed or maintained at the mean 
point of the deflecting system to minimize the effect of capacity and leak- 
age on the stability of the trace. 

11.2.2 The external dc resistance between any deflector plate and the 
final anode of an electrostatic deflection tube should be as low as possible. 
The use of unduly high values is likely to cause instability of the trace with 
variations of brightness. 

11.3 Magnetic Deflection and Focussing 

11.3«I Neck shadowing resulting in the loss of useful screen area, can 
arise from the use of the deflector coil of incorrect length or from failure to 
locate the coil sufficiently forward on the tube neck. Shadowing can also 
result from bad focussing or stray fields. 

11.3.2 For tubes using magnetic focussing, care should be taken to locate 
the magnetic centre of the field in the recommended position with respect 
to the grid aperture or other reference plane. Otherwise an excessive focus 
coil current may be required or a deterioration of focus uniformity may be 
produced. 

11.4 Electrostatic Deflection and Shift 

11.4.1 In conventional electrostatic deflection tubes the most satisfactory 
results are normally obtained with symmetrical deflection; asymmetrical 
deflection of both axis is not recommended if good focus uniformity or 
deflection linearity is required, except with tubes specifically designed for 
such operation. 

11.4.2 In the design of the deflection and shift circuits of flectrostatic 
deflection tubes, account should be taken of the voltage/current characteris- 
tics of the deflector plates. 

NoT» — In some tubes the deflector plates may take current which results in a non- 
linear relationship between the voltage applied to the deflector plate and the move- 
ment of the spot. 

11.5 Liyht Filter— Separate light filters are sometimes employed to 
improve contrast in the presence of ambient light. It is undesirable to 
compensate any loss of brilliance by increasing the beam current as such 
cotiipen^tion may be sufficient to reduce the life of the tube. Where the 






ISt2597 (Part IV). 1970 

tube ratings permit^ compensation should be made by the use of a higher 
final anode voltage. 

11.6 Ultra- Violet Excitation — Certain screens containing materials 
which fluoresce under ultra-violet excitation should be protected by shields 
or filters where necessary. In cases of doubt concerning this screen 
characteristic the manufacturer should be consulted. 

12. STORAGE AND TRANSIT 

12.1 It is very important for cathode-ray tubes not installed in the equip- 
ment to be stored in their original packing or in suitable racks. 

12«2 Normal good storage conditions should be provided to prevent deteri- 
oration, such as corrosion of contacts or impairment of electrical insulation. 

12J The tube should preferably be transported in the original packing 
designed for the purpose. 



( Continutdfrom page 1 ) 

Members 

Shbi K. S. Sreb Prakash 

Shri a. V. Ramachakpra 
Rao ( AlternaU ) 
Shri G. H. Vaze 
Shri Y. S. Vbnkateswaran, 
Director ( Elec tech ) 



Representing 
Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 



Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 
Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri N. Srinivasan 

Deputy Director ( Elec tech ) , ISI 

Panel for Cathode-Ray Tubes, ETDC 39/P4 



ConviMT 
Paoy S. Sautath 

Mmnbers 

Shbi C. Ambasakxaraw 

Shbi A. V. Ramachakpra Rao 

Db N. CL Vaidya 



In personal capacity {Indian Imtitut* ^f TechnoUgy^ 
Madras) 



Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 
Bharat Electroitict Ltcl» Bangalore 
Central Electrofiict Engineering Research Initltiite 
(CSIR),PilBni 

8 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 AUGUST 1973 

TO 

IS: 2597 (Part IV).1970 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR 

THE USE OF ELECTRONIC VALVES 

PART IV CATHODE-RAY TUBES 

Alterations 

( First cover pagiy pages 1 and 2, TitU ) — Substitute the following for the 
existing title: ^ 

* Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE USE OF 
ELEGTTRON TUBES 

PART IV CATHOD8-RAY TUBES' 

Substitute * electron tubes ' for * electronic valves * and * electron 
tubes and valves * wherever it appears in the standard. 

Substitute * tube ^for * valve • wherever it appears in the standard. 
(ETDC39) 



Printed at NMlkunal Princers, Delhi 6» India 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

Over 5 500 Indian Standard^ broadly classified under the following main 
heads, have been issued so far: 

Agriculture & Food Electrotechnical 

Chemical Mechanical Engineering 

Civil Engineering Structural & Metals 

Consumer Products Textile 

Of these, the standards belonging to the Electrotechnical Group fall 
under the following categories: 

Acoustics Insulating Materials 

Appliances Insulators and Accessories 

Automobile Electrical Equipment Integrating Meters 

Batteries Lamps and Accessories 

Cinematographic Equipment Lifts and Escalators 

Conductors and Cables Lightning Arresters 

Electric Welding Equipment Motors and Generators 

Electrical Instruments Mica 

Electron Tubes and Valves Nomenclature and 

Electronic Components and Symbols 

Equipment Power Capacitors and Con- 
Environmental Testing Procedures verters 
Fans Semiconductor Devices 
High Voltage Techniques Switchgear and Controlgear 
Illuminating Engineering Transformers 
Instrument Transformers and Winding Wires 

Relays Wiring Accessories 

OTHER PUBLICATIONS 

Rs 

ISI Buhetln ( Published Every Month ) 

Single Copy ... .. ... ... ... 3-op 

Annual Subscription ... ... ... ... IS-oo 

Annual Reports ( from 1948-49 Onwards ) ... ... 20o to 3-00 each 

Handbook of ISI Publications. 1969 ( Pages vl -f 546, Price Rs 1000) 

incorporating annotations on all Indian Standards, and also listing 

ISO Recomnnendations and Publications of lEC 



Available from 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Headquarters 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi I 

Telephones 27 36 1 1 - 20 Telegrams Manaksanstha 

27 50 31-40 

e^ranch Officet 
Telegrams 

Syndicate Bank Building, Gandhinagar 
534 Sardar Vaitabhbhal Patel Road 
5 Chownnghee Approach 
5-9-201/2 Chirag All Lane 
117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 
S4 General Patters Road 

Prtnted »t CmIoo Vtbm, New Deliii 6. iudi«k 



Manaksanstha 






Bangalore 9 


Telephone 


2 76 49 


Bombay 7 


»» 


35 69 44 


Calcutta 13 


»> 


23-08 02 


Hyderabad 1 


»» 


5 34 35 


Kanpur 5 


99 


82 72 


Madras 2 


»} 


8 72 78 



