Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


CIA oh senate au 
Wades 
AT 1 GARI Waar SİK Faq 


(Ba RAT) 


Criteria for Earthquake Resistant 
Design of Structures 


Part 1 General Provisions and Buildings 


( Sixth Revision ) 


ICS 91.120.25 


© BIS 2016 


Ida AM SAR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 GEÇE AHL ARİ, as feeei-110002 
cree =/ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2016 Price Group 13 


Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Sixth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


India is prone to strong earthquake shaking, and hence earthquake resistant design is essential. The Committee 
has considered an earthquake zoning map based on the maximum intensities at each location as recorded from 
damage surveys after past earthquakes, taking into account, 


a) known magnitudes and the known epicentres (see Annex A) assuming all other conditions as being 
average; and 


b) tectonics (see Annex B) and lithology (see Annex C) of each region. 


The Seismic Zone Map (see Fig. 1) is broadly associated with 1964 MSK Intensity Scale (see Annex D) corresponding 
to VI (or less), VII, VIII and IX (and above) for Seismic Zones II, III, IV and V, respectively. Seismic Zone Factors 
for some important towns are given in Annex E. 


Structures designed as per this standard are expected to sustain damage during strong earthquake ground shaking. 
The provisions of this standard are intended for earthquake resistant design of only normal structures (without 
energy dissipation devices or systems in-built). This standard provides the minimum design force for earthquake 
resistant design of special structures (such as large and tall buildings, large and high dams, long-span bridges and 
major industrial projects). Such projects require rigorous, site-specific investigation to arrive at more accurate 
earthquake hazard assessment. 


To control loss of life and property, base isolation or other advanced techniques may be adopted. Currently, the 
Indian Standard is under formulation for design of such buildings; until the standard becomes available, specialist 
literature should be consulted for design, detail, installation and maintenance of such buildings. 


IS 1893 : 1962 ‘Recommendations for earthquake resistant design of structures’ was first published in 1962, and 
revised in 1966, 1970, 1975 and 1984. Further, in 2002, the Committee decided to present the provisions for different 
types of structures in separate parts, to keep abreast with rapid developments and extensive research carried out 
in earthquake-resistant design of various structures. Thus, IS 1893 was split into five parts. The other parts in the 
series are: 


Part 1 General provisions and buildings 

Part 2 Liquid retaining tanks — Elevated and ground supported 
Part 3 Bridges and retaining walls 

Part 4 Industrial structures, including stack-like structures 

Part 5 Dams and embankments (to be formulated) 


This standard (Part 1) contains general provisions on earthquake hazard assessment applicable to all buildings 
and structures covered in Parts 2 to 5. Also, Part 1 contains provisions specific to earthquake-resistant design of 
buildings. Unless stated otherwise, the provisions in Parts 2 to 5 are to be read necessarily in conjunction with the 
general provisions as laid down in Part 1. 


In this revision, the following changes have been included: 
a) Design spectra are defined for natural period up to 6 s; 


b) Same design response spectra are specified for all buildings, irrespective of the material of construction; 


Indian Standard 
CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT DESIGN 


OF STRUCTURES 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


PART 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BUILDINGS 
( Sixth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) primarily deals with 
earthquake hazard assessment for earthquake-resistant 
design of (1) buildings, (2) liquid retaining structures, 
(3) bridges, (4) embankments and retaining walls, 
(5) industrial and stack-like structures, and (6) concrete, 
masonry and earth dams. Also, this standard (Part 1) 
deals with earthquake-resistant design of buildings; 
earthquake-resistant design of the other structures is 
dealt with in Parts 2 to 5. 


1.2 All structures, like parking structures, security 
cabins and ancillary structures need to be designed for 
appropriate earthquake effects as per this standard. 


1.3 Temporary elements, such as scaffolding and temporary 
excavations, need to be designed as per this standard. 


1.4 This standard does not deal with construction 
features relating to earthquake-resistant buildings and 
other structures. For guidance on earthquake-resistant 
construction of buildings, reference may be made to the 
latest revisions of the following Indian Standards: 
IS 4326, IS 13827, IS 13828, IS 13920, IS 13935 and 
IS 15988. 


1.5 The provisions of this standard are applicable even 
to critical and special structures, like nuclear power 
plants, petroleum refinery plants and large dams. For 
such structures, additional requirements may be 
imposed based on special studies, such as site-specific 
hazard assessment. In such cases, the earthquake 
effects specified by this standard shall be taken as at 
least the minimum. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
456 : 2000 


Title 
Code of practice for plain and 
reinforced concrete (fourth revision) 


IS No. 
800 : 2007 


875 


(Part 1 : 1987) 


(Part 2 : 1987) 
(Part 3 : 2015) 
(Part 4 : 1987) 
(Part 5 : 1987) 
1343:2012 


1498:1970 


1888:1982 
1893 

(Part 2) : 2014 

(Part 3) : 2014 

(Part 4) : 2015 
1905 : 1987 
2131:1981 
2809 : 1972 
2810:1979 
2974 

(Part 1) : 1982 

(Part 2) : 1980 

(Part 3): 1992 


(Part 4) : 1979 


Title 
Code of practice for general 
construction in steel (second revision) 
Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for buildings 
and structures: 
Dead loads — Unit weights of 
building 
material and stored materials (second 
revision) 
Imposed loads (second revision) 
Wind loads (third revision) 
Snow loads (second revision) 
Special loads and load combinations 
(second revision) 
Code of practice for prestressed 
concrete (second revision) 
Classification and identification of 
soils for general engineering 
purposes (first revision) 
Method of load test on soils (second 
revision) 
Criteria for earthquake resistant design 
of structures: 
Liquid retaining tanks 
Bridges and retaining walls 
Industrial structures including stack- 
like structures (first revision) 
Code of practice for structural use of 
unreinforced masonry (third revision) 
Method of standard penetration test 
for soils (first revision) 
Glossary of terms and symbols relating 
to soil engineering (first revision) 
Glossary of terms relating to soil 
dynamics (first revision) 
Code of practice for design and cons- 
truction of machine foundations: 
Foundation for reciprocating type 
machines 
Foundations for impact type 
machines (Hammer foundations) 
Foundations for rotary type machines 
(Medium and high frequency) 
Foundations for rotary 
machines of low frequency 


type 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


IS No. 
(Part 5) : 1987 


Title 
Foundations for impact machines 
other than hammer (Forging and 
stamping press, pig breaker, drop 
crusher and jolter) 
Earthquake resistant design and 
construction of buildings—Code of 
Practice (third revision) 
Code of practice for determination of 
bearing capacity of shallow 
foundations (first revision) 
Improving earthquake resistance of 
earthen buildings — Guidelines 
Improving earthquake resistance of 
low strength masonry buildings — 
Guidelines 
Ductile design and detailing of 
reinforced concrete structures 
subjected to seismic forces — Code 
of practice (first revision) 
Repair and seismic strengthening of 
buildings — Guidelines 
Seismic evaluation and 
strengthening of existing reinforced 
concrete building — Guidelines 
National Building Code of India: Part 6 
Structural Design, Section 4 Masonry 


4326:2013 


6403 : 1981 


13827 : 1993 


13828 : 1993 


13920:2016 


13935 : 1993 


15988 : 2013 


SP7:2016 
(Part 6/Sec 4) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions given 
below shall apply to all structures, in general. For 
definition of terms pertaining to soil mechanics and 
soil dynamics, reference may be made to IS 2809 and 
IS 2810, and for definition of terms pertaining to ‘loads’, 
reference may be made to IS 875 (Parts 1 to 5). 


3.1 Closely-Spaced Modes — Closely-spaced modes 
of a structure are those of the natural modes of 
oscillation of a structure, whose natural frequencies 
differ from each other by 10 percent or less of the lower 
frequency. 


3.2 Critical Damping — The damping beyond which 
the free vibration motion will not be oscillatory. 


3.3 Damping — The effect of internal friction, 
inelasticity of materials, slipping, sliding, etc, in 
reducing the amplitude of oscillation; it is expressed as 
a fraction of critical damping (see 3.2). 


3.4 Design Acceleration Spectrum — Design 
acceleration spectrum refers to an average 
smoothened graph of maximum acceleration as a 
function of natural frequency or natural period of 
oscillation for a specified damping ratio for the 
expected earthquake excitations at the base of a 
single degree of freedom system. 


3.5 Design Horizontal Acceleration Coefficient (4,,) — 
It is a horizontal acceleration coefficient that shall be 
used for design of structures. 


3.6 Design Horizontal Force — It is the horizontal 
seismic force prescribed by this standard that shall be 
used to design a structure. 


3.7 Ductility — It is the capacity of a structure (or its 
members) to undergo large inelastic deformations 
without significant loss of strength or stiffness. 


3.8 Epicentre — It is the geographical point on the 
surface of earth vertically above the point of origin of 
the earthquake. 


3.9 Floor Response Spectrum — It is the response 
spectrum (for a chosen material damping value) of the 
time history of the shaking generated at a floor of a 
structure, when the structure is subjected to a given 
earthquake ground motion at its base. 


3.10 Importance Factor (7) — It isa factor used to estimate 
design seismic force depending on the functional use of 
the structure, characterized by hazardous consequences 
of its failure, post-earthquake functional needs, historical 
value, or economic importance. 


3.11 Intensity of Earthquake — It is the measure of the 
strength of ground shaking manifested at a place during 
the earthquake, and is indicated by a roman capital 
numeral on the MSK scale of seismic intensity (see 
Annex D). 


3.12 Liquefaction — It is a state primarily in saturated 
cohesionless soils wherein the effective shear strength is 
reduced to negligible value for all engineering purposes, 
when the pore pressure approaches the total confining 
pressure during earthquake shaking. In this condition, 
the soil tends to behave like a fluid mass (see Annex F). 


3.13 Lithological Features — Features that reflect the 
nature of the geological formation of the earth’s crust 
above bed rock characterized on the basis of structure, 
mineralogical composition and grain size. 


3.14 Modal Mass (M) in Mode (4) of a Structure — It 
is a part of the total seismic mass of the structure that 
is effective in natural mode k of oscillation during 
horizontal or vertical ground motion. 


3.15 Modal Participation Factor (P,) in Mode (k) of a 
Structure — The amount by which natural mode k 
contributes to overall oscillation of the structure during 
horizontal or vertical earthquake ground motion. Since 
the amplitudes of mode shapes can be scaled arbitrarily, 
the value of this factor depends on the scaling used 
for defining mode shapes. 


3.16 Modes of Oscillation — See 3.19. 
3.17 Mode Shape Coefficient (¢,,) — It is the spatial 


deformation pattern of oscillation along degree of 
freedom 7, when the structure is oscillating in its natural 
mode k. A structure with N degrees of freedom 
possesses N natural periods and N associated natural 
mode shapes. These natural mode shapes are together 
presented in the form of a mode shape matrix [4], in 
which each column represents one natural mode shape. 
The element @,, is called the mode shape coefficient 
associated with degree of freedom 7, when the structure 
is oscillating in mode k. 


3.18 Natural Period (7,) in Mode (4) of Oscillation — 
The time taken (in second) by the structure to complete 
one cycle of oscillation in its natural mode k of 
oscillation. 


3.18.1 Fundamental Lateral Translational Natural 
Period (T,) — It is the longest time taken (in second) 
by the structure to complete one cycle of oscillation in 
its lateral translational mode of oscillation in the 
considered direction of earthquake shaking. This mode 
of oscillation is called the fundamental lateral 
translational natural mode of oscillation. A three- 
dimensional model of a structure will have one such 
fundamental lateral translational mode of oscillation 
along each of the two orthogonal plan directions. 


3.19 Normal Mode of Oscillation — The mode of 
oscillation in which there are special undamped free 
oscillations in which all points on the structure oscillate 
harmonically at the same frequency (or period), such 
that all these points reach their individual maximum 
responses simultaneously. 


3.20 Peak Ground Acceleration — It is the maximum 
acceleration of the ground in a given direction of ground 
shaking. Here, the acceleration refers to that of the 
horizontal motion, unless specified otherwise. 


3.21 Response Reduction Factor (R) — It is the factor 
by which the base shear induced in a structure, if it 
were to remain elastic, is reduced to obtain the design 
base shear. It depends on the perceived seismic damage 
performance of the structure, characterized by ductile 
or brittle deformations, redundancy in the structure, or 
overstrength inherent in the design process. 


3.22 Response Spectrum — It is the representation of 
maximum responses of a spectrum of idealized single 
degree freedom systems of different natural periods 
but having the same damping, under the action of the 
same earthquake ground motion at their bases. The 
response referred to here can be maximum absolute 
acceleration, maximum relative velocity, or maximum 
relative displacement. 


3.23 Response Acceleration Coefficient of a Structure 
(S,/g) — It is a factor denoting the normalized design 
acceleration spectrum value to be considered for the 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


design of structures subjected to earthquake ground 
shaking; this value depends on the natural period of 
oscillation of the structure and damping to be 
considered in the design of the structure. 


3.24 Seismic Mass of a Floor — It is the seismic weight 
of the floor divided by acceleration due to gravity. 


3.25 Seismic Mass of a Structure — It is the seismic 
weight of a structure divided by acceleration due to 
gravity. 


3.26 Seismic Weight of a Floor (W) — It is the sum of 
dead load of the floor, appropriate contributions of 
weights of columns, walls and any other permanent 
elements from the storeys above and below, finishes 
and services, and appropriate amounts of specified 
imposed load on the floor. 


3.27 Seismic Weight of a Structure (W) — It is the 
sum of seismic weights of all floors. 


3.28 Seismic Zone Factor (Z) — It is the value of peak 
ground acceleration considered by this standard for 
the design of structures located in each seismic zone. 


3.29 Time History Analysis — It is an analysis of the 
dynamic response of the structure at each instant of 
time, when its base is subjected to a specific ground 
motion time history. 


4 SPECIAL TERMINOLOGY FOR BUILDINGS 


4.1 The definitions given below shall apply for the 
purpose of earthquake resistant design of buildings, 
as enumerated in this standard. 


4.2 Base — It is the level at which inertia forces 
generated in the building are considered to be 
transferred to the ground through the foundation. For 
buildings with basements, it is considered at the 
bottommost basement level. For buildings resting on, 


a) pile foundations, it is considered to be at the 
top of pile cap; 


b) raft, it is considered to be at the top of raft; 
and 


c) footings, it is considered to be at the top of 
the footing. 


For buildings with combined types of foundation, the 
base is considered as the bottom-most level of the bases 
of the constituent individual foundations as per 
definitions above. 


4.3 Base Dimension (d) — It is the dimension (in metre) 
of the base of the building along a direction of shaking. 


4.4 Centre of Mass (CM) — The point in the floor of a 
building through which the resultant of the inertia force 
of the floor is considered to act during earthquake 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


shaking. Unless otherwise stated, the inertia force 
considered is that associated with the horizontal 
shaking of the building. 


4.5 Centre of Resistance (CR) 


4.5.1 For Single Storey Buildings — It is the point on 
the roof of a building through which when the resultant 
internal resistance acts, the building undergoes, 


a) pure translation in the horizontal direction; 
and 


b) no twist about vertical axis passing through 
the CR. 


4.5.2 For Multi-Storey Buildings — It is the set of 
points on the horizontal floors of a multi-storey building 
through which, when the resultant incremental internal 
resistances across those floors act, all floors of the 
building undergo, 


a) pure translation in the horizontal direction; 
and 


b) no twist about vertical axis passing through 
the CR. 


4.6 Eccentricity 


4.6.1 Design Eccentricity (eş) — It is the value of 
eccentricity to be used for floor 7 in calculations of 
design torsion effects. 


4.6.2 Static Eccentricity (e) — It is the distance 
between centre of mass (CM) and centre of resistance 
(CR) of floor i. 


4.7 Design Seismic Base Shear (V3) — It is the horizontal 
lateral force in the considered direction of earthquake 
shaking that the structure shall be designed for. 


4.8 Diaphragm — It is a horizontal or nearly horizontal 
structural system (for example, reinforced concrete 
floors and horizontal bracing systems), which transmits 
lateral forces to vertical elements connected to it. 


4.9 Height of Floor (h) — It is the difference in vertical 
elevations (in metre) of the base of the building and 
top of floor i of the building. 


4.10 Height of Building (4) — It is the height of building 
(in metre) from its base to top of roof level, 


a) excluding the height of basement storeys, if 
basement walls are connected with the ground 
floor slab or basement walls are fitted between 
the building columns, but 


b) including the height of basement storeys, if 
basement walls are not connected with the 
ground floor slab and basement walls are not 
fitted between the building columns. 


In step-back buildings, it shall be taken as the average 
of heights of all steps from the base, weighted with 
their corresponding floor areas. And, in buildings 
founded on hill slopes, it shall be taken as the height of 
the roof from the top of the highest footing level or pile 
cap level. 


4.11 Horizontal Bracing System — It is a horizontal 
truss system that serves the same function as a 
diaphragm. 


4.12 Joints — These are portions of columns that are 
common to beams/braces and columns, which frame 
into columns. 


4.13 Lateral Force Resisting System — It is part of 
the structural system, and consists of all structural 
members that resist lateral inertia forces induced in the 
building during earthquake shaking. 


4.14 Moment-Resisting Frame — It is an assembly of 
beams and columns that resist induced and externally 
applied forces primarily by flexure. 


4.14.1 Ordinary Moment-Resisting Frame (OMRF) — 
It is amoment-resisting frame designed and detailed as 
per IS 456 or IS 800, but not meeting special detailing 
requirements for ductile behaviour as per IS 13920 or 
IS 800, respectively. 


4.14.2 Special Moment-Resisting Frame (SMRF) — It 
is a moment-resisting frame designed and detailed as 
per IS 456 or IS 800, and meeting special detailing 
requirements for ductile behaviour as per IS 13920 or 
IS 800, respectively. 


4.15 Number of Storeys (7) — It is the number of levels 
of a building above the base at which mass is present 
in substantive amounts. This, 


a) excludes the basement storeys, where 
basement walls are connected with the ground 
floor deck or fitted between the building 
columns; and 


b) includes the basement storeys, when they are 
not so connected. 


4.16 Core Structural Walls, Perimeter Columns, 
Outriggers and Belt Truss System — It is a structural 
system comprising of a core of structural walls and 
perimeter columns, resisting the vertical and lateral 
loads, with 


a) the core structural walls connected to select 
perimeter column element(s) (often termed 
outrigged columns) by deep beam elements, 
known as outriggers, at discrete locations 
along the height of the building; and 

b) the outrigged columns connected by deep 
beam elements (often known as belt truss), 


typically at the same level as the outrigger 
elements. 


A structure with this structural system has enhanced 
lateral stiffness, wherein core structural walls and 
perimeter columns are mobilized to act with each other 
through the outriggers, and the perimeter columns 
themselves through the belt truss. The global lateral 
stiffness is sensitive to: flexural stiffness of the core 
element, the flexural stiffness of the outrigger 
element(s), the axial stiffness of the outrigged 
column(s), and the flexural stiffness of the outrigger 
elements connecting the core structural walls to the 
perimeter columns. 


4.17 Principal Plan Axes — These are two mutually 
perpendicular horizontal directions in plan of a building 
along which the geometry of the building is oriented. 


4.18 P-A Effect — It is the secondary effect on shear 
forces and bending moments of lateral force resisting 
elements generated under the action of the vertical 
loads, interacting with the lateral displacement of 
building resulting from seismic effects. 


4.19 RC Structural Wall — It is a wall designed to 
resist lateral forces acting in its own plane. 


4.19.1 Ordinary RC Structural Wall — It is a reinforced 
concrete (RC) structural wall designed and detailed as 
per IS 456, but not meeting special detailing 
requirements for ductile behaviour as per IS 13920. 


4.19.2 Special RC Structural Wall — It is a RC 
structural wall designed and detailed as per IS 13920, 
and meeting special detailing requirements for ductile 
behaviour as per IS 13920. 


4.20 Storey — It is the space between two adjacent 
floors. 


4.20.1 Soft Storey — It is one in which the lateral 
stiffness is less than that in the storey above. The storey 
lateral stiffness is the total stiffness of all seismic force 
resisting elements resisting lateral earthquake shaking 
effects in the considered direction. 


4.20.2 Weak Storey — It is one in which the storey 
lateral strength [cumulative design shear strength of 
all structural members other than that of unreinforced 
masonry (URM) infills] is less than that in the storey 
above. The storey lateral strength is the total strength 
of all seismic force resisting elements sharing the lateral 
storey shear in the considered direction. 


4.21 Storey Drift — It is the relative displacement 
between the floors above and/or below the storey under 
consideration. 


4.22 Storey Shear (V,) — It is the sum of design lateral 
forces at all levels above the storey i under 
consideration. 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


4.23 Storey Lateral Shear Strength (S,) — It is the 
total lateral strength of all lateral force resisting 
elements in the storey considered in a principal plan 
direction of the building. 


4.24 Storey Lateral Translational Stiffness (K;) — It 
is the total lateral translational stiffness of all lateral 
force resisting elements in the storey considered in a 
principal plan direction of the building. 


4.25 RC Structural Wall Plan Density (p,,,) — It is 
the ratio of the cross-sectional area at the plinth level 
of RC structural walls resisting the lateral load and the 
plinth of the building, expressed as a percentage. 


5 SYMBOLS 


The symbols and notations given below apply to the 
provisions of this standard: 


A, Design horizontal earthquake acceleration 
coefficient 

A, Design horizontal earthquake acceleration 
spectrum value for mode k of oscillation 

b; Plan dimension of floor i of the building, 
perpendicular to direction of carthguake 
shaking 

C Index for the closely-spaced modes 

d Base dimension (in metre) of the building in 


the direction in which the earthquake 
shaking is considered 


DL O Response quantity due to dead load 


Eği Design eccentricity to be used at floor i 
calculated as per 7.8.2 
Eşi Static eccentricity at floor i defined as the 


distance between centre of mass and centre 
of resistance 
EL, Response quantity due to earthquake load 
for horizontal shaking along X-direction 
EL, Response quantity due to earthquake load 
for horizontal shaking along Y-direction 
EL, Response quantity due to earthquake load 
for horizontal shaking along Z-direction 


Foof Design lateral forces at the roof due to all 
modes considered 

Fi Design lateral forces at the floor 7 due to all 
modes considered 

g Acceleration due to gravity 

h Height (in metre) of structure 

h; Height measured from the base of the 
building to floor i 

I Importance factor 


IL Response quantity due to imposed load 
K, Lateral translational stiffness of storey i 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


L 


My 


= 


Dimension of a building in a considered 
direction 


Modal mass of mode k 
Number of storeys or floors 
Corrected SPT value for soil 


Number of modes to be considered as 
per 7.7.5.2 


Mode participation factor of mode k 
Lateral force at floor i 

Design lateral force at floor i in mode k 
Response reduction factor 


Design / Response acceleration coefficient 
for rock or soil sites as given by Fig. 2 
and 6.4.2 based on appropriate natural period 


Lateral shear strength of storey i 


Undamped natural period of oscillation of 
the structure (in second) 


Approximate fundamental period (in second) 


Undamped natural period of mode k of 
oscillation (in second) 


Fundamental natural period of oscillation (in 
second) 


Design seismic base shear 


Design base shear calculated using the 
approximate fundamental period 7, 


Peak storey shear force in storey i due to all 
modes considered 


Shear force in storey 7 in mode k 


Peak storey shear force in the top storey 
due to all modes considered 


Seismic weight of the building 

Seismic weight of floor i 

Seismic zone factor 

Mode shape coefficient at floor 7 in mode k 


Peak response (for example, member forces, 
displacements, storey forces, storey shears 
or base reactions) due to all modes considered 
Absolute value of maximum response in 
mode k 

Absolute value of maximum response in 
mode c, where mode c is a closely-spaced 
mode 

Peak response due to the closely-spaced 
modes only 

Coefficient used in complete quadratic 
combination (CQC) method while combining 
responses of modes i and j 

Circular frequency (in rad/s) in mode i 


6 GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND DESIGN 
CRITERIA 


6.1 General Principles 
6.1.1 Ground Motion 


The characteristics (intensity, duration, frequency 
content, etc) of seismic ground vibrations expected at 
any site depend on magnitude of earthquake, its focal 
depth, epicentral distance, characteristics of the path 
through which the seismic waves travel, and soil strata 
on which the structure is founded. The random 
earthquake ground motions, which cause the structure 
to oscillate, can be resolved in any three mutually 
perpendicular directions. The predominant direction of 
ground vibration is usually horizontal. 


Effects of earthquake-induced vertical shaking can be 
significant for overall stability analysis of structures, 
especially in structures (a) with large spans, and 
(b) those in which stability is a criterion for design. 
Reduction in gravity force due to vertical ground 
motions can be detrimental particularly in prestressed 
horizontal members, cantilevered members and gravity 
structures. Hence, special attention shall be paid to 
effects of vertical ground motion on prestressed or 
cantilevered beams, girders and slabs. 


6.1.2 The response of a structure to ground vibrations 
depends on (a) type of foundation; (b) materials, form, 
size and mode of construction of structures; and 
(c) duration and characteristics of ground motion. This 
standard specifies design forces for structures founded 
on rocks or soils, which do not settle, liquefy or slide 
due to loss of strength during earthquake ground 
vibrations. 


6.1.3 Actual forces that appear on structures during 
earthquakes are much higher than the design forces 
specified in the standard. Ductility arising from inelastic 
material behaviour with appropriate design and 
detailing, and overstrength resulting from the additional 
reserve strength in structures over and above the 
design strength are relied upon for the deficit in actual 
and design lateral loads. In other words, earthquake 
resistant design as per this standard relies on inelastic 
behaviour of structures. But, the maximum ductility that 
can be realized in structures is limited. Therefore, 
structures shall be designed for at least the minimum 
design lateral force specified in this standard. 


6.1.4 Members and connections of reinforced and 
prestressed concrete structures shall be designed (as 
per IS 456 and IS 1343) such that premature failure does 
not occur due to shear or bond. Some provisions for 
appropriate ductile detailing of RC members are given 
in IS 13920. Members and their connections of steel 
structures should be so proportioned that high ductility 
is obtained in the structure, avoiding premature failure 
due to elastic or inelastic buckling of any type. Some 


provisions for appropriate ductile detailing of steel 
members are given in IS 800. 


6.1.5 The soil-structure interaction refers to effects of 
the flexibility of supporting soil-foundation system on 
the response of structure. Soil-structure interaction may 
not be considered in the seismic analysis of structures 
supported on rock or rock-like material at shallow depth. 


6.1.6 Equipment and other systems, which are 
supported at various floor levels of a structure, will be 
subjected to different motions at their support points. 
In such cases, it may be necessary to obtain floor 
response spectra for design of equipment and its 
supports. For details, reference may be made to IS 1893 
(Part 4). 


6.1.7 Additions to Existing Structures 


Additions shall be made to existing structures only as 
follows: 


a) An addition that is structurally independent 
from an existing structure shall be designed 
and constructed in accordance with the 
seismic requirements for new structures. 


b) An addition that is structurally connected to 
an existing structure shall be designed and 
constructed such that the entire structure 
conforms to the seismic force resistance 
requirements for new structures, unless the 
following three conditions are complied with: 


1) Addition shall comply with the 
requirements for new structures, 

2) Addition shall not increase the seismic 
forces in any structural element of the 
existing structures by more than 
5 percent, unless the capacity of the 
element subject to the increased force is 
still in compliance with this standard, and 

3) Addition shall not decrease the seismic 
resistance of any structural element of the 
existing structure unless reduced 
resistance is equal to or greater than that 
required for new structures. 


6.1.8 Change in Occupancy 


When a change of occupancy results in a structure being 
re-classified to a higher importance factor (/), the structure 
shall conform to seismic requirements laid down for new 
structures with the higher importance factor. 


6.2 Assumptions 


The following assumptions shall be made in the 
earthquake-resistant design of structures: 


a) Earthquake ground motions are complex and 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


irregular, consisting of several frequencies and 
of varying amplitudes each lasting for a small 
duration. Therefore, usually, resonance of the 
type as visualized under steady-state 
sinusoidal excitations will not occur, as it would 
need time to build up such amplitudes. But, 
there are exceptions where resonance-like 
conditions have been seen to occur between 
long distance waves and tall structures 
founded on deep soft soils. 


b) Earthquake is not likely to occur 
simultaneously with high wind, maximum flood 
or maximum sea waves. 


c) The values of elastic modulus of materials, 
wherever required, will be taken as for static 
analysis, unless more definite values are 
available for use in dynamic conditions [see 
IS 456, IS 800, IS 1343, IS 1905 and IS 2974 
(Parts 1 to 5)]. 


6.3 Load Combinations and Increase in Permissible 
Stresses 


6.3.1 Load Combinations 


The load combinations shall be considered as specified 
in respective standards due to all load effects mentioned 
therein. In addition, those specified in this standard 
shall be applicable, which include earthquake effects. 


6.3.1.1 Even when load combinations that do not 
contain earthquake effects, indicate larger demands 
than combinations including them, the provisions shall 
be adopted related to design, ductile detailing and 
construction relevant for earthquake conditions, which 
are given in this standard, IS 13920 and IS 800. 


6.3.2 Design Horizontal Earthquake Load 


6.3.2.1 When lateral load resisting elements are oriented 
along two mutually orthogonal horizontal directions, 
structure shall be designed for effects due to full design 
earthquake load in one horizontal direction at a time, 
and not in both directions simultaneously. 


6.3.2.2 When lateral load resisting elements are not 
oriented along mutually orthogonal horizontal 
directions [as per 7.1 and Table 5(e)], structure shall be 
designed for the simultaneous effects due to full design 
earthquake load in one horizontal direction plus 
30 percent of design earthquake load along the other 
horizontal direction. Thus, structure should be designed 
for the following sets of combinations of earthquake 
effects: 


a) EL, +0.3 EL,, and 
b) +03 EL, +EL,, 
where X and Y are two orthogonal horizontal plan 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


directions. Thus, EL in the load combinations given in 
6.3.1 shall be replaced by (EL, + 0.3 ELy) or (EL, + 
0.3 ELy). Hence, the sets of load combinations to be 
considered shall be as given below: 


1) 1.2[DL+IL+(EL,+0.3 EL,)] and 
1.2 [DL +IL+(EL,+0.3 EL,)]; 

2) 1.5[DL+(EL,+0.3 EL) and 
1.5 [DL+(EL,+0.3 EL,)]; and 


3) 0.9DL+1.5 (EL, +0.3 EL,) and 
0.9 DL + 1.5 (EL, +0.3 EL,). 


6.3.3 Design Vertical Earthquake Effects 


6.3.3.1 Effects due to vertical earthquake shaking shall 
be considered when any of the following conditions 


apply: 
a) Structure is located in Seismic Zone IV or V; 
b) Structure has vertical or plan irregularities; 
c) Structure is rested on soft soil; 
d) Bridges; 
e) Structure has long spans; or 


f) Structure has large horizontal overhangs of 
structural members or sub-systems. 


6.3.3.2 When effects due to vertical earthquake shaking 
are to be considered, the design vertical force shall be 
calculated for vertical ground motion as detailed in 6.4.6. 


6.3.3.3 Where both horizontal and vertical seismic 
forces are taken into account, load combination 
specified in 6.3.4 shall be considered. 


6.3.4 Combinations to Account for Three Directional 
Earthquake Ground Shaking 


6.3.4.1 When responses from the three earthquake 
components are to be considered, the responses due 
to each component may be combined using the 
assumption that when the maximum response from one 
component occurs, the responses from the other two 
components are 30 percent each of their maximum. All 
possible combinations of three components (ELy, EL, 
and EL») including variations in sign (plus or minus) 
shall be considered. Thus, the structure should be 
designed for the following sets of combinations of 
earthquake load effects: 


a) +EL,+0.3 ELy+0.3 EL, 
b) +EL,+0.3 EL,+0.3 ELy, and 
c) +EL,+0.3 EL; +0.3 ELy, 


where X and Y are orthogonal plan directions and Z 
vertical direction. Thus, EL in the above referred load 
combinations shall be replaced by (EL, + 0.3 EL, + 


0.3 EL;), (ELy + 0.3 EL, + 0.3 ELy) or (EL, + 0.3 ELy + 
0.3 ELy,). This implies that the sets of load combinations 
involving earthquake effects to be considered shall be 
as given below: 


1) 1.2[DL+IL+(EL, £0.3 EL, +0.3 EL,)] and 
1.2 [DL +IL + (EL, +0.3 EL, +0.3 ELİ; 

2) 1.5 [DL+(EL,+0.3 EL, +0.3 EL,)] and 
1.5 [DL + (EL, + 0.3 EL, +0.3 EL,)]; and 

3) 0.9DL+1.5 (EL, +0.3 EL, +0.3 EL,) and 
0.9 DL + 1.5 (EL, +0.3 EL, +0.3 EL). 


6.3.4.2 As an alternative to the procedure in 6.3.4.1, 
the net response (EL) due to the combined effect of the 
three components can be obtained by: 


EL = (Ely) +(ELy) +(ELz) 


Caution may be exercised on loss of sign especially of 
the axial force, shear force and bending moment 
quantities, when this procedure is used; it can lead to 
grossly uneconomical design of structures. 


6.3.4.3 Procedure for combining shaking effects given 
by 6.3.4.1 and 6.3.4.2 apply to the same response 
quantity (say, bending moment in a column about its 
major axis, or storey shear force in a frame) due to 
different components of the ground motion. 


6.3.4.4 When components corresponding to only two 
ground motion components (say one horizontal and 
one vertical, or only two horizontal) are combined, the 
equations in 6.3.4.1 and 6.3.4.2 should be modified by 
deleting the term representing the response due to the 
component of motion not being considered. 


6.3.5 Increase in Net Pressure on Soils in Design of 
Foundations 


6.3.5.1 In the design of foundations, unfactored loads 
shall be combined in line with IS 2974, while assessing 
the bearing pressure in soils. 


6.3.5.2 When earthquake forces are included, net 
bearing pressure in soils can be increased as per 
Table 1, depending on type of foundation and type of 
soil. For determining the type of soil for this purpose, 
soils shall be classified in four types as given in Table 
2. In soft soils, no increase shall be applied in bearing 
pressure, because settlements cannot be restricted by 
increasing bearing pressure. 


6.3.5.3 In soil deposits consisting of submerged loose 
sands and soils falling under classification SP with 
corrected standard penetration test values N, less than 
15 in Seismic Zones III, IV and V, and less than 10 in 
Seismic Zone II, the shaking caused by earthquake 


ground motion may cause liquefaction or excessive 
total and differential settlements. Such sites should be 
avoided preferably for locating new structures, and 
should be avoided for locating structures of important 
projects. Otherwise, settlements need to be 
investigated, and appropriate methods adopted of 
compaction or stabilization to achieve N values 
indicated in Note 4 of Table 1. Alternatively, deep pile 
foundations may be adopted and anchored at depths 
well below the underlying soil layers, which are likely 
to liquefy or undergo excessive settlements. 


Also, marine clay layers and other sensitive clay layers 
are known to liquefy, undergo excessive settlements or 
even collapse, owing to low shear strength of the said 
soil; such soils will need special treatment according 
to site condition (see Table 2). 


A simplified method is given in Annex F, for evaluation 
of liquefaction potential. 


6.4 Design Acceleration Spectrum 


6.4.1 For the purpose of determining design seismic 
force, the country is classified into four seismic zones 
as shown in Fig. 1. 


6.4.2 The design horizontal seismic coefficient 4, fora 
structure shall be determined by: 


4 2718 
i 2 
(7) 
where 
Z = seismic zone factor given in Table 3; 
I = importance factor given in IS 1893 (Parts 1 


to 5) for the corresponding structures; when 
not specified, the minimum values of / shall 
be, 


a) 1.5 for critical and lifeline structures; 
b) 1.2 for business continuity structures; and 
c) 1.0 for the rest. 


R = response reduction factor given in IS 1893 

(Parts 1 to 5) for the corresponding 
? structures; and 
Ga design acceleration coefficient for different 
soil types, normalized with peak ground 
acceleration, corresponding to natural period 
T of structure (considering soil-structure 
interaction, if required). It shall be as given 
in Parts 1 to 5 of IS 1893 for the corresponding 
structures; when not specified, it shall be 
taken as that corresponding to 5 percent 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


damping, given by expressions below: 


a) For use in equivalent static method 
[see Fig. 2(a)]: 


25 0O<T<0.40s 


For rocky 1 
or hard — 0.40 s< T < 4.00 s 
soil sites 
0.25 T>4.00s 
25 0<T<0.55s 
For med- 
Sa = 4 jum stiff ne 0.55 s< T < 4.00 s 


& soil sites 
0.34 T>4.00s 


2.5 O<T<0.67s 


For soft |1.67 
soil sites T 


042 T>4.00s 


0.67 s<T<4.00s 


b) For use in response spectrum method 
[see Fig. 2(b)] 


14157 7<0.10s 
For rocky] 2.5 0.10 s< T < 0.40 s 
or hard 1 


soil sites T 0.40 s< T < 4.00 s 


0.25 T> 4.00 s 
1+15T T<0.10s 


For med- | 2.5 0.10s<T< 0.55s 
— = ium stiff 41.36 
e soil sites T 


0.34 T> 4.00 s 


0.55 s < T < 4.00 s 


14157 T<0.10s 

. 0.l0s<T<0.67s 
For soft 167 
soil sites | “© 0.67 s< T < 4.00 s 


0.42 T> 4.00 s 


6.4.2.1 For determining the correct spectrum to be used 
in the estimate of (S,/g), the type of soil on which the 
structure is placed shall be identified by the 
classification given in Table 4, as: 

a) Soil type I — Rock or hard soils; 

b) Soil type II — Medium or stiff soils; and 

c) Soil type IN — Soft soils. 


In Table 4, the value of N to be used shall be the 
weighted average of N of soil layers from the existing 
ground level to 30 m below the existing ground level; 
here, the N values of individual layers shall be the 
corrected values. 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


Table 1 Percentage Increase in Net Bearing 
Pressure and Skin Friction of Soils 
(Clause 6.3.5.2) 


SI No. Soil Type Percentage Increase Allowable 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Type A: Rock or hard soils 50 
ii) Type B: Medium or stiff soils 25 
iii) Type C: Soft soils 0 
NOTES 


1 The net bearing pressure shall be determined in 
accordance with IS 6403 or IS 1888. 


2 Only corrected values of N shall be used. 


3 If any increase in net bearing pressure has already been 
permitted for forces other than seismic forces, the 
increase in allowable bearing pressure, when seismic force 
is also included, shall not exceed the limits specified 
above. 


4 The desirable minimum corrected field values of N shall 
be as specified below: 


Seismic | Depth (m) below | N Values Remarks 
Zone Ground Level 
M, IV For values of 
and V depths between 
5 mand 10 m, 
I linear 


interpolation is 
recommended 


If soils of lower N values are encountered than those 
specified in the table above, then suitable ground 
improvement techniques shall be adopted to achieve 
these values. Alternately, deep pile foundations should 
be used, which are anchored in stronger strata, underlying 
the soil layers that do not meet the requirement. 

5 Piles should be designed for lateral loads neglecting lateral 
resistance of those soil layers (if any), which are liable 
to liquefy. 

6 Indian Standards IS 1498 and IS 2131 may be referred 
for soil notation, and corrected N values shall be 
determined by applying correction factor Cy for effective 


' . : 
overburden pressure O ,, using relation N-C,N,, 


where Cy=/P/o'",, $1.7, P, 
pressure and N1 is the uncorrected SPT value for soil. 
7 While using this table, the value of N to be considered 


shall be determined as below: 


is the atmospheric 


a) Isolated footings — Weighted average of N of soil 
layers from depth of founding, to depth of founding 
plus twice the breadth of footing; 

b) Raft foundations — Weighted average of N of soil 
layers from depth of founding, to depth of founding 
plus twice the breadth of raft; 

c) Pile foundation — Weighted average of N of soil 
layers from depth of bottom tip of pile, to depth of 
bottom tip of pile plus twice the diameter of pile; 

d) Group pile foundation — Weighted average of N of 
soil layers from depth of bottom tip of pile group, to 
depth of bottom tip of pile group plus twice the width 
of pile group; and 

e) Well foundation — Weighted average of N of soil 
layers from depth of bottom tip of well, to depth of 
bottom tip of well plus twice the width of well. 


10 


Table 2 Classification of Types of Soils for 
Determining Percentage Increase in Net 
Bearing Pressure and Skin Friction 
(Clause 6.3.5.2) 


SI No. Soil Type Remarks 

a) (2) (3) 

i) TypeA Well graded gravel (GW) or well graded sand 
Rock or (SW) both with less than 5 percent passing 
hard soils 75 mm sieve (Fines) 

Well graded gravel — sand mixtures with 
or without fines (GW-SW) 
Poorly-graded sand (SP) or Clayey sand 
(SC), all having N above 30 
Stiff to hard clays having N above 30, where 
N is corrected standard penetration test value 

ii) Type B Poorly graded sands or poorly graded sands 
Medium or with gravel (SP) with little or no fines having 
stiff soils N between 10 and 30 

Stiff to medium stiff fine-grained soils, 
like silts of low compressibility (ML) or 
clays of low compressibility (CL) having 
N between 10 and 30 

iii) Type C All soft soils other than SP with N<10. The 
Soft soils (o various possible soils are: 

Silts of intermediate compressibility (MI); 
Silts of high compressibility (MH); 
Clays of intermediate compressibility (CI); 
Clays of high compressibility (CH); 
Silts and clays of intermediate to high 
com-pressibility (MI-MH or CI-CH); 
Silt with clay of intermediate compressibility 
(MI-CD); and 

Silt with clay of high compressibility 
(MH-CH). 

iv) Type D Requires site-specific study and special 
Unstable, treatment according to site condition (see 
collapsible, 6.3.5.3) 
liquefiable 
soils 


Table 3 Seismic Zone Factor Z 


(Clause 6.4.2) 
Seismic Zone Factor TI II IV V 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Z 0.10 0.16 0.24 0.36 


6.4.3 Effects of design earthquake loads applied on 
structures can be considered in two ways, namely: 


a) Equivalent static method, and 
b) Dynamic analysis method. 


In turn, dynamic analysis can be performed in three 
ways, namely: 


1) Response spectrum method, 
2) Modal time history method, and 
3) Time history method. 


In this standard, Equivalent Static Method, Response 
Spectrum Method and Time History Method are 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


MAP OF INDIA 


SHOWING 
SEISMIC ZONES OF INDIA 


Kee 10050 6 İdi Hü Mü ere 
timia 


IH TESA THORLEY LINE 


I PAKISTAN 


SANGLADES 


ARABIAN 
SEA 


© Government of India Copyright, 2016 
Based upon Survey of India Political map printed in 2002. 


The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline. 

The interstate boundaries between Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are as interpreted from the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganization) Act, 1971, but have 
yet to be verified. 

The state boundaries between Uttarakhand & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned. 

The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh. 

The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by Survey of India. 

The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher. 


NOTE — Towns falling at the boundary of zones demarcation line between two zones shall be considered in higher zone. 


Fic. 1 SEISMIC ZONES OF INDIA 


11 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


3.0 Type | ROCK OR HARD SOIL 
25 Type Il MEDIUM SOIL 
——— Type lll 
20 yp SOFT SOIL 
D 
g 1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
0 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
NATURAL PERIOD T, s 
2A SPECTRA FOR EQUIVALENT STATIC METHOD 
3.0 
25 = Type | ROCK OR HARD SOIL 
20 Type Il MEDIUM SOIL 
D ——— Type Ill SOFT SOIL 
© 1.5 
Yn 
1.0 
0.5 
0 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
NATURAL PERIOD T, s 
2B SPECTRA FOR RESPONSE SPECTRUM METHOD 
Fic. 2 DESIGN ACCELERATION COEFFICIENT (S,/g) (CORRESPONDING TO 5 PERCENT DAMPING) 
Table 4 Classification of Types of Soils for Determining the Spectrum to be Used to 
Estimate Design Earthquake Force 
(Clause 6.4.2.1) 
SI No. Soil Type Remarks 
a) (2) (3) 
i) I a) Well graded gravel (GW) or well graded sand (SW) both with less than 5 percent passing 75 um sieve 
(Fines) 
Rock or b) Well graded gravel-sand mixtures with or without fines (GW-SW) 
Hard soils c) Poorly graded sand (SP) or clayey sand (SC), all having N above 30 
d) Stiff to hard clays having N above 30, where N is standard penetration test value 
ii) Il a) Poorly graded sands or poorly graded sands with gravel (SP) with little or no fines having N between 10 and 30 
Medium or b) Stiff to medium stiff fine-grained soils, like silts of low compressibility (ML) or clays of low 
Stiff soils compressibility (CL) having N between 10 and 30 
iii) mM All soft soils other than SP with N<10. The various possible soils are: 
Soft soils a) Silts of intermediate compressibility (MI); 


b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 


Silts of high compressibility (MH); 

Clays of intermediate compressibility (CI); 

Clays of high compressibility (CH); 

Silts and clays of intermediate to high compressibility (MI-MH or CI-CH); 
Silt with clay of intermediate compressibility (MI-CI); and 

Silt with clay of high compressibility (MH-CH). 


13 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


adopted. Equivalent static method may be used for 
analysis of regular structures with approximate natural 
period 7, less than 0.4 s. 


6.4.3.1 For structural analysis, the moment of inertia 
shall be taken as: 


a) In RC and masonry structures: 70 percent of 
Loss OF columns, and 35 percent of 7,,.. of 
beams; and 

b) In steel structures: /,... of both beams and 


gross 


columns. 


6.4.4 Where a number of modes are to be considered in 
response spectrum method, A, as defined in 6.4.2 for 
each mode k shall be determined using natural period 
T, of oscillation of that mode. 


6.4.5 For underground structures and buildings whose 
base is located at depths of 30 m or more, 4, at the base 
shall be taken as half the value obtained from 6.4.2. 
This reduced value shall be used only for estimating 
inertia effects due to masses at the corresponding levels 
below the ground; the inertia effects for the above 
ground portion of the building shall be estimated based 
on the unreduced value of A,. For estimating inertia 
effects due to masses of structures and foundations 
placed between the ground level and 30 m depth, the 
design horizontal acceleration spectrum value shall be 
linearly interpolated between A, and 0.5 A,, where A, 
is as specified in 6.4.2. 


6.4.6 The design seismic acceleration spectral value A, 
or vertical motions shall be taken as: 


(5x2) (2.5) 


For buildings governed 
by IS 1893 (Part 1) 


For liquid retaining tanks 
governed by IS 1893 
(Part 2) 


For bridges governed 
by IS 1893 (Part 3) 


For industrial structures 
governed by IS 1893 
(Part 4) 


The value of S,/g shall be based on natural period T 
corresponding to the first vertical mode of oscillation, 
using 6.4.2. 


14 


6.4.7 When design acceleration spectrum is developed 
specific to a project site, the same may be used for 
design of structures of the project. In such cases, 
effects of the site-specific spectrum shall not be less 
than those arising out of the design spectrum specified 
in this standard. 


7 BUILDINGS 


The four main desirable attributes of an earthquake 
resistant building are: 


a) Robust structural configuration, 

b) Atleast a minimum elastic lateral stiffness, 
c) Atleast a minimum lateral strength, and 

d) Adequate ductility. 


7.1 Regular and Irregular Configurations 


Buildings with simple regular geometry and uniformly 
distributed mass and stiffness in plan and in elevation, 
suffer much less damage, than buildings with irregular 
configurations. All efforts shall be made to eliminate 
irregularities by modifying architectural planning and 
structural configurations. A building shall be considered 
to be irregular for the purposes of this standard, even 
if any one of the conditions given in Tables 5 and 6 is 
applicable. Limits on irregularities for Seismic Zones 
III, IV and V and special requirements are laid out in 
Tables 5 and 6. 


Table 5 Definitions of Irregular Buildings — Plan 
Irregularities (see Fig. 3) 
(Clause 7.1) 


SI No. 
(1) 


i) 


Type of Plan Irregularity 
(2) 


Torsional Irregularity 
Usually, a well-proportioned building does not twist 
about its vertical axis, when 
a) the stiffness distribution of the vertical 
elements resisting lateral loads is balanced in 
plan according to the distribution of mass in 
plan (at each storey level); and 
the floor slabs are stiff in their own plane 
(this happens when its plan aspect ratio is 
less than 3) 
A building is said to be torsionally irregular, when, 
1) the maximum horizontal displacement of any 
floor in the direction of the lateral force at 
one end of the floor is more than 1.5 times its 
minimum horizontal displacement at the far 
end of the same floor in that direction; and 
the natural period corresponding to the 
fundamental torsional mode of oscillation is 
more than those of the first two translational 
modes of oscillation along each principal plan 
directions 


b) 


2) 


In torsionally irregular buildings, when the ratio of 
maximum horizontal displacement at one end and 
the minimum horizontal displacement at the other 
end is, 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


AL? 0.15 
or 
A/L>> 0.15 


A A A 
L L 
PLAN PLAN 
3B RE-ENTRANT CORNERS 


Ao>0.5A total Ao>0.1Atotal 
Ao 
Atotal Atotal 
OPENING LOCATED ANYWHERE IN OPENING LOCATED ALONG ANY 
THE SLAB EDGE OF THE SLAB 
PLAN PLAN 


3C FLOOR SLABS HAVING EXCESSIVE CUT-OUT AND OPENINGS 


ELEVATION 
3D OUT-OF-PLANE OFFSETS IN VERTICAL ELEMENTS 


PSN FERS 


PLAN PLAN 
(i) (ii) 


3E NON-PARALLEL LATERAL FORCE SYSTEM: 
(i) MOMENT FRAME BUILDING, and 
(ii) MOMENT FRAME BUILDING WITH STRUCTURAL WALLS 


Fic. 3 DEFINITIONS OF IRREGULAR BUILDINGS — PLAN IRREGULARITIES 


15 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


Table 5 — (Concluded) 


i) in the range 1.5 — 2.0, (a) the building 
configuration shall be revised to ensure that 
the natural period of the fundamental 
torsional mode of oscillation shall be smaller 
than those of the first two translational modes 
along each of the principal plan directions, 
and then (b) three dimensional dynamic 
analysis method shall be adopted; and 

ii) more than 2.0, the building configuration 
shall be revised 

Re-entrant Corners 


A building is said to have a re-entrant corner in any 
plan direction, when its structural configuration in 
plan has a projection of size greater than 15 percent 
of its overall plan dimension in that direction 


In buildings with re-entrant corners, three-dimensional 
dynamic analysis method shall be adopted. 


Floor Slabs having Excessive Cut-Outs or 
Openings 

Openings in slabs result in flexible diaphragm 
behaviour, and hence the lateral shear force is not 
shared by the frames and/or vertical members in 
proportion to their lateral translational stiffness. The 
problem is particularly accentuated when the opening 
is close to the edge of the slab. A building is said to 
have discontinuity in their in-plane stiffness, when 
floor slabs have cut-outs or openings of area more 
than 50 percent of the full area of the floor slab 


In buildings with discontinuity in their in-plane 

stiffness, if the area of the geometric cut-out is, 

a) less than or equal to 50 percent, the floor slab 
shall be taken as rigid or flexible depending on 
the location of and size of openings; and 

b) more than 50 percent, the floor slab shall be 
taken as flexible. 

Out-of-Plane Offsets in Vertical Elements 
Out-of-plane offsets in vertical elements resisting 
lateral loads cause discontinuities and detours in the 
load path, which is known to be detrimental to the 
earthquake safety of the building. A building is said to 
have out-of-plane offset in vertical elements, when 
structural walls or frames are moved out of plane in 
any storey along the height of the building 


In a building with out-of-plane offsets in vertical elements, 
a) specialist literature shall be referred for design 
of such a building, if the building is located in 
Seismic Zone II; and 
b) the following two conditions shall be satisfied, if the 
building is located in Seismic Zones III, IV and V: 
1) Lateral drift shall be less than 0.2 percent in 
the storey having the offset and in the storeys 
below; and 
2) Specialist literature shall be referred for 
removing the irregularity arising due to out- 
of-plane offsets in vertical elements. 


Non-Parallel Lateral Force System 

Buildings undergo complex earthquake behaviour and 
hence damage, when they do not have lateral force 
resisting systems oriented along two plan directions 
that are orthogonal to each other. A building is said 
to have non-parallel system when the vertically 
oriented structural systems resisting lateral forces 
are not oriented along the two principal orthogonal 
axes in plan 


Buildings with non-parallel lateral force resisting 
system shall be analyzed for load combinations 
mentioned in 6.3.2.2 or 6.3.4.1. 


16 


Table 6 Definition of Irregular Buildings — Vertical 


Irregularities (see Fig. 4) 
(Clause 7.1) 


Type of Vertical Irregularity 
(2) 


ii) 


iii) 


iv) 


v) 


vi) 


vii) 


Stiffness Irregularity (Soft Storey) 
A soft storey is a storey whose lateral stiffness is less 
than that of the storey above. 


The structural plan density (SPD) shall be estimated 
when unreinforced masonry infills are used. When 
SPD of masonry infills exceeds 20 percent, the effect 
of URM infills shall be considered by explicitly 
modelling the same in structural analysis (as per 
7.9). The design forces for RC members shall be 
larger of that obtained from analysis of: 

a) Bare frame, and 

b) Frames with URM infills,using 3D modelling of the 
structure. In buildings designed considering URM infills, 
the inter-storey drift shall be limited to 0.2 percent in 
the storey with stiffening and also in all storeys below. 


Mass Irregularity 

Mass irregularity shall be considered to exist, when 
the seismic weight (as per 7.7) of any floor is more 
than 150 percent of that of the floors below. 


In buildings with mass irregularity and located in 
Seismic Zones III, IV and V, the earthquake effects 
shall be estimated by Dynamic Analysis Method (as 
per 7.7). 


Vertical Geometric Irregularity 

Vertical geometric irregularity shall be considered to 
exist, when the horizontal dimension of the lateral 
force resisting system in any storey is more than 
125 percent of the storey below. 


In buildings with vertical geometric irregularity and 
located in Seismic Zones III, IV and V, the earthquake 
effects shall be estimated by Dynamic Analysis 
Method (as per 7.7). 


In-Plane Discontinuity in Vertical Elements 
Resisting Lateral Force 

In-plane discontinuity in vertical elements which 
are resisting lateral force shall be considered to exist, 
when in-plane offset of the lateral force resisting 
elements is greater than 20 percent of the plan length 
of those elements. 


In buildings with in-plane discontinuity and located 
in Seismic Zones II, the lateral drift of the building 
under the design lateral force shall be limited to 
0.2 percent of the building height; in Seismic Zones 
Ill, IV and V, buildings with in-plane discontinuity 
shall not be permitted. 


Strength Irregularity (Weak Storey) 
A weak storey is a storey whose lateral strength is 
less than that of the storey above. 


In such a case, buildings in Seismic Zones III, IV 
and V shall be designed such that safety of the 
building is not jeopardized; also, provisions of 7.10 
shall be followed. 


Floating or Stub Columns 
Such columns are likely to cause concentrated 
damage in the structure. 


This feature is undesirable, and hence should be 
prohibited, if it is part of or supporting the primary 
lateral load resisting system. 

Irregular Modes of Oscillation in Two Principal 
Plan Directions 

Stiffnesses of beams, columns, braces and structural 
walls determine the lateral stiffness of a building in 
each principal plan direction. A building is said to 
have lateral storey irregularity in a principal plan 
direction, if 


a) 


b) 


Table 6 — (Concluded) 


the first three modes contribute less than 
65 percent mass participation factor in each 
principal plan direction, and 

the fundamental lateral natural periods of the 
building in the two principal plan directions are 
closer to each other by 10 percent of the larger 
value. 


In buildings located in Seismic Zones II and III, it 
shall be ensured that the first three modes together 
contribute at least 65 percent mass participation 
factor in each principal plan direction. And, in 
buildings located in Seismic Zones IV and V, it shall 
be ensured that, 


1) 


2) 


the first three modes together contribute at least 
65 percent mass participation factor in each 
principal plan direction, and 

the fundamental lateral natural periods of the 
building in the two principal plan directions 
are away from each other by at least 10 percent 
of the larger value. 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


7.2 Lateral Force 
7.2.1 Design Lateral Force 
Buildings shall be designed for the design lateral force 
Vp given by: 

Vg 54W 
where A, shall be estimated as per 6.4.2, and W as per 
7.4. 
7.2.2 Minimum Design Lateral Force 
Buildings and portions there of shall be designed and 
constructed to resist at least the effects of design 
lateral force specified in 7.2.1. But, regardless of 
design earthquake forces arrived at as per 7.3.1, 
buildings shall have lateral load resisting systems 


capable of resisting a horizontal force not less than 
(Vs) min given in Table 7. 


Kisa > Kiz 
Ki > Ki 


Kia 
Ki 


ELEVATION 


4A STIFFNESS IRREGULARITY (SOFT STOREY) 


Wi > 1.5Wi+4 
Wi Wi > 1.5Wi.1 


ELEVATION 


4B MASS IRREGULARITY 


17 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


L2 > 1.2514 


4C VERTICAL GEOMETRIC IRREGULARITY 


P Lw , 
HA i 


ELEVATION Hte 


4D IN-PLANE DISCONTINUITY IN VERTICAL 
ELEMENTS RESISTING LATERAL FORCE 


ELEVATION 
4E STRENGTH IRREGULARITY (WEAK STOREY) 


| L2 | 
ELEVATION 


Si+1 < Si+2 
Si < Sin 


Fic. 4 DEFINITIONS OF IRREGULAR BUILDINGS — VERTICAL IRREGULARITIES 


18 


Table 7 Minimum Design Earthquake Horizontal 
Lateral Force for Buildings 


(Clause 7.2.2) 
SI No. Seismic Zone p 
Percent 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) II 7 
ii) Ill 1 
iii) IV 1.6 
iv) y 2.4 


7.2.3 Importance Factor (1) 


In estimating design lateral force Vp of buildings as 
per 7.2.1, the importance factor / of buildings shall be 
taken as per Table 8. 


Table 8 Importance Factor (J) 
(Clause 7.2.3) 


Structure I 


(2) (3) 


Important service and community build- 
ings or structures (for example, critical 
governance buildings, schools), signature 
buildings, monument buildings, lifeline and 
emergency buildings (for example, 
hospital buildings, telephone exchange 
buildings, television station buildings, 
radio station buildings, bus station 
buildings, metro rail buildings and metro 
rail station buildings), railway stations, 
airports, food storage buildings (such as 
warehouses), fuel station buildings, power 
station buildings, and fire station 
buildings), and large community hall 
buildings (for example, cinema halls, 
shopping malls, assembly halls and subway 
stations) 

Residential or commercial buildings [other 
than those listed in SI No. (i)] with 
occupancy more than 200 persons 


All other buildings 


ii) 1.2 


iii) 


NOTES 


1 Owners and design engineers of buildings or structures 
may choose values of importance factor J more than 
those mentioned above. 


2 Buildings or structures covered under SI No. (iii) may be 
designed for higher value of importance factor I, 
depending on economy and strategy. 


3 In SI No. (ii), when a building is composed of more than 
one structurally independent unit, the occupancy size 
shall be for each of the structurally independent unit of 
the building. 


4 In buildings with mixed occupancies, wherein different / 
factors are applicable for the respective occupancies, 
larger of the importance factor I values shall be used for 
estimating the design earthquake force of the building. 


7.2.4 Damping Ratio 


The value of damping shall be taken as 5 percent of 


19 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


critical damping for the purposes of estimating A,, in 
the design lateral force Vp of a building as per 7.2.1, 
irrespective of the material of construction (namely 
steel, reinforced concrete, masonry, or a combination 
thereof of these three basic materials) of its lateral load 
resisting system, considering that buildings experience 
inelastic deformations under design level earthquake 
effects, resulting in much higher energy dissipation 
than that due to initial structural damping in buildings. 
This value of damping shall be used, irrespective of 
the method of the structural analysis employed, namely 
Equivalent Static Method (as per 7.6) or Dynamic 
Analysis Method (as per 7.7). 


7.2.5 Design Acceleration Spectrum 


Design acceleration coefficient S,/g corresponding to 
5 percent damping for different soil types, normalized to 
peak ground acceleration, corresponding to natural period 
T of structure considering soil-structure interaction, 
irrespective of the material of construction of the structure. 
S./g shall be as given by expressions in 6.4.2. 


7.2.6 Response Reduction Factor (R) 


Response reduction factor, along with damping during 
extreme shaking and redundancy: (a) influences the 
nonlinear behaviour of buildings during strong 
earthquake shaking, and (b) accounts for inherent 
system ductility, redundancy and overstrength normally 
available in buildings, if designed and detailed as per 
this standard and the associated Indian Standards. 


For the purpose of design as per this standard, 
response reduction factor R for different building 
systems shall be as given in Table 9. The values of R 
shall be used for design of buildings with lateral load 
resisting elements, and NOT for just the lateral load 
resisting elements, which are built in isolation. 


7.2.7 Dual System 


Buildings with dual system consist of moment resisting 
frames and structural walls (or of moment resisting 
frames and bracings) such that both of the following 
conditions are valid: 


a) Two systems are designed to resist total 
design lateral force in proportion to their lateral 
stiffness, considering interaction of two 
systems at all floor levels; and 


b) Moment resisting frames are designed to 
resist independently at least 25 percent of the 


design base shear. 


7.3 Design Imposed Loads for Earthquake Force 
Calculation 


7.3.1 For various loading classes specified in IS 875 
(Part 2), design seismic force shall be estimated using 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


full dead load plus percentage of imposed load as given 
in Table 10. The same shall be used in the three- 
dimensional dynamic analysis of buildings also. 


Table 9 Response Reduction Factor R for Building 
Systems 
(Clause 7.2.6) 


Lateral Load Resisting System 
(2) 


Moment Frame Systems 

a) RC buildings with ordinary moment resisting 
frame (OMRF) (see Note 1) 

b) RC buildings with special moment resisting 
frame (SMRF) 

c) Steel buildings with ordinary moment resisting 
frame (OMRF) (see Note 1) 

d) Steel buildings with special moment resisting 
frame (SMRF) 

Braced Frame Systems (see Note 2) 

a) Buildings with ordinary braced frame (OBF) 
having concentric braces 

b) Buildings with special braced frame (SBF) 

having concentric braces 

c) Buildings with special braced frame (SBF) 
having eccentric braces 

Structural Wall Systems (see Note 3) 

a) Load bearing masonry buildings 

1) Unreinforced masonry (designed as per 

IS 1905) without horizontal RC seismic 

bands (see Note 1) 

Unreinforced masonry (designed as per 

IS 1905) with horizontal RC seismic 

bands 

Unreinforced masonry (designed as per 

IS 1905) with horizontal RC seismic 

bands and vertical reinforcing bars at 

corners of rooms and jambs of openings 

(with reinforcement as per IS 4326) 

Reinforced masonry [see SP 7 (Part 6) 

Section 4] 

5) Confined masonry 

Buildings with ordinary RC structural walls 

(see Note 1) 

c) Buildings with ductile RC structural walls 

Dual Systems (see Note 3) 

a) Buildings with ordinary RC structural walls 
and RC OMRFs (see Note 1) 

b) Buildings with ordinary RC structural walls 

and RC SMRFs (see Note 1) 

Buildings with ductile RC structural walls 

with RC OMRFs (see Note 1) 

Buildings with ductile RC structural walls 

with RC SMRFs 

Flat Slab — Structural Wall Systems 

(see Note 4) 

RC building with the three features given below: 
a) Ductile RC structural walls (which are 

designed to resist 100 percent of the 

design lateral force), 

Perimeter RC SMRFs (which are designed 

to independently resist 25 percent of the 

design lateral force), and preferably 

c) An outrigger and belt truss system 
connecting the core ductile RC 
structural walls and the perimeter RC 
SMRFs (see Note 1). 


ii) 


iii) 
1.5 
2) 2.0 


3) 2.5 


4) 


b) 


iv) 


c) 
d) 
v) 


3.0 


b) 


NOTES 
1 RC and steel structures in Seismic Zones III, IV and V 


20 


shall be designed to be ductile. Hence, this system is not 
allowed in these seismic zones. 

2 Eccentric braces shall be used only with SBFs. 

3 Buildings with structural walls also include buildings 
having structural walls and moment frames, but where, 
a) frames are not designed to carry design lateral 
loads, or 
b) frames are designed to carry design lateral loads, 
but do not fulfill the requirements of ‘Dual Systems’. 

4 In these buildings, (a) punching shear failure shall be 
avoided, and (b) lateral drift at the roof under design 
lateral force shall not exceed 0.1 percent. 


7.3.2 For calculation of design seismic forces of 
buildings, imposed load on roof need not be 
considered. But, weights of equipment and other 
permanently fixed facilities should be considered; in 
such a case, the reductions of imposed loads 
mentioned in Table 10 are not applicable to that part 
of the load. 


Table 10 Percentage of Imposed Load to be 
Considered in Calculation of Seismic Weight 
(Clause 7.3.1) 


SI No. Imposed Uniformity Percentage of 
Distributed Floor Loads Imposed Load 
kN/m? 
a) (2) (3) 
i) Up to and including 3.0 25 
ii) Above 3.0 50 


7.3.3 Imposed load values indicated in Table 10 for 
calculating design earthquake lateral forces are 
applicable to normal conditions. When loads during 
earthquakes are more accurately assessed, designers 
may alter imposed load values indicated or even replace 
the entire imposed load given in Table 10 with actual 
assessed load values, subject to the values given in 
Table 7 as the minimum values. Where imposed load is 
not assessed as per 7.3.1 and 7.3.2, 


a) only that part of imposed load, which 
possesses mass, shall be considered; and 


b) lateral earthquake design force shall not be 
calculated on contribution of impact effects 


from imposed loads. 


7.3.4 Loads other than those given above (for example, 
snow and permanent equipment) shall be considered 
appropriately. 


7.3.5 In regions of severe snow loads and sand storms 
exceeding intensity of 1.5 kN/m?2, 20 percent of uniform 
design snow load or sand load, respectively shall be 
included in the estimation of seismic weight. In case 
the minimum values of seismic weights corresponding 
to these load effects given in IS 875 are higher, the 
higher values shall be used. 


7.3.6 In buildings that have interior partitions, the 
weight of these partitions on floors shall be included 
in the estimation of seismic weight; this value shall not 
be less than 0.5 kN/m?. In case the minimum values of 
seismic weights corresponding to partitions given in 
parts of IS 875 are higher, the higher values shall be 
used. It shall be ensured that the weights of these 
partitions shall be considered only in estimating inertial 
effects of the building. 


7.4 Seismic Weight 
7.4.1 Seismic Weight of Floors 


Seismic weight of each floor is its full dead load plus 
appropriate amount of imposed load, as specified in 7.3. 
While computing the seismic weight of each floor, the weight 
of columns and walls in any storey shall be appropriately 
apportioned to the floors above and below the storey. 


7.4.2 Any weight supported in between storeys shall 
be distributed to floors above and below in inverse 
proportion to its distance from the floors. 


7.6 Equivalent Static Method 


As per this method, first, the design base shear V shall 
be computed for the building as a whole. Then, this Vg 
shall be distributed to the various floor levels at the 
corresponding centres of mass. And, finally, this design 
seismic force at each floor level shall be distributed to 
individual lateral load resisting elements through 
structural analysis considering the floor diaphragm 
action. This method shall be applicable for regular 
buildings with height less than 15 m in Seismic Zone II. 


7.6.1 The design base shear Vp along any principal 
direction of a building shall be determined by: 


Vg SAW 
where 
A, = design horizontal acceleration coefficient value 
as per 6.4.2, using approximate fundamental 
natural period T, as per 7.6.2 along the 
considered direction of shaking; and 
W = seismic weight of the building as per 7.4. 


7.6.2 The approximate fundamental translational natural 
period 7, of oscillation, in second, shall be estimated 
by the following expressions: 


a) Bare MRF buildings (without any masonry 
infills): 


0.0754?” (for RC MRF building) 


(for RC-Steel Composite 


_ 0.75 
T, =40.080h MRF building) 


0.085h°” (for steel MRF building) 


21 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


where 

h= height (in m) of building (see Fig. 5). This 
excludes the basement storeys, where 
basement storey, walls are connected 
with the ground floor deck or fitted 
between the building columns, but 
includes the basement storeys, when 
they are not so connected. 


b) Buildings with RC structural walls: 
0.75 
T= 0.075} 0.09} 


a JA, Jd 


where A,, is total effective area (m?) of walls in 
the first storey of the building given by: 


öte 


izl 


where 

h = height of building as defined in 
7.6.2(a), inm; 

A,, = effective cross-sectional area of wall i 
in first storey of building, in m?; 

Li = length of structural wall i in first storey 
in the considered direction of lateral 
forces, in m; 

d = base dimension of the building at the 
plinth level along the considered 
direction of earthquake shaking, in m; 
and 

N,, = number of walls in the considered 


direction of earthquake shaking. 


The value of L,,,/h to be used in this equation 
shall not exceed 0.9. 


c) All other buildings: 
0.09h 
Le 
Jd 
where 


h= height of building, as defined in 7.6.2(a), 
in m; and 

d= base dimension of the building at the plinth 
level along the considered direction of 
earthquake shaking, in m. 


7.6.3 The design base shear (Vp) computed in 7.6.1 
shall be distributed along the height of the building 
and in plan at each floor level as below: 


a) Vertical distribution of base shear to different 
floor levels — The design base shear Vp 
computed in 7.6.1 shall be distributed along 
the height of the building as per the following 


expression: 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


VB can be VB can be 
calculated calculated 
h as per as per 
7.6.1 is 7.6.1 is 
only for only for 


this provision this provision 


d d 
5B 5B 


Fic. 5 DEFINITIONS OF HEIGHT AND BASE WIDTH OF BUILDINGS 


22 


2 
bl) 
Simp 
j=l 
where 
O, = design lateral force at floor i; 
W, = seismic weight of floor 7; 
h; = height of floor i measured from base; 
and 
n = number of storeys in building, that is, 
number of levels at which masses are 
located. 


b) /n-plan distribution of design lateral force 
at floor i to different lateral force resisting 
elements — The design storey shear in any 
storey shall be calculated by summing the 
design lateral forces at all floor above that 
storey. In buildings whose floors are capable 
of providing rigid horizontal diaphragm action 
in their own plane, the design storey shear 
shall be distributed to the various vertical 
elements of lateral force resisting system in 
proportion to the lateral stiffness of these 
vertical elements. 


7.6.4 Diaphragm 


In buildings whose floor diaphragms cannot provide 
rigid horizontal diaphragm action in their own plane, 
design storey shear shall be distributed to the various 
vertical elements of lateral force resisting system 
considering the in-plane flexibility of the diaphragms. 


A floor diaphragm shall be considered to be flexible, if it 
deforms such that the maximum lateral displacement 
measured from the chord of the deformed shape at any 
point of the diaphragm is more than 1.2 times the average 
displacement of the entire diaphragm (see Fig. 6). 


Amiddle > 1-24 
where Ajve=(Aj+A,)/2 


ave © 


ave 


PLAN 


Fic. 6 DEFINITION OF FLEXIBLE FLOOR DIAPHRAGM 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


Usually, reinforced concrete monolithic slab-beam 
floors or those consisting of prefabricated or precast 
elements with reasonable reinforced screed concrete 
(at least a minimum of 50 mm on floors and of 75 mm on 
roof, with at least a minimum reinforcement of 6 mm 
bars spaced at 150 mm centres) as topping, and of plan 
aspect ratio less than 3, can be considered to be 
providing rigid diaphragm action. 


7.7 Dynamic Analysis Method 


7.7.1 Linear dynamic analysis shall be performed to 
obtain the design lateral force (design seismic base 
shear, and its distribution to different levels along the 
height of the building, and to various lateral load 
resisting elements) for all buildings, other than regular 
buildings lower than 15 m in Seismic Zone II. 


7.7.2 The analytical model for dynamic analysis of 
buildings with unusual configuration should be such 
that it adequately represents irregularities present in 
the building configuration. 


7.7.3 Dynamic analysis may be performed by either the 
Time History Method or the Response Spectrum 
Method. When either of the methods is used, the design 
base shear V, estimated shall not be less than the design 


base shear Vr calculated using a fundamental period 


T,, where T, is as per 7.6.2. 


When V is less than y, , the force response quantities 
(for example member stress resultants, storey shear 
forces, and base reactions) shall be multiplied by 


Vs / V, . For earthquake shaking considered along, 


a) the two mutually perpendicular plan directions 
X and Y, separate multiplying factors shall be 


calculated, namely Vex [Vox and Vay / lar 
respectively; and 


b) the vertical Z direction, the multiplying factor 


shall be taken as Max| Vox [Vax Vey [Vay |. 


7.7.4 Time History Method 


Time history method shall be based on an appropriate 
ground motion (preferably compatible with the design 
acceleration spectrum in the desired range of natural 
periods) and shall be performed using accepted 
principles of earthquake structural dynamics. 


7.7.5 Response Spectrum Method 


Response spectrum method may be performed for any 
building using the design acceleration spectrum 
specified in 6.4.2, or by a site-specific design 
acceleration spectrum mentioned in 6.4.7. 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


7.7.5.1 Natural modes of oscillation 


Undamped free vibration analysis of the entire building 
shall be performed as per established methods of 
structural dynamics using appropriate mass and elastic 
stiffness of the structural system, to obtain natural 
periods 7, and mode shapes {@}, of those of its N,, 
modes of oscillation [k €(1,N,,)] that need to be 
considered as per 7.7.5.2. 


7.7.5.2 Number of modes to be considered 


The number of modes N,, to be used in the analysis for 
earthquake shaking along a considered direction, 
should be such that the sum total of modal masses of 
these modes considered is at least 90 percent of the 
total seismic mass. 


If modes with natural frequencies beyond 33 Hz are to 
be considered, the modal combination shall be carried 
out only for modes with natural frequency less than 
33 Hz; the effect of modes with natural frequencies more 
than 33 Hz shall be included by the missing mass 
correction procedure following established principles 
of structural dynamics. If justified by rigorous analysis, 
designers may use a cut off frequency other than 33 Hz. 


7.7.5.3 Combination of modes 


The responses of different modes considered shall be 
combined by one of the two methods given below: 


a) Peak response quantities (for example, member 
forces, displacements, storey forces, storey 
shears, and base reactions) may be combined 
as per Complete Quadratic Combination (CQC) 
method, as given below: 


where 
A = estimate of peak response quantity; 
, = response quantity in mode i (with sign); 


A; = response quantity in mode j (with sign); 


Pı, = cross-modal correlation co-efficient 


g 8 C(1+B) 8” 
(1-82) +4 CB (148) 


N „= number of modes considered; 


& = modal damping coefficient ratio which 
shall be taken as 0.05; 


0. 


l. 
B = natural frequency ratio = a 


i 


© = circular natural frequency in mode j; and 


©, = circular natural frequency in mode i. 


b) Alternatively, the peak response quantities 
may be combined as follows: 


1) Ifbuilding does not have closely-spaced 
modes, then net peak response quantity 
A due to all modes considered shall be 
estimated as: 


A, = peak response quantity in mode k, 
and 


N „= number of modes considered. 


2) If building has a few closely-spaced 
modes, then net peak response quantity 
A‘ due to these closely space modes alone 
shall be obtained as: 


x => A, 


where 


A, = peak response quantity in closely 
spaced mode c. The summation is 
for closely spaced modes only. 
Then, this peak response quantity 
A* due to closely spaced modes is 
combined with those of remaining 
well-separated modes by method 
described above. 

7.7.5.4 Simplified method of dynamic analysis of 
buildings 

Regular buildings may be analyzed as a system of 
masses lumped at the floor levels with each mass 
having one degree of freedom, that of lateral 
displacement in the direction under consideration. In 
such a case, the following expressions shall hold in the 
computation of the various quantities: 


a) Modal mass — Modal mass M, of mode k is 
given by: 


g = acceleration due to gravity, 


p = mode shape coefficient at floor i in 
mode k, 


W. = seismic weight of floor i of the structure, 
and 


n = number of floors of the structure. 


b) Mode participation factor — Mode 
participation factor P, of mode k is given by: 


LM (x) 


Design lateral force at each floor in each 
mode — Peak lateral force O. at floor i in mode 
k is given by: 


O. = AP AW; 


P 


k 


©) 


where 


A, = design horizontal acceleration spectrum 
value as per 6.4.2 using natural period 
of oscillation 7, of mode k obtained 
from dynamic analysis. 

d) Storey shear forces in each mode — Peak 
shear force V, acting in storey i in mode £ is 
given by: 


Vx = > O, 

j-iH 
e) Storey shear force due to all modes 
considered — Peak storey shear force V, in 
storey i due to all modes considered, shall be 
obtained by combining those due to each 


mode in accordance with 7.7.5.3. 


Lateral forces at each storey due to all modes 
considered — Design lateral forces F „pat roof 
level and F, at level of floor i shall be obtained 
as: 


F 


roof 


y: 


roof ? 


Visi 


and 
B= Ve= 
7.8 Torsion 


7.8.1 Provision shall be made in all buildings for increase 
in shear forces on the lateral force resisting elements 
resulting from twisting about the vertical axis of the 
building, arising due to eccentricity between the centre 
of mass and centre of resistance at the floor levels. The 
design forces calculated as in 7.6 and 7.7.5, shall be 
applied at the displaced centre of mass so as to cause 
design eccentricity (as given by 7.8.2) between the 
displaced centre of mass and centre of resistance. 


7.8.2 Design Eccentricity 


While performing structural analysis by the Seismic 
Coefficient Method or the Response Spectrum Method, 
the design eccentricity e4; to be used at floor i shall be 
taken as: 
1.5e, + 0.056, 
eğ 


Ni - 0.05, 


whichever gives the more severe effect on lateral force 
resisting elements; 


25 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


where 
e, = Static eccentricity at floor i, 
= distance between centre of mass and centre 
of resistance, and 
b; = floor plan dimension of floor i, perpendicular 


to the direction of force. 


The factor 1.5 represents dynamic amplification factor, 
and 0.055; represents the extent of accidental 
eccentricity. The above amplification of 1.5 need not 
be used, when performing structural analysis by the 
Time History Method. 


7.9 RC Frame Buildings with Unreinforced Masonry 
Infill Walls 


7.9.1 In RC buildings with moment resisting frames 
and unreinforced masonry (URM) infill walls, variation 
of storey stiffness and storey strength shall be 
examined along the height of the building considering 
in-plane stiffness and strength of URM infill walls. If 
storey stiffness and strength variations along the 
height of the building render it to be irregular as per 
Table 6, the irregularity shall be corrected especially in 
Seismic Zones III, IV and V. 


7.9.2 The estimation of in-plane stiffness and strength 
of URM infill walls shall be based on provisions given 
hereunder. 


7.9.2.1 The modulus of elasticity £,, (in MPa) of 
masonry infill wall shall be taken as: 


E,=550f, 


where /,, is the compressive strength of masonry prism 
(in MPa) obtained as per IS 1905 or given by expression: 


fa SUAS” Soa 
where 
hh 
İn mo 


7.9.2.2 URM infill walls shall be modeled by using 
equivalent diagonal struts as below: 


compressive strength of brick, in MPa; and 
= compressive strength of mortar, in MPa. 


a) Ends of diagonal struts shall be considered 
to be pin-jointed to RC frame; 


b) For URM infill walls without any opening, width 


w,, of equivalent diagonal strut (see Fig. 7) shall 
be taken as: 


w, = 0.17507 Ly 


Etsin 20 
a, = h 4] ———————_ 
4E,Lh 


where 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


where E,, and E; are the modulii of elasticity 
of the materials of the URM infill and RC 
MRF, /, the moment of inertia of the adjoining 
column, / the thickness of the infill wall, and 
0 the angle of the diagonal strut with the 


horizontal; 
c) For URM infill walls with openings, no 
reduction in strut width is required; and 
d) Thickness of the equivalent diagonal strut 


shall be taken as thickness ¢ of original URM 
infill wall, provided h/t < 12 and l/t < 12, where 
h is clear height of URM infill wall between 
the top beam and bottom floor slab, and / clear 
length of the URM infill wall between the 
vertical RC elements (columns, walls or a 
combination thereof) between which it spans. 


TEE aaa. 


Fic. 7 EQUIVALENT DIAGONAL STRUT OF URM 
INFILL WALL 


7.10 RC Frame Buildings with Open Storeys 


7.10.1 RC moment resisting frame buildings, which have 
open storey(s) at any level, such as due to 
discontinuation of unreinforced masonry (URM) infill 
walls or of structural walls, are known to have flexible 
and weak storeys as per Table 6. In such buildings, 
suitable measures shall be adopted, which increase both 
stiffness and strength to the required level in the open 
storey and the storeys below. These measures shall be 
taken along both plan directions as per requirements 
laid down under 7.10.2 to 7.10.4. The said increase 
may be achieved by providing measures, like: 


a) RC structural walls, or 
b) Braced frames, in select bays of the building. 


7.10.2 When the RC structural walls are provided, they 
shall be, 


a) founded on properly designed foundations; 


b) continuous preferably over the full height of 
the building; and 


26 


©) 


connected preferably to the moment resisting 
frame of the building. 


7.10.3 When the RC structural walls are provided, they 
shall be designed such that the building does NOT 
have: 


a) Additional torsional irregularity in plan than 
that already present in the building. In 
assessing this, lateral stiffness shall be 
included of all elements that resist lateral 


actions at all levels of the building; 


b) Lateral stiffness in the open storey(s) is less 
than 80 percent of that in the storey above; 


and 


©) 


Lateral strength in the open storey(s) is less 
than 90 percent of that in the storey above. 


7.10.4 When the RC structural walls are provided, the 
RC structural wall plan density p, , of the building shall 
be at least 2 percent along each principal direction in 
Seismic Zones III, IV and V. These walls shall be well 
distributed in the plan of the building along each plan 
direction. RC structural walls of this measure can be 
adopted even in regular buildings that do not have 
open storey(s). 


7.10.5 RC structural walls in buildings located in 
Seismic Zones III, IV and V shall be designed and 
detailed to comply with all requirements of IS 13920. 


7.11 Deformation 


Deformation of RC buildings shall be obtained from 
structural analysis using a structural model based on 
section properties given in 6.4.3. 


7.11.1 Storey Drift Limitation 


7.11.1.1 Storey drift in any storey shall not exceed 0.004 
times the storey height, under the action of design base 
of shear V, with no load factors mentioned in 6.3, that 
is, with partial safety factor for all loads taken as 1.0. 


7.11.1.2 Displacement estimates obtained from dynamic 
analysis methods shall not be scaled as given in 7.7.3. 


7.11.2 Deformation Capability of Non-Seismic 
Members 


For buildings located in Seismic Zones III, IV and V, it 
shall be ensured that structural components, that are 
not a part of seismic force resisting system in considered 
direction of ground motion but are monolithically 
connected, do not lose their vertical load-carrying 
capacity under induced net stress resultants, including 
additional bending moments and shear forces resulting 
from storey deformations equal to R times storey 
displacements calculated as per 7.11.1, where R is 
specified in Table 9. 


7.11.3 Separation between Adjacent Units 


Two adjacent buildings, or two adjacent units of the 
same building with separation joint between them, 
shall be separated by a distance equal to R times sum 
of storey displacements A, and A, calculated as per 
7.11.1 of the two buildings or two units of the same 
building, to avoid pounding as the two buildings or 
two units of the same building oscillate towards each 
other. 


When floor levels of the adjacent units of a building or 
buildings are at the same level, the separation distance 
shall be calculated as (R,A, + R,A,), where R, and A, 
correspond to building 1, and R, and A, to building 2. 


7.12 Miscellaneous 
7.12.1 Foundations 


Isolated RC footings without tie beams or unreinforced 
strip foundations, shall not be adopted in buildings 
rested on soft soils (with corrected N < 10) in any 
Seismic Zone. Use of foundations vulnerable to 
significant differential settlement due to ground shaking 
shall be avoided in buildings located in Seismic Zones 
II, IV and V. 


Individual spread footings or pile caps shall be 
interconnected with ties (see 5.3.4.1 of IS 4326), except 
when individual spread footings are directly supported 
on rock, in buildings located in Seismic Zones IV and V. 
All ties shall be capable of carrying, in tension and in 
compression, an axial force equal to 4,/4 times the larger 
of the column or pile cap load, in addition to the 
otherwise computed forces, subject to a minimum of 
5 percent of larger of column or pile cap loads. Here, 
A, is as per 6.4.2. 


Pile shall be designed and constructed to withstand 
maximum curvature imposed (structural response) by 
earthquake ground shaking. Design of anchorage of 
piles into the pile cap shall consider combined effects, 
including that of axial forces due to uplift and bending 


27 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


moments due to fixity to pile cap. 
7.12.2 Cantilever Projections 
7.12.2.1 Vertical projections 


Small-sized facilities (like towers, tanks, parapets, smoke 
stacks/chimneys) and other vertical cantilever 
projections attached to buildings and projecting 
vertically above the roof, but not a part of the structural 
system of the building, shall be designed and checked 
for stability for five times the design horizontal seismic 
coefficient A, specified in 6.4.2 for that building. In the 
analysis of the building, weights of these projecting 
elements shall be lumped with the roof weight. 


7.12.2.2 Horizontal projections 


All horizontal projections of buildings (like cantilever 
structural members at the porch level or higher) or 
attached to buildings (like brackets, cornices and 
balconies) shall be designed for five times the design 
vertical coefficient A, specified in 6.4.6 for that building. 


7.12.2.3 The increased design forces specified 
in 7.12.2.1 and 7.12.2.2 are only for designing the 
projecting parts and their connections with the main 
structures, and NOT for the design of the main 
structure. 


7.12.3 Compound Walls 


Compound walls shall be designed for the design 
horizontal coefficient 4, of 1.25Z, that is, A, calculated 
using 6.4.2 with /= 1, R= 1 and S,/g = 2.5. 


7.12.4 Connections between Parts 


All small items and objects of a building shall be tied to 
the building or to each other to act as single unit, except 
those between the separation joints and seismic joints. 
These connections shall be made capable of 
transmitting the forces induced in them, but not less 
than 0.05 times weight of total dead and imposed load 
reactions; frictional resistance shall not be relied upon 
in these calculations. 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEXA 
(Foreword) 


MAP OF INDIA SHOWING EPICENTRES OF PAST EARTHQUAKES IN INDIA 
(From Catalog of 2015) 


pa” ra 


MAP OF INDIA 


AND SURROUNDING 
SHOWING EPICENTRES 


Lİ 06D dB 
KILOMETRES: 


LEGEND 


MAGHITWDE 
SOTO <6.0 
GOTU <g.5 
BS To = 70 
TÜTÜ = 7.5 


FTO +00 


à 
a*a = 
* avait 
# d 
İL pilin LEE Hia 


MORE THAN ED 


DEEP FOCUS SHOCKS 


NUMBER OF SHOCKS ja] 
FROM THE SAME ORAĞIN 


9900000» 


© Government of India Copyright, 2016 
Based upon Survey of India Political map printed in 2002. 


The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline. 
The interstate boundaries between Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are as interpreted from the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganization) Act, 1971, but have 


yet to be verified. 
The state boundaries between Uttarakhand & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned. 


The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh. 
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by Survey of India. 
The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher. 


NOTE — For details regarding the up-to-date seismic activity (plotted on the Map of India), please visit the online portal of the National Centre for Seismology (NCS), 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi. 


28 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


MAPOFINDIA SHOWING PRINCIPALTECTONIC FEATURES IN INDIA 
(From Catalog of 2001) 


MAP OF INDIA 


SHOWING 
PRINCIPAL TECTONIC FEATURES 


© Government of India Copyright, 2016 


Based upon Survey of India Political map printed in 2002. 


The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline. 


Areas of Arac sür and 


Proterozoic Foddiry 
[Basement of İP) 


ina 
— 
fer 


Galhi Folding 
Sağpura Feiing 
Eastern Ghat Poiding 
Aravali Folding 
Dharwar Falding 


‘Crasstsides Uniterdili¢ied 
{Sym ör Laka Orogeniol 
Basit and Ujta Nasir 
iadreshon and Eiualvas 
Acid Busisa 


Gİ Canazolü Tettogenesi= 


Arakan Yoma Folding 
Frontal F 

örediap Folder 
Himalayan Tectonic Zana 


Frontal Folded Zona 


3 
| 
| 


n 
t 
el 


Cuddapaha [Proteromolc) 


aren al Probrogolo:Lower 


Gandeana jLowar and Upper 
Undian) (Upper 
Carboniteroes-Loeor Crwicecue) 


Mesozoic 


Limits of Meaeroic Effuslves (Duvar 
Trapa/Rajmahal Trapa mel 
Fooganü 


Neogene 


Teetenke £ Sinachers! Feaberos 


Ta 


O 


Sirectures of First Ordür — Pöaltlşş 


Principal Deep-Seated Faute 
Faults (Major, Minor] 


Thrust 


Cimina of Ardant volcanic 
Boundary of Anziani Piatfcem 
Depth Contour an Top of 


{Ony in West Bengal) 


"IP jian Piatto 
Ei Beria sani Amali 


The interstate boundaries between Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are as interpreted from the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganization) Act, 1971, but have 


yet to be verified. 


The state boundaries between Uttarakhand & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned. 


The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh. 
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by Survey of India. 
The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher. 


30 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
MAP OF INDIA SHOWING PRINCIPAL LITHOLOGICAL GROUPS 


MAP OF INDIA 


SHOWING 
PRINCIPAL LITHOLOGICAL GROUPS 


am 100 50 0 mw 20 300 400 km 
-— AAA) 


LEGEND 


ALLUVIUM 
LATERITE 
SEDIMENTARY ROCKS 


VOLCANIC ROCKS AND MINOR 
BASIC INTRUSIVES 


CRYSTALLINE AND METAMORPHIC 
ROCKS 


DATA NOT AVAILABLE 


TAİVANDRU 


© Government of India Copyright, 2016 
Based upon Survey of India Political map printed in 2002. 


The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from the appropriate baseline. 
The interstate boundaries between Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are as interpreted from the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganization) Act, 1971, but have 


yet to be verified. 

The state boundaries between Uttarakhand & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned. 
The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh. 

The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by Survey of India. 

The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher. 


32 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword and Clause 3.11) 
MSK 1964 INTENSITY SCALE 


D-1 The following description shall be applicable. 


a) Type of Structures (Buildings) 


Type A — Building in field-stone, rural 
structures, un-burnt brick houses, 
clay houses 


Type B — Ordinary brick buildings, buildings 
of large block and prefabricated 
type, half timbered structures, 
buildings in natural hewn stone 


Type C— Reinforced buildings, well built 
wooden structures 


b) Definition of Quantity 


Single, few 
Many 
Most 


About 5 percent 
About 50 percent 
About 75 percent 


c) Classification of Damage to Buildings 


Classification Damage 


Grade 1 Slight 
damage 
Grade2 o Moderate 
damage 
Grade 3 Heavy 
damage 
Grade4 Destruction 
Grade 5 Total damage 


Description 


Fine cracks in plaster; fall 
of small pieces of plaster 
Small cracks in walls; fall 
of fairly larger pieces of 
plaster; pantiles slip off; 
cracks in chimneys parts 
of chimney fall down 
Large and deep cracks in 
walls; fall of chimneys 
Gaps in walls; parts of 
buildings may collapse; 
separate parts of the 
buildings lose their 
cohesion; and inner 
walls collapse 

Total collapse of the 
building 


D-2 MSK INTENSITY SCALE 


D-2.1 The following introductory letters (1), (ii) and 
(iii) have been used throughout the intensity scales 
(I to XII), describing the following: 


1) Persons and surroundings, 


i) Structures of all kinds, and 


it) Nature. 


I Not Noticeable 


1) The intensity of the vibration is below the 


34 


limits of sensibility; the tremor is detected and 
recorded by seismograph only. 


iii) — 


II Scarcely Noticeable (Very Slight) 


i) 


Vibration is felt only by individual people at 
rest in houses, especially on upper floors of 
buildings. 


iii) — 


II Weak, Partially Observed 


1) The earthquake is felt indoors by a few people, 
outdoors only in favourable circumstances. 
The vibration is like that due to the passing of 
a light truck. Attentive observers notice a 
slight swinging of hanging objects. 

ii) — 

iti) — 

IV Largely Observed 

i) The earthquake is felt indoors by many 
people, outdoors by few. Here and there 
people awake, but no one is frightened. The 
vibration is like that due to the passing of a 
heavily loaded truck. Windows, doors, and 
dishes rattle. Floors and walls crack. 
Furniture begins to shake. Hanging objects 
swing slightly. Liquid in open vessels are 
slightly disturbed. In standing motor cars the 
shock is noticeable. 

ii) — 

ii) — 

V Awakening 
1) The earthquake is felt indoors by all, outdoors 


by many. Many people awake. A few run 
outdoors. Animals become uneasy. Buildings 
tremble throughout. Hanging objects swing 
considerably. Pictures knock against walls or 
swing out of place. Occasionally pendulum 
clocks stop. Unstable objects overturn or 
shift. Open doors and windows are thrust 
open and slam back again. Liquids spill in small 
amounts from well-filled open containers. The 


ii) 


itt) 


sensation of vibration is like that due to heavy 
objects falling inside the buildings. 


Slight damages in buildings of Type A are 
possible. 


Slight waves on standing water. Sometimes 
changes in flow of springs. 


VI Frightening 


i) 


ii) 


itt) 


Felt by most indoors and outdoors. Many 
people in buildings are frightened and run 
outdoors. A few persons loose their balance. 
Domestic animals run out of their stalls. In 
few instances, dishes and glassware may 
break, and books fall down, pictures move, 
and unstable objects overturn. Heavy 
furniture may possibly move and small steeple 
bells may ring. 


Damage of Grade 1 is sustained in single 
buildings of Type B and in many of Type A. 
Damage in some buildings of Type A is of 
Grade 2. 


Cracks up to widths of 10 mm possible in wet 
ground; in mountains occasional landslips: 
change in flow of springs and in level of well 
water are observed. 


VII Damage of Buildings 


i) 


ii) 


itt) 


Most people are frightened and run outdoors. 
Many find it difficult to stand. The vibration 
is noticed by persons driving motor cars. 
Large bells ring. 


In many buildings of Type C damage of Grade 1 
is caused; in many buildings of Type B damage 
is of Grade 2. Most buildings of Type A suffer 
damage of Grade 3, few of Grade 4. In single 
instances, landslides of roadway on steep 
slopes: crack in roads; seams of pipelines 
damaged; cracks in stone walls. 


Waves are formed on water, and water is made 
turbid by mud stirred up. Water levels in wells 
change, and the flow of springs changes. 
Sometimes dry springs have their flow 
restored and existing springs stop flowing. In 
isolated instances parts of sand and gravelly 
banks slip off. 


VIII Destruction of Buildings 


i) 


Fright and panic; also persons driving motor 
cars are disturbed. Here and there branches 
of trees break off. Even heavy furniture moves 
and partly overturns. Hanging lamps are 
damaged in part. 


35 


ii) 


itt) 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


Most buildings of Type C suffer damage of 
Grade 2, and few of Grade 3. Most buildings 
of Type B suffer damage of Grade 3. Most 
buildings of Type A suffer damage of Grade 4. 
Occasional breaking of pipe seams. Memorials 
and monuments move and twist. Tombstones 
overturn. Stone walls collapse. 


Small landslips in hollows and on banked 
roads on steep slopes; cracks in ground up to 
widths of several centimetres. Water in lakes 
become turbid. New reservoirs come into 
existence. Dry wells refill and existing wells 
become dry. In many cases, change in flow 
and level of water is observed. 


IX General Damage of Buildings 


i) 


itt) 


General panic; considerable damage to 
furniture. Animals run to and fro in confusion 
and cry. 


Many buildings of Type C suffer damage of 
Grade 3, and a few of Grade 4. Many buildings 
of Type B show a damage of Grade 4 and a 
few of Grade 5. Many buildings of Type A 
suffer damage of Grade 5. Monuments and 
columns fall. Considerable damage to 
reservoirs; underground pipes partly broken. 
In individual cases, railway lines are bent and 
roadway damaged. 


On flat land overflow of water, sand and mud 
is often observed. Ground cracks to widths of 
up to 10 cm, on slopes and river banks more 
than 10 cm. Furthermore, a large number of 
slight cracks in ground; falls of rock, many 
land slides and earth flows; large waves in 
water. Dry wells renew their flow and existing 
wells dry up. 


X General Destruction of Buildings 


i) 
ii) 


itt) 


Many buildings of Type C suffer damage of 
Grade 4, and a few of Grade 5. Many buildings 
of Type B show damage of Grade 5. Most of 
Type A has destruction of Grade 5. Critical 
damage to dykes and dams. Severe damage 
to bridges. Railway lines are bent slightly. 
Underground pipes are bent or broken. Road 
paving and asphalt show waves. 


In ground, cracks up to widths of several 
centimetres, sometimes up to | m, parallel to 
water courses occur broad fissures. Loose 
ground slides from steep slopes. From river 
banks and steep coasts, considerable 
landslides are possible. In coastal areas, 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


displacement of sand and mud; change of 
water level in wells; water from canals, lakes, 
rivers, etc, thrown on land. New lakes occur. 


XI Destruction 
i) — 
i) Severe damage even to well built buildings, 


itt) 


bridges, water dams and railway lines. 
Highways become useless. Underground 
pipes destroyed. 


Ground considerably distorted by broad cracks 
and fissures, as well as movement in horizontal 
and vertical directions. Numerous landslips and 
falls of rocks. The intensity of the earthquake 


requires to be investigated specifically. 


XII Landscape Changes 
i) — 
li) Practically all structures above and below 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


LIST OF SOME TOWNS WITH POPULATION MORE THAN 3 LAKHS (as per CENSUS 2011) 
AND THEIR SEISMIC ZONE FACTOR Z 


Town Zone Z 
Agra Il 0.16 
Ahmedabad M 0.16 
Ajmer TI 0.10 
Allahabad I 0.10 
Almora IV 0.24 
Ambala IV 0.24 
Amritsar IV 0.24 
Asansol Il 0.16 
Aurangabad II 0.10 
Bahraich IV 0.24 
Bangalore (Bengaluru) TI 0.10 
Barauni IV 0.24 
Bareilly M 0.16 
Belgaum M 0.16 
Bhatinda I 0.16 
Bhilai Il 0.10 
Bhopal TI 0.10 
Bhubaneswar Il 0.16 
Bhuj V 0.36 
Bijapur M 0.16 
Bikaner m 0.16 
Bokaro Il 0.16 
Bulandshahr IV 0.24 
Burdwan I 0.16 


36 


ground are greatly damaged or destroyed. 


The surface of the ground is radically 
changed. Considerable ground cracks with 
extensive vertical and horizontal movements 
are observed. Falling of rock and slumping of 
river banks over wide areas, lakes are dammed; 
waterfalls appear and rivers are deflected. The 
intensity of the earthquake requires to be 
investigated specially. 


Town Zone Z 
Calicut (Kozhikode) M 0.16 
Chandigarh IV 0.24 
Chennai M 0.16 
Chitradurga TI 0.10 
Coimbatore M 0.16 
Cuddalore TI 0.10 
Cuttack M 0.16 
Darbhanga V 0.36 
Darjeeling IV 0.24 
Dharwad M 0.16 
Dehra Dun IV 0.24 
Dharampuri M 0.16 
Delhi IV 0.24 
Durgapur M 0.16 
Gangtok IV 0.24 
Guwahati V 0.36 
Gulbarga I 0.10 
Gaya M 0.16 
Gorakhpur IV 0.24 
Hyderabad TI 0.10 
Imphal V 0.36 
Jabalpur M 0.16 
Jaipur TI 0.10 
Jamshedpur TI 0.10 


Town 
Jhansi 
Jodhpur 
Jorhat 
Kakrapara 
Kalpakkam 
Kanchipuram 
Kanpur 
Karwar 
Kochi 
Kohima 
Kolkata 
Kota 
Kurnool 
Lucknow 
Ludhiana 
Madurai 
Mandi 
Mangaluru 
Mungher 
Moradabad 
Mumbai 
Mysuru 
Nagpur 
Nagarjunasagar 
Nainital 
Nashik 
Nellore 
Osmanabad 
Panjim 
Patiala 


Zone 


HHRRAHA3İmMAMHIİİHeMİHApAMH<HHHRHRHHeRR 


37 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


Town Zone 
Patna 

Pilibhit 
Pondicherry (Puducherry) 
Pune 

Raipur 

Rajkot 

Ranchi 

Roorkee 
Rourkela 

Sadiya 

Salem 

Shillong 

Shimla 

Sironj 

Solapur 
Srinagar 

Surat 

Tarapur 

Tezpur 

Thane 
Thanjavur 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Tiruchirappalli 
Tiruvannamalai 
Udaipur 
Vadodara 
Varanasi 

Vellore 
Vijayawada 
Vishakhapatnam 


HEHHEHHmREHHH<BH Hp NKRI 


Z 
0.24 
0.24 
0.10 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.10 
0.24 
0.10 
0.36 
0.16 
0.36 
0.24 
0.10 
0.16 
0.36 
0.16 
0.16 
0.36 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.10 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.16 
0.10 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX F 
(Clauses 3.12 and 6.3.5.3) 
SIMPLIFIED PROCEDURE FOR EVALUATION OF LIQUEFACTION POTENTIAL 


F-1 Due to the difficulties in obtaining and testing 
undisturbed representative samples from potentially 
liquefiable sites, in-situ testing is the approach 
preferred widely for evaluating the liquefaction 
potential of a soil deposit. Liquefaction potential 
assessment procedures involving both the SPT and 
CPT are widely used in practice. The most common 
procedure used in engineering practice for the 
assessment of liquefaction potential of sands and silts 
is the simplified procedure. The procedure may be 
used with either standard penetration test (SPT) blow 
count or cone penetration test (CPT) tip resistance or 
shear wave velocity V, measured within the deposit 
as described below: 


Step 1 — The subsurface data used to assess 
liquefaction susceptibility should include the location 
of the water table, either SPT blow count N or tip 
resistance q, of a CPT cone or shear wave velocity V, 
unit weight, and fines content of the soil (percent by 
weight passing the IS Standard Sieve No. 75 u). 


Step 2 — Evaluate total vertical overburden stress O, 
and effective vertical overburden stress o',, at 
different depths for all potentially liquefiable layers 
within the deposit. 


Step 3 — Evaluate stress reduction factor r} using: 


_ f1=0.007657 0<z<9.15m 
a = 11.174- 0.0267z 9.15 m< z < 23.0 m 


where z is the depth (in metre) below the ground surface. 


Step 4 — Calculate cyclic stress ratio CSR induced by 
the earthquake using: 


CSR = oss) D | = J 
g o vo : 
where 
aax > peak ground acceleration (PGA) preferably 
in terms of g, 
g = acceleration due to gravity, and 
rg > stress reduction factor. 


If value of PGA is not available, the ratio (a,,,,/g) may 
be taken equal to seismic zone factor Z (as per Table 3). 


Step 5 — Obtain cyclic resistance ratio CRR by 
correcting standard cyclic resistance ratio CRR} ; for 
earthquake magnitude, high overburden stress level 


38 


and high initial static shear stress using: 


CRR = CRR,, (MSF )K,K, s 
where 


CRR, ¿= standard cyclic resistance ratio for a 7.5 
magnitude earthquake obtained using 
values of SPT or CPT or shear wave 
velocity (as per Step 6), and 


MSF =magnitude scaling factor given by 
following equation: 


MSF = 10°" / M3“ 


This factor is required when the magnitude is different 
than 7.5. The correction for high overburden stresses 
K, 1s required when overburden pressure is high 
(depth > 15 m) and can be found using following 
equation: 

K 


o 


(EY 


' 
vo 


atmospheric pressure are measured in the same units 
and / is an exponent and its value depends on the 
relative density D, For D, = 40 percent ~ 60 percent, 
f= 0.8 ~ 0.7 and for D, = 60 percent ~ 80 percent, 
f= 0.7 ~ 0.6. The correction for static shear stresses Ky 
is required only for sloping ground and is not required 
in routine engineering practice. Therefore, in the scope 
of this standard, value of K, shall be assumed unity. 


where o',, effective overburden pressure and P, 


For assessing liquefaction susceptibility using: 
a) SPT, goto Step 6(a) or 
b) CPT, go to Step 6(b) or 
c) Shear wave velocity, go to Step 6(c). 
Step 6 — Obtain cyclic resistance ratio CRR} 5, 
6(a) Using values of SPT 


Evaluate the SPT (standard penetration test) 
blow count No, for a hammer efficiency of 
60 percent. Specifications for standardized 
equipment are given in Table 11. If equipment 
used is of non-standard type, N,, shall be 
obtained using measured value (N): 


No = NCw , 
where 


Coo = CurCuw Css Cri Cen - 


CYCLIC STRESS RATIO (CSR) OR CYCLIC RESISTANCE 


Factors Cyr, Cyw, Css, Cre and Cap 
recommended by various investigators for 
some common non-standard SPT 
configurations are provided in Table 12. For 
SPT conducted as per IS 2131, the energy 
delivered to the drill rod is about 60 percent 
therefore, Cg, may be assumed as 1. The 
computed Ng, is normalized to an effective 
overburden pressure of approximately 100 kPa 
using overburden correction factor Cy using: 


(N, Jo = Ch Noo» 
where 


The cyclic resistance ratio CAR, ; is estimated 
from Fig. 8, using (N, )ç, value. 


Effect of fines content FC (in percent) can be 
rationally accounted by correcting (N,)ç, and 
finding (N,)¢ocs as follows: 


(N, Jocs =æ+ß(N, Jas 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


where 
< 
PE B=1 for FCS5 
percent 
ps) for 5 percent 
Fe FC Pp 
a=e p =0.99+ < FC<35 
1000 percent 
> 
a=0.5 B-12 Dob 
percent 


Again, Fig. 8 can be used to estimate CRR, ;, 
where (Nj )socs shall be used instead of (NV, )so 
and only SPT clean sand based curve shall be 
used irrespective of fines contents. The 
CRR, , can be estimated using following 
equation, instead of Fig. 8: 


1 Ape 
GN) aa 
50 1 
[10x (Mees +45] 200 


0.6 
Percent Fines = 35 25) 
0.5 ! H 
H H 
I 1 
I I 
j 
j | 
H i 
0.4 / 1 
! 
li 
4 m Clean Sand Base Curve 
(a 
oc 
00.3 
O 
Kk 
<x 
oc 
0.2 
FINES CONTENT 2 5% 
(clay content = 5%) 
0.1 
0 
0 10 20 30 40 50 


CORRECTED BLOW COUNT, (N,)go 


Fic. 8 RELATION BETWEEN CRR AND (N,)o9) FOR SAND FOR M,,7.5 EARTHQUAKES 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


6(b) Using values of CPT (ewes = Kc Yen 
The CPT procedure requires normalization of where 
measured. cone tip resistance a; USME ko = Correction factor to account for grain 
atmospheric pressure P, and correction for characteristics 


overburden pressure C, as follows: 
_ 10 (for I, < 1.64) 
q. ) © İ-04031* 45.581173 — 21.63 I? 433.751, —17.88 


=C, 
aen = Ca [4 (for 7, > 1.64), and 


a 


where qow is normalized dimensionless cone 
penetration resistance, and 


P iü 2 I. Oy P, | 
(4) El) 


= Í: 
1” for sand F=100 | percent, and 
n= 


I, = y(3.47- log) +(1.22- logF 


c vo 


1 for cla 
> where /, = measured sleeve friction. 


The normalized penetration resistance qcin 


: i á Using (qcın)cs find the value of CRR, ; using Fig. 9. 
for silty sands is corrected to an equivalent 


Alternatively, the CRR,, can be found using 


clean sand value (4cıx)cs by the following following equations: 
relation: 
0.6 
0.25 < D50(mm) < 2.0 
M=7.5 Fines Content (%) <5 

0.5 
KA 
Ow e CPT Clean Sand 
AO Base Curve 
X ~~ 
OO 04 
OR 
o < 
zx Liquefaction No Liquefaction 
Fw 
To 
ez 03 
DT 
m R 
Lu D 
Yo 
HD 
N y 
vo 0.2 
J= 
OG 
> > 
OO 

0.1 

0 4 t t 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 


CORRECTED CPT TIP RESISTANCE, den 
Fic. 9 RELATION BETWEEN CRR AND (qcin)cs FOR My 7.5 EARTHQUAKES 


40 


6(c) Using shear wave velocity: 


CYCLIC STRESS OR RESISTANCE RATIO, CSR OR CRR 


RRs = 
of (q CIN a 


0.6 


0.4 


0.2 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


where V} is limiting upper value of V, for 


o| Bad |. 0.05, 0< (dew cg < 50 liquefaction occurrence; a and b are curve 
= fitting parameters. The values of a and b in 


3 
) +0.08, 50< (cn) < 160 Fig. 10 are 0.022 and 2.8, respectively. K, can 


1 000 be assumed to vary linearly from 200 m/s for 


soils with fine content of 35 percent, to 215 m/s 


| for soils with fine contents of 5 percent or less. 
Apply correction for overburden stress to 


shear wave velocity V, for clean sands using: Step 7 — Calculate the factor of safety FS against initial 


liquefaction using: 


P 0.25 
KS V; FS = CRR 
2 CSR ? 


where (V,,) is overburden stress corrected 
shear wave velocity. Using V, find the value where CSR is as estimated in Step 4 and CRR in Step 5. 


of CRR,, using Fig. 10. Alternatively, the When the design ground motion is conservative, 


CRR, , can be found using following equation: earthquake related permanent ground deformation is 
A generally small, if FS 21.2. 
Va 1 1 P ; 
CRR,; =a ml” b my y Step 8 — If FS < 1, then the soil is assumed to liquefy. 
sl sl sl 
| j T 
M, = 7.5 


235 2055 Fines content (%) 


I] | 
| LL 
| ll! 


efaction 


Ligu 


No 
Liguefaction 


0 100 200 300 


OVERBURDEN STRESS CORRECTED SHEAR WAVE 
VELOCITY, V3), m/s 


Fic. 10 RELATION BETWEEN CRR AND V,, FOR M,7.5 EARTHQUAKES 


41 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


Table 11 Recommended Standardized SPT Equipment (see IS 2131) 
[Clause F-1, Step: 6(a)] 


SI No. Element 
QQ) (2) 
i) Sampler 


Standard Specification 
(3) 


Standard split-spoon sampler with, outside diameter, OD = 51 mm; and inside diameter, ID = 35 mm 


(constant, that is, no room for liners in the barrel) 


ii) Drill rods 
iii) Hammer 


A or AW type for depths less than 15.2 m; N or NW type for greater depths 
Standard (safety) hammer with, 
a) weight = 63.5 kg; and 


b) drop height = 762 mm (delivers 60 percent of theoretical free fall energy) 


iv) Rope 
v) Borehole 


Two wraps of rope around the pulley 
100-130 mm diameter rotary borehole with bentonite mud for borehole stability (hollow stem augers 


where SPT is taken through the stem) 


vi) Drill bit 
vii) Blow count rate 
viii) Penetration 
resistant count 


Upward deflection of drilling mud (tricone or baffled drag bit) 
30 to 40 blows per minute 
Measured over range of 150 mm — 450 mm of penetration into the ground 


Table 12 Correction Factors for Non-Standard SPT Procedures and Equipment 
[Clause F-1, Step: 6(a)] 


SI No. Correction for 
(1) (2) 
i) Non-standard hammer weight or height of fall 
ii) Non-standard hammer weight or height of fall 
iii) Non-standard sampler setup (standard samples with 


room for liners, but used without liners) 


iv) Non-standard sampler setup (standard samples with 


room for liners, but liners are used) 


v) Short rod length 
vi) Nonstandard borehole diameter 
NOTES 


1 N = Uncorrected SPT blow count. 
2 Ceo = Gur Caw CssCer Cep 


3 No =NCo 


4 Cp = Correction factor for overburden pressure (N,) 


60 


Correction Factor 


(3) 


y= 0.75 (for Donut hammer with rope and pulley) 
oe 1.33 (for Donut hammer with trip/auto) 
and 

Energy ratio = 80 percent 

HW 


48387 


Cuw = 


where 
H = height of fall (mm), and 
W = hammer weight (kg) 
Ceo = { 1.1 (for loose sand) 
ss 1.2 (for dense sand) 
0.9 (for loose sand) 
0.8 (for dense sand) 
= 0.75 (for rod length 0-3 m) 
= 0.80 (for rod length 3-4 m) 
Cet = = 0.85 (for rod length 4-6 m) 
= 0.95 (for rod length 6-10 m) 
= 1.0 (for rod length 10-30 m) 
| 1.00 (for bore hole diameter of 65-115 mm) 
Cep = 


Css = 


= 1.05 (for bore hole diameter of 150 mm) 
= 1.15 (for bore hole diameter of 200 mm) 


CEN . 


42 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Earthquake Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 39 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Association of Consulting Civil Engineers, Bengaluru 


Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, New Delhi 


Building Materials & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soils and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants Private Limited, Ghaziabad 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR-National Geophysical Research Institute, Hyderabad 


CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 
DDF Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Geological Survey of India, Lucknow 


Housing & Urban Development Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Association of Structural Engineers, New Delhi 


Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Bhubaneswar 


Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar, Gandhinagar, 


Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur 


Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 


Representative(s) 


DR D. K. Paul (Chairman) 


SHRI SANDEEP SHIRKHEDKAR 
Suri ASWATH M U (Alternate) 


Suri L. R. BisHNor 
Suri ROSHAN A. D. (Alternate) 


SHRI Ravi KUMAR 
SHRI HEMANT MALHOTRA (Alternate) 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


CuleF ENGINEER (CDO) 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (D) II (Alternate) 


Suri NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Dr Manis Gupta (Alternate) 


Director CMDD (E & NE) 
Director, EMBANKMENT (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI BARJINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr NAVJEEV SAXENA 
Dr Asay CHOURASIA (Alternate) 


Dr M. Ravi KUMAR 
DR N. PURNACHANDRA Rao (Alternate) 


DR K. MUTHUMANI 
Dr N. GOPALAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR K. G. Bhatia 


DR PRarıma R. Bose 
SHRI SADANAND Oma (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. DIXIT 


Ms Ita Dass 
DR G. G. Srinivas Acuary (Alternate) 


SHRI V. N. HEGGADE 
SHRI ANAND Desa! (Alternate) 


Suri K. C. JosHı 
SHRI SAMIR MITRA 


SHRI S. C. MEHROTRA 
SHRI ALOK BHOWMICK (Alternate) 


Dr K. P. Jaya 


Dr Ravi SINHA 
Dr Arok Goyat (Alternate) 


Dr Suresh RANJAN DASH 


Dr SUDHIR K. JAN 
DR Amit PRASHANT (Alternate) 


Dr HEMANT B. KAUSHIK 
DR DURGESH C. Ral 
Dr C. V. R. Murty 


Dr A. MEHER PRASAD 
Dr RUPEN Goswam (Alternate I) 
DR Arun Menon (Alternate II) 


IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Information Technology, Hyderabad 
Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 
Army HQ, New Delhi 


New Delhi 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida 


Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Mumbai 


Research, Designs and Standards Organization, Lucknow 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 
Risk Management Solutions Inc (RMSI), Noida 


Tandon Consultants Private Limited, New Delhi 

Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 

VMS Consultants Private Limited, Mumbai 
Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology, Nagpur 
Wadia Institute of Himalayan Geology, Dehradun 

In personal capacity, [L-802, Design Arch, e-Homes, 


Sector-5, Vaishali, Gaziabad| 
In personal capacity (174/2 F, Solanipuram, Roorkee] 


In personal capacity [36 Old Sneh Nagar, Wardha Raod, Nagpur] 
In personal capacity [H-102, V.V.I.P. Addresses, Raj Nagar 


Extension, Ghaziabad] 


In personal capacity [Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi| 


BIS Directorate General 


Ministry of Earth Sciences, National Centre for Seismology, 


National Council for Cement and Building Materials, Ballabgarh 


Representative(s) 


Dr YOGENDRA SINGH 
Dr MANISH SHRIKHANDE (Alternate 1) 
Dr AsHok MATHUR (Alternate II) 
Dr B. K. MAHEsHWwARı (Alternate III) 


Dr R. PRADEEP KUMAR 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
Director (Alternate) 


Dr H. R. Wason 
Dr M. L. SHARMA (Alternate) 


BRIG SANDEEP RAWAT 
Lr CoL Gaurav Kausuik (Alternate) 


Dr O. P. MISHRA 
Dr H. S. MANDAL (Alternate) 


Suri V. V. ARORA 


SHRI SACHIDANAND SINGH 
DR Susanta Kumar Jena (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAVEEN KHANDELWAL 
Suri SAURABH Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI ARVIND SHRIVASTAVA 
Suri Racupati Roy (Alternate) 


EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR (B&S) 
DIRECTOR (B&S)/SB-I (Alternate) 


Group GENARAL MANAGER (CED) 
SHRI SUSHIL GUPTA 


Pror MAHESH TANDON 
Suri Vinay K. Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri K. V. SUBRAMANIAN 
Suri B. B. Guarar (Alternate) 


Ms Arra R. SHETH 
Sari R. D. CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 


Dr O. R. JAISWAL 
Dr R. K. INGLE (Alternate) 


DR RAJESH SHARMA 
DR VIKRAM Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr A. S. Arya 


Dr S. K. THAKKAR 
Suri L. K. JAN 
Dr A. K. MITTAL 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCEINTIST E AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist ‘D’ (Civil ENGINEERING), BIS 


Composition of the Drafting Group under CED 39 


Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
VMS Consulting Private Limited, Mumbai 


Dr C. V. R. Murty 
Dr RuPEN Goswami 
Dr Ravi SINHA 


Ms Arra R. SHETH 


c) Bases of various load combinations to be considered have been made consistent for earthquake effects, 
with those specified in the other codes; 


d) Temporary structures are brought under the purview of this standard; 


e) Importance factor provisions have been modified to introduce intermediate importance category of 
buildings, to acknowledge the density of occupancy of buildings; 


f) A provision is introduced to ensure that all buildings are designed for at least a minimum lateral force; 
g) Buildings with flat slabs are brought under the purview of this standard; 

h) Additional clarity is brought in on how to handle different types of irregularity of structural system; 
jJ) Effect of masonry infill walls has been included in analysis and design of frame buildings; 


k) Method is introduced for arriving at the approximate natural period of buildings with basements, step 
back buildings and buildings on hill slopes; 


m) Provisions on torsion have been simplified; and 
n) Simplified method is introduced for liquefaction potential analysis. 


In the formulation of this standard, effort has been made to coordinate with standards and practices prevailing in 
different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. Assistance has particularly 
been derived from the following publications: 


1) IBC 2015, International Building Code, International Code Council, USA, 2015 


2) NEHRP 2009, NEHRP Recommended Seismic Provisions for New Buildings and Other Structures, Report No. 
FEMA P-750, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, DC, USA, 2009 


3) ASCE/SEI 7-10, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures, American Society of Civil 
Engineers, USA, 2010 


4) NZS 1170.5: 2004, Structural Design Actions, Part 5: Earthquake Actions — New Zealand, Standards New 
Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand, 2004 


Also, considerable assistance has been given by Indian Institutes of Technology, Jodhpur, Madras, Bombay, 
Roorkee and Kanpur; Geological Survey of India; India Meteorological Department, National Centre for Seismology 
(Ministry of Earth Sciences, Govt of India) and several other organizations. Significant improvements have been 
made to the standard based on findings of a project entitled, ‘Review of Building Codes and Preparation of 
Commentary and Handbooks’ awarded to IIT Kanpur by the Gujarat State Disaster Management Authority 
(GSDMA), Gandhinagar, through World Bank finances during 2003-2004. 


The units used with the items covered by the symbols shall be consistent throughout this standard, unless 
specifically noted otherwise. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 39 (7975). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


AMENDMENT NO. 1 SEPTEMBER 2017 
TO 
IS 1893 (PART 1) : 2016 CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE 
RESISTANT DESIGN OF STRUCTURES 


PART 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BUILDINGS 
(Sixth Revision) 
(Page 7, clause 6.3.2.2, line 3) — Substitute ‘Table 5(v)’ for “Table 5(e)’. 
(Page 21, clause 7.4.2) — Insert the following new clause at the end: 
‘7.5 Minimum Design Lateral Force 
See 7.2.2.’ 


[Page 21, clause 7.6.2(b)] — Substitute the following for the existing 
formula of A,,: 


m =Y [om o2 G 


(Page 27, clause 7.11.3, para 2, line 3) — Substitute ‘(R,A, + R,A,)/2’ for 
‘(R A tR, A, V. 


(Page 37, Annex E) — Substitute ‘Thiruvannamalai’ for ‘Tiruvannamalai’. 


[Page 39, clause F-1, step 6(a)] — In para 4 under step 6(a), substitute ‘a = 5° 
for ‘a=0.5’ 


(CED 39) BES 
Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


AMENDMENT NO. 2 NOVEMBER 2020 
TO 


IS 1893 (PART 1) : 2016 CRITERIA FOR EARTHQUAKE 
RESISTANT DESIGN OF STRUCTURES 


PART 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND BUILDINGS 
( Sixth Revision ) 


(Page 5, clause 4.25) — Insert the following new definition at the end: 


‘4.26 Floating Column — A vertical element (column) which at its lower level 
(termination level) rests on a beam.’ 


(Page 8, clause 6.3.3.1) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


“6.3.3.1 Effects due to vertical earthquake shaking shall be considered, 
a) for the stability of embankments, bridges and dams; and 


b) for the safety of buildings, embankments, bridges and dams or their 
components, including in the following cases: 


1) Structure located in Seismic Zone IV or V, 
2) Structure has vertical or plan irregularities, 
3) Structure is rested on soft soil, 


4) Structures with long spans, which cause amplification of oscillations 
due to their flexibility, 


5) Structure has large overhangs of structural members or sub-systems, 
6) Prestressed structures, and 
7) Structures with prestressed members.’ 


(Page 8, clause 6.3.4) — Substitute the following for the existing: 
“6.3.4 Combinations to Account for Two or Three Directional Earthquake 


Ground Shaking’ 


Price Group 2 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


[Page 14, Table 5, SI No. (i), last para] — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘In a building with torsional irregularity, when the horizontal total displacement 
A (which is larger in amplitude) at one end of the building in plan is: 


i) in the range of 1.2 A. (0144, (where4, = (naxt A... )/2, in which 
A „in is the horizontal total displacement, which is smaller in amplitude at 
the other end), (a) the building configuration shall be revised to ensure 
that the natural period of the fundamental torsional mode of oscillation 
shall be smaller than those of the first two translational modes along 
each of the principal plan directions, and then (b) three dimensional 
dynamic analysis method shall be adopted. 


ii) more than 1.44, , the structural configuration of the building shall be 
revised.’ 


[Page 16, Table 5, SI No. (ii), last para| — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘Ina building with re-entrant corners, three-dimensional dynamic analysis method 
with flexible floor diaphragm shall be adopted to capture the concentration of 
forces generated in the re-entrant corners especially in the floor diaphragm and 
special elements adjoining the re-entrant corner. This is in addition to the case of 
rigid diaphragm analysis, if applicable, and the worst effect considered.’ 


[Page 16, Table 5, SI No. (iii), last para] — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 
‘In a building with floor slabs having excessive cut-outs or openings, if the area 
of the geometric cut-out is, 

a) less than or equal to 50 percent, the floor slab shall be taken as rigid or 
flexible in plane in structural analysis of the building depending on the 
location of and size of openings. 

b) more than 50 percent, the floor slab shall be taken as flexible in plane in 
structural analysis of the building’. 


[Page 16, Table 5, SI No.(iv), para (b)| — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 
‘b) the following two conditions shall be satisfied, if the building is located in 
Seismic Zones III, IV and V: 


1) The forces and moments due to earthquake effects in the elements 
connecting the two vertical elements with out of plane offset elements, 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


the vertical element supporting the offset, and connections shall be 
enhanced by a factor of at least 2.5. 


2) Lateral drift shall be less than 0.2 percent in the storey having the 
offset and also in the storeys below.’ 


[Page 16, Table 5, SI No. (v), last para] — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘In a building with non-parallel lateral force resisting system, the building shall 
be analyzed for load combinations mentioned in 6.3.2.2 or 6.3.4.1.’ 


[Page 16, Table 6, SI No. (i)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘i) Stiffness irregularity (Soft Storey) 


A soft storey is a storey whose lateral stiffness is less than that of the storey 
above. 
In a building with stiffness irregularity, the following shall be complied with: 
1) Dynamic Analysis shall be employed to capture the actual distribution of 
lateral stiffness along the height of the building; and 
2) The inter-storey drift shall be limited to 0.2 percent in that storey and all 
storeys below, if any, with stiffness irregularity. 
Also, in buildings with URM infills, when contribution of masonry infills exceeds 
20 percent in the structural plan density (SPD) of the building, the effect of URM 
infills shall be considered by explicitly modelling the same in structural analysis. 
In buildings with stiffness irregularity arising out of URM Infills, provisions of 
7.9 shall apply. 


NOTE — This provision is not applicable to such storeys, which have: (a) lower height, where 
services and utilities are housed, or (b) outrigger frame members placed in them.’ 


[Page 16, Table 6, SI No. (ii), last para] — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘In a building with mass irregularity and located in Seismic Zones III, IV and V, 
the earthquake effects shall be estimated by dynamic analysis (as per 7.7).’ 


[Page 16, Table 6, SI No. (iii), last para] — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘In a building with vertical geometric irregularity and located in Seismic Zones 
III, IV and V, the earthquake effects shall be estimated by Dynamic Analysis 
(as per 7.7).’ 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


[Page 16, Table 6, SI No. (iv), last para| — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 
‘In a building with in-plane discontinuity and located in Seismic Zone II, the 
lateral drift of the building under the design lateral force shall be limited to 0.2 
percent of the building height. Buildings with in-plane discontinuity shall not be 
permitted in Seismic Zones III, IV and V.’ 


[Page 16, Table 6, SI No. (v), last para] — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


‘Buildings with strength irregularity shall not be permitted. In case, the weak 
storey is because of URM infills, provisions of 7.10 shall be followed. ’ 


[Page 16, Table 6, SI No. (vi)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘vi) Floating Columns 


Such columns are likely to cause concentrated damage in the structure, and are 
undesirable. 


A building with floating columns shall not be permitted, if the floating columns 
are part of or supporting the primary lateral load resisting system.’ 


[Page 16, Table 6, SI No. (vii)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 


‘vii) Irregular Modes of Oscillation in Two Principal Plan Directions 


Stiffnesses of beams, columns, braces and structural walls determine the lateral 
stiffness of a building in each principal plan direction. A building is said to have 
lateral irregularity in a principal plan direction, if: 


a) the first three lateral translational modes contribute less than 65 percent 
mass participation factor in each principal plan direction, and 
b) the fundamental lateral translational natural periods of the building in the 
two principal plan directions are closer to each other by 10 percent of the 
larger value. 
In a building with lateral irregularity in any of its two principal plan directions, 
and which is located in: 
1) Seismic Zones II and HI, it shall be ensured that the first three lateral 


translational modes together contribute at least 65 percent mass 
participation factor in each principal plan direction. 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


2) Seismic Zones IV and V, it shall be ensured that: 


a) the first three lateral translational modes together contribute at least 
65 percent mass participation factor in each principal plan direction, 
and 


b) the fundamental lateral translational natural periods of the building 
in the two principal plan directions are away from each other by at 
least 10 percent of the larger value. 


NOTE — This provision is not applicable to buildings with large podiums in the lower 
storeys.” 


(Page 17, Fig. 4A, middle figure) — Delete. 
(Page 18, Fig. 4E, middle figure) — Delete. 


[Page 19, Table 8, SI No. (i), col. 2, line 3] — Substitute ‘educational 
buildings’ for ‘schools’. 


[Page 20, Table 9, SI No. (ii)(a), line 2) — Insert the words ‘(see Note 1)’ at 
the end. 


[Page 20, Table 9, SI No. (iv), title] — Delete the words ‘(see Note 3)’. 


[Page 20, Table 9, SI No. (v)] — Substitute the following for the existing: 
‘v) Flat Slab — Structural Wall Systems (see Note 4) 
RC building with the features given below: 3.0 


a) Ductile RC structural walls (which are designed to resist 
100 percent of the design lateral force), 

b) Perimeter RC SMRFs (which are designed to independently 
resist 25 percent of the design lateral force), and 

c) Preferably a system (such as outrigger belt truss system) 


connecting the core ductile RC structural walls and the 
perimeter RC SMRFs.’ 


[Page 20, Table 9, Note 1, line 1] — Substitute ‘Structures’ for ‘RC and steel 
structures’. 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 


(Page 20, Table 9, Note 3) — Substitute the following for the existing note: 
‘See 7.2.7’. 


(Page 20, Table 9, Note 4) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


“4 In these buildings, (a) punching shear failure shall be avoided, and (b) lateral 
drift at the roof under lateral force shall not exceed 0.1 percent. Lateral drift of the 
flat slab buildings shall be estimated: (i) considering total lateral displacement, 
including torsional effects, and (ii) using three-dimensional models. Scaling need 
not be done for displacement response quantities, as stated in 7.7.3.2.’ 


[Page 21, clause 7.6.2 (b) (see also Amendment No. 1)| — Substitute the 
following for the existing expression of A: 


[Page 21, clause 7.6.2(c)] — Insert the following at the end of (c): 


“7.6.2.1 The value of 7 obtained shall neither be taken to be more than that given 
in 7.6.2 (a) nor less than that given in 7.6.2 (c).’ 


(Page 23, clause 7.7.3, para 2, line 1) — Substitute the following for the 
existing: 


“7.7.3.1 When V, < V, , the force response quantities...... 


(Page 23, clause 7.7.3, para 2, last line) — Insert the following new clause 
at the end: 


“7.7.3.2 When V, < V, , the displacement response quantities need not be scaled.” 


(Page 25, clause 7.9.1, last line) — Insert the following new clause at the 
end: 


‘7.9.1.1 RC members shall be designed for the governing combinations of stress 
resultants arising from structural analysis of: 


a) Bare frame building, and 
b) Frame building with URM infills.’ 


Amendment No. 2 to IS 1893 (Part 1) : 2016 
(Page 26, clause 7.11.1.2) — Substitute the following for the existing: 


“7.11.1.2 Displacement estimates obtained from dynamic analysis need not be 
scaled, as stated in 7.7.3.2.’ 


(Page 27, clause 7.11.3, line 5) — Substitute ‘for the two’ for ‘of the two’. 
(Page 39, Fig. 8) — Substitute ‘N Jocs for ‘N o- 


(Page 39, Fig. 8) — Substitute “CYCLIC RESISTANCE RATIO (CRR,,)’ 
in place of the existing ‘CYCLIC STRESS RATIO (CSR) OR CYCLIC 
RESISTANCE RATIO (CRR)’. 


(Page 40, Fig. 9) — Substitute ‘CYCLIC RESISTANCE RATIO (CRR,,.)’ 
in place of the existing ‘CYCLIC STRESS RATIO (CSR) OR CYCLIC 
RESISTANCE RATIO (CRR)’. 


(Page 41, Fig. 10) — Substitute ‘CYCLIC RESISTANCE RATIO (CRR, ,)’ 


in place of the existing ‘CYCLIC STRESS OR RESISTANCE RATIO. CSR OR 
CRR’. 


(CED 39) 


Publication Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 


