( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS : 6134 ( Part VI) - 1981

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS MICROWAVE TUBES
PART VI LOW-POWER OSCILLATOR

OF OF

KLYSTRONS

Electron Tubes Sectional Committee, LTDC ~9
Chairman SHRI H. R. BAPU SEETHARAM Members SHRI B. S. VENUGOPALAN ( Alternate to Shri H. R. Bapu Seetharam ) Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute DR S. S. S. AGARWALA ( CSIR ), Pilani DR G. S. SIDHU ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI P. K. JAIN West Bengal Electronics Industrial Development DR J. N. MAITI Corporation Ltd, Calcutta The Radio Electronics and Television ManuDR P. B. PARIKH facturers' Association ( RETMA ), Bombay Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE Directorate General of All India Radio, New RESEARCHENGINEER Delhi SHRI P. S. SARAN Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI G. K. SARAN( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation. New Delhi SHRI SARWANKUMAR SHRI V. S. MITRA I AIternate j ' Ministry of Defence ( DC1 ) COLR.K. SUD ' SHRI G. N. SAHAI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI K. K. TANEIA New Delhi SHRI R. SOUNDHIRARAJAN( Alternate ) ( Continued onpage 2 ) @ Copyright 1981 INDIAN STANPARDS INSTITUTION This -publication is protected Under the Indian Copyrighr Acr ( XIV of 1957 ) and reprbduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. Representing Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore

IS : 6134 ( Part VI ) - 1981
( Continued from page 1 ) Members DR R. C. TRIPATHI SHIU TEK CHANDANI( Alternate SHRI R. C. JAIN, -Head ( Electronics ) Deuartment ) Director Representing of Electronics. New Delhi Member )

General,

IS1 ( Ex-officio

Secretary ),

SHRI PAV~~N KUMAR Assistant Director ( Electronics

ISI

Panel for Microwave Tubes, LTDC 9 : P5
Convener DR G. S. SIDHU Members DR J. L. BAHRI ( Alternate to Dr G. S. Sidhu ) Indian Teleohone Industries Ltd. , Bangalore SHRI A. K. GHOSH ' SHRI M. A. NARASIMHAN ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centrq, Bombay SHRI B. L. GUPTA Directorate General of Civil Avtation, New Delhi SHRI M. S. KRISHNAN Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) WC CDR LAKHhir SINGH Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI M. H. V. MURTHY Wo CDR K. V. PADMANABHAN I \ _^.._. Altmznte ..~... , 1 Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI P. S. SARAN Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI A. K. SUBRAMANIAN SHRI K. U. LIMAYa I A~m~r-tn \ LT-COL R. K. SUD H ' (i`Fs"`u`c ' Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) MAIMS. K. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore LAN SHRI B. S. VENUGOPA ~___._..___. I 11x ..__. \ Da D.S. VENKATESHWAKLU (Atrernure) Central Electronics Engineering ( CSIR ), Pilani Research Institute

IS : 6134 ( Part VI ) - 1981

Indian Standard
METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF MICROWAVE TUBES
-PART VI LOW-POWER OSCILLATOR KLYSTRONS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard (Part VI ) was adopted by the Indian

Standards Institution on 23 June 1981, after the draft finalized by the Electron Tubes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 This standard covers the methods of measurement lator klystrons. of low-power oscil-

0.3 Methods of measurement of different types of microwave tubes are being covered in a series of standards consisting of the following individual parts : Part I Part II Part III Part IV Part V Part VI Part VII Part IX Part X Common to all microwave tubes Oscillator tubes Amplifier tubes Magnetrons Parasitic noise Low-power oscillator klystrons I-Iigh power klystrons Backward-wave oscillator tube - `0' type Crossed-field amplifier tubes

Part VIII Gas-filled microwave switching devices

0.4 While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from IEC Pub 235-5 ( 1972 ) `Measurement of the electrical properties of microwave tubes : Part 5 Low-power oscillator klystrons' issued by International Electrotechnical Commission.

IS : 6134 ( Part VI) - 1981 0.5 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960".

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard ( Part VI ) describes the methods of measurement of electrical characteristics and related requirements and precautions applicable to low-power oscillator klystrons.

2. TERMINOLOGY
2.1 For the purpose of this standard the terms and definitions given in IS :

1885 ( Part IV/Set 3 ) - 1970t shall apply. 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND PRECAUTIONS

3.0 The general requirements and precautions listed in IS : 6134 ( Part I ) 1978$ shall apply in addition to the following.
3.1 Semiconductor Diodes

3.1.1 When output power is examined by means of output from a semiconductor diode it is necessary to calibrate the diode response over the range of power and frequency to be examined. An acceptable method of calibrating the diode response in terms of relative power levels should be used.

3.1.2 Precaution - Because semiconductors can be damaged by transients and other causes, it is wise to recalibrate them frequently. 3.2 External Cavities 3.2.1 Standardized cavities and assemblies shall be used in measurements, where applicable. 4. METHODS OF MEASUREMENT

4.1 Reflector Current 4.1.1 Total Current - The total reflector current can be measured ( a ) for non-oscillatory conditions, by a meter in the reflector circuit, or
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). tElectrotechnica1 vocabulary : Part IV Electron tubes, Section 3 Microwave tubes. tMethods 01 measurement on microwave tubes : Part I Common to all microwave tubes.

4

IS : 6134 ( Part VI ) - 1981 ( b ) for oscillatory conditions either by a meter in the reflector circuit or by measuring the effect of switching a known high resistance into the reflector In the latter case, the reflector current can be calculated by meascircuit. UI ing the reflector supply voltage change necessary to return the operating ~frequency to its original value. 4.1.2 Leakage Current - The resonator current is reduced to zero by means of grid bias or ~by opening the cathode circuit, and the reflector current is measured. 4.1.3 /on Current ( Gas Current) the leakage current measurement ( see of the total reflector current measured difference is then considered to be the 4.2 Power 4.2.0 Provisions of 10.1 of IS : 6134 ( Part I )-1978* shall apply tion to the following. in addiThe value of current determined in 4.1.2 ) is subtracted from the value under non-oscillatory conditions. The reflector ion current.

The tuning controls are adjusted to 4.2.1 Mean RF Output Power provide optimum power into the stated load at the reference frequency, and the output power is then measured. 4.3 Pulse Measurements 4.3.1 Provisions 4.4 Frequency 4.4.0 Provisions of 10.3 of IS : 6134 ( Part I )-1978" tion to the following. 4.4.1 Warm-Up Frequency Drift -This stated temperature and for a stated time. frequency in the stated time interval. shall apply in addiof 10.2 of IS : 6134 ( Part I )-1978* shall apply.

measurement shall be made under The result is the total change of

NOTE 1 - It is sometimes necessary to consider the change in power occurring during this measurement. NOTE 2 - It is frequently desirable to state ~the beginning during which measurements are made.

of the time interval

4.5 Spectrum Width shall apply.

Provisions

of 10.3.1 of IS

: 6134 ( Part I )-1978*

*Methods of measurement on microwave tubes : Part I Common to all microwave tubes. 5

IS : 6134 ( Part VI ) - 1981 4.6 Tuning 4.6.0 Provisions of Appendix A shall apply in addition to the following. 4.6.1 Frequency Tuning Range - The result of the measurement is the difference between the frequency at which the output power is greater than a stated value, or than a stated fraction of the optimum output power.
NOTE out. In this measurement, optimum power conditions are maintained through-

4.6.2 Mechanical Tuning Range - The klystron is adjusted to operate at the reference frequency under optimum conditions. The mechanical tuning control only is then adjusted above and below the reference frequency to frequency at which the power is a stated minimum value or stated fraction of the power at the mode centre. The result is expressed as the difference in frequency between these reduced power points.

a) Mechanical

tuning range at fixed voltages - The klystron is adjusted to operate at the reference frequency under optimum conditions. The mechanical tuning device alone is then adjusted above and below the reference frequency to the frequencies at which the power output is equal to a stated value. The difference between these two frequencies is the mechanical tuning range at fixed voltages.

b)

Optimum mechanical tuning range - The klystron is adjusted to The operate at the reference frequency under optimum conditions. mechanical tuning device is then adjusted above and below the reference frequency to the frequencies at which the optimum power output is equal to a stated value ( for example, the voltages are adjusted to maintain the power output at its optimum value ). The difference between these two frequencies is the optimum mechanical tuning range.
For reflex klystrons, the reflector voltage alone is adjusted.

NOTE -

4.6.3 Electronic Tuning Range - The klystron is adjusted to operate at The electronic tuning the reference frequency under optimum conditions. voltage only is then varied above and below the reference frequency value to the values at which the power is a stated fraction of the power at the mode centre. The electronic tuning range is the difference in frequency between these reduced power points. 4.6.4 Tuning Sensitivity
4.6.4.1 Mechanical tuning sensitivity Method 1 : The klystron is adjusted to operate at the reference frequency

under optimum

conditions.

The mechanical tuning control is then 6

IS:6134(PartVI)-1981 adjusted by a stated amount in either direction and the electronic tuning control is adjusted to obtain maximum output power. The new frequency is then measured. The mechanical tuning sensitivity is the measured change of frequency per unit change of the tuning position. Method 2 : The klystron is adjusted to operate& the reference frequency under optimum conditions. The mechanical tuning control only is then adjusted by a stated amount and the consequential frequency change is noted. The mechanical tuning sensitivity is the measured change of frequency per unit change of the tuner position.
NOTE 1 --If, when the tuning mechanism has been set to give the reference frequency, its travel is limited to less than the amount required for this measurement, the measurement shall be made between the limit point of the tuner mechanism and the position that the mechanism reaches on being adjusted by the required amount towards the mid-band position. NOTESIn making this measurement, it is necessary to avoid the effect of mechanical tuning hysteresis.

46.5 Electronic Tuning Non-linearity The klystron is operated in The electronic tuning sensitivity is accordance with the stated conditions. measured at the mode centre and at two stated frequencies that are equally spaced from the mode centre. The factor is given by the formula :
s m- so

where the tuning sensitivity at the mode centre. ,Sm = the larger value of tuning sensitivity obtained at the stated frequencies equally spaced from the mode centre. This measurement is usually made by a dynamic method, in which the frequency-control voltage that provides the required frequency shift from the mode centre has superimposed uponit, a small sinusoidal voltage of a much higher frequency. The consequential frequency deviation is measured by means of a suitable frequency discriminator or receiver. The difference between the mode centre value and each of the other two values in turn is measured and the factor is obtained by dividing the larger of the two differences by the mode centre value.
SO =
NOTE - For the purpose of this measurement, the point of minimum tuning sensitivity may be used instead of the mode centre.

electronic

4.7 Heater Modulation Effect 4.7.1 Provisions of 10.4 of IS : 6134 ( Part I )-1978* shall apply.
*Methods tubes. of measurement on microwave tubes : Part I Common to all microwave

7

IS : 6134 ( -Part VI ) - 1981 4.8 Frequency-Pulling 4.8.1 Figure

Provisions of 4.1 of IS : 6134 ( Part II )-1973* shall apply.
of Frequency

4.9 Temperature Coefficient 4.9.1

Provisions of 4.3 of IS : 6134 ( Part II )-1973* shall apply.

4.10 Spurious Mode Oscillation 4.10.1

Provisions of 5 of IS : 6134 ( Part II )-1973" shall apply.

APPEND~IX ( Clause 4.6 )
A-l. A-l.1 TUNING Frequency Tuning Range

A

A-1.1.1 This is obtained by measuring the characteristics versus frequency. It is preferable that the required frequency However, where by the use of a single oscillatory mode. is permissible, this change should not be considered discontinuity of frequency tuning range.

of power output range be obtained a change of mode as constituting a

A-2. TUNING

SENSITIVITY

( Mechanical or Electronic )

A-2.1 The tuning sensitivity may be obtained from a measurement of frequency change with a stated variation of the tuning control ( mechanical or electronic ) or alternatively as a measurement of tuning control variation for a statedfrequency change. A-2.2 As the tuning sensitivity is not necessarily uniform over the tuning range, it is recommended that an indication be given as part of the range is used in making the measurement, for example, frequency spread centred at the half-power point, over the linear in the small-signal range.
*Methods of measurement on microwave tubes : Part II Oscillator tubes. 8

required to which a stated range or

IS : 6134 ( Part VI ) - 1981 A-3. TUNER TORQUE A-3.1 The tuner torque is measured at the required temperature under cold or operating condition over the required tuning range by any suitable means. Measurements of starting, running and stop torque may be made. A-3.1.1 Precautions - The rated maximum stop torque or force, including inertia forces, beyond which the parts of the tuning mechanism may sustain damage, must not be exceeded. A-4. ELECTRONIC TUNING NON-LINEARITY

A-4.1 For this measurement, the frequency of oscillation is varied electronically over a small amplitude ( for example, approximately 4 % of the modulation range ) and the frequency deviation is measured by means of a suitable f. m. receiver ( or spectrum analyzer ). The oscillation frequency is slowly swept by varying the direct voltage applied to the frequency controlling electrode while the small superimposed modulating voltage is maintained constant. The deviation at the centre frequency S,, and the maximum change in frequency deviation n S occurring over the swept range are noted. The ratio AS/S,-, is a measure of the electronic tuning noniinearity. A-5. ELECTRONIC TUNING RATE OR TUNING SPEED

A-5.1 A periodic signal of stated amplitude is applied to the tuning control and the frequency excursion of the device is measured, either ( 1 ) over a stated portion of the duration of one tuning cycle, or ( 2 ) over a complete tuning cycle. A-5.2 The tuning rate can then be expressed in two ways : from ( 1 ) the quotient of frequency excursion by the stated periods of time, and from ( 2 ) the product of the total frequency excursion and the sweeping frequency ( defined as the number of sweeps per second of the tuning control ). A-5.3 The two results may differ substantially. A-5.4 At the stated amplitude, the sweeping frequency is slowly varied during the course of the measurement to determine the frequency at which the reduction of excursion or failure to tune takes place. The maximum tuning rate is determined from this frequency. A-6. TUNING DISCONTINUITIES A-6.1 In measuring tuning discontinuities, the frequency or power is measured over the frequency tuning range with an instrument of suitable 9

IS : 6134 ( Part VI ) - 1981

resolution or precision. An abrupt change greater than astated be considered a discontinuity. A-7. HYSTERESIS

value shall

A-7.1 This may be caused by either the mechanical properties of the tuning control itself, or the electrical characteristics of the tube being measured. A-7.2 If hysteresis is present in the measurement of tuning sensitivity or range, a separate measurement shall be made for each direction of variation of the tuning control and, if these results are in substantial agreement, either result may be quoted. If the results are not in agreement, the direction of variation shall be stated. A-S. MECHANICAL TUNING HYSTERESIS

A-8.1 The tube shall be operated under stated conditions at the reference frequency. The mechanical tuner is cycled as required over the complete frequency tuning range, then returned to the original mechanical setting point, and the frequency measured. Movement of the tuner spindle is then continued in the same direction to the end of the rangej after which the tuner is again returned to the original mechanical setting point, at -which a second measurement of frequency is made. The mechanical tuning hysteresis is expressed as the difference between these two frequencies.
A-9. ELECTRONIC A-9.1 The

TUNING HYSTERESIS

tube is operated under stated conditions at the reference frequency. The electronic tuning control voltage is varied by the application of a suitable alternating sweep voltage of stated amplitude and frequency.
A-10. POWER HYSTERESIS A-10.1 The output

power of the tube is measured as a function of the electronic tuning control voltage, the power obtained as the voltage is increased being compared with the power obtained as the voltage is decreased.
A-10.1.1 Degree of Power Hysteresis -

This may be measured in two

ways as follows: The ratio of ( 1 ) the maximum degree of power hysteresis exprea> ssed, as a difference, within a stated swept range to ( 2 ) the maximum power within that swept range, the result being expressed as a percentage, or

b) The ratio of ( 1 ) the highest power at which a stated degree of

power hysteresis is reached as hysteresis increases to ( 2 ) the maximum power within the swept range, the result being expressed as a percentage or in dB. 10

IS : 6134 ( Part VI ) - 1981 A-10.1.2 Range of Power Hysteresis - This is expressed as the ratio of ( 1 ) the electronic tuning voltage range over which a stated degree of power hysteresis is exceeded to ( 2 ) a stated part of the sweep voltage range ( for example, in reflex klystrons, the voltage range which provides oscillation over the full mode; in backward-wave oscillators, the voltage range required for tuning between stated frequencies ). The result is expressed as a percentage. A-11. FREQUENCY A-11.1 The frequency HYSTERESIS

of oscillation of the tube is examined as a function of the electronic tuning control voltage, the frequency obtained as the voltage is increased being compared with the frequency obtained as the voltage is decreased.
A-11.1.1 Degree of Frequency Hysteresis - This is measured as the absolute value of the difference between ( 1 ) the frequency obtained at a stated value of voltage as the voltage is increased through this value, and ( 2 ) the frequency obtained at the same value of voltage as the voltage is decreased through this value, the result being expressed in frequency units.

A-11.1.2 Range of Frequency Hysteresis - This is measured as the ratio of ( 1 ) the electronic tuning voltage range over which a stated degree of frequency hysteresis is exceeded to ( 2 ) a stated part of the sweep voltage range, the result being expressed as a percentage. A-12. TUNER STOP TORQUE OF FORCE

A-12.1 The tuning control is tuned against an end stop. After a prescribed torque has been applied under stated conditions, no degradation of tuning control performance shall have occurred. A-12.2 The measurement is repeated for each stop in the tuning system. A-12.2.1 Precaution
-

Impact against the stop must be avoided.

11

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units Qoantlfy
Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Units

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

Unit
metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Symbol k; :
K cd mol

Qoantlfy
Plane angle Solid angle

Unit
radian steradian

Symbol rad
Sf

Derived

Units Unit
newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

Quantify
Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Freouencv Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

Symbol
N w" Wb HZ C Pa

Definition 1 N 1 J 1 W 1 Wb
1 1 1 1 1 T Hz S V Pa

- 1 kg.m/ss = 1 N.m = 1 J/s
= = = = = = 1 V.s 1 Wblms 1 c/s ( S-Q 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/ma

