**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 7155-7 (1990) : Code of recommended practice for conveyor 
safety, Part 7: Inspection and maintenance [MED 6: 
Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial 
Ropeways and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



a^v j i imzzmn^a rafrg amsBs 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 7155 (Part 7) : 1990 

(Reaffirmed 1999) 



( q^r -frffe-r^ ) 
Indian Standard 

CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 
FOR CONVEYOR SAFETY 

PART 7 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 621 '867*004*5 : 614*8 : 006*76 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 
December 1990 Price Group 1 



Conveyors, Vertical Hoists and Bucket Elevators Sectional Committee, HMD 06 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 7 ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on 20 February 1990, after the draft finalized by the Conveyors, Vertical Hoists and Bucket 
Elevators Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 

The purpose of safety devices shall not be fulfilled until it is ensured that these remain in their 
best working ccndition. This can be accomplished by regular inspection and maintenance. 

IS 7155 : 1974 'Code of practice for conveyor safety' was published in 1974. Based on the experi- 
ence gained in the field and to incorporate more specific safety requirements for various types of 
conveyors, the revision of IS : 7155 has been taken up in various parts. 

This Part 7 of the standard is one of the series of Indian Standards code of recommended practice 
for conveyor safety. The other parts of the standard are: 

Part 1 General information 

Part 2 General safety requirements 

Part 3 Belt conveyors and feeders 

Part 4 Vibrating conveyor 

Part 5 Apron conveyors/apron feeders 

Part 6 Selection, training and supervision of operators 

In the preparation of this standard reference has been made to AS CZ 15-1971 'SAA Conveyor 
safety code* issued by Standards Association of Australia. 



IS 7155 ( Part 7 ) : 1990 



Indian Standard 



CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE 
FOR CONVEYOR SAFETY 

PART 7 IMSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE 

( First Revision ) 



1 SCOPE 

1-1 This standard ( Part 7 ) covers specific 
requirements of inspection and maintenance for 
conveyor safety. These requirements are in 
addition to the information and general safety 
requirements given in IS 7155 ( Part 1 ) : 1986 
'Code of recommended practice for conveyor 
safety: Part 1 General information' and IS 7155 
( Part 2 ) : 1986 'Code of recommended practice 
for conveyor safety: Part 2 General safety 
requirements' respectively. 

2 SPECIFIC SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

2.1 Besides' statutory and other requirements 
relating to inspection and maintenance of con- 
veyor system, specific safety requirements 
relating to these aspects shall be observed 
particularly at the utilisation stage. 

2.2 Inspection and Maintenance Programme 

An inspection and maintenance programme shall 
be planned, organized and implemented to keep 
the entire conveyor system in a safe operating 
condition. 

2.2.1 The inspection and maintenance pro- 
gramme shall include the various checks to be 
made, time schedule and the responsibility of 
personnel at various levels to implement the 
programme. 

2.3 Regular Checks 

Those responsible for inspection and maintenance 
shall be thoroughly familiar with the recom- 
mendations made by the conveyor manufacturer 
and the inspection and maintenance programme 
( see 2.1 ). 

2.3.1 Among other checks all take-up devices 
provided for the purpose of adjusting for stretch 
in the belt, chain or cable shall be checked for 
proper functioning periodically as per the time 
schedule decided in the inspection and main- 
tenance programme ( see 2.1.1 ). 

2.3.2 All other pins, fasteners and couplings 
shall be checked periodically and carefully in 



accordance with the inspection and maintenance 
programme ( see 2.2 ). 

2.3.3 Regular inspections shall be made and 
details recorded for future reference. 

2.4 Spare Parts 

Depending upon the wear and other character- 
istics adequate spare parts shall be maintained 
for ready replacement. 

2.5 Lubrication 

Inadequate or improper lubrication may lead 
to increased breakdown of the system/sab- 
system/component thus causing safety hazard. 
Particular attention shall be paid to lubrication 
schedules recommended by the manufacturer of 
conveyor and to the replacement of worn parts 
before they fail. The lubricant shall be of the 
type, grade, etc., recommended by the machine 
manufacturer. 

2.6 Removal of Guards 

Where inspection or maintenance work entails 
the removal of guards, power shall be dis- 
connected from the conveyor whilst this is being 
carried out and the control shall be locked in 
the 'off' position and an appropriate warning 
sign shall be secured to the controls. It shall 
be ensured that guards are replaced on the 
completion of inspection and maintenance work. 

2.6.1 It is recommended that a 'DANGER' and 
'OUT-OF-CONTROL' tag system be evolved. 

2.6.1.1 Under normal circumstances when a 
person has tagged or locked out a control then 
it shall be the responsibility of that person to 
remove the tag and to re-set the control after 
the purpose for which these were used was 
accomplished. 

2.7 Safety of Personnel 

Where inspection and maintenance personnel 
are required to work in situations where there 
is a risk of falling, consideration shall be given 
to the use of safety belts and harness assemblies. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS, This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession 
of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS 
giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. HMD 6 ( 5134 ) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 



NEW DELHI 110002 



f 331 01 31 
1 331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.LP. Road, Maniktola 

CALCUTTA 700054 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 2 18 43 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 41 29 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 

BOMBAY 400093 6 32 92 95 

Blanches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESH V\R 
COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANAN THAPURAM 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



