IS : 4720 (

Part XXXV ) - 1974
( Reaffirmed 2006 ) ' RcaflGrmcd lgaa '

Indian Standard

METHODS OF TEST FOR SOILS
PART XXXV MEASUREMENT OF NEGATIVE PORE WATER PRESSURE

( Third Rcprht MARCH 199-I)

UDC 624.131.387

@ Copyright

1974

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAF.4R MARC NEW DELHI 110002 air October 1974

fS:WZO(PartXXXV)-1974

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR SOILS
PART XXXV MEASUREMENT OF NEGATIVE PORE WATER PRESSURE Soil Engineering Sectional Committee, BDC 23
Chairman MOHAN Rcprestmting Central Building Roorkee Research Institute (CSIR),

PROP Drxas~

Members
SHRI G. R. S. JAIN ( Altcrnatc to

Prof Dinesh
.%NC%I

Mohan

) University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur Cementation Co Ltd, Bombay personal capacity ( Calcutta 53) Hindustan Cons+uction Co, Irrigation Research Institute, Indian Geotechnical Society, Indian Institute of Technology, In P-820, New A&ore,

PROP A-

DR A. BANBRJEE SHRI S. GUPTA ( Altewzate j SHRI K. N. DADINA '

SHRI A. G. DASTIDAR SHRX R. L. DEWAN

DR G. S. DHILLON DIRECTOR PROP S. K. GULHATI ( Altcrnatc ) Irrigation & Power Research Institute, Amritsar DIRECTOR SHRI B. B. L. BHATNA~AR ( Ahnate 1 Central Water St Power Commission, New Delhi . DIRECTOR ( CS & MRS) DEPUTY DIRECTOR, (CS & MRS ) ( Alternate ) Radio Foundation Engineering Ltd; and Hazarat SHRI A. H. DIVANJI Co, Bombay SHRI A. N. JANGLE ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI V. G. HEGDE SHRI J. P. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Engineering Research Laboratory, Hyderabad DR IQBAL ALI SHRI K. R. SAXENA ( Alternate) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) J~~~~Daaoro~ RESEARCH ( FE ), DEPUTY DIRECTOR RESEARCH, SOIL MECHANICS, RDSO ( Alternate)

Bombay Khagaul, Patna New Delhi New Delhi

&

( Continued on page 2 )

@I Co&iighi
BUREAU OF INDIAN

1974 STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS :,2720 ( Part XXXV ) - 1974
( Confinuedfrom paga 1 )

Members SHRI 0. P. MALHOTRA
SHRI J. S. MARYA

Publgatz;ks

Department, Government

of Punjab,
)

SHRX A. S. BISHNOI ( Alternate ) SHRI M. A. MEHTA SHRI T. M. MENON ( &&mate ) SHRI T.K. NATARAJAN RESEARCH OFFICER

Roads Wing (Ministry of Shipping & Transport
Concrete Association of India, Bombay ( CSIR ),

Cent;~rah~~ad

Research

Institute

New

Buildings & Roads Research Laboratory, Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh MAJ K.XI.S. SAHASI Engineering-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters \ SHRI P. PUTHISIGAMANI ( Alternare 1 Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SECRETARY DEPUTY SECRETARY ( Alternate ) University of Roorkee, Roorkee DR SHAMsHEa PaAKAsH Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee SHRI H. D. SHARMA E N c I N E E R Concrete & Soil Research Laboratory, Public Works S~IP~RINTENDINC ( PLANNING & DESIGN CIRCLE ) Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras ENGINEER EXECUTIVE ( INCHARGE SOIL MECHANICS & RESEARCH DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) Institution ofEngineers ( India), Calcutta SHR1C.C. SWAMINATHAN All India Instrument Manufacturers & Dealers SARI M. C. \'ERMA Association, Bombay SHRI V. I;. L'ASUDEVAN ( Alternate) Public Works Deppytment, Government of Uttar SIIMI II. G. VEKMA Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI D. C. CHATURYEDI (Alternate) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o@io Member ) SIIRII_). AJITHA SIMHA, l)irector ( Civ Engg ) Secretary
SARI G.

RAMAN
(Civ Engg), ISI

Deputy

Director

Soil

`Testing
Ccmwetler

Procedures

and Equipment

Subcommittee,

BDC 23 : 3

PROF i\Li\hl SisGli

University

of,Jodhpur,.Jodhpur

Mmbers
SIIRIi\r. I;. RERRv SHRI N. K. AIIU,J~ (Alternate ) 1)R R. I<. RIIANDARI

Iseas Dams Cent;jhFoad Roads Wing

Project,

Talwara

Township Institute ( CSIR ), New )

Research ( Ministry

SHKl `I'. N. I%IIARCAwA
SHRI A. s. !.bSIINOI (Alternote)

of Shipping

& Transport

( Conlimed on fqc 2

I3 )

YY: 2720 ( Part XXXV ) - 1974

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR SOILS
PART XXXV MEASUREMENT OF NEGATIVE PORE WATER PRESSURE

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard ( Part XXXV ) was adopted by the Indian Stand.trds Institution on 21 February 1974, after the draft finalized by the Soil Eugineermg Sectional Commutee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council.

0.2 With a view to establish uniform procedures for the determination of different characteristics of soils and also for facilitating a comparative study of the results, the Indian Standards Institution is bringing out the Indian Standards methods of test for soils ( IS : 2720) which wit1 be published in parts. This part ( Part XXXV) deals with the measurement of negative pore water pressure. In partially saturated s$o all the three phases, namely, solid, liquid and gas exist; the liquid phase is usually water and the gaseous phase usually air. At the interfAces: of air and water, the surfke tension of water is operative, the interfaces are curved, and water exists at a pressure loiver than the pressure in the air. When air pressure is atmospheric water pressure is, consequently, less than that is, water is in a state of tension. This atmospheric, or negative, negative pore water pressure tends to hold soil particles together, it thus imparts rigidity and strength to soil. 0.3 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : Z-1960*.

1. SCOPE
( Part XXXV) lays down the method for determining pore water pressure in partially saturated soils. For pressures can be obtained in the range of 0 to - 0.75 kg/cm2 the measurement directly. For this range as well as for greater negative pressures, measurement is possible in soils in which air continuity exists and themeasurement
the negative *R&s for rounding off numerical values (raised).

1.1 This standard

IS : 2726 ( Part XXXV ) - 1974 is achieved indirectly by the axis translation technique by artificially increasing pore air pressure and ambient pressure until pore water The maximum magnitude of the pressure is in the positive range. measurement thus possible is limited to the air entry value of the fine ceramic porous stone used. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard 1972' shall apply. 3. APPARATUS 3.1 The set up of the apparatus as shown in Fig. 1 is sufficient for both direct measurement of negative pore water pressure as well as measurzment of pore water pressure using the axis translation technique. 3.2 For direct measurement of negative pore water pressure it is not Valves A, and C, are necessary to apply cell pressure or air pressure. thus kept closed durin, v the measurement and the apparatus tonne.. +i to them is redendant. For the same reason, the polyester fabric discs (13); the coarse porous stone (12), and the top cap (6) with the air lead are unnecessary and should be replaced by just an ordinary top cap. 3.3 For indirect measurement of negative pore water pressure the balancing manometer (1) is unnecessary; valves D, and Us can thus be left closed. 3.4 The apparatus consists of the following: 3.4.1 Balancing Manometer mercury ( 1 in Fig. 1 ). A polythene U-tube half filled with the terminoloc;y given in IS : P809-

3.4.2 Null Inn'icator - A perspex block having a U-tube with a bore dia ofl*5mm(3inFig. 1). 3.4.3 Water Bottle ( 5 in Fig. 1 ). one with and one without an air lead 3.4.4 To@ Cap - Two caps, connection ( 6 in Fig. 1 ).

3.4.5 Rubber Ritlgs - of circular end caps ( 7 in Fig. 1 ).

cross section to suit the diameter of the

3.4.6 Seamless Rubber Membrane -in the form of a tube, open at both ends of internal diameter equal to the specimen diameter and of length 50 mm greater than the height of the specimen. The membrane thickness should be selected having regard to the size, strength and nature of the soil. A thickness of 0.2 to 0.3 mm is normally satisfactory ( 8 in Fig. 1 ).

l Gl~rsary of terms and symbds dating

to soil cngineertig (jut reuirbn ). 4

IS : 2720( Part XXXV

) - 1974

3.4.7 Fine Ceramic Porous Stone - A ceramic stone 32 mm in dia and 10 mm thick with an an entry value higher than the absolute value of the negative pore water pressure that has to be measured ( 10 in Fig. 1 ). 3.4.8 Air Lead ;-- A flexible, high internal diameter ( 11 in Fig. 1 ). 3.4.9 Coarse Porous Stone Fig. 1 ). pressure polythene tube of 1 mm

diameter 38 mm; G to 10 mm thick ( 12 in Two discs of polyester fabric 38 mm dia '

3.4.10 Polyester Fabric Discs ( 13 in Fig. 1 ).

3.4.11 Triaxiat Cell -with a pedestal about 3% mm in dia. The cell should have two pore water lines through the pedestal and two line through the base; one line to apply cell pressure and one line to connect air pressure load. Each line shall be fitted with a valve whose operation produces no volume change in the line. The pedestal should have a recess of dia 35 mm and depth 10 mm so that a fine ceramic porous stone can be placed and sealed in the recess ( 14 in Fig. I ). 3.4.12 Pressure Gauge-for measuring air pressure with a least count of 0.1 kg/cm2 and a capacity of least 1 kg/cm" greater than the air entry value of the fine ceramic porous stone ( 15 in Fig. 1 ). can supply air at 3.4.13 Air Pressure Regulator -which pressure with a precision of 0.05 kg/cm2 ( 16 in Fig. 1 ). 3.4.14 Air Filter - capable of intercepting moisture in the air supply ( 17 in Fig. 1 ). 3.4.15 Fig. 1 ). Burette-Least count 0.1 a constant and the ( 18 in

fine dust particles 100 ml

ml and capacity

3.4.16 Calibrated pressure mercury manometer, pressure gauge, screw control cylinder, and self-compensating mercury pot system properly connected to each other as in triaxial testing equipment ( X in Fig. 1 ). 3.4.17 Pressure gauge, screw control cylinder, and self compensating mercury pot system properly connected to each other, and a reservoir of de-aired water as in triaxial testing equipment ( Tin Fig. 1 ). 3.4.18 Air Compressor( 5 in Fig. 1 ). or alternately any source of compressed polythene tubing air

3.4.19 Tubing and Valves volume-change valves.

high pressure

and notrimm-

3.4.20 Accessories- For preparation of soil specimens, extrusion, ing and for measurement of size, weight, water content, etc.

IS t 2720 ( Part XXXV

) - 1974

3.5 Use of the balancing manometer during direct measurement of negative pore water pressure enables positive pressure to be maintained in almost the entire pore water pressure measuring system. The zone in which water is subjected to negative pressure is confined to the null indicator and the pore water line between the level of mercury in the balancing manometer near valve Da to valve B,. The volume of water in this zone is susceptible to cavitation and therefore shall be kept to a minimum. It is necessary, thclefore, to locate valve B, as near the cell as possible,' to locate the null indicator as near the cell as possible and to locate the balancing manometer as near the null indicator as possible. It shall be ensured that the water in this zone is as thoroughly de-aired as possible. 3.6 As far as possible, the measurements ment in which the ambient temperature 4. PROCEDURES FOR should be made is kept constant. in an environ-

COMMISSIONING

APPARATUS

4.1 Placement and Sealing of Fine Ceramic Porous Stone 4.1.1 Ensure 4.1.2 cell. that the flat surfaces of the stone have zero curvature. in the recess in the pedestal of the triaxial with epoxy

Place stone centrally

4.1.3 Fill annular groove between stone and recess walls resin seal ensuring that no air gets trapped in the groove. 4.1.4 Let epoxy resin seal set for 24 hours.

4.2 Saturation of Fine Ceramic Porous Stone and De-airing of Pore Water Pressure Lines - Measurement of negative pore water pressure is not possible unless the fine ceramic porous stone is saturated with de-aired water and the pore pressure lines are thoroughly de-aired and filled with de-aired water. The saturation and de-airing process is thus the most important step in commissioning the apparatus. The process is described below and the description assumes that all valves are initially closed. 4.2.1 De-air water by boiling and subjecting it to vacuum. Quantity of water to be de-aired should be sufficient to fill about four triaxial cells. The mercury pot system and the screw controlled cylinder in X and Y should be filled up with this water ( for explanation regarding X and Y (see Fig. I ). 4.2.2 Open valve C, and fill the empty cell ( no top cap assembly and no soil sample ) with de-aired water when the water is still warm from Apply cell pressure of about 6 kg/cm*. having been boiled. 6

X-

Pressure manometer, pressure gauge, screw controlled cylinder and self-compensating mekury potsysiem. Y- Pressure gauge, screw .controlled cylinder and self-compensating mercury pot system and reservoir of de-aired water. <-Compressed air source. A, B, C, D - Valves Balancing manometer Mercury Null indicator Mercury Water bottle Top cap Rubber `0' ring Rubber membrane Soil sample Fine ceramic porous Air lead ::* 14: 15. 16. 17. 18. ::: 21. Coarse porous stone Polyester fabric discs Triaxial cell Pressure gauge Air pressure regulator Air filter Burette Epoxy resin seal Pedestal on base of triaxial Pore water lines

:
3: 4. 2: ii. 9: :7:

cell

stone

FIG. 1

A TVPICAL ASSEMBLYOF APPARATUS FOR MEASUREMENT OF NEGATIVE PORE WATER PRESSURE

Is : 2720 ( Part XXXV

) - 1974

4.2.3 Open valves B, and B, and let the water flow through the Flush water ceramic stone, the pore water line into the burette. equivalent to about half the volume of the cell then close valves B, and B,. 4.2.4 Open valves D1 and Dz and tilt the null indicator so that mercury is out of the flow circuit and let the water flow through the ceramic stone, the pore water line, the null indicator into the water bottle through valve D,. Flush water equivalent to about half the volume of the cell then close valves D, and D,. 4.2.5 Set pressure beyond valve B3 in 2" equal to 5 kg/cm2, open valves B1 and Bs and let the water flow through the ceramic stone the pore water line into the mercury pot system in Y. Flush water equivalent about half the volume of the cell then close valves B1 and BB.

to

4.2.6 Set open valves is out of the pore water
Flush

pressure beyond valves D, and D5 in X equal to 5 kg/ems, D, and D4 and with the null indicator tilted so that mercury flow circuit let the water flow through the ceramic stone, the line, the null indicator into the mercury pot system in X.
equivalent to about half the volume of the cell then close

water

valves D1 and D,. 4.2.7 Open valves B, and B, ( see Note ), reduce pressure in cell to zero, empty the cell of water, let water seep slowly from burette through valves Bs and B1 to ceramic stone. The surface of ceramic stone should always have water standing on it. The burette should always have de-aired water in it at an elevation little higher than that of the ceramic stone.
stone, the pbrmeability of the ceramic stone should be determined. If the permeability so determined is markedly higher than that specified by the manufacturer it may be on account of a leak in the araldite seal. The leak should be plugged and the seal perfected before proceeding. 4.3 Measurement

NOTE- At this stage by measuring flow of water per unit time into the burette, and by knowing the cell pressure, the cross-section area and the thickness of the ceramic

of air entry value of fine ceramic porous stone.

4.3.1 After the ceramic stone is saturated and pore water lines de-aired as indicated in 4.2 with valves B1 and B, open and all other valves closed, wipe off excess water from surface of ceramic stone and assemble empty cell ( no top cap assembly and no soil sample ). 4.3.2 Record level of water in burette which should be a little higher than the elevation of the ceramic stone. Open valves A, and Al and apply After cell on top of ceramic. stone. in burette which may be little higher than pressure pushes any little excess water on top
through

4.3.3

air pressure of O-5 kg/cm2 half an hour record reading initial reading as air under of ceramic stoae into burette.

8

IS : 2720 ( Part

XXXV

) - 1974 the air air the

4.3.4 Raise air pressure in increments of O-5 kg/cm2 reducing increment to O*1 kg/cm"- as the air pressure approaches thz expected entry value of the ceramic stone. Let each successive value of the pressure act on the ceramic stone for half an hour and before applying nest increment of air pressure record the level of water in burette.

4.3.5 The reading in the burette will remain constant for all air pressures less than the air entry value of the ceramic stone unless the epoxy resin seal has a leak ( see Note ). When the air pressure equals the air entry value of the ceramic stone air will enter the stone and push the water in the pore water line into the burette raising the level of the water The pressure at Which one observes the level of the water in the burette. in the burette rising is thus the air entry value of the ceramic stone.
air entry value as given in 4.3 is very much lower than NOTE- If the measured specified by the manufacturer it may be on account of a leak in the epoxy resin The leak should be plugged and the seal perfected before proceeding. that seal.

4.3.6 During determination of the air entry value of the ceramic stone, air enters the ceramic stone and the pore water lines. The system has therefore to be saturated and de-aired again as indicated in 4.2 before using it for measuring negative pore water pressure in soil samples. NOTE -The air entry value of a ceramic stone needs to be measured only once to
determine the range of utility of that stone.

5. SOIL SAMPLE

FOR TEST

5.1 Negative pore water pressure can be measured by this method both for soil samp!es obtained by sampling from the field as well as for soil samples prepared in the laboratory by compaction, remoulding, or any other process. The sample should be trimmed to a diameter equal to the diameter of the pedestal of the triaxial cell. Any height of the sample that is convenient is admissible. 6. PROCEDURE FOR DIRECT PORE WATER PRESSURE MEASUREMENT OF NEGATIVE

6.1 Prepare apparatus as shown in Fig. 1 and as indicated in 3.2. 6.2 Saturate ceramic stone and de-air pore water lines as indicated in 4.2.

6.3 Ensure that there are no leaks in valves B,, II,, D,, D, and D,, or in any connection on the pore water lines or in the system indicated as Xin Fig. 1. 6.4 Initially it is as assumed that all valves are closed except B, and B, and water is gradually flowing' from burette to the surface of the ceramic stone. 9

Is : 2720 ( Part XXXV

) - 1974

6.5 Open valves D4 and D, and using the screw control cylinder in X bring mercury to desired level in the limb of the U-tube closer to valve D, Mark the position of the mercury as null position, in the null indicdtor. Ensure that some water is standing on top of close valves B1: D, and B,. ceramic stone. 6.6 With water level in the water bottle a little above the ceramic stone, open valves D,, D, and D, and using the screw control cylinder in X push the mercury up in the limb of the U-tube closer to valve D3 in the balancing manometer until the pressure measuring systems in X, that is, the pressure gauge and the mercury manometer record a pressure of 1.0 kg/cm2. Close valve D,. 6.7 Wipe off excess water on the top of the ceramic stone. Put a pinch of wet soil ( same soil as in soil sample whose negative pore water pressure is to be measured ) on the top of the ceramic stone and spread it on the top of the ceramic stone, then immediately place the soil sample on the ceramic stone (the pinch of wet soil assists in proper seating of the soil sample on the ceramic stone ). Place the top cap on the soil sample and envelop it with a rubber membrane sealing the rubber membrane with rubber rings at the rop cap and at the pedestal to prevent nloisture loss Assemble the cell and fill it with just from the sample by evaporation. enough water so that the sample is under water. 6.8 Open Valve D, - As soon as valve D, is opened the sampIe will begin to suck water from the porous stone which will show up as an upward movement of the mercury in the limb of the `U-tube closer to valve II1 in the null indicator. This movement of mercury in the null indicator should be prevented and null position maintained by reducing the pressure in X by operating the screw controlled cylinder in X. 6.9 Adjust pressure in X until equlibrium is achieved and there is no tendency of the Amercury in the null indicator to shift from the null position. Record this pressure in X as equlibrium pressure in kg/ems. 6.10 The absolute value of the negative pore water pressure in the soil sample is ( 1.0 - equilibrium pressure ) kg/cm2. 6.11 Open valves B, and D,, dis-assemble the soil sample, reduce pressure in X to zero, close valves D,, D,, D3, D, and D,. Let water flow from burette to top of ceramic stone, clean top of stone. Equipment is now ready for next measurement, unless there is an indication to suggest that air has come out of solution in the pore water line, if so, the system must first be again de-aired as indicated in 4.2 before making the next measurement. 10

IS : 2720 ( Part XXXV 7. PROCEDURE FOR INDIRECT MEASUREMENT NEGATIVE PORE WATER PRESSURE USING AXIS-TRANSLATION TECHNIQUE 7.1 Prepare apparatus as shown in Fig. 1 and as indicated
7.2 7.3 Saturate Ensure

) - 1974

OF THE
in 3.3. in 4.2. etc.

ceramic stone and de-air pore water lines as indicated that there are no leaks in the various valves, connections,

7.4 Initially it is assumed that all valves are closed except B, and B, and water is gradually flowing from burette to the surface of the ceramic stone. 7.5 Open valves D, and D, and using the screw control cylinder in X bring mercury to desired level in the limb of the U-tube closer to valve D, in the null indicator, mark the position of the mercury as null position; close valve D, and partially close valve Bl such that the rate of flow of water from the burette to the surface of the ceramic stone is barely perceptible. 7.6 Wipe off excess water on the top of the ceramic stone. Observe the reading of the water level in the burette. Put a pinch of wet soil ( same soil as in soil sample whose negative pore water pressure is to be measured ) on top of ceramic stone and spread it on top of ceramic stone then immediately place soil sample on ceramic stone ( the pinch of wet soil assists in proper seating of soil sample on the ceramic stone ). 7.7 As soon as sample is placed on the ceramic stone it will begin to suck water from it which will show up as a downward movement of water in The volume of water so sucked burette since valve B, is partially open. up by the soil sample must be minimized by rapidly proceeding with steps as described in 7.8 and 7.9 which elevate the pore water pressure in the sample to the positive range. 7.8 Place two discs of polyester fabric on top of soil sample followed by the coarse porous stone which in turn is followed by the top cap. Envelope the sample with rubber membrane and seal it with rubber ` 0 ' rings. Connect the air lead to the base of the cell and assemble the cell. Cpcn valve C, and fill the cell with water. 7.9 Open valves A, and A, and simultnneously apply pore air pressure through valve A, to the soil sample and cell pressure through valve C,. The cell pressure and pore air pressure applied should bc of equal magnitude and may be applied in increments of 0.5 kg/cm2. In a soil in which pore air exists as a continuous medium, that is, the air phase in difl'erent pores is interconnected, increase in cell pressure and pore air pressure by a certain magnitude will induce an increase in pore water pressure of the 11

IS : 2720 ( Part XXXV

) - 1974

same magnitude. Hold each applied increment of cell pressure and pore air pressure long enough to ascertain whether soil is sucking water from burette or not. Once the cell pressure and pore air pressure are raised sufficiently to have neutralized the negative pressure in the pore water of the soil sample, water will be seen to rise in burette. When this is observed to occur, close valve Bl and record the level of the water in the burette. The di.fference in this reading and the initial reading ( as in 7.6 ) in the burette represents the water absorbed by the soil in the process of setting The negative pore water pressure of the sample as set up up the sample. is thus different from that of the sample prior to being set up, This deviation is reduced by minimizing the water absorbed by the sample during set up as noted in 7.7, 7.10 With valve B, closed the positive pore water pressure produced in the sample will tend to push mercury down from the null position in the,*" null indicator. This is to be prevented and null position maintained by w increasing pressure in X. The null position should be maintained until During the process of achieving equilibrium it equilibrium is achieved. may be. necessary to further increase the cell pressure and the pore air pressure, so as to keep the pore water pressure in the positive range. 7.11 The absolute value of the negative pore sample is equal to the applied pore air pressure tive pore water pressure at equilibrium. water pressure in the soil minus the measured posi-

7.12 Having determined the negative pore water pressure in the soil sample as in 7.11 it is necessary to check that air continuity did indeed This is accomplished by once again increasing the exist in the soil sample. cell pressure and the pore air pressure by the same amount and observing the increase in pore water pressure as null condition is maintained. If the pore water pressure increases by an amount equal to the increase in cell pressure and air pressure, then air continuity exists and the determination of negative pore water pressure in 7.11 is valid. 7.13 Close valve D,, partially open valve Bl, reduce cell pressure and pore air pressure to zero, drain watrr from cell, close valve C,, A, and A,, and Open valve B1 completely and let d&assemble cell and soil sample. water flow from burette to top of ceramic stone, Clean top of stone. Equipment is now ready for the next measurement, unless there is an indica.tion to suggest that air has come out of solution in the pore water line; if so, the system should first be again de-aired as given in 4.2 before making the next measurement.

12

IS I 2720 ( Part XXXV
( Confinucd from fingc 2 ) Members DR A. K. CIlATTERJaa RePresenting
Public Work8 Department, I'radcsh, Lucknow Government

) - 1974

of

Uttar

DR J3. L. DIIAWAN ( Aflemufc) Irrigation Research Institute, Khagaul, Patna SHRI R. L. DEWAN Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi DIRECXOR ( CS & MRS ) DEPIJTY DIRECTOR (CS & MRS ) ( Alfcrnats) Gcoloaistg Syndicnte Pvt Ltd. Calcut~n SII~I II. K. G~IIIA SHRI N. N. hAT'rAarlARA.uA f Alf~rnals`j Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi SHRI S. K. Gu~rran Central building Research Inatitutc ( CSIR), SHRI G. R. S. JAIN Roorkee SHRI AMAR SZNOH ( Altsrnofr ) Buildings & Roada Rcacarch Laboratory, Chandigarh RI 0. P. MALI~OTRA Dn I. S. UPPAL ( AlferaaJu ) United Technical Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi . V. V. S. Rao SHRI K. K. GUPTA ( Allcrnafc ) Engineer-in-Chief's Prnnch, Army Headquarters MAJ K. M. S. SA~IASI Asrociotcd Jnatrumrnt Manufacturers ( India ) Pvt SIIRI H. C. VnnMA J,td, NCW Delhi SIIRI M. N. J~ALIOA ( Allernule)

13

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all Offices ) Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : 1 /14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 Nortnern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C CHANDIGARH 160036 Telephone 331 01 31 331 1376 I 36 24 99

21643 i 3 1641 41 24 42 4126 19 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 ( 41 2916 TWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093

Branch Offices: `Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, 2 63 48 AHMADABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 +,Peenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road. 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 38 49 56 Ganaotri Complex, 5th Floor, 8hadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 6 6i 16 @HOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 63j6. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th By8h8, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 S-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), 23 1083 HY DERABAD 500001 6 34 71 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 { 6 98 32 21 68 76 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 { 21 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 600013 6 23 05 T.C. No. 1411421. University P.O.. Palayam 16 21 04 TRlVANdRUM 695035 16 21 17 inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 61 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, 6 24 36 PUNE 411005 ~~ *Sales Office in Calcutta is at 6 ChowringheeApproach,P. 0. Princep 27 68 00 Street. Calcutta 700072 tSales Office in Bombay is et Novelty rhambrra, Grant Road, 89 6628
Bombay 400007

SSales Office in Bangalore is at,Unity Building, Narasimharaja Square, 22 36 71 Bangalore 560002 Reprography
Unit,

BE,

New Delhi,

India

