IS 8973 :1991 (Reaffirmed 2000)

m&T
qTJT

FTm

*F@Fl

ati*

wT+it TfhTf~~ WTTcft ( qy?TT ~etervr )

Indian Stafidard

LEAK DETECTION TECHNIQUESGLOSSARY (First Revision )

UDC

620-165'29 : 001'4

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI llOOO2

October 199 1

Price Group 6

Non-Destructive

Testing

Sectional

Committee,

MTD 21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. While reviewing this, This standard was tirst published in 1978. standard bringing it in line with present practices being followed. it has been decided to revise the

Leak detection techniques are used for inspection of systems leaking to vacuum, systems leaking to atmosphere, multiple and heremetrically sealed units in industries like - chemicals, petrochemicals, fertilisers, transportation, electronics, nuclear, space. etc. It is essential to define terms used in various le;lk testing techniques to remove ambiguity and confusion arising out of individual interpretation of The terms commonly used in the application of Icak detection techniques are covered different terms in this standard. Some useful factors in leak testing work; useful equations and leak rate conversion factors have been given in Tables 1, 2 and 3 for guidance. Annex A gives useful factors and equations for leak testing.

This standard is based on ASTM Designation: E 425-85 ( 1986 ) standard definition of terms relating to leak testing, issued by ASTM and which has also been adopted by ASME-SE-425 ( 1986 ). ASME-See V. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 8973 : 1991

Irzdian Stmdwd LEAK

DETECTION TECMNrQUES GLOSSARY ( First Revision
)

-

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers glossary detection techniques. 2 TERMINOLOGY A Absolute Manometer A manometer whose calibration can be calculated from the measurable physical constants of the instrument and which is the same for all ideal gases. Absolute Pressure
Prcssurc above the absolute zero corresponding to pressure empty space, that is, local atmospheric In vacuum technology, plus gauge pressure. pressure alway:, corresponds to absolute pressure not gauge pressure.

Atmosphere ( Standard ) relating to leak The pressure exerted by a mercury column 760 mm in hei;:ht at 0 C under standard accclcration of gravity; equivalent Lo I01 325 ( Pa. ). Atmospheric The pressure and time. Pressure of the atmosphere at a specified place

Atomic Mass Unit ( amu ) The atomic mass unit is the unit of measure of the mass of particle ( atom, molecule, ion. etc ). The numerical va!ue of the mass of a particle in amu's is identical with the older atomic weight and is defined as l/12 of the mass of a carbon 12. Audible Leak Indicator An accessory to a leak detector which converts the output signal to an audible note whose frequency is a function of the leakage rate. B

Absorption The binding or incorporation interior of a solid or liquid. Accumulation Test of gas in the Background Signal

A leak test u;ed to detect very small leaks in which gas contained in a component being tested will, if a leak is present collect for a specified period of time in a closed evacuated chamber into At the which the component has been placed. end of the test period the chamber is opened to a leak dctcctor which is sensitive to the gas. Alkali Ion Diode A sensor having leak dctcctor ). Aperture Leak A Icak of' such geometric conliguration that the length of the Jcakagc path is much smaller than the sh~rtcs~ diameter of the path, so that the leak may bc considered the equivalent of an opening in an inlinitely thin wall. halogen gases ( see also Halogen

The steady or fluctuating output signal of the leak detector caused by the presence of residual tracer gas or other substance to which the detcctnlg element responds. Backing Pump

Same as forepump. Backing Space The space between a backing pump ( forcpump ) and the associated din`uslon pump ( or other type of pump requiring a forepump ). ( see also ballast. ) Backing Space Technique A mcthoci of testing for leaks in L+IIICIIthe leak detector is cvnnecled to the bacl~illg sl-;icc lo tz,l\c advantage 01` the compression 01` gas that occurs between the VXUUI~ system and the b,icking pump, due to the action of the dilfuslon pump

IS 8973 : 1991 ( or other type of pump of high speed relative its backing pump ).
to

Concentration

Back Pressure See Forepressure. Back Pressure Test
See Pressure evacuation

The parts of volume of one gas in a mixture of two or more gases, related to total volume. For example, 1 ppm ( part per million ) of Gas A is 1 volume of Gas A mixed with 999999 volumes of another gas or other gases.
Concentration Ratio

test.

Back Pressurizing Testing A method of testing sealed units in which the units arc culjected to a tracer gas pressure for a period, the tracer gas is flushed from outside and the tracer gas leakage from the unit is measured. Also called ( helium ) bomb and pressureevacuation testing.
Bake Out

The ratio of the number of atoms ( molecules ) of a given constituent of a ( gas ) mixture to the total number of atoms ( molecules ) in the mixture. For ideal gases the concentration ratio has the same value as the volume fraction or the partial pressure of the constituent.
Conductance

The degressing of a vacuum during pumping process. Ballast

system for heating

A backing space large enough to maintain a IOW forepressure when the forepump is temporarily stopped.
Bayard-Alpert See ionization Ionization Gauge

The ratio of the through put ( under steady state, conservative conditions ) of a gas flowing through a conduit or an orifice to the difference in the partial pressures of the gas at the two ends of the conduit or on the two sides of the orifice, expressed in volume units per unit time, such as cubic metres per second.
Cracking See Dissociation. D Differential Leak Detector

vacuum gauge.

Bell Jar open at one end ( usually the A container bottom ) which is used as a vacuum chamber or test vessel.
Bell Jar Testing A test used for detecting leakage from an object completely or partially filled with a tracer gas and placed in a vacuum chamber or bell jar. Bomb Test See Pressure evacuation test. Bubble Test

A leak detector employing two similar gauge tubes in a bridge circuit with a trap which is selective for the tracer gas between the system and one of the tubes.
Differential Pirani Gauge

A form of leak test of gas containing enclosures in which a leak is indicated by the formation of bubble at the site of a leak. C
Clean-Up, Clean-Up Time

A leak detecting device employing two similar pirani tubes as arms of a wheatstone bridge, both tubes being connected to the system under test. A cold trap is placed between one tube and the system. Condensable tracer gas entering the system reaches one tube but not the other, producing a differential effect on the tubes, thus unbalancing the bridge and indicating leakage.
Diffusion

4 The flow of gas through

The time required for a leak testing system reduce its signal output to 37 percent of the peak or maximum signal indicated at the time the tracer gas ceases to enter the leak system.
Cold Gathode Ionization Gauge

a substance in which the gas actually migrates through the crystal lattice of the substance rather than through a geometrical leak ( hole dimension versus molecular diameters ). as a iesult of iheir thermal reaction.
Pressure

b) The process by which molecules intermingle
Discharge

See Ionization vacuum gauge. 2

See Forepressure.

IS 8973 : 1991 Discharge Tube Leak Indicator Flooded System A system which, while being tested becomes so filled with tracer gas as to make impracticable further Ieak testing. Flow Rate a) The rate at which gas pas%es a given cross section of a system, determined by the product of the volume passing per unit time and its ( partial ) pressure at the cross section. b) A product of the ( partial ) prcssurc difference of a gas at the ends of a conduit or across the face of an orifice, and the conductance of the gas for the conduit 01 orifice. Expres:cd in pressure-volume per unit time, such as pascal cubic meters per second. Foreline The line backs. between a fore pump and the pump it F

A glass tube with electrodes attached to a source of high-frequency high voltage, such as a Tesla coil, so that changes in the colour of the electrical discharge may be observed when a suitable tracer gas ( methane, carbon dioxide, alcohol ) flow through the leak. Dissociation The breakdown of a substance into two or more The dissociation is sometimes constituents. referred to as cracking. Drift The rclntively slow change in the background output level of the leak detector due to the electronics rather than a change in the level of the tracer gas. Dynamic Leakage Measurement

Leakage measured by measuring the tracer gas equilibrium partial pressure while the system is actively being pumped. Dynamic Leak Test A form of leak test gas entering through for sensing purposes. Dynamic Sensitivity in which some of the tracer a leak is continually removed

Foreline Valve A vacuum valve placed in the foreline to permit isolation of the diffusion pump from its backing pump. Forepressure The total pressure on the outlet side of a pump measured near the outlet port. Sometimes called the back pressure or backing pressure. Also known as outlet pressure, exhaust pressure, or discharge pressure. In discnssing the action of a vapour jet, the term forepressure may be used to designate the total pressure of the gas against which the jet impinges. Forepump The pump which produces the necessary forewhich is incapable of vacuum for a pump discharging gases at atmospheric pressure. Sometimes called the backing pump. 6 Gas The state of matter in which molecules UC practically unrestricted by intcrrnolccal~ir fi~rcl~, so that the molcculcs arc fret to occupy alI sp;icc within ;~ii cnclu~u~c. In v;IcLILlIll lccilnol~~gy, lirc: word gas has been lo~scly applieci to the UIICOIIdensed gas and vapour within a vacuums syhtcm. 3

of Leak Detector

The minimum leakage rate that the detector is capable of detecting while the enclosure under test is actively being evacuated continuously under speciEed conditions. E Electrometer Tube

A special electronic tube, with very high grid-tocathode resistance suitable for use with input grid resistors of very high ohmic value. Equivalent Nitrogen Pressure

The pressure that a gauge or another device would indicate if the gas in the device were replaced by nitrogen at the same molecular density, that is, the same number of molecules per unit volume. Exhaust Tubulation See Pump-out Exhaust tubulation.

l~sessure

See Forepressure.

IS 8973 : 1991 Gauge Pressure A term used to indicate the difference between the absolute pressure and atmospheric pressure. This is the pressure indicated by a pressure gauge when attached to a pressurised system. H Halogen The family of the elements fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine or their compounds. Of significance in halogen leak detection are those which have enough vapour pressure to be useful as tracer gases. Compounds do not fall under the strict definition of `halogen'. However, for the purpose of this standard, this word provides a convenient descriptive term for halogen-containing compounds. Halogen Leak Detector changing helium concentrations ( either due to a leak or outgassing ) in the detector tube. Expressed in scale divisions per unit time. Helium Leak Detector A leak detector Hermetrically using helium Tight Seal as the tracer gas.

A seal which does not exhibit leakage when dynamically tested with commercially built leak detectors that are sensitive to a gas on the pressure side opposite to the side on which tile leak detector is located or which does not exhibit leakage with any form of liquid test. High Vacuum See Table 1.

Holding Pump The force pump used to hold a vapour pump at conditions while a roughing pump operating reduces the system pressure to a point at which the valve between the vapour pump and the system can be opened without stopping the flow of vapour from the nozzles. Hood Test An overall test in which an object under vacuum test is enclosed by a `hood' which is filled with tracer gas so as to subject all parts of the test A form of object to examination at one time. dynamic leak test in which the entire enclosure or a large portion of its external surface is exposed to the tracer gas while the interior is connected to a leak detector with the objective of determining the existence of leakage ( see also Vacuum testing ). Hot Cathode Ionization �ee Ionization Hot-Filament See Ionization Hydraulic the drift from gasket indicated at end of the probe but the probe and can into suspecting the vacuum lonization vacuum Gauge gauge. Gauge gauge.

A leak detector that responds to halogen tracer gases. Also called a halogen-sensitive leak detector or a halide leak detector : (a) The copperflame detector or halide torch consists of a Burnsen burner with flame impinging on a copper plate or screen and a host with sampling probe to carry tracer gas to the air in take of the burner. (b) The alkali ion diode halogen detector depends on the variation of positive ion emission from a heated platinum anode when halogen molecules enter the sensing element. Hang Up A virtual leak caused by the slow release of absorbed or entrapped tracer gas in a leak detector vacuum system ( see Virtual leak ). Helium Bombing A method of testing for leaks in which her3etritally sealed units containing an internal volume are subjected to a helium pressure prior to being bell jar tested. If leaks are present in the sealed unit. the helium pressure will drive some helium into the internal volume and this may be subsequently detected during bell jar testing. Helium Drift

Pressure Test test

a) In leak testing with a probe,
a leak or permeable some distance from the which is detected by misle:~d the operator area near the probe.

See Hydrostatic Hydrostatic Test

b) A gradual
needle

wandering of the output metre of the leak detector due to slowly 4

A pressure test in which the CulH~OllCJlt bc~i~g tested is filled completely with water or anothc~ liquid. Pressure, if required, is then applic~! LU the liquid for rhe required time and the OLI~SI& of the component is examined visually for leaks.

IS 8973 : 1991 I Ideal Gas A gas that obeys Boyle's law, Charle's Also zero heat of free expansion. perfect gas. In Leakage Rate The combined leak rate from a specified evacuated vessel units per unit of time. Inlet The opening, flange, connection or coupling on a leak detector or leak testing system through which the tracer gas may enter due to a leak in an object under test. Inlet Flange See Inlet. Inlet Port See Inlet. Inside Out Method See Pressure evacuation testing. all existing in pressure leaks in volume law and has known as a producing the ionization. as follows: The common types are

a) Hot Cathode Ionization Gauze ., - The ions are produced by collisions with electrons emitted from a hot filament ( or cathode ) and accelerated by an electric field. Also called hot-filament ionization gauge, or simply ion gauge. The Bayarcl-Alpcrt ionization gauge employs a tube with an electrode structure designed to minimize X-ray induced electron emission from the ion collector.

b) Cold-Cathode

Inside Out Testing See Bell jar testing. Ion Pump An electrical device for pumping gas comprising a means for ionizing the gas and a system of electrodes at suitable potentials in some cases also a magnetic field, which causes the ions formed to move towards a surface on which they are absorbed or buried. Ion Source That part of a leak detector tube in which tracer gas is ionized preliminary to being detected. Ionization Potential

ionization Gauge -- The ions are produced by a coldcathodc discharge, usually in the presence of a magnetic field which lengthens the path of the electrons between cathode and anode. The discharge tube is a transparent tube in which the colour and form of a cold-cathode dischage ( without presence of a magnetic field ) gives an indication of the pressure and the nature of the gas. The phillips ionization gauge is a cold-cathode ionization gauge in which a magnetic field is directly parallel to the axis of an annular electrode ( normally the anode ) located between two plate electrodes perpendicular to the axis Various modifications of the Penning gauge are named after the inventors, and certain types are referred to as magnetron vacuum gauges. produced particles) by radiations ( usually alpha emitted from a radioactive source

cl Radioactive Ionization Gauge -. The ions are

Isolation Test A method of determining whether a leak is present in a system or of obtaining an estim:rte of its magnitude by observing the rate of rise of pressure in the evacuated system when the system is isolated from the pump. Also called rate of pressure rise test. K

expressed in ( electron ) The minimum energy, volts, required to remove an electron from an atom or molecule to form a positive ion. Ionization Vacuum Gauge

Krypton 85 A tracer gas used to test for Icakagc radioisotope leak test method is used. Knudsen Flow The how of gases through ducts and tubes undci condition intermediate between l:imiil:ir- VISC~,LIS flow. Also called transition flon. Knt~dscn'x CC~LKItion of now applies to the intcrnicdiatc range III the case of pipes with cncular cross section. when the

A vacuum gauge comprising a means of ionizing the gas molecules, electrodes to facilitate the collection 01` the positive ions formed, and means of indicating the magnitude of the collected ion Various types ionization gauge are current. distinguished according to the method of

of

5

1s 8973 : 1991 L Leak A hole, or void in the wall of an enclosure, capable of passing liquid or gas from one side of the wall to the other under action of a pressure or concentration differential existing across the wall, independent of the quantity of fluid flowing. Leak Detector A device for detecting, locating combination thereof, leakage. Leakage Rate The flow rate of a liquid or gas through a leak at a given temperature as a result of a specified pressure di&rcncc across the leak. Standard conditions for gases are 25�C and 100 KPa. Leakage rates arc expressed in various units such as Pascal cubic meters per second or Pascal litres per second or centimetre standard cubic per second ( see Table 2 ). Lusec A unit of flow rate equal to 0'133 MPa.ms/s. Low Vacuum-See Table I. M Masking The covering of a section of a test object so as to prevent tracer gas from entering leaks that may exist in the covered section or from escaping from leak region. Mass Number atomic mass units or as or measuring or ions. The principal types are as follows :

4 Dempster

( MS ) The accelerated by an electric slit, and are then deflected field through 180" so as to second slit.

ions are iirst field through a by a magnetic pass through a

b) Bainbridge Fordurz ( MS ) - The

ions arc separated by mcaus of a radial elcctrostntlc field and a magnetic Geld deflecting the ions through 60 so arranged that the dispersion of ions in the electric iicld is exactly compensated by the dispersion in the magnetic field for a given velocity JilTcrcnce.

Bleakney 1 MS ) - `llic ions arc separated by crossed electric and magnetic fields. Also called cross fields mass spectrometer. Nier ( MS ) - A modilication of the Dempster Mass Spectronictcr in which the magnetic field deflects the ions. e) Time of Flight ( MS ) - The gas is ionized by a pulsemodulated electron bcarn and each group of ions is accelerated toward the ion collector. Ions of different mass/charge ratio traverse their paths in different times. f) Radio Frequency ( MS ) -- The ions are accelerated into radio frequency analyzer in which ions of a selected mass/charge are accelerated through openings in a series of spaced plates alternately attached across a radio frequency oscillator. The ions emerge into a electrostatic field which permits only the ions accelerated in the analyzer to leach the collector. g) Omegatron ( MS ) - The ions rated by cyclotron principle. Mass Spectrometer Leak Detector arc accelc-

The whole number nearest to the expressed in either atomic mass ( chemical ) atomic mass. Mass to Charge Ratio The ratio of the mass to the expressed as m/e of the ion. Mass Spectrometer number

A mass spectrometer adjusted to respond only to a particular tracer gas. Helium is commonly used as tracer gas, and thus the instrument is normally referred to as a helium leak detector. Mass Spectrum A record, graph, table, etc, that shows the rclativc number of ions of various masses that are produced when a given substance is processed III ;I nubs spectrometer. Mean Free Path The average distance that a molecule travc~s between successive collisions uith other molecules. Medium Vacuum See Table 6 I.

of electrons

( MS ) (g)

Omegatron ( MS ) The ions are accelerated by the cyclotron principle. Gauge that relates an to the partial output which is proportional pressure of a specified gas: as a leak detector sensitive to a particular tracer gas or as an analytical instrument to determine the percentage composition of a gas mixture. Various types are distinguished by the method of separating the

IS 8973 : 1991 Micrometre A unit of length Micron A term for micrometre. Micron Cubic Foot per Hour A mass rate of gas foot passes a given a mass rate of gas caused by the flow 1 hour. Micron of Mercury A unit column of' pressure equal to that exerted of mercury standing one micrometre by a high. The trapping solidification. Outgassing new unit of pressure equal of 10sR The evolution Outlet Pressure of Mercury See forepressure P Palladium Barrier Leak Detector to low6 mm ( 1 mm ) of
is no has been

N equal to one millionth of a metre. Newton The SI unit of force ( kg.m/s' Non Condensable Gas A gas whose temperature perature so that it cannot of pressure alone. 0 Occlusion of undissolved gas in a solid during is above its critical tembe liquefied by increase ).

flow such that one micron cubic point in an hour. Alternatively, flow such that the pressure rise in a lft" volume is 1 mircon in

Microtorr A proposed torr. Millimetre

of gas from a material

in vacuum.

A unit of pressure corresponding to a column of mercury exactly 1 mm high under standard acceleration of gravity. Sometimes called torr. Millimicron of Mercury equal

A unit of pressure mercury.

This terminology NOTE Miltittlicron lol;&er acccptcd in the S.I. The millimicron replactxi by the nanometer ( mm ).

A leak detector using hydrogen as the tracer gas and using the principle of hydrogen diffusing rapidly through a hot palladium barrier into an evacuated vacuum gauge. Partial Pressure The pressure caused by a gas, either by itself, or in the presence of other gases. When a second gas is not present, the partial pressure is the same as the total pressure ( see Table 3 ). Pascal (Pa)

Millitorr A proposed torr. Minimum new unit of pressure equal to IO-"

Detectable

Leakage Rate The preferred unit of pressure in the SI system, defined as one newton per square meter. One Pascal is approx, equal to 1 X 1O"5 atm or more precisely I Pa m"/s-9'869 2 atm. cm"/s or I Pa==0'986 92 x 10d3 atm. Pascal Cubic Metres per Second (Pa.m"/s>

The magnitude of the smallest leakage rate that can be unambiguously detected by a given leak detector in the presence of conditions existing at the time of test. This is commonly known as sensitivity. Molecular Flow

The flow of gas through a passage under conditions such that the mean free path is greater than the largest dimension of a transverse section of the passage. Molecular Leak A leak of such geometric configuration that gas flow through it obeys the law of molecular flow ( Knudsen's law ). The flow is proportional to the dilrcrzncc of the end pressures and inversely, proportional to the square root of the molecular weight of the gas. 7

The preferred unit of gas flow in the Sl system. One Pa.m"/s is approximately equal to 16 atm cm"/s or, more precisely, 1 Pa.m"/s==9.869 2 ntm. cm"/s. Penning Gauge See Ionization Perfect Gas vacuum gauge.

See Ideal Gas.

IS 8973

1991 Coefficient Probe A tube having a fine opening at one end, used for directing or collecting a steam of tracer gas. Probe Gas A tracer gas which issues from a fine orifice so as to impinge on a restricted test arca. Proportioning conductivity vacuum gauge. Probe

Permeability

The steady-state rate of flow of gas through unit area and thickness of a solid barrier oer unit pressure differential at a given temperatuie. Phillips Ionizalion See Ionization Pirani Gauge See Thermal Poiseuille Gauge gauge.

vacuum

Flow

A probe that can vary, sample pure air ratios, between 100 percent sample and 100 percent pure air without substantially changing the total flow rate from the probe. Probe Test A leak test in which the tracer gas is applied by means of a probe so that the arca covered by the tracer gas is localized. This enables the individual leaks to be located. Pump Down Time Time of evacuation. Pump-out Tubufation A tube extending from an evacuated device through which gas is pumped and which is usually permanently sealed off after the device has been evacuated. Sometimes called exhaust tubulation. R Radioisotope Leak Test System

The particular case of laminar viSC0US Bow through a long pipe of circular cross section. Pressure Difference

The difference between the pressure on the inlet side of the leak and the pressure on the exit side of the leak. Pressure Dye Test

4 A form

of leak test in which the systems are filled with liquid dye, fluorescent oil which is then pressurized for the purpose of driving liquid through possible leakage paths and so make its presence visible when the excess liquid has been removed from the exterior. test in which the systems are immersed in a liquid dye or fluorescent oil and then pressurised for the purpose of driving liquid through possible leakage paths and so make its presence visible when the excess liquid has been removed from the exterior. Test

b) A leak

A leak test system which uses a radioactive tracer for measuring the emission gas and a detector from the tracer. Rate of Rise

Pressure Evacuation

A leak test in which one or more devices are placed under gas pressure for a period of time, the objective being to accumulate enough gas in those devices that may leak to permit an indication on a leak detector sensitive to the gas when the devices are placed in an evacuated system jointed to the leak detector. It is also known as `Inside Out Method' or Back Pressuring Testing or Bomb Test. Pressure Testing A method of leak testing in which the component being tested is filled completely with a gas or liquid which is then pressurized. The outside of the component is examined for the detection of any leaks. 8

The time rate of pressure increase at a given time in a vacuum system which is suddenly isolated from the pump by a valve. The volume and temperature of the system are held constant during the rate of rise measurement. ( See Isolation Test. ) Real Leak It is a crack, crevice, fissure, hole or passage waq in the wall of an enclosure, capable of passing air, or other gases, from one side of the wall to the other under an action of a prcssurc or COIICCIItration diflerential existing acr05s the wall. Resistance ( to conductance. Flow ) The reciprocal of

IS 8973 : 1991

Response Factor The response of the halogen leak detector 0'3 MPa m'/s of refgrigerant12 (dichloroditluoromethane, CC 12 F 2 ) or less, divided by the response to the same quantity of another halogen test gas. Thus, the actual leakage rate of a detected leak will be the indication of the detector multiplied by the response factor. The response of mixture of a tracer and nonhalogen gases will be the response factor of the tracer divided by the fraction of tracer gas in the test gas. Response Time The time required for a leak detector or leak testing system to yield a signal output equal to 63 percent of the maximum signal attained when tr,tccr gas applied continuously to the system untter test. Also called response. Reverse Probe probe or probe.

Sensitivity

of Leak Test

The smallest leakage rate that an instrument, method or system is capabie of detecting under specified conditions ( see minimum detectable leakage rate ). Sniffing Method See Pressure testing.

Sniffing Probe See Sampling probe.

Soap Bubble Test A type of leak testing in which the tracer gas leakage is detected by bubbles formed in a layer of soap solution applied to the surface of the test object. Sorption The taking up chemisorption processes. of gas by absorption, or any combination adsorption, of these

See Sampling Roughing The initial Roughing

evacuation Line

of a vacuum

system.

Spark Coil Leak Detector A high frequency discharge coil of the Tesla type which indicates pin holes in glass vacuum systems by a spark jumping between the core of the coil and the pin hole. Spectrometer The sensing detector. Spray Probe A device for directing a small jet of tracer an object under vacuum testing. Squealer See Audible leak indicator. gas on Tube element of a mass spectrometer leak

A line running from a mechanical pump to a which preliminary vacuum chamber through pumping is conducted in the rough vacuum range. Roughing Pump A vacuum a vacuum pump used for the initial system. S Sampling Probe A device used in pressure testing and so designed as to collect tracer gas from an area of the test object and feed it to the leak detector at the reduced pressure required. Also called a `Sniffer' or `Sniffing probe'. Scattering Dispersion or diffusion in various directions due to intermolecular or ionic collisions as applied to the effect of the residual gas in a mass spectrometer tube or an ion beam traversing the tube. Search Gas See Tracer Senbitivity In the case of a leak detector, the response of the detector to tracer gas leakage ( that is, scale, divisrons per unit of leakage rate ). 9 gas. evacuation of

Standard Leak A device that permits a tracer gas to be introduced into a leak detector or leak testing system at a known rate to facilitate calibration of the leak detector. Standard Leakage Rate The rate of flow of atmospheric air under conditmns 111 which inlet pressure IS 0'1 MI% rF_ j percent; outlet pressure is less than 1 kl'a, temperature is 25-C f 5 and dew point is less than -25 c.

IS 8973 : 1991 T Thermal Conductivity Vacuum Gauge Tracer Probe Leak Location See Probe test. Transition Flow The flow of gases between laminary flow. under conditions intermediate viscous flow and molecular

A vacuum gauge containing two surface at different temperatures between which heat may be transported by the gas molecules so that change in the temperature ( or in the heating power required to maintain constant temperature ) of one of the surfaces may be correlated with the gas pressure by calibration against a master gauge. Various types of thermal conductivity gauge are distinguished according to the method of indicating the temperature change. The common types arc as follows: a) Pirani Gawe - An increase of vresswe from the zero point causes a decrease in the temperature of a heated filament of material having a large lemperature coeficient of resistance thus unbalancing a wheatstone bridge circuit ( or the circuit is adjusted temperature to maintain the filament constant ).

u Ultimate Pressure The limiting pressure approached in the V~CLILIIII system after sufficient pumping time to establish that further reductions in pressure shall be negligible. Ultra-High See Table Ultrasonic Vucuum 1. Leak Detector

b) Thermocouple

Gauge - The decrease in temperature of a heated filament as the pressure rises is indicated by decreased emf having the circuit in a thermocouple junction in thermal contact with the centre of the heated filament. Gauge - A form of Pirani gauge employing a thermistor as the heating element.

An instrument that detects ultrasonic energy produced by molecular turbulence that occurs in the transition from the laminar to turbulent flow of a gas through an orifice and that converts this energy to the audible range. V Vacuum In vacuum technology a given space filled wilh gas at pressures below atmospheric pressure ( see Table 1 1. Vacuum Testing A leak-testing method in which the enclosure/ object under examination is evacuated, the tracer gas applied to the outside surface of the enclosure/object and the gas detected after entering it ( see also `Hood test' ). Vapour Pressure

c) Them&or

d) Bimetallic

Strip Gauge - Deflection of a bimetallic strip with changing temperature indicates the changes in pressure.

Throttling Reducing the net pumping speed of a pumping system by partially closing a valve or installing a section of pipeline with low conductance. Throughout See Flow rate. Tight Free from leaks according Torr A unit of pressure equal to 1/760th phere, cqui\alent to 133'322 Pa. Tracer Gas A gas which, passing through be detected by a specific leak disclose the presence of a leak. gas. a leak, can than detector and thus Also called search of an atmosto a given specification.

The pressure txerted by the liquid when in equilibrium liquid. Very High Vacuum See Table 1,

vapour with

of a solid or the solid or

Virtual Leak a) The semblance of a system caused by slow gas. 10 leak in a UCULIII: release of trapped

IS 8973 : 1991 b) During a-rate-of rise test, the semblance of a leak in vacuum system caused by a slow release of sorbed or occulded gas or gases on or in the surface and pores of all materials in a system which has been exposed to atmospheric pressure prior to evacuation. Viscous Flow The flow of gas through a duct under conditions such that the mean free path is very small in comparison with the smallest dimensions of a transverse section of the duct. The flow may be either laminar or turbulent. Viscous Leak A leak of such geometric configuration that flow through it is `VICOUS' in nature that is flow obeys Poiseuille's law. The flow rate proportional to the difference of the squares of end pressures and inversely proportional to gaseous viscosity. gas the is the the Table
To Convert

2

Conversion
From

Factors
To

for Leak Testing
Multiply Column I

(1)
Leukage Rare

(2) Pa. Pa. Pa. Pa. Pa. Pa, P,l Pa Pa Pa Pa Pa Pa Pa. s Pa. s m3/s ma/s m3/s m3/s rnrjs m3/s

by (3) 1'01 x lo1.33x IO-4 1.05 x IO-" 1.00x 10-s 1'01 Y IO-1 1'33 x IO-1 1.01 x IO* 1.00x 106 1'33 x lo-' 1.33 x 10-1 1-33x IO* 689x 103 1.33x 102 1.00x IO--3 1.00x IO-'

atm, cmajs micron, litre/s micron, ft3/h Pascal, iitres/s STD. cn?/s torr, litres/s
Pressure

atmosphere ( std ) bar micrometer of Hg micron millimeter of Hg pounds-force/in2 torr k iscosity centipoise Poise Volume 3 ;ty litre

ma 1~ooxlo-~ m8 2.83x10-2 ma 1.00x 10-S NOTE - In SI units quantity of gas is measured in units of Pascal cubic meters ( Pa.m3 ). The leakage rate is measured in Pascal cubic meter per second ( Pa. m3/s ). For approximate conversion, 1 Pa. m"/s -10 std cc/s.

Table 1
Degrees of Vacuum

Degrees of Vacuum
Range Pa Pressure Range Torr (3) 760 to 25

Pressure

Table 3 Composition and Partial Pressures of Dry Air at Sea Level ( 101'325 kPa )
Constitutent Content r---h--.-~ % ppm Partial Pressure ___h____~~

(1)
Low

(2)
100 kPa to 3 kPa

Medium High Very high Ultra high

Above Above 3 kPa to 0'1 Pa 25 to 1x10-* Above 0.1 Pa to 0.1 mPa Above 0.1 mPa to 0.1 @a Above 0'1 PPa and less In SI unils pressure Above I x10-8 to 1 x10-s

Above 1 x IO-6 to 1 x 10-o Above 1 x10-9 and less

NOTE -

is measured

in pascals.

1 p;!scal : 1 N/m!. 1 atmosphere = 101.3 kl'a. 1 Newton = 1 kg. m/s".

Nitrogen 18'084 20'946 Oxygen C:\rbon dioxide 0'033 Argon 0.934 0'0018 18.18 Neon Helium 0~0005 5.24 1'14 Krypton 0'087 Xenon Hydrngen 0'5 2'0 Methane 0.5 Nitrous oxide ( NzO ) ( a ) Note the similarity of these percentages. When less accuracy use percentage x 1 000.

torr Pa ( a ) 493.43 79 119 159.19 21 224 0.25 33'4 7.10 946 1'38 x IO-2 1'84 3-98 x IO-3 0.53 8.66 x IO-4 0'116 6.61 Y IO-6 O~IIOX 8 3.80x IO--4 0.05 1.52x10-3 0'20 3'80 x IO-" 0.05 numbers with rho can bc toletatcd

II

IS 8973 : 1991

ANNEX
USEFUL A-l Useful factors given below: 1 atmosphere (atm) = in leak FACTORS, testing KQUATIONS work are

A
FOR LEAK TESTING conductance : ( Cl- ) . . . . . . fC, . . . . t-i/C,, for one

viii) Total parallel

CT = C,-1 C,+C, 760 millimetres of mercury (mmHg) 7'6 x 10" microns. 101'325 kPa. 1 x lObe metres of mercury ( mHg ) 1 x 10SR mm Hg 1'333 2X JO-' Pascal l/760 of a standard atmosphere = 133'32 Pa z JO" cm" -._ lxlO-:lm:' = 31,536,OOO s/year = 3'15 X 10' secjyear in air = = in Leak 0'000 5 percent Sppm Testing are given ix) Total series conductance: ( liCr ) = l/C,

l-l/Ci~I-J/C,,

1 micron

x) When viscous conductance is known gas C,. for any other gas C,: c, = (ng/n, ) c, xi) When molecular flow JYILC is known gas Q,, for any other gas Q-: Q- -( MI/M.! ) I" Q'

for OIIC

1 torr

1 cubic metre 1 litre Seconds in I year of helium

xii) When molecuJ:;.r conductance is known one gas C,, for any other gas C,: C, = xiii) ( M,/M, ) "2 `I

for

Percentage

When molecular conductance is known for one gas C, at temperature T,, for any other gas C, at temperature T, is C, = (T,/T,) liaCL

A-2 Useful equations below: i) Mean

xiv) Mean free path of air at ambient temperature ;- (6'8 x 10-"/P ) mctres

Free Path in metres ( mfp ) : hmfp = 116'4 ( n/P ) ( T/M )1'L ) ( PI"-P2" for ) one gas

c=
R=

Gas conductance,

cubic metres/sec Joules/mole per kelvin

Specific gas constant,
=

ii) Viscous flow: Q = ( v r'/16nl

x
n p=

iii) When viscous flow is known QJ, for any other gas Q2: Q2 n2=Ql nl iv) Conductance for viscous flow: C = ( nr'/rlnJ ) Pavg

_;; Mean free path, metres Gas viscosity, Pascal seconds Absolute pressure, Paszals Absolute temperature, degrees kelvin Molecular weight of gas, gms/mole Gas flow rate, Pa. cubic mctres/sec Radius of leakage tube, metres length of leakage Upstream Down stream tube, metrer J%scals Pascals leak path, gas pressure,

T
M Qr

zz
=z

v) Molecular flow: Q - 304'8( r-"/l ) ( T/M ) `I' ( PI-P2

z

)

1zz.c

pi ;I P2 = ravg=

vi) Conductance for tube with molecular flow: C = 3'342 ( r"/l ) ( RT/M )I/' orifice with molecular vii) Conductance for flow: C = 3 613 ( r' ) ( T/M )I/'

gas pressure withln

Average pressure PI-/-Pr, Pascals 2

12

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Br~eau Q/" Ztuliurl Stmtlurtls Act, lY86 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by RIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to BIS is a statutory institution promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free LLSC, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Director Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the or grade designations. Publications ), BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in may bi: possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. MTD 21 ( 3601 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication
~-

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters
:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 311 01 31 1 331 13 75 37 86 62 53 38 43 235 02 lh 6 32 92 95

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western Branches : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS
: Manakalaya,

160036 600113

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

( East )

: AHMADABAD,

BANGALORE, BHOPAL, PARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD,,GUWAHATI, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

BHUBANESHWAK, COIMBATOKE, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR,

Printed

at Printwell

Printers,

Aligarh,

India

