UDC

621.97/`98

: 001'4

IS:

6652(Part

2)-1986

Indian

Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO METAL FORMING MACHINES AND TOOLS
PART 2 METAL FORMING MACHINES RELATING TO SHEET METAL

( First
1. Scope working,
2. Definitions A 2.1 Adapter Plate 2.2 Adjusfable Bed a suitable mechanism An additional plate mounted Covers the definitions of terms relating

Revision

/

to metal

forming

machines

for

sheet

metal

on ram or bolster
OT

to adapt tool or tools, press frame can and provided between with its

Bed of a press mounted for varying the shut height The distance through

and guided press. which the

in

2.3 Adjustment of a Slide extreme limits on screw.

slides

be moved

or power operated machine 2.4 Arbor Press - A manual Also used for forcing mandrels into drilled or bored parts. and for other similar work.

normally bushings

used for forcing arbors or or pins into or out of holes

2.5 Beading Machine

-

A special

purpose

machine

to perform

beading

operation. is fixed the bolster

2.6 Bed of a Press - The stationary and sometimes the die directly. 2.7 Bench Press 2.6 Bolster is fastened. 2.9 Brake-The other device. 2.10 Bulldozer straightening, A small

part of the press serving is mounted

as a table 20 which

press which

on a bench or table. of a press upon which the press tool

The plate or block secured friction mechanism

to the bed or slide

used for stopping press with C

the motion generally

of a press bed

slide, used

feed or any for bending,

- Slow-acting etc.

horizontal

a large

2.11 Cam Press - A mechanical press in which one ( or more ) of the slides Usually double action press with blank holder slide operated by cam. 2.12 Capacity of a Press The maximum

are operated

by cam.

force that a slide of a press can exert. scrap, etc, slide from a machine. member from rotation or roll a driven of coil

2.13 Chute - A trough or inclined plane with guides, down which parts, either in being fed to a magazine or directly to a press or in being ejected 2.14 Clutch - A coupling machine member. used to connect for supporting or disconnect a coil a driving machine

2.15 Coil Cradle - A device while being unwound. 2.16 Crank Press-A to convert the circular

on its periphery is actuated

and allowing

mechanical press the slide of which motion to linear motion.

by a sltder crank-mechanism,

Adopted

5 August

1986

@ March 1987, ISI I
I

Gr 3

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI
110002

INSTITUTION
SHAH ZAFAR MARG

IS : 6652 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 2.17 Crimping Machine seam. 2.18 Crown The top assembly of a straight sided four-piece
D

A

special

machine

for a forming

operation construction

to setdown press,

or close-in

a

2.19 Daylight - The distance from top of bolster/bed term is mostly used in case of hydraulic press.
2.20 Dial Feed - The mechanical rotating disc or dials. 2.21 Die Cushion - An accessory direction opposite of slide motion. press feed in which on press which

to bottom

of slide with slide

fully

up,

This tool by

the work pieces

are fed to the

press usually

gives additional

motion

and force

in the

2.22 Dieing Press - A small high speed press in which the slide is operated by pull rods extending down through the bed where they are connected to a plate which is actuated by the drive mechanism located underneath. 2.23 Die Spotting Press - A hydraulic or mechanical press used to aid removal of high spots on profile, contour, etc, of a female member of a die with a male member or vice versa to match them. 2.24 Double Action Press independent motion. 2.25 Drop Hammer exert force. A press having equipment two independent in which a falling co-axial weight moving slides and having to

A mechanical

is used as the device

2.26 Drum Feed - A special feed in which the work pieces are located in the contoured cavities on the periphery of the drum which is mounted in the die space of a press. The blanks are loaded at the front of drum carried to the top where operation is performed and the parts are discharged at the back.

E
- 2.27 Eccentric Press - A mechanical motion from a rotary motion. 2.28 Endwheel Press and the eccentric shaft press in which eccentric mechanism the flywheel is used to get linear

A gap frame mechanical is located front to back.

press in which F

is at the back of press

2.29 Flat Edge Trimmer shape to plain straight

- A machine for trimming quickly, edges or irregularly notched edges.

accurately

drawn

shells

of almost

any its is on

with a provision 2.30 Flying Cut-Off Device - A shear, saw, die, etc, equipped working stroke in the same direction and at the same rate as a long piece simultaneously worked. press which has a flv weioht 2.31 Flv Press - A manuallv operated mechanical _ `the sprndle, which moves down or up when the wheel is rotated. on a machine 2.32 Flywheel - A wheel used as an energy accumulator energy is used to prevent excessive or sudden changes in speed. 2.33 Folding Machine strip or sheet material. 2.34 Foot Press Small A machine either hand or power operated, press actuated G 2.36 Gang Slitter - A machine with number shafts, used for shearing sheet metal into stocks. for folding

to move during of metal which directlv mounted

and whose

rotational of

and lock forming

size and small

capacity

entirely

by foot pressure

of pairs of rotary cutters, spaced strips or for trimming the edges

on two parallel of coiled sheet

classification of presses in which the uprights are made 2.36 Gap Frame Press - A general in the form of letter `C' thereby making three sides of the space available for mounting dies, tools, accessories, etc. 2.37 Geared Press - A press whose one or more sets of gears. main drive shaft is connected to the driving source through

2

IS : 6652 ( Part 2 ) - 1986 2.38 Gibs are adjustable Guides whichensure proper sliding for taking up excessive wear. fit between two machine parts and which usually shoe

2.39 Grip feed - This is a feeding clamps the stock tightly on feeding

device in which reciprocating head carrying movement and releases it on return stroke. rolling machine for forming or grooving

a gripper

2.40 Grooving Machine ( Groover ) -A straight line seams in sheet material.

and flattening

2.41 Guillotine Shear - Shearing machine in which the bottom cutting member is fixed on the bed and the other top cutting member is mounted at a rake or inclination to it on a moving member. Action of blades similar to guillotine action causes cutting of sheet. H 2.42 Hammer - General classification causing materials to deform at larger 2.43 Horn press.
-

of machines used for hot or cold forming velocities than in the cases of presses. acts as the die or to which a horn for doing the die

by impact, thereby is fastened as forming cylinder on a and whose

A cantilever Press -

block or post which equipped with

2.44 Horning piercing.

A press

operations,

such

2.45 Hydraulic Press - A press whose slide pressure is obtained from hydraulic pump.

or ram is actuated I

by a hydraulic

2.46 Inching Device - An electro-mechanical distance with or without load. 2.47 Inclinable Press - A press which ejecting of finished parts by gravity. 2.48 lnclined Press - Any press having the ram is not vertical, but inclined. may

device

with slow movement in inclined

of a slide position also

to a desired to facilitate of

be operated in fixed

the frame J

inclined

position.

The line of action

2.49 Jaw Clutch - A positive clutch in which male and female jaw parts are made the clutch is engaged and those parts are forced apart while disengaging clutch. K

to

mate

when

a short stroke press in which the slide is directly 2.50 Knuckle Joint Press - Comparatively actuated by knuckle joint which is closed and opened by means of a connection and crank. In this process a knuckle mechanism used to convert rotary motion into a reciprocating motion. L 2.51 Load - With reference to a press to do the process in question. 2.52 Locking Device the load is the amount travel M 2.53 Magazine regular shaped machine. A holding and guiding device in which pieces can be stacked or otherwise parts, such as blank shells or other uniformly positioned for feeding ratchet paw1 or escapement fairly to a of force which distance the press on return is exerting stroke.

A device to lock cushion

for a desired

2.54 Magazine FeedA magazine in combination with slide for feeding one piece at a time to the press tool. 2.55 Mechanical toggle, knuckle,

or reciprocating c;m

device such as crank, eccentric, Press - A press in which a mechanical etc, is used to convert the rotary motion into a reciprocating motion. either relative

2.56 Motion Diagram - A graph or curve which shows motion of slide of driving member, such as rotation of crank or with respect to time. 2.57 Multiple Point Press than one point, for example, A press in which the slide two-point press, four-point 3

to the mcticn at more

is operated by applying press, etc.

pressure

IS : 6652 ( Part 2 ) - 1986
automatic punching or forming press having two or 2.58 Mulfi-Slided Press - High productive more slides actuated by cams to perform various operations progressively. This is used to produce components having operations such as cutting, coining, bending, embossing, marking, etc. Deep drawing is not generally performed in this press. N 2.59 Nibbling Machine - A machine used for contour ting tool which makes numerous small cuts. 0 2.60 One-Piece Frame a single weldment. 2.61 One-Point link. Press A press frame combining A mechanical press whose bed, uprights slide and crown into a single Casting or cutting of sheet metal by a rapidly reciproca-

is actuated opening

by one crank at the back

and connection the two rods used or gets

2.62 Open Back lnclinabie Press ( 0131 Press) - Press with uprights and with type of frame that can be inclined,

between

press with side members consisting of vertical 2.63 Open Red Press - A hydraulic which are spacers between bed and crown upon which the slide is guided. 2.64 Outside Slide - A slide mounted for cut off or other press operation. 2.65 Overhead Drive Press upper part of uprights. on the outside of an upright of a straight

cylindrical press on

sided

Any mechanical

press with driving

mechanism source

mounted when

crown

2.66 Overload Safety Device - A device overloaded beyond a desired load.

to stop the main P

power

the machine

2.67 Pitman
2.68 Plate
sheet,

- It is part or whole crank or eccentric to a slide. Bending RoNs -

of connecting

rod to transmit with three

motion or more

and force from rolls to form

a revolving a
curved

A machine

equipped

2.69 Pre-fill Valve - A pilot operated check valve with large port for admitting oil to, or discharging oil from the main cylinder of a hydraulic press at no-load portions of a stroke. bed or anvil and a slide which has a reciprocating 2.70 Press - A machine having a stationary motion toward and away from the bed surface and at right angle to bed surface, the slide being guided in frame or press to give a definite path of motion. 2.71 Press Brake - A form of open frame housings with a long narrow bed and slide. 2.72 Push Feed - Any mechanical in progressive dies. single action press comparatively wide die between the

feed that pushes R

the part to the die or from one

to the next

member of a press, 2.73 Ram ( Also Called Slide ) - The main reciprocating and to the which punch or the top tool assembly is clamped. 2.74 Reducing other bending
2.75

guided for

in

the

press and

Press - A long stroke, single action, or forming operations on deep shell.

single

crank

press

used

redrawing

of hub or spool and side guides upon which strips of Reel - A revolvable device consisting material or wire may be wound or unwound for ease in handling or feeding to a press or other machines. An automatic device for feeding the strip stock from a coil.

2.76 Roll Feed -

motion of cylindrical key about its 2.77 Rolling Key Clutch - A positive clutch in which oscillatory own axis in the groove on the shaft causes engagement or disengagement of the driving and driven parts. 2.78 Roll Leveller - A power driven mechanism consisting of a series of staggered rolls for repeated flexing of sheets or strips for cold working preparatory for use in drawing or formIng operation, thereby producing a flat surface. 4

IS:6652

(Part2)-1986
rolls between in conjunction with or without

2.79 RollStraightener - A roiling mechanism consisting of a number of staggered The device is usually used which sheet or strip stock is passed for straightening. with a coil cradle and roll feed mechanism to feed coiled stock. 2.80 Rotary Shear - A cutting circle cutting attachments. or shearing machine S with two rotary disc cutters

2.81 Scrap Cutter - A cutter operated by press, and usually made a part of, or at least attached roll feed or press tool and used for cutting scrap into short lengths for convenience of disposal. 2.82 Screw Press - A press in which motion into a reciprocating motion. 2.83 Scroll Shear - A special along an irregular line. shearing a screw or cutting and a nut mechanism machine with special is used contour to convert knives

to,

a rotary

for shearing

2.84 Seaming Machine - This is a machine which provides means for holding or clamping the work and then with a series of folding operations performs the flanging, curling and setting down of the seam. 2.85 Shear sharp edges. A machine for cutting any material by the closing coupling which motion of two closely to fail adjoining

2.86 Shear Pin - A drive member mined torsional load ( or overload

in a safety shaft ) on the shaft.

is designed

at predeter-

2.87 Shear P/ate - A load transmitting plate usually placed connecting link of a press designed to fail at a predetermined

somewhere load.

between

the slide and the of the

2.88 Shut Height of a Press - It is the distance from the top of the bed bolster slide with maximum stroke down and adjustment up. 2.89 Side Wheel Press located on the side. A general classification of presses slide with left to right

to the bottom shaft motion

and flywheel or pressure

2.90 Single Acfion Press - A press with a single device operated by a main drive. main reciprocating member 2.91 Slide -The punch or the top tool assembly is clamped. 2.92 Slide Feed - A feeding device which gripping fingers for feeding strips or parts.

and without guided

any other

of a press, employs

in the press frame and to which slide to which are attached

a reciprocating

2.93 Squaring Shear - A shearing machine consisting essentially of one fixed blade usually mouuted on bed and one moveable blade mounted on ram which is guided in the guide ways on frame, The side gauges are bolted square with the cutting blades, for guiding the sheet for making cuts which are square with the sides of the sheet. 2.94 Stock Oiler A device for spreading oil or lubricant over the faces of sheet or strip or housings having plain punch from stock. flat sides comes UP a stack in

2.95 Straight Sided Press - A mechanical press with which enclose the right and left side of die space.

uprights

2.96 Stretch Press - A press in which sheet metal is clamped to form a part. The part takes the shape of the punch. 2.97 Strip Feed - An automatic magazine or holder. 2.98 Stroke of a Press device for feeding the strip

and a ram carrying stock one at a time the terminal

It is the travel

of the press slide T

between

points

of motion.

2.99 Throat Depth -

The clear distance

from the centre

line of the ram backwards

to press frame. tl,c

2.100 Tie Rod Frame - A frame construction of prass- 3s in which steel tie rods extend through opening in the bed, uprights and crown and securely hold these parts together under stress,

2.101 Transfer Press - A press having multiple slide: or plungers which may be individually adjusted and timed; and having front-to-back roll feed at first blanking station and transfer feed with gripping fingers for carrying the piece to sucressiv 3 stations for piercing, forming or drawing operations. 5

IS : 6652 ( Part 2 ) - 1966
2.102 Trimming Press from drop-forging. A mechnical or hydraulic press extensively used for trimming the flash slides with

or hydraulic press having 2.103 Triple Action Press - Mechanical co-axial motion generally two from the top and one from the bottom.

three independent

2.104 Tripping Mechanism - Any auxilliary mechanism either manually or automatically operated, which starts, stops or otherwise controls the operation of primary mechanism. In presses, tripping mechanisms are used to engage or disengage positive clutches. U 2.105 Under Drive Press or under the bed. A mechanical press in which the driving mechanism is located within

2.106 Vacuum Cup Liffers - A mechanism means of suction cups attached to handle

for lifting or moving blanks or lifting or feeding arms.

or strips

from

a

stock

by

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard was first published in 1973, to cater the needs of metal forming industry for standardization of terms used in connection with metal forming machines, processes relating tools and their components in order to assist the correct interpretation of common terms used in this field. The Committee responsible for formulation of this standard decided to revise the same based In the present revision, upon experience gained in implementing this standard over so many years. Eome terms have been deleted and some additional terms have been included, This standard also been revised: Part 1 Part 3 forms Part tools: 2 of the glossary and and operations relating to sheet metal. publications: Engineers, USA, U.S.A.; of terms. The following other two parts have

Metal forming Metal forming

technology

In preparing a) Die design and b) Metal

this standard, Handbook,

assistance 2nd Edition,

has been derived issued by Society

from the following of Manufacturing Society

Handbook,

Volume

4, Forming,

issued
6

by American

of Metals,

Printed at New India Printing Press. Khurja, lndla

