ART HA IS 17434 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Fat İİT Brat (ARE) HİZ 
FE Sata Sean cat ETA 
visiféra arredi RELE! 


Approval of A Close-Coupling 
Device ( CCD ) and Vehicles 
with Regard to The Fitting of 

an Approved Type of CCD 


ICS 65.060.10 


O BIS 2020 


anda AM A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH HM, 4 İde — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2020 Price Group 6 


Transport Tractors, Trailers and Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee, TED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Transport Tractors, 
Trailers and Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division 
Council. 


Close Coupling Devices (CCDs) automatically provides sufficient space between the bodies of towing vehicle and 
trailers, if additional clearance is needed during angular movement between them. Safety of such devices and their 
fitment to vehicles are to be addressed to have safer and reliable road transportation. 


Considering the importance of the subject of Close Coupling Devices (CCDs), it was identified in the Roadmap 
for Automotive Safety Regulations for formulation of standard in line with ECE R 102. Though such devices 
are not mandatory in other countries, this standard will provide guidelines for CCD manufacturers, vehicle 
manufacturers, testing agencies and users, when such devices are used in India. Thus, enhancement of safety and 
performance levels of the vehicles when used on the road could be achieved. Various aspects of the coupling and 
its requirement are addressed in the right perspective. 


Formulation of this standard has been undertaken to harmonize it with AIS-092. In the formulation of this standard, 
assistance has been derived from: 
ECER 102 Uniform Provisions Concerning the approval of: 
a) A Close-Coupling Device (CCD) 
b) Vehicles with regard to the fitting of an approved type of CCD 


In case of any variance between the standard and Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, later shall prevail. 


Central Motor Vehicles Rules refers to many Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) formulated by Automotive 
Industry Standards Committee (AISC) till such time corresponding BIS Specifications are notified. Under the 
same provision Automotive Industry Standards (AIS) referred in this Indian Standard will be replaced by BIS 
Standards after corresponding BIS Standards are formulated and notified. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17434 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


APPROVAL OF A CLOSE-COUPLING DEVICE (CCD ) 
AND VEHICLES WITH REGARD TO THE FITTING 
OF AN APPROVED TYPE OF CCD 


1 SCOPE 


This standard applies to vehicles of categories N2, N3, 
T3 and T4 as defined in IS 14272. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contains provision, which 
through reference in this text constitutes provision of 
the standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard is encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS/SDO Title 
Standard No. 
14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology (first revision) 
AIS 037 Procedure for type approval 


and establishing conformity of 


production for safety critical 
components 
AIS 091 (Part 1) Automotive vehicles — 


mechanical coupling components 
of combinations of vehicles 
other than agricultural tractors 


requirements 
AIS 092 Approval of (I) A close coupling 
device (CCD); (II) vehicles with 
regard to the fitting of an approved 
type of CCD 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Close-coupling Device (CCD) 


A device which automatically provides sufficient space 
between the bodies of towing vehicles and trailers, 
if additional clearance is needed during angular 
movement between them. Coupling devices having 
no adjusting effect on lengths and/or angles within the 
device are not covered by this standard. 


3.2 Approval of a Device 

It means the approval of a type of close-coupling 
device conforming to the requirements as set-out in 4 
to 8. 

3.3 Approval of a Vehicle 

It means the approval of a vehicle with regard to the 
fitting of an approved close-coupling device; 

3.4 Vehicle Type 


Vehicle type means the vehicles which do not differ in 
essential respects such as: 


a) The make and type of the close-coupling device; 
b) The length and width of the vehicles; 
c) The mass of the vehicles; 


d) The points of attachment of the close-coupling 
device; 


e) The vehicle description (for example truck, tractor, 
trailer, semi-trailer, centre-axle trailer); and 


f) Steering equipment (for example auxiliary steering 
equipment, steering equipment of the trailer). 
3.5 Type of Close-coupling Device 


The type of close-coupling devices means the devices 
which do not differ in essential respects such as: 


a) The make and type of the device; 
b) The operating principle; 
c) The means of attachment to vehicles; 


d) Theoverall dimensions at minimum and maximum 
extension; 


e) The limits of the operating angles; and 


f) The kinematic characteristics in relation to the 
angles of articulation; 


3.6 Automatic Coupling Procedure 


A coupling procedure is automatic, if reversing the 
towing vehicle against the trailer is sufficient to 
engage the coupling completely and properly and 
to secure it automatically and to indicate proper 
engagement of the safety devices without any external 
intervention. 


IS 17434 : 2020 


4 TECHNICAL INFORMATION TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY THE MANUFACTURER 
FOR APPROVAL OF A CLOSE-COUPLING 
DEVICE 


4.1 The application for approval of a close-coupling 
device (CCD) shall be submitted by the manufacturer 
of the CCD or by his duly accredited representative. 


4.2 It shall be accompanied by the following: 


a) In triplicate, a detailed description and fully 
dimensioned scale drawings of the CCD and the 
method of installation. The submitted documents 
shall show to the satisfaction of the test agency 
that the CCD will function reliably and safely. 


b) A sample of the CCD type to be approved; 


c) A combination of vehicles representing the 
worst case condition, fitted with the CCD to be 
approved, shall be selected in conjunction with 
the test agency responsible for conducting the 
approval tests taking into account such aspects 
as suspension, maximum allowable mass and 
dimensions, wheelbase, number and position 
of axles and the extreme positions of the close- 
coupling device. More than one combination of 
vehicles shall be provided, if required by the test 
agency. 

d) Technical information as required in Annex A. 


4.3 Test agency shall verify the existence of 
satisfactory arrangements for ensuring effective control 
of conformity of production before type approval is 
granted. 


SAPPROVAL 


5.1 All parts required for the installation and safe 
operation of a close coupling device (for example parts 
subject to towing and/or steering forces fixed to the 
chassis of the towing vehicle or the trailer, and control 
systems) are subject to type approval. 


5.2 If the CCD submitted for approval pursuant to this 
standard meets the requirements of 6, approval of that 
CCD type shall be granted. (NOTE - Until uniform test 
procedures have been agreed, the manufacturers shall 
provide the test agency with their test procedures and 
results). 


6 SPECIFICATIONS 


6.1 General 


6.1.1 The CCD shall be so designed, constructed and 
assembled such that a vehicle fitted with the CCD 
conforms to the requirements of this standard under 
normal conditions of road use. The coupling devices 
themselves shall comply with the technical requirements 
of AIS-091 (Part 1). Additional forces, which may be 


caused by the assembled CCD in operation, shall be 
taken into account. 


6.1.2 The operation of the CCD shall be automatic. 
Even the reverse movement of the close-coupled 
combination shall be possible without any manual 
action at the CCD. 


6.1.3 In particular, the CCD shall be designed, 
constructed and assembled so as to be resistant to 
all stresses, corrosion and ageing to which it may be 
subjected (for example vibration, humidity, extreme 
temperatures). 

NOTE — Until uniform test procedures have been agreed, 


manufacturers shall provide the test agency with their test 
procedures and results. 


6.1.4 The CCD shall enable vehicles to travel in a 
straight line on a level road, without any abnormal effort 
being applied to the steering control, either forwards or 
In reverse. 


6.1.5 System Failures 


6.1.5.1 Any power system failure and/or control system 
failure of the CCD, while the vehicle is running, shall 
cause the coupling to extend and remain in that position. 
Separation of the towing vehicle and trailer shall be 
prevented by mechanical means under all conditions of 
use. 


6.1.5.2 Any power system and/or control system failure 
shall be indicated to the driver by an acoustic and an 
optical signal. 


6.1.6 When the vehicles are stationary, no uncontrolled 
movement of the CCD may occur under any 
circumstances, including long term uphill parking. 


6.1.7 Non-automatic movement of the CCD may be 
possible only when the towing vehicle is stationary. 
An instruction to apply the parking brake of the towing 
vehicle shall be permanently attached to the control 
unit. 


6.1.7.1 This operation shall be controlled by means of 
a dual control unit. 


6.1.7.2 This control unit shall be fitted outside the 
driver's cabin and shall be situated in such a position 
that the operator is not endangered by the movement 
of the trailer and can see the danger area between the 
vehicles at a glance. 


6.1.7.3 It shall not be possible to lock the control unit 
in the operating position or operate it unintentionally. 


6.1.7.4 The movement of the trailer shall take place 
without jolting, that is at a speed of not more than 50 
mm/sec. 


6.1.7.5 Release of a control shall stop the movement 
immediately. 


6.1.8 Forward movement ofthe towing vehicle shall not 
result in rearward movement of the trailer in relation to 
the road surface. Rearward movement of the trailer of 
not more than 30 mm is permitted for switch and react 
purposes only. 


6.1.9 The CCD shall return to its shortest normal 
straight ahead operating position following relative 
angular movement between towing vehicle and trailer, 
in accordance with Annex-C. 


6.1.10 Operation ofthe CCD shall not interfere with the 
dynamic stability of the combination. This requirement 
shall be checked during the tests described in Annex C. 


6.1.11 The CCD shall be designed so as to enable the 
vehicles to be coupled or uncoupled. All coupling 
operations shall be automatic, including the mechanical 
controls and the parts subject to towing and/or steering 
forces. Correct engagement of the positive locking 
system shall be indicated or be easily visible from 
the side of the vehicle alongside the coupling device. 
Otherwise, a remote indication shall be installed in the 
driver's cabin. Manual coupling of control and power 
supply lines is permitted provided the connections are 
readily accessible from a standing position and the 
combination can be safely driven, without these lines 
being connected. 


6.1.12 The CCD when engaged shall itself provide at 
least the following angular movement: 


Full Centre Axle | Semi-Trailer 
Trailer Trailer 
Horizontal + 60? + 90° „+ 90° 
Vertical + 20° + 15° +12° 
Axial + 15° + 15° o 


6.1.13 For hydraulic or pneumatic CCD's, an optical 
signal shall indicate that the CCD is about to reach its 
maximum extension. This signal may be the same as 
the optical signal mentioned in 6.1.5.2. 


6.1.14 The CCD shall be designed in such a way 
that when coupling at an angle between the towing 
vehicle and trailer different from that when uncoupled, 
unintentional movement of the trailer or incorrect 
functioning of the CCD does not occur. 


6.1.15 A plate specifying the maximum mass of the 
towing vehicle and the trailer, all lubrication points and 
the frequency of lubrication shall be affixed such that it 
is clearly visible even when the trailer is coupled. 


6.2 Tests 


The tests which the CCD shall undergo for approval are 
described in Annex C. 


IS 17434 : 2020 


7 MODIFICATION OF CCD TYPE AND 
EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 


7.1 Any modification of the CCD type shall be notified 
to the test agency which approved the CCD type. The 
test agency may then either; 


a) Consider that the modifications made are unlikely 
to have an appreciable adverse effect and that the 
device still complies with the requirements; or 


b) Request a further test report. 


7.2 In case of 7.1(a), tests for only those parameters 
which are affected by the modifications, shall be carried 
out. 


7.3 In case of fulfillment of criteria of 7.1(a) or after 
successful results of further verification as per 7.1(b), 
the approval of compliance shall be extended for the 
changes carried out. 


8 CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 


8.1 Every CCD approved under this standard shall be 
manufactured so as to conform to the type approved by 
meeting the requirements set out in 6. 


8.2 Conformity of production procedures as laid down 
in AIS-037 shall be applicable. 


8.3 The test agency which has granted type approval 
may at any time verify the conformity control methods 
applicable to each production unit. The normal 
frequency of inspections authorized by the test agency 
shall be once, every two years. 


9 APPROVAL OF VEHICLES WITH 
REGARD TO THE FITTING OF AN 
APPROVED TYPE OF CCD (TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED 
BY A VEHICLE MANUFACTURER FOR 
APPROVAL OF A VEHICLE FITTED WITH A 
CLOSE-COUPLING DEVICE) 


9.1 The application for approval of a vehicle type with 
regard to the fitting of a CCD of an approved type shall 
be submitted by the vehicle manufacturer or by his duly 
accredited representative. 


9.2 It shall be accompanied by the under mentioned 
documents in triplicate and the following particulars: 


9.3 A detailed description of the vehicle type and 
the vehicle parts connected to the CCD, including 
a dimensioned drawing of the fixing points and the 
information and documents referred to in Annex B. 


9.4 At the request ofthe Test Agency, the approval form 
(that is, the form indicated in Annex A) for each type of 
CCD shall also be supplied. 


IS 17434 : 2020 


9.5 A vehicle, representative of the vehicle type to be 
approved, fitted with a CCD, shall be submitted to the 
Test Agency conducting the approval test. 


9.5.1 A vehicle not having all the components 
appropriate to the type may be accepted provided that 
the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the Test 
Agency that the absence of the components omitted has 
no effect on the results of the inspections as far as the 
requirements of this standard are concerned. 


9.6 The Test Agency shall verify the existence of 
satisfactory arrangements for ensuring effective control 
of the conformity of production before type approval 
is granted. 


9.7 Special operating instructions shall be provided 
for coupling operations deviating from usual ones, 
which shall contain in particular, instructions regarding 
coupling and uncoupling with different modes of 
operation (for example angled positions). Each vehicle 
shall be accompanied by such special operating 
instructions. 


10 APPROVAL 


10.1 If the vehicle submitted for approval is fitted with 
an approved CCD and meets the requirements of 13, 
approval of that vehicle type shall be granted. 


11 REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING THE 
FITTING OF AN APPROVED CCD 


11.1 The requirements of 6.1, excluding 6.1.12 have 
to be fulfilled when the CCD is fitted to the vehicle, 
despite any influences which may be caused by the 
operation of the vehicle. 


11.2 The CCD in use shall not impede the movement 
of the vehicles to which it is fitted. This condition shall 
be deemed to have been met, if the test requirements 
described in Annex C are complied with. 


11.3 Warning signal as mentioned in 6.1.5.2 and 6.1.13. 


11.3.1 The acoustic device shall be located in the 
driver's cabin and shall be easily audible by the driver 
under all circumstances, when the vehicle is in normal 
use. 


11.3.2 The optical signal shall be red in colour and 
located on the instrument panel in the direct field of 
vision of the driver and shall be easily visible even in 
daylight. 


11.4 Coupling and uncoupling shall be possible with 
coupling angles of up to 50? horizontally both to the 
right and left, up to 10? vertically both upward and 
downward with full trailers, up to 6? vertically both 
upward and downward with centre axle trailers and 
up to 7? when twisted axially in both directions, that 


is, it shall be possible to couple the trailer up to the 
above-mentioned angular positions between towing 
vehicle and trailer drawbars without the necessity of 
intervention of additional personnel. 


During automatic coupling, it is permitted for a 
temporary position to be arranged before final coupling 
is effected. The temporary position shall permit the 
combination to be safely maneuvered. If the final action 
is operated manually, the space between the vehicles 
shall be at least 500 mm. 


11.5 It shall be possible from the standing position 
for one person to position the coupling devices prior 
to the coupling procedure, without the use of tools. 
This requirement also applies to the connection and 
disconnection of the braking and electrical lines. 


11.6 General Requirements 


To allow automatic coupling, the drawbar eye shall be 
adjustable vertically to the centre height of the coupling 
device under all usual traffic and operational conditions. 


12 MODIFICATIONS OF THE VEHICLE TYPE 
AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 


12.1 Any modification of the vehicle type as defined in 
3.1.4 shall be notified to the administrative department 
which approved the vehicle type. The department may 
then either, 


a) consider that the modifications made are unlikely 
to have an appreciable adverse effect and that 
in any case the vehicle still conforms to the 
requirements, or 


b) require a further test report. 


12.2 In case of 12.1(a), tests for only those parameters 
which are affected by the modifications, shall be carried 
out. 


12.3 In case of fulfillment of criteria of 12.1(a) or after 
successful results of further verification as per 12.1(b), 
the approval of compliance shall be extended for the 
changes carried out. 


13 CONFORMITY 
PROCEDURES 


OF PRODUCTION 


13.1 Every vehicle approved under this standard shall 
be manufactured so as to conform to the type approved 
by meeting the requirements set out in 11. 


13.2 Whole vehicle conformity of production 
procedures shall be applicable as and when laid down. 


13.3 The test agency which has granted type approval 
may at any time verify the conformity control methods 
applicable to each production unit. The normal 
frequency of inspections authorized by the test agency 
shall be once every two years. 


IS 17434 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
| Cause 4.2(d) and 9.4 | 


TECHNICAL INFORMATTON TO BE SUBMITTED BYTHE MANUFACTURER 
FOR APPROVAL OF A CLOSE-COUPLING DEVICE 


A-1 Following technical information shall be submitted 
by the manufacturer for the approval ofa close coupling 
device: 


a) Trade Name or Mark of the CCD 
b) CCD type 
c) Manufacturer's Name and Address 


d) Ifapplicable, Name and Address of manufacturer's 
representative 


e) Brief description of the CCD 
f) Type 
1) Vehicle on which the CCD was Tested 


2) Brief Description Including Information with 
Regards to 3.2.3 


g) Minimum Space Between Motor Vehicle and 
Towed Vehicle 


h) Maximum Extension of Device 


]) Restrictions of use on Vehicles which may be 
utilized (Strike out what does not apply) 


(for example Truck, Tractor, Trailer, Semi-trailer, 
Centre Axle Trailer) 


1) Maximum permissible Mass of the Trailer 
2) Maximum permissible Mass of the Tractor 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 9.3) 


TECHNICAL INFORMATION TO BE SUBMITTED BY A VEHICLE MANUFACTURER FOR 
APPROVAL OF A VEHICLE FITTED WITH A CLOSE - COUPLING DEVICE 


B-1 Following technical information to be submitted 
by a vehicle manufacturer for approval of a vehicle 
fitted with a close-coupling device: 
a) Trade Name or Mark of Vehicle 
b) Vehicle Type 
c) Manufacturer’s Name and Address 
d) Ifapplicable, Name and Address of Manufacturer’s 
Representative 
e) Vehicle Category N2, N3, T3, T4 (Strike out what 
does not apply) 


f) Brief Description of the Vehicle Type in respect 
of the CCD (for example Truck, Tractor, Trailer, 


Semi-Trailer, Centre-Axle Trailer) 
1) Maximum Permissible Mass of the Trailer 
2) Maximum Permissible Mass of the Tractor 


B-7 Trade Name or Mark of the CCD(s) and its/their 
approval Numbers 


B-8 Minimum Space between Towing Vehicle and 
Towed Vehicle 


B-9 Maximum Length of Vehicles with the CCD(s) in 
running position 


B-10 Restriction on Vehicles to be coupled to the 
Vehicle Type 


ANNEX C 
( Clause 6.1.10 ) 
REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING TESTS AND PERFORMANCE 


C-1 CCD RECOVERY DISTANCE 


C-1.1 The towing vehicle/trailer combination shall be 
driven, from a straight ahead position, around a bend 
having an outside radius of 12.5 m and stopped when 
the towing vehicle has turned through an angle of 90? 
(yaw-angle). The combination shall then be accelerated 


as quickly as possible up to a speed of 30 + 2 km/h and 
be maintained at this speed until completion of the test. 
Full retraction ofthe CCD shall have taken place within 
150 m from the acceleration start position (see fig. 1). 


This test shall be conducted in both left and right 
directions. 


IS 17434 : 2020 


START POSITION 
max. 150 m 


Fic. 1 LayouT For Ccp RECOVERY DISTANCE TEST 


NOTE — Compliance with these requirements does not 
guarantee that the overall length of the vehicle combination is 
legal in all driving conditions. 


C-1.2 The test agency shall verify that some retraction 
of the CCD takes place all the time, the towing vehicle 
is moving forward. 

NOTE — For the purposes of approvals under 9 to 13, the test 


agency may take into account tests conducted for the purposes 
of 4 to 8. 


C-2 STABILITY OF THE COMBINATION 


For the approvals, the stability performance shall be 
measured during road tests conducted in the following 
conditions. 


C-2.1 Test Conditions 
C-2.1.1 Loading Conditions 


C-2.1.1.1 The vehicles shall be laden, the distribution 
of mass among the axles being that stated by the 
manufacturers of the vehicles; where provision is made 
for several arrangements of the load on the axles, the 
distribution of the maximum mass among the axles 
shall be such that the mass on each axle is proportional 
to the maximum permissible mass for each axle. 


C-2.1.1.2 The height of the centre of gravity of the 
vehicles shall be at least 1.7 m. 


The actual loading condition shall be specified in 
the test report. For vehicles designed for use with a 
centre of gravity lower than 1.7 m, the test may, at the 
discretion of the approval authority, be conducted at the 
lower figure. 


In this case the maximum centre of gravity height shall 
be stated on the information plate required by 5.1.1.5. 


C-2.1.2 The test shall be carried out at the speeds 
prescribed for each type of test. If the maximum design 
speed of a vehicle is lower than the speed prescribed 
for a test, the test shall be performed at the vehicle's 
maximum speed. 


C-2.1.3 The road shall be level and shall have a surface 
affording good adhesion; 


C-2.1.4 The tests shall be performed when there is no 
wind liable to affect the results; 


C-2.1.5 At the start of the tests, the tyres shall be cold 
and at the pressure prescribed by the manufacturer of 
the vehicles or tyres for the load actually borne by the 
wheels when the vehicles are stationary; substantially 
new tyres shall be used. 


C-2.1.6 The prescribed performance shall be obtained 
without self-amplifying reactions, without deviation 
of the vehicles from their course, and without unusual 
vibration in the steering and coupling system. 


C-2.2 Straight Line Stability Test 


C-2.2.1 Vehicles shall be tested at a speed of km/h and 
remain aligned. During the test, it shall be possible 
to travel along a straight section of the road without 
unusual steering correction by the driver. 


C-2.2.2 An emergency straight line braking test from 
a speed of 60 km/h to rest at a mean fully developed 
deceleration of at least 4 m/s? shall not cause the 
combination to deviate outside a lane 3.5 m wide. 


NOTE — The test agency shall take account of the 
predominance setting of the combination. 


C-2.2.3 Starting from rest, a forward acceleration of 
at least 2m/s? shall not cause any movement between 


the vehicles of a degree likely to cause the driver 
difficulty in controlling the vehicle combination (if the 
acceleration prescribed for this test cannot be reached 
by a vehicle combination, the test shall be performed 
with the maximum acceleration available). 


C-2.2.4 No permanent deformation shall take place 
during the above tests. 


C-2.3 Change of Lane 


C-2.3.1 A simulated overtaking manoeuvre, as defined 
in the Annex D, conducted at a progressively increasing 
speed up to 80 km/h, shall not cause the driver any 
difficulty in controlling the combination. 


C-2.3.2 At a speed of 20 km/h steering from one side 
of the track to the other alternately at least 3 times by 
turning the steering wheel as fast and as far as possible, 
no contact between the vehicles or damage to the CCD 
shall occur (track width is 10 metres). 


C-3 CIRCULAR MOVEMENT 


C-3.1 Starting from rest and a straight ahead position, 
the combination shall be driven around a curve of 25 
m radius to a speed of 20 km/h at an acceleration of 2 
+ 10 percent m/s?. This shall not cause any movement 
between the vehicles of a degree likely to cause the 
driver difficulty in controlling the vehicle combination. 


C-3.2 With the towing vehicle and trailer having 
adopted a steady state, turn so that the front outside 
edge of the towing vehicle describes a circle of radius 
of 25 m, at a constant speed of 5 km/h. The circle 
described by the rearmost outer edge of the trailer shall 
be measured. This manoeuvre shall be repeated under 
the same conditions but at a speed of 25 + 1 km/h. 


During these maneuvers, the rearmost outer edge of the 
trailer, travelling at a speed of 25 + 1 km/h, shall not 


IS 17434 : 2020 


move outside the circle described during the manoeuvre 
at a constant speed of 5 km/h by more than 0.70 m 
(see Fig. 2). 


C-3.3 No part of the trailer shall move more than 0.5 
m beyond the tangent to a circle with a radius of 25 
m when towed by a vehicle leaving the circular path 
along the tangent while maintaining the speed of 25 
km/h. This requirement shall be met from the point 
the tangent meets the circle to a point 40 m along the 
tangent. After that point the trailer shall travel without 
excessive deviation or unusual vibration in its steering 
equipment (see Fig. 3). 


C-3.4 Any motor vehicle or combined vehicle which 
is in motion shall be able to turn within a swept circle 
having an outer radius of 12.50 m and an inner radius 
of 5.30 m. The test shall be conducted in both left and 
right directions. No part of the combination, where 
it penetrates the circle from a tangent, may overlap 
that tangent by more than 0.8 m beyond the point of 
intersection (see Fig. 4). 


C-4 SLOPES 


C-4.1 When positioned longitudinally in line and in the 
normal operation position: 


C-4.1.1 There shall be no unintentional contact between 
any part of the towing device and the towing vehicle 
or trailer when the vehicles are positioned at a relative 
vertical angle of 6°. 


C-4.1.2 No contact shall occur between the bodies of 
the towing vehicle and 


trailer at a relative vertical angle of 5°. 
C-4.2 The requirements of 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 may be 


verified by calculation at the discretion of the test 
agency. 


IS 17434 : 2020 


FOR, 
R1;Y = 5 km/h 
R2; Y = 25 km/h 


R2 - R1 = 70 cm (max.) 


Fic. 2 LAYOUR FOR CIRCULAR MOVEMENT 


Fic. 3 LAYOUT FOR CIRCULAR MOVEMENT WITH TANGENTIAL PROJECTION 


IS 17434 : 2020 


R =12.5 m 


U = max. 0.8 m 


Rb = min. 5.3 m 


FiG. 4 LAYOUT FOR CIRCULAR MOVEMENT WITH TANGENTIAL PROJECTION 


IS 17434 : 2020 


ANNEX D 
( Clause C-2.3.1 ) 
OVERTAKING TRACK 


DISTANCE TO 
RESTABILIZE 


NOTE — This track arrangement may be subject to revision when superseded by an ISO Standard 


10 


IS 17434 : 2020 


ANNEX E 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Transport Tractors, Trailers and Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee, TED 22 


Organization 


Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 
ACMA, New Delhi 

Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 

All India Motor Transport Congress, New Delhi 
BEML Ltd, Bengaluru 

Brakes India Ltd, Chennai 

CIRT, Pune 


Container Corporation of India New Delhi 
Chennai Port Trust, Chennai 


Deptt of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, 
New Delhi 

DGQA, Pune 

Directorate General of Factory Advice & Labour 
Institutes 

Godrej Boyce Mfg Co. Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Cargotec India Private Limited, Chennai 


Jost's Engg Company Ltd, Thane 


KION India Pvt Ltd, Pune 


Knorr-Bremse Commercial Vehicle System India Private 


Limited, Pune 
Machine & Oil Mill Stores, Howrah 
Macneil Engg. Ltd, Praganas 


Mahindra Trucks & Bus Division, Pune 


Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Min of Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 


11 


Representative(s) 
SHRI A. AKBAR BADUSHA (Chairman) 
Suri P. D. BETGERI (Alternate) 


Suri Upay HARITE 
SHRI JITENDER RANA (Alternate) 


Suri M. Ravi 
Suri FAUSTINO V. (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVEEN KUMAR GUPTA 
Suri S. K. MITTAL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. S. THAMILSELVAN 
SHRI MAHADEV NELLUR (Alternate) 


SHRI P. VENUGOPAL 
SHRI G. DEVENDRAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR SATTIGERI 
Suri S. N. DHOLE (Alternate) 


GENERAL MANAGER (TECH.) 


SHRI N. A. KAMATH 
Suri V. Ram Doss (Alternate) 


Suri B. K. MISHRA 
Suri R. K. Jarswar (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESHKAR P. P. 
SHRI N. SARAVANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI H. CHATTOPADHAYAYA 
Suri R. N. MEENA (Alternate) 


Suri Vinay G. KULKARNI 
Suri A. S. TAWDE (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SRINIVAS 
SHRI DEVARAJ NARAYAN (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISH MALVIYA 
Suri S. J. BucH (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL K. Gupta 
Suri Rizwan KHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ARUN BISHT 
SHRI ATUL INGOLE (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK GHOSH 


SHRI S. RAYCHOUDHARY 
Suri K. K. Mirra (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGARAJU K. 
Suri V. G. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. KANAN 
SHRI SAM SHAIKH (Alternate) 


SMT DHARKAT R. LUIKANG 


IS 17434 : 2020 


Organization 


P L Haulwel, New Delhi 
SDR Auto Private Limited, Chennai 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 

TRATEC Engineering Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
VRDE, Ahmednagar 

Volvo India Ltd, Bengaluru 

WABCO, Chennai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI MANOJ VARGHESE (Alternate) 


SHRI B RAMESH 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suni RAHUL MoHAN Rao PATHAK 
SHRI VIVEK Dwivep! (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMAL KHOSLA 
Suri C. RAJASEKHAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. KANNAN 

SHRI SAM SHAIKH (Alternate) 
SHRI KARTHIK SARMA 

SHRI PRAMOD KUMAR HUGAR (Alternate) 
SHRI S. BALACHANDRAN 

SHRI KULDEEP SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (TED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI NAVINDRA GAUTAM 
Scientist ‘E’ (TED), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 22 (14016). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


