INA WAP IS 3401 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Rakai ster — farts 
(FW TITT) 


Silica Gel — Specification 


( Fourth Revision ) 


ICS 71.060.50 
© BIS 2023 
AA ATs Sat 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR MEM, 9 FET BE SHC AMT, AQ ret - 110002 
Nee’ MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 7 


Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee, CHD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Fourth Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division 
Council. 


This standard was first published in 1966. The standard was revised in 1970 incorporating changes in some of the 
requirements and the methods of test. It was again revised in 1979 incorporating changes in the requirements for 
moisture, chloride content for indicating type of silica gel, cobalt and sulphate content. In the third revision, 
changes were made in description, loss on drying and adsorption capacity. The requirement for friability were 
deleted and in its place a new requirement for loss on attrition was incorporated. 


In this revision, instrumental test methods for the determination of chlorides and sulphates have been added as 
alternate test methods. Also, Packing and Marking clause has been updated. Further, all amendments have been 
incorporated. 


Silica gel is pure silica in a highly porous state. It has high adsorption capacity due to the large surface area of 
its particles. Silica gel is normally prepared by the coagulation of colloidal solution of silicic acid. 


Silica gel is used as a desiccant for packages. Its uses also cover prevention of corrosion in instruments, 
maintenance of dry atmosphere in food and pharmaceutical packings, removal of moisture from transformer 
breathers, protection of articles like cameras, televisions, etc in humid atmosphere. Silica gel is also used for 
adsorbing acetylene from oxygen gas and in chromatography for analytical purposes. However, this standard does 
not cover the material intended for these applications. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value shall be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 3401 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
SILICA GEL — SPECIFICATION 


( Fourth Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes requirements and methods 
of sampling and test for silica gel used as industrial 
desiccant. 


1.1 It does not cover silica gel for chromatographic 
and acetylene adsorption applications. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
these standards. 


IS No. Title 


IS 460 (Part 1) Test sieves — Specification: 
: 2020 Part 1 Wire cloth test sieves 
(fourth revision) 


IS 695: 2020 Acetic acid — Specification 


(fourth revision) 


IS 1070: 2023 Reagent grade water — 
Specification (fourth revision) 


IS 4161 : 2023 Nessler cylinder — 
Specification (first revision) 

IS 4905 : Random sampling and 

2015/150 randomization procedures (first 


24153 : 2009 revision) 
3 TYPES 


The material shall be of following two types: 
a) Normal, and 
b) Indicating. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 Description 


The material shall be solid with grainy porous 
structure free from extraneous impurities. The 
indicating type material shall be impregnated with 
cobalt chloride. 


4.2 Particle Size 


The particle size of the material shall be as agreed 


to between the purchaser and the supplier. 
4.3 Bulk Density 


The bulk density of the material shall be as 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 


4.4 Loss on Drying 


The material when tested according to the method 
prescribed in Annex A shall not lose more than 
5 percent of its mass. 


4.5 Adsorption Capacity 


The material when tested according to the method 
prescribed in Annex B shall adsorb minimum 
27 percent of moisture on the basis of its mass. 


4.6 pH 


The pH of aqueous extract of the material when 
determined by the method prescribed in Annex C 
shall be not more than 8 and not less than 3.5. 


4.7 Loss on Attrition 


When subjected to the test according to the method 
prescribed in Annex D, not more than 2.5 percent of 
the material shall pass through the test sieve. 


4.8 Chemical Requirements 


The material shall also comply with the 
requirements prescribed in Table 1 when tested 
according to the methods prescribed in Annex E. 
Reference to the relevant clauses of Annex E is 
given in col (4) of the table. 


4.9 Keeping Quality 

The material stored in original air-tight containers 
shall continue to satisfy all the requirements under 4 
for not less than 6 months from the date of packing. 
5 PACKING AND MARKING 

5.1 Packing 

The material shall be packed in clean, dry and air- 


tight containers, as agreed to between the purchaser 
and the supplier. 


IS 3401 : 2023 


Table 1 Requirements for Silica Gel 
(Clause 4.8 and E-5.3.1) 


SI No. Characteristic Requirement Method of Test, 
Ref to 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) a) Chlorides (as NaCl) (for normal 0.050 E-3 or E-7 
type), percent by mass, Max 
b) Chlorides (as NaCl) 0.400 E-3 or E-7 
indicating type), percent by 
mass, Max 
ii) Cobalt (as COCl:). (for indicating type), 0.500 E-4 
percent by mass, Min 
iii) Ammonium compounds (as NH3), percent 0.001 E-5 
by mass, Max 
iv) Sulphates (as Na2SOx), percent by mass, 0.500 E-6 or E-7 
Max 
5.1.1 The container shall not be opened until Mark. 


required for use and shall not remain open for a 
period longer than required for taking out the 
material. 


5.2 Marking 


The containers shall be marked with the following 
information: 


a) Name and type of the material; 

b) Indication of the source of manufacturer; 
c) Mass of the material in the container; 

d) Batch number; and 

e) Date of packing. 


5.2.1 BIS Certification Marking 


The product may also be marked with the Standard 


5.2.2 The product(s) conforming to the requirements 
of this standard may be certified as per the 
conformity assessment schemes under the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and the Rules and Regulations framed there 
under, and the products may be marked with the 
Standard Mark. 


6 SAMPLING 


The method of drawing representative samples of 
the material, the number of tests to be performed, 
and the criteria for conformity of the material to the 
requirements of the specification shall be as 
prescribed in Annex F. 


IS 3401 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.4) 
DETERMINATION OF LOSS ON DRYING 


A-1 PROCEDURE 


A-1.1 Weigh accurately about 30 g of the material in 
a flat-bottomed glass dish with ground-glass lid and 
keep it (after removing the lid) in an air-oven at 
150 °C + 5 °C for 4 h. Cool the dish and the lid to 
room temperature in a desiccator and weigh. Repeat 
the operation till constant mass is obtained. 


A-2 CALCULATION 


M 
Loss on drying, percent by mass = 100 x = 


where 


Mi = loss in mass in g, of the material on heating; 
and 


M = mass in g, of the material taken for the test. 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.5) 
DETERMINATION OF ADSORPTION CAPACITY 


B-] APPARATUS 


The apparatus required shall be as shown in Fig. 1. 
It comprises the following: 


a) Circulating pump with flowmeter; 


b) Heat exchange coil, of sufficient length 
and efficiency to ensure that air leaving the 
pump is brought to the bath temperature 
before entering the bubbler; 


c) Bubbler of about 250 ml capacity, fitted 
with a thermometer and containing a 
saturated solution of calcium nitrate of 
analytical reagent grade in the presence of 
excess solid calcium nitrate; 


d) Spray-catch bottle of about 250 ml 
capacity, containing glass wool filter; 


e) Tube with side arm, holding a thermometer 
for checking the temperature of air 
entering the adsorption tubes; 


f) Two adsorption tubes, about 15 cm long 
and of 14 mm internal diameter; and 


g) Constant temperature bath, maintained at 
27°C #1 °C. 
NOTE — The underwater connections are conveniently 


made by means of flexible rubber or plastics tubing or 
spherical joints. 


B-2 PROCEDURE 


B-2.1 Weigh accurately about 10 g of the dry 
material immediately after the determination of loss 
on drying (see A-I.1) into each of the two previously 
weighed and stoppered adsorption tubes. Assemble 
the apparatus as shown in Fig. | and adjust the pump 
so that air is passed at a rate of approximately 1 liter 
per tube per minute. Allow air to circulate until no 
further increase in mass of the tubes is observed. 


B-3 CALCULATION 


Adsorption capacity, percent by mass = 100 x vi 


where 


Mi = increase in mass in g, of the material; and 


M = mass in g, of the material taken for the test. 


IS 3401 : 2023 


FLOWMETER 


a kakak aa 
ia 
HEATING a 5, 
ELEMENT— =. 
e 
4 
- -S 
HEAT EXCHANGE a 
co —— C 
a 
¿ CONSTANT oD 


TEMPERATURE BATH 


IM 


BUBBLER SPRAY CATCH BOTTLE 


ADSORPTION 
TUBES 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR DETERMINATION OF ADSORPTION CAPACITY 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.6) 
DETERMINATION OF pH 


C-I PROCEDURE 


Prepare an aqueous extract of 25 g of the material by 
boiling for 2 h with 250 ml of water, free from 
ammonia and carbon dioxide, in a clean flask of 
chemically resistant glass fitted by means of a 
ground-glass joint with a reflux condenser of the 
same material. 


C-1.1 Allow the flask to cool to room temperature 
with adequate precautions against contamination by 
atmospheric impurities. Decant a portion of this 
extract and determine the pH by a suitable pH meter 
using a glass electrode previously calibrated with a 
buffer solution of known pH. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.7) 
DETERMINATION OF LOSS ON ATTRITION 


D-1 PROCEDURE 


Weigh accurately 50 g of the material as received or 
with 95 percent relative humidity. Charge the 
material into two steel cylinders of 3.8 cm diameter 
and 30.5 cm length. Rotate the cylinders kept at a 
distance of 7.6 cm from the centre of rotation (to 
enable the material to tumble) at 30 rpm for 1 h. 


Sieve the material through 850 micron IS Sieve 
(see IS 460 Part 1). Weigh the material passing 
through 850 micron IS Sieve and report as attrition 
loss. 


D-1.1 The material shall satisfy the requirement of 
the test if not more than 2.5 g of the material pass 
through the test sieve. 


IS 3401 : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 4.8, and Table 1) 
METHODS OF TEST FOR CHEMICAL REQUIREMENTS OF SILICA GEL 


E-] QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in 
tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


E-2 PREPARATION OF SOLUTION 
E-2.1 Procedure 


Weigh accurately about 25 g of the material and heat 
to boiling with 200 ml of water for 30 min. Filter and 
wash the residue with warm water till the washings 
are free from chlorides and sulphates. Mix the 
washings and make up to 500 ml in a volumetric 
flask. Use an aliquot of this prepared solution for 
subsequent tests under E-3, E-4, E-5 and E-6. 


E-3 DETERMINATION OF WATER SOLUBLE 
CHLORIDES 


E-3.1 Reagents 
E-3.1.1 Standard Silver Nitrate Solution — 0.1 N 


E-3.1.2 Potassium Chromate Indicator Solution — 
5 percent (m/v) 


E-3.1.3 Dilute Acetic Acid — 10 percent (v/v) 
E-3.1.4 Sodium Acetate Solution — 10 percent (m/v) 
E-3.2 Procedure 

Take 200 ml of the prepared solution (see E-2.1), 
neutralise with sodium acetate solution in case the 
solution is of high acetic pH or neutralise with dilute 
acetic acid if the solution is of alkaline pH. Titrate it 
with 0.1 N silver nitrate solution using potassium 
chromate solution as indicator. 

E-3.3 Calculation 


Water soluble chlorides (as NaCl), percent by mass 


— Vx N x 0.058 44 x 100 


M 
where 
V = volume in ml of standard silver nitrate 
solution; 
N = normality of standard silver nitrate 


solution; and 


M = mass in g, of the material contained in the 
aliquot. 


E-3.4 Alternative Method 


Chlorides may alternatively be determined by 
instrumental test method as prescribed in E-7. 


E-4 DETERMINATION OF COBALT 
E-4.1 Reagents 

E-4.1.1 Dilute Hydrochloric Acid — 5 N 
E-4.1.2 a-Nitroso £-Naphthol Solution 


Dissolve 3 g of dry a-nitroso -naphthol in 45 ml 
of glacial acetic acid (see IS 695). 


E-4.2 Procedure 


Take 50 ml aliquot of the prepared solution (see 
E-2.1). Dilute it with water to 403 ml, acidify with 
10 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid and heat to boiling. 
Add 33 ml of a-nitroso B-naphthol solution with 
stirring. Allow to settle for 2 h and filter through 
Whatman filter paper No. 41 or equivalent. Wash 
the residue with dilute hydrochloric acid and then 
thoroughly with hot water. Take the filter paper and 
the residue in a tared porcelain crucible and ignite 
first gently on the flame of a Bunsen burner and then 
finally at 750 °C to 800 °C. Cool in a desiccator and 
weigh to constant mass. 


E-4.3 Calculation 


Cobalt (as CoCl2), percent by mass 


Mı X 1.617 5 x 100 


M 
where 


Mı = mass in g, of the ignited residue; and 


M = mass in g, of the material present in the 
aliquot. 


E-5 DETERMINATION OF AMMONIUM 
COMPOUNDS 


E-5.1 Apparatus 
Nessler Cylinders — 50 ml capacity (see IS 4161) 
E-5.2 Reagents 


E-5.2.1 Sodium Hydroxide Solution — Approximately 
5N 


IS 3401 : 2023 
E-5.2.2 Nessler Solution 


Dissolve 10 g of potassium iodide in 10 ml of 
ammonia-free water and add to it slowly with 
stirring saturated mercuric chloride solution until a 
slight permanent precipitate forms. Add 30 g of 
potassium hydroxide and when it has dissolved, add 
1 ml more of mercuric chloride solution and dilute 
to 200 ml with ammonia-free water. Allow to settle 
overnight, decant off the clear solution and keep it 
in a bottle closed with a well-fitting rubber stopper. 


E-5.2.3 Standard Ammonium Chloride Solution 


Dissolve 0.314 1 g of ammonium chloride in water 
and make up to 1 000 ml. Take 10 ml of the standard 
solution and dilute to exactly 100 ml with water. 
One millilitre of this solution is equivalent to 
0.01 mg of ammonia (NH3). 


E-5.3 Procedure 


Take 20 ml of prepared solution (see E-2.1) into a 
Nessler cylinder. Add 5 ml of sodium hydroxide 
solution and 2 ml of Nessler solution. Make up the 
solution to 50 ml mark. Carry out a control test in 
another Nessler cylinder with 1 ml of standard 
ammonium chloride solution in place of the material 
and the same quantities of other reagents. Compare 
the colour produced in the two cylinders. 


E-5.3.1 The limit prescribed in Table 1 shall be 
taken as not having been exceeded if the intensity of 
the colour produced in the test with the material is 
not greater than that produced in the control test. 


E-6 DETERMINATION OF WATER SOLUBLE 
SULPHATES 


E-6.1 Reagents 


E-6.1.1 Dilute Hydrochloric Acid — Approximately 
5N 


E-6.1.2 Barium Chloride Solution — Approximately 
12 percent (m/v) 


E-6.2 Procedure 


Take 200 ml of the prepared solution (see E-2.1). 
Neutralize the excess alkali, if any, by dropwise 
addition of dilute hydrochloric acid and then add 
2 ml more of dilute hydrochloric acid. Boil and add 
10 ml of barium chloride solution slowly with 
constant stirring. Boil it for another 5 min and allow 
to settle overnight. 


Filter through Whatman filter paper No. 42 or 
equivalent and wash the residue with hot water till 
washings are free from chlorides. Ignite the residue 


in a tared crucible. Cool, add a drop of concentrated 
sulphuric acid and cautiously ignite again. Cool the 
crucible in a desiccator and weigh. Repeat the 
operation till constant mass is obtained. 


E-6.3 Calculation 


Water soluble sulphates (as Na2SO4), percent by mass 


Mı X 0.608 6 x 100 
M 


where 


Mi = mass in g, of the ignited residue; and 


M = mass in g, of the material contained in the 
aliquot. 


E-6.4 Alternative Method 


Sulphates may alternatively be determined by 
instrumental test method as prescribed in E-7. 


E-7 ION CHROMATOGRAPHY FOR 
CHLORIDES AND SULPHATES 


E-7.1 Principle 


Ion chromatography is an innovative method for the 
determination of ions. The technique is used for the 
analysis of chlorides and sulphates. The technique 
separates ions and polar molecules based on their 
affinity to ion exchanger. When the method is 
employed for the determination of the anions, the 
identification should be made by using a matrix 
covering the ions of interest. In cation exchange 
chromatography, the stationary phase is 
functionalized with anions. These anions will 
attach cations towards it. These surface bound 
molecules/ionic species can then be removed by 
using a suitable eluent containing substituted ions to 
replace them or they can be removed by changing 
the pH of the column. Similarly, in anion exchange 
chromatography, the stationary phase is cationic in 
nature. These cations will then separate the anions. 


Conductivity detector is generally used in this 
method. In case of suppressor ion exchange 
chromatography, analyte ions are separated on the 
ion exchange column and these ions together with 
the eluent move to the matrix suppressor. The eluent 
conductivity is lowered in the suppressor and the 
sample ion conductivity is increased leading to the 
large increase in signal to noise ratio. 


E-7.2 Equipment 


E-7.2.1 Anion Guard Column — A protector of 
the separator column. 


E-7.2.2 Anion Separator Column — Suitable 
for selective separation of ions under analysis. 


E-7.2.3 Anion Suppressor Device — Anion 
micromembrane suppressor is used to analyse the 
data. 


E-7.2.4 Detector — Conductivity detector. 


E-7.2.5 Software — Software suitable for control 
of various operating parameters, receiving inputs 
and analysis of all data. 


Sample loop of 100 ul, 200 ul, 500 ul or 1 000 ul 
be used to determine ionic concentration as per 
instrument manual and practice. 


E-7.3 Reagents and Standards 
E-7.3.1 Glass or Polyethylene Sample Bottles 


E-7.3.2 Distilled Water or Deionized Water 
Free From the Anions of Interest 


E-7.3.3 Eluent — 1.7 mM of sodium bicarbonate 
and 1.8 mM of sodium carbonate solution is used 


For preparation of these solution, 0.285 6 g of 
sodium bicarbonate and 0.381 6 g of sodium 
carbonate is dissolved in 2 liter of water. 


E-7.3.4 Micromembrane Suppressor Solution 
(0.025 N of Sulphuric Acid) — Dilute 2.8 ml of 
concentrated Sulphuric acid in 4 liter of water. 


E-7.4 Standard Solutions 


E-7.4.1 Chloride — Dissolve NaCl, 1.648 5 g in 
1 liter of reagent water. 


E-7.4.2 Sulphate — Dissolve 1.81 g of potassium 
sulphate in 1 liter of reagent water. 


E-7.5 Calibration and Standardization 
For each analyte of interest, prepare calibration 


standards at three concentration levels and a blank 
by adding measured stock standards and diluting 


IS 3401 : 2023 


with reagent water. If the concentration of the 
sample exceeds the calibration range, the sample 
may be diluted. Using 0.1 ml to 1.0 ml injections of 
each calibration standard, tabulate area responses or 
peak height against the concentration. Use these 
results to prepare calibration curve. Record the 
retention time during the procedure. 


E-7.6 Procedure 


Dissolve between 1 g to 5 g sample in 25 ml reagent 
grade water in PTTE/HDPE beaker and use this 
solution for analysis. Inject a well-mixed sample 
(0.1 ml to 1.0 ml) and flush it through an injection 
loop using each new sample. Use the loop of same 
size for the standards and samples. Record the peak 
in size and area units. An automated constant 
volume injection system may preferably be used. 
The width of peak for retention time of ions should 
be same for sample and standard and deviation of 
retention force shall not exceed + 10 percent of RT 
of calibration. Dilute the sample with the help of 
reagent water if the response for the peak exceeds 
the working range of the system for analysis. If 
required, spike the sample with an appropriate 
amount of standard and reanalyze in case of absence 
of distinct resolution. Retention time is inversely 
proportional to concentration. For clear resolution, 
the sample can further be diluted. The dilution 
should be made to an extent till there is no deviation 
from the method. 


E-7.7 Data analysis and Calculations 


Prepare a calibration curve for each analyte by 
plotting instrument response against concentration. 
Compare the sample response with the standard 
curve and compute sample concentration. Multiply 
the value by appropriate dilution factor. 


Report results in mg/l or by suitably modifying into 
percentage. Only report those values that fall within 
the range of lowest and highest calibration 
standards. 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 6) 
SAMPLING OF SILICA GEL 


F-1 GENERAL 
SAMPLING 


REQUIREMENTS OF 


F-1.1 The sampled material shall be kept in a 
protected place and shall not be exposed to damp air. 


F-1.2 The sample shall be placed in suitable 
containers and each container shall be marked with 
full details of sampling giving the date of sampling; 


type of material; batch number, if any; and the name 
of the manufacturer. 


F-2 SCALE OF SAMPLING 
F-2.1 All the containers in a single consignment of 


silica gel of the same type from a single batch of 
manufacture shall constitute a lot. 


IS 3401 : 2023 


F-2.2 Samples shall be tested from each lot for 
ascertaining conformity of the material to the 
requirements of the specification. 


F-2.3 The number of container (n) to be chosen from 
the lot shall depend on the size of the lot (N) and 
shall be as given in Table 2. 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling 
(Clause F-2.3) 


SI No. Lot Size No. of Containers 


to be Selected 

N n 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 25 3 
ii) 26 to 50 4 
iii) 51 to 100 5 
iv) 101 to 200 6 
v) 201 and 8 

above 


F-2.4 The containers to be selected for sampling 
shall be chosen at random from the lot. For this 
purpose a random number table shall be used (see 
IS 4905). In case such a table is not available, the 
following procedure shall be adopted: 


Starting from any container, count them as 1, 2, 3, . 
EAN , r, and so on in a systematic manner, where r 


is the integral part of N/n. Every r™ container thus 
counted shall be withdrawn to constitute the 
required sample. 


F-3 TEST SAMPLE AND REFEREE SAMPLE 


F-3.1 From each of the containers selected, draw 
approximately 1.50 g of the material with the help 
of suitable sampling implement. The material drawn 
from different containers shall be mixed thoroughly 
to give a composite sample weighing about 500 g. 


F-3.2 The composite sample shall then be divided 
into three parts, one for the purchaser, another for 
the supplier and the third for the referee. These parts 
shall be transferred to separate containers which 
shall be suitably closed and marked with all the 
details of sampling. 


F-3.3 The referee sample shall bear the seals of the 
purchaser and the supplier. It shall be kept at a place 
agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier and 
shall be used in cast of a dispute. 


F-4 NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA 
FOR CONFORMITY 


F-4.1 Tests for all the characteristics given in 4 shall 
be conducted on the composite sample. 


F-4.2 The lot shall be declared as conforming to the 
requirements of the specification if all the test results 
on the composite sample satisfy the relevant 
requirements given in 4. 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee, CHD 01 


IS 3401 : 2023 


Organization 


Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research 
Institute, Bhavnagar 


Alkali Mfrs Association of India, Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, 
Mumbai 


Consumer Voice, New Delhi 


Delhi Jal Board, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), 
New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 
Global Adsorbents Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Grasim Industries Ltd, Nagda 


Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd, Vadodara 


Hindalco, Mumbai 


Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Chemical Council (ICC), New Delhi 


Industrial Carbon Pvt Ltd, Ankleshwar 


Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


Representative(s) 


DR KANNAN SRINIVASAN (Chairperson) 
SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIH. S. DAS (Alternate) 


DR A. V. R. REDDY 
DR S. N. ACHARY (Alternate) 


DR RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 
SHRI M. A. U KHAN 

SHRI K. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 


DR GURBACHAN SINGH 
SHRI B. S. TOMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI P. V. V. R SARMA 
SHRI SANJAY DHANUKA 


SHRI ALOK SINGH 
SHRI PANKAJ GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI V. K. MAHIDA 
SHRI SHAILESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESWAR KAPURI 
SHRI AJITH RAMACHANDRA (Alternate) 


MS VRINDA RAJWADE 
SHRI SOJAN VARGHESE (Alternate) 


DR PRAVEEN R. LIKHAR 
DR RAJENDER REDDY (Alternate) 


DR U. SHETKAR 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYAN ROHIT KUMAR 


DR ROHIT MISRA 
DR O. P. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. N. APARAJIT 


DR DARBHA SRINIVAS 
DR PARESH DHEPE (Alternate) 


IS 3401 : 2023 


Organization 


National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 
Hyderabad 


National Peroxide Ltd, Mumbai 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delh 


National Test House, Ghaziabad 


Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tamilnadu Petroproducts Limited, Chennai 

Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur 

The Dharamsi Morarji Chemicals Co Ltd, Mumbai 
Vaibhav Analytical Services, Ahmedabad 


In Personal Capacity (Hari Nagar Co-Op-Society, 
Gotri Road, Vadodara - 390007) 


In Personal Capacity (514 Veer Apt, Sector 13, Rohini, 
New Delhi - 110085) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR TRILOCHAN MISHRA 
SHRI DEVBRATA MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAN KUMAR 
DR PRASHANT SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr Joy ANTHONY 


DR NAHAR SINGH 
Dr S. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


Ms RICHA KUNDRA 


DR KARTHIKEYAN 
Ms ANNA BACKIAM (Alternate) 


DR (Ms) LAXMI RAWAT 
SHRI B. GOVINDAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVI MUTHUKRISHNAN 
SHRI NAJMUL HASAN KHAN 
SHRI MANDAR GAIKWAD 
SHRI GAURANG OZA 


SHRI R. S. BAGHEL 


SHRI D. K. JAIN 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 

SHRI SAGAR SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 

(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 01 (20833). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


