HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION
(First Revision)

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

SP

20(S&T)

: 1991
NOVEMBER MARCH INDIAN 1991 1991 1981

FIRST FIRST

PUBLISHED REVISION OF

0 BUREAU

STANDARDS

UDC

693

ISBN

81-7061-029-X

PRICE

Rs 200.00

PRINTED

IN INDlA

AT KAPOOR ART PRESS, A3813 MAYAPURI, NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS, NEW DELHI 110002

.

COMPOSITION dF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROJECTS (SCIP)

Chairman DR H. C. VISVESVARAYA Vice-Chancellar University of Roorkee Roorkee

Members Dr M. Ramaiah Dr Shri Shri Shri R. K. Bhandari V. Rao Harish Aiyagari Chandra Structural (CSIR),

Representing Engineering Madras Research Research Science Works & Centre Institute, Technology, Department, Consultants

Building Central Roorkee Department of New Delhi Public Central New Delhi

M. L. Mehta S. K. Datta (Alfernare)

Metallurgical and Engineering (India) Ltd, Ranchi Planning Bureau Commission, of Indian

Shri Shri

J. D. Chaturvedi

New Delhi New Delhi

Shri J. Venkataraman (Member Secretary~

Standards,

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

FOREWORD
Users of various civil en ineering codes have been feeling the need for based on Indian Standards. The explanatory handbooks and ot i er compilations need has been further emphasized in view of the first publication of the National Building Code of India in 1970 (which has since been revised in 1983) and its implementation. The Expert Group set up in 1972 by the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India carried out in-depth studies in various areas of civil engineering and construction practices. During the preparation of the Fifth Five-Year Plan in 1975, the Group was assigned the task of producing a Science and Technology Plan for research, development and extension work in the sector of housing and construction technology. One of the items of this plan was the formulation of design handbooks,`explanatory handbooks and design aids based on the National Building Code and various lndian Standards and other activities in the promotion of the National Building Code. The Expert Group gave high priority to this item and on the recommendation of the Department of Science and Technology, the Planning Commission approved the following two projects which were assigned to the Bureau of Indian Standards (erstwhile Indian Standards Institution): a) Development programme engineering construction, b) Typification for industrial on code and buildings. implementation for building and civil

A special committee for Implementation of Science and Technology Projects (SClP) consisting of experts connected with different aspects was set up in 1974 to `advise the BIS Directorate General in identifying and for guiding the development of the work. Under the first project, the Committee has identified several subjects for preparing explanatory hadbooks/compilations covering appropriate .Indian Standards/codes specifications which include the following: *Handbooks
I. Design Published:

Aids for

Reinforced

Concrete

to IS 456 : 1978 (SP Engineering

16 : 1980)

Handbook on Codes of Earthquake 2. Explanatory and IS 4326 : 1976) (SP 22 : 1982)
3. Handbook 4. Explanatory

(1s 1893 : 1975

on Concrete

Mixes

(SP

23 : 1982) for Plain and (SP (SP (SP 25 : 1984)

Reinforced Handbook Summaries Handbook

Handbook on Indian Standard Code of Practice Concrete (IS 456 : 1978) (SP 24 : 1983) on Causes and Prevention of Indian on Concrete Standards of Cracks in Buildings Materials Detailing

for Building and

21 : 1983) 34 : 1987) (Lighting

Reinforcement

Handbook on Functional Requirements and Ventilation) (SP 32 : 1986)
9. Handbook 10. Handbook

of lndustrial 33 : 1986) with of

Buildings

on Timber

Engineering and

(SP

Plumbing I I. Handbook Industrial S&iects
Under

on Water Supply (SP 35 : 1987)

Drainage

Special

Emphasis (other

on than

on Functional Requirements Buildings) (SP 41 : 1987)
Programme:

Buildings

--Foundation --Construction Building

of Buildings Safety Construction Practices Practices
BIS Headquarters, and from all Branches

*Handbooks published are available for sale from
and Regianal Offices of BE.

-Formwork -Fire -Tall -Loading Safety Buildings Code

The Explanatory Handbook on Masonry Code SP 20 (S&T) was first published in 1981 to provide commentary on various clauses of Part Vl, Section 4 of National Building Code of India 1970 (which was based on IS 1905 : 1969 version) with the object of promoting and facilitating the use of the masonry code. The handbook has been found to be very helpful to professional engineers. This handbook while providing commentary on various clauses highlighted certain improvements modifications that were needed in the basic code (IS 1905 : 1969). Subsequent to publication of the handbook, the code (IS 1905) was revised in 1980 (IS 1905 : 1980) taking into consideration the recommendations contained in the handbook (see also Introduction). The code was further revised in 1987 as a result of the experience gained with the use of 1980 version of the code and also other developments in other parts of the world in the design and construction refinements of masonry structures. The revision of the handbook was also taken up simultaneously along with the revision of the code to make it up-to-date. At the same time it was felt that it would be helpful and handy to professionals if information relating to construction practices based on various Indian Standards on masonry was also included along with the commentary. Therefore masonry construction practices have now been included in the revised handbook and the title of the handbook has been changed accordingly. The revised handbook is in two parts. Part I gives commentary on `IS 1905 : 1987 Code of practice for structural use of unreinforced masonry (second revision)' along with design examples (IS 1905 : 1987 has also been included in the National Building Code Part VI, Section 4 Masonry through amendment No. 2) and Part 2 gives all construction aspects relating to masonry construction based on relevant Indian Standards and other literature available on the subject. The following IS 1905 : 1987. points are to be kept in view while using the handbook: it refers to

4 Wherever the expression

`The Code' has been used in the handbook,

b) Part 1 of the handbook is to be read along with IS 1905 : 1987. c) The clause numbers in Part I of handbook refer to the corresponding /

clause numbers in IS 1905 : 1987. The clauses are explained in the same sequence as they occur in IS 1905 : 1987. When there are no comments to a particular clause, the same has been omitted. figures and tables appearing in Part 1 of the handbook are with Prefix `E' to distinguish them from those used in the code. For Figure E-3 refers to the figure in the handbook whereas Figure 3 that given in the Code. Where a clause is pre-fixed by letter `E', it comments on that clause in the handbook. as per IS necessary. 1905 : 1987 are maintained with additional notations

4 For convenience
identified example, refers to refers to

e) Notations
wherever

f)

The handbook does not form part of any Indian Standard on the subject and does not have the status of an Indian Standard. Wherever there is any dispute about the interpretation or opinion expressed in this handbook, the provisions of the Code(s) only shall apply; the provisions of this handbook should be considered as only supplementary and informative. cited have been listed at the end of each part of the handbook.

g) References

The handbook, it is hoped would be useful to practising engineers and field engineers in the design and construction of masonry work. It would also be helpful to students of civil engineering to acquaint themselves with the various provistons of the basic Code on masonry and construction practices. The handbook is based on first draft revision prepared by Shri M. S. Bhatia, retired Engineer-in-Chief, Central Public Works Department (Government of (vi)

India). The draft handbook was circulated for review to Central Public Works Department, New Delhi; Engineer-in-Chiefs Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi; Sr. Civil Engineer (Design), Northern Railway, New Delhi; National Buildings Organization, New Delhi; Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee; Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi; Shri M.G. Virmani, New Delhi; Public Works Deptt., Govt of Tamilnadu, Madras: Maulana Azad College of Technology, Bhopal: Public Works Deptt. Maharashtra, Bombay; Tirath Ram Ahuja Pvt Ltd, New Delhi; National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, New Delhi; National Council for Cement and Building Materials, New Delhi; Structural Engineering Research Centre, Madras; M/s C. R. Narayana Rao, Madras; Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay; Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur; Civil Engineering Department, University of Roorkee, Roorkee; Punjab Public Works Department, Patiala; Structural Designers and Consultants Pvt Ltd, Bombay; Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur; Indian Institute of Architects, New Delhi; School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi; Shri D. N. Chopra, New Delhi; Shri T. S. Khareghate, Bombay; Department of Earthquake Engineering, University of Roorkee, Roorkee; Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi; Tamilnadu Housing Board, Madras; Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi; Andhra Pradesh Housing Board, Hyderabad; Rajasthan Housing Board, Jaipur; Shri Thomas Mathew, Cochin; Central Vigilance Commission, New Delhi; Chief Municipal Architect, Calcutta and the views expressed were taken into consideration while finalizing the handbook.

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

INTRODUCTION
Until 1950's there were no engineering methods of designing masonry for buildings and thickness of walls was being based on `Rule-of-Thumb' Tables given in Building Codes and Regulations. As a result walls used to be very thick and masonry structures were found to be very uneconomical beyond 3 or 4 storeys. Buildings exceeding 3 or 4 storeys had thus to be constructed with steel or RCC frames. Since 1950's intensive theocritical and experimental research has been conducted on various aspects of masonry in advanced countries. As a result different factors which effect strength, stability and performance of masonry structures have been identified and methods of design based on engineering principles evolved. Most of the countries have therefore switched over to use of socalled "calculated or engineering masonry" of structures. Simultaneously methods .of manufacture of bricks and construction techniques have been considerably improved upon. The basic advantage of masonry construction lies in the fact that in load bearing structures, it performs a variety of functions, namely, supporting loads, subdividing space, providing thermal and acoustic insulation, affording fire and weather protection, etc, which in a framed building, have to be provided for separately. No doubt, use of masonry in load bearing structures has certain limitations, but it is suited for a building in which floor area is subdivided into a large number of rooms of small or medium size and in which the floor plan is repeated in each storey throughout the height of the building. These conditions are met with in residential buildings, hostels, nursing homes, hospitals, schools and certain types of administrative buildings. Extensive research, including large scale testing, has been carried out in regard to the behaviour of masonry which has enabled engineers and architects to design tall masonry structures on sound engineering principles with greater exactitude, economy and confidence. There are many recent examples in other countries of well designed 12 to 20 storeyed load bearing masonry buildings which have only 25 to 40 cm thick walls. This is in contrast to the 16 storey `Monadnock Building' in Chicago designed by John Rort in 1891 with 180 cm thick brick walls at the base. In India there has not been much progress in the construction of tall load bearing masonry structures, mainly because quality of bricks generally manufactured in the country is poor, their normal strength being of the order of only 7 to IO N/mmZ. In many Western countries, bricks of even medium quality have crushing strength of 30 to 50 N/mm?. However, recently mechanized brick plants have been set up at a few piaces in the country which are producing bricks of strength 17.5 to 25 N/mm'. Thus, it should now be possible in some parts of the country to go in for 5 to 6 storeyed load bearing structures at costs less than those of RCC framed structures. With this development, structural design of load bearing masonry buildings has assumed additional importance in India as well. In fact under the Experimental Projects Scheme of the National Buildings Organization, 50 residential units in 5 storeyed blocks, having one brick, that is 25.4 cm thick load bearing brick masonry walls in all the storeys were constructed at Manicktola, Calcutta in 1975 and construction of 20 residential units in' 5 storeyed blocks, having one brick, that is, 22.9 cm thick walls, have been constructed in New Delhi. Buildings are presently designed in western countries mostly by allowable stress method of design. Walls are designed as vertical cantilevers with no moment transfer at wall to floor connection. Lateral loads are distributed to cross walls according to their stiffness and locations by the diaphragm action of floor and roof slabs acting as horizontal beams. It has been found that eccentricity of load from a slab at the top of a masonry element gets reduced at the bottom support of the wall. In some countries limit state design method is now coming into vogue because of better reliability and economy obtained through the adoption of this method. For large and important projects strength of masonry is based on `for-the-job' prism tests instead of lacing reliance on standard tables. In seismic zones masonry consisting of ho P low blocks is reinforced vertically to take tension. In some countries structural advantage is taken of the fact that use of through-wall units results in stronger masonry. In tall single storey long-span buildings such as

churches, sports stadia, large halls, etc, use of Diaphragm proving to be an economical innovation. Before concluding, trends of load bearing These are as follows: a) Manufacture perforations

type masonry

wails is

a brief mention may be made of some special features and masonry in other countries for information of designers. with with

and use of high strength burnt day units (70 to 100 N/mm?) for passing vertical reinforcement where necessary. to obtain masonry

b) Use of high-bond organic modified mortars (polymers) very high compressive as well as bond strength.

c) Basing design calculations for structural masonry on prism/cube masonry with units and mortar actually proposed to be used

strength of in the job.

d) Use of `Through-Wall-Units' in order to achieve higher efficiency of masonry (ratio of masonry strength to unit strength). With the use of these units, vertical wall-joints in masonry are eliminated. e) Use of floors/roofs on walls. f) Use of prefabricated of high stiffness brick panels in order to reduce eccentricity in masonry. with normal bricks fbr external walls, for of loading

g) Use of facing bricks in conjunction architectural effects. h) Prestressing of masonry elements.

There is need and considerable scope in this country of intensifying experimental, research and study in the field of load bearing masonry in order to `make better and more economical use of this wonderful and versatiie building material-the brick. In India we have been trying to keep pace to some extent with the developments taking place in other countries in ragard to masonry and in 1961, ISI (now BIS) published its first Code on Masonry which made provisions for design of masonry based on working stress method. This code. was revised in 1969. Certain provisions were upgraded based on improvements brought about in Codes of some other countries. Unfortunately there has not been much of research on the subject in our country. In 1976, BIS undertook the task of publishing a handbook on masonry and during the preparatory work certain deficiencies in the Code came to light. The Code was therefore further revised in 1980 and a comprehensive handbook on masonry with clause-wise commentary and analysis, Illustrative examples and design tables was published in 1981. In view of the growing interests of the users of Code and handbook and practical importance of this subject to designers and builders,, the Code as well as the handbook and practical importance Of this subject to designers and builders, the Code as well as the `handbgok have been further revised and updated. Now Building Regulations incorporate the concept of engineered masonry contained in the Code, where as earlier in our country one brickwall could only be a single storey building. Presently one brick walls are built-up to 4-5 storeys in many parts of the country. The revised Code along with the handbook it is hoped would be of considerable help to engineers in the design and construction of masonry buildings especially tall buildings.

CONTENTS
Page FOREWORD INTRODUCTION PART 1 3 3 4 Units 4 6 8 8 8 10 IO IO 10 It I: V ix

SCOPE TERMlNOLOGY MATERIALS 3.1 Masonry 3.2 Mortar DESIGN

CONSIDERATIONS

4.1 General and Stability 4.2 Lateral Supports 4.2.2 Stability 4.3 Effective Height 4.3.1 Wall 4.3.2 Column 4.3.3 Openings in Walls Effective Length 4".: Effective Thickness Ratio 4:6 Slenderness 4.7 Eccentricity STRUCTURAL 5.1 5.3 DESIGN

5.4

5.5

General Load Dispersion 5.3. I General 5.3.2 Arching Action 5.3.3 Lintels Permissible Stresses 5.4. I Permissible Compressive Stress factor 5.4. I. 1 Stress reduction factor 5.4. I .2 Area reduction 5.4.1.3 Shape reduction factor compressive stresses 5.4.1.4 Increase in permissible ._ . . . allowed fbr eccentric vertical and/or lateral loads under certain conditions 5.4:2 Permissible Tensile Stress 5.4.3 Permissible Shear Stress Design Thickness/Cross Section Subjected to Vertical Loads 5.5. I Walls and Columns 5.5.1.1 Solid walls Mainly Subjected to Lateral 5.5.2 Walls and Columns Loads 5.5.2.1 Free standing walls 5.5.2.2 Retaining wahs Subjected to Vertical as well 5.5.3 Walls and ._ Columns as Lateral Loads to In-Plan Bending and Vertical 5.5.4 Walls Subjected Loads (Shear Walls) Bearing Walls 5.5.5 Non-Load REQUIREMENTS of Construction . . Thickness . of Walls. from

24 25 :: ::

2
25 26 26 28 28 28

6. GENERAL 6.1 Methods 6.2 Minimum ..

6.3 Workmanship 6.4 Joints to Control 6.6 Corbelling ANNEXES ANNEX H-l

Deformation

and

Cracking

WORKED EXAMPLES ON DESIGN STRUCTURAL MASONRY

OF

31

ANNEX ANNEX ANNEX PART 2

H-2 DESIGN OF BRICK MASONRY FOR RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS UP TO 3 STOREYS H-3 DESIGN OFFICE OF BRICK BUILDINGS MASONRY FOR UP TO 3 STOREYS AND ABBREVlATldNS

53 73 104

H-4 NOTATIONS,

SYMBOLS

SECTION I. I I .2 1.3 I .4 1.5 1.6

1 GENERAL

107 107 107 108 III 122 124

Introduction Materials Masonry Units Mortar Scaffolding Curing 2 BRICK MASONRY

SECTlON 2. I 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9

124 124 124 126 127 127 127 127 I 28 128 129 129 129 131 132 133 133 134 MASONRY 138 138 139 139 140 140 140 140 140 140 140 140 141 142 143

General Bonds Laying of Brick Masonry Fixing Door and Window Frames Honey-Combed Brick Masonry Brick Masonry Curved on Plan Extension of Old Brick Masonry Corbelling Efflorescence 3 STONE MASONRY

SECTlON 3. I 3.2 3.3 3.4 3.5 3.6 3.7

General Random Rubble Masonry Coursed Rubble Masonry Ashlar Masonry Laterite Stone Masonry Stone Veneering Miscellaneous items 4 CONCRETE BLOCK

SECTION 4. I 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 4.8

General Handling Laying of Rendering Treatment Provision Intersecting Provision

and Storage of Blocks Blocks and Other Finishes at Openings and Fixing of Lintels Walls of Floor/ Roof ELEMENTS

of Door

and

Window

Frames

SECTION 5. I 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5

5 MASONRY

General Cavity Wall Retaining Wall Masonry Arches Masonry Domes

SECTION 6 SOME TO MASONRY 6. I 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 6.10 6.1 I LIST

MISCELLANEOUS

MATTERS

RELA.TlNG

143

General Chases, Recesses and Holes Brick Nogging and Dhajji Walling Window Sills Copings on Compound Walls and Parapets Use of Fire Bricks Flues and Chimneys in Residential Buildings Protection of Masonry During Construction Use of Reinforcement in Masonry Prevention of Cracks in Masonry Walling with Materials Other than Masonry OF REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY

143 l-43 144 145 145 145 145 146 146 147 147 149

(xiii)

PART

1

COM'MENTARY ON IS 1905: 1987 CODE OF PRACTICE USE OF UNREINFORCED

FOR STRUCTURAL MASONRY

(Third

Revision)

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

1 SCOPE

has not yet formulated any Code of practice for design and construction of reinforced masonry since quality of bricks generally available in the country at present is not suitable for use in reinl'orced mansonry. Bricks for this purpose sl~o~~lcl necessarily be of high strength and should also be dense. so that moisture absorption is less. If bricks have high moisture absorption, reinforcement gets corroded in course of time, thereby lowering its life expectancy.
1.2 Mud mortar for masonry as bonding material is normally not used in the present day construction because of its poor bonding quality. Mud mortar does attain some strength on drying, but it readily absorbs moisture on coming in contact with moisture or rain and loses its strength when wet. For temporary and low cost singli: storeyed houses, however, its use is sometimes made particularly in rural areas, when economy in cost is the main consideration. (Some information on use of mud mortar construction is given in i.4.3.4 and 1.4.4.1 of Part 2.)

1.1 BIS

under compressive loading takes the form of vertical tensile cracks at mid-height and in line with the vertical mortar joints. The cracks can develop at such frequency as to become progressively slender columns side by side. The lower elasticity of mortar causes vertical load to impart. lateral strain compressive movements to the mortar, which produces tensile stresses in the brick by inter-face bond whilst maintaining the bed-joint mortar in compression. The mortar is then in condition of triaxial compressive stress and the brick carries vertical compression in combination with.biaxial lateral tension. Greater the height to length ratio of the wall, higher the value of horizontal tensile stresses `at the vertical joints and, therefore, weaker the wall against vertical splitting under load." Since a column has greater height to length ratio in comparison to a wall, it has a lower permmisible stress under a vertiFal load. A masonry column has been defined as a vertical member the width of which does not exceed 4 times the thickness. This provision is based on British Standard CP Ill : Part 2 : 19702. However, in the National Building Code of Canada and also Recommended Practice for Engineered Bricks Masonry4, 1969, a column has been defined as a member whose width does not exceed 3 times the thickness. 2.9 Hollow
Units

2 TERMINOLOGY Some of the terms defined in this illustrated in Fig. E-i to E-9. clause are

2.3.1 Need for making_ a distinction between column and wall arises because a column can take lesser unit load than a wall. This behaviour of masonry is based on experimental research and, in this context, it will be relevant to quote from the Proceedings of the Conference on Planning and Design of Tall Buildings' as follows: "Walls and Columns-Plain of failure. The characteristic Masonry--Mode failure of wall

Shellback' found that in perforated bricks, type and distribution of voids influence the strength of bricks but for perforation areas up to 35 percent of the cross-section, the bricks hav'e been found to behave as if solid. That explains the background

BED

BLOCK

w
I
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

f

SECTION

XX

ELEVATION FIG. E-l BED BLOCK 1

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 for the definition 3 MATERIALS 3.1 Masonry Units
of `hollow units'.

9

f t m
FIG. E-2 BUTTRESS

Choice of masonry units is generally made from the consideration of: (a) local availability, (b) compressive strength, (c) durability, (d) cost, and (e) ease of construction. Brick has the advantage over stone that it lends itself to easy construction and requires less labour for laying. Stone masonry, because of practical limitations of dressing to shape and size, usually has to be thicker and results in unnecessary extra

1

1

l----b--+
bf?Lt

FIG. E-3 COLUMN

t------b_
Cross
Net Area = a b x is the Area = ab -3x when area of one core to yoova

cost. Thus, the first choice for a building at any place, would be brick, if it is available at reasonable cost with requisite strength and good quality. In hills as well as in certain plains where soil suitable for making bricks is not available or cost of fuel for burning bricks is very high and stone is locally available, the choice would be stone. If type and quality of stone available is such that it cannot be easily dressed to shape and size, or if the cost of dressing is too high, use of concrete blocks may prove to be more economical, particularly when construction is to be more than two storeys, since thickness of walls can be kept within economical limits by using concrete blocks. In areas where bricks and stone of suitable quality are not available and concrete blocks cannot be manufactured at reasonable cost, and lime and sand of good quality are available, masonry units could be of sand-lime bricks. However, for manufacture of sand-lime bricks, special equipment is required, and thus use of sand-lime bricks is not common in India as yet.
ii) Strength

NOTE

-LOSS of area due

is ignored

FIG. E-4 CROS~ECTIONAL
UNIT

AREA OF MASONRY

CROSS

JOINT JOINT

WALL

of bricks in lndia varies from region to region depending on the nature of available soil and technique adopted for moulding and burning. Some research has been done for manufacture of bricks of improved quality from soils such as black cotton and moorum, which ordinarily give bricks of very low strength. The following statement based on information collected by BIS some time back, will give a general idea of the average strength of bricks in N/mm? available in various parts of India, employing commonly known methods for moulding and burning of bricks: Delhi and Pm$ab Uttar Pradesh Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Gujarat Rajasthan West Bengal And hra Pradesh Assam 7 to IO IO to 20 3.5 to 5 5 3 to IO 3 IO to 20 3 3.5 1

FIG. E-5 JOINTS
4

IN

MASONRY HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP. 20 (S&T) : 1991

E-8A RCC LATERAL A WALL

SLAB GIVING SUPPORT TO AT TOP

E-6B

CROSS

WALLS

GIVING TO A WALL

LATERAL

SUPPORT

E-SC

PIERS SUPPORT

GIVING TO A

LATERAL WALL

E-SD

R CC

BEAM TO A OF

GIVING COLUMN ITS

LATERAL IN THE `t'

E-6E

Rcc

BEAMS TO AS A OF

GIVING COLUMN THlCKNESS't' WIDTH

LATERAL IN THE

SUPPORT DIRECTION

SUPPORT DIRECTION AS WELL

THICKNESS

`b'

FIG. E-6 LATERAL SUPPORTS

In certain cities like Calcutta and Madras, machine-made bricks are now being produced, which give compressive strengths varying between 17.5 and 25 N/mm*. iii) The following relation generally holds good between strength of bricks and maximum number of storeys in case of simple residential buildings having one brick thick walls and rooms of medium size:
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

Ni mm2 3 to 3.5 7 10 I.5

Storeys I 2 3 4 to to to to 2 3 4 5

It is, however, possible to go higher than these levels by optimization of architectural and structural designs, for example,
I

SP 20(5&T)

: 1991
,-SHEAR WALL

STONE VENEER

FIG. SHEAR WALL

E-9 VENEERED WALL

PLAN
Horizontal force P acting on wall A is resisted by cross walls B which act as shear wall.

FIG. E-7 SHEAR WALL

PLASTER LOAD lEARING MASONRY -FACING UNITS l~OCD TO ffESULT IN CONMON ACTION U*Ot!RLOAD

strength of masonry depends on surface characteristics and uniformity of size and shape of units as well as certain properties of mortar. Units which are true in shape and size, can be laid with comparatively thinner joints, thereby resulting in higher strength. For this reason, use of A grade bricks gives masonry of higher strength as compared to that with B grade bricks, even though crushing strength of bricks of the two grades may be same. For similar reasons ashlar stone masonry which uses accurately dressed and shaped stones is much stronger than ordinary coursed stone masonry. vi) For detailed information on various masonry units reference may be made to 1.3 of Part 2. 3.1.1 Bond between mortar and masonry units depends on suction rate of masonry units. Masonry units, which have been previously used in masonry would not possess adequate suction rate and may not develop normal bond and compressive strengths when reused. It is therefore not advisable to reuse such units in locations where stress in m'asonry is critical. 3.2. Mortar i) Particulars of mortars for masonry are contained in IS 2250 : 19815. lmportant requirements, characteristics and properties of commonly used mortars are summarised below for ready information. For more detailed information on mortars reference may be made to 1.4 of Part 2 of this Handbook. ii) Requirements of a good mortar for masonry are strength, workability, water retentivity and low drying shrinkage. A strong mortar will have adequate crushing strength as well as adequate tensile and shear strength. It is necessary that mortar should attain initial set early enough to
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

FIG. E-8 FACED WALL adopting cellular type of plan, reducing storey heights, keeping openings away from intersections of walls, limiting spans of rooms and size of openings, designing floor and roof slabs so as to distribute loads evenly on various walls, and using selected bricks in the lower one or more storeys, etc. iv) When building with stone as masonry unit in coursesl minimum thickness of walls from practical considerations has to be 30 to 40 cm depending upon type and quality of stone used. However, CBRI have innovated a technique of making precast stone blocks for use as masonry units, so that it has become feasible to build stone masonry walls of 20 to 25 cm thickness, resulting in economy in cost (see 13.7 of Part 2). v) As a general rule, apart from strength of units and grade of mortar, masonry
6 HANDBOOK

SP 20(S&T) enable work to proceed at a reasonable pace. At the same time it should gain strength within reasonable period so that masonry is in a position to take load early. A workable mortar will hang from the trowel and will spread easily. A mortar with good water retentivity will not readily lose water and stiffen on coming in contact with masonry units, and will remain plastic long enough to be easily adjusted in line and level. This property of good water retentivity will enable the mortar to develop good bond with masonry units and fill the so that masonry has adequate voids, resistance against rain-penetration. are intimate mixtures of some iii) Mortars cementing materials, such as cement, lime and fine aggregate (such as sand, burnt clay/surkhi, cinder, etc). When only fat lime is used, which sets very slowly through the process of carbonation, it becomes necessary, for the sake of better strength, to use some pouolanic material, such as burnt clay/surkhi or cinder. Plasticizers are used in plain cement-sand mortars to improve workability. Mortars could be broadly classified as cement mortars, lime mortars Main cement-lime mortars. and characteristics and properties of these three categories of mortars are as under. a) Cement mortarsThese consist of cement and sand, varying in proportion from 1 : 8 to 1 : 3, -strength and with the increase workability improvin in the proportion o f cement. Mortars richer than 1 : 3 are not used in masonry because these cause high shrinkage and do not increase in strength of masonry. Mortars leaner than 1 : 5 tend to become harsh and unworkable and are prone to segregation. Cement mortars set early and gain strength quickly. Setting action of mortar is on account of chemical changes in cement in combination with water, and thus these mortars can set and harden in wet locations. In case of lean mortars, voids in sand are not fully filled, and therefore, these are not impervious. Rich mortars though having good strength have high shrinkage and are thus more liable to cracking.

: 1991

of mortar using semi-hydraulic lime are intermediate between those of hydraulic and fat lime mortars. When using fat lime, it is necessary to use some pozzolanic material such as burnt clay/surkhi or cinder to improve strength of the mortar. The main advantage of lime mortar lies in its good workability, good water retentivity and low shrinkage. Masonry in lime mortar has, thus, better resistance against rainpenetration and is less liable to cracking, though strength is much less than that of masonry in cement mortar.

cl Cement-lime

mortars - These mortars have the good qualities of cement as well as lime mortars, that is, medium strength along with good workability, good water retentivity, freedom from cracks and good resistance against rainpenetration. Commonly adopted proportions of the mortar (cement : lime : sand) are 1 : 1 : 6, 1 : 2 : 9 and 1 : 3 : 12. When mix proportion of binder (cement and lime) to sand is kept as I : 3, it gives a very dense mortar since voids of sand are fully filled.

iv) Mortar for masonry should be selected with care keeping the following in view. It should be noted that cement-lime mortars are much better than cement mortars for masonry work in most of the structures.

4 If binder contains

more of cement and less of lime, it develops strength early, and is strong when matured. A rich cement mortar is needed, firstly, when masonry units of high strength are used so as to get strong masonry; secondly, when early strength is necessary for working .under frosty conditions; and thirdly, when masonry is in wet location as in foundation below plinth, where a dense mortar being less pervious can better resist the effect of soluble salts.

b) An

b) Lime

mortars - These consist of intimate mixtures of lime as binder and sand, burnt clay/surkhi, cinder as fine aggregate in the proportion 1 : 2 to 1 : 3. As a general rule, lime mortars gain strength slowly and have low Mortars using ultimate strength. hydraulic lime attain somewhat better strength than those using fat lime. In fact, lime mortars using fat lime do not harden at all'in wet locations. Properties
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

unnecessarily strong mortar concentrates the effect of any differential movement of masonry in fewer and wider cracks while a weak mortar (mortar having more of lime and less of cement) will accommodate movements, and cracking will be distributed as thin hair cracks which are less noticeable. Also stresses due to expansion of masonry units are reduced, if a weak mortar is used. Lean mortars of cement alone _,are harsh, pervious and less workable. Thus when strong mortars are not required from considerations of strength or for working under frosty conditions or for work in wet locations, it is preferable to use composite mortars of cement, lime and sand, in appropriate proportions. Figure E-10 baaed on BRS
1 1

HANDBOOK

SP 20(S&T) r/r/d
II

: 1991
Strength Stcngth of of brickwork mortar

Table E-l [Using

Effect of Mortar Mix on Strength of Brickwork Clay Brick of Strength 32.7 N/mm* (4 750 ibf/in*)]
Mortar Compressive Strength Brickwork Compressive Strength Ratio

Mortar

Mix

(Cement: Lime:

Sand)

(28 Days) x

(28 Days) Y

Y x

(1)

(2)
n/ mm2 (Ibf/ in*) N/mm2

(3)
(Ibf/ inz) (I 290) (1 345) (I 235) (660)

(4)

I : `A : 3
1:%:41/2 0 I:1:6 CEMENT LIME SAND 1 0 3 MORTAR 1 `4s 3 RATIO BY 1 1 6

17.8 10.8 4.7 1.7

(2 590) (I 570) (680) (245)

8.9 9.3 8.5 4.6

0.50 0.86

1.82
2.69

1
2 9 VOLUME

1 3 12

I:2:Y

NOTE~ Lime used was in the form of well matured putty.

v)

Effects of mortar idg strengths medium a Strengths strength cement-sand

mix proportions

on the crushbuilt with of

of mortar bricks. are shown

and brickwork relative

to the strength

Optimum mortar mixes from consideration of maximum strength of brickwork for various brick strengths based on Digest No. 616 (Second Series) and Table I of the Code, are given in Table E-2 for general guidance.

I :3
it.

mortar and the brickwork

built

with

FIG.

E-IO RELATION BETWEEN STRENGTH BPICK WORK AND STRENGTH OF

OF

Table 82 Optimum Mortar Mixes for Maximum Masonry Strength with Bricks of Various Strengths
Brick Mortar Mtx

MORTAR

Mortar Type

Strength

(By Volume) (Cement : Lime : Sand) (2)

Digest 6th illustrates the relation between strength of mortar and brickwork for a number of mortar mixes when bricks of medium strength (20 to 35 N/mm* according 10 British Standards) are used. As the proportion of lime in mortar is increased, though mortar loses strength, reduction in strength of brickwork is not much. c) It has been observed from experimental results that lime-based mortars give higher ratio of strength of brickwork to mortar as compared to non-lime mortars. This can be explained as follows: Normally brickwork fails under a compressive load on account of vertical tensile splitting, for which bond strength of mortar is more important than its compressive strength. Since lime-based mortars have much higher bond strength, as compared to cement mortars, the former produce brickwork of higher strength. Table E-l giving test results abstracted from SIBMAC proceedings7 illustrates this point very clearly.
8

(1) (N mm?)
Below 5

(3)

1 :0:6

I : 2c : 9
0:
5-14.9 IA:2-3 I :0:5 I:ic:6 15-24.9 I 25.0 or above Lime I I : 0.: 4 : 1/c: 4%

M2

MI

H2

: o-I/,c :

3

HI to

No IF. lime C.

of grade B can be used as an alternative

4 DESIGN 4.1 General

CONSIDERATIONS

In order to ensure uniformity of loading, openings in walls should not be too large and these should be of `hole in wall' type as far as possible; bearings for lintels and bed blocks under beams should be liberal in sizes; heavy concentration of loads should be avoided by judicious planning and
ON MASONRY DESIGN
AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

HANDBOOK

1

SP 20(S&T) sections of load bearing members should be varied where feasible with the loadings so as to obtain more or less uniform stress in adjoining parts of members. One of the commonly occuring causes of cracks in masonry is wide variation in stress in masonry in adjoining parts.
NOTE-- A `hole in wall' type opening is defined as an opening where total width or height of solid masonry around the opening is equal to or greater than the corresponding window dimension.

: 1991

may be used in place of Table 2 of the Code for buildings up to 3 storeys. Table E-3 Thickness* and Spacing of Stiffening Walls (Brick Size 23 X 11.5 X 7.7 cm) SI
No. Thickness of Load Bearing Wall to be Stiffened (2) (cm) I. 2. 3. II.5 23 34.5 and above Height of Storey Stiffening A / Minimum Thickness Wall Maxim"2 Spacing

4.2 Lateral

Supports

and Stability

(1)

(3) (m) 3.25 3.25 5.00

(4) (cm) 11.5 Il.5 I I.5

(5) (m) 4.50 6.00 8.00

4.2.2 Stability i) In a masonry structure, there are generally inbuilt, out of balance vertical forces due to imperfection in workmanship and verticality of walls which tend to make the structure unstable. Thus for stability calculations of a lateral support, horizontal force equal to 2.5 percent of all vertical loads acting above that lateral support is assumed for checking the adequacy of that support. This ,horizontal force is in addition to any other lateral force, namely wind or seismic that the structure may be subjected to. ii) It `should be borne in mind that assumed horizontal force of 2.5 percent is the total out of balance force due to vertical loads at the particular support and it does not include out of balance forces acting at other supports. Further it should be kept in view that horizontal force of 2.5 percent of vertical loads need not be considered for elements of construction that provide lateral stability to the structure as a whole. 4.2.2.2 a) Provision ,in sub-clause version of IS : 875. (a) is as per 1964

4.2.2.3 i) Cross walls in conjunction with floors in a building provide stability to the structure against the effect of lateral loads that is, wind, etc. In case of halls, we have only end walls and there are no intermediate cross walls. If hall is longer than 8.0 m, the end walls may not be able to provide adequate stability (depending upon the extent of lateral loads) and therefore, it is necessary to check stability and stresses by structural analysis. ii) If roofing over a hall consists of RCC beams and slab, it will be able to function as a horizontal girder for transmitting the lateral loads to the end walls. The long walls will therefore function as propped and should be designed cantilevers, accordingly, providing diaphragm walls, if found necessary. Use of diaphragm walls has been ex lained in E-5.5.3. Also end to shear and walls will I!e subjected bending and should be designed for permissible shear and no-tension. It is necessary that RCC slab of the roofing system must bear on the end walls so that lateral load is transmitted to these walls through shear resistance. Method of structural analysis of a hall is illustrated in Solved Example E-l 1. 4.2.2.4 i) When a hall or a factory type building is provided with trussed roofing the longitudinal walls cannot be deemed to be laterally supported at the top unless trusses are braced at the tie beam level as shown in Fig. E-l 1. With braced trusses as lateral supports, longitudinal walls will function as propped, cantilevers and should be designed accordingly. Even when designed as propped cantilever, ordinary solid walls may have. to be fairly thicker and therefore
1 9

_

b) A cross wall acting as a stiffening wall provides stability to the wall at its junction with the cross wall thereby resisting movement of wall at horizontal intervals and sharing a part of the lateral load. Further in conjunction with the floor supported on the wall, it resists horizontal movement of the top of the wall. For the first mode of stiffenmg, it is necessary that cross wall is built jointly with the load bearing wall or is adequately anchored to it and there should be no opening in the cross wall close to its junction with the main wall (refer clause 4.2.2.2(b) of the Code); for the second mode, the floor should be capable of acting as a horizontal girder and also the floor should be so connected to the cross walls that lateral forces are transmitted to the cross walls through shear resistance between floor and cross walls. c) When bricks of old size that is, 23 X 11.5 X 7.7 cm (FPS System) are used, Table E-3
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(5&T)

: 1991
TIE BEAMS OF FIXED ROOF TO TRUSSES

PURLINS ANCHORED GABLE WAL

impose pressure through tensile cracks if any and endanger the structure. 4.3 Effective 4.3.1 Height 4-Note I)

Wall (Table

DIAGONAL

BRACING

OF TIE BEAMS OF TR SO THAT ROOF ACTS HORIZONTAL TRANSMITS TO GABLE GIRDER WIND FOR WALLS

FIG.

E-l

I DIAGONAL

BRACING

OF TRUSSES

become uneconomical. In that situation use of diaphragm walls may be resorted to since that can result in considerable economy. of size 23 X 11.5 X 7.7 cm (FPS) are used, Table E-4 may be used in place of Table 3 of the Code.
When bricks

Referring to Note I of Table 4, strictly speaking actual height of a wall for the purpose of working out its effective height should be taken to be the clear distance between the supports. However, in the Code it has been given as the height between centres of supports, which is in accordance with the provisions of British Standard CP-I I I : Part 2 : 19702 as well as Australian Standard 164019748. Since thickness of floors is generally very small as compared to height of floors, this method of reckoning actual height will not make any appreciable difference in the end results. One could, therefore, take actual height as given in the Code or clear distance between supports as may be found convenient to use in calculations. Wall (Table 4-Note 5)

Table E-4 Minimum Thickness of Basement Walls (Brick Size 23 X 11.5 X 7.7 cm)
SI
NO.

Minimum Thickness of Basement Wall

Height of the Ground Above Basement Floor with Wall Loading (Permanent Load) of `More than M kN/m Less tha;;\ 50 kN/m
(4) (m) 2.00 I .oo

(1)

(2) (cm) I. 34.5 23

(3) (m) 2.50

Implication of this note is that when wail thickness is not less than 2/3 of the thickness of the pier, a concentrated load on the pier, will be borne by the pier as well as the wall. In this case we may design the element just as a wall supporting a concentrated load, taking advantage of the increase in the supporting area due to the pier projection. In case thickness of wall is less than 2/3 of the thickness of pier, we have to design the pier just like a column, for which permissible stress is less because of greater effective height and further supporting area will bc only that of the pier that is, without getting any benefit in design of the adjoining walls on either side. However in case, the wall and piers arc supporting a distributed load, we would get the advantage of stiffening effect of peirs as in 4.5.2 of the Code. 4.3.2 ColumnIn case of columns actual height ahould be taken as the clear height of a column between supftorts as illustrated in Fig. E-12. 4.3.3 Opening in Walls

2.

I .35

NOTE ~- Permanent nor include

load means only dead load and it does

live load.

4.2.2.7
a ) A free standing

give it stability

wall has no cross walls to against overturning due to lateral loads that is, wind or seismic loads. It thus acts like a cantilever fixed at the base and free at the top. For design of free standing walls please see comments on E-5.5.2.1 and E-5.5.2.2. to retain some dry material and there is no likelihood of any hydrostatic pressure, the design of wall could be based on permissible tension in A retaining wall intended to masonry. support earth should be designed as a gravity structure, placing no reliance on flexural movement of resistance, since water can get access to the back of the wall and HANDBOOK

i) An RCC slab bearing on a wall is assumed to provide full restraint to the wall while a

(7) If a wall is intended

Actual

Height

H = Clear

distance supports.

between

FIG. E-12 ACTUAL HEIGHT OF A COLUMN ON MASONRY DESlGN
AND

10

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) timber floor comprising timber joints and planking is assumed to provide only partial restraint. The clause makes stipulations for reckoning effective height of columns formed by openings in a wall for the two cases: a) when wall has full restraint bottom; and at top and

: 1991

calculation is taken as 19 cm, though nominal thickness is 20 cm. Similarly in case of brick masonry with bricks of old size (FPS System) actual thickness of one-b&k wall would be taken as 22 cm though nominal size of brick is 23 cm. 4.5.2 (See also comments on Note 5 of Table 4.) When ratio tP/ t, is 1.5 or less and the wall is having distributed load, Note 5 of Table 4 would It follows from this that be applicable. interpolation of values in Table 6 are valid only when t,/ t, exceeds 1.5. 4.5.4 i) It has been observed from tests that a cavity wail is 30 percent weaker than a solid wall of the same thicknes's as the combined thickness of two leaves of the cavity wall, because bonding action of ties cannot be as good as that of normal bond in a solid wall. That explains why effective thickness of a cavity wall is taken as twothirds of the sum of the act,ual thickness of two leaves. ii) In this type of wall either one leaf (inner) or both leaves could be load bearing. In the former case, effective thickness will be two-thirds the sum of the two leaves or the actual thickness of the loaded leaf whichever is more. In the latter case effective thickness will be two-thirds of the sum of thickness of both the leaves, or the actual thickness of the stronger leaf, whichever is more. 4.6 Slenderness Ratio

b) when wall has partial restraint at top and bottom. These two cases are illustrated in Fig. E-13. ii) In the case of (b) (see Fig. E-13), if height of neither opening exceeds 0.5H, wall masonry would provide some support to the column formed by openings in the direction parallel to the wall and for this reason effective height for the axis perpendicular toethe wall is taken as Hand otherwise it is to be taken as 2H. For the direction perpendicular to the wall, there is a likelihood of a situation when no joist rests on the column formed between the openings and thus effective height is taken as 2H that is, for a column having no tatera support at the top. 4.4 Effective Length

When a wall has more than-one opening such that there is no opening within a distance of H/8 from a cross wall and wall length between openings are not columns by definition, the design of the wall should be based on the value of SR obtained from the consideration of height or length, whichever is less. 4.5 Effective Thickness modular bricks, wall for design

4.5.1 In case of masonry using actual thickness of a one-brick

i) Under a vertical load a wall would buckle either around a horizontal axis parallel to

,.- COLUMN FORMED \ BY OPENINGS \ rRCC SLAB

Effective Height, h,, = 0.75H + 0.25H1
h,, = H

For H, d h,. = 4,,=2 For H, > h., = h,:2

0.5 H H H 0.5 H 2 H H

E-13A Walls

Having
FIG.

Full

Restraint
HEIGHT OF

E-13B Walls
WALLS WITH 1

Having
OPENINGS

Partial

Restraint

E-13 EFFECTIVE
DESIGN AND

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

CONSTRUCTION-PART

II

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 predominantly through shear action, while with h/r = 4 or more, failure is by vertical tensile splitting. From consideration of structural soundness and economy of design, most codes control the maximum slenderness ratio of walls and columns so as to ensure failure by excessive stress rather than buckling. iv) Limiting values of SR are less for masonry built in lime mortar, as compared to that built in cement mortar, because the former, being relatively weaker, is more liable to buckling. Similarly,, values of maximum SR are less for taller buildings since imperfections in workmanship in regard to verticality are likely to be more pronounced in case of taller buildings. Limiting values of SR for column is less than that of walls because a column can buckle around either of the two horizontal axes, while walls can buckle around horizontal axis only. of a masonry element v) Since slenderness increases its tendency to buckle, permissible compressive stress of an element is related to its slenderness ratio and is determined by applying Stress reduction factor (ks) as given in Table 9 of the Coda Values of Stress reduction factor have been worked out (see Appendix B of BS 56289) by taking into consideration accentricity in loading because of slenderness. Strictly speaking full value of stress reduction factor is applicable only for central one-fifth height of the member. In practice however for the sake of simplicity in design calculations, stress reduction factor is applied to the masonry throughout its storey height (Note 3 under Table 9 of the Code is an exception) and for designing masonry for a particular storey height, generally stress is worked out at the section just above the bottom support assuming it to be maximum at that section. Theoretically critical section in .a storey occurs at a height 0.6 H above the bottom support as explained later in E-4.7. Thus provisions of the Code and the design procedure in question, as commonly followed, is an approximation, that errs on the safe side. vi) Advantage of Note 3 under Table 9 of the Code is taken when considering bearing stress under a concentrated load from a beam. Bearing stress is worked out immediately below the beam and this should not exceed the Basic compressive stress of masonry (see Table 8 of the Code). Also stress in masonry is worked out at a depth of

the length of the wall or around a vertical axis as illustrated in Fig. E-14. Buckling is resisted by horizontal supports such as floors and roofs, as well as by vertical supports such as cross walls, piers and buttresses. Thus capacity of the walls to take vertical loads depends both on horizontal supports that is, floor or roof as well as on vertical supports that is, cross walls, piers and buttresses. However, for the sake of simplicity and erring on safe side, lesser of the two slenderness ratios, namely, one derived from height and the other derived from length is taken into consideration for determining permissible stresses in .masonry walls, thus ignoring strengthening effect of other supports.

SECTION E-14A Section of a Wall with Tendency to Buckle Around Horizontal Axis Under Vertical Load

PLAN

E-14B Plan View of a Wall with Tendency to Buckle Around Vertical Axis Under Vertical Load

FIG. E-14 BUCKLING OF WALLS

ii) In case of columns, there will be two values of SR as illustrated in Fig. 8 of the Code. For the purpose of design, higher of the two values is taken into account since column will buckle around that axis with reference to which the value of SR is critical, that is, greater. iii) Load carrying capacity of a masonry member depends upon its slenderness ratio. As this ratio increases, crippling stress of the member gets reduced because of limitations of workmanship and elastic instability. A masonry member may fail, either due to excessive stress or due to buckling (see Fig. E-22). According to Sahlin (p. 1003)1, for materials of normal strength with SR less than 30, the load carrying capacity of a member at ultimate load is limited by stress, while for higher value of SR failure is initiated by buckling. Further, mode of failure of a very short member having h/r ratio of less than 4 is
I2

$ from

the bottom

of the

This should beam. permissible compressive

not exceed the stress in masonry.
1

HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION--PART

SP 20(S&T) If actual stress exceeds allowable stress in either case, a concrete bed block is provided below the beam (see Solved example E-9 for design of a Bed block). vii) In accordance with 5.4.1.5 of the Code, some increase in permissible compressive stress is allowed for concentrated loads which are concentric. For Checking bearing stress under such a load, however, some authorities on masonry recommend a conservative approach-that is, either to take advantage of Note 3 of Table 9 of the Code or to take advantage of provisions of 5.4.1.5 of the Code but do not apply both the provisions of the code at the same time. In this connection reference may be made to commentary portion 4.13.6 of the Australian Standard 1640-1974s which is appended to that standard. 4.7 Eccentricity

: 1991

critical section in a storey height is at the top of bottom support and masonry is designed accordingly. In other words the design method commonly adopted includes extra self weight of 0.6H of the member and thus errs on the safe side to some extent. In view of the fact that design calculations for masonry are not very precise, the above approximation is justified. 5 STRUCTURAL 5.1 General i) Some general guidance on the design concept of load bearing masonry structures is given in the following paragraphs. ii) A building is basically types of loads, namely: subjected to two DESIGN

9

Eccentricity of vertical loading on a masonry element increases its tendency to buckling and reduces its load carrying capacity; its effect is thus similar to that of slenderness of the member. Thus combined effect of slenderness and eccentricity is taken into consideration in design calculations by the factor known as Stress reduction factor (ks) as given in Table 9 of the Code.

a) vertical loads on account of dead loads of materials used in construction, plus live loads due to occupancy; and b) lateral loads due to wind and seismic forces. While all walls in general can take vertical loads, ability of a wall to take lateral loads depends on its disposition in relation to the direction of lateral load. This could be best explained with the help of an illustration. In Fig. E-16, the wall A has good resistance against a lateral load, while wall B offers very little resistance to such load. The lateral loads acting on the face of a building are transmitted through floors (which act as horizontal beams) to cross walls which act as horizontal beams) to cross walls which act as shear walls. From cross walls, loads are transmitted to the foundation. This action is illustrated in Fig. E-17. Stress pattern in cross walls due to lateral loads is illustrated in Fig. E-18.

ii) Eccentricity caused by an ectientric vertical load is maximum at the top of a member, that is, at the point of loading and it is assumed to reduce linearly to zero at the bottom of the member that is, just above the bottom lateral support, while eccentricity on account of slenderness of a member is zero at the two supports and is maximum at the middle. Taking the combined effect of eccenrricity of loading and slenderness critical stress in masonry occurs at a section 0.6H above the bottom support as shown in Fig. E-15. For the sake of simplicity, however, in design calculations, it is assumed that

WALL

UNDER

MUM TRICITY

eX

ea

et

e, = eccentricity

due to loading. e. = eccentricity due to slenderness. e, = combined eccentricity which is at 0.6 H from bottom support.

maximum

Resistance of brick wall to take lateral loads is greater in case of wall A than that in case of wall E.

FIG. E-15 ECCENTRICITY OF LOADING ON A WALL HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

FIG. E-16 ABILITY OF A WALL TO TAKE LATERAL LOADS 1 13

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 decrease of compressive stress on the windward side. These walls should be designed `no tension' and permissible for compressive stress. It will be of interest to note that a wall which is carrying-greater vertical loads, will be in a better position to resist lateral loads than the one which is lightly loaded in the vertical direction. This point should be kept in view while planning the structure so as to achieve economy in structural design. iv) A structure should have adequate stability in the direction of both the principal axes. The so called `cross wall' construction may not have much lateral resistance in the longitudinal direction. In multi-storeyed buildings, it is desirable to adopt `cellular' or `box construction from type' consideration of stability and economy as illustrated in Fig. E-19.

BASE

OF WALL

`3'

Wind load on the facade wall I is transferred via floor slabs 2 to the cross walls 3 and thence to ground. The strength and stiffness of 2 that is floors as horizontal girder is vital; floors of lightweight construction should be used with care. FIG.

E-17 FUNCTION

OF LATERAL SUPPORT To WALL

iii) As a result of lateral load, in the cross walls there will be an increase of compressive stress on the leeward side, and
WIND LOAD ON SHADED BY

AREA IS RESISTED THE CROSS WALL

STRESS DIAGRAM

DEAD

LOAD

WIND

LOAD

COMBINED

FIG. E-18 STRESS PATTERN IN CROSS WALL 14 HANDBOOK

ACTING AS SHEAR WALL
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

ON MASONRY

SP 20(5&T)
STABLE

: 1991

UNSl

PLAN E-19A CROSS WALL CONSTRUCTION-UNSTABLE IN LONGITUDINAL DIRECTION
STABLE

This separate

wall short

will

not

resist rather

lateral to than

loading act

as

successfully

as wall lengths

2; it tends

as three

STABLE -

PLAN E-19B CELLULAR STABLE OR BOX TYPE CONSTRUCTION IN BOTH DIRECTIONS

FIG. E-19 STABILITY OF CROSS WALL AND CELLULAR (Box TYPE) CONSTRUCTION
This wall will tend to act as one long portion brickwork loading. and will be more resistant to of

v) Size, shape and location

of openings in the external walls have considerable influence on stability and magnitude of stresses due to lateral loads. This has been illustrated in Fig. E-20.

lateral

FIG.

E-20

EFFECT OF OPENINGS STRENGTH OF WALLS

ON

SHEAR

in longitudinal walls are so vi) If openings located that portions of these walls act as flanges to cross walls, the strength of the cross walls get considerably increased and structure becomes much more stable, as will be seen from Fig. E-21. load-bearing masonry a vii) Ordinarily is designed for permissible structure compressive and shear stresses (with no tension) as a vertical cantilever by accepted principles of engineering mechanics. No moment transfer is allowed for, at floor to wall connections and lateral forces are assumed to be resisted by diaphragm action of floor, roof slabs, which acting as horizontal beams, transmit lateral forces to cross walls in proportion to their relative stiffness (moment of inertia). Various modes of failure of masonry are illustrated in Fig. E-22.
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

viii) For working out stresses in various walls, it is faster to tabulate stresses floor-wise for walls .carrying greater loads. such Computations for vertical loads and lateral loads are made separately in the first instance, and the results from the two computations are superimposed to arrive at the net value of stresses. ix) In any particular floor, from practical considerations, generally, quality of bricks and mix of mortar IS kept the same throughout. Also in the vertical direction change in thickness of walls is made only at floor levels. 5.3 Load Dispersion

53.1 GenerulL Pre-1980 version of the Code PI ovided for dispersion of axial loads applied to a
I 1s

CONSTRtICTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991
STRAJGHT STRENOTH WALL INDEX -1

E-21 A BRICKWORK
IFOR ALL

RESISTING
FOUR WALLS)

SHEAR

FLANGED STRENGTH

WALL INDEX =3

E-216

BRICKWORK
(FOR

RESISTING
SHEAR

SHEAR
OF A CROSS WALL'

TWO CENTRAL

WALLS) STRENGTH

FIG. E-21 EFFECT OF FLANGES ON

PORTION UNDER TENSION

-PORTION UNDER COMPRESSION

E-22A TENSILE
VERTICAL

SPLITTING

rOF A WALL UNDER

E-22B

BUCKLING

0F

A WALL

UNDER

COMPRESSIVE

LOAD

VERTICAL

COMPRESSIVE

LOAD

FIG. E-22 VARIOUS MODES OF FAILURE OF MASONRY-(
16

Contd)
1

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 2O(S&T)

: 1991

E-22C SHEAR FAILURE CROSS WALL UNDER

OF A MASONRY LATERAL LOADING

experimental studies carried out at the University of Edinburgh, as: umption regarding even distribution of stress does not seem to have been fully substantiate. The Institute therefore recommended that angle of distribution of concentrated loads in a masonry wall should not exceed 30 degrees. This recommendation is in conformity with provisions of the corresponding German Standard (DIN 1053-1952) Swiss Standard (Technical Standard 113-1965) and the publication: `Brick and Tile Engineering 1962 by Harry C. Plummer'. In view of the above, angle of dispersion had been changed from 45" to 30" in 1980 version of the Code (see Fig. E-23). 53.2 Arching Action

EXCESSIVE MASONR EXCESSI

TENSlON

COMPRESSWE SrRESS AT TOE AND CONSEPUENT TEt4Sll.E SPUTTINO AND CRUSMNO OF MASONRY

E-22D EXCESSIVE COMPRESSIVE WALLS RESULTING IN CRUSHNG AT THE TOE UNDER LATERAL

STRESS IN CROSS OF MASONRY LOADING

FIG. E-22 VARIOUS MODES OF FAILURE OF MAXINRY

masonry wall at an angle of 4Y to the vertical, distributed uniformaly through a triangular section of the wall. This was based on provisions of B. 5. CP-Ill : Part 2 : 19702. According to Brick Institute of America4, though distribution of stress through an angle of 45" is borne out by

i) Arching in masonry is a well known phenomenon by which part of the load over an opening in the wall gets transferred to the sides of the opening. For good arching action masonry units should have good shear strength and these should be laid in proper masonry bond using a good quality mortar. Further, portions of the wall on both sides of the opening should be long enough [see E-533(i)] to serve as effective abutments for the arched masonry above the opening since horizontal thrust for the arch is to be provided by the shear resistance of the masonry at the springing level on both sides of the opening. If an opening is too close to the end of a wall, shear stress in masonry at springing level of imaginary arch may be excessive and thus no advantage can be taken of arching in masonry for design of lintels. ii) To explain the effect of arching on design of lintels and stress in masonry, let us

ANGLE

OF

DISPERSALL50 W

ANGLE

OF

DISPERSAL W

30"

w =Tixz5* W - Concentrated wtoad

w=po 2h tan30

Distributed load after dispersal at depth h from plane of application of concentrated load

FIG. E-23

DISPERSAL OF CONCENTRATED LOAD IN MASONRY

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

consider a wall of length AB with an opening of effective span PQ = L as shown in Fig. E-24 PRQ is an equilateral triangle with PQ as its base. Because of arching action, loads of floor and masonry above the equilateral triangle get transferred to the sides of the wall. Therefore lintel at PQ is designed for load of masonry contained in the triangle PRQ. To work out approximate stress in masonry in various stretches, it is assumed that: a) load from the lintel gets uniformly distributed over the supports, b) masonry and floor loads above the triangle PRQ get uniformly distributed over the stretches of masonry CD and EF at the soffit level of the lintel, CD and EF being limited in length to L/2 and over the stretches GH and JK at the floor level, limited in length to L or L-H whichever is less, H being the 2 height of top of the opening from the floor level. In case some other opening occurs between the lintel and horizontal plane 25 cm above the apex R of the triangle,

arching action gets interrupted because of inadequate depth of masonry above the triangle to function as an effective arching ring. Also if there is some other load between the lintel and horizontal plane 25 cm above the apex R of the triangle, loading on the lintel gets affected.
iii)

in case of buildings of conventional design with openings of moderate size which are reasonably concentric, some authorities on masonry recommend a simplified approach for design. In simplified approach, stress in masonry at plinth level is assumed to be uniformly distributed in different stretches of masonry, taking loadings in each stretch as indicated in Fig. E-25 without making any deduction in weight of masonry for the openings. It is assumed that the extra stresses obtained in masonry by making no deduction for openings, compensates more or less for concentrations of stresses due to openings. This approach is _ of special significance in the design of multistoreyed load-bearing structure where intervening floor slabs tend to disperse the upper storey loads more or less uniformly on the inter-opening spaces below the slabs and thus at plinth level stress in masonry, as worked out by the above approach is expected to be reasonably accurate.

EXTRA FLOOR LOAD ON STRETCH CD AND \

GH

MASONRY

LOAD

x = L OR F,

whichever

is less.

FIG. E-24 ARCHING ACTION IN MASONRY
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION--PART I

SF 20(S&T)

: 1991

ii) When location and size of opening is such that arching action can take place, lintel is designed for the load of masonry included in the equilateral triangle over the lintel as shown in ,Fig. E-26B. In case floor or roof slab falls within a part of the triangle in question or the triangle is within the influence of a concentrated load or some other opening occurs within a part of the triangle, loading on the lintel will get modified as given in (iii), (iv) and (v).
MASONRY LOAD ON LINTEL

NOTE - Loads
are considered respectively.

on Sections to be acting

A to E of the building on wall lengths a to e

FIG. E-25

5.3.3

Lintels i) Lintels over openings are designed taking into consideration arching action in masonry where feasible as explained earlier. It is a common practice to assume that length of walls on both sides of an opening should be at least half the effective span of the opening for transfer of load to sides by arch action. In case it is less, lintel should be designed for full load over the opening regardless of the height of the floor slab as shown in Fig. E-26A.

FLOOR

E-26B Effective Load when LI and L2 >, L/2 and Floor/ Roof Slab does not intercept the Equilateral friangle Over the Lintel

FLOOR LOAD ON LINTEL MASONRY LOAD ON LINTEL

iii) When stretches of wall on sides are equal to or greater than L/2 and equilateral triangle above the lintel is intercepted by the floor/roof slab, the lintel is designed for load of masonry contained in the equilateral triangle plus load from the floor falling within the triangle as shown in Fig. E-26C. iv) When stretches of wall on the sides of the opening are equal to or greater than L/I 2 with the equilateral triangle over the lintel intercepted by floor slab and another opening comes within the horizontal plane 2.5 cm above the apex of the triangle, lintel is to be designed for loads shown in Fig. E-26 D. v) When any other load is coming between the lintel and horizontal plane 25 cm above the apex of the equilateral triangle over the lintel, the latter is designed for the loads as shown in Fig. E-26E. vi) It may be clarified that in fact load coming on a lintel is indeterminate and the above suggestions for the design of lintels are based on empirical rules derived from

I

I

r]

FLOOR

E-26A

Effective
Ll<$

Load

when

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

19

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

(1)
Multiple brick-width

(2)
25.4-38.1 (10-15)

(3) 0.68

Ll ORL2 +
E-26C Effective Load when LI and LZ 2 L/2, and Equilateral Triangle Over the Lintel is Intercepted by Floor Slab Above with no Other Opening to Intercept Arch Action experrence engineering. and general principles of

Theoretical explanation for the above behaviour of masonry is that presence of vertical joints, which have a much lower the lateral tensile strength, reduces compressive stress of masonry under axial loading. Thus greater is the frequency of vertical joints, lesser is the complessive strength of masonry. Thus a 20123 cm thick brick wall (one brick-length) is weaker than a IO/ Il.5 cm brick wall of single brick-width because of presence of vertical joints in both the directions in the former. Table 8 of the Code for Basic Compressive Strength of Masonry, which is based on British Standard*, may be presumed to hold good for one bricklength or thicker walls and thus in case of half-brick load bearing walls some increase in Basic stress may be permitted at the discretion of the designer. For similar reasons, concrete blockwork masonry which has proportionately lesser vertical joints is stronger than brickwork masonry`J, though the Code at present does not make any stipulation about it. In other for high rise load-bearing countries, structure advantage of this phenomenon is taken by making use of `through-wall units' of burnt clay, thereby attaining higher permissible strength for brick masonry, and making it feasible to go high with single unit thick walls. 5.4 Permissible 5.4.1
Permissible

vii) Economy in the design of lintels may be effected by taking advantage of composite action between lintel and the masonry above it. For this purpose centering of the lintel should not be removed till both masonry (up to 25 cm above the apex of equilateral triangle above the lintel) and RCC of the lintel have gained sufficient strength so as to be able to bear stresses in the composite beam having masonry in compressive zone and RCC lintel in the tensile zone. Behaviour of composite beam in this case is anologous to that of grade beam in pile foundation. From experimental research, it has been observed that single brickwidth walls for vertical loads are stronger than multiple brick width wails as can be readily seen from the test results reproduced below (Swiss results quoted by Mark'"):
Wall Construction Wall Thiikness Relative Strength

Stresses
Compressive .factor Stress

5.4.1 .l Stress reduction

When a wall or column is subjected to an axial plus an eccentric load (see Fig. E-27) resultant eccentricity of loading (??) may be worked out as follows: w= Taking moments
Wz= .`. = _-_!%2_ WI + w2

w, + w2 AB,
W2e

about

W, X 0+

cm (in) (I) Single brick-width -do-do20

5.4.1.2 (3) 1.oo 0.89 0.80
HANDBOOK

Area

reduction

jhctor

(2) 12.7 (5) 15.2 (6) 17.8-25.4 (7-10)

i) Provision of Area reduction factor in-this Code was originally similar to that in 1970 version of British Standard Code CP 1112. When the Code was revised in 1980;upper limit of `small area' was reduced from 0.3 to 0.2 m* based on the provision in BS 5628 Part 1 : 1978'.
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

SP 20(S&T) FLOOR

: 1991

.. _ OF FLOOR

MASUNKY

LUA

.LOAD OF FLOOR B AND MASONRY LOA OF STOREY B ON LINTEL :R

STOREY

B

.;,!

,.,....,

!, :

(. . . . .-...
.:. .: .* . :.

I"

. .+*:

MASONRY LOAD OF

STOREY A
STOREY A H /

E-26D Above

Effective Load when L1 and Lz 3 L/2 and Equilateral the Lintel is Within 25 cm l(Vertically) of Another in the Upper Storey
ANOTHER LOAD WtTHlN 25cm HORIZONTAL PLANt PASSING THROUGH THE APEX OF THE EQUILATERAL TRIANGLE OR LowER\ FROM THE

Triangle Opening

ON THE

LOAD OF MASONRY EQUILATERAL TRIANGLE OVER THE LOAD FROM THE OTHER LOAD WITHIN THE INFLUENCE OF EQUILATERAL TRIANGLE OVER THE LINTEL ASSUMED UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED AND DISPERSE AT AN ANGLE OF 30� FROM THE VERTICAL

E-26E

Effective Load when L, and L2 2 L/2 and the Equilateral Triangle is Within the Influence of Another Load FIG. E-26 EFFECTIVE LOADS ON LINTELS FOR VARIOUS SITUATIONS
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

e

F-i
-----B

e

in permissible compressive 5.4.1.4 Increase stresses allowed for eccentric vertical and/or lateral loads under certain conditions

9 Eccentric

A --

---_

L---t----i
WI = W2 = W = T = axial load. eccentric load at distance resultant load at distance resultant eccentricity.

I

1

I
`8 from centre line. `d' from centre line.

`FIG. E-27

RESULTANT ECCENTRICITY

vertical load (vertical load plus lateral load in case of free standing walls) on masonry causes bending stress in addition to axial stress. It has been found that masonry can take 25 percent greater compressive stress, when it is due to bending than when it is due to pure axial load, because maximum stress in case of bending occurs at the extreme fibres and then it gets reduced linearly while in axial compression, stress is more or less uniform throughout the section. For similar reasons permissible compressive stress in concrete for beams is greater than that in columns subjected to vertical loads. This rule of higher Permissible compressive stress when due to bending can also be explained from the consideration that beyond elastic limit redistribution of stresses takes place because of plasticity and thus stress block is in practice more or less rectangular in shape instead of triangular as is normally assumed in accordance with the elastic theory. This enables the member to take greater load.

ii) Area reduction factor due to `small area' of a member is based on the concept that there is statistically greater probability of failure of a small section due to substandard units as compared to a .large element. However American and the Canadian Codes do not include any provision for smallness of area. The reason for this seems to be that factor of safety/load factors inherent in a Code should be enough to cover the contingency mentioned above for this provision. In the Australian Code (1974)8 and draft 1SO standard (l987)ii limits for smallness of area in this context are taken 0.13 and 0.10 m2, respectively. Strictly s eaking necessity for this provision in the 8 ode arises when there is appreciable variation in strength of individual units. In view of the fact that being masonry units strength of manufactured at present in our country can appreciably vary, the necessity for this provision is justified in our code. 5.4.1.3 Shape reduction factor

ii) When loading on a masonry element has some eccentricity, the Code lays down the design approach for various ranges of eccentricity ratios namely (a) eccentricity 1 ratio of - or less; (b) eccentricity ratio 24 I 1 exceeding - but not exceeding 6 , and (c) 24 eccentricity ratio exceeding k Basis of the below (see

design approach a/so Fig. E-28). a) Eccentricity'

is explained ratio of

1 or less24 Refering to Fig. E-28B, I#' is total vertical load per unit of wall with resultant eccentricity r, t is thickness of wall,fi and fiare the stresses at the two faces of the wall. and f;n is Permissible compressive stress for axial loading. .f;=f+" f+" Z Substituting values of A, M and Z

Z

Shape modification factor is based on the general principle that lesser the number of horizontal joints in masonry, greater its strength or load carrying capacity. It has, however, been found from experimental studies that for units stronger than 15 N/ mm2, extent of joints in masonry does not have any significant effect on strength of masonry because of use of the comparatively high strength mortar that normally goes with highstrength units.
22 HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

W
e =t
e'= -

t

6

6

c=o
W=S,t

t

6
w I,

= 1.25 fc
=1.25Xt 2

-L
fC

T

-r

-L fc
STRESS
FIG. E-28D

FIG. E-28A

e= t/24 j-1 = 1.25 fc fc = 1.25 z--c2w z 1

fc

f*= 0.75
w=ji t

j-c

r 3 2(

FIG. E-28B t/24 < e'< t/6 f, = 1.25 fc
FIG. E-28E

W=

2

FIG. E-28C
W= fc = P= I= permissible load per unit length of wall. permissible compressive stress of masonry. resultant eccentricity of loading, thickness of wall. CHANGE
IN

FIG. E-28 VARIATION IN STRESS DISTRIBUTIO.N WITH ECCENTRICITY OF LOADING HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART
I

23

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

for

eccentricity

ratio

4

= 1 cc?ipresIiII

cl Eccentricity

ratio exceeding

$ (see Fig.

since JZ is equal t stres J;,

to axiil

As we allow 25 percent additional compressive stress in case of eccentric it follows that maximum loading, compressive stress 6) for eccentricity ratio up to & does not exceed axial

E-28E)-We had seen from (b) above that when eccentricity ratio reaches the I value.-, stress is zero on one face; when 6 -1 this ratio exceeds - there will be tension 6 on one face rendering ineffective a part of the section of the masonry and stress distribution in this case would thus be as shown in Fig. E-28E. Average compressive stress: f =UO_fl a --2 Since fi

2 to 1.25 fc

has to be limited 1.25 h

compressive stress by more than 25 percent which is permitted by the code. Therefore for eccentricity ratio of $ or

fi; =

2

less, it is not necessary to compute and add bending stress to the axial stress. The designer is expected to work out only axial compressive stress for the purpose of design and see that it does not exceed Permissible compressive stress for axial load. .'. Design load, W =A t & but not E-28D)

The design load Win this case will be equal to average compressive stress multiplied by length ab of the stress triangle abc. Since for equlibrium, the load must pass through the centroid of the stress triangle abc and the load is at t a distance of - - 7from the compressive 2 face, we get ab ---=-3 t 2T

b) Eccentricity
exceeding Bending

ratio exceeding

i (see Fig. E-28C and We X 6 stress = t?; l.(substituting 6

Thus X ab in

design

load,

W = average

stress

for eccentricity ratio the above equations), f;JY+W-2W _t t p$_!Lo t

= 1.25 xfc 2

x 3 (t - q

t

From the above equation we can see that theoretically design load W is zero when Z= t/2. However from practical considerations E should be limited to t/3. iii) In Appendix C of the Code, use of concrete bed block has been suggested in 3.2 and 3.3. It seems necessary to add that in case some tension is likely to develop in masonry beta use of eccentricity of .concentrated loads, the bed blocks should be suitably reinforced and these should be long enough so as to prevent tensile cracks in masonry due to eccentricity of loading. 5.1.2 Permissible Tensile Stress

Thus on one face compressive stress gets doubled and on the other face it is fully nullified by tensile stress and there is no tension in the cross section. For loading with eccentricity ratio between.--!- and !24 6' we have to limit the maximum stressfi to 1.25 fc j;=F(l+y)=l.25f. ... Design Load,

In accordance with Note 2 of the clause tensile stress up to 0.1 N/mm2 and 0.07 N/m@ in the masonry of boundry/compound walls is permitted when mortar used `in masonry is of M 1 and M2 grade respectively or better. This relaxation has been made to effect economy in the
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

24

SP 20(S&T) design of the boundry/compound walls since there is not much risk to life and property in the event of failure of such walls. 5.4.3 Permissible Shear Stress

: 1991

In 1969 version of the Code, provision for Permissible value of `shear stress (based on B.S. CP 111 : Part 2 : 19702) was 0.15 N/mm* (1.5 kg/cm?) for walls built in mortar not leaner than I : I : 6 cement : lime : saad mortar. In the 1981 version of the Handbook it had been brought out that experimental research on the subject had proved that when masonry is preloaded, that is, when it ids having vertical load, it is capable of r&sting greater amount of shear force. Australian Code AS : 1640-19748 had also reflected this already. Based on that in 1980 version of IS 1905, value of Permissible shear stress was suitably modified and was related to amount of preloading, subject t6 a maximum of 0.5 N/mm* and minimum of 0.1 N/mm?. 5.4.4 If there is tension in any part of a section of masonry, that part is likely to be cracked and thus canndt be depended upon for resisting any shear force. The clause is based on this consideration. This situation is likely to occur in masonry elements subjected to bending. 5.5 Design 5.5.1 Load 5.5.1.1 Thickness/Cross Columns Section Subjected to Vertical

common practice since long to build such walls to heights much greater than 0.86 m. It was further seen from Table 9 of 1980 version of the Code (based on BSCP 121 : Part 1 : 197312) that height to thickness ratio of free-standing walls given in relation to certain wind speeds could not be sustained unless flexural moment of resistance of the wall is taken into consideration. From a study of practices being followed in some other countries in this regard, it is evident that, for design of free-standing walls, it is appropriate to take into consideration flexural moment of resistance of masonry according to the grade of mortar used for the masonry. ii) Method of working out thickness of freestanding walls by taking advantage of flexural moment of resistance of the wall has been given in Solved Example E-13. It would be seen that self-weight of a free standing wall reduces tensile stress in masonry caused by lateral load that is, wind pressure. Thus heavier the masonry units, lesser is the design thickness of wall for a particular height. It is, therefore, advantageous to build compound walls in stone masonry in place of brick masonry when stone is readily available and thickness has to be greater than one brick. Also it should be kept in view that use of light-weight hollow units such as bricks/ blocks in free-standing walls has obvious structural disadvantage. iii) As a general rule, a straight compound wall of uniform thickness is not economical except for low heights or in areas of low wind pressure. Therefore, when either height is appreciable or wind pressure is high, economy in the cost of the wall could be achieved by staggering, zigzagging or by providing diaphragm walls. Instances of design of staggered and diaphragm compound walls are given in Solved Examples E-14 and E-15. It can be seen that for wind pressure of 750 N/m*, maximum height of a 23 cm thick brick wall using grade Ml mortar can be 1.5 m for a straight wall, 3.2 m, for a staggered wall and 4.0 m for a diaphragm wall. 5 .S .2.2 Retaining walls

Walls and Solid

walls

Brick work is generally finished by either pointing or plastering and with that in view, it is necessary to rake the joints while the mortar is green, in case of plaster work raking is intended to provide key for bending the plaster with the background. Strictly speaking thickness of masonry for of design in these cases is actual purposes thickness less depth of raking. However in case of design of masonry based on permissible tensile stress (as for example design of a free standing wall), if walls are plastered over (plaster of normal thickness i.e. 12 to 15 mm) with mortar of same grade as used in masonry or M2 grade-whichever is stronger or are flush pointed with mortar of Ml grade or stronger, raking may be ignored. 5.5.2 Walls and Lateral Loads 5.5.2.1 Columns walls Mainly Subjected to

Free standing

i) 1980 version of the Code provided for design of a free-standing wall as a gravity structure that is, without placing reliance on the flexural moment of resistance of the wall due to tensile strength of masonry. It was seen that this approach to design resulted in fairly thick walls and maximum height of an unplastered 23 cm thick wall (one-brick thick of conventional size) could be only about 0.86 m while it has been a
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

This clause is similar to 5.5.2.1 of the Code and method of design of a retaining wall, based on the permissible amount of tension in masonry, is similar to that for a free standing wall. 5.5.3 Walls and Columns I+`t~ll as Latera; Loads Subjected to Vertical as

i) Longitudinal walls of tall single storey wide span buildings with trussed roofs such as industrial buildings, godowns, sports halls, gymnasia, etc, which do not have any
1 25

CONSTHIICTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 information regarding use of diaphragm walls ma refer to `Brick Diaphragm Walls in Tall s"mgle Storey Buildings' by W. G. Curtin and G. Shawl3 5.5.4 Walls Subjected to In-Plane Vertical Loads (Shear Walls) Bending and

intermediate cross walls other than gable walls, tend to be very thick and uneconomical if designed as solid walls, since vertical load is not much and the lateral load due to wind predominates. This would be particularly so when the trusses are not adequately braced at the tie beam level so as to be able to act as horizontal girders for transmitting the lateral loads to the gable walls. In this case, the walls act as simple cantilevers and flexural stres; at hti;et;+e will be quite high. trusses are adequately braced to provide girder action and are suitably anchored to the gable walls, longitudinal walls would function as propped cantilevers, thus resulting in reduction in bending considerable moments on the long walls as shown in Fig. E-29. ii) In UK, masonry diaphragm walls have been adopted in wide-span tall, single storey buildings and these have proved very economical and successful. Principle of a diaphragm wall is similar to that of a rolled steel lrjoist that is, placing more material at places where stresses are more. As a result f ratio of a diaphragm wall is

A cross wall which functions as a stiffening wall to an external load-bearing wall, is subjected to in-plane bending.' If it is also supporting a floor/roof load, it is subjected to vertical load in addition to In-plane bending. The design procedure in this case is given in Example E-l 1. It should be kept in view ,that such a wall when subjected to vertical load gets strengthened, since vertical load reduces or nullifies tension due to bending and also increases the value of permissible shear stress (sre a/so comments on 5.4.3). 5.5.5 Non-Load Bearing Walls

much higher than that of a solid wall, thereby resulting in economy. iii) A typical arrangement for laying bricks in a diaphragm wall is shown in Fig. E-30. By varying the depth and spacing of ribs in terms of brick units, designer can obtain an arrangement that meets the requirement in any particular case. Placing of ribs is consideration that the decided on projecting flange length on either side of rib does not exceed 6 times the thickness of the flange. Thus rib-spacing is limited to 12 tr + t, where tr and t, stand for flange and rib thickness respectively. Brick layout in diaphragm wall is planned such that proper masonry bond is obtained with the least number of cut bricks. Designers interested in getting more detailed

bearing panel and curtain walls, if not designed on the basis .of guidelines given in Appendix D of the Code, may be apportioned with the help of Table E-5 which is extracted from Recommended Practices for Engineered Brick Masonry4. The table is based on the assumption that wall is simply supported only' in one direction either verticahy or horizontally without any opening or other interruptions. Where the wall is supported in both directions, the allowable distance between lateral supports may be increased such that the sum of the horizontal and vertical spans between supports does not exceed three times the permissible distance permitted for supporting in the vertical direction. given in Appendix D of the ii) Guidelines Code are based on some research in which without panels rectangular mainly openings were tested. If openings are small that is, hole-in-wall type (see E4.1 Note), there would be no appreciable effect on strength of panels, since timber or metal frames that are built into the openings compensate to a great extent for the loss of
m ,-TRUSS BRACED PROP

9 Non-load

=xX I 31
E-29A
26

r

TRUSS NOT BRACED

P

l%Ki:
Trusses Not Braced FIG. E-29 EFFECT OF BRACING
HANDBOOK

E-29B Trusses
OF TRUSSED ON MASONRY ROOFS ON

Braced

BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

DESIGN

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

FIG.

E-30 TYPICAL

BRICK

LAYING ARRANGEMENT FOR DIAPHRAGM WALLS

Table E-5 Span
Design Wind

to Thickness

Ratio

of Non-Load

Bearing

Panel/Curtain

Walls

Vertical Span A Gement-Lime Mortar I : I : 6 (2) 38 27 22 19 17 15 Cement-Lime' Mortar I : `/2: 4% (3) 43 30 25 21 19 I7 to any wind pressure a minimum design that is, internal wind pressure Gkment-lime Mortar I : (4) 54 38 31 27 24 22

Horizontal Span A

Pressure
kg/m* (1) 25 50 15 100 125 150 NOTEwith Partition walls which of the above

I :6

Cement-Limd Mortar I : % : 4% (5) 61 43 35 30 27 25 . walls may be apportioned

are not subjected Table by assuming

partition

the help

of 250 N/ml.

strength of the panel due to the openings. However, when the openings are large or when the openings cannot be categorised as of `hole-in-wall' type, it may often be possible to design the panel by dividing it into sub-panels as shown in Fig. E-31.

In situations where design by forming sub-panels is not feasible, panel may be analysed using theory of flat plates (for example, yield line theory or finite element method) taking into consideration end conditions as appropriate.

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

27

SP 20(S&T)
A

: 1991
0
C

D

I

I

I

I

insulation, sound insulation to rain penetration.

and resistance

E

1 !EP.N*III*
____ _________
I I I I

ii) Resistance to Fire-The subject of fire resistance of buildings has been dealt with Indian comprehensively in appropriate Standards'4 and also in Part IV of the National Building Code of India 1983 which may be referred to in this regard.

J K L

M

=
A

I3

C

D

iii) Tlwrmal Insulation ~ Thickness of. walls in case of non-industrial buildings from consideration of thermal insulation should be worked out for the climatic conditions of the place where a building is to be basis of IS the constructed on 3792 : 197815. Even though no Indian Standard has yet been published on the subject for industrial buildings, data and information given. in the above Indian Standard would be of some assistance in deciding the thickness of walls from consideration of thermal insulation. iv) Sound Insulation qf .Value qf' Wall

J

KK OR

L

L n

M

a) Indian

Standard IS 1950 : 196216 lays down sound insulation standards of walls for non-industrial buildings such as dwellings, schools, hospitals and office buildings. Salient features of that standard are summarised below for ready information. thickness/specifications of walls, it is necessary to consider, firstly the level of ambient noise in the locality where building is to be constructed depending upon intensity of traffic and type of occupancy of the building. Noise level of traffic varies from 70 decibels (abbreviated as dB) for light traffic to 90 dB for heavy traffic. Requirements of sound insulation for different buildings from consideration of ambient noise level and occupancy are given in Table E-6. These values are applicable to external walls for reducing out-door air-borne noise.

b) While deciding

J

I
l2cYYl

M Denotes Denotes indicate

freeedge.
simply span supported ring modes edge. of subpmek.

_ Arrow,

FIG. E-31 DESIGN OF PANEL HAVING A LARGE OPENING 6 GENERAL 6.1 Methods REQUIREMENTS of Construction

Table E-6 Requirements of Sound Insulation Values (dB) of External Walls of Buildings Against Air-borne Noise [Clause
SI No. Type of Building

Information regarding constructional aspects of masonry based on IS Codes (relating to materials of construction, Codes of practice, etc) is given'in a classified form in Part 2 of this Handbook for the convenience of the designers, architects and builders. 6.2 Minimum Considerations Thickness of Walls Other than Structural From

6.2(iv)

(b)]
For Quiet Locations (70 dB Level) (4)
25 25 30 20

For Noisy Locations (90 dB Level)

(1)
I. 2.
3. 4.

(2)
Dwellings Schools Hospitals Offices

(31
45 45 50 40

i) Requirements considerations stability have regard to
28

for thickness of walls from other than strength and been discussed below with fire resistance, thermal
HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(54&T) : 1991 c) Sound insulation values of party and internal wallls decided on are considerations of levels of indoor noise emanating from adjacent buildings or adjacent rooms and these should be as given in Tab16 E-7. Table E-7 Sound Insulation Values and Internal Wails si
No. Situation

e) Based on the data given in Table E-8, insulation values of brick walls plastered on both sides work out as in Table E-9. Table E-9 Sound Insulation Values of Masonry Walls Plastered on Both Sides
Thickness of Wall (cm) 7.7 IO 11.5 20 23 dB 45.1 41.3 48.0 51.3 52.2

for Party

Sound Insulation Values dB (3) 50 f)

(1) I. Between house rooms Elsewhere flats

(2) living/ bed room in one or flat and living/bed in another between houses or

NOTE---Thickness of nominal and exclusive

walls given of thickness

above are of phaster.

2.

40

3.

Between one room and another the same house or flat Between teaching school rooms in a

in

30

As a general guide, it may be taken that for noise insulation a one-brick wall (20 or 23 cm thick/plastered on both sides as external wall'and a `/2 brick wall (10 or 1 I .5 cm thick) plastered on both sides as internal walls are adequate.

4.

40

5.

`Between one room and another
in office Between one ward in a hospital: Normal Extra quiet and another

30

v) Resistance to Rain Penetration Recommendations for thickness of walls of different types of masonry from to rain consideration of resistance penetration based generally 01, 1s 2212 : 196217 are given in Table E-10. 6.3 Workmanship

6.

40 45

Common

defects of workmanship mixing water of mortar; cement of

in masonry

are:

a) Improper
d) Sound insulation values of non-porous homogeneous rigid constructions, such as a well plastered brick/stone masonry or concrete wall, vary as the logarithm of weight per unit area and thus increase with the thickness of wall. These values are given in Table E-8. Table E-8 Sound Insulation Values Constructions
Sound

b) Excessive
cl Incorrect
bricks;

ratio

of mortar; rate of

adjustment thick

suction

d) Unduly
e) Uneven

bed joints; bed joints; and laying.

or furrowed

. f-1Voids in perpend
of Solid

joints;

g) Disturbance

of bricks

after

Weight Per rnz of Wall Area kg S 25 50 100 I50 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 600

Insulation Value dB 22.8 33.2 37.6 42.0 44.1 46.4 47.9 49.1 50.0 50.9 51.6 52.3 53.6

Improper mixing of mortar and excessive water cement ratio may reduce the strength of mortar to half, thereby affecting the strength of masonry. Suction rate of bricks has a very pronounced effect on the strength of brick-work and therefore it should be controlled carefully. Water absorbed from mortar by bricks leaves cavities in the mortar, which get filled with air and thereby reduce the strength of mortar:. Brick work built with. saturated bricks develop poor adherence between brick and mortar. Thus flexural strength as well as shear strength of such brickwork would be low. At the same time such a brickwork will be prone to excessive cracking due to high shrinkage and thus rain-resisting qualities of the brickwork will be poor. British Ceramic Association have suggested a suction rate of 2 kg/ mini m2, while in accordance with Canadian Code7 and American
1 29

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Table E-10 Suitability (R-Recommended of Walls for Different Exposures and NR-Not Recommended)
Type Gheltered of Exposure h Moderate (4) Severe' (5)

SI No.

PmtJcuJars of Wall

(I) I.

(2)
Brick masonry-burnt clay or sand-lime a) 1 brick wall-not plastered b) I brick wall-plastered both sides c) 1% brick wall-not plastered d) 1% brick wall-plastered both sides Stone masonry a) Minimum thickness b) Minimum thickness

(3)

R R R R

NR R R R

NR NR NR R

2.

35 cm-not plastered 35 cm-plastered both

sides

R R

R R

NR R

3.

Concrete block masonry 20 cm minimum a) Not plastered b) Plastered on both sides Stone
blocks-20 cm,

thickness R R NR R NR NR

4.

Min thickness R R R NR R R NR NR R

a) Not plastered b) Plastered both 5.
NOTES

sides

Cavity

wall of 25 cm, Min thickness

1 Use of cement-lime or lime mortar in place of cement mortar appreciably improves the resistance of a wall to rain. It is also'important that joints in masonry are fully filled with mortar. 2 Sheltered conditions' are those where wall is protected by overhangs or adjoining buildings or rainfall is low (less than 750 mm per year and is generally not accqmpanied by strong winds. `Severe conditions' occur when wall is subjected to strong winds and persistant rain and there is no sheltering action of overhangs or adjoining buildings, or rain fall is heavy (exceeding 1 000 mm). `Moderate condition'obtains when exposure conditions are between `Sheltered'and `Severe'conditions.

Practice6 adjustment in suction rate is required, initial absorption rate exceeds 1 kg/min/m*.

if

The Commentary on Australian Codes specifies that suction of bricks should be between 1.0 to 3.0 kg/ min/ m2. Optimum suction rate depends on atmospheric conditions, namely, temperature and humidity as well as certain properties of mortar used in masonry. It is desirable that suitable provision for suction rate should be made in our Code after obtaining sufficient data from experimental studies. Strength of masonry gets reduced as the thickness of bed joints increases. Taking normal thickness of bed joints as 10 `mm, an increase of 3 mm in thickness of bed joints may reduce the strength of brick masonry by 15 percent and vice
versa.

position of bricks after laying becomes necessary bricks as well as mortar should be completely removed and brickwork redone with fresh mortar.
Norr:~~~Sdme in the mortar masons have the habit of making a furrow of the bed joint in the middle parallel to the

face, before laying a course of bricks, so as to lessen squeezing out of mortar from the bed joints on pressing into position.

This

practice

should

be avoided. Deformation and Cracking

6.4 Joints to Control

BIS has published a Handbook on `Causes and Prevention of Cracks in Buildings". This book would be of considerable help to designers, architects, engineers and builders for controlling and prevention of cracks in masonry. 6.6 Corbelling i) Limitations of a corbel have been illustrated in Fig. E-32. With these limitations, minimum slope of corbelling (angle measured from the horizontal to the face of. the corbelled surface) would work out to 63O, when using modular bricks with header courses in the corbelled portion. ii) Load on a corbel has very high eccentricity. It is, therefore, necessary to exercise great
ON MASONRY DESlGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

Experiments conducted in other countries indicate that uneven or furrowed joints can reduce strength of brickwork up to about 33 percent. Thus, this is rather a serious defect in masonry construction. Inadequately filled vertica'l joints, substantially lower the rain resisting property of walls. Disturbance of bricks after laying affect the bond strength as well as shear strength of brickwork and therefore should be avoided. If adjustment in
30 HANDBOOK

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

X<-

h
2

I XQ-

3

X<-

d
3

x = allowable projection of one unit. X = total allowable horizontal projection

of

corbel. I = nominal wall thickness (actual-plus thickness thickness of one joint) h = nominal unit height (actual height plus thickness of one joint). d = nominal bed depth of unit (actual bed depth of unit plus thickness of joint). 0 = slope of corbel (angle measured from the horizontal to the face of the corbelled surface).

FIG. E-32 LIMITATION
caution in the use of corbelling in buildings since eccentricity in loads appreciably reduces the permissible compressive stress in masonry. As it is not feasible to make

OF A CORBEL

IN

MASONRY

precise calculations of actual stress in the corbelled portion of masonry, the Code provides for some empirical rules to limit the stress to within safe limits.

ANNEX
WORKED EXAMPLES ON DESIGN

H-l
OF STRUCTURAL MASONRY

(In the solved examples which follow, numerical values have been liberally rounded off with a view to simplifying calculation work. Also, since calculations relating to masonry cannot be very in computation have recise, approximations are not Izeen made when such approximations likely to affect the end results. Emphasis in the solutions is more on practical results than on arithmetical accuracy.) Example 1 : Effective Height, Effective Length, Effective Thickness and Slenderness Ratio of Walls and Columns In a double storeyed building walls are 20 cm thick; clear height of floors is 3.0 m; plinth is 0.7 m above the foundation footing, floor and roof are of RCC 12 cm thick, door height is 2.1 m, window height is 1.5 m and plan of the building is as shown in Fig. E-33. Work out effqctive height, and thickness effective length, effective slenderness ratio of walls and columns of First and Second floors.
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

I . &/rective

Height

a) First ,floor Actual height H = 0.7 + 3.0 + 0.06 = 3.76 m A, B, C, D, E, J and M are all walls, havmg length more than 4 times thickness and thus: Effective height, h = 0.75 H = 0.75 X 3.76 = 2.82 m In case of F, K and N wall, even though length is less than 4 t, these are not to be treated as columns, because they are supported on one side by cross walls. Their height, therefore, effective will be
1 31

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

:

All dimensions

in metres

FIG. E-33 2. Effective
Length of Walls

determined 2.82 m.

as in the case of wall and will be length is less than by definition; thus as
H + 0.25 H,

Brickbl'ord G-Since 41, it is a column per 4.3.3:

Effective length floor and second
Wall A

of walls will be same in first floor. on one end and end is supported by

It

h = 0.75

= 0.75 X 3.76 + 0.25 X 2.1

discontinuous cross walls. ... I

is continuous on the other = 0.9 L = 0.9 X 4.4 = 3.96 m

= 3.34 m
BrickLtlork

in length, horizontal Effective

being less than 4 t and is supported in both the directions by RCC beam/slab. height h=H = 3.76 m in both directions. is thus:

P is a column

Ma//

Bm

supported ... 1

It is continuous by cross walls. =0.8 L = 0.8 X 4.4 = 3.52 m

on both.ends

and

is

II's// C It is discontinuous on one side and continuous on the other and is supported by cross walls on both sides.

b) Second

.floor H = 0.06 + 3.0 + 0.06

... 1

= 3.12 m /I forA,
B, C, D, E, F, J, K, M and

=0.9 L = 0.9 X 3.0 = 2.7 m on one side and has on the other side which is taller than = 1.5 X 3.0 = 4.5 m in both sides,

N

Il'all Dpm It is discontinuous

= 0.75 H
= 0.75 X 3.12

an opening 0.5 H.
... I

= 2.34 m
h for

G = 0.75 X 3.12 + 0.25 X 2.1 = 2.87 m
P in both =H = 3.12 m

M'LI//E -- This wall is discontinuous but is braced by cross walls. .*. 1
Bricknwrk = =iO

h for

directions

m wall, is free
AND

taller

than

F-This 0.5 H
DESIGN

because on one

of opening end and is
I

32

HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

CONSTRUCTION--PART

SP 20(S&T) supported by discontinuous. ... 1 cross =2 wall
L

: 1991

on

the

other

end

is

follows:
Walls A and B : +3 w pS _ -- 4.4 0.19 W, = 23 more than 20, Stiffening

= 2 x 0.7

= 1.4 m It has no support on either side and thus slenderness `for this element will be governed by its height.
Brickbtvrk Brickuvrk J--- Same K-This Hrickwwrk G--

This

being k,=

CO-efficient

as brickwork

G.
Walls

supported other. ... I

is free at one end and by a cross wall but continuous at the = 1.5 L = 1.5 x 0.7 = 1.05 m

1
6 3
3.0

C and

t P=
tw

SP WP

0.19 = 15 approximately

~~~`I~heelement K has been taken as continuous on one etid, because length of wall between cross wall and opening is more than
NOTE

k, = 1.2 Wall M: t, _ 0.40 + 0.095 0.19 = 2.6 say 2.5

H 3 _=_ 8 8 = 0.37 m
Wall M--The wall is continuous on one side and discontinuous on the other. On one side it is supported by a cross wall which is more than

tw -

SP WP

-

2.0

0.19 = 10.5 = 10 (say)

H=3=060
5 in length, 5 being .

m

k, =

1.2 + 1.4 2

0.70 - 0.095 = 0.605

m. 4. Slenderness

= 1.3 (By interpolation) On the other side, length of cross wall is less than H/5 and thus this side is not adequately supported. The brickwork is thus supported and continuous on one side and free on the other, thus
1=1.5 L =1.5X2 Ratio

We may tabulate values of effective height, effective length, effective thickness, and stiffening co-efficient for each element of brickwork worked out earlier and then calculate values of slenderness ratio as in Table E-l 1. Example 2 : Working out Resultant Eccentricity

=3.0
Brickbtlork i?i-

m

supported

This element is discontinuous and on one end and free at the other, thus 1=2
L = 2 x 0.40 = 0.80 m

Column

P : Same

A masonry wall, 20 cm thick (see Fig. E-34) carries an axial load 27 kN/m from wall above and an eccentric load 16 kNjm from RCC floor acting at a distance 4.75 cm from the centre line of the wall. Determine the resultant eccentricity of loading and eccentricity ratio.
Solutior7

as G.

3. lQ"ective

Thickness

Let IV be the total Resultant eccentricity Taking moments w.?= about

vertical load of all loads. the centre

and

r

the

Assume joints are not raked. Actual thickness will therefore be 19 cm. From examination of the plan we find that walls A, B, C, E and M are stiffened by cross walls. Thus effective thickness will be actual thickness multiplied by Stiffening coefficient. In all other cases. effective thickness will be same as actual thickness. Stiffening coefficient of the walls A, B, C, E and M in accordance with Table 3 of the Code will be as
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

line of wall

w, X 0 + wz X 4.75

(27 + 16)x 103~= 27 x f03 X 0 + 16 X lo3 X 4.75 v= 16 X IO3 X 4.75 43 x IO3 = 1.77 cm
I 33

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Table E-11 Values of Slenderness Ratio
Remarks SR (9) 12.3 12.3 10.3 12.3 10.3 7.4 15.1 12.3 5.5 0.5 4.2 16.4 ) (10) Value of SR shown in the table is the one that is to be taken into consideration for design

Brickwork Element /h (1) A
B

Fist I

Floor, I = 0.19 A k. (4) 1.0

Second Floor, 1 = 0.19 h

SR>
(5) 14.8 14.8 12.4 14.8 12.4 7.4 17.6 14.8 5.5 11.4 4.2 19.8

`h (6) 2.34 2.34 2.34 2.34 2.34 2.34 2.87 2.34 2.34 2.34 2.34 3.12

I (7) 3.96 3.52 2.7 2.7 3.0 1.4

kn (8)

(2) 2.82 2.82 2.82 2.82 2.82 2.82 3.34 2.82 2.82 2.82 2.82 3.76

(3) 3.96 3.52 2.7 4.5 3.0 1.4

I
1.2 I 1.2

I I
1.2 I 1.2 I

C
D

E F G
J

1
I I I 1.3 I I I

I
I .05 3.0 0.80 I I I.3 I 1

K M N P NOTES 1 In case

I .05 3.0 0.80

of walls

SR=

h rXor;

and

for design

lesser of the two values axes, greater

is considered. in design.

2 In case of columns

if SR is different

for the two horizontal

of the two values of SR is considered

and clear height between slabs is 3.0 m. If the wall has an axial load of 71.5 kN/ m at the base, inclusive of self-weight, what should be the crushing strength of bricks and grade of mortar for the wall. Wall is 4 m long between cross walls and bricks used are of modular size. Assume that there are no openings junction openings with in cross cross in the wall within H of its 8 walls and there are no walls within -

of their 5 junctions with the load bearing wall under consideration. Assume that two ends of wall are discontinuous and joints are not raked.

H

Solurion
W, = 27 kN/m Wz = 16

Effective

height, h = 0.75

kN!m

H

w= w,+ w2=43 kN/m FIG. E-34

= 0.75 (3 + 0.12)
= 2.34 m t= 19 cm

Resultant

eccentricity

ratio,

SR=!! 1

i? 1.77 - = = 0.09 t 19 =Example Koad 3 : Design of a Wall Carrying Axial 2.34 0.19 = 12.3
NOTE --Since cross walls are more than 0.19 X 20 = 3.80 m apart, value of stiffening co-efficient as per Table 6 of the code will be equal to one. ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

A load bearing brick masonry wall of a building is 20 cm thick, is laterally supported by RCC slabs at top and bottom, which are 12 cm thick each
34 HANDBOOK

SP 20(S&T) Effective length, this will be:

: 1991

l=L = 4.0 m
(Case at Sl. No. 3 of Table 5 of the Code) Since effective height is less than effective Icngth, SR based on height will control the design. Stress reduction factor ks with zero eccentricity (from Table 9 of the Code for SR 12.3, by interpolation) = o 84 _ (0.84 - 0.78) X 0.3 2 = 0.84 - 0.01 = 0.83 Compressive stress in masonry

k, = 0.70 + 1.5A = 0.70 + 1.5 X 0.114 = 0.87 Stress reduction factor for zero eccentricity and SR : 19.8 from Table 9 of Code by interpolation is = o 67 _ (0.67 - 0.62) X 0.2 2 = 0.665 Compressive stress Z---Z in masonry

W A

44x
0.114x

lo3 lo4

= 38.6 N/cm2 = 0.386 N/mm2 For Shape modification factor equal to 1, Basic compressive stress of masonry in question is to be 0.386 = 0.665 X 0.87 = 0.67 N/mm2 From Table 8 of the Code it is seen that strength of bricks in this case should be 7.5 N/mm'. Height to breadth ratio 0.9 =-=l 0.9 Thus from Table lO+k, = 1.1 and value Compressive stress should thus be 0.67 = 0.6 Nf tntn> 1.1 and grade of mortar for this Basis Compressive stress (vide Table 8) should be Ml and masonry in question for element P would thus be : 7.5 - M 1. Example 5 : Design of a Wall Carrying Eccentric Load, Less than L 24 If load at the top of wall in case of Example 4 is acting at a distance of 0.7 cm from the centre line of the wall, design the brick masonry for the wall. Eccentricity Ratio Being of Basis of modular bricks

= 71.5 X lo3 19 X 100

.= 37.6 kg/cm2 = 0.376 N/mm*

With Shape modification factor = 1, Basic Compressive stress of masonry _ 0.376 0.83 = 0.45 N/mm* Referring to Table 8 of Code we find that .bricks of strength 5.0 N/mm2 are required if the bricks have height to width ratio equal to 0.75. Since modular bricks are used which have height to width ratio of 1.0, value of Shape modification factor (from Table 10 of the Code) equals to 1.2. Thus Basic Compressive =- 0.45 1.2 = 0.38 N/mm2 Referring to Table 8 of the Code again, masonry required is-bricks of 5 N/mm* strength and mortar of M3 grade. Example 4 : Design of an Axially Length Wall of a Double Storeyed If masonry element carries a load of 44 load, what should grade of mortar for that joints are not Solulion Length of masonry element as per plan Loaded Short Building stress required

P in first floor of Example 1 kN at the base inclusive of self be the strength of bricks and masonry in question? Assume raked.

SoluIion :
Eccentricity ratio = s 0.7

= 0.6 m As length is less than 4 times its thickness, the element by definition is a column. SR for this column, as worked out in Example 1 is 19.8. Area of P in plan = 0.19 X 0.6 = 0.114 m2. The area being less than 0.2 m* (see 5.4.1.2 of the Code). Area Reduction factor (k,) will be applicable and
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

= 0.037 Since this is less than & it is not necessary to

work out bending stress on account of eccentricity as per Note below of 5.4.1 of the Code. Thus axial stress in masonry at the base will govern the
1 3s

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION--PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 = 22 N/cm* = 0.22 N/mm* Thus maximum compressive stress fl in masonry on one face = axial stress + bending stress 0.42 + 0.068 + 0.22 N/ mm2 0.708 = 0.71 say reduction factor k, for SR = 13.4 and , I (from Table 9 of the Code, eccentrtclty ratio 12 Stress by interpolation) = 0.81 - (0.81 - 0.74) x y = 0.76 In accordance percent additional ratio between with 5.4.1.4(a) of the Code 25 stress is allowed for eccentricity

design and masonry required will be as worked out earlier in Example 4, namely 7.5-Ml. Example 6 : Design of a Wall with Eccentric Load, Eccentricity Ratio Being Between i and i

A wall 20 cm thick, using modular bricks carries at the top a load of 80 kN/m having resultant 1 eccentricity ratio ofWall is 5 m long between 12 cross walls and is of 3.4 m clear height between RCC slabs at top and bottom. What should be the strength of brick and grade of mortar. Assume that joints are not raked. Solution :

As effective height of the wall is less than its length, SR in the direction of height will govern the design. Also since length to thickness ratio of the wall exceeds 20, stiffening coefficient of wall will be unity. Moreover, element being fairly long, Area reduction factor will not apply. Actual thickness = 20 - 1 = 19 cm SR = 0.75 X 3.4 0.19 = 13:4 Although theoretically as explained in E-4.7 critical stress in masonry in any storey occurs at a height of 0.6 H from the bottom support, we would for the sake of simplicity in calculations, assume it to occur at bottom support. Axial stress in masonry =W A = 80 X lo3 100 x 19 = 42 N/cm' = 0.42 N/mm*
Axial

L and.-!24 6

Therefore Basic compressive stress' of re uired masonry having Unity Shape modification ? actor should be 0.71 0.76 X 1.25 = 0.74 N/mm* From Table 8 of t&e Code we find that bricks should have strength of 7.5 N/mm*. Since modular bricks are being used, which have width to height ratio of 1, Shape modification factor ks from Table 10 of the Code is 1.l and thus masonry should have Basic Compressive stress =_ 0.74 1.1 = 0.67 Refering to Table 8 of the Code again we find that, using bricks of 7.5 N/mm* strength, grade of mortar should be M 1. This masonry is designated as : 7.5-Ml.
NO.lTE ~ It masonry just huilding and `ilong with rupport. is a normal practice to work out stress on above the bottom support for every storey of a to design the masonry for slenderness of wall resultant eccentricity of loading at the top

=

due to loading

at top

support

stress due to self load of wall at bottom (W being the unit weight of masonry) _ WAH A 1Oh = 0.068 N/mm' of load at the

= 20 x IO3 x 3.4

Example

7 : Design Ratio

of a Wall Being

Eccentric

Load,

Eccentricity

Greater Than t

Bending top.

stress due to eccentricity M
II

We'X 6
hi?

80 X IO' X 20 X 6 = ~--.--100 X 19- X 12 36 II \~DKOOK

A 23 cm thick brick masonry wall (see Fig. E-35) carries an axial load .of 12 kN per meter length and eccentric load of 27 kN per meter length acting at a distance of 7.33 cm from the axis of the wall. Design the masonry for the wall if its Slenderness ratio is 16, assume that joints are not r;Lked.
O'v MASONRY DICSICN AND CONSTHIIC`TION-PART 1

SP 20(S&T)
l2KN 27KN 7.33 cm

: 1991

= 0.63 - (0.63 - 0.58) (0.23 - .O.16) (0.25 - 0.16) = 0.59 Since 25 ercent higher stress is permissible as per 5.4.1.4( &) of the Code, and Shape modification factor k, of bricks is unity bemuse bricks have height to width ratio less than 0.75, Basic compressive stress of required masonry

cm FIG. E-35

0.44 = 0.59 X 1.25 = 0.6 N/ mm2 Thus from Table 8 of the Code strength of brick should be 7.5 N/mm2 and grade.of mortar M 1. Marginally even mortar M2 can do.

Resultant

eccentricity,
e2

e

Example

8 : Design

of a Wall

with Openings

= WI X el + W2 X
WI+ = w2

12 X 10' X 0 + 27 X IO3 X 7.33 (12 + 27) X IO3

= 5.07 cm, Eccentricity ratio = ; =p 5.07 (23 - 1) = 0.23 This being I more than ; , there will be tension

External wall of a single storeyed house is 20 cm thick. and has door and window openings as shown in Fig. E-36. Plinth level is 1.20 m above the top of foundation footing and floor to ceiling height is 2.80 m. One way RCC slab of 3 m clear span bears on the wall and is IO cm thick. Ljctermine the maximum stress in the wall and calculate strength of bricks and grade of mortar required for the wall. There is a 20 cm thick parapet wall of 0.8 m height above the roof slab. V~`all and parapet are plastered on both sides.

on one face and effective thickness of wall supporting the load will get reduced. Referring to E-5.4.1.4(ii)(c), thickness of wall in compression =3 ( = 3(; ;_a )

I I 0.,64 L 2.0 --

I
Ar.0

I
-cl@5

I
i-l.0 -d

I 0.6

/I
+ I-O.16

LINTEL SILL

LEVEL LEVEL OF

= Z-On? WINDOW=O.bm

All

dimensions in meAreS FIG. E-36

- 5.0)

= 17.8 cm Maximum Compression stress in masonry would be twice the average compressiire stress on compression since stress area under the distribution is triangular. Thus maximum compressive stress = 2 X (12 + 27)103 100 X 17.8 = 44 N/cm2 = 0.44 N/mm' Stress reduction factor /;, for SK 16 and eccentricity ratio 0.23 (from Table 9 of the Code, by interpolation)
HANDBOOK 05 .MASONRY DE:SI(;N AND

From a visual examination of Fig. E-36 it is observed that portion `h' of wall will have the maximum stress. We will. however, for the sake of comparison and illustration, work out stress at plinth level in portion `0' of the wall as well. Since there are no openings below PL. load disperses below plinth and corresponding stresses get reduced notwithstanding the increase in self-load of masonry.
l.oads

Parapet

= v

X 0.80 X 20 X 10'

= 3.52 kN/m
1 37

CONSI`HI`C`1`ION-PAHT

SP 20(S&T) : 1991 Roof Load slab 10 cm thick = 10x250 = 2 500 N/m* = 2.5 kN/m* Lime concrete terrace 12 cm thick Compressive N/m*=2.4 kN/m* Since wall is plastered assumed to have raked Thus effective thickness on both sides, it may be joints on both sides.

RCC

=19-2 = 17 cm stress W =--A = 3065 X lo3 17 X 69 = 26 N/cm2 = 0.26 N/ mm* Slenderness ratio from consideration =h t = o 75 x (1.20 + 2.80 + 0.05) 0.17 = 18 of height at plinth level

= 12x200 =2400 Live load

= 1.5 kN/ m*

Total load = 6.4 kN/ m* Clear span of slab = 3.00 m Effective span = 3.00 + 0.10 = 3.10 In
.* .

Roof

load

on wall 2

= 6.4 X 3.1

= 9.92 kN/m Thickness of wall including =19+3 = 22 cm Self-load of wall up to plinth = 2 level plaster

I `hough length of wall `a' is less than 4 t that is, 76 cm, it will not be considered as a column, because it is supported by a cross wall on one side. Effective length =2 L 1

X 2.8 X 20 X IO3

= 2 X 0.69 = 1.38 m (see Table 5 of the Code) Therefore SR in the direction =1.38 0.17 =8.0 Since direction design. len thwise SR is less than o f height, former will k, for SR that in the govern the 8.0 (trom of length

= 12.32 X lo3 .N/m = 12.32 kN/m It is a common practice not to make any deduction in wall loads on account of openings, since calculations for design of masonry are not very precise. Portion Length `a' of wall = 0.60 + y

(Length of wall `a' has been taken up to centre of cross wall) = 0.69 cm `This portion bears additional load on account of opening on one side, which is 1.0 m in width. ... Total load on wall

Stress reduction factor Table 9 of the Code) = 0.95 Area where .* . ks reduction I
k,

factor

(see

5.4.1.2)

=O.fO+

1.5 A

A = 0.17 X 0.69 = 0.117 m2 = 0.70 + 1.5 x 0.117 = 0.70 -t: 0.18 = 0.88

= (3.52 + 9.92 + 12.32)

= 25.76 X 1.39 = 30.65 kN
3% HANDBOOK

Therefore, basic compressive stress of required masonry, with unity Shape modification factor
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

SP 20(S&T) 0.26 = 0.93 X 0.8B = 0.31 N/mm* Portion `b' of wall Length = 0.5 m. than 4 t, by definition it =-&__k, X k, 0.45 = 0.59 X 0.83 $ = 38.64 kN Compressive stress 17x in wall at plinth 50 = 45 N/cm2
l

: 1991

Area

reduction factor k, =0.7+ 1.5 A = 0.7 + 1.5 X 0.085 = 0.83

Thus masonry

Basic compressive with unity Shape

stress of modification

requisite factor

This being less becomes a column.

.This portion of wall has openings on both sides, therefore, total weight on wall at plinth level -1 0.50 + y

= 0.92 N/mm2 Obvious1 stress in Wall `6' will govern the design. Re ty erring to Table 8 of the Code, we see that bricks of 10.0 N/mm2 strength are required. For these bricks from Table 10 of the Code, k, = 1.1 and thus Basic compressive stress of required masonry should be 0.92 = = 0.84 N/mm2 1.1 Thus from Table 8 we get grade of mortar for the masonry to be Ml. It may be mentioned that if there is only a small portion of wall which is carrying high stress, it may be possible to effect economy in cost by using a lower grade masonry for walls which do not have large openings and to use the masonry we have calculated only for the portions of wall `b', which has openings in both sides. For that purpose stresses on other walls should also be calculated and masonry designed accordingly. It should however be kept in view that if in one storey of a building, bricks and mortar of different strength/grades are to be used a very close supervision is required in order to avoid mistakes. Example 9 : Design of a Wall with Concentrated Loads from Beams Wall of a single storey building as shown in Fig. E-37 carries a concentrated load of 70 kN from a beam. Design the wall as well as bed block under the beam. Roof of the building consists of an RCC slab which bears on cross walls and beams. Height to width ratio of the building is less than 2 and span of the beam is 6 meters. RCC slab is designed as a one-way slab. Solution Let us consider the stress at PL in masonry AB between the window. Top lateral support on this masonry may be assumed to be at mid level of the beam that is, at a height of 5 + 0.15 - i X 0.5

level

= 38.64 X IO3

= 0.45 N/mm2 Slenderness Ratio

Effective height for the masonry for the direction perpendicular to the plane of the wall (see 4.3.3) h Where = 0.75H + 0.25 H, of taller opening HI is the height

= 0.75 (1.2 + 2.8 + 0.05) + 0.25 X 2.0 = 3.04 + 0.50 = 3.54 m Effective height of masonry parallel to the Wall h =H = 1.2 + 2.8 + 0.05 = 4.05 m SR for the two axes 3.54 =-----2.1 0.17 of wall will be and4.05 0.5 = 8.1 for the direction

Thus SR 21 will govern the design as element is being deemed to be a column k, from'Table 9 of the Code for SR 21

= 0.59 Area of the portion of wall in plan

= 0.5 X 0.17 = 0.085 m2 Since plan area is less than 0.2 m2, Area reduction factor (see 5.4.1.2) will apply.
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

= 4.9 m above the plinth level. Bottom support will be reckoned at the top of footing. Thus H = 4.9 + 1.25 = 6.15 m
I 39

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

In addition there will be some stress in masonry due to self load of wall. Because of the window openings weight of 3.5 m length of wall, will be borne by 2.5 m length only. Height of masonry above the plinth = 5.0 + 0.15 + 1.0 = 6.15 m Thus stress in masonry to self load of masonry = A B at plinth level due

20 X lo3 X 0.25 X 3.5 X 6.15 20 X 2.5 X 100

= 21.5 N/cm*
All dimensions

= 0.22 N/mm'
in metres.

FIG. E-37 And effective height, h

= 0.75 X 6.15 = 4.6 m Let us assume that wall is one brick that is, 23 cm thick, joints are raked for plastering on both faces of the wall, and overall thickness including plaster is 25 cm. Thus effective thickness, t (actual thickness of 23 cm wall is 22 cm)

It should be noted that for calculating self weight of masonry we take overall thickness inclusive of thickness of plaster which is 22 + 3 = 25 cm and for the purpose of working out stress we take effective thickness which equals 20 cm. Thus PL overall stress in masonry in question at

= 0.33 + 0.22 = 0.55 N/mm2 From Table 9 of the Code we get stress reduction factor k, for SR 23 = 0.54. Thus Basic Compressive stress for masonry for unity Shape modification factor should be

= 23 - 1 - 2 = 20 cm Thus SR = 5 t 4.6 =---..0.2 = 23

=-

0.55 0.54

= 1.01 N/mm2 Referring to Table 8 of the Code stren$h of bricks to be used should be 12.5 N/mm and grade of mortar should be M 1. Since height to width ratio of units is less than 0.75 and strength of units is 15 N/mm*, shape modifactor will be unity and no further modification is needed. In case bricks of strength 12.5 N/mm2 are not locally available we may either introduce piers of 1% brick thickness under the beams or change the thickness of entire wall to 1% brick that is, 34.5 cm. While considering the alternative with a pier under the beam, advantage may be taken of the provision in Note 5 under Table 4 of the Code. According to that Note if pier is kept 1`/z brick thick and wall is one brick thick, pier and wall will act as one structural element and thus it may be feasible to achieve a fairly economical design without having to make the entire wall I l/z brick thick. Design should be worked out for both these alternatives and the one which is more economical should be adopted. Let us now work out the bearing stress under the beam and examine the need for a bed block.
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

In accordance with 4.6.1 and Table 7 of the Code maximum SR for a brick wall in cement mortar should not exceed 27. Thus thickness of wall is adequate from consideration of SR.
Stress in Masonry

AB at PL

Concentrated load from beam is assumed to disperse to a maximum extent of b + 4t where b is the width of bearing of beam and t is the effective thickness of wall (see Appendix D of the Code). Thus b + 4t = 25 + 4 X 20 = 105 cm Therefore load stress in masonry for concentrated

70 x lo1 = 20 x 105 = 33.3 N/cm2 = 0.33 N/mm2
40

HANDBOOK

SP 20(S&T) Bearing width of beam = .25 cm Thus length of wall supporting rated load at a depth of 0.74 m = 0.25 + 2 X 0.74 X tan 30"

: 1991

the concent-

Length of wall supporting the concentrated load equals the space between window openings which is 3.5 - 1 = 2.5 meter. Since length of wall is more than 3 times the width of bearing, load from the beam would be treated as a concentrated load and 25 percent increase in bearing stress would be permissible (see Appendix D of the Code). Assuming that beam bears on full thickness of wall bearing stress =p 70 x IO3 20 X 25 = 140 N/cm2 = 1.40 N/mm* Stress level due to self load of masonry = at bearing

= 0.25 + 2 X 0.74 X 0.577 = 0.25 + 0.85 = 1.1 m Therefore depth off 70 x lo3 =20x 110 stress in masonrv from beam at a

= 32 N/cm* = 0.32 N/mm* Stress in masonry due to self load of wall at $ that is 0.79 m below the beam = 20 X 10' X 0.25 X (1 + 0.5 + 0.79) 20x 100

20 X lo7 X 0.25(1.0 + 0.5) 20x 100

= 3.8 N/cm" = 0.04 N/mm2 .'. Overall = 1.40 + 0.04 stress = 1.44 N/mm2 Basic compressive 8 of the Code stress of masonry from Table Permissible SK 23 Therefore

= 5.6 N/cm2 = 0.06 N/mm* total stress

= 0.32 + 0.06 = 0.38 N/mm2 compressive = 1.06 X ks immediately
= 1.06 X 0.535

stress in masonry

for

= 1.06 N/mm2 Permissible compressive stress below the beam with k, = 1
= 1.06 N/mm2

= 0.57 N/mm* Thus masonry is safe below + height.

As explained in E-4.6(vii)*when we invoke the provision of Note 3 below Table 9, we do not make any increase in permissible compressive stress, because of concentration of load, under 5.4.1.4(c) of the Code. As bearing stress is more it would bc necessary to block under the beam. This later. Let us also check the depth of r than permissible stress provide concrete bed design has been given stress in masonry at a of the beam. Angle

We have seen earlier that masonry is not safe in bearing under the beam. It is therefore necessary to provide a concrete bed block under the beam.
Design

qf

concrete

bed

block

from the bottom

of dispersal of the load in masonry may be assumed to be 30 degress with the vertical (53.1 of the Code). Height of masonry up to bottom of beam, H

Through a concrete bed block, stress is assumed to spread at an angle of 45" to the vertical. Length of block should be such that compressive stress on masonry after spreading through the block reaches the permissible compressive stress value of masonry, which in this case is 0.57 N/mm* as worked out earlier. A simple method of working out length of block is the trial and error method. Approximate length from the relation of block could be had

= 5 - (0.50 - 0.15) + 1.25 =5.9 m It should be noted that for the portion of wall directly below the beam we have taken actual height to be the clear distance between the supports that is the bottom of beam and top of wall footing H -_= 8
HANDBOOK ON

1 x 20 X 0.57 = 70 X lo3

1=

70 x lo3 20 X 0.57 cm for additional let us assume
41

=61

22 zz 0.74 8
MASONRY DESIGN AND

In order to make some allowance stress due to self load of masonry
(`ONS1`HUCl'ION-PART I

SF 20(S&T)

: 1991 spaced 5 meter apart, in accordance with E-4.2.2.2 it is not necessary to work out wind stresses. However for the sake of illustration we will work out the stresses due to wind in the transverse direction. 2) Loads Assume that roof and floor slabs are I5 cm thick. Since the building is only 3 storeyed, we would ignore the live-load reduction factor for the sake of simplicity. As structural system is based on cross wail construction, slabs are designed for one-way action so that slab load is supposed to come only on the cross walls. Since walls are plastered, joints of masonry are assumed to be raked. Roof/floor load per bay per floor

length of block to be 70 cm. In that case depth of block should be (assuming angle of dispersion to be 45') =-70 - 25 2 = 22.5 cm It is desirable to adopt a depth in terms of number of brick Courses that is a multiple of nominal depth of bricks which is 7.7 cm. Thus let us make the depth to be 23 cm. We would now work out the actual stress at the bottom of this block and compare it with the permissible stress in masonry. Stress due to beam 20 X 70 = 50 N/cm* = 0.5 N/mm* Stress due to self load at the bottom block of the bed load below the block

= 70 X lo3

= 7 X IO3 X 5 X 18.5 = 648 kN Self-load of cross wall per floor

= ; ; :o x IO3 x (0.22 + 0.03) x =240X lo3 N

20 X 10' X 0.25(1 + 0.5 + 0.23) 20 x 100 = 4.33 N/cm* = 0.04 N/mm2 Thus overall stress in masonry

= 240 kN Self load of 2 corridor walls (`/z brick thick) per floor per bay ignoring openings = ; ; $0 x lo3 x (0.105 + 0.03) x =81 Wind load kN

= 0.5 + 0.04 = 0.54 N/mm2 This is safe being less than permissible stress of 0.57 N/mm*. Thus a concrete bed block 70 cm long and 23 cm deep of width same as thickness of wall should be provided below the beam. Example 10 : Design of Walls of a Building with Cross Waij System of Load-bearing Construction A 3 storeyed building as shown in Fig. E-38 has load bearing cross walls of 23 cm thickness. The building is subject to a wind pressure of 132/m*. External longitudinal walls are also 23 cm thick while internal corridor walls are `/z brick thick. All walls are plastered both sides. Design the masonry for cross walls of first floor. Assume roof and floor loads (RCC slab) to be 7 kN/m*. The building is without any parapet over the roof. Centre to centre height of floors is 3 m. Solution 1) We will consider the design of a typical cross wall of first floor marked AA on the plant. Roof and floor loads borne by the typical cross walls is shown shaded on the plan in Fig. E-38. Height to width of the building equals 3x3 (20.5 + 0.44) = o*43' which
42

per bay per floor = 1 320 X 5 X 3 = 20 X lo3 N =2000 kg Stress in Cross Wall Due

3) Direct Compressive to Vertical Loads Total vertical at PL

load on cross walls AA of first floor =3(24000)+2X64800+2X 8 100 = 2.18 X lo3 kN

Area of the cross walls in plan per bay, assuming total depth of raking to be 2.0 cm. = 2 X 8 X (0.22 - 0.020) = 3.20 m2 Thus direct Compressive stress in masonry

due

to vertical loads = 2.18 X IO6 3.20 = 7 X 10' N/m* = 0.7 N/mm'
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

is much

less than

2. As cross

walls are

HANDBOOK

SP 20(5&T) : 1991
SLAB SUPPORTED BY WALL `A' 7

GENERAL

PLAN

TYPICAL

PLAN

OF CROSS WALL `A

All dimensions in mctres.

FKL E-38 4) Bending Stress Due to Wind Load Wind load normal to the main elevation per bay will be acting as shown in Fig. E-39. Wind moments at plinth wall of the building per bay = 10 x 10' x 3 x 1 + 20 x lo3 x 3X2+20X10 X3 = 270 X lo3 N.m Total wind moment in the entire building = 270 X lo3 X 6 = 1 620 kN.m
1

The above moment will be shared by various cross walls including end walls in the ratios of their respective stiffnesses, that is, moments of inertia.
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONStRUCTION-PART

FIG.

E-39eWIND I

FORCES ON ONE

BAY 43

SP 20(S&T) Moments

: 1991 of Inertia of inner cross wall (5 Nos.): Moment of Inertia 12 + 2 X 0.22 X 0.76 (1) of one end 12 18.5 + 0.22 2 2 = 116 - (negligible) = 145 m4 There are in all 5 cross walls and 2 end walls which are resisting the wind moment. Thus B.M. borne by one inner cross wall AA. + 29 wall

In this case parts of the longitudinal wall will act as flanges to the cross walls, the maximum projecting flange length being actual distance between window openings and cross walls or 12 times the thickness of longitudinal wall or H whichever is less (see 4.2.2.5 of the 7iCode). Distance between openings and cross wall

= 0.22 X (18.5)3 _ 0.22 X 2.53

= 2.5 - 0.22 = 2.28 m 12 time thickness of wall

1 620 X lo3 x 182 = (Lg2 X 5 + 145 X 2) k 250 X lo3 N.m By comparison with the figure of 270 kN.m which is the wind moment per bay, it is obvious that as an approximation we could take wind on one cross wall to be equal to wind moment per bay. Bending stress on cross wall due to wind moment = +a = = + 0.013 N/mm* of Overall compressive stress in cross wall I

= 12x0.22 = 2.64 m HI6 =3X3

6

= 1.5 m

Thus overall effective flan e width which will act along with the cross wa B 1 (see Fig. E-40) in resisting bending moment is = 1.5 + 0.22 = 1.72 m Moment flanges of inertia of cross wall AA inclusive

= 0.7 + 0.013 = 0.22 X (18.5)3 _ 0.22 X 2.53 12 + 2 X 0.22 X 1.72 = 116 - (negligible) = 182 m4 12 18.5 + 0.22 2 2 + 66 = 0.713 N/mm* or 0.687 N/mm*

It is thus evident that when height/ width ratio of a building is small, we need not in fact compute wind stresses in the masonry and could base our design only on direct compressive stress. Let us now design the cross wall for overall compressive stress of 0.7 N/mm2 as worked out above.

Moment

of inertia

for the end flange

wall length is to be

In this case projecting limited to 6t or g, -3X3 16 = 0.56 m

whichever

is less

Slenderness ratio of wall, assuming that plinth level is 1.0 m above the top of footing h =t 0.75 (3.0 + 1.o> (0.22 - 0.025) = 15

FIG. 44

E-40 TYPICAL CROSS WALL WITH FLANGES
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

SP 20(S&T) Stress Code reduction = 0.76 Basic compress Shape modification stress of masonry factor for unity factor from Table 9 of the D-DOOR 1.5
x 2.5 W-WINDOW 1.5~ 2.0

: 1991

0.7 = = 0.92 N/mm* 0.76 Referring to Table 8 of the Code bricks should be of strength 10.0 N/mm* and mortar should be of grade Ml. In case of longitudinal grade masonry could be comparatively lighter loads, quality of bricks and grade cross as well as longitudinal since longitudinal walls are to the structural strength Example Load walls, though lower provided because of as a general rule same of mortar are used for walls on one floor, expected to contribute of cross walls.

11 : Design of a Hall Subjected to Wind

A hall as shown in Fig. E-41 and of inside dimensions 10.0 m X 20.0 m with a clear height of 5.5 m' up to the bottom of beam is to be constructed with load bearing masonry walls using modular bricks. Calculate thickness of walls, strength of bricks and grade of mortar for longitudinal and cross walls, assuming a wind pressure of 1 200 N/m2. Solution: 1) Design Data/ Assumptions
PLAN All dimensions FIG. in metres.

E41
18 cm

Roof consists of RCC T-beams 40 cm X 80 cm with RCC slab 12 cm thick, beams being at 4.0 m centres. Roof is covered with lime concrete terrace of 15 cm average thickness. Height of parapet Plinth Height height of plinth = 20 cm above = 0.5 m above foundation footing slab level

h "* t = % =

4.95 -= 27

In view of long spans and assuming that joints are raked to a depth of 1.0 cm on both sides adopt 1% brick wall with actual thickness = 29 cm, that is, nominal thickness 30 cm. Cross wall H = 0.7 + 5.5 + (0.80 - 0.06) (from top of footing = 6.94 m h = 0.75 H = 0.75 X 6.94 m = 5.21 m h t=SR=27 = 19 cm Adopt 30 cm nominal thickness for cross walls. 3) Loads : Roof load RCC slab = 12 X 250 = 300 N/m2
45

= 0.7 m 2) Minimum thickness

of Walls

to centre

of slab)

According to 4.6.1 of the Code, maximum SR = 27, assuming cement or cement-lime mortar Long wall H = 0.7 + 5.5 + 7 = 6.6 m
(NOTE -Actual height has been reckoned foundation footing up to middle of beam.) from

5.21

top of

h = 0.?5 H = 0.75 X 6.6 = 4.95 m SR=h t
HANDBOOK ON

.
DESIGN AND

MASONRY

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(S&T):1991
Terrace Live load Self weight = 15 X 200 = 300 N/m* 1500 N/m2 = 7 500 N/m2 of beam = 40(80 - 12) X 25 000 100 x 100 =6800 Effective span N/m Cross of beam = 10 + 0.3 5 10.3 m Load on long walls
(NOTE-The factor A due to is the to door

Therefore

total

axial

at plinth

level

= 0.28 + 0.46 = 0.74 N/mm* Cross wall without opening (Wall a)

Compressive

61.1 X lo3 stress = 26 x loo = 23.5 N/cm*

= 0.24N/mm*
wall with opening (Wall b) level .= 27.6 N/cm2 = 0.28 N/mm*
make allowance which

Compressive

stress at plinth 10 '

61.1 X lo3 = (26 X 100)

(10 - 1.5)

10.3 Load from beam = (750 X 4 i- 680) 2 =190000 N=190 kN

for increase in stress is 1.5 m long.)

opening

Self load of wall including parapet assuming 3 cm plaster thickness. Since we will be considering combined stresses due to vertical loads and wind load, we will work out all loads at the top of foundation fqoting which is (29 + 3) (0.7 + 5.5 + 0.8 + 0.2) X 20 X lo3 100 = 4.61 X 10" N/m Load on cross walls = 15000 N/m

5) Stresses Stresses i) Long

Due to Lateral walls

Loads and Combined

Shbload

= 75yx4

= 15 kN/m Total load on wall at plinth level

Since long walls are not adequately stiffened in accordance with the requirements of clause 4.2,2.2(b) of the Code and hall is longer than 8.0 m, it is necessary to work out bending stresses due to wind load in longitudinal as well as cross wall. Obviously wind load normal to the long walls will be critical and therefore we will work out bending stresses in long as well as cross walls on account of wind load normal to the long walls. Wind load on long wall Wind load P on long =pA = 1 200 X 4 X (5.5 + 0.8 + 0.2) = 31 200 N = 31.2 kN (Wind plinth Total load on exposed has been ignored) wind load portion of wall below (5 bays) wall per bay

= 46.1 + 15 = 61.1 kN/m 4) Stress Longwall 2.5 m length of wall will bear weight of 4.0 m length of wall, because of openings. .* . Stiess at footing-top = level due to self weight in Walls Due to Vertical Loads

4.61 X lo4 X 4.0 2.5 X 26 X 100

for the building

= 28.4 N/cm'

= 31.20 X 5 = 156 kN Moments due to wind load on long wall

= 0.28N/mm2
Stress Load due ,to concentrated will spread on load from beam

b + 4t = 0.04 + 4 X 0.29 = 1.20 m length .*. Stress at plinth of wall load

level due to concentrated 190000 = 46 N/cm*

The walls are laterally supported at the top by RCC beams and slabs. It can be assumed that this lateral support will be adequate as a horizontal girder to transmit the wind force to the cross walls. The long wall will thus function as a propped cantilever and the maximum bending PH at bottom support as shown moment will be in Fig. E-42. 8 Maximum B.M. on long =- PH 8
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

= 1.56 X 26 X 100

wall per bay

= 0.46N/mm*
46 HANDBOOK

SP 20(S&T)
fRCC I AND SLAB

: 1991

BEAM
PROP

Moment

of inertia of cross wall

SECTIONAL VIEW

1
P FIXED

A part of the long wall will act as a flange with the cross wall and effective overhanging length of flange (see 4.2.2.5 of the Code) will be actual length of wall up to window, that is, 1.25 m or 6t that is 6 X 0.20 or E = 0.45 m I about that is,

0.7 + 5.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 16

B M DIAGRAM

whichever is less, that is, 0.45 m. Thus neutral axis of the wall = 0.29 x.103 12

FIG. E-42 _ 31 200' 8

+ 2(0.45 + 0.29) 0.29 X 5.152 12

x (

0.7 + 5.5 + y )

= 24 + 0.9 = 24.9 m4 Thus bending stresses at extreme fibres

=31200X6.6 = 25 740 N.m = 25.74 kN.m We have erred on the safe side by including a small portion of height which is actually not exposed and thus not subject to any wind force. Bending stress in long wall f=f

+ 2 80 000 X 5.29 24.9 X ld4 = 5 6.0 N/cm2 = 0.06 N/mm2 Combined stress in cross walls stress stresses are

&CSMx+
bd2

25.74 X lo3 X 6 - 4 X 0.292 X lo4

= axial

stress + bending

= + 46 N/cm2 = + 0.46 N/mm2 Combined stresses in long wall =-axial stress + bending stress or

In case of cross wall `a' combined

= 0.24 + 0.06 = 0.30 N/mm2 or 0.18 N/ mm2 (both compressive) ln case of cross wall `6' combined = 2.8 ? 0.6 = 0.28 f 0.06 = 0.34 N/ mm2 or 0.22 N/mm2 (both compressive) Check for shear stress in cross walls We will consider wall `6' which will have greater shear stress Shear load = on the cross 156 X lo3 wall stresses are

= 0.74 + 0.46 = 1.20 N/mm' 0.28 N/ mm2 (both ii) Cross walls

compression)

Wind forces are shared by cross walls in the ratios of their stiffness. Since the cross walls are identical except for a small door opening in the middle in one wall, for practical purposes it may be assumed that wind loads are shared equally by the 2 walls. Total wind load on a cross wall may be assumed to be acting at a plane at mid-height of the cross wall. Thus total B.M. on one cross wall

= 78.0: lo3 N Section of wall being rectangular, we will assume parabolic shear distribution and maximum shear stress will be 1.5 times the average shear. Since flanges do not make any contribution for resisting shear load, maximum shear stress on wall 78.00 X lo3 X 1.5 = 0.26 X (10 - 1.3) X 10" = 5.3 N/cm2 = 0.05 N/mm2

=

1 56 000 X (0.7 + 5.5 + 0.8 + 0.2) 2x2

= 280.8 X lo3 N.m
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

47

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Stress reduction = 0.62 Basic compressive fication factor =0.34 0.62 = 0.55 N/mm2 Referring to Tables 8 and 10 of the Code, bricks should be of strength 7.5 N/mm2 and with Shape modification factor equal to 1.I. Thus basic stress 0.55 =-= 1.1 of masonry 0.5 N/mm2 required stress for unity Shape modifactor from Table 9

Permissible shear stress (see 5.4.3 of the Code), assuming mortar to be of Ml grade. & = 0.1 + fd/6 where fd is axial compressive stress on the wall due to dead load.

fd= stress due to self load of wall + stress due
to dead = load from slab 61.1 X lo3 + 6 X IO3 X 2 26X = 28 N/cm2 = 0.28 N/mm2 Thus fs=O.l =0.14 +0.28 6 . 100

N/mm2

Actual stress being only 0.50 N/mm', wall is safe in shear. In fact since actual shear stress is about one third of permissible shear for Ml mortar, we could use M2 mortar. Thus both cross walls are safe in tension as well as shear. 6) Masonry for i) Long walls Walls

... Grade .of mortar should be M3. However from the consideration of shear stress, we should use grade M2 mortar. Example 12 : Design of Panel Walls

Masonry of long walls should be designed fo5 maximum compressive stress that is, 1.19 N/mm

SR=h

In a framed structure a panel wall (see Fig. E-43) of brickwork 23 cm thick is 4.5 m long and 3 m high (between centres of supports). If the panel is subjected to a horizontal wind pressure of 750 N,`m', determine the mix of motar for the brickwork assuming: a) panel is supported at top and bottom free on other 2 edges, and is

t
+ 5.5 + 0.4) 0126

= 0.75(0.7 = 19 Stress code reduction = 0.65 Therefore for unity Shape factor

k, from Table

9 of the
PANEL WALL

Basic compressive

stress for masonry

modification factor 1.19 =0.65 = 1.83 N/mm2

Fro. E-43 PANEL b) panel other c) panel Solution Case (a)

WALLS

Referring to Table 8 and Table 10, bricks should. be of strength 25 N/mm2 and mortar should be of grade Hl. If bricks of this strength are not locally available it would be necessary to introduce piers under the beams so as to increase the supporting area thereby reducing stress in masonry. ii) Masonry for cross walls

is free at the top and 3 edges, and is supported

supported

on

on all 4 edges.

Masonry of cross wall should be designed for maximum compressive stress that is, 0.34 N/mm2

In this case, panel is spanning direction and maximum bending

in the vertical moment is

SR=h
= ot.75 X (0.7 + 5.5 + 0.8 - 0.06) 0.26 = 20
48 HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

=

750 x 3 x 4.5 x 3 8
AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

DESIGN

SP 20(S&T) (see Appendix = 3 800 N.m D of the Code) Therefore M z---z Z tensile stress
= 12.4 N/cm2

: 1991

3 010 X 6 3 X o*222 x IO4

= 0.124 3 800 X 6 = 4.5 x b.222 x 10" = 0.11 N/mm* Compressive stress (axial) self-weight at mid-height = 20 x IO3 X 3 lo4 x 2 = 3 N/cm2 = 0.03 N/ mm2 .*. Maximum tensile stress in masonry due to

N/mm2

This is safe, being less than permissible limit of 0.14 N/mm' provided mortar of grade M 1 or better and bricks of strength not less than 10 N/mm2 are used, Case (c) In this case panel and g
L

is supported

on all 4 edges

ratio

is 3 = 0.67 4.5

From Table 13 of the Code (by interpolation), we get maximum bending moment M in the horizontal direction = 0.038 X 75 X 4.5 X 3 X 4.5 = 1 730 N.m. Thus the maximum tensile zontal direction will be =1730X6 = 3.0 X 0.22* x 10" M Z = 7.2 N/ cm2 = 0.072 N/ mm2 stress in the hori-

(0.11 - 0.03) = 0.08 N/mm' If mortar used for masonry is 1 : 1 : 6 or better, tensile, stress up to 0.07 N/ mm2 is permissible vide 5.6.2 of Code. It will thus be marginally safe in tension with Ml mortar. It may be clarified that even if `oints are raked to serve as key for plaster it is va j.id to base the design on full thickness of wall provided the wall has ,been plastered with mortar of grade not lower than Ml. Maximum compressive stress

= 0.11 + 0.03 = 0.14 N/mm2 Total shear force on panel

= .048 N/mm2 This will be safe with mortar of M2 grade for which permissible tensile stress is 0.10 N/mm2 for bending in the horizontal direction across bed joints.

= 750 x 4.5 X' 3 = 10 130 N ... Shear stress at supports 10 130 = 2 x 4.5 x 0.22 X lo4 = 0.51 N/cm2 = 0.005 N/ mm2 This is safe being less than 0.1 N/mm2

Example Wall

13 : Design

of a Straight

Free Standing

A free standing brick wall 23 cm thick (see Fig. E-44) is subjected to a wind pressure of 750 N/m . What should be the maximum height from consideration of stability, for mortars M 1 and M2 grades.
Solution

Case (b) : $ Ratio = 314.5 = 0.67 Since HI L ratio exceeds 0.3 and panel is free at top and supported on other 3 edges, maximum bending will be in the horizontal direction, and by interpolation from Table 12 of the Code it will be: = 0.66 PL
z 0.66 X 750 x 4.5 x 3 x 4.5

Code permits tension in masonly free standing walls to the extent of 0.07 N/mm if mortar used is of Ml or better grade and 0.05 N/ mm2 if mortar used is of M2 grade. Tensile stress ft at the base C-M -- * Z A
=-- PH wHXA A
49

of wall

= 3 010 N.m
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

22

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 = 200+ 1 158

930 = 1.46 m say 1.5 m If we use 1 : 6 cement mortar (M2 grade)

ft = 0.05 N/mm2 and from the above equation -20000 H

50 000 = 465 H2=200
:. H =

2 250 H2 0.22 X 0.22 H-500=0
200 + ,/(200)2

+ 4 X 465 X 500 2 X 465

=

200 + 985 930

= 1.25 m In urban areas it is a common practice to build a 23 cm thick courtyard wall for houses in 1 : 6 cement mortar, plastered on both sides up to a height of about 2 meters. It has proved to be generally safe, because the wall is braced by cross walls. The Code permits higher tensile stress in the case of boundry/courtyard walls at the discretion of the designer (see Note 2 of 5.4.2 of the Code). Thus if we design a 23 cm wall for a tensile stress of 0.1 N/mm*, as is permissible for Ml mortar, we get a safe design height of 1.7 m as follows: 465 H* - 200 H - 1 000 = 0 ._--_ H= 200 + J_ 665 X 1 000 of p ~750 2 250 H' t2 is of Ml N/m* and w=2OX = 1.7 m. - 20 X lo3 H grade, Example Standing 14 : Design Wall of a Staggered Free 2 X 465

SECTIONAL FIG.

ELEVATION E-44

Considering
4;=.

1 meter I- wH

length

of wall,

pHX6
2 X t=

3pH2 =--2_-WH t inserting value lo3 N/m3 :. f; = If mortar used

f; = .07 N/mm2

= 70 X lo3 N/m* thickness, actual thick-

For t = 23 cm nominal ness = 22 cm 70 x lo3 = 2 250 H'

0.22 X 0.22

- 20 000 H

A brick masonry wall of staggered shape (see Fig. E-45) is 23 cm thick and is subject to a wind the maximum pressure 750 N/ m2. Determine height of the wall if mortar used is: (a) 1 cement : 1 line : 6 sand (Ml grade), (b) 1 cement : 6 sand (M2 grade). (a) Consider module length AB of the wall which is 2.31 + 0.22 = 2.53 m long. If ft is the permissible tensile stress in masonry

= 46 500 H* - 20 000 H 465 H' - 200 H - 700 = 0 This is a quadratic equation of the form is ax" + bx i- c = 0 and
X=

its solutiqn

-b+db'-4ac 2a .-MM X 700 2 X 465 HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

Thus

we get, H= 200 + J-465

=

750 X 2.53 H2 2

= 950 H2 N.m
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

SO

SP 20(S&T) Solving H=
L 2.31 2

: 1991

this equation

for H we get

200 + 42002 + 4 x 13 1 x 500 2 X 131 200 + 550 262

=

All dimensions

in metres.

= 2.86 m say 2.8 m
NOTEstaggered While planning and designing a free standing wall, it should be borne in mind that total length

FIG. E-45 PLAN VIEW OF A STAGGERED WALL

I, around =2

N.A

of the wall -I- 1.155 X 0.22 X (0.565

[,.155X%
+ =

_ o.22j2 1

0.22 ;;.565'

of projecting flanges on either side of a rib should not exceed 6 times the flange thickness. In other words module of a staggered wall should be limited to 12 times the thickness of wall plus width of the rib or pier formed by staggering. Thus in the above example upper limit of module works out to 12 X 0.22 + 0.22 = 2.86 m as against 2.50 actualiy provided in the wall in question.

= 2 (0.001 025 + 0.007 561) + 0.003 307 = 2 X 0.085 86 + 0.003 807 = 0.017 2 + 0.003 31 = 0.205 m4 0.565 Y=2 = 0.282 m Thus inserting f,=+vH = 950 H' X 0.282 0.205 = 1310 Permissible Cement value Hz-2000 for - 20 000 H (N/m') H 1 : 1 : 6. values in the equation:

Example Standing

15 : Design Wall

of a Diaphragm

Type Free

A brick masonry wall (see Fig. E-46) is built in mortar of grade M 1. Find the maximum safe height for this wall, when it is subjected to a wind velocity of 47 m/s and is located in a built up urban area. Bricks used are of format size 23 X 11.5 X 7.7 cm. In accordance with IS 875(Part 3) : 1987, wind pressure, pZ = 0.6 Vi, where V, stands for design wind speed (= V&&2). Vb is regional basic wind speed and kl, k2, k3 are modification factors k, (for a boundry kz k3 wall) = 0.73 = 0.91 = 1.0

of tension across

.* . pz = 0.6 X (47 X 0.73 X 0.91)' = 750 N/m2 Consider the diaphragm unit of length B and if H be the height of the wall in metres, then Bending Moment
M=_..-

mortar

bed joint

= 0.07 N/ mm2 = 70 X lo3 N/m2 .'. 700,= 131 Hz - 200 H 131 Hz - 200 HSolving H= this quadratic 200 + J2002 equation 700 = 0 we get

pH2 =p(BH)X%zp~
2 750 X 1.27 X H' 2 2 2 = 476 H'

+ 4 X 131 x 700

B = 1.27 m and p = 750 N/m2 :. M =

2 X 131 262

= 200 + 638

= 3.2 metres b) If mortar used is of 1 cement : 6 sand mix (M2 grade), value of permissible tensile stress is 0.05 N/mm2 = 50 X lo3 N/m'. SubStituting in the above equation, 5 000 = 1 310 Hz - 2 000 H 131 Hz-200 HANDBOOK ON MASONRY H-500=0
DESlCN AND

= _ My- wH . . . . . . @qn I MJ being the unit bd3 I2 weight

`xl

of masonry

I_---_ Bd 12
1

@e&wing

to .Fjg. ;E-4q
51

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

B = 126.75 cm, b = 116.25 cm D = 56.5 cm, d = 35.5 cm NOTE : For proper bond some bricks are 3/4 size as shown in plan view of a diaphragm wall.

FIG. E-46 PLAN VIEW OF A DIAPHRAGM

WALL

D = 56.5 cm and Taking I= all units

d=

35.5 cm

in metres, 1.16 X 0.3553 12

If mortar used is of M2 grade, N,' m2 then we get H = 3.6 m.

ft = 50 000

1.27 X 0.5653 12

= 0.019 x 0.004 3 = 0.0147 D y = 2 =_ 0.565 2 = 0.282 In accordance with .the Code, permissible tension in masonry with mortar Ml is 0.07 N/mm' and = 70 000 N/m2 W = 20 000 N/m3 values in the aboive Eqn `X' we get 476 Hz X 0.282 70 000 = - - 20 000 H 0.014 7 =9 Transposing 913 Hz-2000 Solving . . . Hz 130 H2-20000 and simplifying, H-7000=0 equation we get H m4

It will be of interest to compare the economy of staggered and diaphragm type free straight, standing walls as considered for design in Examples 13, 14 and 15. Straight Walls

Area of wall per metre length = 0.22 X 1 = 0.22 m'. This wall for a wind pressure of 750 N/m2 can be taken to a height of 1.5 m using M 1 mortar and to a height of 1.25 m using M2 mortar. Staggered Wall of 2.53 m

Area of wall for module length = 2.31 x 0.22 + 0.22 X 0.565 = 0.508 + 0.124 = 0.632 m2 Area =per metre 0.632 length

Thus inserting

2.53 = 0.25 m2 For the same wind pressure., this wall can be taken to height of 3.2 metres with M 1 mortar and 2.8 m with M2 mortar. Diaphragm Wall

this quadratic

Area for one diaphragm length = 1.268 X 0.565 - 1.163 X 0.355 = 0.303 m2 Area =per metre 0.303 length

2 000 + J2

ooo2 + 4 x 913 x 7 000 2 x 913

=

2 000 + 5 437 1 826

= 4.07 m = 4.0 m (say)
52 HANDBOOK

1.268 = 0.24 m'
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

SP 20(S&T) This wall can be built to a height of 4.0 m, with MI mortar and to a height of 3.6 m with M2 mortar. Diaphragm walls can be used with great

: 1991

advantage and economy in single storeyed tail structures for warehouses, factories and large halls, etc.

ANNEX
DESIGN RESIDENTIAL

H-2

OF. BRICK MASONRY FOR BUILDINGS UP TO 3 STOREYS

H-2.1

Design

Parameters
Maximum Span (Short Span in Case of 2- WaIa Slab) ' Clear Height ?J Store_v Live Load FlZrs

H-2.2.X Wall plastered total plaster thickness H-2.2.9 Length ratio of rooms H-2.2.10 of walls

on both sides. ratio, span

3 cm I .30 of area

to width

Openings in plan

in walls as percentage wall wall

m Case
Case Case Case Case Case Case Case 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 3.00 3.60 3.00 3.00 3.60 3.60 4.20 4.20

m
2.70 2.70 2.70 3 .oo 2.70 3.00 2.70 3.00

kg/ cm? 150 150
200 200 200 200 200 200

a) In external b)* In internal

45 percent 30 percent

H-2.2.1 1 The bricks used in masonry are modular bricks of nominal size 20 X 10 X 10 cm. H-2.2.12 Openings located that: a) In load bearing within $ in a wall are so shaped walls, openings and

do not occur

distance

from a cross wall, that wall, and length x of

H-2.2

Assumptions
For All Cases

function cross

as a stiffening

wall is not less than

(see 4.6 and on 4.4 in any

H-2.2.1 ground H-2.2.2 footing

Height level Height top

of plinth of plinth

from above wall

0.5 m 1.0m

Fig. 9 of the Code and also comments of the Code).

b) The horizontal area of brickwork wall is not less than 2 000 cm'. c) The brickwork openings does definition.
NOTE actual

H-2.2.3 Height of parapet above RCC roof slab

I .Om

between two consecutive not become a column by
In any wall is less than

For Cases I, 3 and 4 H-2.2.4

For Cases 2, 5 and 6

For Cases 7 and 8

~~ In case area of brickwork portions shall be checked

2 000 cm' or becomes a column

by del'inition,

stress in the

by calculations.

RCC

Thickness of roof/floor slab

IOcm IOcm

12cm 12cm

14cm 14cm

H-2.2.13 RCC roof/floor bears fully on eternal masonry walls; thus eccentricity over wall has been assumed to be negligible. H-2.2.14 The RCC slabs are designed as two-wa)' slabs. thus loads on wall are shared accordingly. H-2.3 Design Steps

H-2.2.5 Thickness of lime concrete over roof slab (average)

For

All Cases I cm 4 cm

H-2.3.1
(KS)

Skendert~es.v Ratio (SK) und Stress Fuclot

H-2.2.6 H-2.2.7 flooring

Thickness Thickness

of ceiling of cement

finish concrete

Slenderness ratio and stress factor have heen calculated and are given in Table EZ-I2 for each case (see E-12).
I 53

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRl~CTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Table E-12 Slenderness Ratio and Stress
Case 2 8L Case 5

Factor
Case 4 Case 6 Case 7 Case 8

Particulars

Case 1 & Case 3

I. Third and second sroreg a) Actual height H in m (centre to centre of structural slab) b) Effective height h = 0.75 H from Table 1 of the Code. c) SR=t for t= 19 cm

2.85 2.14 11.3 0.86

2.87 2.15 11.3 0.86

3.15 2.36 12.4 0.83

3.17 2.18 12.5 0.83

2.89 2.17 11.4 0.86

3.19 2.39 12.6 0.83

d) Stress factor K, for SR given above in (c) from Table 9 of the Code 2. First storey a) Actual height H in m (from top of footing to the centre of slab) b) Effective height h = 0.75 H according to Table 1 of the Code c) SR = p for f = 19 cm d) Stress factor K, for SR given above in (c) from Table 5 of the Code
e) SR=

3.76 2.82 14.8 0.76 9.7 0.90

3.77 2.83 14.9 0.76 9.8 0.90

4.06 3.05 16.0 0.73 10.5 0.88

4.07 3.05 16.1 0.73 10.5 0.88

3.78 2.84 14.9 0.76 9.8 0.90

4.08 3.06 16.1 0.73 10.6 0.88

7 for r =29 cm

h

fj Stress factor K, for SR given above in (e) from
Table 9 of the Code

H-2.3.2 H-2.3.2.1

Loads
Unit weights

For calculating the loads of different components of the building, the following unit weights of materials have been taken: a) RCC up to 2 percent steel = 2 500 kg/m3 = 2 000 kg/m3 flooring plaster = 2 400 kg/m3 = 2 000 kg/m3

b) Lime concrete c) Cement d) Brickwork H-2.9.2.2
Load

10 cm are used in brick masonry, shape modification factor for bricks of 5.0, 7.5, 10.0 and 15.0 N/m'm2 strength will be 1.2, 1.1, 1.1 and 1.0 respectively, in accordance with Table 10 of the Code. Thus for determining the particulars of masonry required for any situation, values of basic stress as arrived at without application of shape modification factor will be divided by the above factors and values of basic stress thus obtained, taken into consideration. H-2.3.4
Compressive Stress in Masonry Prrrtku1rr.s of Rryuisite Masonr)? and

concrete

including

distribution

.fhctors

The RCC slab is assumed as two way slab for loading ptirposes. The roof/floor slab loads on the supporting walls have been worked out in accordance with 23.5 and Fig. 6 of IS 456 : 1978. For the assumed span ratio of 1.3, the load distribution factor has been worked out in accordance with Fig. 6 of 1S 456 : 1978 which is as follows: a) For shorter b) For longer span span = 0.62 = 0.38

Following steps have been adopted for calculation of loads and stresses for each case which have then been tabulated: StPp ( I )Calculation of loads on external and internal walls taking into account parapet load, roof: floor load and self load of walls. Working out compressive in masonry assuming that are no openings. stress there

S're[) (2)-

H-2.3.2.3 Unit loads of roof/floor, roof,`floor load over different walls, self weight of wall of different thickness including parapet wails have been calculated and tabulated in Table E-13. H-2.3.3 Assuming
54 Shape Mod$cation Factor

Step (3) ~- Working out compressive stress after making allowance for openings. .Stc/) (4) Working out requisite basic stress after applying stress reduction factor but without applying shape modification factor as per 5.4.1.3 of the Code.
1

that modular

bricks

of size 20 X 10 X

HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTtON-PART

SP 20(S&T) Table E-13 Unit
Particulars

: 1991

Loads

of Roof/Floor

and Walls
Loads

(case I
1. Dead load and live load in kgJm2: i) Roof ii) Floor 2. Roof load on walls in kg/m: i) External wall ii) Internal wall 3. Floor load on walls in kg/m: i) External wall ii) Internal wall 4. Self weight of wall in kg/m per storey (including 3 cm thick plastering): i) For 19 cm thick wall ii) For 29 cm thick wall 625 525

Case

2

Case

3

Case 4

Case

5

Case

6

Case

7

Case

8'

715 575

625 575

625 575

715 625

715 625

805 675

805 675

600

830

600

600

830

830

I 200
510

I 650
660

I 200
550

I 200
550

1 650
720 1440

1 650
720 1440

I 080 2 170
910

I 080 2 170
910

I 010

I 330

I 110

I 110

I 810

I 810

I 250 I 820

I 260

1 250
I 820

I 390
2 020

I 260 I 840

I 400 2 030

I 270
I 850

I 400
2 040

I 840
440

5. Serf weight of parapet wall (19 cm thick) in kg/m (including 3 cm thick plasreringj

440

440

440

440

440

440

440

Step (5):

Working out values of requisite basic stress after applying shape modification factor. Determining the masonry requirements for triple, double and single storey buildings with reference to Table 8 of the Code.

precise, for.

thus

that

refinement

is not

called

Step (6) -

e) In case of first storey SR applicable

H-2.3.5 important notes in regard to tables for all cases are given below:

a) Figures
simplify

have been rounded calculations.

off suitably

to

b) The symbols

FLI, FL2 and FL3 have been used to indicate Floor I (first floor), Floor 2 (second floor) and Floor 3 (third floor) respectively in accordance with IS 2332 : 1972. Here, the floor?l' has been defined as the lowest floor in the building with direct entrance from the road.

to that storey wall is based on height from top of foundation footing to centre of floor slab. Since, we are increasing the stresses due to openings and .openings start from floor 1 level, we get the maximum stress at floor 1 level. Below that level, as, there are no openings, loads on walls will start dispersing and thus, in spite of increase in dead load of masonry, no increase in stress will take place below floor I level unless the percentage of openin s taken into consideration is very small. gThus stresses in case of first storey have been calculated at floor 1 level. No provision has been made for any wind force in the design calculations and it has been assumed that the building as a whole is stable against all loads.

g) No allowance

Cl For the sake of convenience

of reference, the brick masonry requirement has been designated symbolically in the tables. For example, 20-7-M2 means masonry with 20 cm thick wall using bricks with minimum crushing strength of 7 N/mm2 and mortar Type M2. Standard types of mortar have been given for different mix ratios of' cement, lime and sand in Table I of the Code.

has been made for seismic forces and, therefore, when applying these results for structures in seismic zones other than I and II, strengthening measures as given in IS 4326 : 1976 shall be adopted. (see 6.1.2 of the Code).

h) In marginal

d) No deductions

in self weight of walls due to openings and no reduction in live loads have been made in the calculations since design calculations for masonry cannot be very
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

cases, actual stress (basic) may exceed the permissible stress by a maximum of 10 percent, provided sufficient precautions are taken about the quality of materials and workmanship and work is done under .good technical supervision. Alternatively, perc.entage of openings in walls may be reduced suitably to bring down the actual stress to permissible limits.
1 55

HANDBOOK

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 1 Loads
External `Individual Load kg/m

and

Stresses
Internal / Individual Load kg/m (4) Wall Progressive' Load kg/ m (5) (6) Remarks

Particulars

Wall Progressive Load kg: m (3) 440

(1) Parapet Wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storev wall

(2) 440 600 I 250 510 I 250 510 I 250

I 040
2 2 4 4 5 290 800 050 560 810

1 200 I 250 I 010
I 250 I 010 I 250

I 200
2 3 4 5 6 450 460 710 720 970

kg/ cm* Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 2 290 p= I9 x 100 4 050 p= I9 x 100 5 810 p= I9 x 100 1.21 -zz 0.55 I.21 2 -= 450 I9 x 100 4 -= 710 I9 x 100 6 -= 970 I9 x 100 1.29 -= 0.70

kg/cm2 1.29

FL2

2.13

2.48

FL1 Compressive wall with stress openings in masonry

3.06

3.67

FL 3

2.20

1.84

FL 2 FL I

2.13 -cc= 0.55
3.06 -= 0.55

3.87

2.48 -= 0.70
3.67 -= 0.70

3.54

5.56

5.24

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL3

z=

2.56

1.84 -= 0.86 3.54 -= 0.86

2.14

K, = 0.86

FL2

g=

4.50

4.12

K, = 0.86

FL I
Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

5.56 -= 0.76
%=2.l

7.32

5.24 -= 0.76
2.14 1.2 =

6.89

K, = 0.76

FL3

I.8

FL2

F=

4.1

4.12 I.1

=

3.7

FL I
Masonry requirements

7.32 -=
I.1

6.7

6.89 =
I.1

6.3

FL 3 FL 2 FL I

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M3
20-7.5-M I

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M3
20~7.5-Ml (Continued)

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(S&T) Case
Particulars

: 1991

1- Conr~ludd
Internal Wall Remarks

Ex'ternal Wall

kg/ cm2 Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modifcation factor FL2 g= 3.87 -= 0.76 2.56 -= 1.2 5.09 -= I.1 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M 2.56 1.84 -= 0.86 3.54 -= 0.76 2.14 -= 1.2 4.66 I.1 =

kg/ cm2 2.14 K, = 0.86

FL I Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

5.09

4.66

K, = 0.76

FL 2

I.1

I.8

FL Masonry requirements

1

4.6

4.2

FL 2 FL I

1

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2

Basic stress of requisite masbnry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress' of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonrv reauirements

FL

I

2.20 -cc 0.76

2.8?

I .84 -= 0.76

2.42

K, = 0.76

FL FL

I

2.89 -= 1.2 20-3.5-L2

2.4

2.42 -1.2

=

2.0

I

20-3.5-L2

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

57

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 2 Loads and Stresses

Particulars

External Wall f Individual Load hg m Progressive7 Load kg; m (3) 440

Internal Wall `Individual Load kg/ m (4) Progressive1 Load kg/m (5)

Remarks

(1) Parapet Wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall

(2) 440 830 260 660 260

(6)

I 270
2 530 3 190 4 450 5 110 6 370 kg/ cm'

I I

I 650 I 260
I 330 1 260

I 650 2 910 4 240 5 500
6 830 8 090 kg/ cm*

660 I 260

I 330 I 260

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL

3

2 530 p= 19 x 100 4 450 p= I9 x 100 6 370 p= I9 x 100

I .33

2 910 ---z 19 x 100 5 500 --_?z 19 x 100 8 090 ---Yz 19 x 100
1.53 _E 0.70 2.89 0.70 4.26 0.70 =

1.53

FL2

2.34

2.89

F1.I Compressive wall with stress in masonry openings

3.35

4.26

FL

3

1.33 -=

0.55 2.34 -= 0.55
3.35 -= 0.55

2.42

2.19

FL 2

4.25

4.13

FL

I

6.09

=

6.09

Fvr

Three-S/ore>,cdBuilding _____

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor .

FL

3

2.42 PC 0.X6 4.25 FE 0.86
6.09 -xz 0.76 2.81 _=

2.8 I

-= 0.86

2.19

2.55

& = 0.86

I-`[. 2

4.94

4.13 _zz 0.86
6.09 -= 0.76

4.80

KS = 0.86

FL

I

8.01

8.01

K, = 0.76

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

FL

3

1.2
4.94 PC

2.3

2.55 _= 1.2 4.80 -= I.1 8.01 -= I.1 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2 20-7.5-M

2.1

FL

2

I.1 8.01 -= 1.1 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M 20-7.5-M

4.5

4.4

FL

I

7.3

7.3

Masonry

requirements

I-.!. 1 t-1. ; FI. I

I

I

I

S8

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRlICTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 2-Concluded
Particulars For Two-Srorcyed Building kg/ cm* Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modifcation factor FL 2 2.42 -= 0.86 4.25 -= 0.76 2.81 -= 1.2 5.59 -= I.1 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-Ml 2.81 2.19 _= 0.86 4.13 -= 0.76 2.55 _= 1.2 5.43 -= 1.1 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M] kg/ cm' 2.55 External Wall lnternal Wall

: 1991

Remarks

K. % 0.86

FL Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

I

5.59

5.43

K. = 0.76

FL 2

2.3

2.1

FL Masonry require'ments

1

5.1

4.9

FL 2 FL I

For

One-Storeyed

Building

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor __--...-. Masonry requirements

FL

I

2.42 PC 0.76

3.18

2.19 _= 0.76

2.88

K, = 0.76

FL FL

1 I

3.18 -= 1.2 20-3.5-L2

2.65

2.88 _= I.2 20-3.5-L2

2.4

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 3 Loads and Stresses

Particulars

External `Individual Load kg/m

Wall Progressive' Load kg/m (3) 440

Internal `Individual Load kg/m (4)

Wall Progressive> Load kg/m (5) -

Remarks

(1) Parapet Roof Third Wall storey wall

(2) 440 600 I 250 550 I 250 550 1 250

(6)

I 040
2 290 2 840 4090 4 640 5 890 kg/cm'

1 200
I 250 I I I I I10 250 I10 250

I 200 2 450 3 4 5 7 560 810 920 170

Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall

kg/ cm* 2 450 -= 19x 100 4 810 -= 19x 100 7 170 -= 19x100 1.29 -0.70 = 1.29

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

2290 -= 19x 100 4090 -= 19x 100 5 890 -= 19x loo 1.21 o.u=

1.21

FL2

2.15

2.53

FL1 Compressive wall with stress in masonry openings

3.10

3.71

FL 3

2.20

1.84

FL 2

2.15 z= 3.10 0.u =

3.91

2.53 iEi= 3.77 0.70=

3.61

FL 1 For Three-Storeyed Building
Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

5.64

5.39

FL 3 FL 2

2.20
0.86=

2.56 4.55

1.84

0.86=
3.61 0.86 =

2.14

K. = 0.86

3.91 0.86= 5.64 0.76=
1.2=

4.20

K. = 0.86

FL 1
Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

1.42

5.39 0.76
-

=

7.09

K. = 0.76

FL 3

2.56

1.1

2.14 1.2

=

1.8

FL 2

4.55 -iT= 7.42 1.= 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M3
20-7.5-Ml

4.1

4.20 1.1

=

3.8

FL 1
Masonry requirements

6.7

7.09 Ti= 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M3
20-7.5-Ml

6.5

FL 3 FL 2 FL I

(Continued)

60

H'ANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESlGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 3-Cmcludetl
Particulars For Two-Storeyed Building kg/ cm' Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modifcation factor FL2 g= 3.91 -= 0.76 2.56 -= 1.2 $ = 2.56 1.84 -= 0.86 3.61 0.76= 2.14 1.2= 4.75 I.1 = kg/ cm2 2.14 External Wall Internal Wall

: 1991

Remarks

K$ = 0.86

FL basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

I

5.15

4.75

K, = 0.76

FL 2

2.1

1.8

FL Masonry requirements

I

4.7

4.3

FL 2 FL I

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-MI

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2

For One-Sroreyed

Building

Baste stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry requirements

FL1

g=

2.89

1.84 -= 0.76

2.42

K, = 0.76

FL1 FL 1

2.89 E= 20-3.5-L2

2.4

2.42 1.2

=

2.0

20-3.5-L2

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

61

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 4 Loads and Stressem
Internd
/\ `Individual Load kgl m (41 Progressive' Load kg/m (51 (61

Particulars

External Wall A
fIndividua1 Load kg/m Progressive\ Load kg/m (31 440 1040 2 430 2 980 4 370 4 920 6 310 kg/ cm2

Wall

Remarks

(1)
Parapet Wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall

(21 440 600 1 390 550 1 390 550 I 390

1 1 1 1 1 1

2x30 390 110 390 110 390

I 200 2 590 3 700 5090 6200 7 590
kg/ cm2

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

2 430 -= 19x100 4 370 -= 19x100

1.28

2 590 -= 19x100

1.36

FL2

2.30

-=5090 19x100
7 590 -= 19x loo 1.36 -= 0.70

2.68

FLI
Compressive wall with stress in masonry openings

6310 -= 19x100
g=

3.32

3.99

FL3

2.33

1.94

FL 2

2.30 0.55=
g =

4.18

2.68 -= 0.70 3.99 0.70=

3.83

FL 1

6.04

5.70

For three-Sroreyed

Building

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL 3

0.83= 2.33

2.81

0.83= 1.94

2.34

K, = 0.83

FL 2 FL 1
Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

4.18 0.83 6.04 CT=
l.z

=

5.04 8.27

PC 3.83 0.83 5.70 ifix=
1.2

4.61 7.81

K. = 0.83 K. = 0.73

FL 3

2.81

=

2.3

2.34

=

2.0

FL 2 FL 1
Masonry requirements

5.04 1.1 8.27 1.1

= =

4.6 7.5

l.l 4.61 7.81 1.1=

=

4.2 7.1

FL 3 FL 2 FL 1

20-3.5-La Xl-5.0-M 20-7.5-HI

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2 20-7.5-Ml
( Conrinued)

62

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 4-Concluded
Particulars For Two-Storeyed Building kg/ cm' Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modifcation factor FL2 g= 4.18 0.73= 2.81 1.2 5.73 1.1 = 2.81 1.94 -= 0.83 3.83 -= 0.73 2.34 -= 1.2 5.25 I.1 = kg/ cm' 2.34 External Wall Internal Wall

: 1991

Remarks

K. = 0.83

FL Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FL Masonry requirements

I

5.73

5.25

K. = 0.73

FL 2

2.3

1.2

1

=

5.2

4.8

FL 2 FL 1

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ll

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-Ml

For One-Storeyed

Building

Basic stress of requisite masonry of shape without application modification factor

FL

1

2.33 -= 0.73

3.19

-= 0.73

1.94

2.66

& = 0.73

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry requirements

FL FL

1

3.19 - 1.2

=

2.7

2.66 -= 1.2 20-3.5-L2

2.2

1

20-3.5-M2

HANDBOOK

ON MAS.ONRY

*DESIGN

AND

CCWSTRUCTION-P.ART

1

63

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 5 Loads and Stresses
Internal Wall `Individual Load kg/m (4) Progressive' Load kg/ m (5) (6) Remarks

Particulars

External Wall ' Individual Load kg/ m Progressive3 Load kg/m (3) 440 1 270 2 530 3 250 4 510 5 230 6 490 kg/ cm'

(1) Parapet Wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall

(2) 440 830 I 260 720 1 260 720 I 260

I 650 I 260 1 440 1 260 1440 I 260

I 2 4 5 7 8

650 910 350 610 050 310

kg/ cm2 -= 2 910 I9 x 100 -= 5 610 19x 100 8 310 -= 19x100 1.53 -= 0.70 -= 2.95 0.70 4.37 -= 0.70 1.53

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

2 530 -= 19x100 4 510 -= 19x100 6490 -= 19x100 g=

1.33

FL2

2.37

2.95

FL] Compressive stress in masonry wall wit11 openings

3.42

4.37

FL3

2.42

2.19

FL2

g=

4.31

4.21

FL1

g==

6.22

6.24

For

?`hhree-Sforeyed Building 2.19 -= 0.86 4.21 0.86 6.24 -= 0.76 2.55 1.2 4.90 I.1 = =

Basic stress of requisite masonr) without application of shape modification factor

FL3

s=

2.81

2.55

& = 0.86

FL2

g=

5.01

4.90

K, = 0.86

FL1 Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

g= 2.81 1.2 5.01 1.1

8.18

8.21

K, = 0.76

FL 3

=

2.3

2.1

=

4.6

=

4.5

Masonry

requirements

FL 3 FL 2 FL 1

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-Ml 20-7.5-Ml

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-MI 20-7.5-H2 ( Conlinued)

64

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(S&T) Case S-Concluded
Particulars For Two-Sroreyed Building External Wall Internal Wall

: 1991

Remarks

kg/ cm'
Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor FL2 $$= 4.31 0.76= + 2.81 2.19 PC 0.86 4.21 PC 0.76 2.55 1.2 `5.54 -= 1.1 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-Ml =

kg/ cm* 2.55 K, = 0.86

FL Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

1

5.67

5.54

K, = 0.76

FL2

2.3

2.1

FL Masonry requirements

I

+6+

=

5.2

5.0

FL 2 FL I

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ll

For

One-Storeyed

Building

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry requirements

FL1

$f$=

3.18

2.19 -CC 0.76

2.88

K, = 0.76

FL FL

1 I

g

=

2.7

2.88 1.2

=

2.4

20-3.5-M2

20-3.5-L2

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 6 Loads and Stresses
Internal Wall Progressive' flndividual Load Load kg/m (4) kg/m (5) I 650 1400 1440 (6) Remarks

Particulars

External Wall fi ' Individual Progressive\ Load Load kg/m kg/ m (3) 440

(1) Parapet Wall

(2) 440 830 I 400 720 I 400 720 I 400 2 3 4 5 6

Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall

1 270
670 390 790 510 910

1650
3 4 5 7 8 050 490 890 330 730

I 400
1440

1400

kg/ cm' Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 2 670 -= I9 x 100 4 790 -= 19x 100 6 910 -= 19x 100 g= 1.41 3 050 ---= 19 x 100 -= 5 890 I9 x 100 8 730 p= 19x100 I.61 -= 0.70 -= 3.10 0.70 4.59 -= 0.70

kg/ cm* 1.61

FL2

2.52

3.10

FL1

J.64

4.59

Compressive wall with

stress in masonry openings

FL3

2.56

2.30

FL2

g= 3.64 -= 0.55

4.58

4.43

FL

I

6.62

6.56

For

Thre&Sroreyed Building 2.30 -= 0.83 4.43` -= 0.83

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL3

g=

3.08

2.77

K. = 0.83

FL2

g=

5.52

5.34

K = 0.83

FLI Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FL2

g= 3.08 1.2 F=

9.07

-= 6.56 0.73 2.77 1.2 -= 5.34 1.1 8.97 1.1 = =

8.97

K, = 0.73

FL 3

=

26 -. 5.0

2.3

4.9

FLI Masonry requirements FL 3 FL 2 FL I

F= 20-3.5-M2 20-5.0-MI 20-IO-MI

8.25

8.2

20-3.5-M2 2O-5.0-Ml 20-10-Ml

66

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 6-Concluded
Particulars For Two-Storeyed Building External Wall Internal Wall

: 1991

Remarks

kg/ cm2 Basic stress of reauisite masonry without application of shape modification factor
FL 2 2.56 0.83= 4.58 0.73= 3.08 -= 2.30 0.83

kg/ cm'
2.77 K, = 0.83

FL I

6.27

4.43 PC 0.13 2.11

6.07 = 2.3

K. = 0.73

Basic stress of requisite. masonry after application of shape modification factor

FL 2

1.2=
6.27 1.1

3.08

2.6

1.2

FL 1

=

5.1

6.07 1.1

=

5.5

Masonry requirements

FL 2 FL I

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M3

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M3

For One-Storeyed

Building

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonrv reauirements

FL1

g=

3.51

2.30 -=

0.73
3.15 -

3.15

K, = 0.73

FL 1 FL I

3.51

-Ii= 20-3.FM2

2.9

1.2

=

2.6

20-3.5-M2

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) : 1991 Case 7 Lands and Stresses
Particulars External Wall `Individual Load kg/ m (1) Parapet Wall (2) 440 1 080 1 270 910 1 270 910 I 270 I 2 3 4 5 7 Progressive' Load kg/m (3) 440 520 790 700 970 880 150 kg/ cm' Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 2790 -= 19x loo 4 970 -= 19 x 100 7 150 -= 19x 100 g= 1.47 3440 -= 19x100 6 520 -= 19x 100 9600 -= 19x 100 1.81 -= 0.70 3.43 -= 0.70 5.05 0.70= 2 170 1 270 1 810 1 270 I 810 I 270 I Pnternal Wall Individual Load kg/ m (4) Progressive' Load kg/m (5) 2 170 3 440 5 250 6 520 8 330 9600 kg/ cm* 1.81 (6) Remarks

Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall

FL2

2.62

3.43

FL1 Compressive wall with stress in masonry openings

3.76

5.05

FL3

2.67

2.59

FL2

g=

4.76

4.90

FL1

$$=

6.84

7.21

For Three-Storeyed

Building K, = 0.86 -= 4.90 0.86 7.21 -= 0.76 3.01 1.2 5.70 1.1 9.49 1.1 =

Basic stress of reauisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL3

E=

3.10

FL2

g=

5.53

5.70

x; = 0.86

FL 1 Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

E g

=

9.0

9.49

K, = 0.76

FL 3

=

2.6

2.5

FL 2

5.53 1.1

=

5.0

=

5.2

=

8.6

Masonry

requirements

FL 3 FL 2 FL 1

20-3.5-M2 20-5.0-Ml 20-lO-Ml

2O-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ll 20-lO-Ml (Continued)

68

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 7-Concluded
Particulars For Two-Sloreyed Building External Wall Internal Wall

: 1991

Remarks

kg/ cm'
Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor FL 2 2.67 0.86= 4.76 -= 0.76 3.10 1.2= 6.26 -iYi= 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5M2 3.10 2.59 0.86=

kg/ cm* 3.01 K. = 0.86

FL 1 Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

6.26 3.01 -_= 1.2 6.45 1.1 =

K, = 0.76

FL 2

2.6

2.5

FL 1 Masonry requirements FL 2 FL 1

5.7

5.9

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M2

For One-Sroreyed

Building

Basic stress of requisite masonry of without application modification factor shape Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry requirements

FL 1

2.67 0.76=

3.51

2.59 0.76

=

3.40

K, = 0.76

FL I FL 1

3.51 1.2= 20-3.5-M2

2.9

3.40 1.2= 20-3.5-M2

2.8

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

69

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 8 Loads and Stresses
Inter* Wall Remarks

Particulars

Externk

Wall

/Individual Load kg/m (1) Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First stprey wall First storey wall* (2) 440 1 080 1 400 910 1 400 910 1 400 2 040

Progressive\ Load kg/m (3) 440 1 520 2 920 3 830 5 230 6 140 7 540 8 180 kg/ cm'

`Individual Load kg/m (4) 2 170 1400 1 810 1400 1 810 I 400 2040

Progressive Load kg/ m (5) 2 3 5 6 8 9 10 170 570 380 780 590 990 630 (6)

kg/ cm' -= 3 570 19x 100 -= 6 780 19x 100 -= 9990 19x 100 10 630 -= 29X 100 1.88 -= 0.70 3.57 -= 0.70 5.26 -= 0.70 3.67 -= 0.70 1.88

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

2 920 -= 19x 100 5 230 -= 19x100 7 540 -= 19x100 8 180 -= 29X100 $$= 2.75 0.55= g=

1.54

FL2

2.75

3.57

FL1

3.97

5.27

FL I* Compressive wall with stress in masonry openings

2.82

3.67

FL3

2.80

2.69

FL 2

5.00

5.10

FLI

7.22

7.51

FLl'

g=

5.13

6.67

For Thee-Storeyed

Building 2.69 -= 0.83 5.10 -= 0.83 7.51 0.73= 6.67 -= 0.88

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL3

g= 5.00 0.83=

3.37

3.24

K. = 0.83

FL 2

6.02

6.15

K = 0.83

FLI

g=

9.89

10.29

K, = 0.73

FLI+

EC

5.83

7.58

IL = 0.88 ( Continued)

70

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(S&T):1991 Case 8 -Concluded
Particulars External Wall kg/ cm' Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FL 3 s = 2.8 3.24 1.2= FL 2 6.02 I.1 = 5.5 -6.15 1.1 10.29 -= 1.1 FL Masonry requirements 1' z = 5.8 2&3.5-M2 20-7.5-M3 20-IO-Ml 30-7.5-Ml = Internal Wall kg/ cm2 2.7 Remarks

5.6

9.4

FL 3 FL 2 FL 1 FL I*

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M3 20-IO-MI 30-75-M2

For Basic

Two-Sroreyed Building stress of requisite masonry of shape FL2 E= 5.00 -= 0.73 $j= 3.37

without application modification factor

2.69 _-CT 0.83 5.10 PC 0.73 3.24 _= 1.2 6.99 -= 1.1 20-3.5-Ml 20-7.5-M]

3.24

K. = 0.83

FL Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

1

6.85

6.99

K, = 0.73

FL 2

2.8

2.7

FL 1 Masonry requirements FL 2 FL I

T

=

6.2

6.4

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

For One-Storeyed Building Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and masonry

FL 1

2.80 0.73

=

3.84

2.69 PC 0.73 3.68 -= 1.1 20-3.5-M2 wall.

3.68

K, = 0.73

FL FL requirements

I 1 for

3.84 Ti= 20-3.5-M2 jr/4 brick,

3.5

3.4

30 cm thick

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Table

: 1991 Results of Brick Masonry
Three

E-14 Design

Walls

for Residential
Double rlnternal Wall Storeyed /\

Building
Building External ' Wall

Up to 3 Storeys
Single Internal Wall Storpy Building h External' Wall

SI No.

Span (m)

Storey Height (m) 2.7

Live Load (kg/m) 150

Storey Level

Storeyed Building h `Internal External' Wall Wall 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M3 20-7.5-Ml 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2 20-7.5-Ml 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M3 20-7.5-M 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2 20-7.5-Ml 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M I 20-IO-M3 20-3.5-M2 20-5.0-M I 20-IO-MI 20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-L I 20-IO-MI 20-3.5-M2 20-7.SM3 20-IO-MI 30-7.5-M2 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M3 20-7.5-M

1.

3.0

FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL 1 FL 3 FL 2 FL I

I

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M I

20-3.5-L2

20-3.5-L2

2.

3.6

2.1

150

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2 20-7.5-M I 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M I

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M I

20-3.5-L2

20-3.5-L2

3.

3.0

2.1

200

20-3.5-L2

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M 1 20-3.5-L2 20-3.5-L2

I

20-7.5-M 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M 20-7.5-HI

I I

20-5.0-M2

4.

3.0

3.0

200

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M 1

20-3%L2 20-7.5-Ll

20-3.5-L2

20-3.5-M2

5.

3.6

2.1

200

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M I 20-7.5-M I 20-3.5-M2 20-5.0-M 1 20-10-M I 20-3.5-M2 20-5.0-M I 20-10-M 1

20-3.SL2 20-5.0-Ml

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ll

20-3.5-L2

20-3.5-M2

6.

3.6

3.0

200

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M!

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M3

20-3.5-M2

20-3.5-M2

I.

4.2

2.1

200

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M2

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M2

20-3.5-M2

20-3.5-M2

8.

4.2

3.0

200

20-3.5-M2 20-3.5-M 1 20-7.5-M3 or 20-IO-MI or 20-7.5-Ml 30-7.5-M2

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M I

20-3.5-M2

20-3.5-M2

Table

E-15 Design

Results

of Brick Masonry Walls (Using Conventional
`Ibree

for Residential Bricks*)
Double `internal Wall (8) Storeyed A

Buildings

Up to 3 Storeys

SI No.

Span (m)

Storey Height (ml (3)

Live Load (him) (4)

Storey Level

Storeyed Building A `Internal External' Wall Wall (6) (7)

Building External' Wall (9)

Single `internal Wall (IO)

Storey A

Building External> Wall (11)

(1)

(2)

(5)

I.

3.0

2.7

150

FL 3 FL 2 FL I FI 3 FL 2 FL1 FL 3 FL 2 FL I
FL 3

23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2 23-5.0-Ll 23-5.0-M3 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2
23-7.5-M2 23-3.5-L2 23-7.5-Ml 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-M2 23-5.0-M3 23-5.0-M2 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2

2.

3.6

2.7

150

. 3. 3.0 2,7 200

23-5.0-M3 23-5.0-M2 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2 23-7:5-Ml 23-7.5-Ml 23-5.0-M 23-5.0-M I I 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2 23-5.0-Ll 23-5.0-M3 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2
23-7.5-M2 23-i5-L2 23-7.5-M I 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2 23-5.0-M2 23-3.5-L2 23-5.0-M I 23-3.5-M2 23-5.0-M3 23-5.0-M I 23-3.5-L2

23-3.5-L2

4.

3.0

3.0

200

FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I

23-5.0-M3 23-5.0-M I 23-7.5-M I 23-7.5-Ml

23-3.5-L2

5.

3.6

2.7

200

23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2 23-5.0-M2 23-5.0-M2 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2 23-3.5-L2 23-7.5-M I 23-5.0-M 1 23-5.0-M I 23-7.5-M I

23-3.5-M2

(Conrimed) 12
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1

SP 20(S&T) Table E-15 Concluded
(7) 23-3.5-M] 23-5.0-Ml 23-lO.O-M2 23-3.5-M2 23-5.0-M 1 23-IO-M2 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-L] 23-IO-MI 0 (8) (9) (10)

: 1991

(1)
6.

(2)
3.6

(3)

(4)

(5) FL 3 FL 2 FL I

(6) 23-3.5-I.2 23-5.0-Ml 23-7.5-Ml 23-3,5-M2 23-5.0-M] 23-IO-M2 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-L] 23-10-M]

(11)

3.0

200

23-3.5-L2 23-5.0-Ml 23-3.5-M2 23-`.5-M I

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ll

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-M2

7.

4.2

2.7

200

FL 3 FL 2 FL 1 FL 3 FL 2 FL

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ll

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-M2

8.

4.2

3.0

200

1

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M2

2%3.5-M2 23-7.5-M2

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-M2

*Without giving detailed calculations.

ANNEX

H-3

DESIGN OF BRICK MASONRY FOR OFFICE BUILDINGS UP TO 3 STOREYS

H-3.1

Design

Parameters Width Corridor

H-3.2.3 Clear Height 01 Store v Live Load FlErs H-3.2.4

Height

of parapet

wall above

I .O m

Maximum Span (Short Span in Case 2-Way Slab)

roof

slab
For For For Cases Cases Cases I to 4 5 to 8 9 to 12

of

sf
m

RCC

Thickness of roof/floor slab

I I cm IOcm

14 cm 12cm

l7cm l4cm

m 1so I so I so I so I .80 I .no I .80 I .80 2.10
2.10 2.10 2.10

m
3 .oo 3.00 3.30 3.30 3.00 3 .oo 3.30 3.30 3.00 3.00 3.30 3.30

kg/ m2
250 400 250 400 250 400 250 400 250 400 250 400

H-3.2.5 Thickness of lime concrete over roof slab (average) H-3.2.6 Thickness ceiling finish of

Case Case Case Case Case Case Case Case Case Case
Case Case H-3.1.1

I
2 3 4

5
6 7

8
9

IO II
I2
l

3.60 3.60 3.60 3.60 4.50 4.50 4.50 4.50 5.40 5.40 5.40 5.40

I cm 8cm

I cm 8cm

I cm 8cm

H-3.2.7 Thickness of lime concrete cushion under flooring H-3.2.8 Thickness cement concrete flooring of

4cm

4cm

4cm

H-3.2.9 Wall plastered on both sides, total plaster thickness H-3.2.10 Length to width ratio, that is, span ratio of rooms
H-3.2.1 1 Openings in walls as percentage of wall area in plan: a) In wall A (external), percent b) In wall B, percent c) In wall C, percent
1

3cm

3cm

3cm

floors H-3.2

Typical plan of the office building has been shown in Fig. E-47.
Assumptions

at all

I .25

1.33

I .39

For All Cases

h-3.2.1 Height
level H-3.2.2 top Height

of plinth of plinth

from above

ground footing
AND

0.5 m I.0 m

50 25 30

50

50

;:

::
73

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

ROOM

ROOM

ROOM

IROOM FIG.

ROOM

ROOM

ROOM

L WALL Wall `A'-External Wall `B'-Internal Wall `C'-Internal

`A'

longitudinal cross walls longitudinal

wall
walls

E-47 TYPICAL

PLAN

OF OFFICE

BUILDING

AT ALL

FLOORS

H-3.2.12 `The bricks used in masonry are modular bricks of nominal size 20 X 10 X IO cm. H-3.2.13 Openings located that: in a wall are so shaped and

calculated and are given in Table case (see E-16). H-3.3.2 H-3.3.2.1 Loads Unit weights

E-16 for each

a) in load
occur wall and H/6 also

bearing walls, openings do not within H/8 distance from a cross that provides stiffening to the wall, length of cross wall is not less than (see 4.6 and Fig. 9 of the Code and comments on 4.4 of the Code). area of brickwork 2 000 cm?; and in any wall

For calculating the loads of different components of the building, the following unit weights of materials have been taken: a) b) c) d) RCC up to 2 percent steel = 2 500 Lime concrete =2000 Cement concrete flooring = 2 400 Brickwork including plaster = 2 000 Load distribution factors kg/m3 kg/m3 kg/ m3 kg/m3

b) the horizontal
is less than

c) the

brickwork openings does definition.

between two consecutive not become a column by

H-3.3.2.2

NOTE--In case area of brickwork in any wall openings is less than 2 000 cm' or becomes a column by definition, stress in the actual portion shall be checked by calculation.

The RCC slab is assumed as two-way slab for loading purposes. The roof/floor slab loads on the supportmg walls have been worked out in accordance with 235 and Fig. 6 of IS 456 : 1978. For assumed span ratios (see H-3.2.10, the load distribution factors have been worked out in accordance with the above referred figure which are as follows: For For For Cases Cases Cases I to 4 5 to 8 9 to 12 a) For shorter span span 0.60 0.40 0.63 0.37 0.64 0.36

H-3.2.14 masonry assumed H-3.2.15 designed H-3.3 H-3.3.1 (K)

RCC roof/floor bears fully on external walls. So, eccentricity over wall has been to be negligible. The RCC slab is assumed to have been as two-way for loading purpose. Steps Ratio (SR) and Stress Factor and stress factor have been

Design

Slenderness ratio

b) For longer

Slenderness
14

H-3.3.2.3 Unit loads of roof/floor, load over different walls, self weight
ON MASONRY

roof/floor of walls of
1

HANDBOOK

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T) Table E-16 Slenderness
Particulars

: 1991

Ratio

and Stress

Factors
cases 11 and 12

CnSt?S CaWS CaSeS Casts Cases 1 and 2 3 and 4 5 and 6 7 and 8 9 and 10

1. Third and second storey a) Actual height H in m (centre b) Effective c) SR = $ d) Stress height

to centre Table

of structural

slab)

3.24 2.43 12.8

3.54 2.66 14.0

3.21 2.45 12.9

3.57 2.68 14.1

3.30 2.48 13.0

3.60 2.70 14.2

h = 0.75 H from

1 of the Code

for t = 19 cm K, for SR

factor

given above in (c) from

0.82

0.78

0.81

0.78

0.81

0.78

Table 9 of the Code 2. For j?rst storey a) Actual height H in m (from top of footing to the centre of slab) 4.07 4.37 4.08 4.38 4. IO 4.40

b) Effective height h = 0.75 H from Table 1 of the Code c) SR=+ for 1= 19 cm

3.05 16.1
0.73 10.5
0.88

3.28 17.3
0.69 11.3
0.86

3.06 16.1
0.73 10.6
0.88

3.29 17.3
0.69 11.3
0.86

3.08 16.2
0.72 10.6
0.88

3.30 17.4
0.69 11.4
0.86

4 Stress factor K. for SR given above in (c) from
Table 9 of the Code SR= t for t = 29 cm

Stress factor K, for SR given above in (e) from
Table 5 of the Code

different

thicknesses

including

parapet

walls have

been calculated
H-3.3.3 Assuming Shape

and tabulated
Modification

in Table E-17.

Factor

that modular brick of size 20 X 10 X 10 cm are used in brick masonry, shape modification factor for bricks of 5.0, 7.5, 10.0 and 15.0 Table
Particulars `Case

N/mm*, strength will be 1.2, 1.1, 1.1 and 1.0 respectively in accordance with Table 8 of the Code. Thus for determining the particulars of masonry required for any situation, values of basic stress as arrived at without amAication of shape modification factor will be d&ided by the above factors and values of basic stress thus obtained are taken into consideration.
of Roof/Floor and Walls
Loads c

E-17 Unit

Loads

1
1. Dead load and live load in kg/m? i) Roof ii) Room floor iii) Corridor floor 2. Roof load on walls in kg/m: i) `Wall A ii) Wall B iii) Wall C 3. Floor load on walls in kg/m: i) Wall A ii) Wall B iii) Wall C 4. Sey weight of wall in kg/m per srorey 1 430 1960 440 650 810

Case 2

Case
3

Case
4

Case
5

Case
6

Case
7

Case
8

Case
9

Case
10

Case
I1

Case)
12

650 960

650 810

650 960

1060 1060 1060 1060
610 610 610 1480 1480 1480 1 160 I 160 I 160 610 1480

765 765 765 765 880 885 1 035 885 1 035 960 I 135 I 135 1 135 1 135 1 210

880

I 110
1 210

880 960 I 210

880 1 II0 I 210

I

880 2260 160 1640

880 880 2260 2260 I 640 I 640

880 2260

I 640

1220 I 220 1220 3150 3150 3150 2 230 2 230 2 230

1 220 3150 2 230

760 900 760 900 1010 I 190 I 010 I 190 1 330 I 540 I 330 1 540 1 840 2 180 I 840 2 180 2 610 3 060 2 610 3 060 3 430 3 970 3 430 3 970 I660 1 800 1660 1800 2 140 2 310 2 140 2 310 2 710 2 920 2 710 2 920

(including 3 cm thick plastering): i) For 19 cm thick wall i) For 29 cm thick wall 5. Se!f weight of parapet wall (19 cm thick) in kg/m (including 3 cm thick plastering)

1 430 I960 440

1 560 1 560 I 440 2 150 2 150 1970
440 440 440

1 440 I 570 I 970 2 I60 440 440

I 570 I 450 2 160 1980 440 440

1 450 1 580 1 580 1 980 2 170 2 170 440 440 440

HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

75

SP 20(S&T) : 1991 H-3.3.4 Compressive Stress in Masonry Particulars of Requisite Masonry Following calculations which have steps have been of loads *and stresses then been tabulated: and 20 cm thick wall using bricks with minimum crushing strength of 7 N/mm* and mortar of type M2. Standard Types of mortar have been given for different mix ratios of cement, lime and sand in Table 1 of the Code.

adopted for for each case

Step (1) -Calculation of loads on external and internal walls taking into account parapet wall load, roof/ floor load and self-load of walls. Step (2) -Working out compressive in masonry assuming that are no openings. Step (3) -Working out comiressive after making allowance for ings. stress there stress open-

d) No deductions

in self weight of walls due'to openings and no reduction in live loads have been made in the calculations since design calculations for masonry cannot be very precise on account of a number of assumptions and thus that refinement is not needed.

e) In case of first storey, SR applicable

Step (4)-Working out requisite basic stress after applying stress reduction factor but without applying shape modification factor. Step (5)-Working out values of requisite basic stress after applying shape modification factor. Step (6) -Determining the masonry requirements for triple, double and single storeyed buildings with reference to Table 8 of the Code.

to that storey wall is based on height from top of foundations footing to centre of floor slab. Since, we are increasing the stresses due to openings which start from floor I level or htgher than floor 1 level, we get the maximum stress at floor 1 level. Below. that level, as there are no openings, loads on walls will start dispersing and thus in spite of increase in dead load of masonry, no increase in stress will take place below the floor 1 level, unless the percentage of openings taken into consideration is very small. Thus, stresses in case of first storey have been calculated at floor 1 level. has been made for any wind force in the design calculation, and it has been assumed that the building as a whole is stable against all loads. has been made for seismic and, therefore, when applying these for structures in seismic regions other I and II, strengthening measures as in IS 4326 : 1976 shall be adopted (see of the Code).

0 No provision

Important notes in regard to tables for all cases are given below:

a) Figures
simplify

have been rounded calculations.

off suitably

to

g) No allowance
forces results than given 6.1.2

b) The symbols

FL 1, FL 2 and FL 3 have been used to indicate Floor 1 (first floor), Floor 2 (second floor) and Floor 3 (third in accordance with floor respectively IS 2332 : 1972 `Nomenclature of floors and storeys'. Here, the `floor 1' has been defined as the lowest floor in the building with direct entrance from the road.

h) In marginal

cl For the sake of convenience

of reference, the brick masonry requirement has been designated symbolically in the tables. For example, 20-7-M2 means masonry with

cases, actual stress (basic) may exceed the permissible stress by a maximum of 10 percent provided sufficient precautions are taken about the quality of materials and workmanship, and work is done under good technical supervision. Alternatively, percentage of openings in walls may be reduced suitably to bring down the actual stress to permissible limits.

16

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 1 Loads
Particulars `Individual Load kg/m (1) Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall* (2) 440 610 Wall A A Progressive' Load kg/ m (3) 440

: 1991

and Stresses
Wall B Wall A C Progressive) Load kg/m (7) (8) Remarks

~Individual Load kg/m (4) -

Progressive7) (Individual Load Load kg/ m (5) kg/m (6) -

I 050
2 3 4 5 6 7 480 240 670 430 860 390

I 430
760

I 430
760

1 480 I 430 I 840 I 430
I 840 I 430 I 960

I 480
2 4 6 8 9 9 910 750 180 020 450 980 kg/ cm2

I I I I I

160

I 160
2 590 4 250 5 6807 340 8 770 9300 kg/cm2

I 430 I 960
2 480 p= 19 X 100 4 670 ___ = 19 x 100 6 860 = 19x 100 -- 7 390 = 29X 100 s =

430 660 430 660 I 430 I 960

kg/ cm' Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 1.31 pr 2 910 I9 x 100 6 180 ___ = 19x 100 9 450 ___ = 19 x 100 9 980 _ 29X 100 1.43 0.75 3.25 -= 0.75 4.97 0.75 3.44 -= 0.75 = =

1.53

p=2 590 I9 x 100 5 680 ___ = I9 x 100 8 770 ___ 19x100 9300 29X100 1.36 -= 0.70 2.99 -= 0.70 4.62 0.70 3.21 -z 0.70 = = -

I .36

FL 2

2.46

3.25

2.99

FL FL

I l*

3.61 2.55

4.97 3.44

4.62 3.2

Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings

FL3

2.62

2.04

1.94

FL2

g

=

4.92

4.33

4.27

FLI

$$=

7.22

6.63

6.60

FLl* For Three-Sloreyed Building

E

=

5.10

4.59

4.59

m $$ = 3.20 2.04 0.82 4.33 0.82 6.63 0.73 4.59 0.88 2.49 1.2 3.28
=

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL3

=

2.49

I .94 0.82 4.27 0.82 -6.60 _= 0.73 4.59 0.88 2.37 12 _.5.21 -I *

=

2.37

-k; = 0.82

FL2

s

=

6.00

=

5.28

=

5.21

K, = 0.82

FL1

g

=

9.89

=

9.08

9.04

K, = 0.73

FLl* Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FL3

s

=

5.80

=

5.20

=

5.22

K, = 0.88

E 6.bO

=

2.2

=

2.1

=

2.0

FL 2

-

11

5.5

-I 1

=

4.8

=

4.7

(Continued) HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I
11

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 1 - Concluded

Particulars

Wall

A kg/ cm2

Wall B kg/ cm* 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-MI 20- lo-M2 30-5.0-Ml

Wall

C kg/ cm'

Remarks

Masonry

requirements

FL 3 FL 2 FL 1 FL I*

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M3 20-lo-H1 30-7.5-Ll

20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-M2 20-lo-M2 30-5.0-Ml

For

Two-Storeyed

Building g= 2.04 -= 0.82 4.33 0.73 2.49 -= 1.2 5.93 I.1 1.94 0.82 4.27 0.73 2.37 1.2 5.85 1.1

Basic stress of reqUiSite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL2

3.20

2.49

=

2.37

K, = 0.82

FL1

g=

6.74

=

5.93

=

5.85

K, = 0.73

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

FL2

+$=

2.7

2.1

=

2.0

FL1 FL 2 FL I

z

=

6.1

=

5.4

=

5.3

Masonry

requirements

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M3

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ll

For One-Store.wd

Building

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL

1

is

=

3.57

0.73 2.04

=

2.79

0.73 1.94

=

2.66

Ks = 0.73

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FL1

5

=

3.3

2.79 - 1.1

=

2.5

2.66 - 12

=

2.2

FL masonry

I

20-3.5-M2 requirements for 1% brick,

20-3.5-L2 30 cm thick wall.

20-3.5-L2

.

78

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 2 Loads
Particulars {Individual Load kg/m (1) Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wan* (2) 440 610 I 430 900 I 430 900 I 430 I 960 Wall A Progressivel/lndividual Load Load kg/m (3) 440 050 480 380 810 710 140 670 kg/ cm2 Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 2 480 -= 19x I00 4 -= 810 19x100 7 140 -= 19X 100 7 670 ___ = 29 X 100 & = 1.31 2 910 -= 19 X 100 kg/m (4)

: 1991

and Stresses
Wall B Progressive\flndividual Load Load kg/ m (5) kg/m (6) Wall C Progressive\ Load kg/ m (7) (8) Remarks

I 2 3 4 5 7 7

I 480 I 430
2 180 I 430 2 180 I 430 I 960

I 480 2 910 5 090 6 520 8 700 IO 130 IO 660
kg/ cm' 1.53

I I60 I 430
800 430 800 430 I 960

I 160
2 4 5 7 9 9 590 390 820 620 050 580 kg/ cm'

-= 2 590 I9 x 100 5 820 ___ = I9 x 100 9 050 ___ 19x100 9 580 -= 29 X 100 I .36 -= 0.70 =

1.36

FL2

2.53

- 6 520 = I9 x 100 IO 130 ~ I9 x 100 =

3.43

3.06

FLI

3.76

5.33

4.76

FL Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings

I*

2.64

-=IO 660 29 X 100 I.52 -zz 0.75

3.68

3.30

FL3

2.62

2.04

I .94
= 4.37

FL2

$$=

5.06

__ 0.75 3.43 5.33 ---.--.= 0.75 3.68 -=4.91 0.75

=

4.57

0.70 3.06 4.76 -= 0.70

FL1

+

7.52

7.1

I .

6.80

FLl* For Three-Storeved Building Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor FL3

g

=

5.28

3.30 -zz 0.70

4.7

I

g= $

3.20

2.04 __ 0.82 4.57 -= 0.82 7.11 0.73 4.91 0.88 2.49 __ 1.2 5.57 I.1 9.74 I.1 5.58 -= I.1

=

2.49

I .94 0.82
4.37 -= 0.82 6.80 -zz 0.73 4.71 0.88 2.37 1.2 5.33 -= 1.1 9.32 I.1 5.35 -= 1.1

=

2.37

& = 0.82

FL2

=

6.17

5.57

5.33

K, = 0.82

FL1

g

=

10.30

=

9.74

9.32

K, = 0.73

FLI* Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

g g

=

6.00

=

5.58

=

5.35

K, = 0.88

FL 3

,= E

2.7

=

2.1

=

2.0

FL2

=

5.6

=

5.1

4.9

FL1
FLI*

10.30

1.0
?=5.5

=

10.3

=

8.9

=

8.5

5.1

4.9 ( Continued)

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

79

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 2-Concluded

Particulars

Wall A kg/ cm*

Wall B *g/cm' 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-Ml 20-IO-MI 30-5.0-Ml

Wall C kg/ cm' 20-3.5-L2 20-5.0-Ml 20-IO-MI 30-5.0-Ml

Remarks

Masonry

requirements

FL 3 FL 2 FL 1 FL I*

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M3 20-12.5-Ml 30-7.5-M3

For

Two-Storeyed

Building 2.04 -= 0.82

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL2

g=

3.20

2.49

0.82 1.94

=

2.37

K. = 0.82

FL1

$$=

6.93

-= 4.37 0.73 2.49 -= I.2

6.26

0.73 4.37

=

5.99

K, = 0.73

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

FL2

%=

2.7

2.1

-2.37 1.2

=

2.0

FL1 FL 2 FL I

%=6.3 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

6.26 1.1

=

5.7

5.99 1.1

=

5.5

Masonry

requirements

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M3

20-3.5L2 20-7.5-M3

For One-+`toreyed Basic stress

Building

of requisite FL1 $+= 3.59 -2.04 0.73 = 2.79 -1.94 0.73 = 2.66 K, = 0.73

masonry without application of shape modification factor

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FL

I

z

=

3.3

2.79 I.1

=

2.5

2.66 1.2

=

2.2

FL 1 masonry

20-3.5-M2

20-3.5-L2

20-3.5-L2

requirements for 11% brick, 30 cm thick wall.

80

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(S&T) Case 3 Loads
Particulars findivihual Load Wall A Progressive Load

: 1991

and Stresses
*< Wall B

Individual Load

Load

Load

Load

kg/m (1)
Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall*

kg/m
(3) 440

kg/m
(4)

kg/ m
(5)

kg/m
(6)

kg/ m
(7) (8,

(2)
440 610 I 560 760 I 560 760 I 560 2 150

1 480 I 560 I 840 1 560 1 840 I 560 2 150 I 480 3040 4 880 6440 8 280 9 840 10 430 kg/ cm* -= I9 x 100 6440 ~ 19x100 = 3 040 1.60 2 720 p= 19x100 I 160 I 560 1 660 1 560 1660 I 560 2 150

1 160 2 720 4 380 5 940 I 600 9 160 9 750 kg/ cm' 1.43

I 050
2 3 4 5 7 7 610 370 930 690 250 840

kg/ cm* Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 2 610 p= 19 x 100 4 930 p= 19X 100 $$&= 7840 ~ = 29 X 100 g = 1.37

FL2

2.59

3.39

5 940 = 19 x 100 9 160 ___ = 19 X 100 9 750 ___ = 29X 100 1.43 0.70 3.13 0.70 4.82 0.70 3.36 0.70 =

3.13

FL1

3.82

9 840 ~ = 19x 100 10 430 = 29 X 100 1.60 0.75 3.39 0.75 -5.18 0.75 3.60 0.75 =

5.18

4.82

FL Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings

l*

2.70

3.60

3.36

FL3

2.74

2.16

2.04

FL2

E=

5.18

=

4.52

=

4.47

FL1

$$

=

7.64

=

6.91

=

6.89

FLl* For Three-Storeyed Building Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor FL3

E

=

5.40

=

4.80

=

4.80

g

=

3.51

2.16 0.78 4.52 0.78 6.91 0.69 4.80 -= 0.86 2.77 -= 1.2 5.79 I.1 10.01 1.0 5.58 1.1

=

2.77

2.04 0.78 4.47 0.78 6.89 0.69 4.80 0.86 2.62 1.2 5.73 -= 1.1 9.99 1.0 5.58 1.1

=

2.62

K, = 0.78

FL2

E

=

6.64

=

5.79

=

5.73

K, = 0.78

FL1

g

=

11.07

=

10.01

=

9.99

& = 0.69

FLl* Basic stress of requisite

g +$

=

6.28

5.58

=

5.58

K = 0.86

masonry after application of shape modification factor

FL 3

=

2.9

2.3

=

2.2

FL2

!?+

6.0

=

5.3

5.2

FL1

+$

=

11.1

=

10.0

=

10.0

FLlZ

F

=

5.7

=

5.1

=

5.1 ( Continued)

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

81

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 3 -Concluded

Particulars

Wall

A kg/ cm'

Wall

B kg/ cm'

Wall C kg/ cm* 20-3.SL2 20-7.SLl 20-IO-HI 30-7.5-Ll

Remarks

Masonry

requirements

FL FL FL FL

3 2 I 1'

20-3.SM2 20-7.SM2 20-l2.SHI 30-7.5-M2

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ll 20-IO-HI 30-7.5-Ll

For

Two-Storeyed

Building 2.16 -0.78 2.04 0.78

masonry Basic stress without of requisite application modification of shape factor

FL2

$$=

3.51

=

2.76

=

2.02

& = 0.78

FL1 Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification Masonry factor FLI FL 2 FL I

5.18 o=

7.51

4.52 0.69 2.76 1.2 6.55 -= 1.1

4.47 = 6.55 0.69 2.62 1.2 6.48 I.1

=

6.48

& = 0.69

2.9

=

2.3

=

2.2

+ 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M

6.8

6.0

=

5.9

requirements

1

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M2

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M2

For One-Srorqved

Building 2.16 -= 0.69 2.04 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FL1

g=

4.0

3.0

=

3.0

K, = 0.69

FL

I

4.0 1.1

=

3.6

3.1 -1.2 =

2.6

3.0 1.2 =

2.5

FL masonry

1

20-5.0-Ll requirements for 11% brick,

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall

20-3.5-L2

82

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SY SO(S&T) : 1991 Case 4 Loads
Particulars Wall A

and Stresses
Wall B

Individual Load kg/ m (2) 440 610 560 900 560 900 560 150

Progressive? Load kgl m (3) 440

Individual Load kg/m (4) I 480 I 560 2 I80 I 560 2 180 I 560 2 150

Progressiv> 6) Load Load kg/m (5) 1 480 3040 5 220 6 780 8 960 10 520 II II0 kg/ cm' kg/m (6) I 160

Remarks Load kg/ m (7) I 160 2 720 4 520 6 080 7 880 9440 IO 030 kg/ cm*

(1) Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall*

(8)

I 050
2 610 3 510 5 070 5 970 7 530 8 120 kg/ cm'

I
I

I 560
I 800 I 560 I 800 1 560 2 150 2 720 -= 19x100

I
2

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

2 610 ---= 19 x 100 5 070 Ez-Tiz =

1.37

3040 19= 6 780 _ 19 x 100 - 10 520 = I9 x 100 - II 110 = 29X100 1.60 0.75 0.75 3.57 5.54 0.75 3.83 0.75 = = = =

lxiO 3.57 5.54 3.83 2.16 4.76 7.39 5.11

1.43 3.20 4.97 3.46 2.04 4.57 7.10 4.94

FL 2 FL I I*

2.67 3.96 2.80 2.74

6 080 _ 19x 100 - 9440 19x100 - 10 030 29X100 1.43 ~ 0.70 -0.70 3.20 4.97 0.70 3.46 -= 0.70 = = = = =

~

7 530 = 19x 100

FL

8 120 ~ = 29X 100 g=

Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings

FL3 FL2 FLI

g g=

=

5.34 7.92

5.60
For Three-Storeyed Building

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL3

g=
5.34 0.78

3.54

2.16 0.78

=

2.77

2.04 -= 0.78
0.78 4.57 =

2.62

R = 0.78

FL 2

=

6.59

0.78 4.76

=

6.10

5.86

K; = 0.78

FL 1 FL I* Basic. stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor
FL 2

7.92 0.69 5.60 0.86 1.2
3.54

= =

11.48 6.51

7.39 0.69 5.11 0.86 2.77

= = =

10.71 5.94

7.10 0.69 4.94 -= 0.86 2.62

=

10.29 5.74

K, = 0.69 k; = 0.86

FL 3

=

2.9

I.2

2.3

1.2

=

2.2

Tixi

6.59

=

6.0

-6. IO I.1 10.71 1.0

= =

5.5 9.7

5.86 1.1
10.29

= =

5.3 9.4

FL

1
I*

11.48 =
6.51 1. =

10.4

1.0

FL

5.9

5.94 1.1

=

5.4

5.74 1.

=

5.2

( Continued) HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I

SP ZO(S&T) : 1991 Case 4 -Conch/cd
Particulars Wall A kg/ cm2 Masonry requirements FL FL. FL FL 3 2 1 I* 20-3.5-M2 20-7%M2 20-12.5-Ml 30-7.5-M2 20-3.SL2 20-i.5-M3 20-lo-Ml 30-7.5-Ml Well B kg/ cm' 20-3.5-U 20-7.5-Ll 20-IO-Ml 30-7.5-Ll Wall C kg/ cm' Remarks

For

Two-Storeyed

Building 2.16 0.78 4.76 0.69 2.77 1.2 6.90 1.1 2.04 0.78 4.57 0.69 2.62 1.2 6.62 1.1

Basic stress of requisite masonry without .application of shape modification factor

FL2

g

=

3.51

=

2.77

=

2.62

K = 0.78

FL1 Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FL2

g

=

7.74

=

6.90

=

6.62

R = 0.69

+-

=

2.9

=

2.3

=

2.2

FL

1

E

=

7.0

=

6.3

=

6.0

Masonry

requirements

FL 2 FL 1

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

20-3.5-Ll 20-7.5-Ml

20-3.5-Ll 20-7.5-M2

For One-.Sroreyed

Building 2.16 0.69 2.04 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FL1

g

=

3.97

=

3.13

=

2.96

K, = 0.69

FLI

g

=

3.6

3.13 1.2

=

2.6

2.96 1.2

=

2.5

FL masonry

1

20-5-L] requirements for 1lh brick,

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall.

2O-3.5-L2

84

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 5 Loads
Particulars (Individual Load Wall A Progressive1 Load ( individual Load

: 1991

and Stresses
Wx B Progressive Load ,f Wpr! C Individual Load Progressive Load , Remarks

k/m
(1)
Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall*

kg/m
(3) 440 I 2 3 5 6 7 8 320 760 770 210 220 660 190

k/m
(4) 2 260 I 440 2 610 1 440 2 610 I 440 I 970

kg/m
(5) 2 260 3 700 6 310 7 750 IO 360 I 800 12 330 kg/ cm2

kg/m
(6)

kg/m
(7) (8)

(2)
440 880 I 440 1010 1 440 I 010 I 440 I 970

1640

1 440
2 140 I 440 2 140 I 440 I 970

I 640 3 080 5 220 6660 8 800 10 240 IO 770 kg/ cm!

kg/ cm2 Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 2 760 p= 19 x 100 5 210 ___ = 19 x 100 7 660 = 19 x 100 8 190 p= 29X 100 g= 1.45 3 700 ---= 19X 100 7 750 ___ = 19 X 100 800 - 11 = 19 X 100 ___ 12 330 = 29X 100 1.95 -0.80 =

I .95
4.08

3 080 iSi%=

1.62,

FL 2

2.74

p=6660 19x 100 ___ 10 240 = 19 x 100 ___= 10 770 29X 100 1.62 0.75 =

3:51

FL 1

4.03

$21

5.39

FL Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings FL2

I*

2.82

4.25

3.71

FL3

2.90

2.44

2.16

$$=

5.48

-4.08 0.80 6.21 0.80 4.25 -= 0.80

=

5.10

-3.51 0.75 5.39 -= 0.75 3.71 -= 0.75

=

4.68

FL1

g=

8.06

=

7.76

7.19

FL For 7hree-Siroreyed Building Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor FL2

l*

$$

=

5.64

5.31

4.95

FL3

g

=

3.58

2.44 0.81 5.10 -= 0.81 7.76 0.73

=

3.01

2.16 -= 0.81 4.68 -= 0.81 7.19 0.73 4.94 -= 0.88 =

2.67

K, = 0.81

g

=

6.77

6.30

5.78

K, = 0.81

FL1

g

=

11.04

=

10.63

9.85

K. = 0.73

FLl* Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape factor FL2 modification

z F

=

6.41 3.01 1.2

5.62

K, = 0.88

FL3

=

3.0

=

2.5

2.67 1.2 -= 5.78 1.1 9.85 ~ 1.1 5.62 1.1

=

2.2

z=

6.2

-6.30 1.1 10.63 1.0 6.03 1.1

=

5.7

5.3

FL1

g

=

11.0

=

10.6

=

9.0

FLl*

$=5.8

=

5.5

=

5.1 ( Continued)

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRl!CTlON-PART

I

85

SP 20(S&T) : 1991. Case 5-Concluded
Particulars Wall A kg/ cm' Masonry requirements FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL l* For Two-Sroreyed Building 2.44 0.81 5.10 -= 0.73 3.01 1.2 7.0 I.1 = 2.16 -= 0.81 4.68 0.73 2.67 1.2 6.41 I.1 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml 20-12.5-H2 30-7.5-M2 20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M3 20-l2.5-Ml 30-7.5-M3 Wall B kg/ cm' 20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ll 20-10-M I 30-7.5-Ll Wall C kg/ cm2 Remarks

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL2

s=

3.58

=

3.01

2.67

K. = 0.81

FL1 Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FLI Masonry requirements FL 2 FL 1

$$

=

7.51

7.0

=

6.41

& = 0.73

FL2

g

=

3.0

2.5

=

2.2

E

=

6.8

-

=

6.4

=

5.8

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ml

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M2

For One-Storeyed

Building 2.44 0.73 2.16 0.73

Basic stress of requisite masonry without applicaiion of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modificatiod factpr Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FLI

z=

3.97

=

3.34

=

2.96

K. = 0.73

FL1

+

3.6

3.34 1.2

=

2.8

2.96 I.2

=

2.5

FL I masonry

20-5-Ll requirements for

20-3.5-M2

20-3.5-L2

I1/ brick, 30 cm thick wall.

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 6 Loads
Particulars Wa)(A
/;ndividunl Load kg/m Progressive' `Individual

: 1991

and Stresses
WaJ,B
Progressi"~`/;ndividual

wg

C
ProgressiJ

Remarks

Load
kg! m

Load
ku m

Load
kg/m

Load
kg/m

Load
kg/m

(1)

(2)

(3) 440
I 320

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

v-9

Parapetwall IlOOf
`Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall*

2 260 I 3 I 3 I I 440 060 440 060 440 970

2 260 3 6 8 II I2 I3 700 760 200 260 700 230 kg/ cm'

2 3 5 6 8 8

760 950 390 580 020 550

I 640 I 440
2 310 I 440 2 310 I 440 I 970

1640 3 080 5 390 6 830 9 140 IO 580 II II0 kg/ cm2

kg/ cm* Compressibe stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 2 760 p= I9 x 100 5 390 ___ = I9 x 100

I .45
2.84

3 700 ---= I9 x 100 8 200 p= I9 X 100 P= I2 700 I9 x 100 p I3 230 = : 29 X 100 1.95 0.80 -4.32 0.80 6.68 0.80 4.56 0.80 =

I .95

3 080 -= 19x 100 6 830 p= I9X 100

I .62

FL 2

4.32

3.59

FL I

~ 8 020 = I9 x 100 8 350
___ =

4.22

6.68

-- IO 580 = 19x 100 ~ II 110 = 29X 100 1.62 0.75 ~ 3.59 0.75 5.57 -= 0.75 3.83 0.75 = =

5.57

FL Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings FL2

I*

29 X 100 $$=

2.95

4.56

3.83

FL3

2.90

2.44

2.16

g

=

5.68

=

5.40

=

4.79

FLI

z

=

8.44

=

8.35

7.43

FLI*

g

=

5.90

=

5.70

5.11

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL3

g=

3.58

2.44 -= 0.81

3.01

2.16 -0.81

=

2.67

K, = 0.81

FL2

$=

7.01

5.40 0.81 8.35 0.73 5.70 0.88 3.01 ~ 1.2 E I.1 11.44 1.0 6.48 1.1

=

6.67

-= 4.79 0.81 7.43 0.73 5.11 -= 0.88 2.67 1.2 5.91 1.1 10.18 1.0 5.81 I.1

5.91

k: = 0.81

FL1

g

=

II.56

=

II.44

=

10.18

K. = 0.73

FLl* Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

g

=

6.70

=

6.48

5.81

Ks = 0.88

FL3

g

=

3.0

=

2.5

=

2.2

FL2

s 11.56 1.

=

6.4

=

6.1

=

5.4

FL1

=

11.6

=

11.4

=

10.2

FL

l*

,z

=

6.1

=

5.9

=

5.3 ( Conrinued)

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

87

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

Particulars

Wall A kg/ cm'

Wall B kg/ cm2 20-3.5L2 20-7.5Ml 20-12.5-H] 30-7.5-M2

Wall C kg/ cm' 20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-L] 20-12.5-HI 30-7.5-Ll

Remarks

Masonry

requirements

FL FL FL FL

3 2 1 1*

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5Ml 20-12.5-HI 30-7.5-Ml

For Two-Storeyed Building Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor FL1 Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor g= 7.78 5.40 0.73 3.01 1.2 7.40 1.1 = 7.40 4.79 0.73 2.67 1.2 6.56 1.1 = 6.56 K, = 0.73 g 2.44 -0.81 2.16 -0.81

FL2

=

3.58

=

3.01

=

2.67

K, = 0.81

FL2

F

=

3.0

=

2.5

=

2.2

FL1 Masonry requirements FL 2 FL 1

+=7.1 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

=

6.7

=

6.0

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M]

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M2

For One-Storeyed Building Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Haste stress of requisite masonry after applica+tion of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and 2.44 0.73 2.16 0.73

FL1

g

=

3.97

=

3.34

=

2.96

R = 0.73

FL1

+

=

3.6

3.34 -= 1.2

2.8

2.96 1.2

=

2.5

FL 1 masonry

20-5.0-L] requirements for 1% brick,

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall.

20-3.5-L2

.

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRllCTION-PART

I

SP 20(S&T) Case 7 Loads
Particulars clndividual Load kg/m Wall A Progressive) Load kg/m (3) 440 I 2 3 5 6 8 8 320 890 900 470 480 050 640 /Individual Load kg/m (4) 2 260 I 570 2 610 I 570 2 610 I 570 2 160

: 1991

and Stresses
Wall B Progressives Load kg/m (5) /Individual Load kg/m Wall c Progressive\ Load kg! m (7) (8) Remarks

(1)
Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall*

(2)
440 880

(6)
I 640 I 570 2 140 I 570 2 140 I 570 2 160

I 640
3 830 6440 8 010 IO 620 I2 190 I2 780 kg/ cm2

I 640
3 210 5 350 6 920 9 060 IO 630 II 220 kg/ cm*

I 570 IO10 I 570
IO10 I 570 2 160

kg/ cm2 Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings FL3 2 890 p= 19x 100 5 470 p= I9 x 100 8 050 ---= 19x100 8 640 ~ 29X 100 = 1.52 3 830 ____ 19x100 =

2.02

3 210 p= 19x 100 ~ 6 920 = 19X 100 ___ IO 630 19x100 =

1.69

FL2

2.88

~ 19x 8 010 100 = 12 190 ~ I9 x 100 =

4.22

3.64

FLI

4.24

6.42

5.59

FL Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings FL2

l*

2.98

p= 29X100 I2 780 2.02 0.80 -0.80 4.22 6.42 -= 0.80 4.41 -= 0.80

4.41

~ I1 220 = 29X 100 1.69 -= 0.75 0.75 3.64 5.59 -= 0.75 3.87 -= 0.75 =

3.87

FL3

g=

3.04

=

2.53

2.25

g=

5.76

=

5.28

4.85

FLI FL I*

E= 2.98 -= 0.50

8.48 5.96

8.03

7.45

5.51

5. I6

For

7'hreeStoreyed

Building FL3 +!$ = 3.89 2.53 -= 0.78 3.24 2.25 -= 0.78 2.88 K, = 0.78

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL2

E=

7.38

-5.28 0.78 8.03 0.69 5.51 0.86 3.24 I.2

=

6.77

-= 4.85 0.78 7.45 0.69 5.16 -= 0.86 2.88 1.2 =

6.22

K, = 0.78

FLI

g

=

12.29

=

II.64

10.80

K, = 0.69

FL]* Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FL2

-$$

=

6.93

=

6.41

6.0

K, = 0.86

3.24

=

2.7

=

2.4

E 12.29

=

6.7

-= 6.77 121 II.64 I.0 6.4 I I.1 =

6.2

-= 6.22 1.1 10.80 I.0 6.0 -= 1.1 =

5.7

FLI
FLI*

1.0
%

=

12.3

II.6

10.8

=

6.3

=

5.8

5.5 (Continued)

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

89

SP 20(S&T) : 1991 Case IParticulars Wall A kg/ cm* Masonry requirements FL FL FL FL 3 2 1 I* 20-3.5-L] 20-7.5-M I 20-15-H] 30-7.5-M] 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M3 20-12.5-HI 30-7.5-M2

Condutietl
Wall B kg/ cm2 20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M2 20-12.5-Ml 30-7.5-M3 Wall C kg/ cm' Remarks

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL2

$$=

3.90

2.53 -_= 0.78 5.28 0.69 3.24 -= 1.2 -7.65 1.1 =

3.24

2.25 0.78 4.85 0.69 2.88 1.2 7.03 1.1

=

2.88

K, = 0.78

8.35

=

7.65

=

7.03

K, = 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

FL2

s

=

3.25

2.7

=

2.4

FL1 FL 2 FL 1

F= 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-H I

7.6

7.0

=

6.4

Masonry

requirements

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M]

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-MI

For One-Srory,vtl

Building FL1 $= 4.4 I 2.53 -= 0.69 2.25 -= 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry without of shape factor application modification

3.67

3.26

K, = 0.69

Basic strchs of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads. requirements stresses and

FL1

4.41 -yy

=

3.63

3.26 I.1

=

2.72

FL masonry

I

20-5.0-M3 requirements for llh brick.

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall

20-3.5-M2

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION--PART

I

SP 20(S&T) Case 8 Loads
Particulars

: 1991

and Stresses
Remarks

Wall A Wall B Wall c n. A /\ (Individual Progressive\flndividual Progressive~~lndividual Progressi& Load Load Load Load Load Load kgl m kgl m (3)
440

(1)
Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall*

(2)
440

kg/ m (4)

kgl m (5)

kg/ m (6)

kg/m (7)

(8)

2 260 1 570 4060 I 570 3060 I 570 2 I60 2 3 6 8 II 13 260 830 890 460 520 090 1640 I 570 2 310 I 570 2 310 1 570 2 160 1640 3 210 5 520 7 090 9400 IO 970 II 560 kg/ cm2 p=3 210 19x 100 ---= 7 090 19 x 100 ___ IO 970 = 19x 100 11 560 ____ = 29 X 100 1.69 -z 0.75 1.69

880 I 570 I 190 I 570 I 190 I 570 2 160

1 320 2 890 4 080 5 650 6 840 8 410 9 000 kg/ cm2

13 680 kg/ cm*

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

2890 p= 19x 100 5 p= 650 19 x 100 8 410 -= 19 x 100 9000 = 29 X 100 s=

1.52

-= 3 830 19x 100 p=8 460 19 x 100 ~ 13 090 = 19x 100 13 680 = 29 X 100 2.02 0.80 =

2.02

FL2

2.97

4.45

3.73

FL1

4.43

6.89

5.77

FL I* Compressive stress in masonry wail with openings FL2 FL3

3.10 30.4

4.12

3.99

2.53

2.25

g=

5.94

4.45 0.80 6.89 -= 0.80 4.72 0.80

=.

5.56

-3.13 0.75 5.77 -= 0.75 3.99 -= 0.75

=

4.97

FL1

E=

8.86

8.61

7.69

FLl* For Three-Storeyed Building

+!!$

=

6.20

=

5.90

5.32

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL3

E

=

3.90

2.53 0.78

=

3.24

2.25 -= 0.78

2.88

K, = 0.78

FL2

g=

7.62

-= 0.78 5.56

7.13

0.78 4.97

=

6.37

K. = 0.78

FL 1

8.86 = 0.69 6.20 = 0.86
1.2

12.84

8.61 = 0.69 5.90 0.86 = 3.24

12.45

7.69 = 0.69 5.32 = 0.86
-F 1.2

11.14 & =0.69

FL I*
Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

7.21

6.86

6.19 K. = 0.86

FL 3

3.40

=

3.35

1.2

=

2.7

2.83

2.4

FL 2 FL I

7.62 = 1.
12.84 1.0 =

6.9
12.8

7.13 = 1.1
12.45 1.0 0.86 1.1 =

6.5
12.5

6.37 Ti-=
11.14 1.0 6.19 -------= 1.1 =

5.8
11.1

FLI*

yyi-

7.21

=

6.6

=

6.2

5.6

( Conrinued) HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 1 91

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

Particulars

Wall .A kg/ cm2

Wall B kg/ cm2 20-3.SM2 20-7.5-M I 20-l5.0-HI 30-7.5-M I

Wall C kg/ cm* 20-3.5L2 20-7.5M2 20-l2.5-H2 30-7.5-M3

Remarks

Masonry

requirements

FL FL FL FL

3 2 I I*

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5Ml 20-l5.0-HI 30-7.5-Ml

For

Tbt,o-Storqyed

Building 2.53 ~ 0.78 5.56 -z 0.69 2.24 -= I .2 2.25 0.78 4.97 0.69 2.28 1.2 7.20 I.1 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml 20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL2

$$

=

3.89

=

3.24

=

2.88

K, = 0.78

FLI Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

g

=

8.61

8.06

=

7.20

K, = 0.69

FL2

+

3.25

2.7

=

2.4

FLI Masonry requirements FL 2 FL I

8.61 l.l= 20-3.5-M2 20-IO-M2

7.8

=

6.5

I

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FLI

$$

=

4.41

2.53 0.69

=

3.67

2.25 -= 0.69

3.26

K, = 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FLI

$

=

3.68

3.67 __ 1.2

=

3.06

3.26 EC=

2.72

FL masonry

I

20-5.0-M3 requirements for I%1 brick.

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall.

20-3.5-M2

92

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(5&T) Case 9 Loads
Particulars /Individual Load kg/ m (1) Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall* (2) 440 Wall A ProgressivJF Load kg/ m (3) 440

: 1991

and Stresses
Wall B Progressive) Load kg/m (5) (Individual Load kg/m (6) Wall /\ C Progressive\ Load kg/m (7) (8) Remarks

Individual Load kg/ m (4)

3 150 I 450 3 I 3 I 430 450 430 450 980 3 150 4 600 8 9 12 14 14 030 480 910 360 980 kg/ cm* 4600 ~ = 19x 100 ~ 19x 9 480 100 = I4 360 p= 19x 100 2.42 3 680 ---= 19 x 100 ~ 7840 = I9 x 100 12 000 p= 19x100 2 ?30 I 450 2 710 1 450 2 710 I 450 I 980 2 230 3 680 6 7 10 I2 I2 390 840 550 000 530 * kg/ cm2 1.94

I 220 I 450 I 330 I 450 1 330 I 450 1 980
3 I10 100

I 660
3 II0 4440 5 890 7 220 8 670 9 200 kg/ cm*

I

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

-= 19x

1.64

FL 2 FL I

5 890 ___ I9 x 100 = ___ 8 670 = I9 x 100 9 200 ___ 29 X 100 = s

3.10 4.56

4.99

4.13

7.56

6.32

FL Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings FL2 FL1

I*

3.17

~ 29 14 X890 = 100 2.42 -0.85 -= 0.85 4.99 7.56 0.85 -0.85 5.13 =

5.13

____ 12 530 = 29X 100 1.94 -0.80 =

4.32

FL3

=

3.28

2.85

2.43

g g

= =

6.20 9.12

5.87

-4.13 0.80 6.32 0.80 0.80 4.32

=

5.16

=

8.89

=

7.90

FLl* For Three-Storejjetl Building

E

=

6.34

=

6.04

=

5.40

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL3

$$

=

4.05

~ 2.85 0.81 5.87 0.81 8.89 0.72 6.04 0.88 3.52 1.2 7.25 I.1 12.35 1.0 6.86 I.1

=

3.52

-= 2.43 0.81 5.16 0.81 7.90 0.72

3.0

K, = 0.81

FL2

$$ 9.12 0.72 s 4.05 1.2 E i2.67 -iTi 7.20 1.1

=

1.65

=

7.25

=

6.37

& = 0.81

FL

1

=

12.67

=

12.35

=

10.97

K. = 0.72

FLI* Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shane modification factor

=

7.20

=

6.86

5.40 0.88 3.0 1.2 6.37 1.1 10.97 1.0 6.14 I.1

=

6.14

K, = 0.88

FL 3

=

3.4

=

2.9

=

2.5

FL 2 FL I

= =

7.0 12.7

= =

6.6 12.4

= =

5.8 II.0

FL

l*

=

6.5

=

6.2

=

5.6
( Conrinued)

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

93

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 9- ConcluJeed

Particulars

Wall

A kg/ cm2

Wall B kg/ cm2 20-3.5-M2 20-7%Ml 20-15.0-HI 30-7.5-M2

Wall C kg/ cm2 20-35L2 20-7.SM2 20-12.5-H2 30-7.5-M3

Remarks

Masonry

requirements

FL 3 FL 2 FL 1 FL l*

20-35M2 20-7.5-M 1 20-15.0-Hl 30-7.5-Ml

For

Two-Storeyed

Building 2.85 0.81 2.43 0.81 0.72 5.16 3.0 1.2

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL2

+$=

4.05

=

3.52

=

3.0

K, = 0.81

FL Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FL Masonry requirements

1

6.20 0.72

=

8.61

5.87 0.72 3.52 1.2 8.16 1.1

=

8.16

=

7.17

K, = 0.72

FL2

+!+ 8.61 1.1

3.33

=

2.9

-

=

2.6

1

=

7.8

=

7.4

7.17 1.

=

6.5

FL 2 FL 1

20-3.5-M2 20-lo-M2

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

20-3.5-L2 2O-7.5-Ml

For One-Storeyed

Building 2.85 0.72 2.43 0.72

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stiess of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FLI

g

=

4.56

=

3.96

=

3.37

k: = 0.72

FL

1

+$

=

3.8

3.96 1.2

=

3.3

2.37 - 1.2

=

2.8

FL masonry

1

20-5.0-M3 requirements for IIh brick,

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall.

20-3.5-M2

94

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

SP 20(S&T) Case 10 Loads
Particulars Wall A ProgressiveIf Ylndividual Load Load

: 1991

and Stresses
Wall B
e

Wall C
/\

Remarks

Individual Load

Progressive Load

"Individual Load

Progressive7 Load

(1)
Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall*

kg/m (2)
440 1 220 I 450

kg/m
(3) 440 1660 3 110 4 650 6 100 7 640 9 090 9 620 kg/ cm*

kg/m
(4) 3 150 I 450 3 970 l 450 3 970 1 450 I 980

kg/m
(5) 3 I50 4&l 8 570 IO 020 13 990 15 440 15 970 kg/ cm2

kg/m
(6)

b/m
(7) (8)

1540
1 450 I 540 1 450 I 980

2 230 1 450 2920 I 450 2 920 1 450 1 980

2 230 3680 6600 8 050 IO 970 12 420 12 950 kg/ cm'

Compressive

stress

in

masonry wall without openings

FL 3

3 110 iEGi= 6 100 = 19x 100 - 9090 = 19x 100 9 620 = 29X 100

lH

~ 19x100 10 020 ~ 19x100 ~ I5 440 19x100

4600

=

2.42

19x100

3 680

=

I .94

FL 2 FL I

3.21 4.78

= =

5.27 8.13

- 8 050 = 19x 100 12 420 19x100 - 12 950 29X100 1.94 0.80 -4.24 0.80 6.54 -= 0.80 -4.47 0.80 = _

4.24 654

.
= 4.47

FL Compressive` masonry openings stress in

I*

3.32

I5 970 = 29X 100 2.42 0.85 5.27 0.85 8.13 0.85 5.51 0.85 =

5.51

wall with

FL3

,

g= +$ 4.78 ?ix 3.32 0.50 =

3.28

2.85

=

2.43

FL2

6.42

=

6.20

=

5.30

FL I

=

9.56

=

9.56

8.18

FL I* For Three-Sioreyed Building

=

6.64

=

6.48

5.59

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL3

g= 6.42 0.81

4.05

-= 0.81 2.85

3.52

jj-ji 2.43

=

3.0

K, = 0.81

FL 2

=

7.93

0.81 6.20

=

7.65

5.30 Ei 8.18 0.72 -5.59 0.88 3.0 1.2

=

6.54

K = 0.81

FL l FLl' Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

Iix 9.56 E 4.05 -E 7.93 I. 13.28 1.0 7.55 -K

= =

13.28 7.55

0.72 9.56 6.48 0.88 3.52 1.2 7.65 Ti13.19 1.0 7.36 x-

= =

13.19 7.36

= =

11.36 6.35

K. = 0.72 K, = 0.88

FL 3

=

3.175

=

2.9

=

2.5

FL 2 FL 1

= =

7.2 13.3

= =

7.0 13.2

-6.54 1.1 Ii.36 1.0 6.35 I.1

= =

5.9 11.4

FL I*

=

6.9

=

6.7

=

5.8

( Conrimed) HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESlGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART I 9s

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case lo-

Concluded
Wall B Wall C Remarks

Particulars

Wall

A

kg/ cm' Masonry requirements FL 1 FL 2 FL 3* 20-3.5-M2 20-7.SMl 30-7.5-M] 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml 3O-7.5-M]

kg/ cm' 20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-M2 30-7.5-M2

kg/ cm2

For Two-Storeyed

Building 2.85 0.81 6.20 0.72 3.52 1.2 8.61 1.1 2.43 0.81 5.30 _= 0.72 3.0 1.2 =

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

FL2

g

=

4.05

=

3.52

=

3.0

K. = 0.81

FL1 Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

g

=

8.92

=

8.61

7.36

& = 0.72

FL2

F

=

3.38

=

2.9

2.5

FL1 Masonry requirements FL 2 FL 1

E

=

8.1

=

7.8

-7.30 1.1

=

6.7

20-5.0-M3 20-IO-M2

20-3.5-M2 20-IO-M2

20-3.5-L2 20-7.5-Ml

For One-Storeyed`Building Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor Basic stress of requisite masomy after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FL

1

3.28 -= 0.72

4.56

2.85 0.72

=

3.96

2.43 0.72

=

3.37

K. = 0.72

FL1

z=

3.8

3.96 1.2

=

3.3

3.37 _= 1.2

2.80

FL 1 masonry

20-5.0-M3 requirements for II/, brick,

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall.

20-3.5-M2

96

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSlHl~CTION-PART

I

SP 20(S&T) Case 11 Loads
P8rticul8rs W81i A * Progressive' ' Individual Load Load kg/ m (1) Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall* (2) 440 I 220 1 580 1 330 1 580 I 330 1 580 2 170 kg/ m (3) 440 r

: 1991

and Stresses
W811 c L Individual Progressive' Load Load kg/ m (6) kg/m (7) (8) Remarks

W811 B & Progressive" Individual Load Load kg/m (4) 3 150 I 580 3 430 I 580 3 430 I 580 2 I70 3 4 8 9 13 I4 15 150 730 160 740 170 750 340 kg/ cm2 4 730 -= 19x100 9740 = 19X 100 14 ~ 750 = I9 x 100 I5 340 29X100 2.49 -0.85 = 2.49 kg/m (5)

1660
3 240 4 570 6 150 7 480 9060 9 650 kg/ cm*

2 230 I 580 2 710 I 580 2 710 I 580 2 I70

2 230 3 810 6 520 8 100 IO 810 12 390 I2 980 kg/ cm'

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

3 240 -= I9 x 100 6 150 19x loo

1.71

3 810 ~ x = I9 100 -= 8 I00 19x 100 ___ 12 390 = I9 x 100 12 980 19x100 0.80 2.01 =

2.01

FL 2

=

3.24

5.13

4.26

FL 1

9060 ~ = I9 x 100 9 650 ___ = 29 X 100 1.71 0.50 =

4.77

7.76

6.52

FL Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings FL2 FLI

I*

3.33

5.29

4.48

FL 3

3.42

=

2.93

=

2.51

$$ g=

=

6.48 9.54

__ 5.13 0.85 -= 0.85 7.76

=

6.04 9.13

-= 4.26 0.80 -0.80 6.52 =

5.33 8.15

FLl* For Three-Storqved Building FL 3

E

=

6.66

-= 5.29 0.85

6.22

0.80 4.48

=

5.60

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application of shape modification factor

3.42 0.78 g

=

4.38

2.93 0.78 6.04 0.78 9.13 0.69 6.22 0.86 3.76 I.2 7.74 1.1 13.23 1.0 7.23 Ti-

=

3.76

2.51 -= 0.78 5.33 0.78 8.15 0.69 5.60 0.86 3.22 1.2 6.83 1.1 II.81 1.0 6.51 1.1

3.22

K, = 0.78

FL 2

=

8.31

=

7.74

=

6.83

K, = 0.78

1;`L I

9.54 0.69 6.66 0.86 4.38 1.2 8.31 1.1 +2

=

13.82

=

13.23

=

II.81

I& = 0.69

FL l* Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

=

7.74

=

7.23

=

6.51

K, = 0.86

FL 3

=

3.65

=

3.13

=

2.1

FL 2

=

7.6

=

7.0

=

6.2

FL

1

=

13.8

=

13.2

=

11.8

FL

I*

s

=

7.0

=

6.6

=

5.9 (Continued)

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

97

SP 20(S&T) : 1991 Case 11-Concluded
Particulars Wall A Wall B Wall C Remarks

kg/ cm'
Masonry requirements

kg/ cm2 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml 30-7.5-Ml 20-3.5-h42 20-7.5~Ml 30-7.5-M2

kg/ cm2

FL 3 FL 2 FL I*

20-5.0-M3 20-lo-h43 30-7.5-Ml

For Two-Sroreyed Building
Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL 2

$$

=

4.38

-0.78

2.93

=

3.76

-= 0.78

2.51

3.22

R = 0.?8

FLI

E 4.38 1.2 9.39 1.1

=

9.39

6.04 0.69 3.76 1.2 8.75 Ti-

=

8.75

5.33 -= 0.69 3.22 1.2 7.72 1.1 =

7.72

& = 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

FL 2

=

3.65

=

3.13

2.7

FL

I

=

8.5

=

8.0

=

7.0

Masonry

requirements

FL 2 FL I

20-5.0-M3 20-IO-Ml

20-3.5-M2 20- IO-M2

2O-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

For One-Storeyed Building Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor 3.42 0.69 2.93 0.69 2.51 0.69

FL

I

=

4.96

=

4.25

=

3.63

K, = 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FLI

F

=

4.15

FL masonry

1

20-5.0-M2 requirements for 11% brick,

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall.

20-3.5-M2

98

HANDBOOK

ON

MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

SP 20(.5&T) Case 12 Loads
Particulars Wall A I `Individual Progressive' Load Load kg/m (1) Parapet wall Roof Third storey wall Floor 3 Second storey wall Floor 2 First storey wall First storey wall* (2)
440

: 1991

and Stresses
Wall C A Progressive' `Individual Load Load kg/ m (6) kg/m (7) (8) Remarks

Wall B *r `Individual Progressive' Load Load kg/m (4) kg/m (5)

kg/m (3) 440

1 220 I 580
I 540 I 580 I 540 I 580 2 170

I 660
3 240 4 780 6 360 7 900 9 480 IO 070 kg/ cm2

3 I50 I 580 3 970 I 580 3 970 I 580 2 170

3 150 4 730 8 700 IO 280 I4 250 I5 830 16 420 kg/ cm2

2 230 I 580 2 920 I 580 2 920 I 580 2 170

2 3 6 8

230 RIO 730 310

I I 230 I2 8!0 13 400
kg/ cm' 3 810

Compressive stress in masonry wall without openings

FL3

-= 19x

3 240 100

1.71

~ = 19X 100 10 280 = 19x 100 I5 830 ~ = I9 x 100 16 420 ___ 29X100 2.49 __ 0.85 5.41 --.--.-= 0.85 8.33 0.85 5.66 0.85 = =

4 730

2.49

19X100 8 310 ~ 19x100

=

2.01

FL 2

6 360 = 19x 100

3.35

5.41

=

4.37

FL

1
I*

~

9 480 19X 100

=
=

4.99

8.33

12 810 = 19X 100 I3 400 = 29X 100 2.01 0.80 4.37 0.80 6.74 PC 0.80 4.62 0.80 = =

6.74

FL Compressive stress in masonry wall with openings FL2 FL1

10 070 ~ 29X100 g

3.47

5.66

4.62

FL3

=

3.42

=

2.93

2.51

$ g

= =

6.70 9.98

6.36 9.80

=

5.46 8.43

FLI* For lkee-Sloreyed Building

g

=

6.94

=

6.66

5.78

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL3

$=

4.38

2.93 0.78

=

3.76

2.51 0.78

=

3.22

K, = 0.78

FL2

g=

8.59

6.36 0.78 9.80 0.69 6.66 -= 0.86 3.76 I.2 8.15 -= 1.1 14.20 I .o 7.74 -= I.1

=

8.15

5.46 -= 0.78 8.43 0.69 5.78 0.86 3.22 -= 1.2 7.0 -zY. I.1 12.22 I.0 6.72 I.1 = =

7.0

K, = 0.78

FL1

g 6.94 0.86

=

14.46

=

14.20

12.22

K = 0.69

FLl* Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor FL3

=

8.07

7.74

=

6.72

K, = 0.86

E s=

=

3.65

=

3.13

2.7

FL2 FL1

7.8

7.4

6.4 12.2

g

=

14.5

=

14.2

FLl*

#-

=

7.3

7.0

=

6.1

( Continued)

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

99

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 Case 12 -

Concluded
Wall B Wall C kg/ cm' 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Mt 30-7.5-Ml 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml 30-7.5-M2 kg/ cm' Remarks -

Particulars

Wall A kg/ cm'

Masonry

requirements

FL 3 FL 2 FL I*

20-5.0~M3 20-lo-M3 30-7.5-Ml

For

Two-Storeyed

Building 2.93 0.78 6.36 0.69 1.2 3.76 2.51 -= 0.78 5.46 -= 0.69 __ 3.22 1.2 =

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL2

+$=

4.38

=

3.76

3.22

K, = 0.78

FL1

!&?&

9.71

=

9.22

7.9

I

K, = 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor

FL2

++

3.65

=

3.13

2.7

FL1 Masonry requirements FL 2 FL 1

E= 20-5.0-M3 20-IO-MI

9.7

9.22 1.1

=

8.44

-7.91 1.1

=

7.2

20-3.5-M2 20-lo-M1

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M]

For One-Storqved

Building 3.42 0.69 2.93 0.69 2.51 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry without application modification of shape factor

FL

1

=

4.96

=

4.25

=

3.64

K, = 0.69

Basic stress of requisite masonry after application of shape modification factor Masonry *Loads, requirements stresses and

FL1

3=

4.13

4.25 1.2

=

3.54

3.64 1.2

=

3.03

FL masonry

1

20-5.0-M2 requirements for 1% brick,

20-3.5-M2 30 cm thick wall

20-3.5-M2

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

I

Table (1)
9.

E-18 (7)

Concluded
(8) (9) (10) (11)

(2)
5.40

(3) 3.00

(4) 250

(5) FL FL FL FL FL FL FL FL FL FL FL FL 3 2 1 I* 3 2 1 I* 3 2 I l*

(6) 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M 1 2O-15.0-HI or 30-7.5-M 1 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml 30-7.5-M 1 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M I 30-7.5-M I 20-5.5-M2 20-7.5-M I 30-7.5-M 1

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M 1 2O-15.0-H] or 30-7.5-M 1 20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-M] 30-7.5-M I 20-5.0-M3 20-IO-M2 30-7.5-M I 20-5.0-M3 20-IO-M2 30-7.5-M 1

20-3.5-M2 20-7.5-Ml

20-3.5-M2 20-IO-M2

20-3.5-M2

20-5.0-M3

10.

5.40

3.00

400

20-3.5-M2 20-IO-M2

20-3.5-M3 20-lO.O-M2

20-3.5-M2

20-5.0-M3

11.

5.40

3.30

250

20-3.5-M2 20-IO-M2

2O-5.0-M3 20-IO-MI

20-3.5-M2

20-3.5-M2

12.

5.40

3.30

400

FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL I*

20-5.0-M3 20-10.0-MI

20-3.5-M2 20-IO-MI

20-3.5-M2

20-5.0-M2

SP 20(S&T) Table E-19 Design Results of Brick Masonary Walls for Office (Using ConventIonal* Bricks)
`lbree Storeyed Building n ' Internal External\ Wall Wall 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ll 23-IO-MI 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M3 23-IO-MI 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M2 23-IO-MI 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M2 23-IO-H2 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ml 23-IO-MI 23-3.5-L2 23-5.0-M2 23-7.5-H I 23-3.5-L2 23-5-M 1 23-lo-M2 23-3.5-L2 23-5.0-M I 23-IO-M2 23-3.5-L2 23-7.5~LI 23-10-M I 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M2 23-10-M I Double

: 1991

Building

Up to 3 Storeys

SI No.

Spll Cm)

Storey Height Cm) 3.00

Live Load (kg/m*) 250

Storey Level

Storeyed Building Single Storey Building A r\ f Internal External 1 f Internal External \ Wall Wall Wall Wall

I.

3.6

FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M2

23-3.5-L2 23-5-M I

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-1.2

2.

3.6

3.00

400

23-3.5-h12 23-7.5-M2

23-3.5-L2 23-7.5-Ll

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5.L2

3.

3.6

3.30

250

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M

I

23-3.5-L2 23-7.5-Ll

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-L2

4.

3.6

3.3

400

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I

23-3.5-L2 23-7.5-M3

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-L2

5.

4.5

3.0

250

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-M2

6.

4.5

3.0

400

23-3.5-M2 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-MI 23-7.5-M I 23-IO-HI or 34.5-7.5-Ml 34.5-7.5-M I

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ml

23-3.5-M2 23-3.5-M I

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-M2

I.

4.5

3.3

250

FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I FL 3 FL 2 FL I

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ml 34.5-7.5-MI 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ml 34.5-7.5-MI 23-5.0~I.1 23-7.5-Ml 34.5-7.5-M I 23-5.0-LI 23-7.5-MI 34.5-7.5-Ml 23-5.0-M3 23-7.5-MI 34.5-7.5-Ml 23-5.0-M3 23-IO-M2 34.5-IO-M2

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ml 23-10.0-M I 23-3.5-M2 23-7.SMl 34.S7.5-Ml

23-3.SM2 23-7.5-Ml

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I

23-5.0-M3

23-3.5-M2

8.

4.5

3.3

400

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I

23-3.5-M2

23-3.5-M2

9.

5.1

3.0

250

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-Ml 23-7.5~l.2 34.5-7.5-M 1 23-3.5-M I 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I 34.5-7.5-Ml 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I 34.5-7.5-Ml 23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I 23-7.5-Ml

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I

23-3.5-L2

23-3.5-M2

IO.

5.4

3.0

400

23-5.0-Ll 23-IO-M2

23-3.5-M2 23-7.5-M I

23-5.0-M3

23-3.5-M2

I I.

5.4

3.3

250

23-5.0-M3 23-lo-M2

23-3.5-M2 23-IO-M2

23-5.0-M2

23-5.0-M3

12.

5.4

3.3

400

23-5.0-M3 23-IO-MI

23-3.5-M2 23-IO-M2

23-5.0-M2

23-5.0-M3

*Bricks

of nominal

size 23 cm X II.5

cm X 7.7 cm.

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

103

SP ZO(S&T) : 1991

ANNEX
NOTATIONS, SYMBOLS

H-4
= Vertical

AND ABBREVIATIONS
W

H-4.1 Notations, Symbols and Abbreviations from the Code are reproduced below along with additions used in the handbook for ready reference.
NOTE-When its intended any Notation meaning has more than one meaning will be with reference to the context.

WI
w2 w,

=
= =

Y Z cc

= = =

A hA B BM Z :\c e v

$

c

A Q, H I-f Hl, h ia zip ks, IL LL Ll L2 L3 = M Ml M2M31 NA = = P = PPL = RS = RCC = = SR = s, t I,
IP

H2

= =
=

1"
104

=

Hydraulic lime Area of a Section Width of a rectangular Section or Width of bearing of a vertical load Semi-hydraulic lime Bending moment Fat lime Depth of a rectangular Section Dead load Damp proof course Eccentricity as distance from centroid Resultant eccentricity as distance from centroid Stress (either compressive or tensile) Basic compressive stress Compressive stress/ Permissible compressive stress Compressive stress due to dead loads Compressive strength of a masonry as per prism test Shear permissible stress Tensile stress Ground level Actual height between lateral Supports or Total wall height above the level being analysed Hei ht of an opening 4! strength mortars Hlg Effective height of a masonry element between lateral supports Moment of inertia Area reduction factor Shape modification factor Stress reduction factor Stiffening co-efficient of a wall Actual length of a masonry wall Effective length of a masonry wall Live load Low strength mortars Moment Medium strength mortars Neutral axis Unit wind pressure/ Lateral load Total wind force/ Horizontal load Plinth level Rolled steel Reinforced cement concrete Slenderness ratio Spacing of piers/ Buttresses/ Cross walls Actual thickness Effective thickness Thickness of pier Thickness of wall
HANDBOOK

load/ Weight or Resultant load Axial load Eccentric. load Width of piers/ Buttresses/Cross walls Distance of extreme fibre of a section from neutral axis Modulus of a section Ratio of flexural strength of wall in the vertical direction to that in the horizontal direction REFERENCES

I. Proceedings and Design Volume Masonry New 2. CP Load I II III

of the International of Tall Buildings, Structural Design American

Conference on Planning Lehigh University, 1973. of fall Concrete and Society of Civil Engineers. Recommendation British for

Buildings.

York.

:

Part

2

:

1970 Structural Metric Building for of

Bearing

Walls. for

Units.

Standards of

Institution. 3. Masonry Designs Canada 1969. 5. IS 4. Recommended Brick 2250

-~ National

Standard

CAN3-S304-M84. Practice Institute Code Engineered for 61 Brick Masonry, and of America, Practice Digest Virginia. Preparation (Second Brick (Metric

:

1981

Use of Mortars. 6. Building Strength Research Station Series). Walls. Masonry 1970. Units). of Brickwork, Blockwork and Concrete England Code

7. Proceedings Conference 8. AS 1640

of the Second 1974 Part SAA

International

held in Stoke-on-.frent.

: :

Brickwork of Australia.

Standards 9. BS 5628 Standards IO. Monk,

Association

I:

1978 Code

of Practice

for Structural British

Use of Masonry:

Part

2 Unreinforced

Masonry.

Institution. First National 1965). Working for I Draft Brick and Tile Bearing Walls Part I-1987 Code of Practice International for Walling: Standards Buildings

C. B. Jr.. Old and New Research on Clay Masonry (May Pittsburge. Masonry Practice

Bearing Wall. Conference II. ISOThird for Structural Organisation 12. CP Part 13. Brick I21 I

use of Unreinforced Standardization.

:

Part

:

1973 Code Block Walls

of

Brick

and

Masonry. Single

British Storey

Institution. Diaphragm in Tall by W. G. Curtin and G. Shaw. 14. IS 1641 to IS : 164X Code of Practice Buildings. 15. IS 3792-1978 Guide for Heat Insulation of Non-Industrial Insulation Work. in Brickwork 6; 1973. of Free I, Volume of Buildings. 16. IS 1950 : 1962 Code of Practice Non-Industrial 17. IS 2212 18. HANDRY, Strength, 19. THOMAS Standing No. 20. DIN 1974. 5; July Buildings. of Practice Volume for I. Brick No. Workmanship KERFF BOA Factors

for Fire Safety of

for Sound

:

1962 Code (A W). BDA (K)

Technical and

(JOA). `Technical

Dcslgn Note

Brickwalls. 1972.

10531 I Brick Calculation

and Construction

Deutche-

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

1

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

SECTION

1

the quantities available at site from time to time for the purpose of inventory control. I .2.2.3 Cement

1 GENERAL 1 .l Introduction Masonry is one of the main items of construction in a building and needs careful consideration. It comprises masonry units such as brick, stone, concrete block laid in mortar. There is a large variety of units and a number of different types and grades of mortars that are used in masonry. Architects and Engineers should have good knowledge of properties of units and mortars so as to be able to choose an appropriate combination of the two, to meet the requirements for a particular situation. Similarly, field engineers should have good knowledge of the construction practices and techniques so that masonry effectively serves the purpose for which it is intended. 1.2 Materials 1.2.1 Spectfications Materials used in masonry are covered, with regard to their specifications, in a number of Indian Standards a? given in the List of Bibliography at the end. References and Information in a summarised form could be found in "SP : 21 Summaries of Indian Standards for Building Materials". 1.2.2 Stacking and Storage

Cement if received in gunny bags should be stored in a building or temporary godown which is dry, leak-proof and moisture-proof. Cement bags should be stacked off t-he floor on wooden platform about 15 cm clear above the floor and a space of about 45 cm should be left alround between the walls and stacks. Height of stacks should not be more than 15 bags and width not more than 4 bags length. When height of stacks exceeds 8 bags, these should be placed alternately in header and stretcher layers so as to avoid toppling over. As an additional precaution during monsoon season, bags should be covered with tarpaulins or some waterproof sheets and windows (if any) and doors should be kept closed. 1.2.2.4 Lime

Quicklime should be slaked soon after its arrival and should be stored on a dry brick platform in the form of compact heaps suitably protected from rain and storm. During rains slaked lime should be stored under a shed. Hydrated fat or semi-hydraulic lime received in bags should be stored in godown or shed on dry brick platform, while hydrated hydraulic lime in bags should be stored in a godown on wooden platform just like bagged cement. 1.2.2.5 Bricks Bricks should be stacked on dry firm ground, stacks being generally 50 bricks in length, 2 to 4 bricks in width (placed lengthwise) and 10 bricks in height, placing the bricks on edge. Clear spacing between stacks should be 0.8 m or more. 1.2.2.6 Concrete blocks

1.2.2.1 It is necessary that materials for construction are stacked and stored at site in a planned manner so as to minimise chances of to facilitate subsequent deterioration and construction. Detailed handling for recommendations in this regard are contained in `IS 4082 : 1977 Recommendations on Stacking and Storage of Construction Materials at Site'. Summary of recommendations (with minor modifications) relating to materials commonly used in masonry namely, cement, lime, bricks, concrete blocks and aggregates are given in the following clauses. 1.2.2.2 As a general principle, materials should be stacked/stored at site such that: (a) these are not damaged by rain, humidity, wind and dust storm; (b) lead for subsequent handling of those materials is minimum; (c) it should be possible to make use of and exhaust stocks of materials received earlier, before starting use of freshly arrived material; and (d) it is easy to take stock of
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

Concrete blocks should be stacked at site so that stacks are about 1 m high and each stack contain a truck load (or its multiple) of the material. It is very necessary to prevent the blocks from getting wet before use; if there is a possibility of occurrence of rain, either the blocks should be covered with tarpaulins or stacking of blocks should be done under a leak-proof shed. 1.2.2.1 Aggregates Aggregates should be stored in regular stacks on a dry, hard and level patch of ground such that aggregates do not get admixed with soil, and other foreign matter. Sufficient space should be left between stacks of different types of aggregates to prevent intermixing. Special precautions are necessary in case of fine aggregates to prevent the same from being blown away by wind.
2

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T): 1.3 Masonry

1991 Units 1.3.1 Common Burnt Clay Brick

1.3.0 As mentioned earlier there is a large variety of masonry units from which an architect or engineer can choose the one most suited to a particular situation. Main considerations in choosing particular a unit are: availability, strength requirement, durability, dimensional stability and resistance to rain penetration, fire rating, thermal properties, style of architecture and economy in cost. Physical characteristics and properties of various units are detailed in relevant Indian Standards (see' List of References and Bibliography at the end of this Part). Physical characteristics of different units in common use are summarized in Table I. The more important features are briefly given below.

Brick is one of the most commonly used unit for masonry and whenever brick of acceptable quality and desired strength is available locally, it is generally the unit of first choice. It has practically most of the desirable characteristics of unit namely strength, durability, a masonry dimensional stability, good thermal performance, rating and economy in cost. good fire Compressive strength of brick depends on type of soil used for moulding brick, method of moulding, technique of burning, etc. In India, strength of common brick generally varies between 2.5 to 25 N/mm?. 1.3.2 Heavy Duty Burnt Clay Building This brick, also known as `Engineering Brick Brick',

Table 1 Physical

Characteristics (Clause

of Masonry I .3.0)
Water Drying

Different

Units

Sl No.

Nomenclature

Density

Standard Dimensions (Actual) LXBXH cm (4) 19X9X9 19X9X4

Compressive Strength N/mm' (5) 3.5-35

Moisture Movement Percentage

Remarks

Absorption Shrinkage Percentage Percent(By Weight) age

Reference to Indian Standard

kg, mJ (1) (2) (3) NS

(6)

(7)

(8!

(9) Used for all general building construction

(10) 1S 1077

I. Common burnt clay building brick

P20upto NS class 125 PI5 for higher classes

NS

: 1976

2. Heavy duty clay brick

burnt

42

500

do

<40

P 10

NS

NS

Used for heavy engineering works
Used for sewer construction

1s 2180

: 1970

3. Sewer

brick

NS

do

Q 17.5

PI2

NS

NS

IS 4885

: 1968

4. Burnt clay perforated building brick

NS

19 x 19 x 9 29X9X9

47.0

PI5

NS

NS

1s 2222 This unit is lighter in weight and has better thermal insulation than common burnt clay brick

: 1979

5. Burnt clay hollow block for walls and partitions

NS

19 X 19 X 9 43.5 on B20 gross area 29 X 9 X 9 29X14X9

NS

NS

IS 3952 This unit is lighter in weight and has better thermal insulation than common burnt clay brick

: 1978

(Conrimed) IO8

SP 20(S&T) Table 1 -Continued
(1)
6. Stone a) Granite b) Basalt c) Sandstone d) Limestone 7. Precast stone

: 1991

(2)

(3) NS

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10) IS 1597 (Part I): I967 1s 1597 (Part*: 1967

Refer Section

QIOO 3 440 430 420

>5

block--

._

There is no IS Standard yet for this Refer CBRI Building Research Note No. 7 Used in masonry like coursed stone masonry Hollow blocks of grade A & B are used for load bearing walls and of grade C for partitions IS 3620

8. Laterite block

stone

42500

39x 19x 1943.5 49 X 19 X 19 N/mm* 59 X 29 X 19

>I2

NS

NS

: 1979

9. a) Concrete masonry blockhollow

Grade A: L-39, 49 Q: 1 500 and 50 Grade B: B-49, 74 and C: 99, 149 less than 199, 249 I 500 299 but H-19 and 9 41000

Grade A: p 10 Minimum 35, 45, 55 & 70 Grade B: 20, 30 & 50 minimum Grade 415 C:

tiO.1

PO.9

IS 2185 (Part 1979

I):

b) Concrete masonry solid

Q blocks-

I 800 L-39, 49
and 50 B-49, 74 99, 149 199, 249 299 H-19 and 9

Grade D: > 10 Minimum 4.0 & 5.0

PO.1

BO.09

Solid blocks of grade D are used for load bearing walls

IS 2185 (Part 1979

I):

10. Light weight concrete block

> I 600

39 X 30 X 19 428 on 39 X 20 X 19 gross 39 X 10 X 19 area L-49 or 50 B-9, 14, 19, 24 H-19, 24 and 29 Grade 10-70 Grade 15-60

p25

PO.06

BO.05

Used for walls and partitions

IS 3590

: 1966

I I. Auto-claved
cellular concrete blocks

Varying between 451 and

1: NS 2:

1 000

ZP0.05 for grade I and 0.1 for grade 2 PO.1

NS

IS 5482

: 1969

12. Lime-based

block

<I 000

L-39 35 B-10, 20 and 30 H-9 and 19

NS

IP 0.05

Block could IS 3115 be solid or hollow anti is used for load bearing, non-load bearing and panel walls

: 1976

13. Sand-lime

brick

NS

19 X 9 X 9 19X9X4

7.5, 10.0, NS 15.0 and 20.0

I@0.025 for class 75 and 100 ZP0.035 for class 150

NS

Used for masonry just like common burnt clay bricks

IS 4139

: 1976

(Continued) HANDBOOK ON MASONRY
DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

2

109

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991
Table 1 -Concluded

3,

(2)
block

(2)
NS

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7) NS

(8) NS

(9) Used in masonry for lightly loaded low cost buildings

(10) 1S 1725

14. Soil-cement

19X9X9 19 X 9 X 4 29X 19X9

dI2.0 for 15 class 20 43.0 for class 30

: 1982

15. Non-load'

bcal-ing

NS

gypsum partition block (solid and
tlollow)

Length-70 Q5 on maximum, gross in multiples area of IO Breadth-75 to 150 in multiples of 25 Height-30 maximum, in multiples of IO H = Height;

NS

NS

NS

Used for non-load bearing partitions in drq situations

IS 2849

: 1964

/~~~twt/

: L = Length;

B = Breadth;

NS = Not specified;

> = Not more

than;

Q = Not

less than

is characterised by high durability, low water absorption and high compressive strength, and is used in heavy civil engineering works such as bridge structures and industrial foundations. 1.3.3 SeM'er Brick This brick has strength and other characteristics in-between those of common brick and heavy duty brick and is intended for use in sewer construction where higher standard of durability than common brick is needed, because of the aggressive action of sewage. 1.3.4 Burnt Cla), Pecfhated Building Brick

structural and other considerations. Therefore, self-load of stone masonry is high and consequently space efficiency is low. For this reason, use of stone masonry is normally restricted to 2 or 3 storeyed buildings and where possible use of stone in partitions and panel walls is avoided. Since water absorption of stone (about 1.5 percent) is very low as compared to that of brick (about 20 percent), stone masonry is much more durable. particularly in damp locations. Where both brick and stone are available at reasonable cost and ground water table is very high, it is advantageous to provide stone masonry in walls up to plinth level and brick masonry in superstructure. 1.3.1 Precast Stone Block

This unit has the advantage over common brick of lightness in weight and better thermal insulation. It is, therefore, used in load bearing walls as well as non-load bearing partitions and panels, when better thermal insulation andior lightness in weight are required. 1.3.5 Burnt Cla!? Hollo\~~ Block

This unit is similar in properties and use to perforated brick, except that. percentage of voids is higher and thus masonry constructed with this unit is much lighter in weight. Its com'pressive strength is however low and thus this unit is mainly used for non-load bearing walls. I .3.6 Storle In stone masonry, dressing of stone entails lot of labour and time. Therefore, in regions where stone as well as brick is available latter is preferred. Stone as a masonry unit is made use of when brick is either not available or is more costly. As it is more expensive to dress stone to of stone walls is small size units, thickness generally kept more than what is needed from
110 HANDBOOK ON

As mentioned earlier, one of the drawbacks in the use of stone in masonry is that walls have to be thicker than what is necessary from structural and other considerations. This drawback can be overcome by combining stone pieces and lean cement concrete to form precast blocks of regular size and shape-an innovation of Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee. By using precast stone blocks in place of stone, it is possible to construct walls of much lesser thickness, which results in economy in cost of construction and improvement in space efficiency. For detailed information regarding manufacture, properties and use of this unit, a reference may b,e made to Research Note No. 7 of CBRl: 1.3.8 Luterite Stone Block

Laterite, a weathered product of some type of rock, is capable of being cut easily into blocks of regular shape and size, suitable for masonry walls.
MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

SP 20(S&T) Therefore, in those parts of India, where laterite formation is met with, at or close to surface, simple low cost buildings can be constructed economically with the use of laterite blocks. However, because of low compressive strength and wide variation in quality of this material, use of this masonry unit is generally confined to single storeyed buildings of small spans and light loads. 1.3.9 Cement
Concrete Block

: 1991

1.3.14 Soil-cement

Block

Use of this unit is made mainly in low cost buildings, when soil (available locally) is suitable for manufacturing the unit and economy in cost is a primary consideration. 1.3.1'5 Non-load
Bearing Gypsum Block

In areas where brick or stone of suitable quality for masonry is not available at reasonable cost, for suitable quality aggregates of but manufacturing concrete blocks are available, cement concrete biock can be used as a masonry unit for load bearing walls, partitions and panel walls. Concrete block cou]d be solid or hollow depending on strength requirement. Concrete block has much lesser dimensional stability than clay brick and stone, special care in the use of this unit is, therefore, needed in order to avoid or minimise cracks in masonry built with this unit.

This unit is suitable for use in internal partition wails and dry locations. It has low self-weight and high thermal insulation. Use of this unit in masonry will prove to be economical and advantageous mainly when gypsum is locally available. 1.4 Mortar 1.4.1 General Mortar is an intimate mixture with water of a binder such as cement or lime and some inert material such as sand, crushed stone, in the form of a smooth paste. In masonry, mortar has an important role to play and that is to bind the units together into one mass, in order that masonry may effectively perform its functions. Various types of mortars in common use are: mud mar-tar, lime mortar, cement mortar, cement-lime mortar and iime-pozzolana mixture mortar. Composition, properties and methods of preparation of various types of mortars are as follows. 1.4.2 Materials
,fbr Mortars

1.3.10

Light-weight

Concrete

Block

This unit is manufactured. from light-weight aggregates with the object of reducing dead load. It has better thermal insulation than brick, stone and normal concrete but has lesser strength. It is, mainly used for non-load bearing therefore, when for structural reasons it is partitions, considered necessary to reduce dead load. This unit. like concrete block, has low dimensional stability and special care in its use is needed. 1.3.11 Auto-claved
Cellular Concrete Block

in its characteristics, performance This unit, and use is similar to light-weight concrete block. For the manufacture of this unit, lightness in weight is achieved by introducing some gas in the material through chemical action. 1.3.12 Lime-based
Block

Materials used for making mortars are: (a) binder such as clay, lime, cement; (b) inert material such as sand, crushed stone; (c) pozfolana such as fly ash, burnt sclay/ surkhi; (d) lime pozzolana mixture; and (e) plasticizers. Most materials arc covered by Indian of these Standards (see References). 1.4.3 Properties
of- iMortars

This unit is similar in characteristics and use to cement concrete block but its strength is somewhat low. Choice between this unit and cement concrete block depends on considerations of avai!ability, strength requirement and relative economy. 1.3 .13 Sand-lime
Brick

Properties of mortars which are sought for use in masonry are: workability, water retentivity, rate of stiffening, strength, resistance to rain penetration and durability. These properties have been discussed below explaining their effect on masonry. Choice of masonry mortar is governed by several considerations such as type of masonry unit and its properties, degree of exposure to weather and environments, strength requirements, etc. 1.4.3.1
Workability

Characteristics of this unit are more OI- less similar to that of common burnt clay brick. In areas where neither soil suitable for burning brick nor stone suitable for masonry, nor aggregates for making concrete block are available, but lime and siliceous sand are readily available, one could go in for this type of unit. The unit can be manufactured to any desired strength between 7.5 to 20.0 N/mm2 depending on the requirements. This unit has better dimensional stability than concrete block .and lime-based but is inferior to brick and stone in this respect.
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

Workability is the property of: mortar which enables it to be spread and applied to masonry unit with ease. It also facilitates proper filling of joimts in masonry. A good mortar would hang from the trowel and will flow down readily when lightly jerked. This property of mortar depends on properties of various ingredients used for making mortar and on the method of mixing adopted. As a general rule, a mud mortar prepared from fine clay soil has better workability than one prepared from sandy soil and a lime mortar has a better
2 111

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T) : 1991 workability than cement mortar. Lime when used in the form of putty, gives better workability than when used in dry hydrated form. Also grinding of lime mortar in a mortar mill, results in improved workability. When using dry hydrated lime in mortar, it is desirable to soak lime in water before mixing with sand in order to improve its workability. When mortar is made by mixing dry hydrated lime and sand without pre-soaking of lime, workability can be improved somewhat, by keeping the mixed mortar in a covered heap for about 12 hours before use. This process, known as maturing, allows particles to swell up time to time. A ,mortar made from well graded sand has better workability than one made from ungraded sand. Cement mortar made with ungraded coarse sand has poor workability, particularly when mix is lean and sand used is angular. Workability of such a mortar can be improved by either adding lime or chemicals known as plasticizers. To some extent workability depends upon consistency of mortar which is measured by recording depth of penetration of a standard cone as detailed in IS 2250 : 1981. That Standard following depth recommends values of penetration for different purposes: For ,laying walls with solid bricks90-l 30 mm For laying perforated bricks -- 70-80 mm For filling cavities -130-150 mm As a general principle, when joints are thin or units have high suction, consistency should be more and when units are'. heavy and have low suction, consistency should be less. A good craftsman adjusts the consistency of mortar by varying the quantity of water through his experience. Composite cement-lime mortars are well known for their good workability and have some other desirable properties as discussed later in 1.4.3.5. 1.4.3.2 Water-retentivit_v Most of the masonry units have normally appreciable suction, .depending on their porosity and moisture content and they begin to suck moisture from mortar as soon as these come in contact with mortar. If units draw out too much moisture from the mortar rapidly, the latter is unable to gain adequate strength, when gain of strength is dependent on the process of hydration in mortar. Thus, when binder used is portland cement or hydraulic lime, it is necessary that mortar should not part with its moisture readily by suction-that is mortar should have good water- retentivity. As a general rule, lime mortar and cement-lime mortar have good water retentivity while plain cement mortar made with coarse ungraded sand has low water retentivity. Water retentivity of cement mortar is improved by the addition of hydrated lime or finely ground limestone or chemical compounds known as plasticizers. Generally speaking, mortars having good workability have also good water retentivity.
112 HANDBOOK

A standard test for determination of water retentivity in masonry mortars is given in IS 2250 : 1981. In accordance with that standard water ,retentivity of masonry mortar should not be less than 70 percent. It may be clarified that property of water retentivity in masonry mortars is imnortant mainlv when masonrv units have high ;ate of suction-as for example, common burnt clav brick and concrete block. In case of engineering brick and hard stone, which have low suction, high water retentivity of mortar does not have much advantage. In case of_common brick which has water absorption of about 20 percent, suction rate of units is reduced by pre-soaking or pre-wetting of the units. In case of concrete blocks and such other units, which have very high shrinkage rate, pre-soaking or prolonged prewetting is likely to result in extensive cracking of masonry due to drying shrinkage and therefore pre-wetting has to be done on a restricted scale and a mortar with high water retentivity (85 percent or more) should be chosen for such masonry (see also 6.3 of Part 1). 1.4.3.3 Rate of stiffening

Stiffening of mortar in masonry is caused either by loss of moisture or by the setting action of binder used in the mortar or by both. Most of the moisture lost is absorbed into the masonry unit but some evaporates into the atmosphere. A mud mortar stiffens only by loss of moisture and there is no setting action of its clay. A lime-sand mortar made from non-hydraulic lime (limes of grade C and D) also stiffens in early stages by loss of moisture but it has also very mild and slow setting action due to carbonation. A cement mortar stiffens mainly through setting action of cement. Behaviour of a cement-lime mortar is in-between that of lime mortar and cement mortar. It is necessary that mortar should have sufficiently high rate of initial stiffening so that construction work could proceed at a reasonable pace. If rate of stiffening is too low, mortar, due to its plasticity will get compressed and squeezed out, as the work proceeds, due to self-load of masonry, thus resulting in variation in thickness of joints and distortion of masonry. On the other hand, if rate of stiffening is too rapid, it wiil result in cracking masonry as the unavoidable shrinkage in units due to drying and slight settlements in foundation due to loads, cannot then be accommodated within the mortar joints. In cold regions, when nights are frosty, it is important that mortar should stiffen rapidly enough so that it is not damaged by frost by formatibn of ice crystals within the body of mortar. For this reason, as a general rule, cement mortar should not be leaner than I : 5 and cementlime mortar leaner' than I :`A :41/. In addition, some further precautions like preventing masonry units, sand and water from getting too cold, use of warm water for mixing of mortar, use of calcium chloride as an accelerator in cement mortar, covering the freshly laid masonry with
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION--PART 2

SP 20(S&T) tarpaulins at the close should be taken. 1.4.3.4 Strength of the day's work, etc,

: 1991

A mortar gains strength, to a small extent by loss of moisture that is by drying action as in mud mortar and non-hydraulic lime mortar, but mainly by setting action of its cementitious content, namely lime and cement. In case of lime mortar made from non-hydraulic lime, which sets through carbonation, gain of strength is very slow. In case of cement mortar or lime mortar made from hydraulic lime, gain of strength is due to hydration and is comparatively rapid. From structural considerations it is necessary that masonry should attain the requisite strength by the time loads are imposed on it. With that in view, 28-day strength of a mortar is taken into consideration. As stated earlier, mud mortar stiffens only by loss of moisture and its constituents, namely soil has no setting action. It softens again on absorbing moisture and is easily eroded by rain. It has, therefore, very low strength and poor durability. For this reason, mud mortar is considered suitable only for use in superstructure of temporary or semi-permanent buildings with very light loadings. When mud mortar is used in brick or stone masonry, basic stress in masonry should be limited to 0.2 N/mm* and to prevent erosion due to rain, external face of walls should be protected either by lime/cement pointing or some form of non-erodible plaster. Mud mortar should not be used in moist-or wet situations for examnle. foundations of a wall. This mortar is also hot suitable for use in areas infected with white ants. Strength of masonry, inter-alia, depends on strength of mortar. It is however, to be kept in mind that undue importance should not be attached to strength of mortar at the cost of other properties of mortar. Mortar need not, therefore, be stronger than what is necessary from consideration of strength of masonry, and it should possess other desirable properties. High strength mortar has an advantage only in case of highstrength units, and heavy loads. Ordinarily in buildings designed as per provisions of Design Standard Codes, slenderness ratio of load bearing elements is restricted so that due to over-loading, failure of masonry would take place by tensile splitting of masonry and not by buckling. Therefore, bond between mortar and masonry is more important than compressive strength of mortar. Use of composite cement-lime mortar, because of its better bond strength, gives a stronger masonry than that with plain cement mortar, even though plain cement mortar may have higher compressive -strength. 1.4.3.5 Resistance to rain penetration

masonry units, (b) through pores of mortar, and (c) through cracks between units and mortar. It has been found that rain penetration through units and mortar is not very significant and main source of rain penetration is through cracks in masonry. Moreover, rain penetration is much more through wide cracks, even if few in number, than through thin cracks which may be more in number. These cracks are mostly caused by shrinkage of units and mortar on drying, thermal movement of units and mortar and inevitable slight settlement to which every building is subject. Thus, from the view-point of rain penetration, bonding property of mortar is of great importance. It has been observed that if mortar is not very strong, if it ains strength slowly, and if it has good bon % with umts, movement of units due to shrinkage, temperature variations and settlement of foundation get accommodated to a great extent within the mortar and cracks are, therefore, thin and evenly distributed. As a result, masonry has much better resistance to rain penetration. A composite cement-lime mortar possesses practically all the above mentioned desirable qualities. In this mortar relative proportion of cement and lime is varied to suit the strength requirement of masonry and shrinkage coefficient of units. For units having high shrinkage for example, concrete block, lime content should *be ample. Mixes of composite mortars in common use are 1 : `/z : 455, 1 : 1 : 6, 1 : 2 : 9 and 1 : 3 : 12. Of these 4 mixes 1: 1 : 6 mix is in more common use since it has reasonably good strength and also, imparts to masonry, adequate resistance to rain penetration. 1.4.3.6 Durability

Deterioration in mortar takes place due to: (a) frost action before the mortar has gained sufficient strength, and repeated cycles of freezing and thawing, (b) prolonged chemical action between soluble sulphates present either in burnt clay bricks or in soil in contact with masonry in foundation, and (c) ingress of moisture through cracks into the body of the masonry and consequent repeated cycles of wetting and drying over a number of years and crystallization of salts. For protection against frost damage, and repeated cycles of freezing and thawing, it is necessary that mortar should gain strength rapidly, it should be dense and should have good ultimate strength. lt should therefore, contain adequate proportion of portland cement, and sand should be well graded. Since lime mortar is slow in setting, and does not have much ultimate strength, its use is not suited when there is early frost hazard or when masonry is likely to be subjected to repeated cycles of freezing and thawing. Use of an air-entraining admixture in cement mortar 1 : 5 or 1: 6 considerably improves its resistance to frost action and repeated cycles of freezing and thawing. For protection
2

Rain water penetrates a masonry wall by three different modes, namely: (a) through pores of
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

against

sulphate

attack,

a rich
113

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 lumps or in ground form when so required. Semi-hydraulic and non-hydraulic lime are generally supplied as quicklime, but these are also available as hydrated limes in bags. Kankar lime is supplied either as quicklime in lumps or as ground quicklime in bags. When lime is supplied as quicklime, ,it should be slaked as soon as possible (preferably within 7 days) since it deteriorates in quality due to on slaking if kept unslaked. Quicklime should be stored when storing is unavoidable, in compact heaps under cover from rain so that its exposed surface is minimum.

cement mortar (I : 4 mix or better) or composite cement-lime mortar 1 : L/2 : 4% using ordinary portland cement should be used when only moderate protection is needed and rich cement mortar (1 : 4 or better) with sulphate resisting cement should be provided when sulphate attack is expected to be severe.. It should be borne in mind that if masonry in any situation remains generally dry, sulphates, even if present in brick or sand in excessive quantity, cannot cause much damage. durability of mortar against ensure To weathering action due to repeated cycles of wetting and drying of masonry (for example, parapets) in exposed situations, mortar should be dense and moderately strong. For this mortar should be either 1 cement: 5 sand or 1 cement: 1 lime: 6 sand using well graded sand. Further, properties of mortar should match `the type of unit used in masonry, so that there are no wide cracks in masonry. For example, when using units having high shrinkage. such as concrete blocks, cement-lime mortar should be used since this mortar, being slow in gaining strength, permits volumetric changes in units within the mortar joints without occurrence of wide cracks and has good resistance to rain penetration. Use of some air-entraining admixture in cement mortar also improves its durability quite appreciably. 1.4.4 Preparation 1.4.4.1
Mud of' Mortars

b)

Slaking cf lime-There are basically two methods of slaking of quicklime at site, namely, `tank slaking' and `platform slaking'. In the latter method, there are some variations depending on type of lime, that is hydraulic, non-hydraulic, dolomitic or kankar. These methods have been described below:

mortar

Soil for mud mortar should have clay and silt content--60 to 70 percent and sand content40 to 30 percent. It should be free from vegetation, organic matter, gravel, coarse sand and should not contain excessive quantities of soluble salts. Selected soil should be placed in regular stacks of about 30 cm height, with raised edges. Size of stack should be regulated so that mortar obtained is adequate to meet a day's requirement. Enough water should then be added so as to soak the entire soil. After 12 to 24 hours, it should be worked up with a `phowrah' and trodded over with bare feet so as to form a thick paste, adding more water if necessary and removing all clods, stones, roots, etc. If during course of use, the mortar becqmes stiff due to loss of moisture by evaporation, more water should be added and mortar retempered. If use of soil containing excessive soluble salts is unavoidable, salts should be leached out from the soil, by adding sufficient water daily to the soil stack, once or twice, for about a week and letting the water drain out from the sides of the stack. If soul containing excessive salts is used in mud mortar without leaching, the mortar will not have much binding quality. 1.4.4.2
Lime mortar

1) Tank siaking - This method of slaking is adopted in case of semi-hydraulic and non-hydraulic calcium lime. It is not suitable for slaking hydraulic, dolomitic and kankar lime because, firstly, thtse limes, being slow in slaking, do not slake properly by this method and secondly, hydraulic and kankar limes lose their strength rapidly due to excess of moisture. In case of semi-hydraulic and non-hydraulic calcium liine, this method has the advantage over the other method of slaking, namely platform slaking that hydrated lime obtained is in the form of putty, free from any impurities and unhydrated particles, and mortar made from lime in puttyform has good workability. For this method of slaking, there should be preferably two tanks of suitable sizes, the first one at a raised level of 40 to 50 cm depth, so that its contents could flow by gravity to the second tank of 75 to 80 cm depth, at a lower level. The upper tank is filled with water up to about 25 cm depth and quicklime broken to small lumps of 5 to 10 cm size is added to the tank to cover the entire bottom of the tank up to about half the depth of water. Care should be taken to ensure `that no part of lime is exposed above water. As soon as quicklime comes in contact with water, it begins to slake with evolution of heat and rise of temperature. Pace of feeding of quicklime to tank is so adjusted that near-boiling temperature is maintained. Contents of the tank are constantly hoed and stirred to promote slaking. After the slaking has apparently ceased, hoeing and stirzing is continued for sometime
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

lime is a) Supp/_v qf lime - Hydraulic normally supplied as h drated lime in bags, but it could be supp ?led as quicklime in
I14 HANDBOOK

SIP 20(S&T) more to ensure complete and thorough slaking. Lime in slurry form is then run down, through a sieve of IS designation 2.36 mm, to the lower tank, where it is allowed to mature and thicken so as to form putty. Period of maturing should be I to 2 days'in case of semi-hydraulic lime and not less than 3 days in case of non-hydraulic lime. supply of lime In case, a continuous putty is desired, there should be two lowlevel ta,nks, to be used alternatively. On small jobs, the lower tank could be dispensed with and slaking of lime and its maturing to form putty could be carried out in one tank. Lime, putty should not be attowcd to dry before use, and when kept in storage, it should be completely covered with a layer of water. Putty of non-hydraulic lime could be kept in storage up to 2 weeks, without any risk of deterioration in quality but putty of semi-hydraulic lime should be used within 1 or 2 days.

: 1991

slaking. Quickline should be heaped on a water-tight masonry platform and water to the. extent of about 30 litres per quintal sprinkled over the heap and mixed with lime so that all lumps or of quickline get thoroughly pieces wetted. The heap should then be covered all over with a layer of measured quantity of sand 5 to 8 cm thick in order to conserve heat of hydration and the heap left undisturbed for 36 hours. After this, time along with sand should be sieve of 1s screened through a designation 6.3 mm; When using this hydrated time, quantity of sand used for covering the heap should be taken into account while proportioning lime and sand. This lime should be stored in a compact heap and protected from moisture and rain. It should be used as soon as possible within 7 days. If limestone has been burnt at high it cannot be properly temperatures, slaked at site, and pressure slaking in an autoclave becomes necessary. 4)
~k~l~fiJrl?l

2) Plurfti~l~l sluliinn

.I

of' semi-h ~xlraulic~ uml
_,

SlUliitlg

qf' dolottlitic

litm

limes -non-hydraulic calcium' Ouicklime is broken to about 5 to IO cm s&e and is spread in a 15 cm thick layer on a water-tight masonry platform. Water is then sprinkled over it intermittently, overall quantity of water used being approximately 60 percent by weight of the quantirJi of quicklime. It is necessary to regulate the quantity of water carefully through experience, so that after slaking, hydrated lime is in the form of dry powder. If excess water is used, hydrated lime will not be in dry powder form and if less water is used, slaking will not be complete. To ensure thorough and complete sl~ing, lime should be, at intervals, hoed and turned over adding more water if necessary. When slaking activity has a parently ceased, the slaking process s f: ould be allowed to continue by itself for a further period of one or two days. Slaked lime should then be screened through a sieve of IS designation 3.35 mm and hydrated lime kept stored in a compact heap, suitably covered with a tarpaulin or a layer of dry bricks to protect it from wind, dust and rain. It is desirable to use lime after slaking as soon as possible but within 7 days, since it deteriorates in quality due to contact with air.
sluking ctj' hydraulic littw 3) Plu~form Hydraulic lime slakes rather slowly and therefore, before slaking the lumps should be broken to pieces of size 5 cm and below. In fact, if lime is very refractory, it should be ground to a coarse powder so as to ensure good
HANDbOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

Slaking procedure of this lime is similar to that of hydraulic lime. However, the quantity of water used should be 40 litres per quintal and the heap should be left undisturbed for 2 to 3 days. Thereafter, it screened. stored illld should be proportioned just like hydraulic time. In case of this lime also, pressure slaking is needed when limestone has been burnt at high temperature. 5) Slulcirzg q/' liut~kur lime -~Since kankar lime contains a large proportion of impurities, it is very slow in slaking. This lime has, therefore, to be ground to a coarse powder before slaking. Procedure for slaking of this lime is similar to that of hydraulic lime. However, no sand should be added as. cover during slaking and the quicklime after wetting and turning over, should be left in the form of a compact heap for 2 to 3 days for slacking. Alternatively the process of slaking and wet grinding to form mortar could be combined and carried out in mortar mill as in 1:4.4.2(e)(6).

cl U,w of h~drutecl

lime itI nwrtur ~~~~ When semi-hydraulic and non-hydraulic limes have been supplied at site in hydrated form or these have been slaked on a platform at site, it is desirable to soak lime in,water for some time before use, so as to -ensure proper workabilitv of mortar. Soaking should be for a minimum period of 16 ho;rs in case of non-hydraulic lime and for 8 to 12 hours fat semi-hydraulic lime. Hydraulic lime should not be soaked before use since this lime
2 115

CONSTRUCTION--PART

SP 20(S&T):l991
starts'setting on getting wet and thus loses strength if presoaked. If lime mortar has been prepared from dry hydrated, nonhydraulic and semi-hydraulic limes, its workability can be improved by keeping it in storage for 16 to 24 hours in case of nonhydraulic lime and 8 to 12 hours in case of semi-hydraulic lime. In case however, some pozzolana has been used in the mix, the mortar should be used as soon as possible within 4 hours. mixer is used, all 3) When a mechanical ingredients may be added at one time and mixing carried out for at least 5 minutes. optimum result is 4) In lime mortar obtained by grinding the mortar in a mortar mill, after dry or wet mixing of ingredients,. manually or mechanically. The mortar mill could be either animal drawn or mechanically powered. The ingredients after mixing are fed into the mortar mill and grinding done, continuously raking the stuff to ensure uniform grinding, and adding more water as and when necessary. Grinding should be continued till all particles of fine aggregate are fully coated with lime and' mortar is of uniform colour all through. In an animal drawn mortar mill, grinding should generally be done for 120 to 180 revolutions (2 to 3 hours) depending on nature of lime and aggregate used and quality of mortar desired. In case of mechanically powered mortar mill, grinding, should generally be done for at least 15 minutes. 5)._When using hydraulic _ . . lime, .. .sometimes, _ " as a short cut, unslaked lime in the term of small lumps or coarse powder, is fed directly into the mortar mili along with requisite quantity of fine aggregate and wet grinding is started. Thus, process of slaking, mixing and grinding take place Drawback of this simultaneously. method is that some unburnt stone also gets crushed and incorporated into the mortar mix and as a result, strength obtained from this mortar is somewhat less. It is, therefore, desirable to first slake the hydraulic lime and screen the same so as to remove unburnt stone before mixing and grinding.

d) Proportioning of mix - For preparation

of lime mortar, lime, in the form of dry hydrate or putty, and fine aggregate (sand and pozzo1an.a) are proportioned by volume. Though density of lime putty varies with its age, getting denser as it ages, for all practical purposes, volume of putty is taken to be same as that of dry hydrated lime. In case of sand, it is its dry volume that is to be taken for proportioning and therefore due to allowance has to be made for its bulkage, in case the sand is moist. When lime supplied is in the form quicklime for estimating roughly, lime requirement, it may be assured that one quintal of quicklime will yield 5 standard sized bags (0.035 m3) of dry hydrated lime, after making allowance for residue and wastage. When lime used in non-hydraulic, it is necessary that at least half the volume of fine aggregate is a pozzolanic material namely, cinder, fly ash or burnt clay. Even in case of semi-hydraulic lime it is desirable to use pozzolona to the extent of at least one third of the volume of fine aggregate, so as to get better strength. Though it is not essential to use pozzolana in a mix of hydraulic lime mortar, there is no technical disadvantage in doing so if it results in saving in cost. and grinding

e) Mixing

1) Mixing can be done either manually

in a masonry trough or in a mechanical mixer. The latter method gives much better result and is preferable. For all important jobs, mixing should therefore be done in a mechanical mixer.

6) Kankar

2) When mixing is done manually,

if lime is in dry powder form, lime and sand or lime and pozzolana and then sand should be first mixed dry. Water should then be added and wet mixing continued for some time more so as to ensure thorough and uniform mixing. When lime is in putty form, some water may be added right in the beginning, since otherwise, because of sticky nature of putty, mixing is difficult. Alternatively, lime putty and water may be first mixed in the trough to form a thin paste and then sand/pozzolana added and further mixing carried out.
HANDBOOK

lime - Mortar from kankar lime is made by grinding slaked lime in a mortar mill. Proportion of sand to be added to the mix is determined after testing lime for its calcium oxide content. When calcium-oxide content is close to the minimum limit of 25 percent, no sand is added to the mix. When lime is of very good quality, lime and sand are mixed in the proportion of 1 : 1. Alternatively, mortar from kankar lime should be prepared directly from quicklime by first dry grinding quicklime in the mortar mill and then wet grinding the same, with or without addition of sand. The process of wet grinding should be continued for a minimum period of three hours to ensure thorough slaking. In this process, slaking and grinding take simultaneously. The place result,

116

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

2

SP 20(S&T) however, obtained is not so satisfactory as that by the former method.

: 1991

7) Iri case of small and less important

jobs, it is generally not feasible to arrange a mechanical mixer for mixing and a mortar mill for: grinding of mortar. In such a case, wet mixing should, be in the continued mortar trough manually, for a period of `at least 15 minutes so that. all particles of fine aggregate get thoroughly coated with lime and mortar is of uniform colour all over. Workability and strength of such a mortar however, is not so good as that of mortar prepared by proper grinding.

qf' mortar - As a general rule, all mortars should be u&d as soon as possible after preparation and mortar should not be allowed to get stiff before use. Mortars prepared from non-hydraulic and semihydraulic limes should be used on the same day and left-over' mortar of previous day should be discarded. As an exception to this general rule, lime mortar prepared from dry hydrated lime without any presoaking should be kept stored in a covered heap before use as in 1.4.3.1, in order to improve its workability. In case of mortar prepared from hydraulic lime, it should be used within 4 hours, as otherwise, it may partly set before use.

Storage

depending on ready availability, and requirements of rate of strength development and resistance to sulphate action, etc. As !I general rule, for masonry mortars it is not desirable to use cements that set rapidly except in cold regions where early strength development is needed from consideration of frost action. Masonry cement gives a good workable mortar and being slow in strength development, masonry is much less liable to shrinkage cracks. Portland pozzolana cement is also somewhat slow in strength development and should be preferred to ordinary portland cement, when there is no need for early strength development; in addition it has better resistance against chemical and sulphate attack. Sulphate resisting portland cement and super sulphated cement are used when moderate to high resistance against sulphate attack is desired.

b)

Proporlioning -- Proportion.ing of ingredients for mortars is normally done by volume, taking a normal bag of cement weighing 50 kgs as a standard unit of volume 0.035 cu.m. Measurement of sand is done by making use of a box of size 40 X 35 X 25 cm which has the same volume as that of a standard bag of cement. When sand used is not dry, due allowance shouL be made for bulkage of sand, after carrying out test for bulkage. MixingExcept on small jobs or when requirement of mortar is not much, mixing of mortar should be done ip a mechanical mixer. Cement and sand in specified proportions are added to the mixer, and the two are first dry mixed till a mix of uniform colour is obtained. Water in measured quantity is thin added gradually and wet mixing continued till mortar of uniform colour and desired consistency tS obtained, time for wet mixing being not less than 3 minutes. Quantity of water should be regulated so that mix obta'ined has the consistency of a stiff paste. If mortar contains too much of water, strength of masonry will be affected. Mixer should be cleaned with water immediately after use each time before suspending the work.

Use of' pozzolana in lime mortar - Mortar prepared from non-hydraulic lime and sand does not have much strength and is thus not suitable for masonry work, except for very light loads and temporary structures. Such a mortar depends, for its setting or hardening action on carbonation which takes place very slowly and that also mainly at the surface. Use of coarse angular sand and thorough grinding for such a mortar however, do help to promote carbonation to some extent and that way, there is some improvement in strength. Where semihydraulic and hydraulic limes are not available and use of non-hydraulic iime for masonry is unavoidable, strength of mortar is imprbved by substituting sand wholly or partly with some pozzolanic material such as fly ash, or burnt clay. Alternatively in place of lime; one of the standard lime-pozzolana which marketed as mixtures, are standardized materials (Refer IS 4098 : 1967) should be made use of as dealt with in 1.4.4.5.
1.4.4.3 Cement mortar

c)

a) Cement -Types of cement normally used for masonry mortars are: ordinary portland portland slag cement, Portland cement, masonry cement, pozzolana cement, sulphate resisting portland cement and super-sulphate cement, choice of cement
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

For hand mixing, measured quantity of sand should be stacked over a water-tight platform and contents of a cement bag emptied and spread over it .in a uniform layer. The two ingredients should be first mixed dry, by turning over and over a number of times till a mixture of uniform colour is obtained. Wet mixing of the whole or a part of the dry mix should be done either on the same platform or in a separate trough, by adding requisite quantity of water and hoeing the mix continuously for 5 to 10 minutes so that a stiff paste of uniform
2 117

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

colour is obtained. Care should be taken not to add excess water. If a plasticiser is to be used in cement mortar to improve its workability, its measured quantity should be added to mixing water for the cement mortar. When lime is to be used as a plasticiser, it should preferably be a non-hydraulic lime and failing that semi-hydraulic lime. It should be either used in the form of putty added to the mix or mixing water, or as a second choice in the form of dry hydrated lime, presoaked in a trough for some time and added to the mix or mixing water, such that cement mortar contains the right proportion of lime. As far as possible only that much quantity of mortar should be prepared at one time as can be consumed within half an hour. However, if for some reason that is not found feasible, mortar could be used up to a maximum period of 2 hours, by retempering the same, adding more water if necessary to get the desired consistency. Mortar not used within 2 hours of addition of water should be discarded. 1.4.4.4 Cement-lime mortar

composite mortar namely 1 : 1 : 6, I : 2: 9 and 1 : 3 : 12 are needed, coarse stuff of standard proportion I : 3 is prepared and additional sand is added where required at the time of mixing to cement and coarse stuff so as to obtain any desired mix. For example, when k : 1 : 6 mortar is to be pre ared with this stock, cement, coarse stu Pf and sand are mixed together in the proportion I : 1 : 3. Similarly, for obtaining 1 : 2 : 9 and 1 : 3 : 12 mortars, cement, coarse stuff and sand in the proportion 1 : 2 : 3 and I : 3 : 3 are mixed. When only a small quantity of mortar isneeded, mixing of mortar could be done manually on a platform or in a trough.

b) Method

Two - In this method, cement and sand are taken in specified proportions and are mixed together dry in a mixer. Lime putty in specified proportion along with requisite quantity of water are then added and further mixing done till mortar of uniform colour is obtained. When lime to be used is in the form of dry hydrated powder, it should be pre-soaked in a trough for about 16 hours in case of nonhydraulic lime and for 8 to 12 hours in case of semi-hydraulic lime, excess of water if any, decanted off from top and putty thus formed in the trough, used for making mortar, as described earlier. If mixing is to be done manually, measured quantity of lime putty and water are mixed together separately in a container and emulsion of lime thus formed (called milk of lime) added to dry mix of cement and sand and further mixing done in a trough or over a platform. Care should be taken to add only that much water as would give mortar of desired consistency.

There are three `methods of making cement-lime mortar as given below. These methods are described in order of their preference. On large method one should be and important jobs, normally adopted. Method three should be adopted only for small and unimportant jobs. Only that much quantity of mortar should be prepared at a time, as can be consumed in 2 hours.

4 Method

One - Lime mortar with lime and sand in specified proportion for whole day's requirement should first be prepared from lime putty and sand by mixing in a mechanical mixer and then grinding it in a mortar mill. This mortar called "coarse stuff' is kept aside as stock and prevented from drying ,out. Coarse stuff and cement should then be taken in suitable proportions in batches and mixed, along with additional water in a mechanical mixer for a minimum of 3 minutes so as to obtain mortar of desired consistency and uniform colour. When ratio of lime to cement in the mix is 1 or less than 1, main function of lime in the mix is to act as a plasticiser and grinding for preparation of coarse stuff may be dispensed with.

c) Method

Three - In this method, cement, hydrated lime and sand in the specified proportion are first mixed dry in a mixer or on a platform and then water added and further mixing done so as to obtain a mix of uniform colour and desired consistency. Wet mixing should be carried out for a minimum period of 3 minutes in case of mechanical mixing and 10 minutes in case of manual mixing. With this method, workability of resulting mortar is not so good as that obtainable by methods one and two. This method of mixing should, therefore, be adopted only when methods one and two feasible from practical are not considerations. mixture mortar

For proportioning, volume of coarse stuff is taken to be equal to that of sand in the mix. Thus for preparing cement-lime mortar 1 cement: 2 lime: 9 sand, coarse stuff of proportion 1 : 4% is prepared and cement and coarse stuff are mixed in the proportion 1 : 2. If on the same day, different mixes of
118 HANDBOOK

1.4.4.5 Lime-pozzolana

This mortar is made by taking lime-pozzolana mixture and sand in specified proportions and mixing the -ingredients in the same manner as cement mortar. Mortar made from limepozzolana mixture of type LP-20 or LP-40 as
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION--PART 2

SP 20(S&T) binder, which are hydraulic should be used within 4 hours of mixing, while mortar made from limepozzolana mixture of type LP-7 which is semihydraulic should be used within 12 hours. I A.5 Standard Mixes 1.4.6 Choice of Mortar

: I991

Standard mortar mixes for masonry commonly used, mainly based on Table 1 of IS 2250 : 198 1 are given in Table 2. Table 2 Standard
SI No.

1.4.6.1 Choice of mortar is governed by several considerations such as type of structure, type of masonry units, degree of exposure to weather, nature of environment, strength requirements, etc. These considerations are briefly discussed below: a) Type of Structure-Structures may classified as permanent, semi-permanent Mixes for Masonry
Midimum Compressive Strength N/mm*
IO

be or

Mortar
Proportions /\ L.P. Mixture

Type
Gement Lime

Mix

Pozzolana

Sand'

I. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.

H-l H-2 H-2 M-l M-l M-l M-2 M-2 M-2 M-2 M-2 M-2 M-3 M-3 M-3 M-3 M-3 M-3 L-l L-l L-l L-l L-l L-2 L-2 L-2

I I 1
1

O-I/,C or B 0-N C or B `/z C or B

3 4 4% 5 6 1.5 6 9 2

7.5 6.0 5.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 I .5 I.5 I.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.5

I I I

1 C or B 1 (LP-40) 28 IA IB I C or B

I
2

I
1.75 7 12 3

II.
12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26.

I
(LP-40)

I 1

3B IA IB I C or B I (LP-40) IB 1 C or B I (LP-40)

2 3

I
-. 2 8 2 I 2.25 1.5 3 2 I .5

-

1
I 2

I
(LP-20) IB 1 C or B

I I
(LP-7)

NOTES

:

1 .A11 proportions are by volume. 2 Sand for making mortar should be well graded; if it is not well graded proportion of sand in the mix shall be reduced in order to achieve the minimum specified strength. 3 In mixes I and 2, use of lime is optional, it is intended to improve workability. 4 In mixes 4, 7, I3 and 19, either lime C or D to the extent of `/4 part of cement (by volume) or some plasticizer, should be added for improving workability. 5 In mixes 8 and 14. lime and sand should first be ground in mortar mill and then cement added to coarse stuff. 6 It is essential that mixes 9. IO, II. 15, 16, 17, 20, 21, 24 and 25 are prepared by grinding in mortar mill. 7 Mix 3 has been classed to be of same type as mix 2, mix 5 and mix 6, same as mix 4 and mixes 8 to 12 same as mix 7, even though their compresive strength is less, because on account of higher bond strength these are taken as equivalents in regard to strength of masonry. 8 Use of an air-entraining admixture in mortar 4 and 7 improves its sulphate resisting property as well durability that is resistance, to frost hazard or damage due to repeated cycles of freezing and thawing.

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

2

II9

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 that it gains adequate strength before occurrence of frost at night. For this, cement mortar not leaner than 1 : 4 or cement-lime mortar not leaner than 1 : 1/ : 41/2 or cement mortar 1 : 5 with an air entraining admixture should be used and use of plain lime mortar Addition of air entraining avoided. admixture to cement mortar considerably improves its durability.

temporary, depending on their life expectency. Durability of mortar varies according to the type of binder used in making the mortar. Mortars for permanent buildings should have greater durability than those for temporary buildings. On this consideration, mortars used should be as under: Permanent structures - Cement mortars not leaner than 1 : 6; Cement-lime mortar not leaner than 1 : 1 : 6; Lime-mortars using hydraulic lime; and Lime mortar using limepozzolana mixtures LP-40 and sand; Semi-permanent structures - Cement mortar 1 : 7 or 1 : 8 depending upon quality of sand, Lime mortar using semi-hydraulic lime; Lime mortar using non-hydraulic line in conjunction with some pozzolana; Lime mortar using lime-pozzolana mixture of type LP-7; and Temporary structures - Semi-hydraulic lime mortar; Lime mortar using nonhydraulic lime in case semi-hydraulic lime is not available lime mortar using lime pozzolana mixture of Mud mortar Type LP7.

4 Nature

of Environment - Environments which affect choice of mortar for foundation masonry are moisture in soil in contact with masonry and presence of soluble sulphates in soil and bricks. From this consideration, mortar should be a cement mortar not leaner than 1 : 4 or cement-lime mortar not leaner than 1 : 1/2 : 4% or cement mortar 1 : 5 with air-entraining admixture. When concentration of sulphates in soil is quite appreciable, sulphate-resisting cement should be used. Use of air entraining admixture in cement mortar 1 : 5, improves its resistance to sulphate attack. To obtain desired strength of masonry, it is necessary that strength of mortar should match the strength of unit in use. No useful purpose `is served in using strong mortar with units of low or moderate strength. It is not economical or sound to use mortar which is stronger than that which gives the optimum strength in masonry. Optimum mortar mixes from consideration 6f strength of brick masonry for bricks of various strengths are given in Table 2 of IS 1905 : 1987 for general guidance. Masonry should be designed in accordance with the provisions of IS 1905 : 1987. Recommended mortar mixes for masonry

4 Strength of Masonry-

b) Type

of Masonry Unit - Physical characteristics of units which have a reIevence in regard to choice of mortar are their porosity, shrinkage co-efficient and strength. For unit of high porosity, such as common burnt clay bricks and cement concrete blocks, mortar used should have good water retentivity. Similarly, in case of units with high or moderate shrinkage coefficients such as concrete blocks, cellular concrete blocks and sand-lime bricks, mortar used should not be very strong and should gain strength slowly. Such mortars are cement-lime mortars of mix 1 : 2 : 9 and 1 : 3 : 12 and lime mortars.

1.4.6.2

c) Degree of Exposure to Weather - External
walls to a moderate extent and free-standing walls such as parapets and compound walls to a great extent are exposed to weather which means rain penetration and repeated cycles of wetting and drying in areas of heavy rainfall and, frost action at night and repeated cycles of freezing and thawing in very cold climate. From consideration of rainfall and repeated wetting and drying, mortars which are slow in setting and have good bond strength namely cement-lime mortars or hydraulic lime mortars are better than plain cement mortars. Masonry subjected to night frost during construction and repeated freezing and thawing during its life span, should have greater durability than masonry which is only subjected to repeated -wetting and drying. When masonry work is being done in cold climate and nights are frosty, mortar should be quick setting so 120
HANDBOOK

Table 3 for recommended mortar mixes, for different purposes is given below. One may choose a suitable mortar mix for any specific location/situation with the help of this table, keeping in view the structural requirements of masonry as per Table 10 of IS 1905 : 1987. 1.4.7 Miscellaneous 1.4.7.1 Retempering qf mortar

If mortar gets stiffened due to evaporation of moisture before use it could be retempered for immediate use by adding water and bringing it to desired consistency within two hours of mixing in case of cement and cement-lime mortars; 4 hours in case of hydraulic lime mortar, 8 hours in case of semi-hydraulic and 12 hours in case of nonhydraulic lime mortars. As regards mud mortar, there is no time limit because it has no setting action. A mortar, other than mud mortar, which has been retempered once, should not be retempered for the second time and should be discarded.
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

SP 20(S&T) Table 3 Recommended
Sl No. Situation/Location Type of Masonry Units

: 1991

Mortar

Mixes

for Masonry
Recommended Mortar MixP /\ Moder/Heavy Ligh> Loads ate Loads Loads (5) 3, 4

Environmental/Exposure Condition

(1)
I. Foundation

(21
and plinth

(3)

(4)

(6)
5 to 12

(7) 13 to I8

Brick, stone, concrete blocks Dry with water . subgrade table 1.5 m or more below of normal density, etc subgrade Moist subgrade with water table within 1.5 m of subgrade, !ittle or no soluble salts in soils Moist subgraded moderate soluble content in soil Moist subgraded with sulphate

3, 4

5, 6, 7

9, 12, 13

1, 2

3,

4,Q

with

lR

2R

4R

high sulphate in soil

content

Masonry is subject early frost hazard 2. External walls Brick. stone Moderate

to

2,

3,

4Q

1 to 3

4 to 6

7 to 18 4 to 7

Severe as in parapets, free standing walk, coping, sills Concrete block of normal density sand-lime brick, etc Moderate 3

5, 6,
8 to 12

14 to 18

Severe as in parapets, free standing walls, coping, sills, etc 3. Internal walls Brick, stone Concrete block of normal density sand-lime brick, etc Light weight/ cellular concrete Brick, stone concrete blocks, normal density, etc Brick Normal Norma1 Normal 2, 3 3 4 to 12 5 to 12 8 to 12

5 to

12

13 to 26 14 to I8 14 to 18

4. External Internal

or walls

Subject hazard

to early

frost

2

3

4Q

5. Brickwork with reinforcement

Sheltered portion exposed to weather/ moisture to corresponding mprtar-mixes given in Sl. Nos

1, 2 1, of Table

2 1 2. From

2 1 consideration

`-Recommended

mortar

mixes

refer

strength, mortar should be selected in accordance with IS 1905 `-Use air entraining plasticizer as admixtures in the mortar. a-Use sulphate resisting cement for the mortar.

: 1987.

1.4.1.2

E$itnating

mortar

reyuiremenr

As a general rule volume of mortar is taken as equivalent to volume of fine aggregates namely sand, surkhi, cinder, pozzolana, etc, used in the mortar mix. Quantity of mortar required for masonry depends on size of units, trueness of shape of units, thickness of joints and workability
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

of mortar. For brick masonry using bricks of size 23 X 11.5 X 7.7 cm mortar requirement is about 25 percent for class A bricks and 30 percent for class B bricks. In case of bricks of size 20 X 10 X 10 cm it is about 22 percent and 26 percent (for classes A and B) respectively. In case of stone masonry, it varies from 8 percent for fine ashlar
2 121

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SI' 20(S&T)

: 1991

c
compounds compounds agents or plasticizers mortar gets improved. Its use is advocated in case of plain cement-sand mortars 1 : 3, 1 : 4, 1 : 5, 1 : 6, 1 : 7 and 1 : 8, which otherwise would be harsh, particularly when sand used is coarse and ungraded. Use of plasticizer reduces water requirement of mortar and thus, because of reduction in water cement ratio, increases strength of mortar. iii) Air-entraining AgentsBy use of an airentraining agent in mortar, its durability, that is, resistance to freezing and thawing and sulphate attack is improved. Use of this admixture in cement mortar also gives protection to masonry against frost damage, in very cold weather. iv) AcceleratorBy adding an accelerator in mortar, rate of hydration of cement is increased and consequently setting time is re'duced. This helps in combating early frost hazard. Accelerator commonly employed for this purpose is calcium chloride to the extent of 1.5 to 2 percent of cement content of mortar (by weight). 1.5 Scaffolding 1.5.1 Scaffolding is a temporary structure erected during construction for supporting labour and materials in order to execute masonry and some other items of work. It is very essential that scaffolding should be strong enough and safe so that accidents do not occur due to its failure. 1.5.2 A scaffold (see Fig. 1) consists of upright

masonry to about 25 percent for coarsed rubble masonry and about 30 percent for random rubble For concrete block masonry, mortar masonry. requirement varies between 12 to 20 percent. 1.4.1.3 Mortar additives

Properties admixing commonly

of cement mortar can be modified by certain chemicals. The admixtures used in mortars are termed as:

i) Waterproofing ii) Water reducing

iii) Air-entraining iv) Accelerators

The substances/ chemicals generally used are and manufacturer's articles proprietory instructions for their use are to be followed.

9 Waterproo.fing

Compounds - These compounds are used when it is intended to improve water proofing quality of masonry as in thin external walls or linings of water tanks and water channels. Apart from proprietory materials use of crude oil to the extent of 5 percent by volume of cement makes the mortar water proof and is sometimes used for filling joints of bricks/ tile pavement of roof terraces.

Compounds or Reducing ii) Water Plasticizers--. By addition of such a compound plasticity or workability of

\GUARD

RAIL

(

PLATFORM

L LONGITUDINAL CONNECTER

DIAGONAL BRACE TO UPRIGHTS

FIG. 1 TYPICAL

SKETCI~ ILLIJSTRATING COMPONENTS HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

OF A SINGLE SCAFFOLD DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

SP 20(S&T) members called standards, longitudinal horizontal members parallel to the wall called stringers and cross horizontal members at right angle to the wall called putlogs. Over the putlogs, planks are provided to form a platform which serves as working space for workers and stacking space for materials. In order to distribute concentrated loads from standards on the ground, these are supported on base plates of suitable size. On the other side of platform, plank on edge called `too board' is provided to prevent falling down of materials, and also a guard rail is provided for safety of workers. 1.5.3 There are two systems of scaffolding, namely `single scaffolding' and `double scaffolding'. In case of the former, there is only one row of standards at some distance from the wall and putlogs are supported stringers on one end, and on wall masonry at the other. For this purpose, holes at suitable intervals are left in a header course of the masonry. In case of `double scaffolding' two rows of standards are provided and the two ends of putlogs rest on stringers only. The scaffolding is thus more or less independent of the wall except for some ties of the scaffolding with wall or other structural members at suitable intervals, which are provided to give additional stability ,to the scaffolding, especially in case of tall buildings. It is necessary to go in for double scaffolding when wall has exposed brick/tile or some other decorative finish and it is obligatory to avoid holes in masonry. When using `single scaffolding', not more than one header for each putlog should be left out, and no holes should be permitted in pillars or stretches of masonry narrower than 1 m in width, or immediately below or close to a concentrated load on masonry or near skew backs of arches. Holes left in masonry for scaffolding should be made good on removal of the scaffolding in such a way as to match the surrounding surface. 1.5.4 Sometimes, it is necessary for workmen to execute `certain items of work-such as application of finish coats to external walls at a height which cannot be reached by ladders and it is not economical to go in for norma! scaffolding for that purpose. In such situations, a craddle with working platform called `jhoola', suspended by ropes from the roof terrace, is provided. The craddle is held in position or moved sideways or up and down by a few workers stationed on the terrace. 1.5.5 Depending on the nature of material used, there are two main types of scaffold, namely `timber/ bamboo scaffold' and `steel scaffold'. Main features of the former type which is commonly used are given below. For details of latter type, 1s 2250 : 1981 may be referred to. 1 S.6 Timber/ Bamboo Scaffolding scaffolding
DESIGN AND

: 1991

4 single Scaffolding-

For single scaffolding the row of standards should be at a distance of 1.2 to 1.5 m from the wall. Standards should be 1.8 to 2.4 m apart and connected horizontally by stringers, spaced vertically at 1.5 to 1.8 m centres. Putlogs with one end resting on stringers and tied to them and the other end resting in holes in masonry, should be spaced horizontally 1.2 or less apart (usually half the spacing of standards). Nominal diameter of standards should not be less than 8 cm subject to a minimum of 5 cm at the thin end: When it is necessary to extent a standard, overlap between two standards should be at least 60 cm. In double scaffolding, one row of standards should be close to the wall and the other 1.2 to 1.5 m away from the wall. Nominal diameter of standards should not be less than 10 cm. subject to a minimum of 5 cm at the thin end. For extension of standards over-lapping should be done as for single scaffolding. Inside and outside scaffolding should be interconnected by cross-ledgers passing through openings in masonry with a view to obtainmg better stability.

b) Double Scaffoldihg-

1.5.6.2 The scaffoldin should be provided with diagonal bracings B or stiffening it in the longitudinal direction so as to- prevent its distortion. It should also be tied to the structure at suitable intervals to prevent it from leaning away from the structure. In case of a tall structure, with a view to increasing stability of scaffolding, it is desirable to embed the standards in ground to the extent of 60 cm, supported over base plates and if that is not feasib!e, standards may be supported in steel barrels of about 60 cm height, filled with soil which should be well rammed after filling it into the barrels. 1.5.6.3 Standards, stringers and putlogs are generally of round poles and planks for the platform are of section 20 cm X 3.5 to 4.0 cm. Ends of planks may be hooped to prevent their splitting, thus prolonging their life. Standards, stringers and putlongs could also be of sawn timber in which case their minimum sections should be 7 X 7 cm, 7 X 5 cm, and 5 X 5 cm respectively. Lashing of various members of scaffolding should be done with strong fibre ropes, applying non-slip knots. When bamboo poles are ,used as standards, horizontal members should be tied to the verticals just above a knot of the vertical bamboo. Toe boards and guard rails are fixed to platform/standards by nailing. Planks of the platform at their heading joints are butted, two putlogs being placed at this part about 10 cm apart to support the ends. 1.5.6.4 Scaffolding for stone masonry structures has to be stronger than that for brick masonry structures, in view of heavier weight of masonry units. This could be done by reducing the spacing
2 123

1.5.6.1 Timber/ Bamboo either single or double.
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY

could

be

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 and using thicker planks not exceeding 0.05 percent as otherwise strength of masonry may be affected or it may cause efflorescence in masonry. 1.6.6 In mud masonry, apart from drying of mud mortar and consequent hardening of mortar on this account, there is no other setting action requiring the presence of moisture. Thus, no curing is required in case of this masonry.

of standards and putlogs for the platform. 1.6 Curing

1.6.1 Masonry mortars based on cement, hydraulic and semi-hydraulic lime, and nonhydraulic limes containing pozzolanas, depend for their setting/ hardening action of hydration for which it is necessary that water used in mixing should not dry out during the process of hydration. In order to prevent early drying of moisture, all exposed faces of masonry are wetted periodically by sprinkling water over the same. The process of sprinkling water over masonry to prevent drying out is commonly known as "curing". 1.6.2 Curing of masonry should begin as soon as partial set of mortar has taken place. This would depend on type of binder used (that is whether hydraulic semi-hydraulic, or noncement, hydraulic lime) and the ambient temperature. In hot weather, setting action is rapid, while in cold weather, it is slow. Another factor which governs the time of commencement of curing is the water retentivity of mortar. Curing of masonry using cement mortar, which has low water retentivity should be commenced early while curing of masonry using lime mortars which have high water retentivity should be commenced a little later. Broadly speaking, in hot weather, curing of masonry should be commenced within 12 hours in case of cement mortar, 24 hours in case of lime mortars made from hydraulic and semi-hydraulic limes and .36 hours in case mortars made from non-hydraulic lime. In cold weather, curing should be deferred for about 12 hours in each case. 1.6.3 Curing should be continued up to a minimum period of 7 days from date of laying of masonry. However, in case of masonry using rich cement mortar (1 : 4 or richer) when strength of masonry is a special consideration, period of curing should be extended to 10 days in dry weather (humidity less than 50 percent). 1.6.4 Frequency of curing during a day depends on ambient temnerature and relative humiditv. In hot and dry weather water should be sprinkled 3 times a day that is early morning, mid day and evening, in hot and humid weather or temprate and dry weather, watering should be done twice (morning and evening) and in cold weather, once a day. In case of masonry units having high shrinkage co-efficient, as for example, concrete blocks, sprinkling of water should be done sparingly so that water affects only the surface of the masonry. Excessive watering in this case is likely to cause too much of shrinkage cracking on drying. 1.6.5 Quality of water used for curing could be same as for mixing water. It should be free from organic impurities and excess of soluble salts. Chloride not exceeding 0.1 percent and sulphate
124 HANDBOOK

SECTION
2 BRICK MASONRY

2

2.1 General Of all the masonry units, the one most commonly used in masonry is ordmary burnt clay brick. In order that brick masonry serves its purpose effectively, it is necessary that quality of materials used (brick and mortar), construction technique and workmanshiu should be sound. Materials used in brick maionry, namely brick and mortar have been dealt with earlier in Section 1. In the section, construction techniques and workmanship of brick masonry are discussed. 2.2 Bonds Since masonry consists of a large number of individual units jointed together with mortar so as to form one mass, it is necessary to lay the units in such a way that, under load, the units act jointly. The most important rule to be observed in this connection is that vertical cross-joints in any course should be staggered and these should not be nearer than a quarter of brick length from those in the course below or above that course. There are a number of brick laying arrangements in vogue-called `bonds', of which those commonly `English bond', `Flemish bond', used are: bond' and `Quetta `Stretcher bond', `Header bond'. These are briefly described below. 23.1

English Bond

In this bond (Fig. 2), bricks in the facing are laid as alternate header and stretcher courses. The

FIG. ON MASONRY DESIGN

2 ENGLISH
AND

BOND 2

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T) header course is commenced with a quoin header followed by a queen closer and continued with successive headers. The stretcher course is formed of structures, having a minimum lap of one quarter brick length. This bond is considered to give the best strength in masonry and is mostly adonted in all load bearing masonrv. that is to be plas'tered over. In this bo&, when the wall is only one brick thick. one face is fair and even. while the other face' may be uneven due to' slight variations in length and breadth of units. 2.2.2 Flemish Bond

: 1991

Flemish bond is employed mainly in exposed brick masonry because of its better appearance. When only one face of brick masonry has exposed brick finish as is generally the case, the single Flemish bond possesses the `advantage of both Flemish bond (better appearance) and English bond (better strength). In brick masonry, with special facing bricks on the external face, adoption of single Flemish bond leads to economy in the use of number of facing bricks. Sometimes, for one brick walls, that are not heavily loaded and strength of masonry is not a major consideration, Flemish bond is adopted in preference to English bond, since with this bond both faces of the wall are more or less fair and even, and therefore, plastering of those faces is less expensive. 2.2.3 Stretcher Bond

In this bond, in each course, headers and stretchers are used alternatively. When a course is started with a quoin header, it is followed by a queen closer to obtain desired lappage of one quarter brick length. In case of a wall which is more than one brick thick, this bond has 2 variations, namely single Flemish bond (Fig. 3) and double Flemish bond (Fig. 4). In the former, use of Flemish bond is provided only on one face while backing consists of English bond. In the latter, Flemish bond is used both in front and at the back.

In this bond (Fig. 5) stretchers are used in all courses, with a lappage of half brick. This bond is adopted in half-brick masonry such as in partitions and cavity walls.
/--SLATE CLOSURE TO JAMB

PLAN OF COURSE `8'

M

I
I

1
I

I
I

I
I

I
I

I I

PLAN OF COURSE `A'

FIG. 3 DOUBLE FLEMISH BOND
ELEVATION NOTE-Use

construction

of stretcher bond in cavity is illustrated here.

wall

FIG. 5 STRETCHER BOND

2.2.4 Header

Bond

In this bond (Fig. 6) only headers are used in all courses with a lappage of half-brick width. This bond is adopted in walls curved in plan for.better alignment, in foundation footings of a wall for better transverse load distribution, and in corbels for better anchorage. 2.2.5 Quetta Bond
FIG. HANDBOOK

4 SINGLE FLEMISH BOND

This bond (Fig. 7) is adopted when it is necessary to provide vertical reinforcement in walls for
2 125

ON MASONRY

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 sets by hydration. It is, therefore, necessary that for brick masonry in mortar other than mud mortar, bricks should be soaked in water by immersion or sprinkling, before use, so that water penetrates to the entire depth of bricks. Period of soaking would vary depending on porosity of bricks and it could be determined by soaking a few bricks for different periods and then breaking them to find out depth of penetration of moisture. When bricks are soaked by immersion, these should be taken out from the tank a little while before their actual use, so that these are surface dry at the time of use. 2.3.2 All loose materials, dirt and set lumps of mortar which may be lying over the surface, on which brick masonry is to be freshly started should be removed with a wire brush and surface should be wetted slightly. Bricks should be laid with frog up, on full and even bed of mortar. While laying, bricks should be slightly pressed to ensure good adhesion. All cross joints and wall joints should be properly flushed and filled with mortar so that no hollow spaces are left. Eveness of bed joint and proper filling of wall joints ensures maximum strength and proper filling of cross joints ensures better resistance to penetration of moisture which takes place mainly through cross joints. In case of walls thicker than one and a half-brick, vertical joints should be grouted at every course in addition to flushing of vertical faces of bricks with mortar. The course at the top of plinth, sills and parapets and just below floor/roof slab, should, where feasible be brick-on-edge (applicable only in case of traditional bricks), using cut bricks at corners to form what is known as `panja' or `marukona' (Fig. 8). [MORTAR JOINTS

PLAN OF COURSE'A'

ELEVATION

FIG. 6 HEADER BOND FOR A WALL
CURVED IN PLAN

FIG. 7 QUETTA

BOND FIG. 8 I-YPICAL ARRANGEMENT IN A CORNER

areas subjected to earth tremors. Minimum thickness of wall in this case is 1% bricks and both front and back elevations of the wall are similar to that of Flemish bond. With the adoption of this bond, quarter brick by half brick pockets, which are continuous through full height of the wall, are formed along the length of the wall. In these pockets steel rods are placed, and pockets are filled up with cement concrete or mortar as the work proceeds. 2.3 Laying 23.1 of Brick Masonry of Bricks

OF CUT

BRICKS

Soaking

Bricks being porous, absorb moisture from the mortar on coming in contact with it, if these are in a dry state. This would weaken a mortar which
126 HANDBOOK

2.3.3 Thickness of courses should be kept uniform,. and for this purpose a wooden `straight edge ('known as storey rod) with graduations giving thickness of each course including joint thickness should be used. Height of window sills, soffits of lintels, beams and slabs and such other important levels/planes, in the height of the wall should also be marked on it. Thickness of mortar joints should not exceed 10 mm unless otherwise stipulated. It should be borne in mind that strength of masonry decreases with increase in thickness of joints and vice versa.
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION--PART 2

SP 20(S&T) 2.3.4 All brick masonry should be built in uniform layers racking back where necessary at corners, and for long lengths. Provision for subsequent construction of cross-walls should be made by leaving indents of 1/4brick in depth and width equal to thickness of wail, in alternate courses. Similarly, provision for future extension should be made by toothing at the end of a wall. No part of a wall during its construction should be raised more than 1, metre in one day in case of one brick or thicker walls and 0.6 metre in one day in case of a half-brick wall. This is to obviate possibility of squeezing out of gree mortar from joints of masonry under self-load and also to avoid unequal settlement of foundation of a building. 2.3.5 Striking/ Finishing of Joints

: 1991

from damage. The second method has the advantage that work is not heid up if there is delay in the supply of frames, and there is no likelihood of wooden frames getting damaged due to dropping of brick bats, mortar and curing water, movements of workmen, etc. Disadvantage of the second method is that in order to facilitate subsequent fixing of frames, width of openings in case of doors and width as well as height of openings in case of windows has to be kept more than the width/height of frames to the extent of about 10 mm. The gap thus left between frame and the masonry/lintel has to be made good hy increase in the thickness of plaster in jambs and soffits of openings. 2.4.2 Frames of doors and windows are fixed in position with the help of holdfasts of adequate size and strength embedded in brick masonry by leaving recesses in masonry of suitable length, two courses in height and of width equal to full thickness of wall and subsequently filling the recesses with cement concrete of 1 : 2 : 4 mix, using coarse aggregate of size IO mm and below. When door and window frames are to be provided later in openings left in masonry, recesses should be left in masonry at levels corresponding to the pcsition of holdfasts. These recesses Should be temnorarilv i filled in with unjointed brick-bats whi'ch are removed at the time of fixing of frames. recesses are filled with cement contrite at the time of fixing of frames, for embedding the holdfasts. 2.5 Honey-Combed Brick Masonry

If a wall is to be plastered over, face joints should be raked to a depth of 10 mm while the mortar is green, in order to provide key for plaster. In case a wall is to be finished by pointing, face joints should be raked to a depth of 15 mm and face of masonry should be wire brushed to remove loose mortar and blemishes from the surface. If, as an economic measure, joints are to be finished flush without any plastering or pointing, this should be done while the mortar is green. 23.6 From structural and other considerations, horizontality of courses and verticality of walls and columns are very important. For ensuring horizontality of courses a straight edge and spirit level are used by the mason to check every course as the work proceeds. For checking verticality a straight edge and plumb-bob are employed. Deviation in verticality should not exceed 6 mm for.a height of 3 m or one storey, and a total of 12.5 mm for the entire height when the building is more than one storeyed. 2.3.1 Improved Method of Brick Laying

2.5.1 For laying honey-combed brick masonry, pattern as shown in drawings should be followed. Bricks should have a minimum bearing of 4 cm on either side in case of half-brick wall and 2 cm in case of one-brick wall. Bricks should be laid with frog down. 2r6 Brick Masonry Curved on Plan

An improved method of brick laying has been evolvEd by CBRl (Refer CBRI Building Digest No. 84) so as to increase productivity of masons. In this method of brick laying, special gadgets called `end frame', `string holder' and `mortar board' are made use of. For success in the adoption of this method of laying bricks, masons should be given a brief training in the use of the special gadgets and practice in following a particular sequence of operations for laying bricks. 2.4 Fixing Door and Window Frames

2.4.1 Door and window frames can be fixed in masonry either at the time when masonry work is in progress or subsequently in openings left in masonry for the purpose. Former method has the advantage that there are no gaps between the frames and masonry and thus fixing of frames is firm and sound. Disadvantage in this method is that frames made of wood are liable to get damaged due to the work in progress and special care has therefore to be taken to protect them
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

2.6.1 When radius of curvature of brick masonry curved in plan exceeds 6 metres, it can be laid just like ordinary brickwork, by providing some taper in cross joints. When radius of curvature is 6 metres or less, either specially moulded bricks should be used or bricks cut to required radius should be laid in header bond. Use of specially moulded bricks is however feasible only in large works. In case of unimportant works such as lining of soakage pits and cesspools of circular shape, curved brickwork may be provided by using uncut bricks, and thick tapered cross joints, thus obviating labour on cutting of bricks. 2.7 Extension of Old Brick Masonry 2.7.1 Normally provisions for future extension of brick masonry should be made at the time of initial construction as mentioned in 23.4. When no such provision has been made, proper bonding of new work with old should be carefully made. 2.7.2 For making addition of a new cross-wall, recesses in old brickwork should be cut out, at
2 127

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 ground water in contact with foundation. Where source of salts is brick or sand, efflorescence appears soon after construction in the first dry spell when water used in construction dries up. This efflorescence could be easily removed by wire brushing the surface. If masonry does not get wet again, as in case of internal and protected walls, there may be no further recurrence of efflorescence. In case of external walls, however efflorescence may appear again during subsequent cycles of wetting and drying, but to a gradually lessening extent and may stop altogether in course of time as the salts get depleted. Efflorescence appearing on exposed brickwork may cause no damage to masonry if bricks are strong and well burnt. Weak and under-fired bricks however are liable to get crumbled at the surface due to strong force exerted by the process of crystallization of salts. If the brickwork had been plastered over, before drying out of construction water used in masonry, plaster is likely to get damaged and flaked due to the salts. Surface finish on plaster is also likely to get spoil?d if it had been applied before drying out of masonry and plaster. 2.9.3 Where source of soluble salts is ground water efflorescence will affect super-structure only if there is no DPC at plinth level or DPC used is not very effective; otherwise effJorescence will appear only on external masonry below DPC level. Since ground water would provide an inexhuaustable source of salts, efflorescence due to this source will appear whenever there is a dry spell and it would thus, in course of time, weaken the masonry and affect the life of the structure. This brings out the necessity and importance of using well burnt bricks in good mortar in foundation and plinth and providing a good DPC at plinth level, particularly when the water table in the area is high and soil contains appreciable quantity of soluble sulphates. 2.9.4 incidence of efflorescence in buildings could be reduced if following measures are adopted at the stage of construction of a building and subsequent maintenance. 2.9.4.1 Bricks should effloresence rating and excessive efflorescenae possible. be tested for their use of bricks liable to should be avoided if

regular intervals, equal in width to the width of new wall three courses in height and half-brick in depth, spacing of the recesses also being three courses. New brickwork should then be built into the recesses formed in old brickwork using sotie strong mortar. For making longitudinal extension of a wall, the new wall should be toothed for its full width with the old wall up to a depth of one quarter brick length in alternate courses. New brickwork should be laid in such a way that height of each course is the same as that of corresponding old course. It should be ensure that there is no hump or projection at the junction of old and new brickwork. 2.7.3 In case bricks used in old brick masonry are of size as per foot-pound system, while in new brick masonry, bricks of size as per metric system are to be used, height of recesses in old brickwork as well as their spacings should be 4 courses of old brick masonry and height of 3 courses of new brick masonry should correspond to that of 4 courses in old brick masonry, making; suitable adjustment, if necessary by varying thickness of joints of new brickwork. 2.7.4 Old brickwork should be thoroughly cleaned of old mortar and wetted before jointing it with new brickwork. 2.8 Corbelling 2.8.1 Where corbelling is required in brick masonry for supporting some other structural member, maximum projection of individual bricks should not exceed one-half the height of brick nor one-half of its built-in part and overall horizontal projection of the corbel should not exceed one third of the thickness of wall. It is preferable to adopt header courses in the corbelled portion of brick masonry from consideration of structural stability and economy. 2.8.2 Structural stability of the corbel should be ensured as per provision of clause 6.4.2 of IS 1905 : 1987. Corbelled masonry should not be loaded till it has fully set and sufficient masonry above corbel has been laid so that counterbalancing weight is not less then twice the over turning weight. 2.9 Efflorescence 2.9.1 Phenomenon of appearance of white deposits on the external as well as internal surface of walls (mostly external) is called efflorescence. It is due to the movement of s`oluble salts-mainlv sulphates of sodium, magnesium, potassium ani calcium in solution to the surface. , evanoration of moisture and crystallization of salts at the surface. Efflorescence may appear on exposed brickwork or plastered surface or may appear through painted surface.
r

2.9.2 Efflorescence can occur only if there is some source of soluble salts as well as moisture. Soluble salts may be present in bricks used !or masonry or in sand used in masonry and plaster work or in
128 HANDBOOK

A simple test for determining `efflorescence' rating of bricks consists in standing a brick vertically in a flat bottom dish containing distilled water up to a depth of 2.5 cm, till the entire water is absorbed and the brick appears to be dry.. W,ater is again added to,the dish to the samC level i.e. 2.5 cm depth and allowed to get absorbed and evaporated. The brick is examined after second evaporation. If there is deposit of salts covering 50 percent or more of the brick surface, the brick is rated as liable to excessive efflorescence. This test should be carried out on at least 5 bricks
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

SP 20(S&T) selected at random conclusion. from a lot for coming to a

: 1991

2.9.4.2 Sand used in mortar for masonry and plaster should not contain more than 0.1 percent of soluble salts (chlorides and sulphates). 2.9.4.3 When water table is within 1.5 m of subgrade and soil contains appreciable percentage of soluble sulphates, mortar used for masonry m foundation and plinth should be as in 1.4.6.1(d) and at plinth !evel a good DPC should be provided. 2.9.4.4 Before application of decorative coats of distemper or paint to the ,plaster, it should be ensured that plaster has fully dried. 2.9.4.5 At plinth level, an effective course of DPC such as a .4 to 5 cm thick layer of cement concrete I : 1 r/2 : 3 containing some integral water proofing compound, should be provided. 2.9.4.6 Since efflorescence can take place only when there is some source of moisture, dampness in any part of a building due to rain water, water leaking from storage tanks or leakages in plumbing system should be guarded against by ensuring soundness of construction and good maintenance. 2.9.4.7 Apart from efflorescence, `sulphate salts when present in bricks, sand and ground water are likely to cause cracks in masonry and plaster and weaken a structure due to what is termed as `sulphate attack'. Soluble sulphates in the presence of moisture undergo a chemical action with portland cement used in mortar, thus forming a compound which exerts expensive force on masonry and plaster and causes damage. This phenomenon has been dealt with in detail in "SP : 25 Causes and Prevention of Cracks in Buildings".

absorption should not exceed 5 percent. Stone should not contain cryptic crystalline silica or chert, mica, or other deleterious materials like iron oxide and organic impurities. Selection of stone is usually based on past experience, and in order to ensure desired quality, it is customary to stipulate source of stone that is particulars of quarries from which stone should be procured for use in a particular job. 3.1.4 All stones should be wetted before use. Masonry should be laid truly in plumb or to required batter where so specified. Height of construction in a day should not exceed 1 metre so as to avoid excessive load on fresh mortar. Connected masonry should be raised uniformly all over. However, if one part of masonry is to be left behind, the wall should be racked at an angle not steeper than 45 degrees. Toothing in stone masonry should not be allowed. 3.1.5 There are three main varieties of stone masonry in common use namely random rubble, coursed rubble and ashlar, with some further subvarieties de,pending upon quality of stone, standard of dressing and laying of stones, standard of finish and workmanship and architectural style. For the sake of brevity only the main varieties of stone masonry are described in this Handbook. 3.2 Random 3.2.1 Rubble Masonry

General

SECTION
3 STONE 3.1 General MASONRY

3

In this variety of masonry (see Fig. 9) as the name suggests, stones are laid at random, that is without any regular courses and for that reason, it is sometimes also designated as "Uncour,sed rubble masonry". For this masonry, labour spent on dressing of stone is minimal and thus it is least expensive. This masonry has a rough finish and also is not very strong. It is, therefore, adopted for low-cost and low-height structures where economy in cost is a primary consideration, much strength is not needed and appearance does not matter. 3.2.2 Size

3.1.1 Use of stone in masonry for buildings in this country has been made for a long time as can be seen from some old monuments and historical buildings. Stone suitable for building construction is available in many parts of the country. Main reason for popularity of stone masonry in the past its durability, strength and case of was construction. 3.1.2 Types of stone commonly used in building construction are granite, trap, basalt, quartzite, limestone, and sandstone. Another type of stone which is a semi-weathered rock--namely laterite, though not very durable and strong, is available in some regions of this country, and is used for small and low cost structures. 3.1.3 As a general rule, stone for use in masonry should t5e hard, sound and free from weathering, decay, cavities, cracks, sand-holes, injurious veins, patches of loose or soft materials, etc. Its water
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

qf Stone

Selection and grading of stones for rubble masonry is mainly done at site using selected and larger stones at the faces and smaller stones.in the hearting. Ordinarily stones for use in this masonry should be small enough so that these could be lifted by hand. Minimum size of stone however should be such that it does not pass through a ring of 15 cm internal diameter and a rectangular slit of- 10 cm width. Height of stones may be up to 30 cm. Length of a face stone at its base should not be less than its height nor greater than three times the height. Breadth of a stone at base should not be greater than three-fourth of the thickness of wall nor less than its height, and at least one-fourth of the face stones whrch are not less than 200 cm* in section, should tail into the work to the extent of 2/3rd the thickness of wall for walls thicker than 30 cm and for full thickness
2 129

CONSTRUCT!ON-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

SECTION
FIG.

xx

9 RANDOM

RUBBLE

UNCXERSED MASONRY

of wall for walls 30 cm or less in thickness. Size and number of bond stones should be as given in 3.2.4.4. 3.2.3 Dressing qf' Stone

3.2.4.4

Bond

stones

Stone should be hammer dressed on the face, sides and bed to enable them to come in proximity with the neighbouring stones. Bushing on the face should not be more than 4 cm from the general wall surface. However, for the face to be plastered, bushing should not exceed 1 cm. 3.2.4 Laying of Stones

3.2.4.1 Stones should be wetted before use, laid on their natural quarry bed and solidly bedded in mortar by hammering them down to position with a wooden mallet. No pinning should be done in the face. Stone chips, not exceeding 20 percent of volume of masonry may be used in hearting where necessary to avoid thick mortar joints, taking care that no hollow spaces are left in masonry. Chips should be used only for filling interstices between adjacent stones and no chips should be used below bed of hearting stones to bring the latter in level with face stones. Hearting should be laid nearly level with the face stones except for the vertical bond stones or `plumbs'. Projecting upwards to the extent of 15 to 20 cm at about one metre intervals. 3.2.4.2 Though stones are laid without adhering to any courses, masonry is required to be brought to level at plinth. window sill, lintel and roof levels. This should be done firstly by selecting stones of appropriate height and secondly, if by providing a levelling course of necessary, concrete made by mixing 1 part of mortar used for masonry and 2 parts of stone aggregate of 20 mm nominal gauge. 3.2.4.3 Bonding in masonry is obtained by closely fitting adjacent stones, by using specified proportion of headers and bond stones, and by laying face stones so as to break vertical joints as much as possible, avoiding long vertical joints.
130 HANDBOOK

There should be at least one bond stone (also called `through stone') for every 0.5 m2 of wall surface. These stones should be marked with white paint at the face for subsequent check and verification during construction. In case of a wall up to 60 cm thick, length of bond stones should be equal to thickness of wall, while for walls thicker than 60 cm, two or more stones with an overlap of at least 15 cm should be used to serve as a bond stone. Bond stones should have a minimum section of 400 cm2. Where bond stones of suitable length are not avilable these could be made of precast cement concrete 1 : 3 : 6 (I cement : 3 sand : 6 stone aggregate of 20 mm nominal gauge). In case of highly absorbent stones (porous limestone and sandstone) the bond stone should extend to about two-third into the wall for all walls whatever the thickness and a set of two or more bond stone with an overlap of 15 cm should be provided. Use of a single bond stone for full thickness in this case is likely to result in movement of moisture to the inside face of the wall, through the bond stone, if continuous from face to face.

3.2.4.5

Quoin

stones

Quoins that is corner stones should be selected stones dressed with hammer and/ or chisel to form the required angle. Length of these stones should be 45 cm or more and at least 25 percent of the stone should be 50 cm or more in length. These should be laid as headers and stretchers alternately. The quoins should have a uniform chisel draft of at least 2.5 cm width at four edges of each exposed face, all the edges of a face being in one plane. No quoin should be smaller than 0.025 m* in volume. 3.2.4.6 Jambs Stones quoin, should less. used in jambs should be similar to those in excepting the length of the stem which be 45 cm or thickness of wall whichever is
DESIGN AND CQNSTRUCTION-PART 2

ON MASONRY

SP 20(S&T) 3.2.4.7 Joints JOINTS THICK

: 1991 17 mm

All joints should be completely filled with mortar and face joints should not be thicker than 20 mm. When surface of masonry is not to be pointed or plastered, joints should be struck flush and finished at the time of laying. In case plastering or pointing is required; joints should be raked to a depth 20 mm while the mortar is still green. It is desirable to do pointing, where required, within a few days of paying masonry to ensure,good bond. 3.3 Coursed 3.3.1 General Rubble Masonry

EL EVAT I ON

In this variety of masonry (see Fig. 10) stones are laid in courses, height of each course being not less than 15 cm nor more than 30 cm. All face stones in one course should be of same height. This type of masonry has two sub-types known as `first sort' and `second sort'. In masonry of first sort, height of all courses should be same while in masonry of second sort, height of courses may vary but height of any course should not be greater than that of a course below it and difference in height of 2 adjacent courses should not exceed 2.5 cm. In the latter variety of masonry, at places 2 stones could be used in the face to make up height of a course. 3.3.2 Size of Stone This should be same as for random rubble masonry except that for this masonry at least one third of the stones (by volume) should tail into the work for a depth not less than twice their height. 3.3.3 Dressing

PLAN

FOR

COURSE

1

PLAN

FOR

COURSE

2

Face stones should be hammer dressed on all beds and joints so as to give them approximate1 rectangular shape. These should be square on a Y 1 beds and joints. The bed joints should be chisel drafted for at least 8 cm from the face and side joints for at least 4 cm. No portion of a dressed joint should show a depth of gap of more than 6 mm in case of masonry of first sort and 10 mm in case of masonry of second sort from a straight edge placed on it and no portion of the stone should project beyond the surface of bed and side joints. Standard of bushing on the exposed face should be same as for random rubble masonry. 3.3 4 Laying All courses should be laid truly horizontal, and vertical joints should be truly vertical. All stones should be bedded solidly into the mortar. Stones should be laid as headers and stretchers alternatively. Volume of chips used for filling interstices in the hearting should not exceed 10 percent in case of this masonry of first sort and 15 percent in case of masonry of second sort. While using ,chips it should be ensured that no hollow spaces are left anywhere in masonry. No pinning should be done at face.
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

CROSS

SECTION

FIG. IO COLJRSED RUBBLE MASONRY

3.3.5 Bond, Stones These should be same as for random rubble masonry (clause 3.2.4.4) except that these should be provided in every course, at not more than 1.8 m intervals. 3.3.6 Quoin Stones No quoin should be smaller than .025 m3 in volume. Quoin stones should be of same height as that of the course in which they occur. These should not be smaller than 40 cm in length, should be rough chisel dressed to a depth of 10 cm at the beds and should have a uniform chisel draft of 2.5 cm at all four edges of each exposed face. These should be laid square on beds as headers and stretchers alternatively. 3.3.1 Jambs Stones used in jambs of doors, openings should be similar except that minimum length thickness of wall whichever
2

windows and other to those in quoins should be 40 cm or is less.
131

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 2O(S&T) : 1991 33.8 Joints 3.4.2.3 Laying Stones should be laid on full and uniform bed of moriar and bedded in position with wooden mallet without use of chips or pinning of any sort. Stones should be laid as headers and stretchers alternately. Headers should be placed, as far Bs possible, over middle of the stretchers below and stones should break joints on the face for at least half the height of the course and the bond should be carefully maintained throughout. For wails up to 80 cm thick, ail headers should have length equal to full thickness of wail. If necessary, jib cranes and other mechanical appliances should be used to handle heavy pieces of stones and to place them into correct position. When racking is unavoidable, its slope to the horizontal should not exceed 30'. 3.4.2.4 Joints

Ail bed joints should be horizontal and side joints vertical. These should be made and treated as in case of random rubble masonry except that thickness of joints should not exceed 10 mm in case of masonry of first sort and 15 to 20 mm in case of masonry of second sort. 3.4 Ashlar Masonry

3.4.1 General Ashiar masonry is the superior most of all varieties of stone masonry and is provided generally in important and prestigeous buildings architectural appearance and were strength, durability of the structure are some of the major considerations. Stones of appropriate quality are carefully selected and dressed to suitable size and shape. This variety has some sub-varieties, depending on standard of dressing and workmanship; the main sub-varieties being called `plain ashiar-fine tooled' and `plain ashiar-rough Plain ashlar-fine tooled masonry is tooled'. illustrated in Fig. 11.

All joints should be uniform and not more than 5 mm in thickness. A uniform recess of 15 mm depth from the face should be left in ail joints with the help of a steel plate during construction. All exposed joints should be pointed with mortar as per architectural requirements. Normally joints are finished with pointing which is sunk to a depth of 5 mm from the face, depth of mortar in pointing being not less than 10 mm. Coiour of mortar for pointing should match with the coiour of stone and for this purpose fine aggregate should be obtained by crushing chips of stone used in masonry. 3.4.3 Plain Ashlar

ELEVATION
FIG. 3.4.2 ii PLAIN ASHLAR FINE

SECTION
TOOLED MASONRY

Plain Ashlar-Fine Size of stone

Tooled

Masonry

3.4.2.1

Height of stones after dressing should not be less than 15 cm nor greater than 30 cm inclusive of thickness of joints, and for high class work, ail courses should be of uniform height. In less important works variation in height of courses may be permitted such that height of any course is not greater than the height of all courses below that course. Length of a stone should not be less than twice nor greater than thrice the height and breadth should not be less than height. 3.4.2.2 Dressing of stones

Rough Tooled Masonry-This type of masonry is similar to plain ashlar fine tooled masonry described above, egcept that exposed face should have a fine chisel draft, 2.5 cm wide round the edges and should be rough tooled between the draft such that the dressed surface should not deviate more than 3 mm from the straight edge placed over it. 3.4.4 Ashlar Stone Masonry Coursed Rubble Masonry with a Backing of

The stones should be cut to regular and required size and shape so that all sides are rectangular and joints could be truly horizontal and vertical. Ail sides of stones should be chisel dressed such that a fairly smooth surface is obtained and no point on the dressed surface is d.eeper than 1, 3, 6 and 10 mm from a 60 cm long straight edge placed on the surface of exposed face, beds, sides, and rear surface respectively. Ail angles and edges that remain exposed in the final position should be true square and free from chippings.
132 HANDBOOK

In many cases inner faces of ashiar masonry wails are finished in plaster. In such cases backing of ashiar masonry consists of coursed rubble stone masonry and two varieties of masonry are laid together in uniform courses of same height with proper bonding of the two types. Back faces of stones used in ashiar masonry need not be dressed to the standard required for ashlar masonry and may simply tail into coursed rubble masonry. 3.4.5 Ashlar Stone Brickwork Masonry with a Backing of

In regions where normal mode of walling is ashlar faced wails generally have brickwork, backing of brickwork. It is essential that the facing is effectively bonded with backing. This is achieved and wastage of bricks and iabour in cutting of bricks avoided by: (a) making the
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

SF 20(S&T) ashlar courses alternately half-brick and one brick in breadth; (b) providing breadth of brick backing as a multiple of half-brick; and (c) keeping height of each course of ashlar same as the height of a few brick courses inclusive of thickness of bed joints. It is desirable that high strength bricks of first grade with very thin joints are used in backing so as to ensure reasonable compatability between stone masonry and brickwork. 3.4.6 Mortar Mortar for ashlar masonry should be reasonably strong and durable. Mortar mix should therefore be either cement-sand mortar 1 : 5, I : 4 or 1 : 3 or composite cement-lime-sand mortar I : 1 : 6/ 1 : `/2 : 41/2, depending on strength requirement, loads and other considerations. 3.5.5 Joints

: 1991

Thickness of joints in good quality work should not exceed 10 mm. Faces may be plastered, pointed or finished flush depending on architectural effect to be achieved. When surface is to be plastered or pointed, joints should be raked while the mortar is green to a depth of IO mm and 15 mm respectively. Pointing should be done as early as possible after raking of joints to ensure good bond. 3.6 Stone Veneering

3.5 Laterite 3.5.1 General

Stone

Masonry

3.6.1 Wall faces are sometimes, veneered with thin slabs of stone or marble with the object of providing a decorative and durable finish. Mostly veneering is provided on the external face for architectural effect, but it is also provided on the internal face in special areas such as entrance halls and toilets. 3.6.2 For veneering stones generally used are sandstone. limestone and marble. the walling being e&rally brickwork, rubble stone masonror R.? .C . Veneering stone should be hard. soun b;. and free from crack; flaws, decay and weathering and it should be of uniform or specified texture. Colour and texture of stone or marble are specified on considerations of architecture, durability, cost and availability. Detailed specifications of limestone and marble slabs are given in IS 1I28 : 1974 and IS 1130 : 1969 respectively. 3.6.3 Thickness of stone veneer generally varies between 2 to 8 cm, depending on type of stone, architectural style, and type of building. As a general rule, when using expensive variety of stone for facing, comparatively a thin veneer stone is specified, for economy in cost. 3.6.4 Dressing 3.6.4.1 Sandstone and limestone

Laterite stone should be compact in texture. It may be mottled with streaks of brown, red and yellow colours. It should not contain white clay or lithomarge or an appreciable number of deep sinuosities.. Blocks should be obtained from a good ferrugenous variety of laterite which hardens on exposure after it is quarried. Density of laterite stone should not be less than 2.5 gm/cm3 and moisture absorption should not exceed 12 percent. 3.5.2 Size of Stone Blocks

Minimum height of blocks should be 19 cm actual that is 20 cm nominal with normal joint thickness of 10 mm. Breadth of blocks should be equal to height and length should be equal to twice the height. Standard sizes of laterite blocks as per IS 3620 : 1966 are given in Table I. 3.5.3 Dressing of Stones

Stones should be dressed soon after quarrying into regular rectangular blocks so that all faces are free from waviness and edges are straight and sauare. Blocks mav be cut to size either manuallv 0; by machine, hut for good qualit work it cs desirable to use machine cut blocks. i tone blocks after dressing should be exposed to atmosphere for a period of 3 months before use in masonry. This stone, on exposure changes its nature and improves in compressive strength. 3.5.4 Laying Blocks are laid in masonry in regular horizontal courses, breaking bond of vertical joints in every course to the extent of at least half the height of blocks. when a masonry element is thicke; than breadth of blocks, these should be laid as headers and stretchers similar to English bond of brickwork. All joints should be completely filled with mortar. Normally all courses should be of same height.
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

Sandstone and limestone slabs should be cut to the required size and shape so as to be free from any waviness and to give truly vertical and horizontal joints with the adjoining slabs. The faces that are to remain exposed in the final position as well as the adjoining faces to a depth of 6 mm should be fine chisel dressed so that when checked with a 60 cm straight edge, no point in the finished surface varies from it by more than 1 mm. The faces top bottom and vertical sides which are to form joints should be chisel dressed so that variation from straight edge at no point exceeds 5 mm. Dressing at the back should not be done so as to ensure good grip with the backing. All angles and edges that are to remain exposed in the final position should be true square free from chippings. 3.6.4.2 Marble slabs

Marble slabs should be cut to required size and shape and chisel dressed on all beds and joints so as to be free from any waviness and to give truly
2 133

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 2O(S&T)

: 1991 deformation 3.6.5.4 and thermal variations.

vertical and horizontal, radial or circular joints as required. The exposed faces and joints 12 mm from the face should be fine tooled such that straight edge laid along the face of the slab is in contact with every point on it. The surfaces should then be rubbed smooth. All visible edges and angles should be true square and free from any chippings. Beyond the depth of 12 mm from the face, the joints should be dressed with a slight splay so that joints are V shaped, being thin at the face and wide at the back. Surface of the stone coming in contact with backing should not be dressed so as to ensure a good grip with the backing. 3.6.5 Laying and Fixing 3.6.5.1 Stone slabs should be thoroughly wetted before laying. All joints should be truly horizontal and vertical and face should be in plumb. For grounding in case of stone and marble and jointing in case of stone slabs, mortar generally used is cement mortar I : 4 or cement-lime mortar I : `/2 : 4. In case of marble, mortar for jointing should be same as specified for pointing, and care should be taken that mortar used in the grounding does not spill over to the joints or exposed face. It should be ensured that no hollows are left in the grounding and that all joints are completely filled. 3.6.5.2 Slabs should be anchored to the backing unmetal or some by means of cramps (of bronze, other non-corrodible metal). f n case of thin veneers (less than 16 cm in thickness) and by means of stone dowels in case of thick veneers (6 cm or more in thickness). In addition slabs should be interconnected to each other in the horizontal direction b means of copper pins in case of thin veneers an B by means of cramps in case of thick veneers. Cramps generally used are of size 3 mm X 2.5 cm X 20-30 cm and normal size of pins is 6 mm dia X 7.5 cm long. Spacing of cramps, stone dowels and pins would depend on size of slabs but it is necessary to ensure that each slab is properly secured to the backing as well adjoining slabs. Cramps dowels and pins are generally fixed in cement mortar 1 : 2, using fine and. Some typical details for fixing veneering slabs are shown in Fig. 12, 13, 14 and 15. 3.6.5.3 The facing should be provided with a continuous support at the ground level as well as at every storey level that is, at about 3.5 m vertical intervals, the supports being in the form of projections in concrete floor slab or beams between columns or angle iron attached to backing. Such supports should also be provided the top of all openings and soffits of cantilevered portions. Alternatively specially designed cramps in accordance with IS 4101 (Part 1) : 1967 may be used so as to hold the facing in position as well as to transfer full weight of facing to the backing. In case of large buildings, provision in fixing arrangements for veneering work should be made for movements in facing due to creep, elastic
134 HANDBOOK

Pointing

All exposed joints in facing should be pointed with mortar, as may be specified for the purpose to match the colour of the facing. Pointing in case of stones other than the marble, should be sunk from the face by 5 mm and depth of ointing should not be less than 15 mm. In case o P marble veneering, mortar joints should be finished neat and fair in jointing mortar as the work proceeds, since joints being very thin, no subsequent pointing is' possible. 3.6.5.5 Jointing Thickness of joints should not exceed 5 mm in case of sandstone and limestone veneering and 1.5 mm in case of marble veneering. In the former case, a uniform recess of 20 mm depth from face should be left with the help of a steel plate. In the latter case jointing should be done with mortar specified for pointing. 3.6.5.6 Finishing

After the marble veneering has been cured, it should be rubbed with Carborundum stone of grades 60, 80 and 100 in succession, so as to give a plane, true and smooth surface. It should then be cleaned with oxalic acid solution, washed and finished clean. 3.7 Miscellaneous 3.7.1 Stwe Pillars Items

Masonry in stone pillars is as a general rule similar to that of masonry used for walls in a job in regard to quality and size of stones, dressing of stones, height of courses, quoin stones, bond stones, jointing, finish, etc, with the following exceptions:

a) Random

rubble masonry - Bushing of exposed faces should not exceed 20 mm. Quoins should have length not less than 25 cm for pillars up to 40 cm side, and 30 cm for pillars having side greater than 40 cm. Bond stones should not be less than 15 cm in height and should be hammer dressed on beds, faces and sides into squared blocks. rubble masonryBeds of stones should be rough tooled true and square for a distance of at least 10 cm from the face and the sides of stones for at least 5 cm from the face. Beds and sides of quoins should be rough tooled for a distance of at least 10 cm from the face. ~Length of the stone should not be less than 1% times the height. masonry - Minimum height of stones for fine tooled masonry should be 30 cm and for rough tooled masonry 20 cm. area of 0.25 m* or less, bond stone should be a single full stone and for pillars exceeding
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

b) Coursed

cl Ashlar

4 For pillars having a cross sectional
ON MASONRY

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

STONE LGUN

VENEER CRAMP

COPPER

PIN

METAL

rEXPOSED

FACES AND Smm FROM 0 BE INE TOOLED

L

FACE

JOINTS

AR

FULL SIZE

DETAIL

`A'

rMORTAR C 6,
LONG PIN 75 mm COPPER

I

I

SECTIONAL PLAN FULL SIZE DETAIL A

FIG. 12 TYPICAL DETAILS OF FIXING STONE VENEERWORK FACING USING GUN METAL CRAMPS AND COPPER PINS

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN AND

CONSTRUCTION-PARr

2

135

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

STONE

VENEER SECTIONAL PLAN

GUN

METAL

CRAMP

`\L

FACE

JOINTS

\

GUN

METAL

CRAMP

SECTIONAL

ELEVATION

AT

P Q

SECTIONAL (FULL SIZE

ELEVATION OETAILS AT'A')

SECTIONAL (FULL SIZE FIG.

,PLAN DETAILS

AT `A')-

13 TYPICAL DETAILS OF FIXING STONE VENEER WORK ~JSING STONE DOWELS AND GUN METAL CRAMPS
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

136

SP 20 (S&T) : 1991

NORTAR

-. . . .

. . ..

;_-..-.

,_.,;:.

:

.`..I

\-STONE VENEERING

GUN MEfAL
14 TYPICAL

CRAMP

FIG.

DETAILS

OF FIXING GUN METAL

STONE CRAMPS

FACING

SHOWING

USE OF

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

2

137

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991
BACKING WALI,

/

/WASHER

NON-CORiOSIVE CRAMP A8OUT

50

ANGLE mm WIDE

/

A

L NONCORROSIVE DOWEL

F
rGUN-METAL CRAMP

I

I.1

.,

I

I

G
FIG. 15 TYPES OF CRAMPS FOR STONE FACINGS

0.25 m* in area, it should be made up of four stones provided in two courses at right angle. Three bond stones should be provided in each pillar of storey height at bottom, middle and top. In case of plastered masonry, bond stones could be of precast cement concrete of M-15 grade laid on the full section of pillar in one piece.

twice its breadth. Standard of dressing of stone should be as for ashlar masonry. Joints of the sill should break joints with those of masonry below. Thickness of vertical joints of sill should not exceed 1.5 mm in case it is fine tooled and 3 mm in case it is rough tooled. Embedment of sills into masonry on any side should not be less than 5 cm.

SECTION
4 CONCRETE 4.1 General BLOCK

4

e) Height of masonry laid in pillars in one day
should 3.7.2 Corbels 3.7.2.1 Corbelling in brick masonry has been dealt with earlier in 2.8. Corbelling in stone masonry is generally similar to that in brick masonry. In view, however, of greater strength of units in case of stone masonry and difference in jointing, there are some minor variations. 3.7.2.2 For stone corbelling, breadth of embedded portion of stone should not be smaller than 1.5 times the breadth of projected portion. Vertical joints of corbel and its junction with adjoining masonry should break joints with those in the courses below and above. 3.7.3 Window Sills not exceed 60 cm.

MASONRY

4.1.1 Concrete blocks for use in masonry may be solid hollow, lightweight or autoclaved cellular as per standard specifications IS 2185 (Part 1) : 1979, IS 2185 (Part 2) : 1983, IS 2185 (Part 3) : 1984 and IS 3115 : 1978. These are used for load bearing walls as well as non-load bearing panels and partitions. Choice of units should be made carefully, taking into consideration type of structure, loads, .climatic conditions, economy in cost, ready availability of units, etc. 4.1.2 Concrete block masonry is very much prone to shrinkage cracks and, therefore, masonry units must strictly conform to standard specifications and suggestions for handling, storage, moistening before use, selection of mortar for laying curing and finishing as given below masonry, should be carefully followed so as to avoid or to minimise cracks. Moreover, it should be ensured that concrete blocks are dried for a period of at
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

Thickness of sills should not be less than 5 cm. Entire width of sill should be in one stone and length of any sill stone should not be less than
138 HANDBOOK

SP 20 (S&T) least 28 days undergo initial work. 4.2 Handling after curing so that the blocks shrinkage before use in masonry and Storage of Blocks -

: 1991

4.2.1 The blocks should be handled with care in transport as these are liable to get broken and damaged due to jolts and mishandling. These are to be stored at site in such a way that these may not be able to absorb moisture from any source. These shall, therefore, be stacked on planks, or such other supports and in inclement weather protected from rain. 4.3 Laying 4.3.1 of Blocks Before Use

mortar is spread on the bed, and these blocks are placed back truly level and plumb. The string is then stretched tightly along the outer edge of these two corner blocks. Thereafter, each block is removed one by one and relaid over bed of mortar with mortar on sides, to correct level, alignment and plumb. 4.3.4.2 Having completed first course of blocks, other courses are laid on it, breaking joint and checking alignment, horizontality, verticality and trueness of plane with the help of mason's line, straight edge, mason's level and plumb bob. Use of a storey-rod should also be made to ensure that each course is laid at its proper level. As far as possible, work should proceed uniformly all over, but when that is not feasible portion of masonry to be left behind should be racked back, to the extent of half the length of block at every course. It should be ensured that all perpends are truly vertical. 4.3.4.3 To ensure good bond between blocks and mortar, the latter should not be spread too far ahead of laying of blocks, as otherwise mortar may stiffen and may not bond well with the blocks. As each block is laid, excess mortar from the joints should be scraped off with trowel and either thrown back to the mortar board (or pan) and reworked with fresh mortar or applied to the vertical side of the block just laid. Care shouid be taken to prevent mortar falling into the cavities of hollow blocks while laying. 4.3.5 Jointing 4.3.5.1

Wetting

In humid weather, blocks should not be wetted before laying. If weather is dry (humidity below 50 percent), bottom, to and sides of blocks may be slightly moistened. I?xcessive wetting of blocks before use in masonry is likely to result in extensive shrinkage cracks. 4.3.2 Mortar As a general rule, mortar for concrete block masonry should be relatively weak and slow setting, so as to minimise possibility of shrinkage cracks. Generally speaking, composite cement lime mortar is best suited for the purpose, using 1 : 2 : 9 mortar for normal work and 1 : 1 : 6 mortar when intensity of loading is high or masonry is exposed to weather. Mortar for masonry in foundation and plinth should be somewhat richer than that for super-structure masonry. 4.3.3 Masonry in Foundation and Plinth

qf Hollow
joints

Blocks

Horizontal

For two or more storeyed buildings, it is desirable to avoid use of hollow blocks in foundations and plinth. If for some reasons hollow blocks are to be used for this purpose, hollows of the blocks should be filled with cement concrete 1 cement : 3 sand : 6 coarse aggregate of 20 mm nominal size. In single storeyed buildings, when using hollow blocks, the hollows should be filled with sand up to one course below plinth and the top course below plinth should be filled with cement concrete 1:3:6. 43.4 Masonry in Super-structure

Normally in load bearing walls, mortar is spread over the entire top surface of the block, that is front and rear shells and webs as a uniform layer of 10 mm thickness so as to achieve full load carrying capacity of the blocks. However, in case of non-load bearing masonry as in panels of framed structures, where load on masonry is very light, mortar may be applied only on the top of front and rear shells, and not on the webs. This results in economy in cost and also minimises possibility of moisture penetrating to the interior face of the wall. 4.3.5.2 Vertical joints

4.3.4.1 First course of concrete block masonry should be laid with special care, making sure that it is properly aligned, levelled and plumbed, as this would greatly facilitate laying subsequent courses correctly. Before laying the first course, ali nment of the wall should be marked on the Df%. On this. blocks should be first laid drv. that is without using mortar, aligning them coirectly with the help of mason's line, in order to determine correct position of blocks including those of the cross-walls and to adjust their spacing. When blocks have been placed correctly, two corner blocks (one at each corner) are removed without disturbing adjoining blocks,
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

For vertical joints, mortar should be applied on vertical sides of the front and rear shells. This could be done either by applying mortar on the block already laid or on the one which is to be laid next. Latter method is more convenient as mortar could be applied with greater ease, by keeping the block in such a way that side to be mortared is upward and horizontal. In case of two-cell blocks, there is a slight depression on the vertical sides, which may be filled up with mortar when it considered necessary to secure greater lateral rigidity.
2 139

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T) 4.3.6 Closure

: 1991 Block masonry by means of holdfasts embedded in insitu cement concrete blocks (of mix 1 : 2 : 4) locations of which should correspond to locations of masonry units so that in-situ blocks for embedding holdfasts replace precast blocks and cutting of blocks is avoided. 4.6 Provision of Lintels A lintel over an opening may consist of either a singIe reinforced precast unit or a number of precast units of U-shape provided with required reinforcement bars in the hollows and filled insitu with I : 21/ : 3% cement concrete. 4.7 Intersecting Walls All walls, whenever they meet or intersect, should be bonded together by laying the courses of the two walls at the same time, providing true masonry bond between at least 50 percent of the units at the intersection. When it is not feasible to construct the two walls simultaneously, pockets in alternate courses should be left in the wall laid first and corresponding courses of second wall built into those pockets. 4.8 Provision of Floor/Roof If hollow blocks are used in masonry, hollows of the blocks in the last course, just below the floor/roof should be filled with cement concrete 1 : 3 : 6. The top course in case of all varieties of blocks should be finished smooth with a thin coat of 1 : 3 cement mortar. After this has set and partly dried, the bearing surface should be either given a coat of crude oil or covered with craft/tarred paper to serve as a slip-joint at the bearing of the slab. SECTION 5 MASONRY 5.1 General Masonry elements in common use are: wall, pillar, cavity wall, retaining wall, arch and dome. Construction of wall and pillar has been covered earlier in Sections 2, 3 and 4. Constructiop of other elements is given below. 5.2 Cavity Wall ELEMENTS 5

When layin the closure block, all edges of the opening an d all four edges of the block should be buttered with mortar and carefully lowered into place, without letting the mortar fall down. If any mortar drops off, the block should be lifted back, fresh mortar applied and block reset into position. 4.4 Rendering 4.4.1 External and Other Finishes Renderings

Concrete blocks of various varieties are mostly pervious and are liable to get damp when exposed to rain. In areas of heavy and mdderate rainfall, exterior surface of block'masonry walls should therefore be made water-proof by plastering which should be applied only after the wall has thoroughly dried. To provide key for plastering, joints should be raked to a depth of 10 mm, while the mortar is green. Masonry surface should be lightly moistened just .before application of plastering. Excessive wetting of block masonry is likely to result in shrinkage cracks in masonry on drying. Curing of plaster should also be done sparingly so that masonry does not absorb much moisture. In areas of heavy rainfall, plastering should be done in two coats, first coat being 12 to 15 mm thick and `second coat 8 to IO mm. Mix of mortar for plaster should be 1 cement : 1 lime : 6 sand, usihg coarse sand (3 mm and down) and surface should be finished coarse with a wooden float. In areas of moderate rainfall, one coat of plaster 12 to 15 mm thick in cement-lime mortar 1 : 1 : 6 is adequate. In areas of scanty rainfall, it is not necessary to provide plaiter, but joints should be flush pointed with cement mortar 1 : 3. For this purpose, mortar joints should be raked to a depth of 15 mm at the time of laying masonry while the mortar is green. 4.4.2 Internal Renderings

As concrete blocks generally have even and uniform surface, it is not essential to provide a rendering coat on the inside surface. Joints should, therefore, be flush pointed and surface finished in cement paint. However, when a very smooth and high class finish is desired, walls may be given one coat of plaster 8 to IO mm thick in cement lime mortar 1 : 2 : 9, and desired finish give to the surface. 4.5 Treatment at Openings and Window Frames and Fixing of Door

4.5.1 When using hollow blocks as masonry units? either one course of masonry under window openings should be built with solid blocks or hollows of blocks in one course should be filled with cement concrete 1 : 3 : 6. 4.5.2 Jambs of large door and windows should be e'ther- built with solid blocks or hollow blocks s f, ould be filled with cement concrete 1 : 3 : 6. 4.5.3 Door and window frames should be fixed to
140 HANDBOOK

53.1 A cavity wall is a double wall consisting of two separate leaves of masonry bonded to each other, and having a thin cavity in-between which intercepts movement of moisture from outer leaf to the inner leaf and also improves the thermal insulation of the wall. A cavity wall can be either load bearing or non-load bearing. Generally speaking, both the leaves of masonry are half brick thick, built in stretcher bond. It for architectural effect, the outer leaf has to be in "Flemish bond" it is necessary to make use of purpose made snap header, since headers made by cutting normal full length bricks do not prove to be satisfactory. 5.2.2 The outer and inner leaves of masonry are tied together by means of metallic ties, which are
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

SP 20(S&T) embedded in the mortar joints with a slight fall towards the outer leaf so that ties may not act as a path for travel of rain water from outer leaf to the inner leaf. Wall ties may be made of galvanised mild steel bar or galvamsed flat iron pteces with fish-tailed ends. Galvanising is necessary to make the mild steel rustproof. A less expensive alternative, which is not so satisfactory is to use M.S. ties which are coated, with bitumen and sand. To prolong the life of galvanised M.S. ties, sometimes, these are also coated with bitumen and sand before use. Spacing of ties should be, generally, not less than 1 m horizontally and t/2 m vertically, with additional ties on the sides of openings. As far as possible, ties should be evenly distributed over the entire wall. 52.3 Foundation of the cavity .wall should be solidly constructed like ordinary wall foundation up to 15 cm below DPC. Two leaves of masonry should be raised simultaneously and uniformly. Measures should be adopted to ensure that cavity is kept free from mortar droppings. Door and window jambs should be built solid by headers suitably bonded with the main leaves of the cavity wall. Window sills should consist of either precast concrete slabs or a header course of bricks. Lintels should be of full thickness of wall. Below the floor or roof slab there should be two courses of solid masonry. In case of non-load bearing panel walls, `however, cavity may extend up to sojfit of the beam. Cavity should be ventilated by use of air bricks or weep holes both at bottom and top. In areas of heavy rainfull, where it is necessary to ensure full protection from rain penetration, vertical DPC should be provided at jambs of doors,and window, which are solid built. Width of cavity should be 4 cm minimum and 10 cm maximum. In case of walls having door and window openings it facilitates construction of solid portion of masonry in foundation, plinth, jambs, sills of windows and bearings of R.C.C. slabs of overall thickness of cavity wall is kept as a multiple of half-brick. 5.3 Retaining Wall exceed half the depth of course.

: 1991

5.3.3 In case of a retaining wall, intended to resist it is necessary to prevent earth pressure, accumulation of water on the back side of the retaining wall by making suitable arrangements for quick drainage of rain water. For this purpose, a back fill of minimum width 45 cm consisting of quarry spoil, stone spalls,. gravel, disintegrated rock, brick-bats or some granular material should be provided together with weep holes of size 5 to 7.5 cm square in masonry. Weep holes should be spaced at intervals of 2 m horizontally and 1 m vertically, lowest row of weep holes being 30 cm above the ground level, and their inlets should be surrounded by loose stones or some other course material. It may be mentioned that weep holes are not needed in case of dry random rubble stone masonry because water can easily drain out through the unmortared joints of such masonry. Remaining fill behind a retaining wall should be compacted in 15 cm layers, sloping way from the wall. 5.3.4 Stone Retaining Wall 5.3.4.0 Mostly stone retaining walls are built either in dry random rubble masonry or dry coursed rubble facing masonry with a backing of random rubble masonry the former in case of roads in unpopulated areas, where appearance is not of much consideration and the latter in where appearance is an populated areas, important consideration. Mortar bound stone retaining walls are generally not provided on economic considerations. 5.3.4.1 Retaining stone masonry walls of dry random rubble

5.3.1 Function of a masonry retaining wall is to resist lateral pressure due to earth, water or some other non-cohesive material. Masonry units commonly, used for retaining walls are stone and brick. Since a masonry retaining wall is designed as a gravity structure, it is preferable, on grounds of economy,, to use a masonry unit of.high density for a retainmg wall. From this constderation, m regions where stone is available, retaining wall js normally constructed in stone. 5.3.2 From structural consideration, a retaining wall is built generally with one face vertical (the face on which lateral thrust is acting) and the other face battered. Courses of masonry instead of being horizontal are laid at a slope normal to the battered face. Foundation for retaining wall should be taken deep enough so as to be safe from the effect of scour, frost and surface water. Projections of any footing course, should not
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

Stones in the facing for this masonry should have a minimum height of 15 cm, their average breadth should not be less than height and averge length not less than 11%times the height for stones up to 20 cm height and 1`/j times the height for stones larger than 20 cm in height. Bond stones; which should be at least 300 square centimetres in section and 80 centimetres in length should be provided at a rate of 2 per square metre of face area. Stone in foundation should be as large as possible, and should be placed with their bed at right angles to the face better. Stones in the front and back face should be laid .as headers and stretchers alternately, all stones breaking bond with stones below, as much as possible. When ,it is desired to construct a retaining wall of height exceeding 3 m, it should be provided with bands of rubble masonry laid in mortar, both in the vertical as well as in the horizontal directions. In the vertical direction, bands should be of 0.5 m height at about 3 m intervals and in the horizontal direction these should be of 1 to 2 m width at about 10 m centres. Top few courses of wall should be strengthened either by laying them in mortar or by providing a
2 141

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T) concrete concrete intervals intervals.

: 1991 bressummers are used for spanning horizontal in buildings, openings, circular arches are sometimes provided over bressummers to serve as relieving arches for reducing masonry loads on bressummers which otherwise would sag under excessive load. Before advent of RCC, brick arch roofing used to be a popular and economical mode of roofing for buildings. 5.4.2 Centering Centering for an arch should be true in shape and should be sufficiently rigid so as not to yield under load. Also there should be some arrangement (for example folding wedges) for slightly easing the centering without any vibration, soon after construction of the arch, so that masonry units of the arch may bed down firmly before the mortar has finally set. Slackening of the centering, however, should not be done too soon after laying of masonry in arch, as that may squeeze out the mortar from part of the masonry laid last. For arches up to 2 m span, centering may consist of honey-combed brickwork supported on planks or battens of sufficient stren th, suitably held in position. For spans between 9 to 4 m, timber centering should be used with hard wood wedges for slackening the centering. For spans exceeding 4 metres, it is desirable to use steel centering, particularly when a large number of arches of same span have to be so that repeated use of steel constructed, centerings could be made. For spans exceeding 6 metre, slackening device should consist of sand boxes. When there are 4 spans or less, all the spans should be completely centered at one time and construction of all the arches should be commenced simultaneously. In case of a structure with more than 4 spans, there should be at least 4 sets of centerings so that a minimum of 4 spans could be centered at one time and arched over. Centering should not be struck before one week after the completion of an arch. Care should be taken to ensure that walls on the sides of an arch are built up to at least two-thirds of the height of the arch and haunches are filled up to that height, before striking of centering. 5.4.3 Construction 5.4.3.1 Masonry work in arch should be carried up from both ends uniformly and keyed in the centre. Masonry units forming skew backs should be cut or dressed so as to give proper radial bearings to the end voussoirs. Defects in dressing should not be made good by mortar or chips. The arch work should be kept thoroughly wet.so that no portion of the arch hardens and fully ,sets before the whole arch is completed. From this consideration, it is desirable to employ a mortar which is slow setting. In multiple arches, the key units (brick or stone) should not be inserted in any one arch till the adjacent arch or arches have been constructed to the extent of at least 25
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART 2

coping of 15 cm depth in cement 1 : 3 : 6, with control joints at 3 metre and expansion joints at 10 metre wall in dry coursed rubber

5.3.4.2 Retaining facing masonry

Specification for facing is same as for coursed rubble ,masonry (33) but without any mortar in joints and backing, as laid down in 5.3.4.1. 5.3.5 Brick Retaining Wall

Brick retaining wall should be laid in cement mortar of mix 1 : 6 using coarse sand. It could be finished either by plaster or pointing, depending on architectural considerations. It is desirable that bricks should be well burnt from consideration of durability of the wall-in fact somewhat overburnt bricks would do better. Since compressive stress in a retaining wall is generally not much, broken bricks can be used in the hearting of the wall, provided all joints are properly filled with mortar. This would, however, increase the consumption of mortar for this masonry and therefore one should carefully weigh the economy in use of broken bricks against the increase in cost of mortar. Top of a brick retaining wall should generally be protected by a cement concrete coping of 7.5 to 10 cm thick, concrete being of 1 : 3 : 6 mix. This coping should be laid with control joints at about 3 metre intervals and expansion joints at about 10 metre intervals in order to obviate possibility of shrinkage and thermal cracks in coping. 5.4 Masonry' Arches 5.4.1 General

A masonry arch is employed for horizontal spanning, that is bridging and transmitting loads from above to the sides of an opening. In building construction, arches are provided over door and window or verandah openings, mainly for architectural effect but sometimes for economy in cost in case of small spanssay up to 1 metre. Arches are of various shapes and forms; those in common use being circular (segment or semicircle) and flat. A segmental arch generally employed is that subtending an angle of 60" at the centre. Such an arch has a rise to span ratio of 1 : 7.464. For simplicity a circular arch of rise to span ratio of I /S is often adopted. A semi-circular arch is a half circle so that rise in the middle is half the span. This arch has an advantage over segmental arch that side thrust at the support is much less and thus side supports need not be very wide. A flat arch, which is suitable only for small spans (say up to 1 metre) and light loads, has a horizontal extrados and slightly cambered intrados (to nullify the small amount of sag of the arch under load) is employed mainly for spanning door and window openings in ordinary buildings. Usual allowance for camber in the intrados in the flat arch is 1/ 100 of the span. When wooden
142 HANDBOOK

SP 2O(S&T) : 1991 percent arch. 5.4.3.2 for counter-acting the side thrust of the reinforced concrete and prestressed concrete, use of domes is not made now, except on special architectural considerations in case of monumental, religious and institutional buildings. 5.5.2 Construction technique of a dome is more or less similar to that of an arch. In view of the fact that use of dome is very uncommon now, it has not been considered necessary to go into details of this technique.

Brick arch

Brick arch may be either gauged or plain. In gauged arch, cut or moulded bricks are used and in plain arch uncut bricks are used. Joints in brick work should consist of through radial joints and voussoirs should break joints with each other. For a gauged arch thickness of radial joint should not exceed 5 mm. In case of plain arch, minimum thickness of joint should be 5 mm and maximum 15 mm. When arch face is to be pointed, face bricks should be moulded or cut to proper shape so as to have uniform face joints not more than 5 mm in thickness. 5.4.3.3

SECTION
6 SOME RELATING 6.1 General

6
MATTERS

MISCELLANEOUS TO MASONRY

Stone arch

Stones should not be smaller than 25 cm in any direction for fine tooled ashlar arch and smaller than 20 cm in case of rough tooled ashlar arch. Stones, for arches up to 60 cm in depth, should be of full thickness of wall. For arches exceeding 60 cm but not exceeding 90 cm in depth, stones should be laid in alternate courses of headers and stretchers, all the headers being of full thickness of ring and not more than two stretchers being used to make up full thickness, of a ring. For arches over 90 cm in depth, quoins and key stones only need be of full thickness of the ring. Break of joints across the depth should be not less than 20 cm. During the progress of work, care should be taken to distribute the load on centering evenly in order to obtain true curvature on completion of the arch. For ashlar masonry arch, joints should not be more than 5 mm thick and face joints should be all uniformly recessed to a depth of 20 mm. 5.4.4 Loading

some miscellaneous matters In this section, relating to masonry not covered in earlier sections are dealt with briefly. 6.2 Chases, Recesses and Holes Requirements of chases, recesses and holes have been covered in detail in IS 1905 : 1987. 6.2.1 Chases and recesses are provided in masonry to run services like electric supply, water supply, telephone lines, etc, and to provide space for meters and shelves. As far as possible, services should be planned with the help of vertical chases in walls, in conjunction with horizontal runs in floors and roofs and horizontal chases in walls should be avoided. 6.2.2 Vertical chases should not be closer than 2 m in any stretch of a wall. These should be kept away from bearings of beams and lintels, but if unavoidable, stress in the affected portion should be checked and kept within limits. Vertical chases should be avoided in narrow stretches of masonry such as between door and window openings. When unavoidable, such narrow stretches of wall should be built with stronger units and richer mortar or built in plain cement concrete. 6.2.3 Horizontal chases when unavoidable, should be located in the upper or lower one third of height of a storey, and no continuous horizontal chase should exceed 1 m in length. 62.4 For load bearing brick walls depth of vertical and horizontal chases should not exceed one-third and one-sixth of the thickness of wall respectively. No chase should be. provided in a load bearing half-brick wall and chases in a onebrick load bearing wall should be provided with care so as to avoid excessive cutting and structural .damage to masonry. Chases in masonry should always be cut with a sharp chisel since a blunt chisel disturbs the masonry units and weakens the masonry. 6.2.5 In brlckwork, chases are normally cut, after the masonry has adequately set. However, in case of stone masonry, because of hardness of stone, this is not possible and therefore chases have to be formed by using selected and specially shaped stones while laying stones in masonry. In case of masonry with hollow concrete blocks, hollows of
2 143

of Arches

Loading of arches should be gradual and so regulated that at least 7 days should elapse before 50 percent of design load and at least 14 days should elapse before 75 percent of design load comes on the arch, allowing full design load only after 28 days of completion of arch. 5.4.5 Supports End supports that is abutments of arches should be strong enough to withstand the horizontal thrust of end arches as well as vertical loads. When constructing arched roofs, horizontal thrusts at ends on walls should be resisted with the help of mild steel tie rods. In case of multiple arches of uniform span and loadings, as there is no horizontal thrust at intermediate supports (walls or piers), normally no ties are needed, in intermediate spans. 5.5 Masonry Domes

5.5.1 Masonry domes were provided in the past to serve as roof cover for large structures, when no other structural means of bridging large spans were available. With the advent of steel,
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T) blocks can services.

: 1991 be made use of for running the 6.3 Brick Nogging and Dhajji Wailing

6.2.6 Recesses in masonry of size up to 30 cm X 30 cm could be provided without a lintel, provided there is no concentrated load directly over the recess. Masonry over a recess wider than 30 cm (horizontal dimension) should be supported on a lintel. In case of circular recesses, no lintels are needed if upper half of the recess is built as an arch.

63.1 In regions where timber is comparatively cheap and available in abundance, load and nonload bearing walls are sometimes built by providing a timber framework' infilled with halfbrick or stone masonry. This type of walling is known as brick nogging when infilling is done with bricks and dhajji walling when infilling is done with stones. Thickness of wall is generally 12 to' 13 cm. Brick nogging walling is illustrated in Fig. 16.

900 mm

WIRE NAlL8 FOR BONDING

--MORlICE AND TENON JOINT

-HORIZONTAL RIBS

BRICK WORK IN LIME OR CEMENT MORTAR. PLASTERED BOTH SIDES

FIG. 16 TYPICAL DETAILS OF BRICKNOCGED WALLING
144

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION-PART

2

63.2 Timber framing consists of vertical posts of storey height 1 to 1.5 m apart and horizontal battens at about 1 m intervals. The battens are notched into the posts and fastened by iron spikes of about 8 mm dia. In case of dhajji walling the frame is braced by diagonals which are halved at their intersections at-@ are fastened to the posts by means of IO cm long wire nails. In case of brick nogging diagonals for bracing are not provided because, firstly brickwork which is laid tightly with well-filled thin joints and good quality bricks, itself serves as bracing for the frame and secondly, use of diagonals if. provided, would interfere with brick laying and would considerably weaken the brickwork. In this type of walling position of doors and windows is so planned that frames for doors and windows form a part of the wall frame. Sections of various members of the frame and their spacings are determined after taking into consideration the loads on the wall, finish of the wall faces, sill level of window, lintel level of doors and windows, storey height, length of wall, size of bricks, etc. Sections common1 used are 12.5 X 12.5 cm for verticals, 12.5 X 7. J cm for horizontals and 10 X 5 cm for diagonal braces. 6.3.3 Before laying of masonry, surface of timber which- is to come in contact with masonry is given one or two coats of hot bitumen or some wood preservative such as sollignum. 6.3.4 Brickwork and stone masonry are anchored to the vertical posts by means of 10 cm long wire nails half driven into the posts at intervals of 3 to 4 courses or about 30 cm so that projected portions of nails get embedded in bed mortar of masonry. 6.3.5 Both faces of internal walls and inner face of external walls are generally finished in cement or lime plaster all over except at the door and window frames. In order to bond plaster to the wood surface strips of wire netting of about 1.5 cm mesh are nailed over the wood surface to be plastered. Outer face of external walls can be finished by (a) plastering over the entire surface (except frames of doors and windows); or (b) plastering over the infilling and stopping it against the frame; or (c) pointing over the infilling. In case of alternatives (b) and (c), the filling should be so laid that the frame face projects by about 3 mm beyond the plastered or pointed surface. 6.3.6 In dhajji walling, thickness of stone masonry is generally 10 to 12 cm and all st.ones must be through stones with flat beds laid to fit closely against the vertical posts and diagonal bracing. In hilly regions, where bricks are difficult to procure and stone is easily available, dhajji walling is adopted in preference to brick nogging. 6.3.7 Since thickness of brick nogging or dhajji walling is generally 12 to 13 cm, it does not have much thermal insulation and resistance to rain penetration. It is, therefore, not suitable for use as external wall in regions of extreme climate or
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

SP 20(S&T) : 1991 . heavy rainfall. This type of walling, because of its light weight and good ductility, is well suited for earthquake prone regions. 6.4 Window Sills

It is a good practice to provide for extra strength and durability in window sills so that these do not get damaged, loosened or worn out in use. This is done by (a) laying a course of brick on edge at the sills in case of brick masonry or laying a course of headers in case of rubble stone masonry; or (b) providing a 4 to 5 cm thick layer of cement concrete, with or without terranzzo finish; or (c) laying a 4 to 5 cm thick course of stone or marble slabs. Choice of a specification for this purpose in any case would depend upon cofisiderations of cost, type of masonry units used for ,walls and architectural requirements of the building. 6.5 Copings on Compound Walls and Parapets

Copings on compound walls and parapets are provided to afford protection to the top courses of masonry from weathering action due to repeated cycles of heating and cooling and rainfall, which would otherwise tend to dislodge the top courses of masonry. The coping generally consists of precast cement concrete slabs or stone slabs about 5 cm in thickness laid in suitable mortar. The coping should project about 2.5 cm on both sides of the wall faces with drips and should be provided with expansion joints about 5 mm in width at 2 to 4 m intervals. Parapet copings should slope to the rear to prevent rain washing down dust on the face of wall and spoiling it. 6.6 Use of Fire Bricks

When masonry is in immediate contact with fire as in fire places, hearths, incinerators, bakeries, ovens, etc, it will not be able to stand the intense heat and would disintegrate and get burnt out very soon. It is, therefore, necessary in such situations to provide a lining of fire bricks (see IS 1526 : 1960) laid in fire proof mortar (see IS 195 : 1963). for laying, fire bricks are simply dipped in a thin paste of well puddled firelclay in water and laid so that joints are very thin. No lime or cement mortar should be used in masonry which is to be in contact with some source of heat. In case of ordinary residential buildings, CHULLAHS or cookin'g places could be built with common bricks laid in mud mortar and finished with mud plaster. 6.7 Flues and Chimneys in Residential Buildings

6.7.1 In residential building a flue is generally provided in kitchen (in conjunction with a hood) so as to take out smoke, hot gases, fumes, etc, from CHULLAHS or cooking stoves. Flue may consist of either an, asbestos cement pipe of 15 cm dia encased in masonry wall or a duct formed in masonry itself. In the.latter case, thickness of wall has to be at least I `/ brick, which would give a flue of about 10 X 20 cm section. Masonry flue
2 14s

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

. should be laid in weak cement mortar or mud mortar and pargetted with a mix I cement : 1 GOBAR : 3 mud. Pargetting has to be done in small stretches as the work roceeds, since it is not possible to provide any B. nush to the interior of the flue, after it has been constructed to full height. During construction of a flue it is necessary to prevent mortar. dropings falling into the flue and blocking it. This could be done by plugging the completed part of flue with a roll of gunny bag and shifting the plug up as the work proceeds. As a further precaution, after the completion of a flue, a core of unny bag or old cloth tied to a long rope should 1 e pulled through the flue to make sure that the flue is not blocked.

: 1991

need protection. This protection is needed more in case of slow setting lime or cement-lime mortars and less in case of fast setting cement mortars. 6.8.3 Protection Against Frost

6.7.2 In case of multi-storeyed buildings, when there are a number of kitchens one above the other, every kitchen should have an independent flue going up to the top and flues of different kitchens should not be combined or interconnected as otherwise smoke from one kitchen is likely to be blown into another. 6.7.3 In order to ensure good draught a flue should be more or less vertical with minimum of bends. When bends are unavoidable, as in multistoreyed buildings having a number of kitchens one over the other, angle of bend in any flue should not be flatter than 60" to the horizontal. 6.7.4 Flues are more efficient, when provided in an internal wall. If placed in an external walls, thickness of wall on the external face of the flue should preferably be one brick but not less than half-brick so that outside low temperature in winter may not have much damping effect on the draught. 6.7.5 Flues in the form of a chimney should be carried to a height of at least 1 metre above the roof and ended into a chimney top, having side outlets and a stone or concrete slab over to prevent rain water getting into the chimney. 6.8 Protection of Masonry During Construction

As a general rule no masonry work in exposed situation should be carried out when ambient, temperature is below 5'C, unless special means are adopted to heat masonry ,materials and to protect completed work. When there is likelihood of occurrence of frost at night, in the first instance, mortar which is quick setting, that is, mortar containing fair proportion of portland cement should be used for laying masonry (see 1.4.3.3). Where considered necessary, use can be made of accelerators in cement mortar so that mortar sets quickly and develops sufficient strength before occurrence of frost [see 1.4.7.3 (d)]. As a further precaution, day's work should be protected by covering the freshly laid masonry with tarpaulins, canvas or gunny bags. Use of airentraining admixtures in cement mortars results in increased resistance to repeated cycles of freezing and thawing. 6.8.4 Protection Against Storm

A masonry wall is able to resist lateral forces due to wind pressure only when cross walls have been built or R.C.C. floor/roof bearing on the wall has been laid. A high wall, therefore, is liable to overturn due to wind pressure if a storm happens to occur, before the wall has been braced either by cross walls or by floor/roof slab. It is, therefore, necessary to protect an unbraced wall during construction if there is a likelihood of occurrence of a storm, with the help of adequate number of bully stays, fixed on both sides of the wall. 6.8.5 Care qf Exposed Masonry

6.8.1 It is necessary to protect masonry during construction when the mortar is green or when masonry has not been laterally supported, against damage due to rain, frost, storm, etc. Lt is also necessary to protect some vulnerable parts of masonr such as jambs, corners and sills and expose d masnory, during construction from damage due to construction activities. 6.8.2 Protection Against Rain

In case of masonry which is not to be plastered over and is to have exposed finish, care should be taken that mortar droppings and surface blemishes are removed soon after laying of masonry, that is, before mortar has set. It is very difficult and laborious to clean the surface of exposed masonry once mortar droppings have set and surface has been blemished. 6.8.6 Protection from Damage Construction Activities Due to Normal

A heavy down-pour of rain falling on freshly laid masonry can leach out cement and lime from the mortar used for laying masonry if mortar has not sufficiently set. In the first instance, masonry work should be suspended if heavy rainfall is expected. When some masonry work has been freshly laid and rain is imminent, masonry should be covered with tarpaulins or water-proof canvas and if these are not readily available, with old gunny bags. It is only the top few courses which
146 HANDBOOK

Care should be taken that corners/edges and jambs and sills of openings, etc, are not damaged due to falling of materials, movement of workers, fixing and removal of scaffolding, centring and shuttering, etc. For preventing damage of this nature, it is necessary to issue suitable instructions to workers and to impress upon them the necessity of exercising due care. 6.9 Use of Reinforcement 6.9.1 in Masonry Rei~f&cement is provided in order to
2

Provision qf Horizontal

Sometimes horizontal reinforcement in long half-brick partition walls
ON MASONRY DESIGN AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T) : 1991 increase their lateral resistance. Reinforcement for this purpose could be in the form of M.S. flat of section 3 X 25 mm, or M.S. round bars of 6 to 8 mm dia. Bricks for such walls Should have a minimum crushing strength of 10 N/mm2 and mortar should not be leaner than 1 cement : 4 sand. Reinforcement is generally provided in every third or fourth course. Reinforcement should have a minimum mortar cover of 15 mm in the lateral direction and 5 mm in the vertical direction. It should be securely anchored at the ends into load bearing walls. A brick wall which is exposed to rain or is likely to get wet frequently, should not be reinforced, as mild steel is likely to rust and damage the masonry in course of time. Lateral resistance of brick walls in exposed situations should, therefore, be increased where necessary by other means such as increase in thickness of wall or by providing piers or buttresses. 6.9.2 Provision of Vertical Reinforcement members function as panels. Reeds could be used either in the form of machine made `reed boards' nailed to the frame or as individual reeds horizontally slipped into grooves provided in the vertical timber, parts. Reeds are strengthened on both sides by bamboo slips of not less than 6 mm thickness and 25 mm width at about 40 cm Reed panels are plastered (two interva'ls. coat - 15 mm thick) on both-sides with cement mortar 1 : 6 or lime mortar so as to stiffen and protect the reed wall. For further details of this construction a reference is invited in IS 4407 : 1967 on this subject. 6.11.3 Soil Cement in-situ Construction 6.11.3.1 This type of construction is considered suitable for low cost and low height single storeyed buildings which may be permanent or semi-permanent, in areas where soil suitable for soil cement construction is locally available. Soil for this type of construction should have a minimum sand content of 35 percent. Black cotton soil and soils containing large proportion of plastic clay are not suitable for this type of construction. Maximum dry density of soil should not be less than 1.8 g/cm3. Walls made with soil cement could be either load bearing or non-load bearing. In the former case, minimum thickness should be 30 cm and in the latter case 20 cm. 6.11.3.2 Cement content of soil generally for this type of construction is 2.5 to 3.5 percent. Proportion of cement for any particular soil is decided after carrying out laboratory tests so that compressive strength of soil cement is not less than I .4 N/mm? in dry condition and 0.7 N/ mm2 in saturated condition. Total quantity of water in the soil cement mix is kept at optimum moisture level as determined by Proctor Test so as to achieve maximum dry density. 6.11.3.3 Selected soil is thoroughly pulverized and stacked to a height of 30 cm. Requisite quantity of cement is uniformly spread over the stack and soil and cement are mixed by spading and again stacked to original height. Requisite quantity of water is then added and wet mixing done to such portion of the stack as can be laid in waH and compacted within l/2 an hour of addition of water. Soil cement mix is laid in 75 mm layers and well compacted in position with the help of proper shuttering for a lift of 60 cm at a time. The walls should be cured for 15 days after removal of Shuttering and after drying for at least 4 weeks, finished with plaster 12 mm thick on both sides with cement mortar (I : 5). 6.11.3.4 For fuller details construction of soil-cement invited to 1s 2110 : 1960. in regard to in-situ walls a reference is

Vertical reinforcement is provided in masonry at junctions and corners of walls when it is necessary to strengthen a building against seismic forces. This matter has been dealt with at some length in IS 4326 : 1976 which may be referred to for further details. 6.10 Prevention of Cracks in Masonry

Quite often, non-structural cracks occur in masonry due to causes such as drying shrinkage, thermal movement, differential strain, chemical action, settlement of soil/foundation, etc. This matter has been dealt with in details in SP 25 : 1984 which may be referred to. 6.11 Walling with Materials Other than Masonry

6.11.1 It will not be out of place to make a brief mention here of some types of wallings with materials other than masonry. These are `Reed Walling' and `Walls with soil cement'. 6.11.2 Reed Walling 6.11.2.1 This type of walling, which is classed as semi-permanent is provided for low cost buildings in areas, where reed for the purpose is locally available. The variety of reeds used for this construction are `ekra' (also spelled as accra) in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh, and Sarkanda in Northern India. Reed walling, being light and ductile has a special advantage in zones of high seismicity such as Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. 6.11.2.2 For construction of reed walling a timber frame consisting of vertical and horizontal members is provided. This frame should be structurally capable of taking vertical and horizontal loads. Reeds in between the frame

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

2

147

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991

LIST OF REFERENCES

AND BIBLIOGRAPHY

Department Works Public I. Central Specificationsp~~l~~. I-1977. Department Works 2. Rajasthan (B&R) Specification and Explanatory Notes Vol. i-1968. Handbook. Bombay Vol. I-1968. 3. P.W.D. 4. MES Standard Schedule of Rates (Part ISpecificatio;)Wl~.O. Specification--l963 . . s. Punjab (Reprint 1980). Specification6. Madras Detailed Standard 1956 (Reprint 1964). Research Note No. 7 of CBRI, 7. Building Roorkee. Construction Parts 1 & II by 8. Building George A. Mitchell-l 944. of Modern Building Vol. 1 and 9. Principles 11-1961. Construction Vol. I by W. B. IO. Building MCKAY Second Edition--1943. for sand for II. IS 21 I6 : 1980 Specification masonry mortars yirst revision) for calcined 12. IS 1344 : 1981 Specification clay for pozzolana (second revision). for fly ash for 13. IS 38 I2 : 198 I Specification use as pozzolana and admixture (first revision). for building 14. IS 712 : 1973 Specification limes (second revision). for ordinary and 15. 1s 269 : 1976 Specification low heat portland cement (third revision). for portland slag 16. IS 455 : 1976 Specification cement (third revision). for portland 17. IS 1489 : 1976 Specification pozzolana cement compounds (second revision). for masonry 18. IS 3466 : 1967 Specification cement (first revision). for high 19. IS 6452 : 1972 Specification alumina cement for structural use. for super20. IS 6909 : 1973 Specification sulphated cement. for high 21. IS 8112 : 1976 Specification strength ordinary portland cement. for integral 22. IS 2645 : 1975 Specification cement water-proofing compounds first revision). for lime23. IS 4098 : 1983 Specification pozzolana mixture (first revision). for common 24. IS 1077 : 1976 Specification burnt clay building bricks (third revision). for heavy-duty 25. IS 2180 : 1970 Specification burnt clay building bricks (first revision). for sewer 26. 1s 4885 : 1968 Specification bricks. for burnt clay 27, IS 2222 : 1979 Specification perforated building bricks (second revision).
HANDBOOK ON MASONRY DlS'lGN AND

for burnt clay 28. 1s 3952 : 1978 Specification hollow blocks for walls and partitions (first revision). for laterite 29. IS 3620 : 1979 Specification stone block for masonry (first revision). for 30. IS 2185 (Part 1) : 1979 Specification concrete masonry units: Part I Hollow and solid concrete blocks (second revzsion). for 31. IS 2185 (Part 2) : 1984 Specification concrete masonry units: Part 2 Hollow and solid .light weight concrete blocks Cfirst revision). for 32. IS 2185 (Part 3) : 1984 Specification concrete masonry unit: Part 3 Autoclaved cellular (aerated) concrete blocks (first revision). for lime based 33. IS 31 I5 : 1978 Specification blocks (first revision). 34. IS 1725 : 1982 Specification for soild based blocks used in general building construction (first revision). for sandlime 35. IS 4139 : 1976 Specification bricks yirst revision). for non-load 36. IS 2849 : 1983 Specification bearing gypsum partition blocks (solid and hollow types) @st revision). 37. IS I 128 : 1974 Specification for limestone (slab and tiles) (first revision). 38. IS 1130 : 1969 Specification for marble (blocks, slabs and tiles). 39. IS 3622 : 1977 Specification for sandstone (slabs and tiles) (first revision). 40. IS 2212 : 1962 Code of practice for brickwork. 41. 1s 1597 (Part I) : 1967 Code of practice for construction of stone masonry: Part 1 Rubble stone masonrv. 42. IS 2572 : 1963 Code of practice for construction hollow concrete block masonry. 43. IS 6041 : 1971 Code of practice for construction of autoclaved cellular concrete block masonry. 44. IS 6042 : 1969 Code of practice for construction of light weight concrete block masonry. 45. IS 4101 (Part 1) : 1967 Code of practice for external facings and veneers: Part I Stone facing. 46. IS 4101 (Part 2) : 1967 Code of practice for external facings and veneers: Part 2 Cement concrete facing. 47. IS 4101 (Part 3) : 1969 Code of practice for external facings and veneers: Part 3 Wall tiling. and mosaics. 48. IS 4407 : 1967 Code of practice for reed walling.
2 149

CONSTRUCTION-PART

SP 20(S&T)

: 1991 safety code for scaffolds and ladders: Part I Scaffolds. IS 2750 : 1964 Specification for steel scaffoldings-BIS. SP 21 : 1983 Summary of Indian Standards for Building Materials-BE. SP 25 : 1984 Causes and Prevention of Cracks in Buildings-BE. BS CP 121 : 202 (1951) Masonry--Rubb Walls.-British Standards Institution. BS CP 121 : Part I (1973) Brick and Block Masonry-British Standards Institution.

49. IS 2110 : 1980 Code of practice for in-situ construction of walls in buildings with soilcement (first revision). of 50. IS 1969 : 1968 Method for determination breaking load and elongation at break of woven textile fabrics. 51. IS 1905 : 1986 Code of practice for structural use of unreinforced masonry (third revision). 52. IS 4326 : 1976 Code of practice for resistant construction of earthquake buildings (first revision). for 53. IS 3696 (Part 1) : 1966 Specification

54. 55. 56. 57. 58.

150

HANDBOOK

ON MASONRY

DESIGN

AND

CONSTRUCTION-PART

2

