IRRI 21761685 IS 13946 (Part 1): 2022 
Indian Standard 


Wet чєгєт та eat — tifa afar 


ттт 1 zaara Тая atteror 
эйч ei-Rera Газгагат us sererfera г агот ugiat 
Hl STAT HA EU 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Determination of 
Rock Stress — Code of Practice 


Part 1 Using the Hydraulic 
Fracturing Test and Hydraulic Tests on Pre-Existing 
Fractures Techniques 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, 4% freh - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 6 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Vertical stress on a rock mass varies in a more predictable fashion than horizontal stress because the former is 
primarily affected by the weight of overburden. 


When an opening is introduced in the rock mass, the natural state of stress is disturbed locally as the rock mass 
attains a new state of equilibrium. The stress around an opening resulting from various man-made activities is 
termed as ‘induced stress’ as opposed to virgin stress or absolute stress which describes the original, undisturbed 
state of stress. The natural state of stress is often termed as in-situ stress. 


In-situ stress is sometimes sufficiently high (relative to the rock mass strength) to cause rock bursting, spalling, 
buckling, heaving, or other ground control problems. In such cases, knowledge of the state of in-situ stress is of 
critical importance to the design and construction of engineering structures in a rock mass. Even in cases where 
the effects of stress are less dramatic, the optimum shape, orientation and layout of underground structures, as well 
as the effectiveness and ultimate cost of rock support systems, can be significantly influenced by the in-situ stress. 


Factors affecting the magnitudes and orientation of in-situ stress include the weight of overlying materials, 
geologic structures (on local and regional scales), tectonic forces within the earth’s crust, residual stress and the 
thermal stress. The complexity of the relations between these factors and the in-situ stress usually prohibits reliable 
estimation of rock stress. In addition, stress cannot be measured directly, and therefore, rock stress determination 
techniques rely on the measurement of some response (for example displacement, strain and deformation) that 
is induced by a disturbance of the rock mass. This measured response of rock in a stress-disturbed zone (for 
example, the wall of a tunnel) is extrapolated, from the opening outwards, through a numerical model or analytical 
techniques; or measurements must be made via a drill hole that extends into an undisturbed region of the rock 
mass. 


Several methods have been tried to arrive at a reliable means of measuring in-situ stress. Each offers different 
advantages and disadvantages with respect to a particular application. 


Different methods for measurement of rock stress have been covered in different parts of this standard which have 
got wide acceptance; the other parts of the standard are: 


Part 2 Using a USBM type drill hole deformation gauge 
Part 3 Using CSIR-type or CSIRO-type cell with 9 or 12 strain gauges 
Part 4 Using flat jack technique 


Hydraulic fracturing technique is the only rock stress determination technique that has been successfully applied 
to deep drill hole. This technique has, therefore, found application in in-situ characterization investigations via 
vertical drill holes from the surface. Hydrofracturing may also be done across pre-existing joint holes in the drill 
hole and values of in-situ stresses obtained. 


This Standard (Part 1) was first published in 1994. This revision incorporates modifications found necessary as 
a result of the experience gained with the use of the standard and to bring the standard in line with present good 
practices being followed in the country and abroad. The principal modifications in this revision are as follows: 


a) Hydraulic tests on pre-existing fracturing (HTPF) technique has been included, accordingly the title 
of this part has been modified from ‘Part 1 Using the hydraulic fracturing technique’ to ‘Part 1 Using 
hydraulic fracturing test and hydraulic tests on pre-existing fractures techniques’; 


b) Different options for repressurisation to assess shut-in pressure; 

с) Procedure for recording of hydrofracture position and orientation has been included; 
d) Methods for interpretation of shut-in pressure, P have been included; 

e) Requirements relating to reporting of results have been improved; and 

f) Various figures have also been improved. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 13946 (Part 1): 2022 


Indian Standard 


DETERMINATION OF 
ROCK STRESS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


PART 1 USING THE HYDRAULIC FRACTURING TEST AND HYDRAULIC TESTS 
ON PRE-EXISTING FRACTURES TECHNIQUES 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) covers the method of 
determination of the state of in-situ stress underground 
through a drill hole using hydraulic fracturing technique 
and hydraulic tests on pre-existing fractures. The test 
provides, in general, the magnitudes and direction 
of the maximum and minimum stresses in the plane 
perpendicular to the drill hole axis. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards: 


IS No. Title 


11315 Method for the quantitative 
description of discontinuities 


in rock masses: 


(Part 1): 1987 Orientation 
(Part 6): 1987 Aperture 
11358: 1987 Glossary of terms and symbols 
relating to rock mechanics 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS 11358 shall apply, in addition to the following. 


3.1 Fracture Initiation Pressure — During 
pressurization as the pressure is increased both 
tangential and vertical stresses may become tensile. 
Fracture will occur if the induced tensile stress reaches 
the rupture strength of rock. The drill hole fluid pressure 
at the moment of drill hole rupture is termed as fracture 
initiation pressure or breakdown pressure. 


3.2 Fracture Reopening Pressure — After fracture 
initiation pressure, further pressurization cycles are 


carried out keeping the same flow rate. After initial 
rise in injection pressure, a stage will come when 
further rise in pressure stops, this pressure is termed as 
reopening pressure. 


3.3 Shut-in Pressure — After injecting a sufficient 
volume to propagate fracture length equal to about 
three times the drill hole diameter, injection is stopped 
and hydraulic system is sealed or shut-in, yielding the 
instantaneous pressure called shut-in pressure. 


4 SYMBOLS 
For the purpose of this standard, the following symbols 
shall apply: 
Н = depth at test zone below ground level; 
P, = static pressure head of fracture fluid; 
v — mass density of rock; 
P. — initial pore water pressure; 
— fracture initiation pressure; 
— pumping pressure; 
P. — instantaneous shut-in pressure; 
Р = facture reopening pressure; 
б, = vertical stress; 
— minimum horizontal stress; 
— maximum stress; and 


max 


T = rupture strength of the rock. 
5 APPARATUS 
5.1 Drilling Equipment 


5.1.1 Any drilling equipment capable of producing 
a stable hole to the required test depth may be used. 
The hole diameter should suit the available packer 
equipment or vice versa. 


5.1.2 The drilling equipment should also be capable of 
obtaining good quality core samples in the vicinity of 
the test sections in order to evaluate drill hole rupture 
strength and to examine discontinuity orientations and 
characteristics. 


IS 13946 (Part 1): 2022 


WATER 


CONNECTED METER/TRANSDUCER 


TO HOIST 


УУЗУ 5 А 
NAA 


HIGH PRESSURE 
TUBE 


PRESSURE 
TRANSDUCER 
HOUSING 


| 


MINIMUM LENGTH OF 
FRACTURE INTERVAL = FIVE TIMES A 


DRILL HOLE DIAMETER PACKER 


| 


K PRESSURE 
TRANSDUCER 
HOUSING 


DRILL HOLE 


1A HYDROFRACTURING TOOL 


STRADDLE 


TO PUMP WATER 
METER/TRANSDUCER 


E PUMP 


М) [Xo NN NONO 
NAAR 60 25 
DRILL ROD 
3 < 
> < 
СОМРА55 
PRESSURE 
TRANSDUCER 
HOUSING 
— 
3 € 
GREATER THAN THE 
FRACTURE LENGTH 
MPRESSION 
PACKER 
> E 
| NE 
3 € 
DRILL HOLE 


1B IMPRESSION PACKER 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION 


5.2 Packer Equipment (see Fig. 1) 
The packer equipment shall comprise the following: 


a) A system to isolate a test section of drill hole. 
Inflatable packers, shall be used to seal the holes 
enabling a test section to be pressurized. Double 
packer system, which isolate a part of the hole, shall 
be used. For setting the packers and to seal the test 
interval, hydraulic or gas expansion shall be used. 
The initial packer setting pressure depends on the 
packer type. If the internal pressure approaches 
the packer pressure, the packer pressure should be 
increased to a level sufficient to prevent leakage 
past the packers. 


b 


— 


For separating the packers, spacers shall be used. 
The length of the test section shall be chosen 
from the observation of core and/or drill hole wall 
conditions by means of methods described in 5.5. 
A minimum length of five times the drill hole 
diameter is commonly recommended. 


5.3 Fluid Injection Equipment 
Fluid injection equipment shall comprise the following: 


a) A high pressure pumping system capable of 
maintaining a constant flow over the range of 
pressure expected during the test. 


The pumping system should have sufficient 
capacity to overcome the friction-losses in the 
hydraulic line and to initiate the fractures. 


b) Sufficient supply rods, tubing or hose normally 
used to lower the packer into the drill hole. 


5.4 Inspection Equipment 


The following equipment may be used to find the 
direction of fractures: 


a) Drill hole periscope or television camera for visual 
inspection. A video recording of a pretesting 
observation is advantageous for comparison 
purposes. 


b) Acoustic televiewer. 


c) Drill hole calliper which 18 helpful to ensure that 
the designated test section 18 of suitable diameter 
for satisfactory seating of packers. 


d 


М7 


Orientation tool to measure alignment апа 
straightness in case of any indication of excessive 
deviation. 


е 


хи 


Magnetic compass, which is used to orient 
cameras or televiewers for impression packers. 
Alternate means of orientation shall be used in the 
minerology of the rock which is likely to affect 
the compass reading. Magnetic rich rock (that is 
iron formations or basic igneous rocks) may be 
suspect. Gyroscopic compasses, which maintain 
the orientation of the inspection device from the 
hole collar, may be used. 


15 13946 (Part 1): 2022 


5.5 Measuring Equipment 
Following measuring equipment shall be used: 


a) Pressure transducers for measurement of fluid 
injection at the surface or immediately above the 
packer. 


b) A pressure gauge or transducer to measure 
packer inflation pressure with a compatible level 
of accuracy. 


c) Instrument to record fluid flow with time. 
d) Acoustic logging tools. 


6 PROCEDURE 
6.1 Assumptions 


6.1.1 Hydraulic Fracturing Test (HF) 
The following assumptions shall apply : 


a) There is no theoretical limit to the depth of 
measurement provided the borehole is stable, 
rock mass is elastic and brittle, and the equipment 
has sufficient capacity. 


b) One of the principal stress is parallel to the 
borehole axis. 


c) Rock mass is linearly elastic, homogeneous and 
isotropic. 

d) Principal stress directions are derived from the 
fracture delineation on the borehole wall under 
the assumption that fracture attitude persists 
away from the hole. 


е) Fracture used іп stress computations аге 
delineated on the borehole wall assuming that 
their orientation persists away from the hole. 


6.1.2 Hydraulic Tests on Pre-existing Fractures 
(HTPF) 


The following assumptions shall apply : 


a) There is no theoretical limit to the depth of 
measurement provided borehole is stable, rock is 
elastic and brittle, and equipment has sufficient 
capacity. 

b 


wm 


The method assumes that isolated pre-existing 
fractures or weakness planes are present in the 
rock mass, that they are not all aligned within 
a narrow range of direction and inclination 
and that they can be mechanically opened by 
hydraulic pressure. When the straddled interval 
includes multiple fractures, it is necessary to 
verify that only one fracture has been opened, 
since opening of the pre-existing fracture 
changes the local stress field. 


c) One of the principal stresses is parallel to the 
borehole axis. 

d) Rock mass is linearly elastic, homogeneous and 
isotropic. 


IS 13946 (Part 1): 2022 


6.2 Drilling and Inspection 


6.2.1 Hole diameter and size of downhole hydraulic 
fracturing equipment shall be selected based on the 
equipment available. After determination of the test 
location and depth, a drill hole should be sunk beneath 
that depth so as to provide the test intervals. Final choice 
of the test zone length and depth shall be made based 
upon the fracture characteristic of recovered cores or 
on inspection of the drill hole wall by an optical or 
acoustic logging tool. 


6.2.2 Rock cutting and/or cores shall be examined 
in detail to determine rock characteristics at the test 
horizons. The choice of packers and inflation pressure 
may be affected by rock hardness and roughness of the 
drill hole wall. 


6.2.3 To clear the passage for the packer assembly, hole 
may be flushed to remove debris and/or the drill bit 
may be lowered to the test depth to clear the passage 
for the packer assembly. 


6.2.4 The orientation and apertures of geological 
discontinuities with respect to the test section shall be 
estimated and recorded in accordance with IS 11315 
(Part 1) and IS 11315 (Part 6), respectively. This also 
serves as a pre-test run of the fracture orientation 
measurement. 


6.2.5 A drill hole calliper log in order to avoid 
placing packers in oversized sections of the hole is 
recommended. 


6.2.6 For HF method, select test sections that are devoid 
of fractures or other disturbances. For HTPF, select 
well isolated planar fractures with dip and azimuth 
sufficiently variable to enable measurement of the state 
of stress properly. 


6.2.7 The packer assembly shall be inserted to the 
predetermined depth, the depth shall be recorded, and 
the packers are inflated to a pressure sufficient to seal 
against the applied fluid pressure. 


6.2.8 When filling the injection tubing, care shall be 
taken to eliminate air from the system. Trapped air 
greatly increases the compressibility of the system and 
has an adverse effect on the rate of pressure build-up 
during test interval pressurization. 


7 TESTING 


7.1 Pressure shall be monitored either at the ground 
surface or within the test location. When the pressure 
is monitored at the ground surface, the pressure in 
the test interval shall be increased slowly to ensure 
minimal pressure losses in the tubing. When pressure 
is monitored within the test section, pressure losses are 


unimportant. No standard for pressurization rate or flow 
rate exists; however, a common range of pressurization 
rate of 0.1 MPa/s to 2.0 MPa/s may be followed. Slow 
pressurization rate is recommended to ensure that the 
fracture retains its initial geometry during the first 
shut-in phase. The pressurization rate shall be controlled 
by the constant flow rate selected. The appropriate flow 
rate to achieve the desired pressurization rate shall vary 
depending on the overall compressibility of test system, 
which largely reflects the elasticity of the tubing, the 
length of the tubing, the compressibility of the fluid and 
the volume of fluid in the test system. In general, deep 
tests with large diameter tubing shall require higher 
flow rates than short-hole tests with smaller diameter 
tubing. 


7.2 The packer pressure should be initially set well 
below the anticipated breakdown pressure; the packer 
pressure should be increased at the same rate as the 
injection pressure. The procedure reduces the possibility 
of fracture initiation caused by the packer pressure. 
However, after the rough range of hydrofracturing 
pressure, at a particular site is known, the subsequent 
packers can be inflated to the desired/required pressure 
in single stage. The test interval pressure shall be 
recorded against time. As pressure increases, both 
tangential and vertical effective stresses can become 
tensile. Evidence of failure shall be obtained from 
pressure-time curve and fracture initiation pressure 
shall be noted. Throughout the pressurization cycles, 
packer pressure is maintained at about 2 MPa to 4 MPa 
higher than injection pressure. 


7.3 After injecting a volume sufficient to propagate 
a fracture length equal to about three times the drill 
hole diameter, injection shall be stopped and the 
hydraulic system shall be sealed or shut-in yielding 
the instantaneous shut-in pressure, Р. The pressure 
at which fracture closes is termed as shut-in pressure. 
Injection as well as packer pressure are then vented to 
ambient level. Additional pressurization cycles shall be 
used to determine the fracture reopening pressure, P, 
and additional measurements of the shut-in pressure, Р. 
The rise in pressure after closing the valves indicates 
pore pressure. P, сап be determined from additional 
fracture reopening pressurization cycles following any 
one or combination of the following options: 


a) Option 1 — This option is used only for HF 
method. After breakdown and venting, wait for 
a few minutes so that pore pressure reaches its 
original value. Repeat pressurization cycle at 
least 3 times using the same flow rate. These 
pressurization cycles shall yield additional values 
of shut-in and reopening pressure of the induced 
fracture (see Fig. 2). Reopening pressure is lower 
than breakdown pressure. 


PRESSURE ----- 


FLOWMORE 


Б. = FRACTURE INITIATION 
PRESSURE 


SHUT - IN 


Р, = SHUT- IN 


PRESSURE 


CYCLE 1 


15 13946 (Part 1): 2022 


Р. = FRACTURE REOPENING 
PRESSURE 
SHUT- IN 
Р. = SHUT- IN 
PRESSURE 


P, = FORMATION 
PORE PRESSURE 


CYCLE 2 CYCLE 3 


TIME — —»— 


Fic. 2 IDEALIZED HYDRAULIC FRACTURING PRESSURE RECORD 


b) Option 2 — Step rate pressurisation cycle can be 
adopted after Option 1 (see Fig. 3) or after venting 
the pressure in fracture breakdown cycle. This 
option is applicable to both HF test and HTPF 
methods. 


Flow rate is set at a low level and maintained 
constant until it reaches a plateau and then raised 
to next higher level and again maintained constant. 
Typically, 5 min are sufficient for each constant 
pressure step. This step rate process is repeated 
several times to get array of constant pressure 
levels (see Fig. 4). A stage is reached when fluid 
injection stops, it indicates the fracture is fully 
open. Fluid injection is stopped at this point and 
pressure drop is monitored to get value of shut-in 
pressure. 


с 


ми 


Option 3 — This option is applicable to both HF 
and HTPF methods. The option is similar to Option 
2 except that after reaching maximum injection 


flow rate, the pressure is decreased progressively 
in stepwise manner so as to attain complete closure 
of the fracture and to get additional independent 
shut-in pressure (see Fig. 3). 


After completing the test, vent both packer and injection 
pressures so as to deflate the packers completely and 
move to next location and repeat the process. 


7.4 Subsequent repressurization cycle should be 
conducted at similar, constant flow rates; higher or 
lower flow rate cycles may be added at the discretion of 
the operator. Use of higher or lower flow rate cycles in 
the stress calculation should be specified and explained 
in the report of results. 

7.5 After the test is completed, the packers shall be 
deflated and the equipment shall be recovered from 
the drill hole. Care should be taken that the packers are 
fully deflated before attempting to move them. 


7.6 The hole inspection shall be carried out to observe 
and record hydrofracture positions and orientation. 


IS 13946 (Part 1) : 2022 


12.0 
m 
A 
> 
т 8.0 
=) 
0 
0) 
ш 
(ra 
ай 
-— 
E 
& 4.0 
ui 
2 STEP-RATE 
= PRESSURE 
Ti CYCLE 
H 
0.0 


TIME (s) ——— 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL TEST INTERVAL PRESSURE AND FLOW RATE VERSUS TIME RECORD 


WELL PRESSURE 


WELL FLOW, Qw 


BACK-FLOW 


TIME ——— 2 ат 


Fic. 4 TYPICAL STEP CYCLING PRESSURE TEST 


0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 


FLOW RATE (І/тіп.) 


WELL PRESSURE, Pw 


The orientation of fractures can be obtained by 
positioning the impression packer at the test section 
and then inflating the same at a constant pressure 
slightly greater than the fracture reopening pressure, P. 
and less than the fracture initiation pressure, Р,. The 
impression packer should be kept in pressurization 
mode for about 30 min (depending on the aperture of 
fracture) to get the impression of induced fracture. The 
length of impression packer should be greater than the 
fracture interval. 


Impression of the fracture gets developed on the soft 
rubber wrapped onto the impression packer which can 
be traced out by wrapping a tracing sheet. The direction 
of fracture corresponds to the direction of maximum 
stress normal to the drill hole axis. A reference line is 
drawn on the impression packer and direction of stress 
is determined in relation to marked direction. For 
vertical holes, reference line is oriented magnetic north 
so as to enable the direction of fracture corresponding 
to the maximum horizontal stress. 


Minimum horizontal stress direction shall be orthogonal 
to the direction of fracture. For shallow holes, manual 
system of transfer of magnetic north using marker on 
the impression packer and subsequent tubes may be 
adopted. For deep drill holes, a camera mounted on 
the orienting tool attached to the impression packer is 
triggered by a preset clock to take photograph of the 
face of the digital or electronic compass or magnetic 
compass and of the line marked on the packer, thus 
enabling the evaluation of stress direction (see Fig. 5). 


7.7 The drill hole rupture strength of the rock may be 
estimated from laboratory tests on core samples or may 
be obtained in-situ by comparing the fracture initiation 
pressure with subsequent reopening pressure. 


8 CALCULATIONS 


8.1 Hydraulic Fracturing Method 


Where the pumping pressure is measured directly at the 
test zone, Р,, P. and P, may be obtained directly from 
the time versus pressure plot (see Fig. 2). 


Figure 2 presents an idealized hydraulic fracturing 
pressure record. The general form of the pressure 
record depends on the relative magnitudes of the 
principal stresses. 


When the plane of hydrofracturing 18 nearly parallel to 
the drill hole axis, the following expressions may be 
used to obtain the principal stresses: 


CLP. .44(1) 
Ga T=3P HPF, pa (2) 

(for initial pressurization cycle) 
Onn = 3P,-P.-P, e (3) 


(for subsequent pressurization cycle) 


IS 13946 (Part 1) : 2022 


The drill hole rupture strength, 7 is determined from 
laboratory tests, which model the hydraulic fracturing 
process (preferable) or the tensile strength obtained 
from direct tension or Brazilian tests. Appropriate 
corrections for the effects of sample size and test 
configuration may need to be made. The vertical stress 
18 usually assumed to be the stress generated by the 
depth and density of overlying rock. The direction of 
G „ax 1$ in the fracture plane and orthogonal to oiy 


ma: min 
In case of testing in vertical drill hole, с, becomes 
maximum horizontal stress, о, and с, becomes 
minimum horizontal stress, c,. Vertical stress, с, can be 


estimated from the following equation: 
с,-у2 
where 
v= average density of rock/overburden; and 
Z= depth of rock and overburden above the test 
section. 
8.2 Hydraulic Tests on Pre-existing Fractures 


Stress tensor is evaluated using normal stress 
measurements for all the tested fractures. A complete 
stress tensor determination requires theoretically a 
minimum of six different tests on fractures with dip and 
azimuth in order to solve the linear system provided by: 


от -o(X,)n,n,, 2... (4) 
where 
т = location of the mth test; 
or = measured normal stress supported by 
fracture plane with normal n, and; 
o(X,) = stress tensor at X 


m varies from 1-п, for a total of n complete HTPF 
measurements (normal stress and fracture plane 
orientation). 


As the measurements are never exact and always 
encompass some uncertainty, it is always desirable to 
conduct more number of tests than there are unknowns. 
Minimum eight tests are necessary for determination of 
complete stress tensor. In the event of assuming vertical 
stress as principal stress, number of variables reduces 
to five and further assuming that vertical stress is equal 
to weight of overburden, stress tensor reduces to four 
variables. In such situation, five tests may be needed. 
In case of large distance between tests, stress gradients 
should also be considered. Assuming linear variation 
along the borehole axis, stress field can be evaluated 
using: 

с (х) = (х) + (X, —X)a wla) 


where the stress at point Х may be expressed as а 
linear function of the stress at point X, and a is the 
stress gradient along the borehole axis. 


IS 13946 (Part 1): 2022 


122.0 L— | 
| 
| 
Е 
I 
d 
ай 
LLI 
Q 
| 
| 
| | 
| STRIKE АТ 40° 
STRIKE AT 220° 
122.9 — | 
360 270 180 90 


DEGREES FROM MARKER LINE 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL IMPRESSION OF INDUCED FRACTURE 


Generally, equation (5) involves twelve parameters 
and requires a minimum fourteen to fifteen tests for 
solution. In case of vertical drill hole with no lateral 
stress variation, vertical stress gradient is along vertical 
principal direction and number of unknowns reduces to 
ten which can further be reduced to five depending on 
simplifying assumptions. 


9 REPORTING OF RESULTS 


9.1 General Information 


The report should include the following general 
information: 


a) A description of the test site location. 


b) A geotechnical log of the test section giving all 
available information and including the recorded 
geological discontinuity characteristics and drill 
hole wall conditions. 


c) A geological description of rock tested, including 
rock type and availability of core. 

d) The test depth, length of the test zone and drill 
hole size. 


IS 13946 (Part 1) : 2022 


e) Influence of the regional or local geological 
discontinuities, if any vis-a-vis in-situ stress. 


9.2 Detailed Information 


The report should include the following detailed 
information for each measurement location: 

a) Graphs showing pumping or flow rate, injection 
pressure versus time for each test and a description 
of the method(s) used to select Р, Р and Р, if 
distinct pressures are not obvious. 

b) Tabulated values of H, Р, Р, P,, P,, maximum and 
minimum horizontal stresses and stress directions. 

c) Representations of fracture tracers, constructed 
from impression packers, on photographs and/or 
acoustic televiewer logs of test intervals. 


d 


— 


A description of the method used for calculating 
б.е Тһе drill hole rupture strength determined 
by the laboratory test results and the method of 
data reduction, including equations used, should 


be reported in detail. 
e 


— 


Test results showing substantial discrepancies in 
magnitude and orientation of stresses compared 
with other data and giving possible explanations 
of the causes. 


IS 13946 (Part 1): 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organizations 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
Amberg Technologies, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organisation, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 
Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 
Dhanbad 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology-ISM, Dhanbad 

Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling, 
New Delhi 

Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 


National Highways and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dn N. K ЅАМАРНІҮА (Chairman) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


Lr Cor PARDEEP SINGH 
SHRI С. P. PATEL 

SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 
Suri HARI Dev 

SHRI MAHABR Dixit (Alternate) 
SHRI RIZWAN ALI 

Dr S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 
MEMBER (D & R) 

CHIEF ENGINEER, DESIGN (NW & S) (Alternate) 
DR SHANTANU SARKAR 

SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 
Dr J. K. MOHNOT 

"к К. D. Dwivepi (Alternate) 
DR PANKAJ GUPTA 

ӛнкі R. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 

Suri D. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 

Dr MAHESH CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 

SHRI SOURABH LONKAR ( Young Professional) 
Рвок R. AYOTHIRAMAN 

PROF PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 
Dr MAHENDRA SINGH 

Dr PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 

PROF SUMIT SEN (Young Professional) 


PROF A. K. MISHRA 
DR К. К. Sinna (Alternate) 


Dr C. S. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL (Alternate) 


Js (MITIGATION) 
Dr RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


10 


Organizations 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 
National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 
Faridabad 


National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 


NTPC Ltd, Noida 

Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 

Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 

RITES Ltd, Gurugram 

THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 

In Personal Capacity (С-1004, Park View City-2, 


Sector-49, Gurugram) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, ACE 
Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida) 


In Personal Capacity (4-125. Prodhyagiki Apartment, 


Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (Naimex House, A-8, Mohan 
Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 
New Delhi 110044) 


In Personal Capacity (Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21-C, 
Faridabad - 121001, Haryana) 


BIS Directorate General 


15 13946 (Part 1): 2022 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate I) 
SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYAK (Alternate II) 


Dr A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRI N. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH Rawat (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI VAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 


SMT JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 
SHRI AHMED SHAZ (Young Professional) 


Suri Т. S. ROUTELA 

SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (A/ternate) 
Dr MANOJ VERMAN 
SHRI К. К. GOEL 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Dr MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


11 


(Continued from second cover) 


In the formulation of this standard, assistant has been drawn from the publication ‘Suggested method for rock 
stress determination: Part 3 Hydraulic fracturing (HF) and/or hydraulic testing of pre-existing fractures (HTPF)’, 
International Journal of Rocks Mechanics and Mining Science, International Society for Rock Mechanics, Oxford, 
England. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for founding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (16126). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


