is 5553 ( Part 2 ) : 1990

Indian Standard
PART 2 ( SHUNT REACTORS

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

REACTORS - SPECIFICATION F'irstRevision)

UDC

621'318'43'076'61

@ BIS 1990

MANAK August 1990

BUREAU

~BHAVAN,

OF

NE-W DELHI 110002

9

INDXAN

BAHADUR

SHAH ZAFAR

STANDARDS

MARG Price Group 4

Transformers

Sectional Committee,

ETD 16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian on 5 January 1990, after the draft finalized by the Transformers Sectional Committee approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. Standards had been

This standard was first published in 1970. This revision has been undertaken with a view to bringing it in line with the IEC Pub 289 ( 1988 ) `Reactors', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ). In this revision, the requirements Part Part Part Part Part Part Part Part for reactors have been covered in eight parts as follows:

I General 2 Shunt reactors 3 Current limiting and neutral earthing reactors 4 Damping reactors 5 Tuning reactors 6 Earthing transformers ( neutral couplers ) 7 Arc suppression reactors 8 Smoothing reactors

This standard ( Part 2 ) has been based on IEC Pub 289 ( 1988 ) `Reactors, Reactors', issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. This part ( Part 2 ) shall be read in conjunction with Part 1 of this standard.

Section 2 Shunt

IS 5553 ( Part 2 ) t 1990

Indian Standard REACTORS PART 2

SPECIFICATION

SHUNT REACTORS

( First Revision)
1 SCOPE
NOTE - Information on magnetic should be supplied on request. characteristios

1.1Reactors covered by this standard ( Part 2 ) are intended for shunt connection in a system to compensate for capacitive current.
NOTE -The absorbed reactive power at rated voltage can be constant or may be varied by use of additional devices: a) Variation can be achieved, for example, by phase-controlled thyristors ( static var source ) or by dc magnetization of the iron core; and b) Variation can be achieved by winding tappings, by means of off-load or on-load tap changer ( variable reactance ).

With regard to its entire magnetic characteristic, the reactor is identified as: ii a) linear, Fig. la; b) non-linear, Fig. lb; The reactors with non-linear magnetic characteristic have their normal operation range in the linear part of the magnetic characteristic; and c) saturated, Fig. lc.
2 REFER_RNCES

1.2 Design With regard to design reactor is identified as: and installation, the

2.0 A list of referred standards is also Annex A of Part 1 of this standard. 3 ,.,_RRMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Rated Voltage, U,

given in

a) Single-phase or three-phase, b) Dry-type or oil-immersed,

( Part 2 ),

cl d) 4 f)

With air core or with gapped iron core, With or without magnetic shield, For indoor or outdoor installation, For fixed or variable reactance, and Having additional loading winding.

d

1.3 Magnetic Characteristic Knowledge of the entire magnetic characteristic as shown in Fig. la, lb and lc may be necessary for: a) to set a normal operation range, and b) study of over voltage conditions, c) simulation in system studies. XI a) Linear

The voltage at rated frequency assigned to be applied between the line terminals of a winding of a three-phase reactor, or between the terminals of a winding of a single-phase reactor. The rated voltage U, provides a basis for the design, the manufacturer's guarantees and the tests.
NOTE - For single-phase reactors intended to be associated in a three-phase bank, the rated voltrse of a single-unit intended for star connection is indicated by a fraction, in which the numerator is the line-to-line voltage and the denominator is a, for example:

UN = $!$

kV

b) non- linear

cl saturated

CURRENT

PEAK

VALUE

PER

UNIT

__c

Fro. 1 TYPES OF MAGNETIC CHARACTERISTIC FOR SHUNT REACTORS 1

IS 5553 ( Part 2 ) : 1990 3.2 Maximum Operating Voltage, V,,, The highest voltage at rated frequency _a.fwhich the reactor shall bs capable of operating continuously without exceeding the specified temperature rises.
NOTES 1 The rated voltage maximum operating may be specified voltage. equal to the voltage

3.7 M&al reactor )

-Reactance, X,

( of a three-phase

The ratio between induced voltage in an open phase and the current in an excited phase ( in ,ohms per phase at rated frequency ) ( see Fig. 2 ). Mutual reactance is suitably expressed of the rated reactance.
NOTE - For network of considerations, be noted that the mutual reactance will be negligible for: a) a bank of three separate sed reactors, single-phase

per unit
it should geg.er@ly oil-immr( dry-type) and magne-

2 Maximum operating voltage and rated have to be spec.ified by the purchaser.

3.3 Rated Power, QN The reactive power specified rated voltage and frequency. 3.4 Rated Carrent, I, The line current of the reactor rated power and rated voltage.
NOTE - For single-phase

for operation

at

b) a bank of three single-phase air-core reactors in side-by-side arraagemept,

derived from

c) a three-phase tic iron-path

reactor having continuous for zero-sequence flux.

3.8 Magnetic Characteristic The magnetic characteristic is the relation between: a) peak magnetic flux and peak current, or b) average voltage and peak current.
NOTE - For nonilinear reactors, the magnetic characteristic is in accordance with Fig. 2. The knee point and the slope in the saturated area are subject to agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer. They may be provided by measurement or by calculation.

reactors intended to be associated in a three-phase bank, the rated current of a single-unit intended for delta connection is indicated by a fraction in which the numerator is the corresponding line current and the denominator is 1/ ?_, for example:

3.5 Rated Reactance, X, The reactance ( in ohms per phase at rated quency ) specified at rated voltage. fre-

3.6 Zero-Sequence Reactance, X0 ( of a tbreephase reactor ) The reactance per phase at rated frequency, equal to three times the value measured between the line terminals of a three-phase star winding, connected together, and its neutral terminal.

4 RATINGS 4.1 The ratings of a shunt reactor refer to continuous duty, unless otherwise specified. For reactors used in a SVS ( static var source ) scheme -with phase-controlled current, the guaranteed values are referred to the full load current sinusoidal waveform unless otherwise specified.

0

V
1 CURREmNT

I
2

I
3

I
L

PEAK VALUE PER UNIT part

in the saturated part k - saturation knee point, intersection of the two straight lines a and 6 Is considered linear up to knee point k. NOTE - The characteristic
FIG.

a, = slope angle of the characteristic (I* = slope angle of the characteristic

in the non-saturated

2

PARAMETERS FOR NON-LINEAR MAGNETIC CHARACTERISTIC( EXAMPLE )

2

IS 5553 ( Part 2 ) : 1990 5 1NStJLATfiDN LEVEL 8.1 The insulation level shall be according to the requirements specified in IS 2026 ( Part 3 ) : 1981. 6 RATING PLATES fd Each reactor shall be provided with a rating plate of weatherproof material, fitted in a visible position, showing the appropriate items indicated below. The entries on the plate shall be indelibly marked ( for example; by etching, engraving or stamping ). 6.2 hformation a) b) c) d) tb be Given in All Cases 7.2 Type Tests The following shall constitute the type tests: resistance winding a) Measurement of ( see 7.5 ), b) Measurement of insulation resistance [ see 16.6 of IS 2026 ( Part 1 ) : 1977 1, c) Measurement of reactance ( see 7.6 ), d) Measurement of loss ( see 7.7 ), e) Dielectric tests ( see 7.11). f) Measurement of voltage ratio and shortcircuit impedance on shunt reactor as with additional loadable winding, and g) T;;p;rature-rise test [ IS 2026 ( Part 2 ) : 7.3 Routine Tests The following shall constitute the routine tests:

Type of reactor; Manufacturer's name; Manufacturer's serial number; Year of manufacture;

e) Number of phases; f j Rated power in kVA; g) Line diagram of the reactor showing the location of CT ( if any ) atid details; h) Rated frequency; j) Rated voltage; k) m) n) p) q) r) Maximum operating voltage; Rated current; Insulation levels; Connection symbol; Reactance at rated voltage; Type of cooling;

4 Measurement b)

of winding resistance ( see 7.5 >, Measurement of insulation resistance [ see -16.6 of IS 2026 ( Part .l ) : 1977 1, reactance ( see 7.6 ), loss ( see 7.7 ), see 7.11 ), and

cl Measurement of 4 Measurement of e) Dielectric tests ( f 1 Measurement of

voltage ratio and shortcircuit impedance on shunt reactors with additional loading winding.

7.4 Special Tests The following shall constitute the special tests:

s) Massof core and winding asse m%ly; t) Total mass; u) Mass of insulation oil; and v) Zero-sequence 6.3 Additional C'e'dht Cases impedance, to if called for. be Given in

Ioformation

Thermal class of insulation ( for dry-type reactors only ); Temperature rise ( if not a normal value ); Transportation mass ( for reactors ceeding 5 t total mass ); Type of insulation liquid, oil; and Details regarding tappings. 7 `PESTS 7.1 General Requirements for Types, Routine and Special. Tests The requirements given in _(Part 1 ) : 1977 shall apply. 16.1 of IS 2026 3 ex-

reactance on three-phase reactors ( see 7.9 ); of mutual reactance on b) Measurement three-phase reactors ( see 7.10 ); cl Measurement of acoustic sound level ( see 7.13 ); d) Measurement of vibration and stress measurement on tank ( see 7.14 ); 4 Measurement of harmonics of the current ( see 7.8 );

4 Measurement of zero-sequence

f ) Measurement

if not mineral

of the power taken by the fan and the oil pumps, if any ~[see 16.14 of IS 2026 ( Part 1 ) : 1977 1; g) Measurement of magnetization characteristic ( see 7.12 );

h) Measurement of capacitance and tan delta of winding ( applicable only for liquid filled reactors ); and i) Dissolved gas analysis of mineral oil used before and after heat run tests (see IS 10593 : 1983 ). If special tests other than those listed above are required, the test method shall be subject to agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser.

fS 5553 ( Part 2 ) : 1990 7.5 Measurement of Winding Resistance The provisions of 16.2 of IS 2026 ( Part 1 ) : 1977 shall apply. 7.6 Deterainatioo of Reactance with the The method for determination of loss is. subject to agreement and satisfactory documentation regarding accuracy and reliability of the proposed method shall be provided. As the power factor of a shunt reactor is normally very low, loss measurement using conventional wattmeter methods may be subject to considerable errors. A bridge method may be used to advantage. The loss in various parts ,of the reactor ( I*R loss, iron loss and additional loss ) cannot be separated by measurement; it is thus preferable, in order to avoid corrections to referenee temperature, to perform the measurement when the average temperature of windings is practically equal to the reference temperature. If this is impracticable, the additional loss shall be deemed independent of temperature. If several units are to be tested, it is recommended that the unit which receives loss measurement as a type test at nearly reference temperature, shall be measured at ambient temperature also, thus establishing a temperature coefficient for total loss ( assuming linear variation ). Remaining units will then be measured at ambient temperature only and their loss figure shall be corrected to reference temperature using the temperature coefficient established on the type tested unit. The loss measured at or corrected to rated voltage shall be recalculated by multiplication by the square of the ratio of rated to measured current ( at rated voltage ).
NOTE - See Note under 7.6.

The test shall be carried in accordance following procedure:

a) The reactance is determined as the ratio of rated voltage to the measured phase current ( rms value ) assuming that the resistive - component of impedance is negligible.

b) The reactance

4

4

shall be determined at rated frequency by applying an approximately sinusoidal supply [ see 3.2.1 of IS 2071 ( Part 2 > : 1974 1. For reactors which have neither gapped iron core nor magnetic shield, the measurements may be made at any voltage between 10 and 100 percent. For reactors having gapped iron core or magnetic shield, the measurement shall be made at rated voltage. In exceptional cases, for example, extremely large rated power and high system voltage, it may be difficult to maintain these test conditions. For linear and non-linear reactors, extrapolations of approximately 10 percent are allowed, that is, the test voltage shall in all cases exceed 0'9 Vi.

e) The reactance of three-phase reactors shall be measured with symmetrical three phase voltage applied to the reactor terminals. The reactance shall be taken as: Line-to-line applied voltage average measured current x 2/ 3 For three-phase reactors with magnetic iron-path for zero-sequence flux, the reactance measurement may also be performed with single-phase excitation.
test, it may be made on site the subject to agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer.
NOTE When the testing

7.8 Measurement at Rated Voltage

of Harmonics of the Current

allow a satisfactory

installation does not

This measurement applies to reactors with saturated magnetic characteristics ( see Fig. lc ). The harmonics of the current in all three phases are measured by means of a harmonic analyser and the magnitude of relevant harmonics is expressed as a percentage of the fundamental component. The harmonics of applied measured at the same time. voltage shall be

7.7 Measurement

of LOSS

NOTE - This test is practicable only if the distortion factor of applied voltage is less than 2 percent.

The loss shall be measured at rated voltage and The voltage shall be measured rated frequency. with an instrument responsive to the mean value of voltage but scaled to read the r m s value of a sinusoidal wave having the same mean value. In exceptional cases, for example extremely large rated power and high system v.o!tage, it In may be difficult to meet this test condltlon. these cases, the loss at rated voltage shall be obtained by multiplying the measured loss by the square of the ratio of rated current to the current measured at the reduced voltage. 4

7.9 Measurement of Zero-Sequence Reactaoce The provision of 16.10 of IS 2026 ( Part 1 ) : 1977 shall apply. This measurement~has to be carried out with a test voltage corresponding to neutral current not exceeding the rated phase current. 7.10 Measurement of Mutual Reactance Three-Phase Reactors The measurement shall be made rated voltage according to Fig. 3. on at

preferably

5
v3
Mutual

v,, va, vs = Voltmeter reading ,-I1 = Amperemeter Reading V3 Va reactance = x or -&--, resPectiVelY

FIG. 3 7.11 Dielectric

MEASUREMENT OF MUTUAL REACTANCEFOR THREE-PHASE REACTORS
NOTE 1985. For dry type reactors, see also IS 11171 :

Tests

The application of different dielectric tests to shunt reactors in general follows the corresponding rules for transformers in IS 2026 ( Part 3 ) : 1981. 7J1.1 Separate Source Voltage Withstand Test The provisions of 10 of IS 2026 ( Part 3 ) : 1981 shall apply. 7.11.2 Induced Overvoltage Withstand Test
( Routine Test )

7.11.3

Lightning Impulse

Test

The provision of 12 of IS 2026 ( Part 3 ) : 1981 shall apply. 7.11.4 Switching Impulse Test The provisions of 14 of IS 2026 ( Part 3 ) : 1981 shall apply. 7.12 Measurement Characteristic of Magnetization

Induced over voltage withstand test shall be carried out in general accordance with 11 of IS 2026 ( Part 3 ) : 1981, except if otherwise described below: If the reactor is uniformly insulated, 11.2 of IS 2026 ( Part 3 ) : 1981 applies. If the reactor is non-uniformly insulated, either 11.3 or 11.4 of IS 2026 ( Part 3 ) : 1981 apply depending upon test voltage and test facilities available. The test according to 11.4 is the alternative only U, > 300 kV but may be used by agreement between the purat lower chaser and the manufacturer voltages as well. When the test according to 11.4 is applied, it is modified as follows: The partial discharge measurement shall be prerformed with test voltage UZ = 1'5

A measurement of magnetization characteristic may be specified when the reactor is non-linear ( Fig. lb ) or saturated ( Fig. lc ). The measurement may be conducted with power frequency voltage and current up to maximum operating voltage or by agreement slightly above this value. The measurement result shall be expressed in terms of average value of voltage ( which is proportional to crest value of flux linkage ) against crest value of current. Alternative method of measurement range of flux may be agreed upon. over a wider

NOTE - A typical method-for the measurement of magnetization characteristic is given in Annex A.

urn
-Or 43

l-3 d3'

urn

7.13

Measurement

of Acoustic Sound Level

the short

time appli-

cation of enhanced level U1 being omitted. If the power and voltage requirements for these tests exceed those available at the test station, the test shall be replaced by agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer by a lightning impulse test in line with 12 of IS 2026 (Part 3 ): 1981. Test voltages and test methods in line of the above tests have to be agreed upon at the time of the order. 5

The method of test and criteria for conformity shall be agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 7.14 Measurement of Vibration Measurement on Tank and Stress

If measurement of vibration is specified, the following items shall be agreed before the time of the test: a) Whether the test shall be made as a type test on one unit or as a routine test on all units;

b) Whether the test shall be run at rated voltage or maximum continuous operating voltage, if different; and c) Where and how the measurements shall be taken normally on all four sides of the tank wall and at a sufficient number of points to permit an averaging procedure. The measurements shall be expressed in terms of peak-to-peak amplitude vibration. A recommended maximum value is 200 micrometre. 7.141
Measurement of Dynamic Stress

of maximum operating voltage. The temperature rise $hall be corrected to maximum operating voltage according!tb IS 2026 ( Part 2 ) : 1977 and IS 11171 : 1985. 8 TOLERANCES 8.0 In the case of shunt reactors with tappings, the tolerances apply to principal tapping unless / otherwise specified. 8.1 TolCrances on Reactance and Rated Frequency at Rated Voltage

This measurement is carried out to ascertain that the dynamic stress level in the tank is well within the endurance limit of the tank steel. Measurements are made by gluing strain gauges at two or three locations where the vibration amplitudes are the highest as determined by vibration measurement ( 7.14). At each location, two gauges - one in the vertical and the other in the horizontal direction are glued on to the tank wall after peeling off the paint. The strain gauges are connected to different channels of the U/V recorder. Measurements are made at a voltage at which vibration amplitudes are measured. 7.15 Temperature-Rise The provisions shall apply. of
Test

Tolerances on reactance at rated voltage and rated frequency shall be f 5 percent of the rated reactance. In the case of three-phase shunt reactors or banks of three single-phase reactors, the reactance& on the three phases when connected to a system of symmetrical voltages, shall not deviate from the average by more than f 2 percent but always w~ithin the above mentioned f5 percent tolerance. If a linearity relation to ( Fig. lb ) has been specified for a reactor, a tolerance on variat'on of reactance of &5 percent reactance va i ue measured at rated voltage applies, up to a limit of voltage specified by the purchaser. 8.2 Tolerance on Loss accordloss by

IS 2026 ( Part

2 ) : 1977 maximum cannot be performed 90 percent

This test is performed preferably at operating voltage and rated frequency. If the maximum operating voltage maintained during the test, it may be at a reduced voltage but not less than

The total mass measured and corrected ing to 7.7 shall not exceed the guranteed more than 15 percent.

NOTE --For large power rating feactots. if net nossibk ia the factory, the test may be carried out bn site subject to agreement between the purchaser and the manufacturer.

TEST

69 JEC~

"DC

FIG,

4

A SUGGESTEDCIRCUIT DIAGRAM FOR MEASUREMENT OF
MAGNETIZATION CHARACTERISTIC

6

JS

5553( Part 2):1990

ANNEX A ( Clause 7.12 )
METHOD ~FOR MEASUREMENT OF MAGNETIZATION CHARACTERISTIC

Magnetization curve of a reactor can be obtained using direct current as follows: `The reactor is charged with direct current. When the maximum test current is reached, the reactor is short-circuited and the charging The decaying is disconnected. current current in the circuit is registered by a computer assisted data acquisition system.' The saturation curve +/&K,~ versus Z/Znomis then calculated using the formulas listed below: The decaying current Z (1) is measured. Zmtn is the minimum measured current. Zmal is the maximum measured current. Znomfor shunt reactor is nominal AC-current multiplied by 2/T.

Znomfor smoothing reactor is nominal DCcurrent. Imean is the mean value of the calculated inductance from Zmin to Znom. 4~0~1is the nominal flux at ZMUII.

R is the circuit resistance, that is, reactor RL,shunt Rs and cable resistance. L(I) = ZxR
di/di _

L(t) X dl
I min
+ nom
=

+

zmtn X Lmesn

ZnomX Lmeen

Standard Mark
Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder, The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the proStandard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to ducer. Details of'conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a &t&her safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to muticturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard
Stairdards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

Bureau of Indian Standards
BIS is a statutory

institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No psrt of these publications mzy b? reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course I>f implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright bz addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amsndmsnts, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference : Dot : No. ETD 16 ( 2762 > Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

.

-

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.LT.

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all O&es ) Teltphone

t 331 0.1 13 31 75

37 86 62 2 1843 41 29-16

160036 600113

Campus,.IV

Cross Road, MADR&

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM~.

6 32 92 95

Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi. India

