**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 15061 (2002) : Automotive Vehicles - Flammabiltiy 
Requirements [TED 6: Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories 
and Garage Equipments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 15061 : 2002 

Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — 
FLAMMABILITY REQUIREMENTS 



ICS 13.220.40; 43.040.60 



© BIS 2002 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



January 2002 Price G roup 7 



Automotive Basic Standards Sectional Committee, TED 1 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive 
Basic Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. 

This standard specifies the technical requirements of the burning behaviour of materials used in interior 
construction of M3 category of motor vehicles. 

With a view to ensure the safety of the occupants of the vehicle, it is important that the materials used in the 
construction of the inside of motor vehicles of M3 category satisfy minimum requirements in order to avoid or 
at least retard development of flames, such that it allows the occupants to evacuate the vehicle in case of fire. 

The special requirements for motor vehicles transporting hazardous material will be covered in the separate 
standard. 

For the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been derived from EEC Directive 95/28/EC 
January 1996 — Burning behaviour of internal materials. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 APRIL 2006 

TO 

IS 15061 : 2002 AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — 

FLAMMABILITY REQUIREMENTS 

( Page 2, clause 3.1 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

*3. 1 The interior materials used in the vehicle to be type approved shall undergo 
one or more of the tests specified in Annex A, Annex B and Annex C as per 4 
and shall comply with the requirements given in 3*2, 3.3 and 3.4/ 

( Page 2, clause 3.5.4 ) — Substitute the following for the existing clause: 

•3.5.4 Electric cable; except for wiring cables used in CNG and LPG fuelled 
vehicles for which, ihe cables shall conform to flammability test as per 22 
of IS 2465 : 1984 Specification for cables for motor vehicles. 

3.5.5 Elements for which it is not possible to extract a sample in the prescribed 
dimensions as specified in A-3.1, B-3.1 and C-3/ 

( Page 10, clause B-4.6, second sentence ) — Substitute the following for 
the existing: 

'If one or two specimens in any set of three specimens fail to burn to the top 
marker thread, another set of three specimens shall be tested for that direction or 
fcce.' 



(TOD6) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, Indu 



IS 15061 : 2002 



Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — 
FLAMMABILITY REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

This standard applies to the burning behaviour 
(ignitability, burning rate and melting behaviour) of 
interior materials used in motor vehicles of category 
M3 carrying more than 22 passengers, not being 
designed for standing passengers and urban use (city 
buses). 

2 DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this standard following definitions 
shall apply. 

2.1 Type Approval of a Vehicle 

The approval of a vehicle type with regard to the 
burning behaviour of the interior materials used in 
the passenger compartment. 

2.2 Vehicle T>pe 

A category of power-driven vehicles which do not 
differ in such essential respects as: 

2.2.1 The interior materials seats, curtains, separation 
walls, etc, used in the passenger compartment. 

2.2.2 The mass of the interior materials used so far as 
they have an effect on the performance, described in 
this standard. 

2.2.3 The optional arrangements and/or fittings should 
not have detrimental effect on the performance. 

2.3 Approval of a Component 

The approval of a component means an approval for 
devices such as interior materials, seats, curtain, etc. 

2.4 Type of Component 

Type of component means components which do not 
differ in respects, such as: 

a) base material for example wood, plastic, 
rubber, blended material; 

b) intended use for example seat upholstery, roof 
lining, etc; 

c) number of layers, in case of composite 
materials; and 

d) other characteristics in so far as they have an 
appreciable effect on the performance, 
described in the standard. 



2.5 Passenger Compartment 

The space for occupant accommodation (including bar, 
kitchen, toilet, etc), bounded by: 

— the roof, 

— the floor, 

— the sidewalls, 

— the doors, 

— the outside glazing, 

— the rear compartment bulkhead, or the plane 
of the rear seatback support, 

— at the driver's side of the longitudinal vertical 
median plane of the vehicle, the vertical 
transversal plane through the driver's R- 
point, 

— at the opposite side of the longitudinal vertical 
plane of the vehicle, the front bulkhead. 

2.6 Seat 

The structure which may or may not be integral with 
the vehicle structure complete with trim, intended to 
seat one adult person. The term covers both an 
individual seat or part of a bench seat intended to seat 
one adult person. 

2.7 Group of Seats 

A bench-type seat, or seats which are separate but side 
by side (that is; with the foremost anchorages of one 
seat in line with or forward of the rearmost anchorages 
and in line with or behind the foremost anchorages of 
another seat) and which accommodate one of more 
seated adult persons. 

2.8 Bench Seat 

A structure complete with trim, intended to seat more 
than one adult person. 

2.9 Burning Rate 

The quotient of the burnt distance measured and the 
time taken to burn this distance. It is expressed in 
mm/min. 

2.10 Composite Material 

The material composed of several layers of similar or 
different materials intimately held together at their 
surfaces by cementing, bonding, cladding, welding, etc. 



1 



IS 15061 : 2002 



When different materials are connected together 
intermittently (for example, by sewing, high frequency 
welding, riveting), such materials shall not be 
considered a composite materials. 

2.11 Exposed Face 

The side of a material which is facing towards the 
passenger compartment when the material is mounted 
in the vehicle. 

2.12 Upholstery 

The combination of interior padding and surface finish 
material which together constitute the cushioning of 
the seat frame. 

2.13 Interior Lining(s) 

The material(s) that (together) constitute(s) the surface 
finish and substrate of a roof, wall or floor. 

3 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 The performance when tested in accordance with 
the procedures outlined in Annexes A to C shall 
comply with the requirements given in 3.2 to 3.4. 

3.2 Test to Determine the Horizontal Burning Rate 
of the Materials 

The result of the test, described in Annex A, shall be 
considered satisfactory if, taking the worst test results 
into account, the horizontal burning rate is not more 
than 100 mm/min or if the flame extinguishes before 
reaching the last measuring point. 

3.3 Test to Determine the Vertical Burning Rate of 
the Materials 

The result of the test described in Annex B shall be 
considered satisfactory if, taking the worst test result 
into account, the vertical burning rate is not more than 
100 mm/min. 

3.4 Test to Determine the Melting Behaviour of the 
Materials 

The result of the test, described in Annex C, shall be 
considered satisfactory if, taking the worst test results 
into account, no drop is formed which ignites the 
cotton wool. 

3.5 Following materials are not required to be tested 
as described in the Annexes A to C: 

3.5.1 Parts Made of Metal or Glass 

3.5.2 Each individual seat accessory with a mass of 
non-metallic material less than 200 g. If the total mass 
of these accessories exceeds 400 g. of non-metallic 
material per seat, then each material must be tested. 



3.53 Elements of which the surface area or the volume 
does not exceed respectively. 

3.5.3.1 One hundred cm 2 or 40 cm 3 for the elements 
which are connected to an individual seating place. 

3.5.3.2 Three hundred cm 2 or 120 cm 3 per seat row 
and, at a maximum, per linear meter of the interior of 
the passenger compartment for these elements which 
are distributed in the vehicle and which are not 
connected to an individual seating place. 

3.5.4 Electric Cables 

Elements for which it is not possible to extract a sample 
in the prescribed dimensions as specified in A-3, B-3 
and C-3. 

3.6 Any adhesive agent used to affix the interior 
material to its supporting structures shall not, as far 
as possible, exacerbate the burning behavior of the 
material. 

4 SELECTION AND NUMBER OF TEST 
SPECIMEN 

For carrying out the tests as given in Annexes A, B 
and C, the following criteria shall be adopted. 

4.1 For Tests as per Annex A 

Five samples from the following materials in the case 
of an isotropic material or 10 samples in the case of a 
non-isotropic material (five for each direction) shall 
be tested: 

a) material(s) used for the upholstery of any seat 
and its accessories (including the driver's 
seat); 

b) material(s) used for the interior lining of the 
roof; 

c) material(s) used for the interior lining of the 
side and rear walls, including separation 
walls; 

d) material(s) with thermal and/or acoustic func- 
tion; 

e) material(s) used for the interior lining of the 
floor; 

material(s) used for the interior lining of lug- 
gage-racks, heating and ventilation pipe; and 

g) material(s) used for the luminaires. 

4.2 For Tests as per Annex B 

Three samples in the case of an isotropic material, or 
six samples in case of a non-isotropic material, of the 
material(s) used for curtains and blinds and/or other 
hanging material(s) shall be tested. 



IS 15061 : 2002 



4.3 For Tests as per Annex C 

From the following material(s) four samples, for both 
faces (if they are not identical), shall be tested: 

a) material(s) used for the interior lining of the 
roof; 



b) material(s) used for the interior lining of the 
luggage-racks, heating and ventilation pipes 
situated in the roof; and 

c) material(s)used for the luminaires situated in 
the luggage-racks and/or roof. 



ANNEX A 

(Clauses 3.1, 3.2 and 4.1) 

TEST TO DETERMINE THE HORIZONTAL BURNING RATE OF MATERIALS 



A-l PRINCIPLE 

A sample is held horizontally in a U-shaped holder 
and is exposed to the action of a defined low-energy 
flame for 15 s in a combustion chamber, the flame 
acting on the free end of the sample. The test 
determines if and when the flame extinguishes, or the 
time in which the flame passes a measured distance. 

A-2 EQUIPMENT 

A-2.1 Combustion chamber (see Fig. 1), preferably of 
stainless steel and having the dimensions given in 



Fig. 2. The front of the chamber contains flame- 
resistant observation window, which may cover the 
front and which can be constructed as an access panel. 
The bottom of the chamber has vent holes and the top 
has a vent slot all around. The combustion chamber is 
placed on four legs, 10 mm high. 

The chamber may have a hole at one end for the 
introduction of the sample holder containing the 
sample. In the opposite end, a hole is provided for the 
gas line. Melted material is caught in a pan (see Fig. 3) 
which is placed on the bottom of the chamber between 
vent holes without covering any vent hole area. 




Fig. 1 Combustion Chamber with Sample Holder and Drip Tray 

3 




VENT SLOT 



385 



Z-[^— 

1 1» "II # * 

36 J - — "T — 



^ '/> 



GAS BURNER 




204 



Fig. 2 Dimensions of Combustion Chamber 



336 



16 



^*mm>mm^*mmm*mi 



85 



12 



Fig. 3 Drip Pin 



A-2.2 Sample holder, consisting of two U-shaped metal 
plates or frames of corrosion-proof material. 
Dimensions are given in Fig. 4. 

The lower plate is equipped with pins, the upper one 
with corresponding holes in order to ensure a 
consistent holding of the sample. The pins also serve 
as the measuring points at the beginning and end of 
the burning distance. 

A support shall be provided in the form of 0.25 mm 



diameter heat resistant wires spanning the frame at 
25 mm intervals over the bottom U-shaped frame 
(see Fig. 5). 

The plane of the lower side of samples shall be 1 78 mm 
above the floor plate. The distance of the front edge of 
the sample holder from the end of the chamber shall 
be 22 mm; the distance of the longitudinal sides of 
the sample holder from the sides of the chamber shall 
be SO mm (all inside dimensions) (see Fig. 1 and 2). 



IS 15061 : 2002 



FIRST MEASURING POINT 



JO 



r 

100 

L 



fifitO 



J10_ 



=r=- 



t c 



1 



10 



38 



t 127tQ-2 , 



LAST MEASURING 
/ POINT 



AMPLE 



254&0-2 



356 



361 




Fig. 4 Sample Holder 



GROOVES 0-5x0-5 



$&, 



OUTER 
FRAME SIDE 




*HPL£) 



Fig. 5 Suction of Lower U Frame Design for Wire Support Facility 



A-2.3 Gas Burner 

It shall have the inside diameter of the 9.5 ± 0.5 mm 
and shall be placed in the test cabinet so that the center 
of its nozzle is 1 9 mm below the center of the bottom 
edge of the open end of the sample (see Fig. 2). 

A-2.4 Test Gas 

It shall be supplied to the burner and have a calorific 
value near 38 MJ/m 3 (for example, natural gas). 

A-2.5 Metal Comb 

It shall be at least 110 mm in length, with seven to 
eight smooth rounded teeth per 25 mm. 



A-2.6 Stop- Watch 

Stop-watch shall be having an accuracy of 0.5 s. 

A-2.7 Fume Cupboard 

The combustion chamber may be placed in a fume 
cupboard assembly provided that the internal volume 
is at least 20 times, but not more than 110 times, 
greater than the volume of the combustion chamber 
and provided that no single height, width, or length 
dimension of the fame cupboard is greater than two 
and a half times either of the other two dimensions. 

Before the test, the vertical velocity of the air through 
the fume cupboard shall be measured 100 mm in front 
of and behind the final position where the combustion 



IS 15061 :2002 



chamber will be located. It shall be between 0.10 and 
0.30 m/s in order to avoid possible discomfort, by 
combustion products, to the operator. It is possible to 
use a fume cupboard with a natural ventilation and an 
appropriate air velocity. 

A-3 SAMPLES 

A-3.1 Shape and Dimensions 

A-3. 1 . 1 The shape and dimensions of samples are given 
in Fig. 6. The thickness of the sample corresponds to 
the thickness of the product to be tested. It shall not 
be more than 1 3 mm. The sample shall have a constant 
section over its entire length. 





38 


h 251* 

. 127 Ll 










l" 


n _4 








100 -JU 


t 


80 

t 



356 



Fig. 6 Dimnizsions of Sample 

A-3. 1.2 If the shape and dimensions of a product do 
not permit taking a sample of the given size, the 
following minimum dimensions shall be maintained: 

a) For samples having a width of 3 to 60 mm, 
the length shall be 356 mm. In this case the 
material is tested in the product's width. 

b) For samples having a width of 60 to 100 mm, 
the length shall be at least 138 mm. In this 
case the potential burning distance corre- 
sponds to the length of the sample, the meas- 
urement starting at the first measuring point. 

A-3.2 Sampling 

The samples shall be taken from the material under 
test. In materials having different burning rates in 
different material directions, each direction has to be 
tested. The samples are to be taken and placed in the 
test apparatus so that the highest burning rate will be 
measured. 

When the material is supplied in widths, a length of 
at least 500 mm shall be cut covering the entire width. 
From this the samples shall be taken so as to be at 
least 100 mm from the material edge and equidistant 
from each other. 

Samples shall be taken in the same way from finished 
products, when the shape of the product permits. When 
the thickness of the product is more than 13 mm, it 



shall be reduced to 1 3 mm by a mechanical process 
applied to the side which does not face the occupant 
compartment. If it is impossible, the test shall be 
carried out, in accordance with the Technical Service, 
on the initial width of the material which shall be 
mentioned in the test report. 

Composite materials shall be tested as if they were of 
uniform construction. 

In the case of materials made of super-imposed layers 
of different composition which are not composite 
materials, all the layers of material included within a 
depth of 13 mm from the surface facing towards the 
passenger compartment shall be tested individually. 

A-3.3 Conditioning 

The samples shall be conditioned for at least 24 h but 
not more than 7 days at a temperature of 27 ± 2°C and 
a relative humidity of 65 ± 5 percent and shall be 
maintained under these conditions until immediately 
prior to testing. 

A-3.4 Procedure 

A.3.4.1 Place samples with napped or tufted surfaces 
on a flat surface and comb twice against the nap using 
the comb (see A-2.5). 

A-3.4. 2 Place the sample in the sample holder 
(see A-2.2) so that the exposed side will be downwards 
to the flame. 

A-3.4.3 Adjust the gas flame to a height of 38 mm 
using the mark in the chamber, the air intake of the 
burner being closed. Before starting the first test, the 
flame shall burn at least for one minute for 
stabilization. 

A-3.4.4 Push the sample holder into the combustion 
chamber so that the end of the sample is exposed to 
the flame, and after 15 s cut off the gas flow. 

A-3.4.5 The measurement of the burning time starts 
at the moment when the foot of the flame passes the 
first measuring point. Observe the flame propagation 
on the side burning faster than the other (upper or 
lower side). 

A-3.4.6 Measurement of burning time is completed 
when the flame has come to the last measuring point 
or when the flame extinguishes before coming to the 
last measuring point. If the flame does not reach the 
last measuring point, measure the burnt distance up 
to the point where the flame extinguished. Burnt 
distance is the decomposed part of the sample, which 
is destroyed on its surface or in the interior by burning. 

A-3.4.7 So far as the sample does not ignite or does 
not continue burning after the burner has been 
extinguished, or when the flame extinguishes before 



IS 15061 : 2002 



reaching the first measuring point, so that no burning 
time is measured, note in the test report that the 
burning rate is mm/min. 

A-3.4.8 When running a series of tests or repeat tests, 
ensure that the combustion chamber and sample holder 
have a maximum temperature of 30°C before starting 
the next test. 

A-4 CALCULATION 

The burning rate, B ] \ in mm/min, is given by the 
formula : 



B = - x 60 



where 



s = the burnt distance, in mm; and 

/ = the time, in seconds, to burn distance V. 



I} The burning rate (B) for each sample is only calculated in the case 
where the flame reaches the last measuring point or the end of the 
sample. 



ANNEX B 

(Clauses 3.1,3.3 and 4.2) 

TEST TO DETERMINE THE VERTICAL BURNING RATE OF MATERIALS 



B-l PRINCIPLE 

This test consists of exposing samples, held in a 
vertical position, to a flame and determining the speed 
of propagation of the flame over the material to be 
tested. 

B-2 APPARATUS 

The apparatus shall consist of: 

a) specimen holder; 

b) burner; 

c) ventilation system to extract gas and com- 
bustion products; 

d) template; and 

e) marker threads of white mercerized cotton 
threads having a maximum linear density of 
50 tex. 

B-2. 1 The specimen holder shall consist of a 
rectangular frame 560 mm high and shall have two 
rigidly connected parallel rods spaced 150 mm apart 
on which pins shall be fitted for mounting the test 
specimen which is located in a plane at least 20 mm 
from the flame. The mounting pins shall be not greater 
than 2 mm diameter and at least 27 mm long. The 
pins shall be located on the parallel rods at locations 
shown in Fig. 7. The frame shall be fitted onto a 
suitable support to maintain the rods in a vertical 
orientation during testing. (For the purpose of locating 
the specimen on the pins in a plane away from the 
frame, spacer stubs 2 mm diameter may be provided 
adjacent to the pins). 



B-2.2 A typical burner is described in Fig. 8. 

The gas supplied to the burner can be either 
commercial propane gas or commercial butane gas. 

The burner shall be positioned in front of, but below, 
the specimen such that it lies in a plane passing 
through the vertical center line of the specimen and 
perpendicular to its face (see Fig. 9), such that the 
longitudinal axis is inclined upwards at 30 to the 
vertical towards the lower edge of the specimen. The 
distance between the tip of the burner and the lower 
edge of the specimen shall be 20 mm. 

B-2.3 The test apparatus may be placed in a fume 
cupboard assembly provided that the internal volume 
is at least 20 times, but not more than 1 10 times, 
greater than the volume of the test apparatus and 
provided that no single height, width or length 
dimension of the fume cupboard is greater than two 
and a half times either of the other two dimensions. 
Before the test, the vertical velocity of the air through 
the fume cupboard shall be measured 100 mm in front 
of and behind the final position where the test 
apparatus will be located. It shall be between 0.10 and 
0.30 m/s in order to avoid possible discomfort, by 
combustion products to the operator. It is possible to 
use a fume cupboard with a natural ventilation and an 
appropriate air velocity. 

B-2.4 A flat rigid template made of suitable material 
and of a size corresponding to the size of the specimen 
shall be used. Holes approximately 2 mm diameter 
shall be drilled in the template and positioned so that 
the distances between the centre of the holes 
correspond to the distances between the pins on the 



IS 15061 : 2002 



•1 



ut 



b 



a 



.1 



r 



15.L 



o 




THIRO MARKER THREAD 



SECOND MARKER THREAO 

FABRIC SPECIMEN 
FIRST MARKER THREAD 
MOUNTING PINS 



02 SPACER STUBS 
(OPTIONAL) 



BURNER 



Fig. 7 Specimen Holder 



frames (see Fig. 7) The holes shall be located 
equidistant about the vertical centre-lines of the 
template. 

B-3 SAMPLE 

B-3.1 The samples dimensions are 560 mm * 170 mm. 

B-3.2 The samples shall be conditioned for at least 
24 h at a temperature of 27 ± 2°C and a relative 
humidity of 65 ± 5 percent and shall be maintained 
under these conditions until immediately prior to 
testing. 

B-4 PROCEDURE 

B-4.1 The test shall be carried out in an atmosphere 
having a temperature between 27 ± 2°C and relative 
humidity 65 ± 5 percent. 

B-4.2 The burner shall be preheated for 2 min. The 



flame height shall be adjusted to 40 ± 2 mm measured 
as the distance between the top of the burner tube and 
the tip of the yellow part of the flame when the burner 
is vertically oriented and the flame is viewed in dim 
light. 

B-4.3 The specimen shall be placed on the pins of the 
test frame, making certain that the pins pass through 
the points marked off from the template and that the 
specimen is at least 20 mm away from the frame. The 
frame shall be fitted on the support so that the 
specimen is vertical. 

B-4. 4 The marker threads shall be attached 
horizontally in front of the specimen at the locations 
shown in Fig. 7. At each location, a loop of thread 
shall be mounted so that the two segments are spaced 
1 mm and 5 mm form the plane of the front of the 
specimen. 



IS 15061 : 2002 



NER TUBE FLAME STABILIZER 



\ assv - li / 

CHOKE TUBE NOTCH 

a) GAS BURNER ARRANGEMENT 



05*0-05 



HO Ml * I 




L#1.5 I * 



♦0-03 
*018 




b) GAS JET 



A-H 



A-A 

(») PITCH CI RCLE DIAMETER Umm 

c) FLAME STABILIZER 



¥4tO05 



AS MIXING ZONE 
IFFUSION ZONE 




d) BURNER TUBE 



OUTLET 



Fig. 8 Gas Burner 



IS 15061 : 2002 




SPECIMEN 




FRAME 

SPACER "^1 — IL 
1/ STUB \| m,n - 
Y (OPTIONAL) p 



PINS 



EDGE IGNITION 




Fig. 9 Burner Ignition Location 



Each loop shall be attached to a suitable timing device. 
Sufficient tension shall be imposed to the thread to 
maintain its position relative to the specimen. 

B-4.5 The flame shall be applied to the specimen for 
5 s Ignition shall be deemed to have occurred if flaming 
of the specimen continues for 5 s after removal of the 
igniting flame. If ignition does not occur, the flame 
shall be applied for 15 s to another conditioned 
specimen. 

B-4.6 If any result in any set of three specimens 
exceeds the minimum result by 50 percent, another 
set of three specimens shall be tested for that direction 
or face. If one or two specimens in any set of three 
specimens fail to burn to the top marker thread, 
another set of three specimens fail to burn to the top 
marker thread, another set of three specimens shall 
be tested for that direction or face. 

B-4.7 The following duration, in seconds, shall be 
measured: 

a) from the start of the application of the igniting 
flame to the severance of the first marker 
thread (/,); 



b) from the start of the application of the ignit- 
ing flame to the severance of the second 
marker thread (/ 2 ); and 

c) from the start of the application of the ignit- 
ing flame to the severance of the third marker 
thread (/ 3 ). 

B-5 RESULTS 

The observed phenomena shall be written down in 
the test report, to include: 

The durations of combustion : /,, f 2 and t 2 in seconds; 
The corresponding burnt distances: d v d 2 and d 3 
in mm. 



The burning rate V and the rates, 



V 2 and 



V» if 



applicable, shall be calculated (for each sample if the 
flame reaches at least the first marker thread) as 
following: 



f/ = -i-x60(mm/min) 



The highest burning rate of V v V 2 and V 3 shall be 
taken into account. 



10 



IS 15061 : 2002 



ANNEX C 

(Clauses 3.1, 3.4 and 4.3) 

TEST TO DETERMINE THE MELTING BEHAVIOUR OF MATERIALS 



CI PRINCIPLE 

A sample is placed in a horizontal position and is 
exposed to an electric radiator. A receptacle is 
positioned under the specimen to collect the resultant 
drops.Some cotton wool is put in the receptacle in order 
to verify if any drop is flaming. 

C-2 APPARATUS 

The apparatus shall consist of (see Fig. 10): 

a) an electric radiator; 

b) a support for the sample with grill; 

c) a receptacle (for resultant drops); and 

d) a support (for the apparatus). 

C-2.1 The source of heat is an electric radiator with a 
useful output of 500 W. The radiating surface must be 
made of transparent quartz plate with a diameter of 
100 ± 5 mm. The radiated heat from the apparatus, 
measured on a surface which is situated parallel to 
the surface of the radiator at a distance of 30 mm shall 
be 3 W/cm 2 . 

C-2.2 Calibration 

For calibration of the radiator, a heat flux meter 
(radiometer) of the Gardon (foil) type with a design 
range not exceeding 10 W/cm 2 shall be used. 

The target receiving radiation, and possibly to a small 
extent convection, shall be flat, circular, not more than 
10 mm in diameter and coated with a durable matt 
black finish. The target shall be contained within a 
water-cooled body the front face of which shall be of 
highly polished metal, flat, coinciding with the plane 
of the target and circular, with a diameter of about 
25 mm. 

Radiation shall not pass through any window before 
reaching the target. The instrument shall be robust, 
sample to set up and use, insensitive to droughts, and 
stable in calibration. The instrument shall have a 
accuracy of within ± 3 percent and a repeatability 
within 0.5 percent. 

The calibration of the heat flux meter shall be checked 
wheriever a recalibration of the radiator is carried out, 
by comparison with an instrument held as a reference 
standard and not used for any other purpose. The 
reference standard instrument shall be fully calibrated 
at yearly intervals in accordance with a national 
standard. 



C-2.2.1 Calibration Check 

The irradiance produced by the power input which 
the initial calibration has shown to correspond to an 
irradiance of 3 W/m 2 shall be frequently checked (at 
least once every 50 operating hours) and the apparatus 
shall be recalibrated if such a check reveals deviation 
greater than 0.06 W/cm 2 . 

C-2.2.2 Calibration Procedure 

The apparatus shall be placed in an environment 
essentially free of air currents (not more than 0.2 m/s). 

Place the heat flux meter in the apparatus in the 
specimen position so that the target of the heat flux 
meter is located centrally within the radiator surface. 

Switch on the electricity supply and establish the power 
input of the controller required to produce irradiance 
at the centre of the radiator surface of 3 W/cm 2 . 
Adjustment to the power unit to record 3 W/cm 2 should 
be followed by the five-minute period without further 
adjustment to ensure equilibrium. 

C-2.3 The support for the samples shall be a metallic 
ring (see Fig. 10). On top of this support a grill, 
made of stainless steel wire, is placed with the 
following dimensions: 

— interior diameter : 1 18 mm, 

— dimension of the holes : 2. 1 mm 2 

— diameter of the steel-wire : 0.70 mm. 

C-2.4 The receptacle shall consist of a cylindrical tube 
with an interior diameter of 1 1 8 mm and a depth of 
12 mm. 

The receptacle shall be filled with cotton wool. 

C-2.5 A vertical column shall support the items 
specified in C-2.1, C-2.3 and C-2.4. 

The radiator is placed on top of the support in a manner 
such that the radiating surface is horizontal and the 
radiation is downwards. A lever/pedal shall be 
provided in the column to lift the support of the 
radiator slowly. It shall also be provided with a catch 
in order to ensure that the radiator can brought back 
to its normal position. 

In their normal position, the axes of the radiator, the 
support for the sample and the receptacle must 
coincide. 



11 



IS 15061 : 2002 




1 RADIATOR 

2 SAMPLE 

3 GRILL(FOR THE SUPPORT OF 

THE SAMPLE) 

4 COTTON WOOL 

5 RECEPTACLE 



300 



GRILI 



"7" 



-y 



LL MOBILE METALLIC RING 



METALLIC RING/' 
(FIXEO) 



^ 



li 



/////// 



DETAIL OF THE METALLIC RINGS FOR 
THE SUPPORT OF THE SAMPLE 

k 



/ S-T7" 




Fig. 10 Metallic Ring and Appartus for Testing 



C-3 SAMPLES 

The test samples shall measure 70 mm x 70 mm. 

Samples shall be taken in the same way from finished 
products, when the shape of the product permits. When 
the thickness of the product is more than 13 mm, it 
shall be reduced to 13 mm by a mechanical process 
applied to the side which does not face the occupant 
compartment. If it is impossible, the test shall be 
carried out, in accordance with the Technical Service, 
on the initial width of the material which shall be 
mentioned in the test report. 

Composite materials (see 2.8) shall be tested as if they 
were of uniform construction. 

In the case of materials made of superimposed layers 
of different composition which are not composite 
materials, all the layers of material included within a 
depth of 1 3 mm from the surface facing towards the 
passenger compartment shall be tested individually. 

The total mass of the sample to be tested shall be at 
least 2 g. If the mass of one sample is less, a sufficient 
number of samples shall be added. 



If the two faces of the material differ, both faces must 
be tested, which means that eight samples are to be 
tested. 

The samples and the cotton wool shall be conditioned 
for at least 24 h at a temperature of 27 ± 2°C and a 
relative humidity of 65 ± 5 percent and shall be 
maintained under these conditions until immediately 
prior to testing. 

C-4 PROCEDURE 

The sample is placed on the support and the latter is 
so positioned that the distance between the surface of 
the radiator and the upperside of the sample is 30 mm. 

The receptacle, including the cotton wool, is placed 
beneath the grill of the support at a distance of 
300 mm. 

The radiator is put aside, so that it can not radiate on 
the sample, and switched on. When it is on full 
capacity it is positioned above the sample and timing 
is started. 

If the material melts or deforms, the height of the 
radiator is modified to maintain the distance of 30 mm. 



12 



IS 15061 : 2002 



If the material ignites, the radiator is put aside three 
seconds afterwards. It is brought back in position when 
the flame has extinguished and the same procedure is 
repeated as frequently as necessary during the first 
five minutes of the test. 

After the fifth minute of the test : 

a) If the sample has extinguished (whether or 
not it has ignited during the first five minutes 
of the test) leave the radiator in position even 
if the sample reignites; and 



b) If the material is flaming, await extinction 
before bringing the radiator into position 
again. 

In either case, the test must be continued for an 
additional five minutes. 

C-5 RESULTS 

Observed phenomena shall be noted in the test report, 
such as : 

a) the fall of drops, if any, whether flaming or 
not; and 

b) if ignition of the cotton wool has taken place. 



13 



IS 15061 :2002 



ANNEX D 

(Foreword) 

COMMUTE COMPOSITION 

Automotive Basic Standards Sectional Committee, TED 1 



Organization 
Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 



Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 

Association of State Road Transport Undertaking, New Delhi 

Automotive Component Manufacturer Association of India Ltd, New Delhi 

Bajaj Auto Limited, Pune 

Bajaj Tempo Ltd, Pune 

Central Institute of Road Transporst (T&R), Pune 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Vehicle), Ahmednagar 
Daewoo Motors India Ltd, New Delhi 

Eicher Motors Ltd, Dhar (MP.) 

Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd, Bangalore 

Hindustan Motor Ltd, Distt Hooghly 

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun 
Kinetic Engineering Ltd, Pune 
LMLLtd, Kanpur 

Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd, Nasik 

Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon 

Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, Department of Heavy 
Industry, New Delhi 

Ordnance Factory Board, Ministry of Defence, Kolkata 

Pal-Peugeot Ltd, Dombivli (East), Thane 

Premier Automobiles Ltd, Mumbai 

Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, New Delhi 

Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Chandigarh 

Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co Ltd, Pune 

Transport Commissioner, Mumbai 



Representative(s) 

Shri B. Buahot (Chairman) 

Shri U.A. Kulkarni {Alternate \) 
Shri S.S. Sandhu (Alternate II) 

Shri C. J. Nagabhushana 

Shri M. Subramanian {Alternate) 

Dr M. Koteeswaran 

Shri A. S. Lakar {Alternate) 

Shri Vishnu Mathur 

Shri K. N. D. Nambudiripad {Alternate) 

Shri T. M. Balaraman 

Shri V. M. Mantel {Alternate) 

Shri R. M. KANrrKAR 

Shri V. V. Deshpande {Alternate) 

Shri D. G. Shirke 

Shri P. C. Barjatia {Alternate) 

Shri K. Eswaraiah 

Shri R. Govindappa 

Shri A. Batra {Alternate) 

Shri Sharad Saksena 

Shri Charanjiv Singh {Alternate) 

Shri Harjit Singh 

Shri C. Patnaik {Alternate) 

Shri U. K. Kini 

Shri D. B. Ray {Alternate) 

Shri Janarohan Sharma 

Shri R. V. Govind 

DrB.P.Pundir 

Shri Suraj Agarwal {Alternate) 

ShriZ.A.Mujawar 

Shri S. K. Mukherjee {Alternate) 

Shri I. V.Rao 

Shri P. Purushothaman (Alternate) 

Shri Sushil Kumar 

Shri S. K. Bharu (Alternate) 

Shri M. L. Sud 

Shri M. K. Mishra (Alternate) 

Shri V. R. Kulkarni 

Shri R. P. Sovanee (Alternate) 

ShriG.Y.Bhatt 

Shri S. N. Srintvasan (Alternate) 

Shrimati Pamela Tickoo 

Shri Sumit Sharma (Alternate) 

Shri A. K. Jindal 

Shri V. Krishnaswamy 

Shri R. R. Akarte (Alternate) 

Shri S. B. Sahasrabudhe 



(Continued on. page IS) 



14 



IS 15061 : 2002 



(Continued from page 14) 

Organization 
TVS Suzuki Ltd, Hosur 

Vehicle Research & Development Establishment, Ahmednagar 
Volvo India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 
Yamaha Motors Escorts Ltd, Faridabad 
BIS Directorate General 



Representative(s) 

SHRI M. N. MURAIJKRISHNA 

Shri S. R. Saranathan (Alternate) 

SllRI R. R-UARAM 

Shri K. Senthil Kumar (Alternate) 

Shri Anton Friesleben 

Shri S. V. Suderson (Alternate) 

Shri S. C. Yonezawa 

Shri B. Sarkar (Alternate) 

Shri A. R. Gulati, Director & I lead (Transport F.ngg) 
(Representing Director General (Ex-off\cio)\ 



Member-Secretary 

Shri A.K.N agpal 

Director (Transport Engg), BIS 



15 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and 
attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue 
of 'BIS Handbook' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc: No. TED 1 (219). 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 323 01 31, 323 3375, 323 94 02 

Regional Offices: 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 6001 13 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 
MUMBAI 400093 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 
COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH, PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Telegrams: Manaksanstha 
(Common to all offices) 

Telephone 

323 76 17,323 38 41 



|337 84 99, 337 85 61 
1337 86 26,337 91 20 



{ 



60 38 43 
60 20 25 
T254 12 16,254 14 42 
1254 25 19,254 13 15 

f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 
1832 78 91,832 78 92 



Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi 



