( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS i 4545 ( Part 4 ) - 1983

Indian Standard

METHODSOFMEASUREMENTON RECEIVERS FOR TELEVISIONBROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART 4 ( SYNCHRONIZING QUALITY

First Revision)
Sectional Committee, LTDC 20

Radio Communications
Chairman SHRI H. S. JOLLY Members

Representing

All India Radio, New Delhi

KHUSHU( Akernate to Shri H. S. Jolly ) ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR STANDARDS (S&T ) JOINT DIRECTORSTANDARDS ( S & T ) - IV ( AIternate ) CDR S. S. BAIDWAN LT-CDR A. BHOMICK( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. BASAK
SHRI 0. P.

Ministry of Railways ( RDSO ) Ministry of Defence (DPI) Development Commissioner, New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers (N ), New Delhl Small Scale Industry,

SHRI V. V. R. PRABHU ( Afternate ) SHRI H. M. BHATNAGAR SHRI V. K. SETHI ( Altwzate ) SHRI H. S. CHANDRAMOULI SHRI K. RAMASESHU ( Alternate ) SHRI R. G. DEODHAR SHRI M. L. DHAR SHRI P. K. DHINGRA( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. GHOSE

Association,

New Delhi

Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore -Wireless Planning and Co-ordination Wing ( Ministry of Communications )., New Delhi Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore National Test House, Calcutta The Radio Electronic & Television Manufacturers Association ( RETMA ), Bombay Peico Electronics 8c Electricals Ltd, Bombay Federation of Associations of Small Industries of India. New Delhi of Electronics and Telecommunication Institution Engineers, New Delhi Directorate of Coordination ( Police Wireless ), Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi
( Continued on page 2 )

SHRI N. KRISHNAN KUTTY ( Alternate ) SHRI B.P. GHOSE SHRI B. C. MIJKHERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI J. GUPTA SHRI T. S. BUXI ( Alternate ) SHRI J. GUPTA SHRI P. S. SACHDEV ( Alternate ) SHRI B. S. GUPTA DR S. K. HAJELA SHRI S. JANAKIRAMAN SHRI R. P. MATHUR ( Alternate ) LT-COL KRISHAN LAL LT-COL B. S. NATRAJAN ( Alternate )

@I Copyright 1986

INDIAN

STANDARDS INSTITUTION

I

This publication is protected under the Zndian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with writtenpermission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 4545 ( Part 4 ) - 1983 ( Continued from page
Members
SHRI R. LALWANI SHRI V. V. CHAUDHARY ( Alternate ) !&RI R. C. PANDEY SHRI C. M. KRISHNA MURTHY ( Alternate SKRI A. K. N. PRASAD SHRI M. G. SRIDHARAN ( Alternate ) SHRI W. V. RAMANA SHRI K. P. RAMASWAMY SHRI K. B. BORKER( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. RANGOLE SHRI H. K. JAIN ( Afternate SHRI M. SANKARALINGAM Posts & Telegraphs Ministry of Defence Aeronautics 1)

Representing
Board, ( DTD Ltd, New Delhi 8c P ) ( AIR Bangalore ), Bangalore

)

Hindustan Electronics Directorate

Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad General of Doordarshan, New Delhi Engineering of Supplies Research and Institute, New

Centr;;laifectronics Directoo;;; Department General

)

Disposals,

SHRI R. S. ARORA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. SHARMA DR K. S. K. SAI ( Alternate ) SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN SHRI TSHWARDUTT ( Alternate) SHRI SURESHCHANDRA SHRI K. K. TANEJA SHRI H. S. DUBEY ( Alternate SHRI C. M. THIRUMURTHY SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics )

of Electronics,

New Delhi Development

Electronics Trade and Technology Corporation Ltd, New Delhi

National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi Directorate General of Technical Development, Delhi

New ~Ltd,

)

Gujarat Communications and Electronics Vadodara Director General, IS1 ( Ex-officio Member )

Secretary
SHRI D. K. NAYYAR Assistant Director (Electronics ), ISI

Panel for TV Receivers,
Convener
SHRI N. N. MOHANTY

LTDC 201P3
New Delhi

All India Radio,

Members
SHRI A. S. GUIN ( Alternate to Shri N. N. Mohanty ) SHRI M. L. ARORA ASSISTANT WIRELESSADVISER ( PLANNING-I ) SHRI 1-I. M. BHATNAGAR SHRI R. B. LAL ( Alternate SHRI R. S. BHATNAGAR

M/s Chawla & Company, New Delhi Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing ( Ministry of Communication ), New Delhi Indian TV Manufacturers Association, New Delhi Federation of Associatiom of Small Industries India Ltd, New Delhi Directorate General of Doordarlhan, New Delhi Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad of

)

SHRI K. B. BORKER SHRI M. BUTCH~ RAJU SHRI P. JANARDHAN( Alternate SHRI R. K. CHAKRAVARTI SHRI A. GHAFFAR SHRI S. JANAKIRAM SHRI K. L. KANDOI SI~RI S. MITRA

)

Department of Electronics, New D_elhi U.P. Electronics Corporation Ltd. Lucknow Relations Information & P&blic Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad The Radio Electronic and Television Manufacturers Association, Bombay ElectroilxiReglonal Test Laboratory ( North ), New

SHRI INDERIEET BANAUDHA ( AIternate I ) SHRI C. L. KAUL ( Alternate II ) SHRI A. RA&ZAQUB REPRESENTATIVE SHRI P. K. SANDELL SHRI C. G. SUBRAMANYAN( Alternate SHIU C. S. ARORA ( Alternate II ) SHRI V. V. R. SASTRY SHRI V. K. SEKHRI SHRI SURESH CHANDRA SHRI INDERJEBT BANAUD~~A( Alternate I )

Centra:laE.ectronics

Engineering

Research

Institute,

Tamil Nadu Local Administration Radio and Television Manufacturers Oraanization. Madras Electronics Trade and Techiiology Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore Electronic Components Industries Association, Delhi National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi

New

)

IS : 4545 ( Part 4 ) F 1983

Indian Standard METHODS OF MEASUREMENT ON RECEIVERS FOR TELEVISION BROADCAST TRANSMISSIONS
PART 4 SYNCHRONIZING QUALITY

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1This
Indian Standard (Part 4) (First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 6 December 1983, after the draft finalized by the Radio Communications Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. 0.2 The first version of IS : 4545 covered the methods of measurement for television broadcast receivers having monochrome vision reception. With the introduction of colour television receivers, this standard is now being revised to make it applicable to receivers designed for both monochrome and colour vision reception, and published in a number of parts to deal with different aspects of characteristics of television receivers. 0.3 This standard ( Part 4 ) covers methods of measurement for synchronizing quality of the television receivers. Other parts in this series are: Part 1 General considerations Part 2 Tuning properties ments and general measure*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised).

Part 3 Geometrical properties of the picture Part 5 Sensitivity Part 6 Selectivity and response to undesired signals Part 7 Fidelity Part 8 Compatibility with audio visual recording equipment Part 9 Electrical and acoustic ,measurements at audiofrequency 0.4 This standard ( Part 4 ) is largely based on IEC Publication 107-l ( 1977 ) Recommended methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General considerations electrical measurements other than those at audio-frequencies, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1.SCOPE 1.1This standard ( Part 4 ) covers methods of quality of measurement for synchronizing television receivers, namely:

m) Scan generator frequency variation with time, and n) Effects of scanning circuits upon colour signal decoding.

a>Line
cl 4 g)

scan phase error characteristic, range, pulses,

1.2This standard

shall be read in conjunction with IS : 4545 ( Part 1 )-1983*.

b) Line scan phase transfer characteristic,
Line scan synchronizing

2. LINE SCAN PHASE ERROR CHARACTERISTIC 2.1 Introdnctian - The phase error characteristic of a line scan flywheel circuit indicates the extent to which the receiver line scan circuit will -follow phase perturbations present on the line synchronizing pulses and thus indicates the disturbance
*Methods of measurement on receivers broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General
(first revision ).

d) Pulling on whites,
Pulling on vertical synchronizing Weave and ripple, Quality of interlace,

f) Ragging, h) Horizontal scan phasing,

3

for television considerations

k) Jumping,
3

IS : 4545 ( Part 4 ) 5 1983 that will occur to vertical picture components in the presence of either random or coherent noise affecting the line synchronizing pulse train and the associated picture signal. Such perturbations may be present in the output signal of some video recording and reproducing equipment. 2.2 Method of Measurement -The measurement procedure is shown in Fig. 1. The line synchronizing pulse generator is phase-modulated by the output of a low-frequency sine-wave oscillator. The phase error is displayed on the oscilloscope, care being taken to ensure, that the trigger is taken from the correct point. The level of signal applied to the receiver shall be such that noise and over-loading effects are avoided. Measurement shall be carried out for a range of perturbating frequencies extending from below field frequency up to half-line scan frequency. A typical characteristic is shown in Fig. 2, indicating that below a given frequency, the receiver line scan generator tracks with the perturbating signal while at some high frequency no tracking occurs due'to filtering action of the flywheel automatic phase control circuit. The result is plotted with the frequency of perturbation on a logarithmic horizontal scale and the receiver line scan generator tracking error as a percentage on a linear vertical scale. 2.3 Presentation of Results The value of of percent is plotted as a function the frequency of perturbation by the low frequency sine-wave ostiillator, where $0 = phase deviation of the input synchronizing signal, and 41 = phase deviation of the line scan oscillator output ( see Fig. 2 ). 3. LINE SCAN PHASE TRANSFER CHARACTERISTIC 3.1 Introducdon - The phase characteristic of a line scan flywheel circuit indicates the extent to which the receiver line scan circuit will reject noise present on the synchronizing signals that does not also phase-modulate the associated picture signal. This is the situation when receiving a signal accompanied by background noise. 3.2 Method of Measurement - The measurement procedure is as in 2.2 except that the are different ( see oscilloscope connections is shown in Fig. 3 ). A typical characteristic Fig. 4 indicating that the receiver line scan generator response falls with increasing frequency The result is plotted with of perturbation. frequency on a logarithmic horizontal scale and the receiver line scan generator perturbation as a percentage on a linear vertical scale. 3.3 Presentation of Results - The value of
_!!A percent I 40 I

is plotted

as a function

of the

frequency of perturbation by the low frequency sine-wave oscillator where +O = phase deviation of the input synchronizing signal. & = phase deviation of the line scan oscillator output ( see Fig. 4 ).

OYl

-

fro

o Trigger Oscilloscope d?l

0

--" modulator

Line trigger

Receiver under test

Line scan pick up

Phase

modulated

line

trigger

FIG. 1

LINE SCAN PHASE ERRORMEASUREMENT

4

IS : 4545 ( Part 4 ) - 1983 procedure is then repeated in the low-frequency direction and the two frequencies noted at which unlocking occurs. Since the line scan generator frequency may be influenced by noise present when the input signal is removed, it is recommended that the picture carrier input is retained and the modulation removed. The carrier level in the absence of modulation must be carefully controlled since overloading may~take place when the synchronizing signal is not present. The pull-in range is measured by adjusting the receiver line scan generator to a free-running frequency in the high-frequency direction outside the range at which locking occurs. The oscillator is then slowly moved towards the nominal frequency and frequency noted at which locking occurs. This procedure is then repeated starting from the low-frequency direction.
10 100 1000 Perturbation $,=phase deviation fraction of line $,=phase deviation fraction of line of input synchronizing period. of line scan oscillator period. signal output 10000 Hz

frequency

or equivalent or equivalent

It may be convenient in some cases to carry out these measurements by varying the frequency oscillator in the waveform of the master generator. Since receivers employing either direct lock rather than a flywheel or dual mode flywheel automatic phase control circuits may be capable of locking over a very wide range of frequencies care shall be taken with these measurements not to introduce so great a frequency error that damage to the scanning circuits might result. The results may be conveniently expressed by marking the frequencies of interest on a frequency scale ( see Notes 1,2, 3, 4 and 5 under 13.1).

FIG. 2

EXAMPLE OF LINE SCAN PHASE ERROR

RANGE 4.1 Method of Measurement - The hold-in range of line scan generator is measured by setting the receiver for optimum performance using a signal of nominal line scan frequency. The receiver line scan oscillator frequency is then slowly varied in the high-frequency direction until synchronization is lost. The input signal is removed and the free-scanning frequency of the line scan generator is measured. This

4. LINE SCAN SYNCHRONIZING

0

t4Sync.

line

trigger

phase' modulator

- c----o

Picture

0

O

Receiver under test Line scan pick up coil

Other

waveforms

oscillator

Phase

modulated

line

trigger

FIG. 3

LINBISCANPHASE CHARACTERISTIC MEASUREMENT 5

IS : 4545 ( Part 4 ) - 1983 undulations, their positions in the vertical axis and their extent should be noted ( see Fig. 5B ).

h

FIG.
IO 100 1000 10000 Hz

5B PULLING ON VERTICAL SYNCHRONIZING PULSES

7.1 Method of Measurement - This is measured $,=phase devitaion of input synchronizing signal or equivalent by displaying a test pattern signal containing fraction of line period. vertical lines, random displacements of groups $,=phase deviation of line scan oscillator outpul or equivalent fraction of line period. of scanning lines in the picture shall, where FIG. 4 EXAMPLE OF LINE SCAN PHASE CHARACTERISTIC possible, be expressed as the average displacement as a percentage of picture width, together 5. PULLING ON WHITES with the distribution in the vertical scan direction 5.1 Method of Measurement - A test pattern, ( see Notes 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 under 13.1 ). having the appropriate black and white and black and colouted areas of high saturation and 8. WEAVE AND RIPPLE luminance ( that is yellow ) near the edges of the 8.1 Method of Measurement - Coherent horipicture, is applied to the receivers and the horizontal displacements of a vertical bar shall be zontal displacement d of those parts of a vertical expressed as a percentage of picture width and bar in the picture that are collinear with the the frequency or frequeacies estimated ( see picture content near the edges, this displacement Notes 1, 2,3, 4 and 5 under 13.1 ). is expressed as a percentage of the picture width ( see Fig. 5A, Notes 1, 2, 3 and 4 under 13.1). 9. HORIZONTAL SCAN PHASING 9.1 Method of Measurement - The accuracy of phasing of the scan relative to the line synchronizing pulses is assessed by expressing the portions w1 of the picture at the left or righthand edges that are missing or folded as a percentage of the picture width w. The effect of the horizontal frequency or horizontal hold If the control shall be included in the results. receiver is fitted with a horizontal phase control, this shall be adjusted to the optimum position ( see Fig. 5C ) ( see Notes 1,2,3 and 4 under 13.1). 10. QUALITY OF INTERLACE
FIG. 5A PULLING ON WHITES 6. PULLING ON VERTICAL SYNCHRONIZING PULSES

Perturbationfrequency

7. RAGGING

6.1 Method of Measurement - This is measured as the horizontal displacement dl at the top of a vertical bar expressed as a percentage of the picture width w and the extent Y of this effect expressed as a percentage of the picture height h. If the displacement exhibits one or more 6

10.1 Method of Measurement - The distances between a given scanning line of one identical field and the two adjacent lines belonging to the other interlaced field of the pair each expressed as a percentage of the distance between two consecutive lines of a single field, shall be measured at several points on the screen ( see Fig. 6 ). Particular note is to be taken of the effect of the field or vertical hold control and the

IS : 4545 ( Part 4 ) - 1983 been achieved, with the receiver operating under conditions of constant supply voltage, ambient temperature and relative humidity. If applicable, the measurements shall be repeated at the lowest and highest values of ambient temperature to be encountered in -practice.
NOTE - It may not be possible to carry out this test in some receiver designs since in such cases damage may occur to the scan generators, or misoperation of automatic gain control circuits may occur in the absence of synchronizing signals.

-4 I
I-

w1

"
W---------pi

i

12.2 Presentation of Results - The variation in frequency is plotted as a function of time in a curve having as abscissa the time in minutes on a logarithmic scale and as ordinate the frequency change in hertz.

FIG. 5C HORIZONTALSCAN PHASING

effect of small variations in the picture height and vertical linearity controls. If the receiver is fitted with an interlace control, this is adjusted for optimum performance ( see Notes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 under 13.1 ).
11. JUMPING 11.1 Method of Measurement - Vertical movement of the picture is expressed as a percentage of the picture height, note being taken whether the disturbances are random or coherent ( see Notes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 under 13.1 ).

13. EFFECTS OF SCANNING CIRCUITS UPON COLOUR SIGNAL DECODING 13.1 Method of Measurement - A test pattern signal is applied to the receiver and the hold or scan frequency controls adjusted over the range giving satisfactory scan synchronization. Any effect upon colour decoding is noted.
NOTE 1 -This measurement may be carried out over a range of power supply voltages as described in 5 of IS : 4545 ( Part 1 )-1983*. shall be carried out NOTE 2 - This measurement at an input signal level of -50 dB ( mW ) and at other levels as appropriate depending upon the behaviour of the receiver. NO-FE3 -This measurement using a range of range adjustments shall be repeated of user controls.

12. SCAN GENERATOR FREQUENCY VARIATION WITH TIME 12.1 Method of Measurement - A television signal of -50 dB ( mW ) modulated with a test pattern is applied to the receiver input terminals and the receiver adjusted for optimum results. All modulation, including the synchronizing signals, is removed from the picture carrier which remains applied at a suitable level to suppress background noise effects that might otherwise influence the results. Line and field scan frequency are set to their nominal value and a series of measurements made at suitable intervals until frequency stability has

Nom 4 -This measurement may be carried out using picture content having low, medium and high average values. NOTE 5 signal. measurement may be carried out NOTE 6 -This for various phase relationships between supply mains wave-form and field synchronizing pulse. *Methods of measurement on receivers for television broadcast transmissions: Part 1 General considerations
(first revision ).

out with impulsive

This measurement interference

may also be carried present on the input

-Field

'

Field

2

Qualitv

30'70

FIG.

6

QUALITY 7

OF INTERLACE

iS : 4545 (; Part 4 ) - 1983

14. FOLD OVER 14.1 Method of Measurement - The width of the part of the picture which is missing or folded should be assessed asa percentage of the width The foldover effect may also be of the picture. due to the non-linearity of the timebase circuits. 15. HUM-BAR 15.1 Method of Measurement - When a television picture of standard test card is on display, a horizontal black bar appears locked or moving up or down the screen at a slow rate (equal to difference between field frequency and the main frequency). This is due to the mains ripple adding to the video signal. This can be judged subjectively or measured by monitoring the video signal or by luminance measurements. The receiver input terminals are fed with a - 50 dB standard test chart signal, and the picture displayed on its screen. The video signal at the cathode of the picture is also recorded. Measurement on seriousness of hum-bar can be made by recording the luminance at the screen and in the hum-bar region of the screen when the receiver is fed with a picture signal corresponding to a white field. 16. SYNCHRONIZING STABILITY

television signal. Thereafter the receiver shall be switched off for a sufficiently long period to cool off completely. The signal shall be removed, the receiver switched on and the free-running frequency of the time-base circuit shall be measured with the aid of an oscilloscope and a generator. The time at which the raster appears shall be noted, the corresponding frequency of the timebase circuit shall be measured and measurements continued until the frequency has become stable. 16.1.3 Graphic Representation - The frequency drift shall be plotted as a function of time in a curve having the time in minutes as abscissa and the frequency drift in Hz, as ordinate. 16.2 Frequency Shift of Time-Base Circuits - A variation in the supply voltage sometimes results in a shift of the free-running frequencies of the This form of frequency shift time-base circuits. follows the variations in the supply voltage rather quickly, but an allowance should be made in order to let the cathode temperature of the valves become stable again. 16.2.1 Dejinition - The variation of the freerunning frequency ~of ~a time-base circuit as a function of the supply voltage is called the frequency shift of that time-base circuit. 16.2.2 Method of Measurement - The receiver shall be adjusted for normal operation and standard video output voltage on a standard television signal. The signal shall then be removed and the measurement started when the temperature frequency drift of the time-base circuits has reached a sufficiently steady state. The freerunning frequency of the time-base circuit shall be measured with the aid of an oscilloscope and a generator or an electronic counter. The supply voltage shall first be lowered and then raised by 10 percent, and -after about half a minute, in each case, the free-running frequency of the time-base circuit shall again be measured.

16.1 Frequency Drift of Time-Base Circuits in the Absence of Synchronization - During the heating-up period of the receiver the variation of the constants occurring in valves and other components will change the circuit constants of the time-base generators. 16.1.1 Definition - The variation of the freerunning frequency of a time-base circuit during the heating-up period is called the frequency drift of that time-base circuit. 16.1.2 Method~of Measurement shall be adjusted for normal standard video output voltage
-

The receiver operation and on a standard

