**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11367 (1985) : Glossary of terms relating to textile 
materials for aerospace purposes [TXD 13: Textile Materials 
for Aerospace Purposes] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 11367 . IMS 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

RELATINC TO TEXTILE MATERIALS FOR 

AEROSPACE PURPOSES 



UDO OOM: e7?-l/-5 : 629-73 




® Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK. BHAVAN, 9 BAHAOUR SHAH ilAFAR MAKO 
NEW DELHI U0002 

Or 3 Ffhruary 5 98G 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 2004 

TO 

IS 11367 : 1985 GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

RELATING TO TEXTILE MATERLVLS FOR 

AEROSPACE PURPOSES 

[ Page 9, Heading Parachute (Research)' J — Substitute 'Parachute 
(Reserve)' /<"' 'Parachute (Research)'. 



(TX13) 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



IS 1 113C7 - 1905 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

RELATING TO TEXTILE MATERIALS FOR 

AEROSPACE PURPOSES 

Textile Materials for Aerospace Purposes Sectional Committee, TDG 27 
Chairman Ripnstnting 

Shbi p. R* Chasibbabbkhar Office of the Director General of Civil Aviation, 

New Delhi 

Mtmiftrs 

Wo*GoB A. S. Ahluwalia Ministry of Defence ( Air Headquarters ) 

Shri R. B. Mohiudra ( AlUrnaie ) 
Shbi A. K. Basu Ministry of Defence [ DT&P ( Air ) ] 

Shbi H. S. Chaudhaby ( AlUrnatt ) 
Shbi M. S. Ekbotj: Indian Airlines, New Delhi 

Shbi K. S, Gaicbbh Babv Ordnance Parachute Factory, Kanpur 

Shbi A. M. Aohihotri ( AlUrnaU ) 
Shbi N. N. Gobl FGP Limited, Bombay 

Shbi G. K« Takiar ( Alternate ) 
ShrI I. HusSAiN Ministry of Defence ( R&D ) 

Shri S. K. Ganouli ( Alternate ) 
Lt-Col R akbsh Jha Ministry of Defence (DGI) 

Shri K. K. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y. S. Maratue Swastik Rubber Products Ltd, Pune 

Shbi Shailksh M. MeIta Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd, 

Vadodara 
Shbi G. L. Moondra Jaya Shree Textiles, Rishra 

Shri K, Gofinath ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Gautambhai Nanavaty Unnati Corporation Ltd, Ahma4abad 

Shbi Jan AK Nanavaty ( Alternate ) i 

Shri S. G. Ratnam Madura Coats Ltd ( Thread Group ), Koratti 

Shbi J. S. Ramedios ( Alternate ) \ 

Shbi G. H. Rodricks Ceat Tyres ( Fibre Glass Divisioli ), Hyderabad 

Shbi Rajinder Pai* ( Alternate ) \ 

Shbi V. G. Sarukkai Aero Marine Industries Pvt Ltd^. Madras 

Shri C. Sivaraman J. K. Synthetics Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. K« Iyengar ( Alternate ) 
Shbi F. M. Soonawala Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore 

Wo-Cdb N. K. Wadhwa ( Alternate ) 

(Continued on page 2) 



© Co^right 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Coftyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 1 11367 . 1985 



( Continued from page 1 ) 
Members 

ShBX B, G. V. SUBBAHMANYAM 

Shri K. S. Tabapobewala 



Representing 

Research 



Organization, 



Indian Space 

Ahmadabad 
The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 
Bombay 
Sbbi M. G. Thanawala M. Best Cotton Rope MfgCo, Bombay 

Shbi p. G. Tbanawala ( Alternate ) 
Shbi S. B. Todi Todi Industries Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri N. B. Todi ( Alternate ) 
Shbi V. K. Verma Air India, Bombay 

Sbbx R. 1. MiDHA, Director General, ISI ( Ex^offieio Member ) 

Director (Tex) 

Secretary 

Shbi M. S. Verma 
Assistant Director ( Tex ), ISI 



IS t 11367 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 

RELATING TO TEXTILE MATERIALS FOR 

AEROSPACE PURPOSES 

0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 16 August 1985, after the draft finalized by the Textile Materials 
for Aerospace Purposes Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Textile Division Council. 

0*2 This standard is intended to provide standard definitions of 
technical terms relating to textile materials lor aerospace purposes. While 
purporting to give the generally accepted meaning of a term, a definition 
should not be regarded as in any case taking the place of a specification. 

0.3 The following Indian Standards may be referred to for the other com- 
monly used terms relating to textiles which arc not covered by this stan- 
dard : 

IS : 232-1985 Glossary of textile terms — natural fibres ( second 
revision ) 

IS : 1324-1966 Glossary of textile terms relating to man-made fibre 
and fabric industry {first revision ) 

IS : 2364-1979 Glossary of textile terms — fabrics made from natural 
fibres (first revision ) 

IS : 3871-1984 Glossary ol terms relating to fibre ropes and cordages 

{first revision ) 

IS : 4125-1967 Glossary of terms pertaining to defects in fabrics 

IS : 6239-1971 Generic names for man-made fibres 

IS : 9603-1980 Glossary of terms pertaining to textile processing 

0.4 While preparing this standard, considerable assistance has been derived 
from BS 185 : 1973 ' Glossary of aeronautical and astronautical terms', 
issued by the British Standards Institution and from ASTM D 123-1980 
'Definitions of terms relating to textiles *, issued by the American Society 
for Testing and Materials ( ASTM ). 

3 



IS 111367 -1985 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard defines technical terms relating to textile materials for 
aerospace purposes. 

2. DEFINITIONS 



Aerospace — Pertaining to the properties of and activities in both the 
earth's atmosphere and space. 

Air Permeability — The rate of air flow through fabric under differen- 
tial pressures between the two fabric surfaces. Expressed generally in cubic 
metres of air per minute per square metre of fabric at a stated pressure 
difference between the two surfaces of the fabric. 

Air Ventilated Suit — A suit designed to keep the body temperature 
within a comfortable range by discharging conditioned air from the suit 
over the body surface. 

Air IVicking — It is air permeability in the plane of the fabric. The 
passage of air longitudinally along or through yarns in a fabric that has 
been encased and cured, for example, in rubber or other elastomers. 

Anti-G Suit ( G-Suit ) — A suit that exerts pressure on the abdomen 
and lower parts of the body to prevent or retard the pooling of blood in 
these areas under positive acceleration. 

Apex — The highest point in canopy of a parachute in a vertical descent. 

Associated Air Mass — The mass of air which moves relative to the air 
stream at the same velocity as the canopy. 

Axial Cord — A central rigging line joining the apex of a parachute to 
the lower extremities of the rigging lines. 

B 

Bias Construction — Arrangement of the gores such that the direction 
of the threads of the fabric makes an angle usually of 45®, with the centre 
line of the gore. 

Block Construction — Arrangement of the gores such that the direc. 
tion of the threads of the fabric is parallel to the centre line of the gore. 

Blown Periphery — A portion of the peripherial hem blown between 
two rigging lines on another section of the canopy during inflation, and 
inflating inside out thus forniing a lobe. This is sometimes erroneously 
termed thrown tine\ 

Bridle — A multi-lagged strop. 



IS t 11367 - 1985 



Canopy — The fabric body of a parachute, which provides high air-drag 
when inflated. 

Ghannel Patch — A channel shaped fabric fitting secured to the enve- 
lope to enable a rigid member to be laced thereto. 

Cluster — An assemblage of two or more parachutes attached to a 
single load and generally designed to open simultaneously. 

Cross Seam — The seam joining two adjacent panels in a gore. 
Crown — The upper portion of the canopy. 

D 

Diaphragm — A fabric partition within a lighter-than-air aircraft, which 
may be gastight to provide separate compartmens ( for example, ballonnet 
diaphragm ) or non-gastight to maintain shape ( for example, stabilizer 
diaphragm ). 

Drip Flap — A strip of fabric secured by one edge to the envelope or 
outer cover to deflect rain from the surface below it. 

E 

Elastic Fabric, Wide — A knitted or woven fabric constructed with 
elastomeric yarns either alone or in combination with other textile fibres, 
that is 152 mm in width or wider. 

Elastic Fabric — A textile fabric made from an elastomer either alone 
or in combination with other textile materials. 

Elastomeric Thread — The component conferring the elastic properties 
in the fabric. Generally it is either natural or synthetic rubber or polyurc- 
thane. 

Envelope — a) The gas-containing unit oi a balloon or non-rigid or 
semi-rigid airship. 

b) The outer cover of an airship in which the gas contain- 
ing units are surrounded by a layer of air or inert gas. 

Eta Patch — A fan-shaped patch of fabric and webbing secured to the 
envelope. 



IS t 11367 . 1985 

F 

Fabric, Airplane — A plain-weave fabric, well woven practically with- 
out imperfections, of mercerized two-ply yarns, width 90 to 140 cm, 
maximum mass 142-5 g/m« and yarns per inch warp and filling 80 to 84. 

Fabric, Bonded — A layered fabric structure wherein a face or shcil 
fabric is joined to a backing fabric, such as tricot, with an adhesive that 
does not significantly add to the thickness of the combined fabrics ( see 
also Fabric, Laminated ). 

Fabric, Braided — A structure produced by interlacing several ends of 
yarns in a manner such that the paths of the yarns are not parallel to the 
fabric axis. 

Fabric, Combustible — A fabric v;hich after ignition will continue to 
burn at a moderate to fast rate. 

Fabric dip — A chemical composition which is applied to a textile cord 
or fabric to improve its adhesion to rubber or other elastomer. 

Fabric, Impregnated — A fabric in which the interstices between the 
yarns are completely filled with the impregnating compound throughout 
the thickness of the material, as distinguished from sized or coated materi- 
als, where these interstices arc not completely filled. 

Fabric, Laminated — A layered fabric structure wherein a face or outer 
fabric is joined to a continuous sheet material, such as polyurethane foam, 
in such a way that the identity of the continuous sheet material is retained, 
either by the flame method or by an adhesive, and this is in turn nor- 
mally, but not always, is joined on the back with a backing fabric such as 
tricot ( see also Fabric, Bonded ). 

Fabric, Noncombustible — A fabric that will neither ignite nor give off 
vapours that will ignite when subjected to external sources of ignition. 

Fabric, Stable — A textile fabric, the dimensions of which do not change 
significantly with multiple passes through measuring devices. 

Note — A stable fabric as defined above may not be dimensionally stable if 
subjected to a series of laundering or drycleaning operations. 

Fabric, Treated — A fabric to which a finish has been applied in order 
to change the original level of a specific property or properties, for example, 
property or water repellency, crease resistance, soil resistance. 

Free Balloon Net — A net over the envelope of a free balloon, from 
which the basket is suspended. 

G 
Gas-bag-Net — A net of cordage or wire to retain a gas bag in position. 



18 t 11367 . 1985 

Gas Main — A fabric hose running through the length of a rigid airship 
having branches to the gas bags for inflation. 

Gore ( Aerostat ) — A shaped section of an envelope or gas bag made of 
fabric. 

Gore ( Parachute ) — A shaped section of the canopy normally boun- 
ded by two adjacent rigging lines. 

H 

Harness — An assembly of straps or cords worn by parachutist or emplo- 
yed to suspend an inanimate load to which the parachute is attached. 

Immersion Suit — A suit designed to protect the body against the 
effects of immersion in cold water. 



Inflation Net — A net of cordage used to hold down an envelope during 
inflation. 

Insulation Ratio, EflFective — In thermal transmittance of textile, an 
indication of the increase in insulation afforded by the fabric in comparison 
to the uncovered test plate under specified conditions of test. 



Jackets — A textile product, woven or felted into tubular or sleeve form 
ready for covering and shrinking on a machine rolL 

K 

Keeper — A ring, usually of webbing metal, forming the rigging lines 
into a riser. 



Laid Cordage — Cordage constructed by twisting three or more strands 
about each other to form a helix round a central axif. 

Lazy Leg -— A cord intended to withdraw certain items of an assembly 
in correct sequence after the main withdrawal or static line has been relea- 
sed or fractured. 

Lift Web — That part of the harness connected to the rigging lines. 

Lip — A partial extension of the periphery of the canopy to facilitate 
inflation. 



IS 1 11367 . 1985 



M 



Man AUgmneiit Drogue — A small stabilizing parachute attached to 
the parachutist so that, when it opens, his feet are directed towards the 
airflow. 

Main Seam — The seam joining two adjacent gores in a canopy. 

Multiply Fabric — Fabric formed of more than one ply. 

P 

Pack ( Pack Cover, Inner Pack ) — A fabric bag or envelope in which 
a parachute is packed. 

Pack ( Outer ) — A fabric envelope in which other components of a 
parachute system are stowed when the canopy is packed in a separate 
inner pack. 

Pack«Elastics — Elastic cords, with a means of fastening at either end, 
fixed under tension to pack flaps to ensure their quick opening. 

Panel ( Aerostat ) — A sub-division of a gore. 

Parachute — An umbrella-shaped, aerodynamic device to produce drag, 
commonly used to reduce the velocity of a moving body. 

Parachute ( Antispin ) — A parachute attached to an aircraft to assist 
in its recovery from a spin. 

Parachute ( Approached ) — A parachute deployed from an aircraft to 
steepen the approach. 

Parachute ( Automatic ) — A parachute which is caused to deploy at 
a predetermined height by a barometric or other time delay device. 

Parachute ( Auxiliary ) — A subsidiary parachute attached to the pack 
or to the main parachute to assist in the deployment sequence. 

Parachute ( Blank Gore ) — A parachute in which the whole or part of 
one or more gores is cut out. The peripheral and vent hems are retained. 

Parachute ( Conical ) — A parachute constructed from triangular gores 
which form a multi-sided pyramid or approximate cone. 

Parachute ( Drogue ) — A relatively small parachute or parasheet com- 
monly used to provide stabilization or for the initial stage of a compound 
parachute system. 

Parachute ( Emergency ) — A parachute used by an occupant of an 
aircraft for an emergency descent. 



IS t 11367 . 1985 

Paraclmte ( Extractor ) — A parachute designed to withdraw a load 
from an aircraft in light. 

Parachate ( Flat ) — A parachute, the canopy of which consists of 
triangular gores forming a regular polygon when laid out flat. 

Parachute ( Guide Surface ) — A parachute in which the canopy is 
shaped in such a manner as to produce, close to the periphery, a re-entrant 
surface which acts as a guide or stabilizing member. 

Parachute ( Hem Rigged ) — A parachute, the rigging lines of which 
are attached at the peripheral hem and do not pass over the canopy. 

Parachute ( Landing Brake ) — A parachute deployed from an air- 
craft to reduce its landing run. 

Parachute ( Research ) — A second parachute sometimes carried by a 
parachutist for use in emergencies when the parachute normally used fails 
to function. 

Parachute ( Ribbon ) — A parachute, the gores of which are construc- 
ted of ribbons instead of continuous fabric. 

Parachute ( Ring Slot ) — A parachute, the canopy of which is made up 
of concentric rings of fabric separated from each other by fixed distances 
and joined at regular intervals by radial tapes. 

Parachute ( Shaped ) — A parachute, the canopy of which is construc- 
ted of gores that are not straight-sided. 

Parachute ( Square ) — A parachute, the canopy of which when laid 
out flat, is approximately square. 

Parachute ( Stabilizing ) — A parachute used to stabilize an otherwise 
unstable load. 

Parachute ( Retarder ) — An extractor parachute; used to deploy the 
main load-carrying parachute. 

Parachute ( Triangular ) — A parachute which is approximately trian- 
gular when laid out flat. 

Parallel Fabric — A multiply fabric with the warp threads of all the 
plies parallel. 

Parasheet — A parachute constructed from a piece ( or pieces with 
parallel warp ) of fabric in the form of a regular polygon, with the rigging 
lines attached to apices of the polygon. 

Parasheet ( Gathered ) — A parasheet, the periphery of which is cons- 
trained by a hem cord. 



18 t 11367 - 1985 

Parasheet ( Ungathered ) - - A parasheet, the periphery of whidi is not 
constrained by a hem cord. 

Permeability — The rate of diffusion of gas through unit area of materi- 
al under specified conditions. 

Petticoat — A sleeve so pleated as to leave a clear passage when coll* 
apsed. 

Porosity, Geometric — The percentage of aperture to total canopy 
area in a ribbon, ring slot or similar design of parachute. 

Pressure Suit — A suit which is capable of exerting pressure on the 
body in order to counteract an increase of pressure in the lungs. 

Pressure Suit, Full — A pressure suit which exerts pressure oh the 
whole of the body. 

Pressure Suit, Partial — A pressure suit which does not exert pressure 
on the whole of the body and is limited, therefore in, the altitude/time pro- 
tection it affords. 



Ribbon, Textile — A fine-textured, narrow fabric which weighs less 
than 5'25 kg/ 100 metres per dm of width approximately 510 g/m* and 
which is used primarily for trimming or decorative purposes. 

NoTB — Usually ribbons are woven fabric less than 100 mm wide. 

Riggring — The system of cords and their attachments by which the dead 
weight is distributed over the hull or envelope. 

Rigging Band — A reinforced band secured to the envelope for the 
attachments of the rigging. 

Rigging Line — Any cord attached to the canopy which transmits the 
drag of the parachute to the load. 

Rip Cord ( Aerostat ) — A cord for tearing open the rip panel. 

Rip Cord ( Parachute ) — A cord or flexible cable on a parachute 
which, when pulled, opens the pack and allows the parachute to deploy. 

Riser — An extension of the rigging lines of a parachute formed into 
strop. 

S 

Safety Thread — A breakable thread of specified strength used to make 
a safety tie. 

Safety Tie — A breakable tic connecting any two parts of a parachute 
system to prevent accidental release. 

10 



tS : 11367 - 1985 

Searing — A damage to rigging Knes or fabric due to heat generated by 
friction. 

Skirt ( Parachute ) — The lower portion of the canopy. 

Skirt, Hesitator — A weak tie around a folded canopy enclosing a 
bight of rigging lines to ensure their correct deployment before the canopy 
begins to inflate. 

Sleeve ( Sock, Deployment Bag ) — A long fabric container for a 
canopy, to control its deployment from a parachute pack or stowage. 

Sleeving — Braided, knitted or woven fabric of cylindrical form having 
a width less than 10 cm ( circumference less than 20 cm ). 

Stowage Loops — Tape, webbing or cordage loops for stowing the 
rigging lift cables or wires in a pack. 

Strop — A length of wire, cable, cordage or webbing, with loop ends or 
metal fittings attached to increase the distance at deployment between two 
components of a parachute assembly. 



Tack Tear — The measurement of the resistance of a coated fabric to 
tearing under conditions simulating an installation that has been tacked in 
place. 

Tape Elastic — A textile tape containing rubber or other elastomers to 
permit rubber-like stretch in at least one directon. 

Teschengurt — Short lengths of tape or webbing, across and external to 
the rigging lines, joining adjacent lobes of the peripheral hem to increase 
the rate of inflation of the parachute. 

Tear-off Cap — A piece of fabric, lightly sewn over the opening of a pack, 
and torn off by tension in the static line, allowing the parachute to deploy. 

Trajectory Band — A band of webbing carried ov^r the upper surface 
of an envelope to reduce deformation under load. 

Trail Rope — a) A rope trailed by a balloon over the ground to decrease 
the ground speed and to regulate the height automati- 
cally when near the ground by varying the weight of 
the rope carried by the balloon. 

b) A rope carried in an airship for ground handling. 

Tubing — Braided, knitted or woven fabric of cylindrical form having a 
width of 10 cm or more ( circumference of 20 cm or more ) ( see also 
sleeving ). 

11 



tSi 11367 -198S 

V 

Veat — An opening, usually at the apex of a canopy« 

Vent Cap — A piece of fabric covering the vent, sewn on to the vent 
hem. 

Vent Hem — The hem, usually reinforced by tape, round the periphery 
of the vent. 

Vent Patch — A patch sewn into the crown of a canopy to reinforce tlie 
crown or to reduce its porosity. 

W 

Water«Cooled Suit — A suit designed to keep the body temperature 
within a comfortable range by circulating water through small pipes in the 
suit 

Weak Tie ( Breaking Tie ) — A piece of cord or thread which is inten-r 
tionally broken at some stage of the deployment of a parachute in order 
that the deployment may occur in some predetermined manner. 

Webbing} Elastic — A textile webbing containing rubber or other elas- 
tomers to permit rubber^like stretch in at least one direction ( see also 
webbing, textile ). 

Webbing, Textile — A stout narrow fabric weighing at least 5*25 kg/ 100 
metres per dm of width ( approximately 510 g'm^ ). 

Wind-Sock ( Wind Cone, Wind Sleeve ) — A wind indicator in the 
form of a truncated fabric cones. 



12 



^ INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



Headquarters! 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 110002 

Telephones i 3 31 01 31, 3 31 13 75 Telegrams i Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

^Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC, Marol, Andherl ( East ), 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

tEastern s 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, 36 24 99 

Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 24 42 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 180036 (2 18 43 

(3 16 41 

Branch Offices: 

Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, |2 63 48 

AHMADABAD 380001 \2 63 49 

•F' Biock, Unity BIdg, Narasimharaja Square, 2^48 05 

BANGALORE 560002 

Gangotri Complex, Bhadbhada Road, T. T, Nagar, 6 27 16 

BHOPAL 462003 

22E Kalpana Area, 8HUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 2? 

53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, — 

GUWAHATI 781003 

5-8.56C L. N. Gupta Marg, HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 6 98 32 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 4 72 92 

Paliiputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 

Hantex BIdg ( 2nd Floor ), RIy Station Road, 32 27 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 

Inspection Office ( With Sale Point ) i 

institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivajl Nagar, 5 24 33 
PUNE 411005 



•Saiss Office In Bombay Is at Novelty Chambsrs, Grant Road, 89 65 28 
Bombay 400007 

fSales Office In Calcutta Is at S Ctiowringhee Approach, P. 0. Princep 27 68 00 

Street, Calcutta 700078 

Printed •( New ledTe Printlna <»«e*. Khurle. India 



