IS 15643:2006

Wi'd?u%'m

Indian Standard

NON-DESTRUCTIVE EXAMINATION OF POLYMER BASED COMPOSITE MATERIALS -- CODE OF PRACTICE

Ics

19.100

,,, ,

(3 BIS 2006

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

March 2006

Price Group 6

Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee, MTD21

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the dratl finalized by the Non-destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. Fibre reinforced polymeric materials have come into wide spread use for applications where high strength-toweight ratios and considerable stiffhess are needed. In addition, the ability to use a variety of fibre and matrix materials, and to alter the fibre lay up, enables the material properties to be tailored to the specific applications. The detection of flaws in composites is particularly difficult because of the in-homogeneous, anisotropic and layered nature of the material. Moreover, the defects are of multiple geometries, hence, composite materials must be regarded as a different media from metals when considering which NDT methods are appropriate. The following abbreviations shall apply in the standard: Acoustic emissiontesting Carbon fibre reinforced plasitc Fibre reinforced plastic Glass fibre reinforced plastic Non-destructive testing Radiography testing Ultrasonic testing Visual Test Infrared thermography AET CFRP FRP GFRP NDT RT UT VT IRT ,,

In preparation of this standard assistance has been drawn from the following documents: MIL-HDBK-732 A :1991

Radiography, Department of Defence, USA. Non-destructive testing methods of composite materials -- Acoustic emission. Department of Defence, USA. Non-destructive testing methods of composite materials -- Radiography. MIL-HDBK-733 :1986 Department of Defence, USA. Non-de&ructive testing methods of composite materials-- Thermography. MIL-HDBK-731 :1984 Department of Defence, USA. Non-destructive testing techniques for structural composites. Department MIL-HDBK-793 :1989 of Defence, USA. The code sub group of the European Working Group on Acoustic Emission. EWGAE codes for acoustic emission examination: code IV and code V. NDT International. 18,4; 1985; 185-194. ADAMS (RD) AND CAWLY (P) A review of defect types and non-destructive testing techniques for composite and bonded joints. NDT International, 21,4:1988:208-221. NDE of fibre reinforced composite materials--A review. Materials BAR-COHEN (Y) Evaluation. 44, March; 1986; 446-454. Radiation inspection methods for composites. NDT International.21, 4; JONES (TS), POLANSKY (D) 1988; 277-281. AND BERGER (H) A critical assessment of acoustic-ultrasonics as a method of non-destructive RUSSEL-FLOYD AND examination for carbon fibre reinforced thermoplastic laminates. NDT PHILIPS (MG) International. 21, 4; 1988; 247-257. SCOTT (IG) AND SCALA (CM) A review of non-destructive testing of composite materials. NDT International. 15, 2; 1982; 75-85.

IS 15643:2006

Indian Standard

NON-DESTRUCTIVE EXAMINATION OF POLYMER BASED COMPOSITE MATERIALS -- CODE OF PRACTICE
1 SCOPE 1.1 This Code describesthe non-destructive examination methods forpolymer based fibre reinforced composites. Some of the NDT techniques available for the testing of fibre reinforced composites are described in a manner that outlines the techniques, their advantages and limitations. Lastly the applications of these techniques on products is explained. Several techniques have been developed over the past couple of years for NDT of composites, which include radiography, ultrasonic, infrared thermography, acoustic emission and acousto-ultrasonics. Only these techniques have been covered in this standard. 1.2 The contents of this document have been divided in the following three sections: Section 1 Section 2 Section 3 Composite material Non-destructive testing techniques Application of non-destructive testing techniques 2.8 Chip -- A small piece broken off on edge or surl%ce. Low density regions between two plies filled completely with resin. 2.9 Resin Rich Lines (Resin Leanness) -- Lo\v density region between two plies having intermittent resin filling. 2.10 Lack of Material--Non-availability due to insufficient machining allowance.
SECTtON 3 COMPOSITE 1 COMPOSITE

of material

MATERIAL

MATERIALS

3.1 Overview Composites are defined as material systems consisting of two or more constituents, each of which is distinguishable at microscopic level. The constituents retain their individual identities in the composite ,and are separated by a detectable interface. Generally, one of the constituents acts as a reinforcing agent, and the other serves as the matrix or the binder. The properties of the composite materials are derived from the combination of properties contributed by the constituents but modified by their synergistic effects. The loads are taken up by the reinforcements while the matrix holds the fibres together, transfers load from one fibre to the other and protects them against environmental attack and damage due to handling. The composite materiak described here are polymer based having `advanced high modulus or highp.erformance reinforcements'. The reinforcements include glass, carbon and aramid fibres. The type of composite structures considered include solid laminates, wound structures and sandwich constructions. 3.2 Reinforcements Reinforcements are available in various forms but the basic form is fibre from which all other forms are made. 3.2.1 Glass Fibre Fibre glass generally utilizes either E-glass (a limealumina-borokilicate glass) or S-glass (a silica-aluminamagnesia glass) fibre and is produced as a continuous

2 TERMINOLOGY -For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. the following

2.1 Delamination -- Separation of the layers of material at the edge of a laminate. 2.2 Debond -- Separation of two distinct layers individually-processed, observed at the joining planes. 2.3 Wrinkles -- In a laminate an impregnation that has the appearance of a wave moulded into one or more plies, fabric or other reinforcement material. 2.4 Crack -- An actual separation of the laminate, visible on opposite surface and extending through the thickness. 2.5 Porosity -- Presence of numerous visible pits (pin holes). 2.6 Inclusion -- Metallic or non-metallic particles included in a laminate which are foreign to its composition. 2.7 Void -- Air entrapment within and between the plies of reinforcement, usually spherical in shape.

IS 15643:2006 monofilament bundle by drawing molten glass through a rmdtihole bushing. The size of the holes will determine the diameter of the fibre. The monofilament bundles can then be prepared in different forms such as rovings, multifilament strands, and woven and non-woven fabrics. Glass is the most widely used reinforcement. It is light in weight, has high tensile strength and high heat resistance. It is virtually tire proof, inexpensive and available in various forms. 3.2.2 Carbon Fibre High performance carbon fibre is produced "by the pyrolisis of .polyacrylo nitrile (PAN) fibres under tension at temperatures of 2033-3033 Kin controlled atmosphere. The properties of the fibre are a function of both the tension and the temperature used during pyrolisis. Like glass fibres, carbon fibres can also be obtained in various forms. Carbon fibres have strength vastly superior to that of glass fibres and have excellent heat stability too. Among the fibres presently available, carbon tibre has the highest modulus. As they have high dimensional stability over widely ranging temperature differences or thermal cycles, they find applications in electronic instrumentation and spacecraft. Some of the other wide range of applications include aircraft structural components, missiles and armament components, X-ray equipments, various automotive applications, sports and recreational equipment. 3.2.3 Aramid Fibre Aramid is a generic term denoting a class of polyamide materials. The aramid fibres are produced by conventional textile spinning methods. Kewlar,Twaron and Nomex are some of these materials. Kevlar is the registered trade-mark for a new family of aromatic polyimide fibre introduced by M/s Dupont, USA. It is a product derived from paraphenylene diamine and terephthaloyal chloride. Kevlar-49 is the principal art!mid tibre currently used in advanced composite applications. The fibre is pale yellow in colour and it is available as yams, rovings and woven fabrics. Aramid fibres are used in composite applications because of their outstanding combination of low density, high strength and good stiffness. The fibre is inherently flame resistant and does not melt, but will decompose at about 733 K. Application areas include high performance structures for aerospace, automobiles, rocket, missile cases and sporting goods. 3.3 Matrix Materials The principal matrix materials used in composites are epoxy, polyester, phenolics and polyamides. The 2 polymeric matrix material used in composites has, as its main role, the responsibility of absorbing and transmitting loads to the reinforcement fibre. However, secondarily, the matrix material also controls many other properties, such .as the viscoelastic behaviour. creem stress relaxation, and in-plane and interlaminar shear. The chemical, thermal, electrical and environmental ageing characteristics of the composites are also properties that are controlled by the matrix material.
1.

3.4 Manufacturing

Metltods

3.4.1 Hand Lay-Up Process In this process, components are normally produced on a metal mould coated with a release agent. After applying a gel coat, reinforcements are added and wetted with suitable resin. The component after cure/ post-cure is removed from the mould and trimmed to shape. 3.4.2 Vacuum Bagging This technique is used for fabricating components and structures having complex shapes, including double curvature, and relatively large parts. The flexible plastic membrane, that is, placed over the surface of the layup forms a vacuum bag. The bag is evacuated, and atmospheric pressure is used to consolidate the lay-up against the mould. ., 3.4.3 Filament Winding Precise lay-up of continuous reinforcements to pre-described patterns is the basis of the filament winding method. It is a process in which resin impregnated continuous rovings/tows (gathered strands of fibre) are wound over arotating male mandrel. The reinforcement may be wrapped either in adjacent bands or in repeating bands that are stepped by multiple width of the band and which eventually cover the mandrel surface. In this technique, it is possible to vary tk winding tension, wind angle or resin content in each layer of reinforcement in order to obtain the desired thickness and resin content of the composite with required directional strength. 3.4.4 Tape Winding A tape winding machine essentially consists of a head-stock, tail-stock and a modified tiltable bed with hydraulically operated compound slide. Preimpregnated carbon/phenolic or silica/phenolic tapes are fed through rollers on to a cylindrical or conical mandrel. The winding-can be carried out either parallel to the axis or at an angle. A hydraulic device provides necessary pressure to the lay up. A heating system also is generally employed at the time of winding to soften the matrix.

-IS 15643:2006

3.4.5 Sandwich Process A sandwich structure is made up of two outer skins of composite laminate. These skins are bonded to an internal structural material such as honeycomb core, foam, etc (see Fig. 1). 4 DEFECTS IN COMPOSITES 4.1 Types of Defects The types of defects occurring in fibre reinforced composites are different from those found in conventional materials, as the nature of the defects is very much dependent on the manufacturing methods.

SECTION 2 NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING TECHNIQUES 5 VISUAL TEST 5.1 Overview

Visual inspection was probably the first method of non-destructive testing employed and even today it remains foremost among all the other NDT techniques developed so far, to detect and evaluate defects. Luminous energy NDT tests are used primarily (a) for inspecting accessible surfaces of opaque materials, and (b) for inspecting the interior of transparent test objects.

Y

FACE SKIN \
\

HONEYCOMB CORE

.!,

,

ADH

Y

I

FIG.

FACE SKIN

1 TYPICALSANDWICH CONSTRUCTION (HONEYCOMB)

3

IS 15643:2006
5.2

Visual Aids

Lamps of proper luminance, magnifying glasses, etc, are employed for the visual inspection of all materials. Endoscopes and fibroscopes are widely used now-adays for the visual inspection of surfaces which are not accessible to the human eye. 5.3 Remote Visual "Inspection (RVI) Various NDT methods exists, including radiography, ultrasonics, infrared thermography, etc, but perhaps the simplest to use, easiest to interpret and most economical to adopt is the remote visual inspection. Endoscopes and fibroscopes act purely as an extension to the eye and do not involve extensive training, complex electronics or detailed analysis of results. since there are only a few moving parts, breakdown is rare and the inspection can usually be completed in minutes via existing access points. Theendoscope or fibroscope is a precision optical instrument with self contained illumination and is used for the visual inspection of a wide variety of internal surfaces such as bores, deep holes, recesses and other inaccessible areas, through openings.
5.4 The Limitation

of radiation other than visible light. The most widely known form of radiography is X-ray. Other forms of radiography NDT are fluoroscopic radiography, neutron radiography and gamma radiography. 7.2 X-Ray Radiography
7.2.1 X-ray radiography is one of the most commonly

used non-destructive method of detecting the presence and location of internal flaws like cavities, inclusions or other disccmtinuities in materials. When X-radiation is directed normal to the surface of a specimen, part of it is absorbed and the rest is transmitted. If the specimen is of uniform thickness, the transmitted beam will be of equal intensity. However, if the specimen contains any internal flaws, there will be -a variation at those points. This results in variation of the emergent X-ray beam, which makes possible, to study the internal structure of matter. 7.2.2 Limitations Due to the geometry of the defects ocwrring in composites, X-ray radiography has potential mainly in the tangential mode. Normal exposures do not detect delaminations/debonds as the gap due to delamination/ debonds is not sufficient to cause a variation in the emergent X-ray beam. In the radiography of composites, which comprise of low and medium density materials, scattered radiatidn forms a high percentage of the total radiation reaching the film. This is.due to the nature of the soft, low voltage radiation used to radiograph these materials, which is inherently less penetrating and more subjective to scatter. However, if higher, more penetrating voltages are used excessive overall film density could occur, resulting in reduced contrast and the radiograph becomes unreadable in terms of flaw detection. Scatter, is therefore, a major problem during radiography of composites. This can be solved to a certain extent by placing lead foils on both sides and in close contact with the X-ray film. The foil nearer to the radiation source typically has a thickness of 0.02-1.15 mm. While the foil on the back of the screen is to absorb scattered radiation, the front screen is to generate electrons and secondary radiation in order to increase the intensity transmitted to the radiographed object. 7.3 Real Time Radiography
7.3.1 Real time radiography is quick and enables hundred percent inspection within a short time. The real time display systems are cost effective wherever they are used because they eliminate the use of films and their development costs and provide instant information. Real time X-ray systems, when combined with computers and image enhancement techniques, allow obtaining defects information not obtainable

Visual NDT is one of the most important and simplest forms of inspection. It is used to observe the surface defects of the material or product under test. But this technique is highly operator dependent and hence the operators should be trained to know what they are looking for and what any variation might mean to the reliability of the final product. 6 TAP TEST
6.1 The tap test is one of the oldest methods of non-

destructive testing and it is regularly used for the testing of laminated structures, honeycomb construction and bonded joints. In the tap test, themrface of the structure is tapped by hand using a hard blunt object such as a tapping hammer or a coin. The operator taps each point of the structure and listens to the resulting sound radiated by the structure. Defective areas sound `hollow' in comparison with a good area. This method is always used as a fkst inspection method, which is followed by one or more other suitable techniques to evaluate completely the test object. 6.2 Limitation The main limitation of this technique is that it calls for much skill and only a qualified person having experience can carry out this test successfully. 7 RADIOGRAPHIC
7.1 Overview NDT

Radiographic non-destructive testing is the technique of producing a picture on a sensitive surface by a form 4

IS 15643:2006

otherwise. Over the past ~ew years, a number of computer based image enhancement and analysis systems have been developed, some of which provide various forms of image enhancement and others which provide both enhancement and image analysis. Advances in the design and construction of X-ray image intensifier tubes have resulted in large improvements and hence of late, real time radiography is gettingincreased attention. However, this technique also has a serious limitation of low sensitivity level. 7.3.2 Limitations In a real time radiography system, the radiation emitted by an X-ray -source, after penetrating the sample, impinges on the input phosphor screen of an image intensifier tube. This screen converts the radiation into a light image. The phosphor is in direct contact with a photo cathode. Photo cathodes emit electrons when excited by the input phosphor light. These electrons are accelerated and focused into a phosphor output screen which converts the electrons back to light of high intensity. The output from the camera is amplified, digitised, stored and enhanced by a digital image processor, which is then presented on a television monitor. 7.3.3 Gamma Radiography Gamma radiography is generally used in the same manner as X-ray radiography. This is used for in-situ applications and for cost reduction. 7.3.4 Neutron Radiography Neutron radiography, like X-ray radiography, depends on the differential absorption of neutrons by the specimen material. Neutrons, particularly those with low velocities (thermal neutrons), exhibit a random variation of absorption from element to element. The range of absorption coefficients for neutrons is 0.03 to 90, considerably exceeding that for X-rays (O.13 to 4.0), which allows for greater flexibility and excellent contrast in neutron radiographs. Furthermore, elements with adjacent atomic numbers may have widely different neutron absorption coefficients, and some low atomic number elements (such as hydrogen) can attenuate neutrons much more strongly than some high atomic number elements (such as lead). Thus, thicker sections of high atomic number materials can be radiographed with neutrons in a much shorter time than with X-rays. Also neutron radiographs can exhibit a sharp contrast between elements which have similar absorption coefficients for X-rays but quite different ones for neutrons. Hence neutron radiography is a promising technique for composites in which the fibre and matrix are having similar coefficients of absorption. However, this technique is yet to become popular for thelQDT of composites. 5

8 ULTRASONIC
8.1 Overview

NDT

Advanced composites tire of low density and do not lend themselves to non-destructive evaluation with conventional high frequent y (2.25 MHz) ultrasonic inspection-methods. However, there are a few ultrasonic equipments which utilize the lower frequencies of the ultrasonic spectrum (20 to 40 KHz) and are able to penetrate lower density materials like composites. Perhaps ultrasonic technique is the most widely used NDT technique for composites. The test maybe carried out either with a single transducer in pulse echo mode or with hvo transducers in through-transmission mode. In either case, it is necessary that the transducers are coupled to the test material via a liquid or a suitable solid medium because of the severe impedance mismatch between air and solid materials. In many cases, particularly in aerospace structures, nonapplication of couplant is most essential as they are difficult to be cleaned completely after the test. This may hamper any further processing on the product. In spacecraft applications the minute particles of the couplant may outgo in space and settle on nearby electronic component this affecting the normal functioning of the components and hence the satellite, In such situations, dry-scan ultrasonic systems (which do not use a liquid couplant) are employed. The ultrasonic testing is broadly based on (a) pulse-eeho, (b) through-transmission, and (c) resonance methods. All the three methods are employed for the NDT of composites. 8.2 Pulse-Echo Method In pulse-echo method, evenly times pulsed of ultrasonic waves are transmitted into the material being tested. These pulses reflect tlom discontinuities in their path, or from any boundary of the material on which they strike. The received reflections or echoes are then usually displayed on a CRT. A single transducer is used as both the transmitter and the receiver, although sometimes two transducers are used, one acting as the transmitter and the other as the receiver. Ultrasonic equipments are available for point contact inspection in the pulse-echo method. The point contact inspection dispenses with the application of a,couplant for the testing to be carried out. The transmitter and receiver transducers are point tipped and are housed in a single casing. This facilitates the probe to be seated properly on curved surfaces also. The transmitter generates a wavefront in the material under test. Afier it propagates through the internal structure, it strikes the receiver. The energy upon arrival at the receiving transducer, is sensed and electronically evaluated. Changes in the-material properties such as thickness

IS 15643:2006

and debonds, etc, cause changes in the received energy phase and/or amplitude. These changes are sensed by the alarm circuitry and produce audible and visible alarms. 8.3 Through-Transmission
Method

The through-transmission method requires the use of two transducers. One transducer is used as a transmitter while the other is used as a receiver. As in pulse-echo, short pulses of ultrasonic waves are transmitted into thematerial, although continuous waves are sometimes used. Echoes returning to the transmitting transducer are not used. The receiving transducer is aligned with the transmitting transducer to pickup the sound waves which pass directly through the material. The soundness or quality of the material being tested is in terms of energy lost by a sound beam as it travels through the material. Dry-scan ultrasonic systems are available which are very effective in through-transmission mode. In this method, the ultrasonic energy is measured after it passes through the material under test. Reduction of energy due to defect results in reduced amplitude of the peak. This is used/preferred for thicker parts perpendicular to the direction of ultrasonic transmission. In such systems, the transducers have soft rubber tips which act as the coupling agents for the probe to the material under tests. This is a completely dry technique providing a remarkable break-through in the NDT of composites. Tests can be conducted with speed and convenience as there is no requirement for liquid acoustic coupling.
8A Resonance Method

A resonant condition will exist any time a continuous longitudinal wave is introduced into a specimen and reflected' in-phase' with the incoming wave. Standing waves are set up and the specimen vibrates with considerable increase in amplitude. Resonance will occur any time a continuous longitudinal wave is transmitted into a specimen and the frequency is varied till standing waves are set up. The equipment based on resonance method is an inspection tool which provides information about cohesion stiffness of bonded structures. It comprises of an instrumerit which imposes a definite band of frequencies on a piezoelectric crystal to vibrate in one of its own natural resonance frequencies. When this freely vibrating crystal is coupled by means of a liquid to the structure to be tested, the natural resonance frequency will be influenced by the mass coupled to it. The resonance frequency and the voltage over the crystal are made visible by means of leder displays. 8.5 Limitation The limitations of the above-mentioned equipments are that the part being tested must be manually scanned and manually marked to identify the defect areas as recorded information from these equipments are not easily obtained. 9 INFRARED
9.1 Overview THERMOGRAPHY ,,, ,

ResonanGe can be defined as the characteristic of a vibrating body to--Under certain conditions-- Resonate or vibrate in sympathy with vibration source.

Infrared thermography is one of the most promising non-destructive testing techniques for composite applications. Heat is applied to one surface and allowed to flow inwards. If any inhomogeneity ispresent within the material, the heat flow characteristics change accordingly and cause a change in the temperature on the surface (see Fig. 2). Either through-transmission.or single surface temperature transients can be used. The
SURFACE TEMPERATURE DISTRIBUTION

INCIDENT ~RAOIATlON

T1

T2

7
.

~TRANSMITTED RADIATION

ABSORBED RADIATION

L

FIG. 2 HEAT TRANSFER THROUGH A MATERIALWITHDEFECT 6

IS 15643:2006

changes in temperatures are detected and displayed by means of an infrared thermography system. It is a fast and non-contact method. Hence large objects which are inaccessible can be scanned thoroughly. Various types of defects such as delamination, debonds, internal voids and inclusions can be easily detected. 9.2 Theory All objects emit heat (infrared radiation) which is constantly being absorbed and re-emitted by ourselves and everything around us. Infrared thermography is the technique that uses to make an object visible by means of this heat radiation. Infrared radiation occurs at the red end of the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum and its wavelength varies from 0.75 to -1000 microns. This infi-ared radiation follows the same laws and has similar characteristics as visible light. Thermography ensures that the picture focused by the scanner can be interpreted by human eye. Thermogram `infrared' or `heat' picture gives the heat distribution of an object. When a thermal input to an object, the heat flow pattern is impaired by inhomogeneities which results in a corresponding surface temperature distribution, and hence radiant emittance. The Stefan-Boltzmann Law states that the total radiant emittance from a black body per unit area varies directly as the fourth power of the absolute temperature. To express it mathematically, the total radiant emittance per unit area of a grey body is:
W= EoT4

the detector material no longer emits any current, that is it is not sensitive to wave lengths above the cut-off wavelength. There is a fundamental feature for semi conducting material. It always emits a certain disturbance current called noise, which is dependent on the temperature of the material. Such noise is often called thermal agitation noise. To minimize the effect of this noise, the detector is mounted into the side of a flask containing liquid nitrogen. This has a temperature of 77 K. The effect of cooling ensures that the noise is considerably reduced. A further advantage of cooling is that the cut-off range is also increased. Electronically cooled detectors are also available. The detector constantly monitors different points and the electrical current from the detector varies in strength with the radiation of the object at every point. This current and its variations are used to produce a picture in a grey scale where the most intensity radiating points are the brightest (hottest areas). The scanner is connected to a display unit wtilch presents an intlared picture of the object on a television type screen. Under normal mode, the hot areas of the object appear white, the cold areas appear black and vice-versa under inverted mode. 9.4 Advantages Infrared thermography is an attractive and relatively simpler technique for the non-destructive testing of composites. The main advantages of this technique are the speed with which large areas can be scanned in lesser time and the non-essentiality of direct contact with the object to be inspected. This technique has got very wide range of applications which include defense, industry, medicine, scientific research and development, etc. The tests can be recorded on a video tape for further analysis and preservation. The tests can also be photographed using a polaroid camera. Computer aided analysis helps to simplify the much contained information in the therrnographic images. All these make infrared thermography a powerful and promising NDT technique for the evaluation of composites, 9.5 Limitation The main limitation of this technique is that only planer defects can be easily detected and that defect thickness depth of the defect cannot be ascertained. This is only an initial scanning method and firther tests are required to get complete details regarding the size and shape of defects. In many cases radiography, has to be resorted to for getting the depth and thickness of defects. Uniform heating of the specimen is most essential. Heat perturbations occurring during heating are attributed 7

where
E = emissivity of the grey body, and

c = stefan-Boltzmann constant. It is the relative temperature distribution that is represented on the display in the form of athermogram. 9.3 Thermography
System

The thermography system consists of two main parts, scanner and display unit. The scanner is an infrared camera which converts infrared radiation from an object into electronic signals. It has a detector-iridium antirnonide/mercury cadmium telluride-which actually senses the infrared radiation. The detector in an infrared scanner comprises a material which produces an electric current when exposed to infrared radiation. The electric current can be used in many different ways to produce an infrared picture. The current is dependent on the intensity and wavelength of the radiation. A characteristic of-the detector is its cut-off wavelength. If the incident radiation arriving at the detector material is of a wavelength that exceeds the cut off wavelength,

1S 15643:2006 to the defects present. Non-uniform heating gives rise to improper surface temperature distribution on the specimen and this makes it difficult to do proper interpretation of the display. 10 ACOUSTIC
10.1 Overview EM-ISSION NDT

developed non-destructive evaluation method that combines the features of both acoustic emission and ultrasonics. In the case of acoustic emission technique, one has to wait for spontaneous signats and defects which are growing only can be monitored. Hence material has to be deformed in order to get acoustic emission events. In the case of ultrasonics, when the defect concentration is more, the distance between the peaks obtained is very small and in some cases they overlap one over the other. So exact location of the defect becomes difficult. In the case of acousto-ultrasonics, the ultrasonic pulses which resemble acoustic emission waves in the material are injected inside the materials. These pulses are allowed to interact with the material medium which makes it possible to characterize the material quality without loading it. -By using AUT, the degradation in mechanical performance of a structure can also be assessed. This is a distinct advantage over the other NDT techniques. Flaw detection is done to find out whether the component will perform satisfactorily under working condition. This is because flaws affect the strength and hence the performance of the component. But the strength itself can be predicted using AUT. In some cases a composite structure may be free of readily detectable flaws but exhibit low strength. and probably it is unsuitable for use. In such situations, AIJT places an important part of determining the strength of the material.
11.2 Principle

Acoustic emission (AE) testing is one particular area of composite testing that is progressing rapidly. Technological advances in sensor technology, data collection and manipulation are.increasing the amount of information obtainable by this method. Combined with a growing sophistication in interpretation of AE data and correlation with information from other test methods, these advances are helping AET to be very versatile in locating and identifying a growing range of defect phenomena. Acoustic emission testing is used for the proof testing of composite strictures for global identification of structural defects. AE tests not only show the areas of growing defects but also provide insight into improved structural design. 10.2 Principle Composite materials release discrete bursts of energy when stressed, some of which are audible. Much of the acoustic emission (AE) activity in composites is inaudible to the unaided ear because it is too high in frequency or too low in amplitude. With piezo-electric transducers affixed to the surface of a composite specimen, these emissions may be electronically monitored and recorded for subsequent analysis with the assistance of computer data reduction and manipulation techniques. In fibre reinforced composites, the acoustic emission is generated by cracking of the matrix, debonding of the matrix from the fibres, delamination, separation, etc. Signals from these growing flaws travel within the structure and are detected by the surface mounted piezoelectric sensors. Proper instrumentation can identify flaw location by collecting the data obtained from the multiple sensors on the test specimen and using source location methodologies. 10.3 Stress Application The stress-applied to the composite structures to cause the material to emit acoustic emissions is generally accomplished by applying a mechanical force such as bending, tension or torsion on the item. For proof testing of composite pressure vessels, they are internally pressurized to emit the acoustic signals.
11 ACOUSTO-ULTRASONIC 11.1 Overview NDT

In acousto-ultrasonic technique, the ultrasonic pulses that are injected inside the material resemble the spontaneously generated acoustic emissions signals which arise due to deformation, crack growth, residual stresses, etc. Therefore, it is quite natural that if these artificially generated stress waves are allowed to interact with the internal features of the material (that is, microstructural environmental within the material), the resultant modulated signal characterises the material quality. The measurement of these simulated acoustic emission waves correlates strongly with material microstructure and mechanical strength in the case of composite material. Using this acousto-ultrasonic technique, strength can be measured indirectly by means of a material characterization parameter known as stress wave factor (SWF). Higher values of SWF denote higher material strength.
11.3 Stress Wave Factor

The acousto-ultrasonic

(AU) technique is a newly 8

Stress wave factor is the product of repetition rate, time

IS 15643:2006 interval and ringdown counts. It is mathematically expressed as,
SWF = R. T. N

where R = repetition ~ate of ultrasonic pulses that are injected inside the material; T = time interval between which counting has been made; and N = number of threshold crossings. The acousto-ultrasonic measurements are made by means of the stress wave factor. The value of SWF is used to quantify mechanical properties like strength and fracture resistance. The SWF will indicate regions where strain energy is likely to concentrate and result in crack nucleation and fracture. Stress wave factor mainly depends on the dampening effect of the material medium of ultrasonic pulses, such as microstructure, morphology, porosity, bond quality, cure state, micro cracks and so on.
SECTION 3 APPLICATION OF NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING TECHNIQUES

debonds are easily identified provided they are oriented parallel to the X-ray beam. Foreign materials and crushed honeycomb core in sandwich structures can also be detected. Radiographs are expensive in terms of time and materials, but they are permanent record that the engineer can use these to evaluate problems that may occur at a later date. Film"based radiography is possible only at discrete locations in a product, but with the fluoroscope systems it is possible to have 100 percent scanning. 14 ULTRASONIC The dryscan ultrasonic system uses a completely dry technique providing a remarkable break-through in the NDT of advanced materials. Tests can be conducted with speed and convenience as there is no Requirement for liquid acoustic coupling. The system has soft rubber tipped transducers which act as the coupling agent for the probe .to the material under test. The transmitterand the receiver are positioned exactly opposite to each other over a good region as shown in Fig. 3(A). The beat pa~ern observed in the CRT is adjusted to Full Screen -Height (FSH) with a suitable gain. The probes are then placed over a delaminated region as shown in Fig. 3(B). As the medium through which the ultrasonic pulses travel is not continuous due to the presence of a delamination, very littleultrasonic energy is transmitted to the receiver. Consequently, no beat patterns are obtained. The beat patterns corresponding to the good and delaminated regions are as given in Fig. 4(A) mrd Fig. 4(B). 15 INFRARED THE-RMOGRAPHY 15.1 Overview To apply the thermography technique for nondestructive testing, one must introduce a thermal

12 OVERVIEW Non-destructive testing of all finished products is a necessity to find out their structural integrity. Table 1 lists some of the defects that would affect the stmctura] integrity of composite structures and the NDT techniques that may be used to detect these defects. 13 RADIOGRAPHY Radiography is widely used for the detection of internal defects in products which -is represented as crosssectional density variations. Delamination and

Table 1 Defects Detected by Various NDT Techniques (Clause 12)

Defect (1) Delamination Debond Fibre Misalignment Damaged Fibres Variation in Thickness Variation in Density Voids and Porosity' Crushed Core

Tap Tests Radiography
(2)

Radiography (3)

Ultrasonic (4)

Infrared Thermography (5)

Accoustic Emission (6)

AccoustoUltrasonic (7)

x x

x x x x x x x x

x x

x x

x x

x x

x x x x x

x x

x x

9

IS 15643-:2006

?

/

?

\

{

GOOD REGION

UELAMINAIION

3(A)

Transducer

Position

at a Good Region
FIG.

3(B) Transducer

Position at a Delamination

3 TRANSDUCER POSITION

k!mmc
4(A) Beat Pattern at a Good Region 4(B) Beat Pattern at a Delamination
FIG. 4 BEAT PATTERN

pattern in the test object to be studied, observe the relative temperature distribution on the surface of the examined test object and properly interpret the results.
15.2 Active and Passive Methods

the test object is treated as a path for heat from external heat source. In this, flaws will cause local differences in thermal conductivities which will evidence themselves in the thermal mapping. It is this method which is widely used in the thermographic NDT of composites. 15.3 Basic Principles of Operation A specimen (with various inbuilt defects) is uniformly heated to about 10to 15�Cabove the room temperature. Defects in the specimen are revealed by corresponding differences in heat emission pattern by the specimen. The heat emission pattern is detected by the scanner and transmitted to the display unit. 10

Thermographic NDT-techniques may be categorized as active or passive when referring to the means by which heat is produced in the object to be tests. A structural material may become hot under mechanical loading in regions where damage is occurring. Such a situation in which heat is produced actively in the specimen by damage process is called active technique. Similarly, passive method refers -to those for which

IS 15643:2006 15.4 Heat Emission Patterns

A matter of importance in passive thermography is the choosing of steady state or transient conditions in order to develop the heat-emission patterns. For a steady state method, the heat source, the specimen and all of the heat loss mechanisms are given sufficient time to reach thermal equilibrium before the observation of thermograms is made. At steady state conditions, the temperature distribution remains constant as a fimction of .tirne. Such a procedure has the advantage of being more easily reproducible and more amenable to quantitative interpretations and comparisons. Once the entire system has reached thermal equilibrium, the number of operational or system dependent variables that enter into the interpretation of the data recorded is minimized. Hence the interpretation of the data is greatly facilitated. Though this is the ideal method of producing heat pattern for repeatability and better interpretation of thermograms, it is not always possible to achieve steady-state conditions with appreciable temperature differentials corresponding to the flaws. On the other hand, in transient heating method, the largest temperature differential in a specimen occurs at the'`firstinstant when a heat source is applied to the specimen. Following that first point of time, energy is transferred according to Fourier's law and distributed in such a way-so as to balance the energy input against conduction, convection and radiation losses. The temperature gradients are reduced by this process until thermal equilibrium is reached. Hence it is not very easy to interpret the thermograms at steady-state conditions and transient method is resorted to in most of the applications, Infrared lamps or hot air blowers can be used to heat the specimens uniformly. Heating and scanning are done simultaneously from the same side of the specimen. Lack of heat transfer due to the presence of defects gives rise to hot spots. In transient heat method, as the heat source passes the area of the specimen surface over a flaw, that portion cools slower than the surrounding material. These localized hot spots

appear as white areas on the display screen during scanning. The excellent sensitivity of the thermography system, which will detect temperature differences of as small as O.1�C ensures that defects in the specimen are clearly identifiable. 16 ACOUSTIC
EMISSION

The primary failure modes in composite structures include matrix cracking, delamination and fibre breakage. These failures occur during the pressurization of a fibre reinforced pressure vessel. AE can be used for inspecting all the three modes of failure. AE testing involves the positioning of AE transducers at proper locations on the structure and then applying a load or a stress. As the load increases, micro failures occur and the transducers pick up the signal. The source of the signal and hence the defect can be located from the time required for the signal to reach the various transducers. By use of standard specimens representing a structure, AE counts versus load traces can be prepared and then compared to the counts obtained during pressure testing to help to predict the strength or weakness of a structure. Acoustic emission based proof testing of composite structures is well known and a preferred method for global identification of structural defects.
17 ACOUSTO-ULTRASONIC ,,, ,

A material free of any defects allow the stress waves to pass through it more easily than when it is a defective one. In other words a good quality material dampens the stress waves to a lesser extent as compared to a material which has grossly distributed defects. Hence higher values of SWF are obtained for a good quality material. During the passage of ultrasonic pulses if it finds any defects such as voids and delamination, then the pulses are scattered and hence the peak amplitude of the signal is decreased; as a result the number of threshold crossing (N) is also decreased. Hence stress wave factor decreases.

11

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS k a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications mriy be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions', This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. MTD 2.1 (4609).
Amendments Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Amend No.

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
Headquarters:

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002
Telephones: 23230131,23233375,2323 Regional Offices: 9402 website: www.bis.org.in Telephones

Central Eastern Northern Southern Western
Branches

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Krmkurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892

: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD.

GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPA.TNAM.

Printedat Simco -Printing Press,Delhi

