IS 13144 : 1991 ( Reaffirmed 2002 )

srr-c?fbT WTT

qiv * ;SFT~T ~3 dhmit 4 srww~ +9-fq~arF<$ 0
Indian Standard RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PROVISION OF FACILITIES OUTSIDE THE DAMS

UDC

627'82

: 711'8

0

BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK Augusf 1991

c)F
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group 1

Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow

) Sectional Committee,

RVD 9

FOREWORD This lndian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by Dams ( Overflow and Non-overflow ) Sectional Committee had been approved by River Valley Division Council. When a dam is constructed, the area around it is required to be developed by providing certain The required facilities depend upon the importance and size of dam and amenities and facilities. potential of the lake formed,~being used as a tourist place. The facilities like lighting, water supply and sanitary arrangements, tourist spot, gardens, transport system, medical facilities and safety agent outside army attack are covered in this standard. Provisions regarding lighting and facilities inside dams have been covered in IS 9297 : 1979 `Recommendations for lighting, ventilation and other facilities inside dams'. Provisions regarding drainage system for dams have been covered in IS 9429 : 1980 `Code of practice for drainage system for earth and rockfill dams' and IS 10135 : 1985 `Code of practice for drainage system for gravity dams, their foundations and abutments ( first revision ). Provision of check-posts and watchmen's cabins, kiosks etc, on roads leading to dam approaches, adit entrances and other vulnerable points be also made in addition to the above facilities.

IS 13144 : 1991

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PROVISION OF FACILITIES OUTSIDE THE DAMS
1 SCOPE This standard covers the recommendations provision of facilities outside the major medium dams. 2 LIGHTING 2.1 Sufficient and proper lighting is a necessity outside the dam. Lighting installations should provide satisfactory illumination, for proper vigilance, and monitoring of the dam and appurtenant works. 2.2 Lighting System 2.2.1 The lighting system on approach and service roads, top of dam and surrounding areas should generally consist of flourescent light tubes or high pressure mercury vapour lamps. In areas where dense fog is expected, sodium vapour lamps should be provided in operation areas. The spillway, irrigation sluice, power outlets, downstream face of dams, abutments etc. should be flood lit by properly located flood lighting units. The spacing of poles for tubelights may be about 30 m c/c. 2.2.2 Special lighting arrangements for earth dam for vigilance at night, after gorge filling would be necessary. 2.2.3 All wiring joints should be made in the junction boxes provided for the purpose through procelain connectors. Precaution to prevent entry of rain water, flood water, leakage water, etc, in the electrical installation should be taken. Additional plug points of adequate capacity may be provided at suitable locations. The design and layout of generator, transformer, electrical and cables, switches, etc, circuits, conduits should be properly coordinated with the layout and design of the main components of the dam. 2.2.4 Since, in the projects areas, heavy mist is likely Taohamper visibility, a series of sodium vapour lamps may also be installed at vulnerable points. This will additionally add to the beauty of the area when such locations become popular tourist spots. 3 WATER SUPPLY ARRANGEMENTS AND SANITARY for and Suitable control valves, if required outside the dam, should be properly installed for safe and convenient operation of the system. 3.2 Raw Water Supply Suitable pumps with stand-by capacity according to actual requirements should be installed for supply and distribution of raw water for fire fighting, gardens, sanitary blocks etc. Raw water supply should also be provided near the entrance of the grouting and drainage galleries so that necessary maintenance operation can be carried out. Arrangements should also cover other areas in the abutments where drainage holes or grouting and other protection works The pipe line should provide for are needed. required valves and suitable hose connections spaced at required interval based on overall planning. 3.3 Drinking Water Supply To cater for the requirements of drinking water, suitable raw water tanks, treatment plant and pure water sumps or elevated services reservoir, with valves and distribution system should be provided. Drinking water facilities should be made around the dam complex at suitable locations including the approach road. 3.4 Sanitary Arrangements

Toilet facilities including wash basins and urinals should be provided at suitable locations to serve project staff and tourists. At least one toilet on each bank is recommended. Sewage and waste water should be disposed through drainage system and septic tanks. 4 TOURIST SPOT

for drinking 3.1 Water supply is required purposes, sanitary blocks, fire fighting, gardens etc. In some projects provision of water supply to nearby-town is also made. The location and diameter of water supply pipe should be selected to meet individual requirement of the project.

4.1 Irrigation projects have aroused public interest resulting in increasing seasonal visitors both during and after construction. Large lakes created by the project are points of interest and potential tourist areas, Various facilities as under may be considered and provided where required for tourists and visitors to the project: a) Tourist bunglows and dormitories b) Parking areas c) View points d) Information centre e) Telephone f) Model room g) Fishing, Boating, Water Sports such as skiing 1

IS 13144 : 1991 h) Gardens j) Canteen k) Bus Stop, Post Office, Dispensary, Police Station, etc. ~ m) Toilets - at least one on each bank n) Notice Board and Sign Boards. 4.2 The extent and type of facilities to be provided for tourists will depend on potential of the project for development as a tourist centre. 4.3 The areas under submergence may have uneven topography, rocks, trees and area vulnerable for land sides, etc, which may endanger the lives of tourist when boating and fishing. These areas should be properly demarcated and unauthorized persons should not be allowed in these areas. Life boats and other life saving arrangements may be made in the vicinity. 5 GARDEN Well planned gardens, orchards, tree plantation and landscaping on downstream side of the dam is an essential feature of irrigation projects. Suitable fountains, water courses, ete, will add to attractiveness of the garden. 6 TRANSPORT A public transport system for the visitors should be provided from the nearest township. Transport facilities be provided to students going to schools or colleges from township to nearby town. 7 MEDICAL FACILITIES Necessary health care facilities should also be provided which should also include the provision of ambulance van and other requisite equipment to meet any contingencies. 8 PROVISION CONDUCTORS OF LIGHTNING

Lightning conductors should be provided at suitable locations on concrete and masonry structures. d SAFETY AGAINST OUTSIDE ATTACK ARMY

From strategic point of view dam proper, other structures, buildings nearby dam, light poles, etc, should be provided with camouflage colours as these being protected structures.

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau ofIndian Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well `defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BLS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.
Standards

Bnreao ef Indian Standards remote BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of htdian Standards Act, 1986 to harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certific t tion of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, sudh as symbols and sizes, type OF grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are issued from possession of the to BIS giving the are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are In Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent latest amendments or edition, following reference :

Dot : No. RVD 9 ( 4289) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 331 13 75

Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 600113

37 86 62 53 38 43 2350216

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

6 32 92 99

Printed

at Swatantra

Bharat Press, Delhi. India

