(Reaffirmed 2001)

Indian

Standard

SPECIFICATION FOR ICE TANKS
Refrigeration Chairman
SIIRI J. C. KAPUR

and Air-Conditioning

Sectional

Committee,

BDC

18

Representing
Air-Conditioning Corporation Ltd., Calcutta, and Air-Conditioning and Refrigeration Council of India

Members
SIXRI MOHAN T. ADVANI Blue Star Engineering Ltd., Bombay Co.

( Bombay)

Private

SHRI RAM D. MALANI ( Alternate ) The Economy Refrigeration and Engineering Co. SHRI Y. D. AHUJA Ltd., Bombay Voltas Ltd., Bombay SEIRI N. BALASUBRAMANIAN SHRI K. V. RAMAN ( Alternate ) Naval Headquarters 1,~ S. N. BHAR~AVA Central Public Works Department SHRI S. K. BHAT~ACHARYA Ministry of Food & Agriculture SIIRI S. Ii. CIIAIJDHURY Centfialor~~.lding Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRI N. K. D. CKOUDRURY SHRI B. C. RAY CHOUD~URY ( Akernck? ) Development Wing (Ministry of Economic & SHRI P. N. DEOBHAKTA Defence Co-ordination ) SARI A. N. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI K. C. JERATH The Hyderabad Allwyn Metal Works Ltd., SHRI G. K. KABRA Hyderabad Godrej & Boyce Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd., Bombay SHRI H. J. LENTIN Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SLJRO-COM M. S. MALHOTRA National Physics1 Laboratory ( CSIR ), New SHRI NAUNIHAL SINC+H MATHUR Delhi, and Indian Society of Refrigerating Engineers, Calcutta, of Refrigerating Engineers, Indian Society SHRI A. P. SHIVDASANI Calcutta ( Alternate ) Government Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. N. MUK~RJI SHRI B. K. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) S~IRI AMAR SINGH NAQRA National Buildings Orgenization ( Ministry of SHRI C. B. PATEL Works, Housing & Rehabilitation ) SHRI V. D. TIWA~I ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 ) INDIAN STANDARDS NEW DELHI INSTITUTION ROAD 1

MANAK BHAVAN,

9 MATHURA

fS : 2374 - 1963
( Continued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI K. N. R. PILLAI

Representing
Directorate General of Posts & Telegraphs ( Ministry of Transport & Communications ), Jabalpur

SHRI I<. R. D. IYENC+AR( Alternate ) SHRI R. BALASUBRAMANIAM ( Alternate ) Ministry of Labour & Employment SRRI B. J.`RAMRAKHIANI Directorate General of Supplies SHRI U. S. SAVAEOOR ( Ministry of Economic 84 ordination ) SFIRI D. T. GURSAHANI ( Alternate ) Director, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) DR. H. C. VISVESVARAYA, Deputy Director ( Bldg )

& Disposals Defence Co-

Secretary
SHRI C. 12. RAMA RAO

Assistant

Director

( Bldg )

Ice Plant Convener
SHRI Y. D. AHUJA

Subcommittee,
The

BDC

18 : 5
& Engineering Co.

Economy Refrigcmtion Ltd., Bombay

Members
SHRI C. A. ALMEIDA Bombay Ammonia Bombay & Refrigeration Co. (P) Ltd., SIIRI MAX MOHAN SIN~R ( Alternate ) The Ice Machinery Mart, Gwalior SHRI B. B. BIXAROAVA Development Wing (Ministry of SHRI P. N. DEOBHAKTA Defence Co-ordination ) SIIRI A. N. MUKHERJEII:( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies SARI U. S. SAVAKOOR of Economic & (Ministry ordination ) SRRI D. T. GURSAHANI ( Alternate )

Economic

&

& Disposals Defence Co-

18:2374-1963

Indian

Standard

SPECIFICATION FOR ICE TANKS
0. FOREWORD
0.1This
Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 May 1963, after the draft finalized by the Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Building Division Council.

0.2 Commercial ice making is gaining importance due to the increased demand for ice all over the country and ice plants are being set up in Simultaneously, the manufacincreasing numbers to meet the needs. ture of ice making machinery has made considerable progress during the last few years and today almost all the components are indigenously manufactured except the ammonia compressors, controls and valves. A number of schemes for the indigenous manufacture of items which are now being imported is underway and it may be expected in the near future that all the needs of the industry would be met fully from indigenous sources. Besides, the ice making machinery offers considerable potential for export and attempts, are being made to increase It is necessary in this connection that the indigenously its export. manufactured items should not only conform to minimum standards of manufacture and performance but also should be able to compete both in quality and price in the foreign markets. In order to assist the indigenous industry engaged in this field, a series of standards is being formulated. Indian Standard Specification for Ice Cans been published and this standard covers ( IS : 1869-1961) h as already the requirements for ice tanks in which a brine bath at sub-zero temperatures is used for freezing water contained in ice cans. 0.3 The capacity of ice tanks used in India varies from as small as 0.5 metric tonne to 90 metric tonnes or more per day of 24 hours and therefore, it has not been found depending on the requirements, feasible at the present stage to lay down specific dimensions for ice However, certain points to be borne in mind in designing them tanks. have been given and it is hoped these will give the necessary guidance in arriving at suitable sizes of ice tanks. 0.4 The Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this consideration the views of producers, standard has taken into consumers and technologists and has related the standard to the 3

18:2374-1963
manufacturing and trade practices followed in the country in this field. Due weightage has also been given to the need for international co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world. 0.5 Wherever specification, a reference to any Indian it shall be taken as a reference Standard appears to its latest version. in this and

0.6Metric dimensions

system has been adopted in India and all quantities in this standard have been given in this system.

0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960 Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values ( Revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 0.8 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical relating to ice tanks, and it does not cover all the necessary of a contract. provisions provisions

1.SCOPE
1.1 This standard covers the general construction, finish and testing of ice tanks block ice. dimensions, used in the materials manufacture and of

2. GENERAL
2.1 The factors: a) b)

DIMENSIONS of the tank of ice plant; and arrangement of brine of coil or brine of ice cans; and cooler. agitator; (see

dimensions Capacity Size,

also 0.3 ) depend

on the following

.
number

c) Type d) Type

and design and design

2.1.1 The depth of the tank depends on the sizes of the ice cans ( see IS : 1869-1961 Specification for Ice Cans) and height of coil, and should be at least 25 mm more than the depth of the ice can. 2.1.2 The length and width of the ice tank depend `on the number of ice cans, type of coil and the design of agitator which the tank will have to accommodate.

4

IS : 2314 - 1963 3. MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION 3.1 The tank shall be fabricated
the requirements Steel ( Standard out of black steel sheets specified in IS : 226-1962 Specification Quality ) ( Third Revision ). plates used for sides and bottom conforming to for Structural of ice tanks

3.2 Thickness of steel shall be as given below: 60 to 99 cm

Depth of Tank
100 cm and above 3.3 The coil casing shall be minimum thickness of 3 mm. fabricated

Thickness, Min 5
mm 6.5 mm out of steel plates having a

3.4 Tanks of all sizes shall have an angle iron welded to the top -edge Angle iron shall not be of the tank both along the length and width. smaller than 50 x 50 mm and is meant for the purpose of stiffening the sides and also supporting the wooden framework, Tie rods shall be provided at suitable intervals to prevent the bulging of sides caused by hydraulic pressure. Coil casing may be of the bolted type and the top and end of the coil shall be covered with steel plates not less than 3 mm in thickness. 3.5 The bulk head ( plate supporting funnel or hood where horizontal agitator is used ) of ice tanks of capacity one metric tonne and more shall be fabricated out of steel plates having a minimum thickness of 5 mm. 3.6 Where partitions are considered necessary, they out of steel plates not less than 3 mm in thickness. 3.7 shall be fabricated

Precautions to be Exercised in Welding 3.7.1 General-Welding
of with *IS : 823of Mild Steel. steel plates shall be generally done in Code of Procedure for Manual Metal backing strip

accordance Arc Welding

3.7.2 For large tanks welded at site, a 5 x 50-mm steel shall be used along and underneath butt-welded joints.

3.7.3 Underneath the steel backing strip, any one of the following materials ( suiting to the insulating material) shall be used to prevent the insulating material from burning while welding ( see Fig. 1 ): a) 2 layers of asbestos paper of minimum size 75 x 1 mm,
the welding procedure

*Under preparation. Until that standard is published, shall be as agreed to between the concerned parties.

5

IS : 2374 - 1963 b) 6 mm thick cement c) 25mm plaster of suitable mix, or proportions.

slab of cement 1.5 To 3
APART mm

concrete

of suitable
BOTTOM

CEMENT RCC

PLASTER SLAB

OR

STEEL STRIP

BACKING 50 x 5 mm

PIG. 1

WORKING

PROCEDURE

FOR WELDING

OF STEEL PLATES

3.7.4 A IO-mm round steel bar shall be tack welded to the bottom plate to assist in keeping side and end plates straight and in line while welding them to the bottom ( see Fig. 2); alternatively, angle irons of length 15 cm and of minimum size 40 x 40 x 6 mm (see IS : 808 1957 Specification for Rolled Steel Beam, Channel and Angle Sections ) may be welded to the bottom plate at 90 cm centres.

w-

SIDE

OR

END

PLATE

1
25mm FIG. 2

I! 10mm

0 STEEL ROD, OR 40x 4Ox6mm ANGLE IRON TACK WELDED BOTTOM PLATE TO

.l BOTTOM PLATE

OVERLAP ON ENDS OF TANK

SIDES AND BOTTOM

WELDING

DETAILS

AT JUNCTION

OF BOTTOM

AND

SIDE STEEL PLATES

4. FINISH 4.1 The inside of the tank, after anti-corrosive paint which shall corrosive action of brine at sub-zero 5. TESTING 5.1 The tank shall be tested for leakage test shall be carried out before painting. 6 by filling it with water. This fabrication, be capable temperatures. shall be finished of withstanding with the

IS:

2374-

1963

6. MARKING 6.1 Each
tank should be trade-mark either inside manufacturer. 6.1.1 Mark. Each ice tank may marked with the manufacturer's or outside as found convenient also be marked with the ISI name or to the

Certification

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that Standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control during production. This system, which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are continuously checked by ISI for conformity to the Standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

_..

____

INDIAN

STANDARDS

INSTITUTION

The Indian Standards Institution (ISI), which started functioning in 1947, is the national standards organization for India. its principal object is to prepare standards on national and international basis, and promote their general adoption. The overall control of ISI, which is run and financed jointly as a non-profit making body by the Central Government and private enterprise, is exercised by a General Council, composed of representatives of Central and State Governments: leading trade, scientific and technological organizations: subscribing and members. The Union Minister for Commerce & Industry is the ex-officio President of ISI. The present technical activity of ISI is carried out through its Division Councils for Agricultural and Food Products; Building; Chemical; Electrotechnical; Engineering; Structural and Metals: and Textile. All technical work relating to the formulation and revision of standards is done by committees appointed by and under the direction of their respective Division Councils. These committees consist of experts drawn from manufacturing units, technical institutions, purchase organizations and other concerned bodies. To make available benefits of Indian Standards to the common man, ISI has introduced its Certification Marks Scheme under the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1952, as According to this Act, amended by the Amendment Act, 1961. quality goods conforming to Indian Standards can carry the ISI Certification Mark. This Mark is a third party guarantee of Licences to use the ISI Certification quality of marked goods. Mark are granted to manufacturers using reliable methods of quality control and providing facilities for inspection by ISI staff. In the international field, ISI represents India on the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the InterElectrotechnical Commission (IEC). IS0 and IEC national respectively link 46 and 36 countries, and function through 104 and 53 technical committees: ISI participates in 75 technical committees of IS0 and all the technical committees of IEC. The committees and subcommittees of IEC and IS0 for which ISI holds Mica, Pictorial the secretariat deal with: Electric Fans, Lac, Markings for Handling of Goods, Liquid Flow Measurements in Open Channels, Spices and Condiments, and Stimulants. ______

