WAT ATA IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


shaa Us AMTa 
Unt 1 RNA gtt 
(TEM FRAT) 


Life Cycle Costing 
Part 1 Terminology 


(First Revision) 


ICS 03.100.10 


© BIS 2022 


di AA sid 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAS Uo, 9 geld Mle THN AMT, As ect - 110002 
Se ë MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110 002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 7 


Resource Management Sectional Committee MSD 12 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards, after the draft finalized by the Resource Management Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. 


With ever increasing investments both by industry and Government, together with the 
manifold complications of the continuous explosion in technology, considerable inflation in 
cost of materials, labor, energy, etc, and the changing international and national 
environments, decisions based on initial costs alone have often proved to be counter- 
productive and uneconomical. In particular, where public money is involved, it becomes 
necessary to ensure the maximum benefits out of every investment. In this situation, a 
systematic methodology for assessing the total cost of an asset or proposed investment over 
its entire operating life, and in particular, to equitably compare various choices open to the 
decision making authority, becomes essential. 


Life Cycle Costing (LCC) is a method to arrive at such an economic and equitable 
assessment of competing design alternatives. It takes into account every significant element 
of cost over the total ownership period of the asset and works out its total costs over its entire 
operating life, expressed in monetary units applicable to a given base date. Given equal levels 
of performance, the LCC comparison will then itself enable decisions being made. Where 
levels of performance vary, the LCC can be related to specific units of performance in such a 
way as to enable optimum decisions. 


The present revision for IS 13174 : Part 1 has been taken up in order to update the standard in 
the light of experience gained in its usage since its publication and to align it with the latest 
practices being followed at national and international level. Many old terms are modified and 
new terms are added as well in IS 13174 : Part 1 of the standard. 


Following new terms have been added in this revision: 


— 


) Acquisition costs 

2) Assets 

3) Budget 

4) Cost breakdown structure 
5) Disposal 

6) End-of-life cost 

7) Environmental cost 

8) External cost 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


Indian Standard 
LIFE CYCLE COSTINGPART 1 TERMINOLOGY 
(First Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) defines the terms 
used in Life cycle costing (LCC). 


2 TERMINOLOGY 
2.1 Acquisition costs 


All costs associated with bringing the 
product, service, or capital equipment into 
Operation at the customers’ location. 
Examples of acquisition costs are 
sourcing, administration, freight, taxes, 
and so on. 


2.2 Alteration Costs 


Anticipated costs of modernization or 
changes to the facility or asset in order to 
provide for changed requirements. 


2.3 Amortization 


The process of converting the initial 
capital cost and one time future costs to 
annual figures incurred over the life of the 
asset, thus enabling that initial or one time 
cost together with interest due thereon to 
be wiped out in full. 


2.4 Amortization Factor 


The multiplying number or decimal used 
to convert the initial cost or one-time cost 
into amortized payments necessary to pay 
off that initial costs/debt/investment or one 
time amount together with any interest due 
thereon, over the desired period, usually 
the life of the asset. 


2.5 Analysis, Future Value 


Present value analysis (see 2.7) except that 
the cost will relate to a future point in 
time. 


2.6 Analysis, Life Cycle Cost 


The comparison of acceptable alternatives 
on the basis of their contribution of life 
cycle costs using present value or 
annualized cost methodology. 


2.7 Analysis, Present Value 


An economic technique to discount cost 
occurring in future years to their 
equivalent current value and sum them 
taking into consideration the effects of 
inflation or deflation as well as the earning 
potential of money over a given period. 


2.8 Annual Recurring Costs 


The costs that are incurred on a regular 
pattern each year throughout the life under 
study. 


2.9 Annual Value 


The money value worked out as per the 
cost annualized method (see 2.10) 


2.10 Annualized Method 


A technique that enables conversion of all 
present and future incomes or expenditures 
to a recurring annual figure based on the 
same, uniform desired life. 


2.11 Annuity 


A series of equal payments or receipts to 
be paid or received at the end of 
successive periods of equal time. 


2.12 Assets 


Whole building or structure or unit of 
construction works, or a system or a 
component or part thereof. 


2.13 Associated Costs 


These costs may include: safety, security, 
insurance, utilities (other than energy), 
waste disposal and any other costs not 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


specifically defined elsewhere in this 
standard. 


2.14 Baseline 


The common point in time against which 
all costs or benefits from investment 
opportunities are measured; this is usually 
the commissioning date, also referred to as 
the base date. 


2.15 BreakEven Point 


The operating level or financial level at 
which income of a company or facility just 
cover all fixed and variable costs. 
Depreciation is normally included. Profits 
start accruing only after the breakeven 
point. 


2.16 Budget 


Financial estimates approved by 
management or the client as the cost 
control mechanism for a project. 


2.17 Capital, Cost of (see 2.49). 
2.18 Capital, Fixed 


The investment in an asset. It may 
represent real estate, equipment, buildings, 
furniture and fixtures, transportation 
equipment used directly in the production 
of a product or service, etc. It includes all 
the costs incidental to getting the facility in 
place and in operating condition including 
legal patents, licenses, installation and 
start-up expenses. 


2.19 Capital, Working 


Capital in current use in the operation of a 
business; the excess of current assets over 
current liabilities; net current assets. 


2.20 Capitalized, Cost 


The present worth of the cost incurred 
annually such as for operating and 
maintaining an asset. 


2.21 Cash Flow 


The net flow of money into or out of the 
proposed project. It is the algebraic sum in 
any time period, of all cash receipts, 
expenses, and investments. 


2.22 Construction Cost 


A general term used to describe either the 
total cost associated with the construction 
of an asset or the costs incurred at the 
construction site. It is the sum of all costs, 
direct and indirect, inherent in converting a 
design into a commissioned project ready 
for operation, that is sum of Geld labor, 
supervision, administration, tools, field 
office expense and field purchased 
material costs, engineering, installation 
and commissioning, etc. 


2.23 Cost Breakdown Structure 


Structure related to the methods and 
approach that an organization employs to 
record and report costs. 


2.24 Cost Control 


The application of systematic procedures 
to monitor the progress of projects, 
manufacturing operations and/or service 
functions in order to minimize cost with 
the objective of increasing profitability 
while continuously assuring efficient 
operations. 


2.25 Cost Life Cycle (see 2.59). 
2.26 Cost, Differential 


The difference in the life cycle cost 
between two competing alternatives. 


2.27 Cost, Investment (see 2.57). 
2.28 Cost, Lowest Total 

The lowest life cycle cost. 

2.29 Cost, Variance 


The difference between the budgeted or 
standard cost and the actual cost incurred. 


2.30 Depreciation 


A method that distributes the monetary 
value (less salvage value) of a tangible 
asset over the estimated years of 
productive or useful life. It is a process of 
allocation, not valuation and intended to 
fund the replacement of the used-up asset. 


2.31 Differential Inflation Rate 


The expected percent difference between 
the rate of increase assumed for a given 
item of cost (such as energy), and the 
general rate of inflation. 


2.32 Discount Cash Flow 


A technique for converting future cash 
flow to a present value (see 2.77 and 2.32). 


2.33 Discount Factor 


A multiplication number for converting 
cost and benefits occurring at different 
times to a common baseline. 


2.34 Discount Rate 


The rate of interest reflecting the 
investor’s time value of money, used to 
determine discount factors for converting 
benefits and costs occurring at different 
times to a baseline. 


2.35 Discount Rate, Nominal 


The same as discount rate (see 2.35) 
except in this case, no allowance is made 
for the changes in the purchasing power of 
money (such as inflation). 


2.36 Discount Rate, Real 


The nominal discount rate, after the 
adjustment for variations in the purchasing 
power of money discounted payback 
period (see 2.39). 


2.37 Discounted Payback Period 


The time it takes the benefits resulting 
from an investment to payback the costs 
involved. A simple payback period does 
not consider ‘the time value of money’. 


2.38 Discounting 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


A technique for converting future cash 
flows to equivalent amounts at present or 
on an agreed prior date. 


2.39 Disposal Cost 


Costs associated with disposal of the asset 
at the end of its life cycle. 


2.40 End-of-Life Cost 


All costs incurred when a product, service, 
or capital equipment reaches the end of its 
usable life, net of amounts received from 
the sale of the remaining product or the 
equipment (disposal value) as the case 
may be. Examples of end-of-life costs are 
obsolescence, disposal, clean-up, and 
project termination costs. 


2.41 Environmental Cost 


Cost incurred in meeting compliance 
obligations for environmental laws and 
those incurred to prevent degradation/ 
impact of the environment, attributed to 
the product, service or entity. 


2.42 Equivalent Annual Cost 


The conversion by an interest rate and 
present worth technique, of all capital and 
operating costs to a series of equal annual 
costs. As a system for comparing proposed 
investments, requires assumption of a 
specific acceptable interest rate. 


2.43 Equivalent Costs 


Costs, both present and future, expressed 
with reference to a common baseline 
reflecting the time value of money and 
inflation (see 2.77 and 2.10). 


2.44 Equivalent Full Load Hours 


Total energy consumption divided by the 
full-load energy input. This gives the 
number of hours a piece of equipment 
would need to operate at its full capacity to 
consume as much energy as it did 
operating at various part-loads. 


2.45 Escalation 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


An increase in the cost of equipment, 
material, or labor due to price level 
changes. 


2.46 External Cost 


Costs associated with an asset that are not 
necessarily reflected in the transaction 
costs between provider and consumer and 
that, collectively, are referred to as 
externalities. 


NOTE — These costs may include business 
staffing, productivity and user costs; these 
can be taken into account in a life-cycle 
cost analysis but are to be explicitly 
identified. 


2.47 Field Costs 
All costs normally incurred at the job site. 
2.48 Field Overhead Costs 


All those costs, other than direct labour 
and material such as field administration, 
supervision, tools, etc, involved in 
completion of a project. 


2.49 Financing Costs 


The costs of any loan, debt, market 
borrowing associated with the project, 
assets, capital or working costs. 


2.50 Fixed Costs 


The costs, independent of short-term 
variations in output of the system under 
consideration. Includes indirect labour, 
maintenance, technical services, Research 
and development,taxes and insurance, 
plant overhead, general administrative and 
marketing expenses. 


2.51 Future Value/ Future Worth 


The value of a benefit or a cost at some 
point in the future, considering the time 
value of money. 


2.52 General and Administrative 
Expenses 


Any management financial or other 
expense which is incurred by or allocated 


to that part of an organization which is for 
the general management and 
administration of the organization as a 
whole. 


2.53 Inflation 


A continuing rise in the general price 
levels, caused usually by an increase in the 
volume of money in circulation and credit 
relative to available goods. 


2.54 Initial Costs 


Allcosts associated, with market research, 
initial development, testing, trials, 
construction and commissioning of an 
asset. 


2.55 Intangible Capital Asset 


An asset which has no physical substance 
but has a value which is generally the 
present worth of its future estimated 
earnings (for example, the cost of training, 
managerial skills, special talents, etc). 


2.56 Internal Rate of Return 


The company’s or organization’s rate of 
interest that, when used to discount by life 
span, the costs and benefits of the project, 
will make the two equal. 


2.57 Investment 


Capital needed or deployed to create a new 
asset or a new product or alter an existing 
one. 


2.58 Life Cycle Cost 


It covers all the costs from project 
conception to final scrapping and disposal 
and includes all costs of operation, repairs, 
maintenance, energy consumption ,rentals, 
insurance etc. in addition to the initial 
costs of development and/or acquisition, 
all discounted to the same point in time. 


2.59 Life Cycle Costing 


A comparative assessment of competing 
design alternatives based on their 


respective life cycle coats over their 
economic life. 


2.60 LifeSpan 


A common measure used to compute Life 
cycle costing for all competing alternatives 
so as to ensure a common base for valid 
comparison. It may be expressed in terms 
of years or output such as km run, or 
kilowatt hours produced or number of 
units manufactured. 


2.61 Life, Actual 


The period of time an asset is actually 
used. 


2.62 Life, Design 


The period of life assumed by the designer 
for a product or project, under his expected 
levels of use, maintenance, repair and 
disposal. 


2.63 Life, Economic 


That period of life over which an 
investment continues to be the least-cost 
alternative for meeting a particular 
objective. 


2.64 Maintenance and Repair Cost 


The total of lab our, material and other 
related costs incurred in carrying out 
inspection, preventive maintenance 
(including replacement) and repair on an 
asset, and/or on its systems and 
components. 


NOTE In chemical industries ETP will be 
included in the cost; cost of disposal of 
waste generated will be included. 


2.65 Manufacturing Costs 


The total of operating costs chargeable to 
production of the given product includes 
direct expenses such as material, labour, 
shop overheads and cost of disposal of 
waste generated. 


2.66 Marginal Costs 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


The change in total cost caused by varying 
the output by one unit. 


2.67 Merit Points 


An evaluation of total performance or 
quality in numerical terms vis-a-vis all 
applicable performance criteria, clearly 
defined and weighted. 


2.68 Net Benefits 


The difference between the gross benefits 
and the total costs, both discounted to Net 
Present Value (NPV). 


NOTE— The consideration of net benefits 
would consider accounting depreciation, 
taxation, interests. 


2.69 Nominal Discount Rate 


The rate of interest reflecting the time 
value of money stemming both from 
inflation and the real earning power of 
money over time. 


2.70 Non-recurring Cost 


Cost that occurs or is expected to occur 
only once. 


2.71 Obsolete 


No longer useful because something better 
has been invented. It may not be useful for 
many other entities. 


2.72 Operating Cost for Consumer 


The amount procurement cost plus 
operating cost throughout the life cycle 
minus disposal value (it could be negative 
also). 


2.73 Operating Cost for Producer 


A term used in a manufacturing activity or 
service utility and similar to manufacturing 
cost used in a production unit. 


2.74 Opportunity Cost of Capital 


The rate of return possible on the best 
available investment of comparable risk. 


2.75 Overhead Cost 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


A cost or expense inherent in the 
performing of operations, that is 
engineering construction, operating or 
manufacturing which cannot be charged to 
or identified with a specific part of the 
product, or asset and therefore, must be 
allocated on empirical basis believed to be 
equitable, or handled as a_ business 
expense, independent of the volume of 
production. 


2.76 Payback Period 


The time it takes the benefits resulting 
from an investment to payback the cost 
involved. A simple payback period does 
not consider the time value of money. A 
discounted payback period does. 


2.77 Present Value Factor; Present 
Worth Factor 


The discount factor used to convert future 
benefits and costs to the present. 


2.78 Present Worth Method 


A method that requires conversion of all 
future cash flows to a present value 
considering both inflation and opportunity 
cost of capital. Sometimes also called 
‘Present Value Method’. 


2.79 Present Worth; Present Value 


The value of a benefit or cost derived by 
discounting future cash flows to the 
present value. 


NPV= Present Value — Current Investment 
2.80 Procurement Price 


The amount paid to the vendor/contractor 
for the product, service, or capital 
equipment. 


2.81 Project Scope 


The defined limits or scope of the project 
expressed in quality and quantity. 


2.82 Rate of Return 


A ratio relating to the net profit or cash 
flow incomes to investments. 


2.83 Recurring Costs 


Costs that recur on a periodic basis 
throughout the life of a project. 


2.84 Redundant 


No longer needed for a job and therefore 
out of work. The item which is redundant 
with one entity may be of use to other 
entity. 


2.85 Resale/Salvage/Residual Value 


The monetary sum expected from the 
disposal of an asset at the end of its 
economic life, or at the end of the study 
period. Also, termed as salvage value or 
scrap value in certain cases depending 
upon how the asset may be treated after 
disposal. (refer end of life) 


2.86 Scrap 


Discarded material generated during the 
process which may or may not fetch value. 


2.87 Sensitivity Analysis 


A technique to assess the effect a change 
in the input variable(s) has on the resulting 
output. For instance, the effect on the rate 
of return by assumed changes in inputs 
such as raw material cost, wages, energy, 
taxes, duties, natural causes, etc. It is an 
analysis deliberately carried out to take 
into account the effects of uncertainties. 


2.88 Standard Cost 


A benchmark cost which is based on pre- 
established measures that are expected to 
remain unchanged over an extended period 
of time. Should be periodically reviewed. 
Usually fixed for production or 
construction items or operations. 


2.89 Study Period 


The length of time over which an 
investment is analyzed (see2.60). 


2.90 Sunk Cost 


A cost that has already been incurred and 
that will not be affected by an investment 
decision (therefore should notbe 
considered in making a current investment 
decision). 


2.91 Sustainability 


State of the global system, including 
environmental, social and economic 
aspects, in which the needs of the present 
are met without compromising the ability 
of future generations to meet their own 
needs. 


2.92 Time Value of Money 


A name given to the fact that the value of 
money changes with time. Investment in a 
project requires that funds either be 
borrowed (thus incurring an interest 
charge) or that it be taken from owner 
resources (thus foregoing potential interest 
income). Because of these interest costs, 
the time at which money is required 
(today, next year, or 10 years from now) 
becomes very important in decision 
making. It takes into account both the 
opportunity cost and inflation/deflation. 


2.93 Total Cost of Ownership 


While the value of a product covers all 
components of value over the “Whole-Of- 
Life” (WOL), the costs incurred on the 
product should also take into consideration 
the total of various elements of costs 
incurred over WOL of the product. For 
this purpose, future costs are discounted to 
present value (not to be confused with the 
value we are discussing — this is a financial 
discounting concept). For example, it 
would not be prudent to buy a cheap car, 
which has a very high cost of operating. 
This is called variously as WOL or “Life- 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


Time-Cost” (LCC) or “Total Cost of 
Ownership” (TCO). The last is a preferred 
nomenclature in procurement and is 
defined as the total of all costs associated 
with a product, service, or capital 
equipment that are incurred over its 
expected life. Typically, these costs can be 
broken into four broad categories: 1) 
Procurement price, ii) Acquisition costs, 
iii) Usage costs, and IV) End-of-life costs. 


2.94 Usage Costs 


In the case of a product, all costs 
associated with converting the procured 
part/material into the finished product and 
supporting it through its usable life. In the 
case of a service, all costs associated with 
the performance of the service that is not 
included in the procurement price. In the 
case of capital equipment, all costs 
associated with operating the equipment 
through its life. Examples of usage costs 
are inventory, conversion, wastage, lost 
productivity, lost sales, warranty, 
installation, training, downtime, and so on. 


2.95 Value Analysis (VA) 


Application of a framework based 
approach to product cost improvement 
and/or product function improvement 
through idea generation and implementing 
engineering change. 


2.96 Value Engineering (VE) 


Application of techniques for function- 
based analysis of features during the 
product development stage with the goal 
of improving value, typically carried out 
before any capital investment in tooling, 
plant or equipment. 


2.97 Variable Costs 


All those costs direct, indirect, etc, which 
may vary for a given level of output. 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Resource Management Sectional Committee, MSD 12 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Materials Management, 


New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Limited, New Delhi 


CMAI Association of India, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, Gurgaon 


Department of Scientific and Industrial 


Research, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, 


New Delhi 


Institute of Management, Nirma University 


Institute of Steel Development and Growth, 


New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Management, Indore 


Indian Institute of Management, 
Tiruchirappalli 


Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 


International Management Institute, New 


Delhi 


International Facility Management 


Association 


Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public 


Enterprises 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. K. JAIN (Chairman) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
Ms EKTA BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI N. K. GOYAL 


DR PRADEEP KUMAR 
DR DEVESH TIWARI (Alternate) 


DR VIPIN SAHNI 
SHRI VIRENDER SINGH (Alternate) 


DR SUJATA CHAKLANOBIS 


SHRI M. SARAVANAN 
SHRI N. PRABAKARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBIR VERMA 


SHRI PYDI LAKSHMAN RAO 


PROF RISHIKESHA T. KRISHNAN 


DR BHMARAYA METRI 


SHRI SIVAKUMAR PALANIAPPAN 


DR MAMTA MOHAPATRA 
DR SWATI DHIR(Alternate) 


SHRI VINAY KUMAR SHETTY 


DR NITIN AGARWAL 


Organization(s) 


R Systems International Ltd, Noida 


IS 13174 (Part 1) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI PREM GOSWAMI 


SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR SHUKLA 
(Alternate) 


Steel Authority of India Limited, New Delhi SHRI VIKRAM SAXENA 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


SHRI ANINDYA CHAKALADAR (Alternate) 
SHRI B. DHAL 
Ms RENU SHARMA 
SHRI ANUPAM KAUL 


SHRIMATI SNEHLATA, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND 
HEAD (MSD) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex- officio Member)] 


MemberSecretary 


SHRI KISHORE MANDAL 
Scientist `B’ (Management and Systems), BIS 


Composition of MSD 12/Panel-5 


Representative(s) 
SHRI V. K. JAIN (Convener) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR 
Ms EKTA BHARDWAJ (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. BHARDWAJ 
SHRI VINAY KUMAR SHETTY 


SHRI ANUPAM KAUL 
SHRI LAKSHMAN RAO PYDI 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Materials Management, New Delhi 


Bharat Electronics Limited, Ghaziabad 


Bureau of supply chain Logistics 


International Facility Management Association, 
Bangalore 


IN PERSONAL CAPACITY 


Institute of Steel Development and Growth, New 
Delhi 


(Continued from second cover) 


1) Operating Cost for producer 

2) Operating cost for consumer 

3) Obsolete 

4) Overhead cost 

5) Procurement price 

6) Redundant 

7) Resale / salvage /residual value 

8) Sustainability 

9) Scrap 

10) Total cost of ownership 

11) Usage costs 
This standard (Part 1) is a part of IS 13174 under the general title ‘Life Cycle Costing’. 
Other part in this series is: 

Part 2 Life Cycle Costing: Part 2 Methodology 

For convenience, the terminology has been arranged in alphabetical sequence. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in 
Annex A. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 12 (16741). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


