UDC 621-928.235

IS:12213-1987 Indian Standard
(Reaffirmed 2003)

CODE .
1. Scope sizes.

FOR MECHANICAL
vibrating screens

VIBRATING
used for, screening
with

SCREENS
the material of various grain

Covers mechanical

1.1 The standard sieves'.

screen sizes shall be in accordance

IS : 2405-1980

`Specification

for industrial

2. Nomenclature - For the purpose of this standard, vibrating screens shall be designated as in Fig. 1 and 2. 3. Classification

the

various

components

of mechanical

3.1 Application of Machine - A machine for screening, grading, dewaterizing material of various sizes. Vibrating screen may be with dust cover for air environment. 3.2 Types of Vibration 3.2.1 vibration

or scalping the pollution control

Circular motion vibration - Eccentric mass and/or eccentric shaft gives centrifugal of basket/live frame. Concentric shaft with eccentric weights may also be used. rotating shafts

force for

3.2.2 Straight line motion vibration - Eccentric masses are set on two counter direction to give straight line vibration to the basket/live frame.

rotating

in

3.2.3 Gyratory motion vibration - Eccentric mass attached to vertical shaft gives centrifugal force This type of motion shall be considered in for horizontal vibratory motion of basket/live frame. special cases. 3.3 Type of Enclosure 3.3.1 Vibratfng screen with dust cover - The vibrating screens aie to be provided with dust cover, in case dust containment or extraction is envisaged. Vent hood may be provided to connect with dust collection system. 3.3.2 Vibrating screen without dust cover - These vibrating screens are without screen is fitted with open basket/live frame where dust generation is not envisaged, 3.4 Number of Decks 3.4.1 3.4.2 Single deck Double deckTriple deckFour deckThe screens are provided The screens are provided The screens are provided The screens are provided with with with with one deck vibrating basket/live frame. dust cover. The

two decks.
three decks.

3.4.3 3.4.4

four decks.

3.5 Type of Cloth Fixing
3.5.1 Longitudinal tensioning arrangement and tensioning is done at the end of the screen. Where cloth is fitted with vibrating screen, fixing

3.5.2 Side tensioning arrangement Fixing and tensioning 3.6 Type of Screening

Screens are provided with cross is done from the side of screen basket/live frame.

tensioning

arrangement.

3.6.1 Vibrating screen -The screens are used for gradation deck are fine, medium and large.
Adopted 3 BUREAU
MANAK OF BHAVAN,

of

sizing

purpose.

The openings

of

16 October

1987

6

May

1988,

BIS

Gr 3

INDIAN STANDARDjS 9 BAHADUR SHAH! ZAFAR fMARG NEW DELHI 110002

IS:12213-1987
SCREEN BASKET BE ARING SPRING UNIT

E ME

DRIVE ONE DECK

UNIT

c
TWO DECK

I

THREE

DECK

FIG.

1

VIBRATION

SCREEN

WITHOUT

DUST

COVER

AND

CHUTE

2

IS : 12213 - 1987
SCREEN \ DUST
COVER -I\

CLOTH \

BEARING

ASSEMtiLY

BASE FRAME

ONE DECK

TWO

DECK

T
THREE OECK

FIG. 2 VIBR ATION

SCREEN WITH

DUST COVER AND DISCHAR GE CHUTE

3

IS:12213-1987
3.6.2 Grizzly scalper -The screens with percentage of undersize particles are less. 3.6.2.1 3.6.2.2 Vibrating type -This Roller.grizzle is similar comparatively large opening. The screens are used where

to vibrating

screens. are rotated along its axis.

Material

rolls over the rollers which

3.7 Basket Mounting 3.7.1 3.7.2 3.7.3 V-spring Supported on base frame. on base frame. from top support.

Vertical spring Vertical spring -

Supported Suspended

3.6 Screen inclination 3.8.1 Horizontal type Screen almost horizontal with downslope 0 to 5". capacity and

3.8.2 Inclined type - Screen downslope shall be decided, based on screening material characteristics and shall normally be between 15 to 25" from horizontal.

4. Principle of Operation -The vibrations are given to basket/live frame by unbalanced masses. The vibration may be of either circular motion or straight motion. Material is fed from feed end on Undersize material flows down the deck and oversize material flows vibrating basket/live frame. ahead on separate zone. The zone may be divided in different chutes connected down below. 5. Construction -Vibrating basket/live unit, bars, screens/grizzly frame, shall consist mainly of :

4 b) 4

vibrating vibrating

screen cloth, or peiforated plate/grizzly

d)
e)

supporting frame or dust cover, and drive unit. It shall consist rolled section of or

5.1 Vibrating Basket/Live Frame -It shall be of bolted or welded construction. Cross members shall either be of standard two side plates and cross members. frame section with adequate strength. 5.2 Vibrator Unit

5.2.1 Circular motion vibration - It shall consist of concentric/eccentric shaft mounting in duty with special clearance. spherical/cylindrical roller bearing. The bearing shall be of vibration arrangement for unbalanced Unbalanced masses are provided at either end of bearings. Adjustment Bearing unit shall be properly masses shall be provided. ubricated by grease/oil. Circular motion vibration shall normally be applied to inclined screen. 5.2.2 Straight line motion vibration - It shall consist masses .. of two shafts with unbalanced rotating in opposite directions and mounted SO that the line of action between them passes through the centre of gravity of screen assembly resulting in near straightline or little elliptical motion at an angle of approximately 45" with screen surface in the direction of material flow. Vibrating duty bearing shall be used. Bearing unit shall be properly lubricated, either by oil or grease. Unbalanced mass direction shall be adjusted to give required angle of throw in straight line direction. Straight line motion vibration shall normally be applied to horizonta I screen. 5.3 Bearing Arrangement The circular motion screens may have the following bearing shaft arrangement. on two

5.3.1 Two-bearing system - The vibrator unit shall consist of an eccentric bearings each bearing being supported by one of the side plates.

mounted

5.3.2 Four-bearhg system - The vibrator unit shall consist of an eccentric shaft mounted on the the outboard bearings attached to the stationary main frame in addition to the bearing arrangement The side plate bearings being eccentric to the outboard bearings, as in case of two-bearing system. the eccentric shaft serves as both a crank arm and a counterbalance and produces positive action. 4

IS:l2213-1987
5.4 Mounting of Vibrator Unit-The vibrator unit shall be attached to the side plates through or near the centre of gravity of the screen to generate uniform vibration throughout the entire screen. 5.5 Screen Cloth - Screen cloth shall be fitted with edge binding plate in case of smaller opening and thin wire size. Large opening and bigger size with cloth are fitted with straight plates only. Cloth may be provided with middle fixing arrangement in case of bigger size cloth. 5.6 Base Frame, Dust Cover and Feed Box ( Optional) -Sturdy base frame may be provided to support vibrating units. The natural frequency of base frame shall not be near or equal to the operating frequency of screen. This shall preferably be higher than the screen operating frequency. Dust cover may be provided with inspection and maintenance door for spare part replacement. Dust hood vent may be provided for connecting to the dust collection system. Hinge door may be provided for spring unit and unbalanced mass inspection. Width of dust cover may be selected such that proper clearance is available during vibrating motion. Necessary feed box may be provided in such a way that the material is fed to the screen across its entire width in the direction of flow. be provided for all types of vibrating screen drive. 5.7 Drive Unit - V-belt drive shall normally However, drive motor with universal coupling may also be used for drive. Drive motor may be provided with pivoted motor/sliding base for proper tensioning as well as to take up V-belt stretch due to start/stop bounces. 6. Material of Construction

6.1 ShaftThe material of the shaft shall be 45C8 of IS : 1570(Part 2 )-I979 `Schedules for wrought steels) (first revision)' steels for general engineering purposes: Part 2 Carbon steels ( unalloyed equivalent or as per designer's recommendation depending upon duty condition. 6.2 Bearing Housing -Cast iron conforming to IS : 210-1978 `Specification for grey iron castings ( third revision)' or cast steel conforming to IS : 1090 - 1982 `Specification for carbon steel castings for general engineering purposes ( third revision )' or fabricated type depending upon designer's recommendation. to IS : 226-1975 `Structural steel ( standard quality ) (fifth 6.3 Side Plate - St42S conforming revision )' or flow alloy steel or boiler quality conforming to IS : 200-I 969 `Method for determination of copper number of cotton textile material ( first revision )' or low alloy steel. 6.4 Pulleys/Sheave Cast iron conforming to Gr 20 of IS : 210-1978 or fabricated. requirecross

6.5 Screen Cloth - Screen cloth 0'5 percent ments depending upon duty condition. 6.6 Hardware members. High tensile hardware shall

carbon steel ( high carbon steel ) or purchaser's be used for connecting the live frame

and

6.7 Dust Cover/Base Frame (Optional) 7. General Requirements

-

St42S of IS : 226-I 975.

7.1 Safety Requirement-The design of the screen shall minimize hazards to the operator. The pulleys, belts and unbalanced mass which are rotating at high speed shall be well protected with a guard. The screen shall be provided with dust covers for dust containment and/or dust extraction. The screen may be supplied with a screen base frame. 7.2 Maintenance Accessibility - The design of the vibrating screen component sub-assemblies and parts for maintenance and repairs. shall provide accessibility to all

means shall be provided for the bearings. All lubricated nipples should 7.3 Lubrication - Lubrication be located at approachable distances. The lubrications may be with grease arrangement or oil type. Lubrication shall be selected as per duty condition. 7.4 Designation a) Horizontal b) Grading C) Width d) number The designations or inclined or scalping of vibrating screens shall include the following:

screens, or dewaterizing,

and length, of decks provided,

e) Dust cover or base frame, and f) Type of vibration. 6

IS:12213-1987
7.5 Supply - The manufacturer supplier shall give the certificate Appendix A. . shall supply certificate to the purchaser for main components. The of the test run items to be covered under this certificate as given in

APPENDIX ( Clause 7.5 )
INFORMATION TO THE

A

TO BE GIVEN IN THE CERTIFICATE BY THE MANUFACTURER PURCHASER AT THE TIME OF SUPPLYING THE MACHINE

A-l. The inspection report shall state that the each part of the mechanical vibrating screen has been inspected before assembly to ensure that it is free-from visible defect in casting, machining, etc. The report shall include overall dimensions and specifications as per order. A-2. Test Run Test run report shall include the following: run continuously under no load after completion

a) Number of hours the equipment of assembly. b) In the test run, the following 1) Bearing temperature, 2) Amplitude of the vibrations, 3) If the construction 4) If the lubrication

has been

points

shall be observed:

of the machine condition

is satisfactory,

and

is satisfactory.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE
the material of various grain Of construction, recommended vibrating screens for use in

Mechanical vibrating screens are generally used for screening classification, details sizes. This standard covers the nomenclature, material of construction and safety requirements for mechanical nonhazardous areas. 6

F&ted at Swatantrr Bhrrat Prosa,Delhi, India

