( First Reprint August
UDC 621.315'221'8

1997 ) IS:10810

: 621'315'616'9

[ 678'073/`074]

: 620'172

(Part 7)-1984
: .., .< .+,Y,I I i

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR CABLES
APART 7 TENSILE STRENGTH AND ELONGATION THERMOPLASTIC AND ELASTOMERICiNSULATION

`,;` ( Reaffirmed i; ,",; ) .-U-, Id ,`I2001

AT BREAK OF AND SHEATH

I. Scope-Covers the method to determine the tensile stre~ngth and thermoplastic and elastomeric insulation and sheath of electric cables.

elongation

at break of

2. Significance - During the process of manufacture and during installation electric cables are unavoidably subjected to mechanical stresses; particularly bending. Thermoplastic or elastomeric insulation and/or sheath in the cable are also subjected to these stresses and strains. Th~is test is carried out to ensure that the insulation and/or sheath have requisite tensile strength and elongation :o withstand the same. 8. Terminology j.1 Gauge Length -The 3f length is determined. original length of that portion of the specimen over which strain or change at the

3.2 Elongation at Break - The increase in gauge length of a tensile test specimen mom-ent of break and expressed as a percentage of the original gauge length. 3.3 Breaking Load The load at which the test specimen breaks. from

measured

strength is computed 3.4 Tensile Strength at Break -Tensile load and cross-sectional area of the test specimen. 4. Apparatus 4.1 Die specimens to prevent

the measurements

of breaking

The shape and dimensions of dumb-bell punching die for preparing ~dumb-bell ttest shall be as shown in Fig. 1 and 2. The die shall be sharp and free from nicks in order ragged edges on the specimens.
MARKER 20 LINES ~

75 r

c

All FIG. 1

dimensions

in millimetres. TEST PIECE

STANDARD
MAEKER

DUMB-BELL
LINES

IAll FIG. 2 SMALL

50
dimensions

J
in millimetres. TEST PIECE

DUMB-BELL

Adopted

14 March

1984

@June

1985, BIS I

Gr 2

BUREAU MANAK

OF BHAVAN,

INDIAN 9 BAHADUR

STANDARDS SHAH ZAFAR MARG

NEW DELHI 110002

IS:1081O(Part

7)-1984
It shall have the capacity to meet of jaws as specified in 8.3. The be measured manually or with an

4.2 Tensile Testing Machine - The machine shall be automatic. the requirement of this test and shall have the rate of separation grips shall firmly hold the test specimen. The elongation may automatic device. 4.3 Analytical Weighing Balance Sensitivity 0'1 mg. dimensions

4.4 Mechanical/Optical Instruments not worse than 0'01 mm. 5. Material 6. Test -No materi.al

For measuring

of test

specimen

to an accuracy this test.

other than the test specimen

is required

for performing

Specimen a piece of insulated conductor/sheathed cable taken not

6.1 The specimen shall be prepared from less than 300 mm from the end of cable.

6.2 Type of Test Specimen - The test specimen may be of two types, dumb-bell or tubular. Whenever possible, dumb-bell type test specimens shall be used, Tubular test specimens shall be used only when the insulated conductor/sheathed cable is of such a small size that it is not possible to prepare the dumb-bell test pieces from them. 6.3 Number of-Test Specimens Four in each case of insulation or sheath.

6.4 Preparation

of Test Specimens less than 100 mm long shall be conductor/sheathed cable piece

6.4.1 Tubular test speimens - A tube of insulation/sheath not obtained by carefully removing other components of the insulated without damaging the insulation/sheath. 6.4.2 Dumb-bell test specimens

6.4.2.1 The insulation/sheath shall be cut open length-wise and the other components of the insulated conductor/sheathed cable which are not to be part of +his test specimen shall be removed carefully without causing damage to insulation/sheath. 6.4.2.2 Semi-conducting layers, if any, adhering removed carefully without damaging the insulation. to the insulation inside or outside shall be

6.4.2.3 It shall be permissible to grind or cut the insulation/sheath, by a method which does It is not not over-heat or distort it, so as to obtain two parallel surfaces between the marker lines. normally necessary to remove by grinding the webs -Formed between the wires of a stranded After grinding or cutting, the thickness of conductor, but in case of dispute this should be done. test pieces shall be not less than 0'8 mm and not more than 2'0 mm. 6.4.2.4 From test pieces of insulation/sheath prepared as above, dumb-bell test specimen shall test specimens shall be punched be punched in accordance with Fig. 1. If possible, two dumb-bell side by side, When the diameter of the insulated conductor/sheathed cable is too small, the dumbbell test specimen shail be punched in accordance with Fig. 2. :6.5 Determination of Cross-Sectional Area of Test Specimen by

be determined either 6.5.1 Cross-sectional area ( mm2) of tubular test specimen -- Shall dimensional measurements or by computation from density, mass and length measurement. 6.5.2 Cross-sectional area ( mms ) of the dumb-be// of the follcwing methods. test specimen Shall be determined

by one

the dimensional measurements - The cross-section&l area of each 6.5.2.1 Method A -From of the dumb-bell test specimen shall be arrived at from the measurements of width and thickness at three points between the marker lines ( that is geuge marks ), on both surface of the test specimen of the cross-section. Th? smallest of the taking the mean of the two values for th, n calculation three cross-sections thus found shall be used for the calculation of ihe tensile strength. Thre instrument to an accuracy of measurements shall be made using a suiL qble mechanical/optical O-0 Imm. If m_xhanical instrument is used care shall be taken to keep the contact pressure as small, as possible. 2

IS:10810(Part7)-1984 6.5.2.2 Method I3 - From the density, fhe mass and the length - The mean cross-sectional area of the gauged portion ( that is portion between the marker lines ) of dumb-bell test specimen shall be determined after the tensile test. For this purpose, the specimen after test shall be cut accurately and squarely along the middle of each gauge mark and weighed to give the mass of the gauge length to an accuracy of 0'001 g. The mean cross-sectional area is then calculated from~this mass, gauge length.and density. 7. Conditioning - All the test specimens of not less than 3 h prior to testing, 8. Procedure 8.1 The test shall be made within 5 min of removing and specimen shall receive minimum handling. the specimen from the conditioning cabinet shall be kept eat a temperature of 27 & 2% for a period

8.2 Immediately before the tensile test, the respective gauge length shall be marked by two lines centrally on each specimen, The gauge length shall be 20 mm for tubular specimen and in accordance with Fig. 1 in case of dumb-bell specimen. For the small dumb-bell specimen of Fig. 2, the gauge length shall be 10 mm. 8.3 The rate of separation of the jaws (grips) in case of doubt or dispute, the separation elongation of the test specimen between 600 percentlmin. shall be 250 f 50 mmlmin in all cases. However, of the grips shall be such that the relative rate of the marker lines, that is, gau_ge length, is about

8.4 The tensile strength and elongation at break shall be determined simultaneously on the same test specimen. During the test the distance between the marker lines shall be closely followed and the elongation shall be determined by measuring the distance between the two marker lines at the instant of break, that is, the separation of the gauge marks at break. This distance is used to calculate the percentage elongation at break based on the original gauge length. The breaking load at which the test specimen breaks is also recorded for each test piece. An shall be shall be test shall unsatisfactory result due to any test specimen breaking due to damage in or at the grips At least four valid results ignored and the test shall be made on a new test specimen. obtained in order to calculate the tensile strength and elongation at break; otherwise the be repeated. area and the

8.5 The tensile strength shall be calculated on the original mean cross-sectional percentage.elongation shall be based on the original gauge length. 9. Tabulation of Observations --Description Symbol Unil

Observed Values for Specimen 1 2 3 4

Mean value of outer diameter test specimen

of tubular test

D kV

mm mm

Mean value of width of dumb-bell specimen within gauge length Mean vaule of thickness Mass of relevant Relevant toad length length

of test specimen of test specimen

f m I F

mm !J mm N mm mm

of test specimen

at break gauge lengkh at break

Original

G G2

Separati~on of gauge marks

3

IS:10810

(Pad

7).1984

10. Calculation 10.1 Calculation 10.1.1 Area a) ~For tubular test specimen: A =%Y t for individual Specimen

b) For dumb-bell

test

specimen A=Wxt OR A1 000 m -sx I

where A is area of the specimen, s is the density 10.1.2 Tensile 10.1.3 Elongation 10.2 The calculated result. strength, at break, of material, mm?; and g/cmg.

F N/mm" 3 X. percent = 7Ga-G1 x 100 .

maximum and the minimum values of the tensile strength and elongation from the values are discarded and the average of the remaining two is considered as the test

11. Report 11.1 Test for Tensile Strengfh Cable Type Batch No./Lot Cable 11.2 Results Reference Specification Observed Vaalue at break, percent N/mm' Specified Value NoJDrum . No. No. and Elongation at Break of Insolation/Sheath of Material

Property Tensile strength

Elongation _ 11.3 Conclusion

at break,

-

Specimen

meets/does

no~t meet the requirements

of the specification.

4 Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

