IS 10303 : 1893 IS0 6749 : 1984

( Reaffirmed 1999 )

(

'@FTT

@%-WJI )

lndhn Standard
EARTH-MOV ING MACHINERY - PRESERVAT ION AND STORAGE

( First Revision )

UDC

621'878/`879

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 3 ZAFAR MARG

October 1993

Bulk Handling

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

HMD 07

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This lndian Standard which is identical with IS0 6749 : 1984 `Earth-moving machinery-Preservation and storage', issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( IS0 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the-Bulk Handling Equipment Sectional Committee (HMD 7) and approval of the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This Indian Standard standard, this standard system. was first is being published in 1982. revised by adopting Consequent upon the IS0 standard the revision under dual of IS0 number

The text of IS0 standard has been approved for publication as Indian Standard tions. Certain terminology and conventions are however not identical to those Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' should be read as `Indian Standard'. appear, referring in Indian to this

without deviaused in Indian standard, they

b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while practice is to use a point ( . ) as a decimal marker. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

Standards,

the current

IS 10280 : 1993 `Earth-moving machinery Operation and maintenance - Format and content of manuals' ( under print ) is a necessary adjunct to this standard and may cover the information required to be included in the operator's manual in accordance with -4.1.6 of this standard. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off values should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS JO303 : 1993 IS0 6749 : 1984

Indian Standard
EARTH-MOVING MACHINERY - PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

( First Revision )

1

Scope

4 4.1

Preservation General

This International Standard specifies the general methods for preservation and removal of preservation materials from earthmoving machinery and its elements, and the categories of storage and transportation conditions.

4.1.1 Preservation treatment consists of preliminary operations possibly involving some dismantling, marking, preparation for preservation, the preservation proper, and final packaging. 4.1.2 Preservation of a newly-manufactured machine and its elements, unless otherwise stipulated in the order or the contract of sale, shall be carried out by the manufacturer. 4.1.3 All materials used for the preservation of a machine and its elements shall conform to the specifications laid down in International Standards or other appropriate technical documents specified in the order or contract of sale, and shall ensure conservation of a machine for the intended period of preservation. 4.1.4 A machine shall be delivered for preservation treatment without any traces of corrosion on metal surfaces, or damage to paintwork, metallic, or other coatings. A used machine shall be reconditioned prior to preservation. 4.1.5 Preservation treatment shall be carried out in suitable conditions (ambient temperature, humidity) and with the correct materials which provide for the required quality of preservation v\. 1: taking due care to ensure the safety of personnel and protection of the environment. 4.1.6 Each machine given the preservation treatment shall be provided with instructions for the removal of preservatives.

2

Field of application

This International Standard is applicable to newlymanufactured earth-moving machines as well as to those already in use to be preserved.

3

-Definitions

For the purpose of this International Standard, the following definitions apply :

3.1

preservation : Set of operations to be carried out by the manufacturer, the user and others for the purpose of protecting a machine against the corrosive action of the environment and against minor damage that might occur during handling, transportation and storage.

3.2

transportation : Conveyance of a machine by any mode of transport, i.e., rail, road, sea, river and air. 3.3 storage : Period during which a machine is kept idle from the moment preservative is applied until the moment the preservative is removed.

3.4

removal of preservatives : Set of operations to be carried-out by the dealer, the user and/or others prior to putting a machine into service.

These instructions may be included as a separate chapter in the operator's manual.

1

IS 10303 : 1993
IS0 6749 : 1964

4.1.7 The instructions for preservation and removal of preservatives svall be packed in a labelled waterproof envelope and attached to the machine in a conspicuous place. 4.1.8 The instructions for removal of preservatives shall specify ttie categories of conditions for storage and transportation, the idate of preservation, and the duration of validity nf preservation. The instructions shall also specify the methods forthe remval of presehatives and reassembly of dismantled elements, a list of tools and appliances needed for these operations. 4.1.8 CYperationsof preservation and removal of preservatives shall be Icarried out with due regard for the general accikient prevent& measures specified, if necessary, by the nat/onal governing body having jurisdiction. 4.1.10 :Full details concerning preservation, packing and transpohation shall be specified by the manufacturer in special instructions included with the machine documentation ;upon requesti for example a) a method of lifting the machine for loading and/or unloading in order to keep preservatives intact; b) particular requirements, such as operations necessary when a machine is to be transferred from one mode of transportation to another which may require unpacking, including a procedure for re-preservation. 4.1.11 It is important to ensure that tyres, hoses, etc. are protected against damage or deterioration by preservatives, by sokents used near them, and by exposureto the sun, mPisture and other natural occurrences.

4.2.1.4 Dismantled elements and their corresponding mating surfaces on the base machine may be appropriately marked to guide correct reassembly. Tags used for marking dismantled elements should be of waterproof material. 4.2.2` Preparation of surfaces for preservation

4.2.2.1 Surfaces of a machine and its dismantled elements requiring protection shall be cleaned and be free of corrosion, oil, and other contaminants, and dried. 4.2.2.2 Aqueous alkali solutions, organic solvents, blasting with abrasives or any other suitable means which ensure the required degree of cleanliness and do not cause damage to the machine can be used for cleaning and degreasing the outer surfaces. The cleaning method shall be chosen depending on the structural features and degree of soiling and the type of outer coatings present. 4.2.2.3 Preparation of surfaces by means of alkali solutions shall-be carried out in washing installations with such solutions and by such procedures that ensure the required degree of cleanliness and degreasing. 4.2.2.4 If organic solvents are used, the areas to be preserved shall be wiped with soft rags or brushes wetted with solvent. 4.2.2.5 If blasting with gbrasives is used, the surfaces shall be cleaned by blowing with @high-velocity jet of water or air containing fine abrasive particles. 4.2.2.6 After cleaning, the surfaces shall be thoroughly dried to remove traces of solvents and moisture by one of the following methods : a) b) blohing,with a jet of filtered, dry, compressed air;

4.2 4.2.1

Preliminary

operations and marking

Partial dismantling

`heating in a temperature-controlled oven; wiping with clean rag or paper; or

4.2.1.1 Partial dismantling shall be kept to a minimqm and shall be carried out : a) to give preservation treatment to inaccessible areas;

cl

d) subjecting to the action of IR rays or any other suitable means that will not damage the surfaces.

b) to safeguard protruding elements or easily damageable parts against damage or loss; and c) to bring down the overall dimensions of a pachine within the limits of transportation size specified in International Standards or other documents specified in the order or contract of sale. 4.2.1.2 When dismantled elements are to be attached to the base machine they shall be so secured that they may not shift or be damaged or lost during handling or transportation. 4.2.1.3 Fastenings used to attach the dismantled elements shall also be given the preservation treatment, and wherever possible, shall be secured to appropriate mating surfaces to guard against loss. 4.3 Preservation procedures protective coatings and types of

4.3.1 The preservation method and the type of protective coating shall be chosen depending on the structural features and the materials of the machine, preservation duration, storage and transportation conditions with due regard for the amount of labour needed and the availability of materials required for removing the preservative coatings. 4.3.2 Preservative coatings shall be applied to those metallic surfaces which, if corrodefl, may deteriorate the operational qualities of the mnchinf! or flf?tract from its exlwnal ap
pearance.

IS 40303 IS0

: 1993

6749 : 1964

4.3.3

The surfaces of non-vital parts or those of corrosionresistant metals such as copper, nickel, chromium, and bronze need not be treated, unless transported by sea.

4.3.4.3 Application of inhibitor polymer dopes on machine surfaces can be carried out by any suitable method which ensures a uniform coating without any discontinuities or inclusions.

Special attention should be given to protecting electrical system junction boxes, switches, relays, etc. Permanent protective coatings should be applied during the-assembly process. 4.3.4 4.3.4.1 Recommended preservation meth~ods

4.3.4.4 To protect against the influence of the sun, rubber elements shall be preserved by coating with light-proof compounds by means of a brush or by spraying or any other suitable method which ensures the required quality~of preservation.

Inhibitor coatings 4.3.5 Other suitable preservation methods can also be practised, or a combination of two or more preservation methods applied, provided such a procedure does not cause damage to the machine.

Protective inhibitor coatings recommended are inhibitor paper, alcohol or alcohol-aqueous solutions of inhibitors, and powdery or other forms of inhibitors capable of protecting the machine surfaces. 4.3.4.1.1 Protection by inhibitor paper : constituent parts of machines may be completely wrapped in inhibitor paper with sufficient overlapping at joints. To protect the elements of heavy machines of complicated configuration with inhibitor paper, an additional outer protective layer such as PVC film, metallic foil, etc. may also be used. 4.3.4.1.2 Alcohol or aqueous-alcohol. solutions of vapour phase inhibitors or powdery inhibitors can be applied to preserve~closed cavities which need to be airtight in the course of operation. After treating with inhibitor solutions, excess solution shall be removed and the machine or its elements dried until the inhibitor crystallizes on the preserved surfaces. All ports and cavities shall be covered with inhibitor paper or glued with-an adhesive polymer film and sealed. 4.3.4.2 Preservation with oil or dope coatings

4.3.6 Preservatives may be iemoved by one of the methods recommended in table 1 or by any other suitable method which does not cause damage to, or detract from, the external appearance of the machine.

Table 1 -

Methods recommended of preservatives

for removal

Preservation method Inhibitor coating on the surface Oil or dope coatingon the surface

Removal method Unwrap inhibitor paper, blow the cavitieswith hot, dry air or wash with soap-sodasolution Cleanse with hot water, detergent solution or wipe with organic
solvents and then wash with hot water or detergent solution

Inhibitor polymer coating on the surface Coating of light-proof compoundon rubbersurface

Peel off polymer film by cutting at a
suitable point

Wash with detergent

4.3.4.2.1 Preservation of outer surfaces with an oil coating shall be carried out by dipping, spraying or other suitable method. After the outer surfaces have been treated with oil, excess oil shall be allowed to drain away. 4.3.4.2.2 Preservation of inner surfaces shall be carried out by pouring oil into the cavities and subsequently rotating the corresponding moving parts of the machine, or by pumping oil into the system to be preserved, or by any other suitable means of applying the preserving oil. In this process, care should be taken that a uniform film of oil is applied to all surfaces being treated. Excess oil shall be allowed to drain~away. 4.3.4.2.3 Inner surfaces of hydraulic systems operating on inhibited hydraulic fluids shall be preserved by filling these systems with the appropriate operating fluids. 4.3.4.2.4 Preservative dopes in molten state or dissolved in white spirit shall be applied to the machine surfaces by spraying, coating or other suitable means which ensure the required quality of preservation. 4.3.4.2.5 Any defect c.ctected in the preservative coating shall 1x3c!limil,iltcd by applying the same oil or dope.

4.4

Packaging

4.4.1 Packaging is classified into protective and transport packing.

4.4.2 Protective packing is carried out to prevent or to inhibit penetration of moisture or corrosive gases, to delay diffusion of inhibitor vapours into outer space and to retain the inhibitor oil or dope on the machine surfaces, and to protect the machine against termites and rodents in the course of transportation or during starage.

4.4.2.1 The material and the type of protective packing shall be chosen depending~on the preservative applied, storage duration and transportation conditions. ,Packing materials recommended are waterproof paper, film, and sealing compounds.

4.4.2.2 Partial packing can be practised for machine surfaces of complicated configurations.

3

IS 10303
IS0 6749

: 1993
: 1964

4.4.2.3 If a machine is wrapped in paper or in film, the edges shall overlap each other, and the junctions shall be sealed. 4.4.3 Transport packing is intended to protect the machine against mechanical damage that might occur during handling, transportation and storage. 4.4.3.1 Transport packing used by the manufacturer shall be in compliance with International Standards or other documents stipulated in the order or contract of sale. 4.4.3.2 A machine can be shipped without any packing or only with partial packing of vital parts, provided such a packaging does not cause damage to or detract from the external appearance of the machine.

5.1.5 The categories of transportation conditions are listed in table 3. 5.1.6 The categories of storage and transportation for dismantled elements shall be the same as the categories of storage and transportation of the base machine. 5.2 Storage sites and conditions

5.2.1 Machines may be stored under cover, in the open air in transport packing, in closed unheated or air-conditioned premises, or under any other storage site conditions equivalent to or better than those recommended ~bythe manufaOurer. 5.2.2 Prior to putting into long-term storas, the machine shall be inspected and the condition of presehccrtiontreatment, seals, and components shall be checked. 5.2.3 The machine shall be set horizontally on supports to prevent warping of the frame or deformation of pneumatic wheels. The clearance bemeen the wheels and the supporting surface shall be not less than 8 cm. 5.2.4 Access openings, fuel filler openings, exhaust pipes and other openings through which atmospheric precipitations may penetrate into the inner cavities of component+nitsanddparts, shall be tightly closed with caps, plugs, water-resistant adhesive tape or other special devices. 5.2.5 Control levers and pedah shall be set in such positions where there is no danger of the machine being set in operation accidentally. 5.2.6 Storage batteries shall be disconnected. The level and density of electrolyte shall be in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer. When the machine is put into storage for more than one month, storage batteries shall be removed from the machine and put into storage in special premises. 5.2.7 Fuel, lubricants, hydraulic fluids, coolants and water in tanks shall be filled to the levels recommended by the manufacturer or the national governing body h'aving jurisdiction. 5.2.8 A machine in long-term storage shall be regularly inspected for its external appearance, the condition of preserved surfaces, and the preservatives. PrGferred inspection intervals for long-term storage are as follows :

5
5.1

Storage and transportation
Storage and transportation conditions

5.1.1 Four categories of severity for storage and transportation, depending on the nature of corrosive agents in the atmosphere and on storing conditions, are recognized. The categories are :

A - light duty.
6 C D medium duty, heavy duty, and very heavy duty.

The category of storage and transportation conditions shall be specified by the user (see 5.1.3, 5.1.4, and 5.1.51. 5.1.2 Storage is classified as short-term and long-term.

5.1.2.1 Short-term storage wvers periods up to two months. In short-term storage, the machine shall be held ready for immediate use. 5.1.2.2 Long-term storage covers periods exceeding two months. Longdterm storage is classified as a) b) for periods up to one year, for periods exceeding one year.

5.1.3 For machines in short-term storage, the normal caiegory is A (see 5.1.1). but under very severe corrosive conditions a higher category may be necessary. 5.1.4 The categories of long-term storage conditions are listed in table 2.

-

in temperate climatic conditions : every 6 months;

in tropical, cold, arctic and coastal climatic conditions : every 3 months.

IS 10303 : 1993
ISO 6749 : 1964

Table 2 Content of corrosive agents in open atmosphere Atmosphere Sulfur mg/mg Not over 0,OZ Chlorides mg/m3 oer dav Not over 0,3

Categories

of long-term

storage conditions Storage category in climatic region Tropical Temperate Cold Drv Humid

Storage

sites

Aural, forest, mountatn

Under cover or in open air in transport packing In closed unheated store-

1
C

I
C

I
B

I
D

house In air-conditioned~storehouse Industrial From 0,02 to 2.0 From 0.3 to 2,0 Under cover or in open air in transport packing In closed unheated store-

B A

B A

A A

C A

D

D

D

D

house In air-conditioned storehouse Coastal From 0.02 to 0.2 from 2,0 to 2 000 Under cover or in open air in

B A

C A

B A -

C A

1 transport packing
In closed unheated storehouse , In air-conditioned storehouse

D

D

D

C

C

-

C

1

A

1

A

1

-

1

A

NOTE -

The relative humidity in an air-conditioned storehouse should not exceed 70 %.

Table 3 -

Categories

of transportation

conditions

I
Land

Transport

I

Transportation condition On platform car or in open truck In rail wagon or in closed truck On shipdeck with measures to prevent penetration of water In shio hold

I

Category

I

River Air NOTES

In the hold or on deck with measures to prevent penetration of water -

B B

1 In case of transportation by sea or river, if the categories of storage and transportation are different, the more exacting of the two shall be taken. 2 In case of land or air transportation, if the categories of storage and transportation are different, a transportation category lesser by one degree shall be taken, provided the transportation duration is not more than 10 % of the storage duration (for example, B for C, or A for B).

RcproBraphy

Unit,

UIS,

New

Delhi,

India

__~~~

Standard Mark
Standards Act, 2986 and the Rules and Regulations

by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously cheked by Details of conditions under BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. which a licence for the use -of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed

Bureau of Indian

Standards
Standards Act,

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian of standardization, promote harmonious development of the activities certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright

marking

1986 to and quality

No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. This does not preclude the free use, in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. Enquiries relating ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the up for revision, latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. HMD 7 ( 0174 ) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication of Issue Text Affected

Date

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg,

New Delhi

110002 Telegrams ( Common : Manaksanstha to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central Eastern

Offices ? : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg Maniktola 37 84 99, 1 37 86 26, 53 38 43, ( 53 23 84 235 02 16, ( 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91,

331 01 31 331 13 75 1 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector : C. I. T. Campus, 35-C, CHANDIGARH MADRAS Andheri

Northern Southern Western Branches

160036 600113

IV Cross Road, Marol,

235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 63218 92

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093

( East )

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNGW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh. India

