Wd UTE IS 16344 : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


ART — E eer Huren A caret 
aut Pair cR fat waeatia ent 
Tara ch fen feeder 


Geosynthetics — Guidelines for 
Installation of Geotextile for 
Permanent Erosion Control 

in Hard Armor Systems 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ada AMA em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Wh WS, 9 SERA WHC BÉ we feeei-110002 
E am MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2015 Price Group 3 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Soil banks or slopes exposed to constant concentrated flows, currents or waves cannot support vegetation and 
thus need to be protected from erosion by hard armor systems. These systems include fabric formed revetments, 
gabions, articulating concrete blocks and riprap. In a hard armor system, water can seep in or out of the bank or 
slope and gradually carries soil particles with it creating voids causing loss of armor support over time called 
piping and thus culminates in shifting, rolling or other instability in the armor system. The traditional system 
may use controlled thickness filter layers of graded sand which is very costly and difficult to construct especially 
on steep slopes. 


Geotextiles with specific hydraulic and soil retention properties to complement the soil needing protection can 
be used as standard filter layers for hard armor systems as these can be installed with ease on slopes even under 
water and are cost effective. Depending upon the gradation of the bank soil, either a non-woven or a woven 
geotextile can be selected and used beneath hard armor system in an erosive environment. 


The primary function of geotextile in permanent erosion control applications is filtration. Geotextile filtration 
properties are a function of site hydraulic conditions and the in-situ soil gradation, density, and plasticity. 


Survivability of geotextiles is very important from the viewpoint of their long-term durability and is defined as 
resistance to mechanical damage during construction and initial operation. The ability of a geotextile for permanent 
erosion control to survive installation and associated pressures during service shall be assured if it is to perform 
as designed. Installation damage to a geotextile is a function of the following: 


a) Geotextile thickness, 

b) Compactive effort and fill thickness, 

c) Grain size distribution of backfill, 

d) Angularity of backfill, 

e) Polymer used in the manufacture of geotextile, and 
f) Geotextile manufacturing process. 


Geotexiles are mainly made from polyester (PET) or polypropylene (PP). PP is lighter than water, strong and 
very durable. PET is heavier than water, has excellent strength and creep properties, and is compatible with most 
common soil environments. Geotextiles are mainly of two types, namely, woven and non-woven geotextiles. 
Knitted and stitch bonded geotextiles are occasionally used in the manufacture of specialty products. Non-woven 
geotextiles are highly desirable for subsurface in planer drainage, and erosion control applications as well as, for 
road stabilization over wet moisture sensitive soils. Out of woven geotextiles, slit film fabrics geotextiles are 
commonly used for sediment control, that is silt fence and road stabilization applications but are poor choices for 
subsurface drainage and erosion control applications. Monofilament woven geotextiles have better permeability 
making them suitable for certain drainage and erosion control applications. High strength multifilament woven 
geotextiles are primarily used in reinforcement applications. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16344 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GUIDELINES FOR 
INSTALLATION OF GEOTEXTILE FOR PERMANENT 
EROSION CONTROL IN HARD ARMOR SYSTEMS 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes guidelines for installation 
of geotextile for permanent erosion control in hard 
armor systems. It does not apply to other types of 
geosynthetic erosion control materials such as turf 
reinforcement mats. 


2 SURFACE PREPARATION 


The slope or bank shall be graded smoothly and be 
free from obstructions, depressions and soft pockets 
of material by clearing vegetation, large stones, limbs, 
stumps, trees, brush, roots and other debris. The surface 
shall be compacted. Any pockets of soft soil shall be 
removed and replaced with compacted earth material 
to provide a consistently uniform and strong, stable 
surface. Remove all sharp objects and large stones. 


NOTE — Excessive soft spots or voids may be unsuitable for 
geosynthetic installation. 


3 DEPLOYMENT OF THE GEOSYNTHETIC 


3.1 Unroll the geosynthetic directly on the prepared 
soil. It shall not be exposed to ultra-violet (UV) 
deterioration for more than one week in case of 
untreated geotextiles and for more than 30 days in case 
of UV protected and low UV susceptible polymer 
geotextile. The geosynthetic shall be placed parallel 
to small ditch and stream alignments and perpendicular 
to lake or ocean shores to minimize the exposure of 
the geosynthetic to current or wave uplift. 


3.2 Secure the geosynthetic in place using 15 to 45 
cm steel pins, pointed at one end and fitted with 40 
mm metal washer at the other end or staples. Longer 
pins are advisable for use in loose soils. The pin spacing 
dependant on slope shall be as follows: 


Slope Pin Spacing, mm 
(1) (2) 
Steeper than 1 V over 3 H 600 
1Von3Hto1Von4H 900 


Flatter than 1 V on 4 H 1 500 


3.3 Do not drag the geotextile or mishandle in any way. 
Loosely place the geotextile without wrinkles or folds 


and with no void spaces between the geotextile and 
the surface so that it does not tear. Lap or sew the 
geotextile at the ends and sides of adjoining sheets as 
specified by the construction drawings or by the 
Engineer. Successive sheets of geotextiles shall be 
overlapped a minimum of 500 mm with the upstream 
sheet overlapping the downstream sheet in order to 
provide continuous erosion protection. 


3.4 When used for wave attack or cut and fill slope 
protection, the geotextile shall be placed vertically 
down the slope and the upslope strips shall cover the 
downslope strips. In case of slopes, place the geotextile 
with the machine direction oriented up-down. Stagger 
the overlaps at the end of the strips at least 1 500 mm. 
The geotextile shall be anchored at its terminal ends to 
prevent uplift or undermining. For this purpose, key 
trenches and aprons are used at the crest and toe of the 
slope. 


3.5 When used for stream bank protection, where 
currents acting parallel to the bank are the principal 
erosion forces, place the geotextile with the machine 
direction in the direction of the anticipated waterflow. 
The upper strips of the geotextile shall overlap the 
lower strips. 


3.6 On curves, the geosynthetic may be folded or cut 
to conform to the curves. The fold or overlap shall be 
in the direction of construction and held in place by 
pins, staples, or piles of fill or rock. 


3.7 If geotextiles are placed under water or in areas 
where water will flow, a geotextile material of a density 
greater than that of water shall be selected. The 
geotextile may be placed with the machine direction 
parallel to the direction of water flow. Overlap sheets 
such that upstream sheet is placed over the top of the 
downstream sheet. Adequately secure the geotextile 
to prevent slippage. As the geotextile is placed under 
water, place the backfill material on it to the required 
thickness. Do not place the geotextile more than 15 m 
ahead of the specified cover material. 


3.8 When field sewn seams are required, sew field 
seams with polymeric thread consisting of 
polypropylene or polyester and as resistant to 
deterioration as the geotextile being sewn. Use a colour 
of thread that contrasts with the geotextile being sewn 


IS 16344 : 2015 


so that the stitches are exposed for inspection when 
the geotextile is placed. Seams shall meet the testing 
requirements given below: 


a) Usetwo rows of lock type stitching, to make 
the seams. The two rows of stitching shall be 
12 mm apart with a tolerance of + 6 mm and 
not cross except for restitching. 

b) The minimum seam allowance (the minimum 
distance from the edge of geotextile to the 
nearest stitching shall be: 


Flat or Prayer Seam, Type SSa-1 40 mm 


“J” Seam, Type SSn-1 25 mm 
Butterfly-folded Seam, Type SSd-1 25 mm 


c) Obtain the geotextile manufacturer's 
recommendation for the type of seam and 
stitch to be used. If the contractor does not 
obtain and provide this information, use a “J” 
seam with at least three stitches per 25 mm. 
The flat or prayer seam may be used for repair 
or damaged in-place geotextile. 


3.9 Adjacent geotextile strips shall have a minimum 
overlap of 300 mm along the edges and at the ends of 
the rolls. Specific application may require additional 
overlaps. Sewing, stapling, heat welding, or glueing 
adjacent panels, either in the factory or on site are 
preffered to lapping only. 


3.10 Prior to covering, the geosynthetic shall be 
inspected by a certified inspector of the Engineer to 
ensure that the geosynthetic has not been damaged 
during installation. Damaged geosynthetic shall be 
repaired or replaced immediately. In case the geotextile 
is damaged during installation, or aggregate placement, 
a geotextile patch shall be placed over the damaged 
area extending beyond the damaged area a distance of 
300 mm, or the specified seam overlap, whichever is 
greater. 


3.11 The geotextile shall be laid at the proper elevation 
and alignment as shown on the construction drawings. 
The geotextile shall be installed in accordance with 
the installation guidelines provided by the 
manufacturer or as directed by the Engineer. The 
geotextile may be temporarily secured in place with 
ties, staples, pins, sand bags or backfill as required by 
fill properties, fill placement procedures or weather 
conditions or as directed by the engineer. 


3.12 Place, spread, and compact granular fill material 
in such a manner that minimizes the development of 
wrinkles in or movement of the geotextile. 


4 PLACEMENT OF THE COVER MATERIAL 


The cover material such as armor, riprap or concrete 
blocks shall be placed in accordance with accepted 


practices. For sloped surfaces, placement of the cover 
material shall start from the base of the slope moving 
upward and preferably from the centre outward to 
limit any partial movement of soil because of sliding. 
The drop height shall be held to a minimum and care 
shall be exercised to avoid damage to the 
geosynthetic. If a drop height greater than 100 cm is 
anticipated, a heavier, more durable geosynthetic shall 
be required. 


5 PROTECTION OF GEOTEXTILE 


5.1 Protect the geotextile at all times from ultraviolet 
(UV) rays, contamination by surface runoff and 
construction activities. Traffic or construction 
equipment shall not be permitted directly on the 
geotextile except as directed. 


5.2 During installation, cover the geotextile with 
specified cover material as soon as possible. Do not 
leave in uncovered condition for more than five days, 
except when used with temporary, wrap faced, 
mechanically stabilized earth walls and asphalt 
overlays. 


5.3 Place the cover material on the geotextile in such a 
manner that the geotextile is not torn, punctured or 
shifted. Do not end dumping cover material directly 
on geotextiles other than riprap geotextile. 


6 INSPECTION 


6.1 The owner or owner's representative may randomly 
inspect geotextile before, during and after (using test 
pits) installation. 


6.2 Any damaged or defective geotextile (that is frayed 
coating, separated junctions, separated layers, tears, 
etc) shall be repaired/replaced in accordance with 7. 


7 DAMAGE REPAIR 


7.1 Repair or replace all torn, punctured or 
contaminated geotextiles during placement of the 
armor. Clear the damaged area, plus an additional 1 m 
around it, of all armor material and cover it with a patch 
of the specified geotextile that extends 1 m beyond 
the perimeter of damage. The patch should be placed 
beneath the damaged geotextile and pinned. Then 
carefully replace the armor material. 


7.2 Where geotextile seams are required to be sewn, 
repair any damaged sheet by sewing unless otherwise 
indicated on the plans or special provisions, as directed 
below: 


a) Embankment Geotextile — Construct 
embankment stabilization according to details 
shown on the plans. Place the geotextile layers 
so that the geotextile machine direction is 
transverse to the embankment centerline. 


b) 


Spread the geotextile so that all slack and 
wrinkles are eliminated. Construct 
embankment in uniform layers. 

Riprap Geotextile — Place geotextile behind 
and beneath riprap, buttresses, inlays, shear 
keys and erosion control applications 
according to the details shown. Demonstrate 
to the satisfaction of the Engineer that the 
combination of the rock-fill drop height and 
the thickness of any aggregate cushion, when 
specified or required, is adequate to prevent 
puncturing or damaging the geotextile when 
placing the riprap or stone embankment 
material, the following limits shall apply: 


IS 16344 : 2015 
Maximum Drop Height, m 


Size of Rock Onto Geotextile Onto an Aggregate 


Material Cushion Blanket 
(1) Q) (3) 
Greater than 0 1 
90 kg 
90 kg or less 1 1 


After placing the riprap, backfill all voids in the riprap 
face so that the geotextile is completely covered and 
not visible. 


IS 16344 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries? Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Pati (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI RITIKA GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri MANISH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dn U. S. SARMA 
Suri M. KUMARASWAMY PILLAY (Alternate) 


Dn SwAPAN GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


SHRI R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA KAPOOR (Alternate) 


Suri S. MAsooD HUSAIN 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. CHITNIS (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri KousHik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. K. KUSUMGAR 
Dr M. K. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. KHASTAGIR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALUCHAMY (Alternate) 


Dn SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 


Suri C. K. CHAUDHURI 
Suri C. K. Jan (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Dn SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


Organization 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16344 : 2015 


Representative(s) 


DR ManisHa MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


Suri JANAK NANAVATY 
SHRI S. P. BORKAR 


SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist “E” and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. Gupta 


Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards : Monthly Additions'. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1075). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


