**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 14283 (1995) : Automotive Vehicles - Accelerator Control 
Systems - Safety Requirements [TED 4: Automotive Braking 
Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18 14283:1995 
%T Hdl4l flT'T^ ( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 

Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES- ACCELERATOR 

CONTROL SYSTEMS - SAFETY 

REQUIREMENTS 



UDC 629-113-053-2 : 614-8 



BIS 1995 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



April 1995 



Price Group 1 



Automotive Vehicles Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee, TED 8 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Automotive Vehicles Testing and Performance Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Transport Engineering Division Council. 

The purpose of this standard is to reduce accidents resulting from engine overspeed caused by malfunc- 
tions in the accelerator control system. 

Considerable assistance has been taken from ARAI Safety Standard, SS 2-1993 'Acceleration Control 
System'. 

The committee responsible for the preparation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, 
observed or^calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for 
rounding ott numerical values ( revised )\ 



IS 14283: 1995 



Indian Standard 

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — ACCELERATOR 

CONTROL SYSTEMS — SAFETY 

REQUIREMENTS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for 
the return of a vehicle's fuel regulating device 
to the low idle position when the driver removes 
the actuating force from the control, or in the 
event of a severance or disconnection in the 
accelerator control system. 

1.2 This standard applies to all automotive 
vehicles other than three wheelers of engine 
capacity less than 500 cc, motor cycles and 
tractors. 

2 TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 Driver Operated Accelerated Control System 

'Driver-operated accelerator control system' 
means all vehicle components, except the fuel 
metering device, that regulate engine speed in 
direct response to movement of the driver- 
operated control and that return the throttle to 
the low idle position upon release of the actuat- 
ing force. 

2.2 Throttle 

'Throttle' means the component of the fuel 
metering device that connects to the driver- 
operated accelerator control system and that by 
input from the driver-operated accelerator cont- 
rol system controls the engine speed. 

2.3 Low Idle Position 

'Low idle position' means the position of the 
throttle at which it first comes in contact with 
an engine idle speed control appropriate for 
existing conditions according to the manufactu- 
rer's recommendations. These conditions in- 
clude, but are not limited to, engine speed 
adjustments for cold engine, air conditioning 
and emission control and the use of throttle 
setting device. 



2.4 Ambient Temperature 

'Ambient temperature' means the surrounding 
air temperature, at a distance such that it is not 
significantly affected by heat from the vehicle 
under test. 

3 REQUIREMENTS 

The vehicle shall meet the following require- 
ments when the engine is running under any 
load condition, and at any ambient temperature 
between - 10*C and +5U°C after 12 hours of 
soaking at any temperature within that range, 
subject to the condition that the vehicle is 
capable of operating under these conditions. 

3.1 There shall be a source of energy capable of 
returning the throttle to the low idle position 
within the time limit as indicated in 3.3 from 
any accelerator position whenever the driver 
removes the opposing actuating force. 

3.2 The throttle shall return to the low idle 
position from any accelerator position or any 
speed which the engine is capable of whenever 
any one component of the accelerator control 
system is disconnected or severed at a single 
point. The return to low idle position shall 
occur within the time limit specified in 3.3 
measured either from the time of severance or 
disconnection or from the first removal of the 
opposing actuating force by the driver. 

3.3 Except as provided below, maximum time to 
return to low idle position shall be one second 
for vehicles of 4 000 kgf or less GVW, and 2 
seconds for vehicles of more than 4 000 kgf 
GVW. Maximum time to return to low idle 
position shall be 3 seconds for any vehicle that 
is exposed to ambient air at 3 to — J0 G C during 
the test or for any portion of the 12 hour condi- 
tioning period. 



IS 14283 : 1995 



ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 

Automotive Vehicles Performance Evaluation and Testing Sectional Committee, TED 8 



Chairman 

SHBI K. SlUNIVASAN 

Members 

Shri P. R. Akarte ( Alternate to 
Shri K. Srinivasan ) 

Shki M. Srinivasulu ( Alternate to 
Shri K. Srinivasan 
Shri H. K. Acharya 

Shrt Y. V. Nagaraj ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. P. Agarwal 

Shri D. G. Shirke ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. An and 

Shri S. K. Gautam ( Alternate ) 
Lt Goi* P. L. Hhatia 
Shri P. V. Bhandaue 
Shri S. V. Desigan 
Director ( Engine Dev ) 
Dr K. K. Gandhi 

Shri Mukesh SaxeNa ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. B. Gupta 
Shri S. K. Gulati 

Shri D. GaNgopadhyaya ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. C.Jain 

Shri R. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri R., K.Jain 

Shri V. Rajaram ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. Jinljal 
ShriU. K. Kini 

Shri M. G. Jhingran ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sushjl Lakba 
Shri Z. A. Mujawar 

Shri P. N. Rangan ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. M. Muncada 

Shri S. B. Dugad {Alternate ) 
Prof M. V. Narsimhan 

Shri A. G. Marathk ( Alternate) 
Shri M. Natraj 

Shri P. Appalaraju ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Partkasarathy 

Shri M. V. Venkateswaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri I. V. Rao 

SkriB. S. Kaustuban ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. G. Sethi 

Shri R. Rajaram ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. G. Shah 

Shri T. V. Srinivasan ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. K. Sharma 
Shri S. N. Srinivasan 

Shri P. N. Burgul (Alternate ) 
Shri S. R. Tapade 

Shri P. C. Barjatia ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. K.Jain, 
Director ( TED ) 



Representing 
Tata Engineering & Locomotive Go Ltd, Pune 



The Enfield India Ltd, Madras 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Directorate Genera! of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance Vehicles, Ahmednagar 

Kinetic Engineering Ltd, Pune 

Standard Motor Products of India, Madras 

Research, Design & Standards Organization, Lucknow 

Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehra Dun 

Hero Honda Motors Ltd. New Delhi 

Directorate of Technical Development & Production ( Air ), New 

Delhi 
Escorts Ltd, Faridabad 

Ministry of Defence { OFB ), Calcutta 

Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Chandigarh 
Hindustan Motors Ltd, Hooghly 

Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi 
Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 

Bajaj Tempo Ltdj Pune 

Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Ashok Ley land Ltd, Madras 

Mahindra & Mdhindra Ltd, Nasik 

Maruti Udyog Ltd, Gurgaon 

Vehicle Research & Development Establishment, Ahmednagar 

Association of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, Bombay 

DCM Toyota Ltd, New Delhi 
Premier Automobiles Ltd, Bombay 

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 

Director General, BIS ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 



Secretary 

Shri T. M. Majumdar 
Director ( TED ), BIS 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or. grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that 
no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. 
Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or 
edition. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No. TED 8 (0065) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 



Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 

Regional Offices : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all offices ) 

Telephone 

f 331 01 31 
{ 331 13 75 

f 37 84 99, 37 85 61 
( 37 86 26, 37 86 62 

f 60 38 43 
1 60 20 25 



235 02 16, 235 04 42 
235 15 19, 235 23 15 

632 92 95, 632 78 58 
632 78 91, 632 78 92 



Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Khurja, India 



