( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 11315( Part 7 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR QUANTITATlVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART
Rock
Chairman DR BHAWANI S~NQH Members Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee / Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune D,k:::d, ( CW & PRS ) SI~RI S. L. MOKHASHI ( Alternate ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTOR New Delhi Karnataka Engineering Research Station, DIRECTOR ( CHIEF ENGINEER ) Krishnarajasagara Snlrr R. NARY SIMHA IYENQAR ( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad DR A. K. DUBE Irrigation and Power Department, Government of SHRI P. S. GOSAL Punjab, Amritsar Hindustan Construction Co Ltd. Bombay DR UDAY V. KULKA~NI Centr&~~dmg Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR G. S. MEIIROTRA ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICER Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi PROF T. S. NAQARAJ ( Alternate ) SH~I P. L. NARULA Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) PROF T. RAMAMURTHY Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi Dn G. V. RAO ( Alternate) DR Y. V. RAMANA National Geophysical Research Institute ( CSIR ), Hvderabad Indian'Geotechnical Society, Delhi DR G. V. RAO
SHRI SHRI

7

FILLING
Committee,
Refwesenting

Mechanics

Sectional

BDC 73

University of Roorkee,

Roorkee

A. Gnosli M. D. NAIR

( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 )

@ Coplrigrhhr1987
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the In&an Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11315( Part 7 > - 1987
( Continued from page 1 ) Members RESEARCH OFFICER ( MERI ) Representing Irrigation Department, Government of Maharashtrz, Nasik Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, Gandhinagar Director General, BIS ( Ex-o@cio Member ) Secretary SHRI K. M. MATHUR Joint Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

SECRETARY DIRECTOR (C) ( Alternate ) SHRI C. D. THATTE SHRI G. RAXAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

Rock

Slope Engineering, Improvement

Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Subcommittee, BDC 73 : 4
University of Roorkee, Roorkee Institute Institute ( CSIR ), ( CSIR ),

Convener PROF L. S. SRIVASTAVA Members DR R. K. BHANDARI SHRI A. GHOSH SHRI B. D. BALICA
(

Central Building Roorkee Alternate ) Central Mining Dhanbad Cemindia Company

Research Research

Limited, Bombay SHRI A. P. BANERJEE SRRI D. J. KETKAR ( Alternate ) Jaiprakash Associates Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Central Road Research Institute SHRI T. K. NA'TARAJAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR T. RAMAMURTHY DR K. G. SHARXA ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur DR YUDHBIR ,

2

IS : 11315 ( Part 7 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR QUANTITATWE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART 7 FILLING

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 7 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 6 April 1987, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved. by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Jn view of the advancement in the field of rock mechanics, a number of methods for assessing the strength characteristics of the rocks and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Slope Engineering and Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee of Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee. The majority of rock masses, in particular those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous, with the discontinuities largely determining the mechanical behaviour. It is, therefore, essential that the structure of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified description of rock masses and discontinuities, and it may be possible to design engineering strucCareful field tures in rock within minimum of expensive in-situ testing, descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 0.3 Discontinuity is the general terms for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low-tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistocity planes, weakness, zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities are orientation, spacing persistance roughness, wall strength, aperture, filling, seepage number of sets and block size. These parameters are also evaluated from the study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 3

IS : 11315( Part 7 ) - 1987 0.4 It is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard covering various parameters to describe discontinuities in rock masses is being formulated in various parts each part covering one parameter. This part covers filling.
0.5 Filling describe the material that separates the adjacent rock walls of a discontinuity, which is usually weaker than the parent rock. Typical filling materials are sand, silt, clay braccia gauge, mylonite. Also include thin mineral coatings and healed discontinuities, for example, quartz and veins. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : Z-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the method for the filling in the discontinuities in the rock mass. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For
the purpose of this IS : 11358-1986t shall apply. 3. GENERAL standard, the definitions of terms given in quantitative description of

3.1 Filling is the term for material separating the adjacent rock walls of . . for example, calcite, chlorite, clay, silt, fault gouge, discontinurtles, The perpendicular distance between the adjacent rock breccia, etc. walls is termed the width of the filled discontinuity, as opposed to the aperture of a gapped or open feature.
3.2 Due to the enormous variety of occurrences, filled discontinuities display a wide range of physical behaviour, in particular as regards their shear strength, deformability and permeability. Short-term and long-term behaviour may be quite different such that it is easy to be misled by favourable short-term conditions. 5.5 The wide range of physical behaviour depends on many which the following are probably the most important: a) mineralogy b) grading of filling material, size, or particle factors of

*Rules for rounding tGlossary of terms off numerical values ( wised ). and symbols relating to rock mechanics.

4

IS : 11315

( Part

7 ) - 1987

c)

over-consolidation

ratio,

4 water content and permeability, e) previous shear displacement, f> wall roughness, g> width, and h) fracturing or crushing of wall

rock.

3.4 Every attempt should be made to record the above factors, using quantitative descriptions, where possible, together with sketches and/or Certain index colour photographs of the most important occurrences. tests are suggested for a closer investigation of major discontinuities In special cases, the result of these considered to be threat to stability. field descriptions may warrant the recommendation for large scale in-situ testing, at least in the case of dam foundations or major slopes. 4. PROCEDURE 4.1 The minimum and maximum ( for example, clay filled joints 10 percent and an estimate made Marked differences between the indicate that shear displacement unaltered or unweathered. widths of simple filled discontinuities ) should be measured to the nearest of the most common ( modal ) width. minimum and maximum widths may has occurred if the walls are essentially

4.1.1 In cases where fillings are thin it may be helpful to try to measure the mean amplitude of wall roughness using the straight edge, and compare this with the mean width of the filling as illustrated in Fig. 1. This will be especially valuable when assessing shear strength and deformation characteristics in detailed studies. 4.1.2 The principal dimensions of complex filled discontinuities ( for example, shear zones, crushed zones, faults, fault, zones, dykes and lithological contacts ) should be estimated, or measured to the nearest 10 percent, when possible. In the case of important occurrences, it is helpful to make field sketches such that the condition of the wall rock ( that is, degree of associated fracturing and/or alternation ) is also communicated ( see examples in Fig. 2 ). 4.2 Filled. discontinuities that weathering along discontinuities The rock, or disintegrated rock. have originated as a result of preferential may have fillings composed of decomposed relevant type should be recorded:

4 b)

Decomposed -- The rock is weathered to the condition of a soil in which the original material fabric is still intact, but some or all of the mineral grains are decomposed. Disintegrafed - The rock is weathered to the condition of a soil, in which the original material fabric is still intact. The rock is friable, but the mineral grains are not decomposed.

IS : 11315 ( Part 7 ) - 1987

ROUGHNESS

AMPLITUDE

MEAN

= -

_ .

I
I0500 (_

4

L

-

1

1:0.750

FIG.

1 IN

THE CASE OF SIMPLE FILLED J>ISCONTINUITIES, THE AMPLITUDE OF THE WALL AND THICKNESS OF THE FILLING CAN HELP TO INDICATETHE AMOUNT OF SHEAR DISPLACEMENTREQUIRED FORROCK CONTACT ( STIFFENING ) TO OCCUR (Zero VOLUME CIIANI;E FIG. 2 E?IAMPLE OF FIELD SKETCHES OF COMPLEX FII.LED DrsASSUMED DURING SHEAR) CONTISUITIES 6

LS : 11315( Part 7 ) - 1987
the finest fraction of the filling or gouge is of most interest since this usually controls the long-term shear strength. The mineralogical composition of the finer filling material should, therefore, be determined, espacially in cases where active clays Samples should be taken when in doubt or swelling clays are suspected. concering the mineralogy.
alternation of gouge material and/or the deposition of NOTE - Hydrothermal hydrothermal products will complicate the mineralogical identification of fillings since products not associated with the petrography of the crushed rock or the wall rock may be present.

4.3 For all types of filled discontinuities

4.3.1 In cases where swelling clay such as montmorillonite is identified or suspected, and where this condition might be critical for stability, samples should be taken for free swelling and swelling pressure tests. ( It is of advantage of record the in-situ water content of these samples, where possible. Such samples should, therefore, be sealed ).
4.4 The method of describing the grading or particle size will depend on the type of occurrence. A rough quantitative description of the grading of discontinuity fillings can be given by estimating the percentages of clay, silt, sand and rock particles ( & 10 percent ). Several kilos of filling material may need to be extracted and fingered before making these estimates. 4.4.1 1970*: Particle size can be classified as under according to IS : 149%

_

a) boulders; b) cobbles; C) coarse gravel; gravel; d) medium,

e) fine gravel;

f ) coarse
g) medium

sand; sand; and

h) fine sand; j) silt, clay.

4.4.2 If a detailed soil mechanics investigation is warranted, the first fraction can be analyzed in the laboratory to determine clay fraction liquid limit and plasticity index, according to relevant method given in relevant part of IS : 2720. 4.5 Filling material, in particular the finer fraction which is usually weakest, can be assessed by means of the manual index tests given in Table 1.
revision ) .

*Classification and identification

of soils for

general

engineering

purposes

(Jr~t

7

IS : 11315 ( Part 7 ) - 1987
TABLE GRADE DESCRIPTION 1 MANUAL INDEX APP~OXJMATE RANGE OF UNIAXIAL COMPRE~~IVP: STRENGTH (MPa) < 0.025 0*025-0.05

( Clause 4.5 ) FIELD IDENTIFICATION

Sl s2 s3 s4

Very soft clay Soft clay Firm clay

Easily penetrated ches by fist Easily penterated ches by thumb

several several

inin-

Can be penetrated several inches by thumb with moderate effort Readily indented by thumb but penetrated only with great effort Readily indented by thumbnail Indented with difficulty by thumbnail

0.05.0'10

Stiff clay

0.1 O-O.25 0.25-0.50 > 0.50

S5 S6

Very stiff clay Hard clay

NOTE - Grades Sl to S6 apply to cohesive soils, for example clays silty clays, and combinations of silts and clays with sand, generally allow draining. Discontinuity wall strength will generally be characterized by grades RO-R6 ( rock ) ( see Part 6 ) while Sl-S6 ( clay ) will generally apply to filled discontinuities.

4.5.1 The undrained shear strengths of the soils represented in grades Sl to S6 are equal to one half of the given uniaxial compressive strengths ( care should be taken in applying these estimates to fissured clays ).
NOTE - The manual index tests for determining grades Sl to S6 can be replaced by more accurate assessments using a standard soil mechanics penetrometer. This contains a stylus which is pressed into the sample at a constant rate. The maximum resistance can be read off a scale which is calibrated to show the maximum com[ This value is equal to twice the undrained shear pressive strength of the sample. strength = ) ( al - es ) 1.

4.5.2 If a detailed soil mechanics investigation is warranted ( as in drained shear strength determination ) due to critical natures of an individual filled discontinuity, then undisturbed samples of the filling material may be required. Various tube samples are available for this sampling operation. 4.6 Care should be taken to determine whether a given filled dicontinuity has suffered previous shear displacement or not ( Slickensides, shears, This should be recorded in conjunction displaced cross joints, etc ). with an estimate of the approximate over-consolidation ratio ( OCR ) of any clay filling.
has occurred through the potential weakest NOTE - If previous displacement that is, through the clay filling or clay gouge, as layers of a filled discontinuity, evidenced by slicken sides and shears, then the over-consolidation ratio ( OCR ) of

8

IS 8 11315 ( Part 7 ) - 1987
the clay will not strength. However, suspected, then the shear strength of Short-term stability be important since the discontinuity will be close to residual if previous displacement through these weak layers is not over-consolidation ratio will be important since the peak drained the intact clay may be much higher than the residual strength. will be deceptively high, especially in the case of unloading,

also due to strain softening caused by engineering loading, for example, by etcavaThis potential for reduction in strength with time tion of an overlying rock slope. should not be underestimated during field assessment.

due to the reduced or negative pore pressures. However, in time swelling and softening may occur due to increased pore pressure and water content and possibly

4.7 The water content and permeability of the filled discontinuity as a whole and of the clay filling, in particular, should be described as below. The decision to make actual measurements of these properties will depend on the importance of the occurrence to the project:
W1 The filling

ficant

materials are heavily consolidated and dry, flow appears unlikely due to very low permeability. materials materials are damp, but no free water is present,

signi-

W2 The filling I+`, The filling

are wet, occasional

drops of water, continuous flow of water water and

W4 The filling materials show of outwash, ( estimate litres!minute ).

TV5 The filling materials are washed out locally, considerable flow along-out wash channels ( estimate litres/minute describe pressure, that is, low, medium high ).

We The filling materials are washed out completely, very high water pressures experienced, especially on first exposure ( estimate litrets/minute and describe pressure ).
NOTE - Faults frequently contain highly permeable brecciated gouge adjacent to highly impermeable clay gouge. The water conducting capacity will therefore be strongly anisotropic, and may even be confined to flow parallel to the plane of the fault. It may be premature to describe a fault zone as dry or impermeable, if the tunnel or exploratory adit has not completely penetrated the feature.

5. PRESENTATION

OF RESULTS will be dependent on the importance ( or set ) to the project as a whole. be arranged as below, so as to include of particular relevance to project in hand: width wall roughness field sketch
of

5.1 The detail of presentation the individual filled discontinuity general the description should

In

a

description

of those factors

a) Geometry:

IS : 11315 ( Part b) Filling

7 ) - 1987 mineralogy particle size weathering grade soil index parameters swelling potential manual index ( SI -S6 ) shear strength over-consohdation ratio displaced/undisplaced water content ( rating WI - IV, ) permeability quantitative dara as

type:

c) Filling

strength:

d) Seepage:

10

