NAT HIAF IS 1324 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


aar — maa-A Na W, 
am Ud HAS — Wealacit 


(FAT JETT ) 


Textiles — Man-Made Fibres, 
Yarns and Fabrics — Glossary 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 59.060.20; 59.080; 01.040.59 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay eeft — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2021 Price Group 6 


Man-Made Fibres, Cotton and their Products Sectional Committee, TXD 31 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Man-Made Fibres, Cotton and their Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textiles 
Division Council. 


The glossary of textile terms relating to man-made fibre and fabric industry was originally published as 
two separate Indian Standards; one covering the textile terms relating to man-made fibres or filaments 
(IS 1324 : 1958) and the other covering fabrics made from man-made fibres or filaments (IS 1325 : 1958). The 
first revision of the above two standards was taken up to include a host of new definitions which have come into 
vogue in the recent years as a result of the developments in the man-made fibre industry. This opportunity was 
also availed of to combine both the Indian Standards into one, thus covering the definitions of terms relating to 
man-made fibre and fabric industry in one comprehensive standard. 


The present revision has been prepared with the intention of eliminating ambiguity or confusion arising from local 
interpretations of definitions of terms commonly used in the man-made fibre and fabric industry and to establish 
a generally recognized usage. Some of the terms covered in this standard are also applicable to the other sectors 
of the textile industry. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


TEXTILES — MAN-MADE FIBRES, YARNS 
AND FABRICS — GLOSSARY 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the definitions of terms 
commonly used in the man-made textile industry. 
Definitions of terms relating to textile machinery, fabric 
defects and mill accessories have not been covered in 
this standard. 


2 DEFINITIONS 


2.1 General, Fibres and Yarns 


Abraded Yam — Continuous filament yarn in which 
the outer filaments have been purposely cut or abraded 
at intervals to bring about a certain degree of hairiness. 
Abraded yarns are usually plied with other yarns before 
using. 


Abrasion — The wearing a way of any part of a 
material against another surface. 


Acetate — A specific term used for man-made fibres, 
monofilaments and continuous filament yarns of 
acetylated cellulose, with less amount of non-fibre 
forming material or without it. 


Acetate Modified — Acetate products composed 
principally of cellulose acetate and containing a certain 
amount of other fibre-forming material. 


Acrylic Fibre — A man-made fibre made entirely or 
containing 85 percent or more of acrilonitrile. 


Aerated Yarn — A special type of viscose yarn, in 
which is enclosed a small amount of air or some inert 
gas. It is also known as ‘hollow filament’, ‘tubular 
yarn’ or ‘macaroni yarn’. 


Animalizing — A chemical process designed to confer 
on man-made fibres an affinity for dyestuffs normally 
used on wool. The process is carried out during or after 
the manufacture of the fibres. 


Anti-crease Process -— A chemical or mechanical 
treatment or both of fabric to increase its capacity of 
recovery from wrinkling or mussing. 


Anti-shrink Treatment — Treatment designed to 
prevent fabrics from shrinking when subjected to 
wetting or laundering. 


Anti-static Agent —— A compound applied to textiles 
to eliminate the retention of electrical charges by the 
fibre. 


Arrasene -— A cord of man-made fibre used for 
embroidery purpose. 


Atmosphere-Fading — See ‘Gas-Fading’. 


Avivage -— The after treatment of desulphurized and 
rinsed rayon yarns in order to give a soft hand to the 
stock. 


Azlon -— A generic term for fibres or filaments 
manufactured from modified proteins or derivatives 
thereof, with less amounts of non-fibre forming 
material or without it. 


Ball Warp -— Warp, which after being wound on a 
warping mill, is bunched together in twistless rope 
form and then made into a ball or similar form. 


Ball-Warp Sizing — The application of size to warp 
yarn in the form of ball warp or rope. 


Basified Viscose — Viscose rayon which has been 
modified by treatment with synthetic resins in such a 
way that it can be dyed with dyes normally used for 
wool. 


Beaming — Winding of warp yarns on the warp beam 
or winding of cloth on a tube or a beam. 


Blending — A process of mixing fibres of different 
lots, types and varieties to produce yarns having desired 
characteristics. 


Blowing (Steam) — A process applied during finishing 
in which steam is blown through cloth usually wound 
on a perforated roller. 


Body — Describes the compact, solid or firm feel of a 
textile stock or fabric. 


Bolt — A roll or length of fabric. 


Braid —— A narrow tubular or flat fabric produced 
by intertwining sets of yarns. It is generally used for 
binding or trimming in widths up to 10 cm. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Breaking Elongation (or Extension) — The 
elongation at the breaking load. 
Breaking Extension, Percent — The extension at 


breaking load expressed as a percentage of the original 
length. 


Breaking Load — The maximum load (or force) 
supported by a specimen in a tensile test carried to 
rupture. It is commonlv expressed in grams (kilograms) 
or in Newtons. 


Breaking Stress — The value of the stress at breaking 
load in a tensile test. 


Bright Yarn — A general term for lustrous yarn as 
contrasted to dull, semi-dull, extra-dull or matt yarn. 


Bristle — Any rugged, short, stiff fibre. 


Bulked Yarns — A yarn that has been prepared in such 
a way as to have greater covering capacity or ‘apparent 
volume’ than that of conventional yarn of equal linear 
density and of the same basic material with normal 
twist. 


Bulky Yarns 


a) Yarns in which the apparent density of the 
filaments is much lower than the real density, 
for example ‘hollow filament yarns’, the 
cross-sectional appearance of which is so grossly 
irregular that close packing is impossible. 


b) Spun yarns made from staple fibres having a high 
degree of resilience, such as protein fibres, acrylic 
fibres. 


Bullion Cord — A cord having a core yarn, usually 
cotton, covered by twisting other yarns, usually ‘rayon’, 
around it. 


Button-Hole-Twist — A multiple ply sewing thread 
of man-made fibre made with a hard twist and used 
in stitching around the edges of button-holes to give 
strength. 


Cabled Yarn — Yarn produced by twisting two or 
more plied yarns. 


Cake — An annular-shaped package of man-made 
fibre yarn. 


Cake Sizing — Application of size to yarns in cake 
form. 


Carding -— The separation and partial cleaning by 
processing a tangled or matted mass of fibres to a filmy 
web by working the fibres between two closely spaced, 
relatively moving surfaces, clothed with sharp points. 


Casein Fibre -— A synthetic fibre made from protein, 
namely, casein which is obtained from milk by 
precipitation. 


Cellulose Acetate — A regenerated cellulosic fibre in 
which the fibre forming substance is cellulose acetate, 
an acetic acid ester of cellulose. 


Cellulose Diacetate — Theoretically, cellulose 
diacetate is a compound of cellulose and acetic acid 
containing 48.8 percent of combined acetic acid. This, 
however, is not a commercial product. 


Cellulose Triacetate — A generic term for cellulose 
acetate fibres in which not less than 92 percent of the 
hydroxyl groups are acetylated. 


Cheese — A cylindrical package of yarn usually cross 
wound on a flangeless tube of wood, paper or other 
material. 


Compressibility — Ease of squeezing. 


Compressional Resilience — The ability of a fibre or 
yarn to recover from compressional deformation. 


Continuous Filament Yarn — A yarn formed 
by continuous filament or filaments into a single 
continuous strand. 


Conventional Allowance — A fixed percentage which 
is added to the oven-dry weight of a textile material 
previously freed from any finish, lubricant or size. The 
percentage is fixed for each textile material so as to 
include both the moisture regain of the material when in 
approximate equilibrium with the standard atmosphere 
and the normal finish which is removed in the usual wet 
processing treatments. 


Cord (or Cabled Yarn) — A term applied loosely to a 
variety of textile strands including: 


a) cabled yarns, 
b) plied yarns used in tyres, and 


c) structures made by plaiting or braiding, for 
example, parachute cords. 


Correct Invoice Weight — The weight of a textile 
material in a consignment calculated from its oven-dry 
weight by adding to it the proportionate commercial 
moisture regain. 


Cover — The degree of evenness and closeness of 
threat spacing in a fabric to produce the effect of a 
uniform plane surface. 


Cover Factor — A number that indicates the extent 
to which the area of a cloth is covered by one set of 
threads. 


Crease Resistance — The property which enables a 
fabric to resist wrinkling or mussing. 


Creep — Deformation which is time dependent and 
exhibited by a textile material subjected to continuing 
load. Creep is recoverable or non-recoverable following 
removal of the applied load. 


Creep, Primary — The recoverable component of 
creep after some time. 


Creep, Secondary — The non-recoverable component 
of creep. 


Crepe Yarn -— A twisted single yarn which, when 
woven into a cloth of suitable construction and given 
the appropriate finishing treatment, is capable of 
producing a pebbled surface effect. 


NOTES 

1 Originally, highly twisted natural silk yarn. 
Example: 

3/13/15 denier. twist either S or Z, 2 200 tpm. 


2 Crepe yarns are produced in a similar construction from other 
natural and man-made fibres. 


Crinkled Yarn — A stretch yarn in which the 
deformation is wave like. The crimp is obtained by 
knitting a yarn into a fabric, heat setting the fabric and 
then back winding the yarn from the fabric. 


Cross Dyeing — A method of dyeing a union fabric 
in two baths successively with different class of dyes. 


Curing — The setting of a resin, plastic or chemical 
in textile material. The setting is usually obtained by 
heating. 


Deformation — A change in the shape of a specimen, 
for example, an increase in length produced as a result 
of the application of a load. Deformation may be 
immediate or delayed, and the latter may be recoverable 
or non-recoverable. 


Deformation, Delayed -— See ‘Creep’. 


Deformation, Immediate Elastic — Recoverable 
deformation which is essentially independent of time, 
that is, deformation occurring in a time approaching 
zero time and recoverable in a time approaching zero 
time after removal of the applied load. 


Delustering — A process of reduction of the natural 
lustre of yarn or fabric. 


Denier — A unit of yarn number which is numericallv 
equal to the number of grams per 9000 metres of yarn. 


Density, Linear — The mass per unit length. 


Dent — The unit of a reed comprising a reed wire and 
the space between the adjacent wires. 


Desizing — A process of removing size from textile 
material. 


Dimensional Restorability — The ability of a fabric 
to return to its original dimensions expressed as a 
percentage of the original dimensions. 


Dole — A group of ‘Rayon’ skeins twisted into a roll. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Dope — A solution of a fibre forming polymer as 
prepared for extrusion through a spinning jet. 


Dope-Dyed Fibre or Filament — Yarn or tow 
produced by dope-dyeing. 


Dope-Dyeing — Production of coloured’ yarn or tow 
by incorporation of coloured pigments in the spinning 
solution. 


Drape — The manner in which a fabric falls when 
worn on the body or placed on a form frame or manikin. 


Drawing — A process of hot or cold stretching of 
man-made fibres to increase molecular orientation. 


Dressing 


a) Sizing applied to yarn or cloth to add weight, 
smoothness, strength or firmness. 


b) The operation of assembling on a beam, yarns 
from ball-warp beam or chain, immediately before 
weaving. 


Dull Yarn — Yarn which has a very subdued lustre 
usually produced by incorporating finely divided 
particles of titanium dioxide in the spinning solution. 


Dyeing — The process of colouring textile materials. 


Elasticity — The property of a material by virtue of 
which it tends to deform on application of stress and 
to recover its original size and shape immediately after 
removal of the stress causing deformation. 


Elongation — In a tensile test, the difference between 
the length of a stretched specimen and its initial length, 
usually expressed as a percentage of the latter. 


Embossing — A process by which a fabric is pressed 
between engraved rolls to give raised effect. 


Extensibility — The ability of a textile material 
to undergo extension or elongation following the 
application of sufficient force. 


Extension, Percent — In a tensile test, the elongation 
expressed as a percentage of initial length. 


Fashioning — Decreasing or increasing the width of 
a knitted fabric during the knitting operation so that it 
conforms to a definite shape when the fabric is made 
into a garment. 


Fibre Strength — Average breaking load of a single 
fibre. 


Filament — A fibre of indefinite length. 


Filament or Yarn Number — The linear density of 
a filament or yarn expressed in suitable units as tex, 
denier, millitex, etc. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Filling 
a) Non-substantive and generally insoluble material, 
such as china clay and gypsum, added to fabrics 
together with starches or gums during finishing 


to add weight or to modify the appearance and 
handle of fabrics. 


b) Asynonym for weft yarn. 
Finishing — The process of fabrics to impart to them 


the desired appearance and feel by means of bleaching, 
dyeing, printing or in any other manner. 


Flexibility 
a) The ease of bending of a fabric ranging from 
pliable (high) to stiff (low). 
b) Inthe case ofa fibre it is the ability to be deformed 
without rupture or fracture. 


Flexural Fatigue — A physical property expressed m 
terms of the number of times a material can be bent on 
itself through a prescribed angle, before it ruptures or 
loses the ability to recover. 


Flock 


a) Fibrous particles, chiefly those obtained from 
shearing the pile of fabrics, napped goods, etc. 


b) Flock obtained from rayon staple or tow. 


Flocking — The application of flock by dusting or by 
an electrostatic field to a surface previously coated with 
an adhesive. 


Foggy Yarn — Yarn soiled during processing by dirt 
suspended in the atmosphere. 


Folded Yarn — Yarn composed of two or more single 
yarns twisted together in one operation. 


Frill Yarn — Yarn with spiral or corkscrew effect 
usually made as a novelty yarn. 


Garnetting — A mechanical process of opening hard 
and soft waste. 


Gas-Fading — Changes in hue or the fading of colour 
of textile material by the action of certain acidic gases. 


Glass (Textile) — Glass in a form suitable for spinning 
or weaving. 


Gut Thread — A thread incorporated in a woven or 
braided structure primarily for the purpose of limiting 
its extension. 


Hank 


a) A synonym for skein. A yarn or twine in coiled 
form. 

b) A definite length of sliver, slubbing, roving, yarn 
or filament, for example, 840 yd of cotton yarn. 

c) Asynonym for count as applied to sliver, slubbing, 
or roving. 


Hank-Sizing (or Skein Sizing) — The application of 
size to yarn in hank form. 


Heat-setting — The process of stabilisation of fibres, 
yarns or fabrics to any shape by the action of moist or 
dry heat. The process consists essentially in exposing 
the material while under dimensional control and shape 
to a temperature higher than any temperature likely to 
be met with in its subsequent use. 


Heat-relaxation — The process of exposing the fabric 
to moist or dry heat allowing complete freedom for the 
yarn or fabric to shrink. 


High Bulk Yarn — Spun synthetic yarns which owe 
their bulk to the blending of pre-shrunk and unshrunk 
fibres in which the different degree of shrinkage in the 
fibres in wet finishing produces a bulking out of the 
yarn. 


High Draft — A draft which is higher than that 
normally possible with the conventional three roller 
system at the fly frames or spinning frames. 


Hollow Yarn or Filament — See ‘Aerated Yarn’. 


Humidity, Absolute — The weight of water vapour 
present in unit volume of air, expressed in grams per 
cubic metre, grams per cubic foot, etc. 


Knitting — The process of producing a fabric with the 
aid of needles by the inter looping of one or more yarns. 


Knot Strength — The breaking load required to 
rupture a single strand having an overhead knot in the 
portion of the specimen between the clamps. It is used 
as an approximate measure for brittleness of yarn. 


Lease — In weaving, the system of crossing the warp 
yarns in a loom, between the yarn beam and heddles, 
effected by passing each warp yarn Alternately over 
and under two lease rods. 


Lofty — Describes fibres or yarns which are open, 
lively, highly elastic and springy, resuming normal 
position after pressing in hand. 


Macaroni Yarn — See ‘Aerated Yarn’. 
Matt Yara — Dull-lusterd yarn. 


Mildew — A superficial fungal growth on a heavily 
sized textile material or sizing material. 


Mill Ends — Remnants or short lengths of finished 
fabric. 


Mill Run — Yarns, fabrics or other textile products 
which are not inspected or which do not come up to the 
standard quality. 


Mixed — Describes a fabric or yarn in which two or 
more types of fibres have been combined. 


Mixture — See ‘Blending’. 


Modified Rayon — Rayon composed principally 
of regenerated cellulose and containing amounts of 
non-regenerated cellulose fibre-forming material; for 
example, a fibre spun from viscose containing casein or 
other proteinous fibre. 


Modulus of Elasticity — The ratio of the stress 
expressed in force per unit linear density (denier) to the 
strain (percent elongation). 


Moisture Equilibrium — The condition reached by a 
sample or specimen in a controlled atmosphere when 
the net difference between the amount of moisture 
absorbed and the amount of moisture desorbed, as 
shown by change in weight, shows no trend and 
becomes insignificant. 


Monofilament — A single filament of sufficient size to 
function as a yarn in normal textile operations. 


Multifilament — Yarn with many continuous filaments 
or strands. 


Nap — The downy or fuzzy surface of cloth produced 
by brushing. 


Novelty Yarn — Yarns produced for special effects; 
usually uneven in size or colour. Flakes, nubs and slubs 
are typical of novelty yarn. 


Nylon — A generic term for man-made fibres in which 
the fibre forming substance is any long chain synthetic 
polyamide having recurring amide groups (-C-NH-) as 
an integral part of the polymer chain. 


Olefin — A man-made fibre in which the fibre 
forming substance is any long chain synthetic polymer 
composed of at least 85 percent by weight of ethylene, 
propylene or other olefin units. 


Optical Bleach — A process for imparting improved 
whiteness to an uncoloured textile material in the form 
of fibres, filaments, yarns or fabrics by application of 
colourless compounds which flouresce under ultra 
violet light. The apparent whiteness of the textile 
material is increased due to increase in the apparent 
reflectance in the visible region by conversion of ultra 
violet radiation into visible light. 


Oven-dry Weight — The weight of a sample of textile 
material dried to substantially constant weight in an 
oven maintained at 105°+3 °C and supplied with air 
at the standard atmospheric conditions (65+2 percent 
relative humidity and 27°+2 °C). 


Pebble — The irregular or rough surface texture of a 
fabric. 


Perching — A process of examining cloth for defects. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Permeability — The rate of flow of fluid, vapour or 
gas under a differential pressure through a material. 


Picks — The weft or filling yarn which lies across the 
length of a fabric. 


Pigmented Yarn — A dull or coloured yarn spun from 
a solution to which a pigment has been added. 


Pile — The raised loops or tufts (cut loops) that form 
all or part of the surface of a pile fabric. 


Pile Yarn — The yarn forming the loops or tufts 
(cut loops) of a pile fabric. 


Plain Knit — Describes simplest knit structure as in 
hose. 


Porosity — ‘The ratio of the volume of air or void 
contained within the boundaries of a material to the 
total volume (solid material plus air or void) expressed 
as a percentage. 


Printing — The decoration of the surface-or surfaces 
of textiles by the application of insoluble pigments or 
dyes in definite repeated forms and colours. 


Raising — The production of a layer of protruding 
fibres on the surface of woven or knitted fabrics, by 
brushing, teazling or rubbing. 


Rayon — A generic term for man-made fibres, 
monofilaments and continuous filaments composed of 
regenerated cellulose with less amounts of non-fibre 
forming material or without it. 


Rayon, Modified — See ‘Modified Rayon’. 


Rayon, Solution-dyed or Spun-dyed — See 


‘Pigmented Yarn’. 


Rayon Spun Yarn — Yarn spun from rayon staple or 
cut rayon waste. 


Rayon Staple — Rayon fibres of spinnable length 
manufactured directly or by cutting rayon tow. This 
does not include rayon waste. 


Rayon Tow — A multifilament strand suitable for 
cutting into rayon staple or spinning directly into spun 
rayon yarn. 


Resilience — The property of a material by virtue of 
which it is able to return to the original state from its 
deformed state. 


Roving — A continuous slightly twisted strand of 
fibres produced on a roving frame and from which yarn 
is spun. 


Saran — A man-made fibre composed of copolymers 
of vinylidene and vinyl chloride. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Sase (or Sases) Yarn — Spun rayon yarn made of 
viscose staple of different count. 


Sizing, Single End — Application of size to individual 
yarns during winding from one yarn package to another. 


Sliver, Carded — A continuous assemblage of a strand 
of fibres without twist. 


Slub — An abruptly thickened place in yarn. 


Snag-resistance — The ability of a hosiery fabric, 
held under a predetermined and uniform tension, to 
resist a downward penetration and pull of an adjustable 
snagging needle. 


Snarls — Small curly portions in a yarn with twist. 


Snarl Yarn — A compound yarn which displays snarls 
or kinks projecting from the core. 


Soaking — Treatment applied to skein or cake of rayon 
yarn preparatory to throwing. 


Solution-Dyed Yarn — See ‘Dope-Dyed Fibre or 
Filament’. 


Solution Dyeing — See ‘Dope-Dyeing’. 


Spandex — A man-made fibre in which the fibre 
forming substance is a long chain synthetic polymer 
comprised of at least 85 percent of 5 segmented 
polyurethane. 


Spinning 

a) The-process of making yarns or cordage from 
fibres, tow or liquid materials. 

b) The formation of a yarn by a combination drawing 
or drafting and twisting operation applied to 
prepared fibre masses, such as rovings. 

c) The extrusion by pressure through a spinnerett 
of a liquid or solution into a coagulating medium 
which produces a solid filament or filaments. 


d) The formation of a yarn from filaments by the 
combination of cutting and breaking, together 
with drafting and twisting in a single series of 
operations. 


Spiral Yarn — A plied yarn: displaying a characteristic 
smooth spiralling of one component around the other. 


Sponging — The process of steaming piece goods ona 
perforated steel steam box to obtain shrinkage. 


Spooling — The winding of yarn or sliver on spools. 


Spun-Dyed Yarn — See ‘Dope-Dyed Fibre or 
Filament’. 


Spun-Dyeing — See ‘Dope-Dyeing’. 


Stagger — In rayon sizing, the placing of bundles of 
yarn in the basket in rows alternating in the order of 
bricks in a wall. 


Staple Length — A measure of fibre length of a typical 
and representative sample from a bulk. 


Static — Accumulation of electrostatic charge on 
fibres, yarns or fabrics when they rub against each 
other or against the insulated parts of the processing 
machinery. 


Strength, Tearing — The force required to start or 
continue a tear in a fabric under specified conditions. 


Strength, Tensile General — The strength shown by a 
specimen subjected to tension as distinct from torsion, 
compression or shear. 


Stress, General — The resultant internal resistance to 
deformation developed within a specimen subjected 
to an external force, for example, tensile stress, shear 
stress, or compressional stress. 

NOTE — Strew usually reaches a maximum at the time of 


rupture. When a textile material is subjected to a stress below 
that causing rupture, the stress gradually leaves with time. 


Stretch — A ‘process change’ accompanied by an 
increase in dimension. 


Stretch, Warp — The amount of stretching sustained 
by warp yarn during sizing operation. 


Stretch Yarns — Yarns made from thermoplastic fibre, 
usually in the form of continuous filament, which are 
capable of pronounced degree of stretch and rapid 
recovery. 


Synthetic — A term to denote man-made fibres or 
filaments produced by the polymerization of monomers. 


Take Up 
a) The dimension in length of yarn on twisting. 
b) The difference between the straightened and 


woven lengths of warp threads due to their bending 
around the weft threads. 


Tape Sizing — A process of applying size to the warp. 


Taping — A defect in sized warps in which groups 
of ends are stuck together by size to give a tape like 
appearance. 


Taping, Dry — Preparation of weavers beam directly 
from crepe yarns without the application of size. 


Tare — The weight of all external and internal packing 
materials of a case, bale or other type of container 
including the weight of bobbins, tubes, etc. 


Tensile Test — A test to measure the resistance of a 
material to a force tending to stretch the specimen in 
one direction. 


NOTE — The tearing test is not regarded as a tensile test. 


Thermal Character — A term used to denote cold or 
heat. 


Thread (Sewing) — A variety of yarn, normally 
plied, characterized by a combination of twisting and 
finishing with solid or semi-solid, wax like materials to 
secure a smooth, compact strand which is quite flexible 
but presents no loose fibres. 


Throwing — Doubling and twisting of filamentous 
yarns. 


Top — An untwisted strand of staple fibre obtained 
after combing or made direct from man-made fibre tow. 


Tubular Yarn — See ‘Aerated Yarn’. 


Twist, Cable — A twine, cord or rope construction in 
which each successive twist is in the opposite direction 
to the preceding twist. 


Twist, Hawser — A twine, cord or rope construction 
in which the single and first ply twists are m the same 
direction, as in S/S/Z or Z/Z/S construction. 


Twist Setting — Any of the several methods used to 
fix or set the twist in yarns to prevent snarling, tangling 
or kinking. 


Tyre-Cord — Cabled yarn made from natural or 
synthetic fibres for use as reinforcement in tyres. 


Vinyon — A man-made fibre made from copolymer of 
vinyl chloride and vinyl acetate. 


Warping — The preparation of warps for looms or 
for warp knitting machine by arranging the yarns on 
a beam. 


Warp-Knit Fabric — A fabric knitted on a machine 
that receives yarns from a warp beam and guides each 
yarn separately from each needle. 


Warp (or End) 


a) Threads lengthwise in a fabric as woven; and 


b) A number of threads in long lengths and running 
in the same direction intended for weaving or 
knitting. 


Warp Stretch — See ‘Stretch Warp’. 


Weight, Commercial — The oven-dry weight of 
staple, spun yarn or filament yarn after scouring by 
definite methods plus the weight corresponding to their 
commercial moisture regain. 


Weight, Gross — The total weight of a consignment 
case, bale or sample; including the weight of packing 


IS 1324 : 2021 


materials, containers and of supports, such as cones, 
bobbins, etc. 


Yarn — A continuous strand of textile fibres or filaments 
with or without twist suitable for plying, knitting, 
braiding, weaving, or otherwise intertwining to form a 
textile end product. Yarn occurs in the following forms: 


a) Spun Yarn — A yarn composed of fibres (short 
length, or staple) twisted together; 


b) Filament Yarn — A yarn composed of continuous 
filaments assembled with or without twist; 


c) Amonofilament, with or without twist; and 


d) A narrow strip of materials, such as paper, 
cellophane or metal foil, with or without twist. 


NOTE — Varieties include single yarn, plied yarn, cabled 
yarn, cord, thread, fancy yarn, etc. 


Yarn, Backing — The base yarn that holds the pile in 
place formed by the stuffer yarn and the warp and the 
weft. 


Yarn, Blended — A single yarn spun from a blend or 
mixture of different fibres. 


Yarn, Cabled (or Cord) — See ‘Cord (or Cabled 
Yarn)’. 


Yarn, Carded — Yarns made from fibres that have 
been carded but not combed in the manufacturing 
process. Most spun yarns are of this type. 


Yarn, Combination — A ply yarn twisted from single 
yarns of different types of fibres, for example, silk and 
rayon or viscose and acetate rayon. 


Yarn, Cross-Blended — A single yarn spun from 
a blend or mixture of different types of fibres, for 
example, yarn spun from cotton fibre and rayon staple. 


Yarn, Fancy — A yarn that differs significantly from 
the normal appearance of a single or plied yarn due to 
the presence of irregularities, deliberately produced 
during its formation. 


Yarn, Filament — See ‘Yarn (b)’. 


Yarn, Flake — Spun yarn containing intentional flakes 
or unevenness in fibre arrangement. 


Yarn, Intermediates — A generic term for products 
obtained during the conversion of fibres to yarns, 
including card webs, laps, slivers, rovings, tops, etc. 


Yarn, Kraft — A yarn made by twisting a strip of paper 
manufactured from wood pulp by the sulphate process. 


Yarn Number — See ‘Filament or Yarn Number’. 


Yarn, Self-blended — A single yarn spun from a blend 
or mixture of the same types of fibre, for example, spun 
rayon yarn produced from staple of different lengths 
and different counts. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Yarn, Thick and Thin — A continuous filament, 
novelty yarn of viscose or acetate rayon made purposely 
uneven in the spinning operation. 


Yarn, Union — Yarn made by mixing and spinning 
two or more different kinds of fibres or yarns. 


2.2 Fabric 


Accordian Fabric — A weft-knitted fabric showing 
a figure design in two or more colours, produced on 
one set of needles by knitting, tucking and missing; and 
in which tuck loops are introduced to eliminate long 
lengths of floating thread at the back. 


Angel Lace (Knitting) — A warp-knitted fabric made 
on a bearded needle or compound-needle machine. 
The fabric is made with separating threads, usually of 
secondary cellulose acetate, which are dissolved out to 
leave narrow strips for trimmings. 


Antique Satin — A heavy, dull-lustered fabric, woven 
with fancy yarns. 


Basket Cloth — A fabric in which each group of two 
or more warp ends passes alternately over and under 
groups of two or more picks. 


Bengaline — A _ warp-faced plain woven fabric 
resembling ‘poplin’ with pronounced cords or ribs 
running weftway, the weft being coarser than the warp. 


Bolting Cloth — A light weight open fabric 
characterized by its fine and uniform mesh, used fork 
sifting flour or screen printing. Both warp and weft 
threads are accurately spaced and are woven in gauze 
or other non-slip construction in order to maintain the 
mesh size. 


Bonded Fibre Fabric — A fabric with a structure 
consisting of one or more webs or mass of fibres held 
together with a bonding material. 


Broad Goods — All woven fabrics 60 cm or more in 
width, as distinguished from ribbon. 


Brocade — A jacquard weave fabric of rich appearance. 
Unlike the design in a ‘Damask’ which appears to be flat 
with the surface of the fabric, the design in a Brocade 
looks as if it were raised or embroidered. 


Broken Filament — A fibrous appearance of a fabric 
made from continuous filament yarn which may be 
localized or general and which is caused by damage to 
individual filaments. 


Broken Twill — Any twill weave in which the 
move number is not constant, with the result that the 
continuity of the twill line is broken. 


Brushed Rayon — Woven or knitted rayon fabric 
which has been given considerable brushing or napping 


by the teasel treatment or by rollers covered with card 
clothing used for napping purpose. 


Canton Crepe — A plain-woven crepe with rippled 
texture, heavier than ‘Crepe de Chine’. 


Casement Cloth — A light-weight curtain fabric made 
in a variety of weaves and textures. The weft yarns are 
coarser than the warp yarns. 


Cavalry Twill — A firm warp-faced cloth in which 
the weave gives steep double twill lines separated by 
pronounced grooves formed by the weft. The name 
was originally applied to firm heavy-weight cloths 
for making riding breeches for cavalry, but was later 
extended to cover cloths used for rain coats and other 
clothing purposes. 


Cellular — A term describing a fabric constructed so 
as to have a close and orderly distribution of hollows 
or holes. In woven fabric, this can be achieved by 
honeycomb, leno or mock-leno weaves. 


Challis — A light, soft and pliable fabric of plain or 
twill weave, usually printed in small floral designs but 
sometimes dyed in plain colours. 


Chiffon — A plain and open weave, light-weight fabric 
woven out of hard twisted yarn. 


Chiffon Velvet — A light-weight, soft velvet with a 
short thick pile. 


Circular-knit Fabric — A fabric made in a tubular 
form on a circular knitting machine. 


Corduroy — A cut pile fabric, with ridges or cords, 
woven in a variation of twill or satin weave. 


Crash — A fabric, originally made of linen, which has 
an irregular appearance, due to the use of thick, uneven 
yarn, particularly in the weft. Woven in plain or fancy 
crepe weaves, cloths of linen, cotton, spun rayon and 
unions of these are now made. Typical linen crash 
fabrics for towels are plain woven from 16 to 25 lea 
(66 to 103 tex) flax tow yarns. 


Crepe — A fabric, characterized by a crinkled, 
puckered or pebbly surface, with highly twisted yarns 
in the wal.p or weft or both. Crepe is also woven in 
twill and satin or jacquard weave. 


Crepe-back Satin — A fabric characterized by a satin 
weave on the ‘face and a crepe on the back. The weft 
is generally of crepe twist. The fabric appears dull on 
one side and lustrous on the other. It is also called 
“Satin-Back Crepe’. 


Crepe de Chine — A finely crinkled plain weave fabric 
with a smooth and lustrous surface exceptionally soft, 
light-weight and well-draping. Crepe effect is obtained 
by alternating two weft yarns twisted in one direction 
with the next two yarns twisted in the opposite direction. 


Crepe Georgette — A light-weight, semi-shear, 
plain-woven crepe, dull in appearance, woven with 
highly twisted yarns, alternating in ‘S’ and ‘Z’ twists in 
both warp and weft. 


Crepe Marocain — A heavy dress-weight ‘canton 
crepe’. The weft is coarser than the warp and gives a 
cross-ribbed effect. 


Crepon — A fabric srmrlar to crepe but heavier, 
characterized by blister or pucker effect in stripes or 
figures formed by thick, alternately twisted warp yarns. 


Damask — A firm, lustrous, reversible fabric with 
a satin ground and a flat-jacquard pattern, somewhat 
similar in appearance to Brocade but flatter. 


Doeskin — A twill-woven fabric finished with a nap 
on one side. Some of these fabrics are made from 5-end 
satin weave. 


Double Jersey — A fabric with fine rib structures 
made on a machine having two beds of needles, each 
part knitting independently of the other. The resultant 
fabric has two interconnected layers which are back to 
back; having the appearance at front and back of the 
face of jersey fabric; that is, the two sides of the cloth 
are interlocked or interknitted to create the impression 
of a doubly-knitted plain-jersey material. 


Duvetyn — A twill-woven fabric with a very soft, 
velvet-like appearance produced by raising, cropping 
and brushing the face of the fabric. 


Eponge — A French term for ‘sponge cloth’ or 
‘ratine’ woven from a hard twist warp and soft spun 
weft, usually with a fancy yarn to give a; soft and 
loose-woven fabric. 


Fabric Laid — A fabric made without weft yarns. The 
warp yarns are held together by a binding material. 


Faille — A soft, flat-ribbed plain-woven fabric with 
body and drape in which the ends per decimetre are 
more than the picks per decimetre. The ribs are wider 
and flatter than those in ‘grosgrain’. 


Faille Taffeta — A ‘taffeta’ with pronounced ribs 
running crosswise. 


Filter Cloth — A fabric made of various weaves and 
different types of fibres used for filtering purposes. 
Glass fibres, nylon and other synthetic fibres are used 
because of their inertness to many chemicals. 


Flannel — A light-weight plain-or twill-woven fabric 
with a soft nap finish on one side, partially concealing 
the weave. 


Flat Crepe — A smooth, soft fabric in plain weave, 
less crinkled in texture than other crepes. It is often 
called a French crepe’. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Foulard — A light-weight fabric, in twill weave; soft 
and well draping. 


French Crepe — See ‘Flat Crepe’. 


Frieze — A heavy, coarse twill-woven, napped fabric. 
It usually has coarser warp than weft and is made to 
produce a mixed colour effect by double cloth weave. 


Frise — A pile fabric of uncut loops. 


Gaberdine — A firm, tightly woven, steep-twill 
fabric characterized by diagonal ribs distinguished by 
appreciably more ends than picks. 


Gauze — A light, sheer, open mesh, loosely-woven 
fabric in plain, leno or mock-leno weave. Thin curtain 
fabrics are often called ’ gauze’. 


Genoa Velvet — A heavy type of velvet with three 
picks to a wire and a special ground weave, the repeat 
of which is on four ends and six picks. It is commonly 
a figured velvet with a smooth ground and a pile figure 
developed in various colours. 


Georgette — A fine light-weight open-texture fabric, 
usually in plain weave, made from crepe yarns usually 
2 ‘S’ and 2 ‘Z’ in both warp and weft. 


Grey Goods — Fabrics just taken off the loom or 
knitting machine and in an unfinished state. 


Gros de Londres — A cross-ribbed fabric in plain 
weave or its derivative, with heavy and fine ribs 
alternating; or with ribs of different colours. 


Grosgrain — A hard finished, closely woven, ribbed 
fabric, in plain or derivative of plain weave having the 
ribs running crosswise. The ribs are heavier than those 
in ‘poplin ’ and are rounder than those in ‘faille’. 


Honeycomb — A rough textured fabric with marked 
ridges and hollows produced by floating warp and 
weft yarns. The appearance of the fabric resembles the 
cellular comb of the honey bee. It is also called ‘waffle 
cloth’. 


Huckaback — A fabric with pebbly or irregular 
surface produced by short floats of warp and weft on 
a plain ground. 


Industrial Fabrics — A variety of fabrics used for 
non-apparel purposes in industry. 


Jersey — A plain-knit fabric as opposed to rib-knit 
one. It may be circular knit, flat knit or warp knit. 


Lame — Any fabric in any weave using metal threads 
or JARI threads in warp or weft for decoration. 


Leno — A fabric with a leno weave in which warp 
ends are in pairs or groups, partly twisting around 
one another between picks; commonly a light-weight 
open-mesh cloth. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Locknit — A fabric made on a warp knitting machine 
with one needle bar and two full-set guide bars, where 
the guide bar movements are controlled as follows: 
a) Front guide bar 
b) Back guide bar 


2-3, 1-0 and repeat; and 
1-0, 1-2 and repeat. 


Lyons Velvet — A ‘velvet’ having a rich, full pile and 
a fairly stiff twill back. 


Marquisette — A leno sheer fabric with a soft, crisp 
hand. 


Matelasse — A double woven fabric with a raised or 
puckered surface that has a quilted appearance. 


Mechanical Fabrics — A class of heavy fabrics used 
in various industries, such as sheeting for the laundry 
trade, drill for oil and chemical filters, duck for tent, 
etc. 


Messaline — A light-weight ‘satin’ fabric, woven with 
fine yarns. 


Milanese — A type of warp-knit fabric with a 
distinctive diagonal cross effect. 


Mildew Resistant Fabrics — Fabric treated to resist 
the growth of mildew or mould. 


Mock Romaine Crepe — A fabric similar to ‘Romaine 
crepe’ in texture and appearance but made with 
combination twist yarns only in the warp. 


Moire — A fabric usually a ‘taffeta or a faille’ with a 
watered or waved effect given by a special finish. 


Mossy Crepe — A fabric with a fancy crepe weave 
characterized by a pebbly, rough surface. It is also 
called ‘sand crepe’ because it presents a-sandy effect 
on its face. 


Mousseline de Soie — A crisp, plain weave, sheer 
fabric, more closely woven than ‘chiffon’ and not as 
soft as voile. 


Mull — A soft, sheer, lustrous fabric in plain weave. 


Net — An open work material usually made on a lace 
machine. 


Ninon — A very thin, smooth rather crisp fabric in 
plain weave, heavier than ‘chiffon’. 


Off-Square — A fabric where ends or picks per 
decimetre differ appreciably. 


Oil Cloth — Fabric coated with a resin-forming 
material and pigments. 


Oiled Fabric — Thin fabric soaked in boiled linseed 
oil and dried to make it waterproof. 


10 


Ottoman — A heavy cross-ribbed plain weave fabric 
having larger and rounder ribs than those in ‘faille’ or 
“bengaline’. 


Oxford — A fabric with basket weave, usually made in 
two-colour effects. 


Panne Satin — A highly lustrous rather stiff satin 
fabric. 


Panne Velvet — A light-weight ‘velvet’ with the pile 
pressed flat in one direction. 


Parachute Fabric — Fabric used for making 
parachutes which are used in man or supply dropping 
purposes. 


Pigment Taffeta — A dull ‘taffeta’, made of dull or 
pigmented yarns. 


Pile Fabric — A fabric in which certain threads project 
and form a pile on the surface. ‘Velvets’ and “plushes’ 
in which extra warp yarns are used or ‘velveteen’ and 
‘corduroy’ in which extra yarns are used, are some of 
the examples of ‘pile fabric’. 


Pique — A group of fabrics in plain weave or its 
derivative, with varied surface textures formed by 
raised stripes or wales running crosswise. 


Plated Fabric — A fabric that is produced from two 
yarns of different qualities of colours, characters or 
qualities of one of which appear on the face and of 
the other on the back. A yarn may be plated by being 
covered by another yarn. Plated fabric is extensively 
used in making heavy sweater and other bulky materials. 


Plush — A cut pile fabric in derivative of plain weave 
with pile of greater depth than that in ‘velvet’. 


Poplin — A light-weight, firm, cross-ribbed fabric 
in plain weave, between ‘taffeta’ and “bengaline’ in 
weight and appearance. The rib effect is obtained by 
coarser yarn in the weft than in the warp. 


Radium — A firm, smooth, soft, closely woven fabric 
in plain weave. Usually it is tightly woven under high 
tension and is finished to produce a high lustre. 


Ratine — See ‘Eponge’. 


Rep or Repp — A fabric in plain weave or its 
derivative, with narrow ribs running widthwise. 


Ribbed Satin — A ribbed fabric, such as ‘bengaline’ 
or ‘faille’ woven, with a satin face, the ribs giving a 
broken, lustrous surface to the face of the fabric. This 
fabric may be given a moire finish. 


Ribbon (Cut or Slit) — A fabric 30 cm or less in width 
made by cutting wider fabrics to a desired width. 


Ribbon-woven — A woven narrow fabric. 


Rib-knit Fabric — Knitted fabric with length-wise 
ribs formed by wales alternating on right and wrong 
sides. 


Romaine Crepe — A light-weight, plain-woven, 
heavy sheer fabric having slightly dull lustre. 


Sateen — A fabric with a lustrous surface obtained by 
a satin weave with weft floats. 


Satin — A fabric with a lustrous surface obtained by a 
satin weave with warp floats. 


Satin-Back Crepe — See ‘Crepe-Back Satin’. 


Satin-Backed Velvet — A lustrous ‘velvet’ with satin 
weave. 


Seamless Fabric — Tubular knit fabric without seams. 


Seersucker — A light-weight plain weave fabric 
with permanent woven in, crinkled stripes, running 
lengthwise. The crinkle is formed by slack tension in 
alternate groups of warp yarns. 


Serge — A fabric with twill weave and smooth finish. 
It is very fine and close. 


Shantung — A plain weave fabric with a slubbed or 
nubbed texture, made with filament warp and weft 
yarns. 


Sharkskin — A firm, heavy, acetate rayon fabric in 
twill weave made with delustered filament yarn. 


Sheer — A class of thin, light-weight, diaphanous 
fabrics, such as ‘sheer crepe’, ‘sheer velvet’, ‘georgette’, 
‘chiffon’, etc. 


Sponge Cloth — See ‘Eponge’. 


Surah — A soft, light-weight, lustrous fabric woven in 
twill weave giving plain effect. 


Taffeta — A closely, woven, smooth, crisp fabric in 
plain weave or its derivative, in which the warp and 
weft yarns are of the same or nearly the same count. 


11 


IS 1324 : 2021 


Tissue Taffeta — A very light-weight ‘taffeta’. 


Transparent Valvet — A light-weight, soft, sheer 
velvet in derivative of plain weave. 


Tricot — A fine closely knitted fabric made with a 
number of yarns on a tricot machine. The fabric has a 
fine chain stitch, running lengthwise on one side and 
crosswise on the other. One of the most common tricot 
fabrics is warp-knit ‘jersey’. 


Tricotine — A hard textured fabric woven with a steep 
twill weave. It resembles ‘gaberdine’ but has a distinct 
double twill line running from left to right. 


Triple Sheer — A tightly woven, sheer fabric with a 
fine flat surface. 


Tweed — A fabric in plain, twill or variation of twill 
weave, rough, wiry and somewhat hairy in texture. 


Tyre Cord — Fabrics which comprise the main carcass 
of pneumatic tyre, constructed predominantly of warp 
cords (cable yarns) with light wefts. The latter merely 
serve to hold the cords together for processing. These 
fabrics are often called ‘warp sheets’. 


Tyre Fabrics — Fabrics used in the construction of 
pneumatic tyres, such as casing plies, breakers, chafers, 
etc. These include tyre cord fabrics and tyre canvas 
(cross woven) fabrics. 


Velvet — A warp pile fabric, usually having a cut pile, 
rich in appearance and soft to the touch. 


Velveteen — A weft pile fabric, similar to ‘corduroy’ 
but having a surface uniformly covered with a short full 
cut pile. The weft yarn is soft spun, which when cut 
gives a soft smooth velvety pile. 


Weft-Knit Fabric — A fabric produced by a method 
of knitting in a crosswise direction as distinguished 
from warp-knitting. 


Whipcord — A twill-woven fabric usually with a 
steep-warp twill and a clear finish having pronounced 
ribs. 


IS 1324 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Man-Made Fibres, Cotton and their Products Sectional Committee, TXD 31 


Organization 


ICAR-Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, 
Ahmedabad 


Association of Synthetic Fibre Industries New Delhi 
Bidhata Industries Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Confederation of Indian Textile Industry, New Delhi 

Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 

Cotton Association of India, Mumbai 

Defence Materials and Stores Research and 
Development Establishment, Kanpur 


Grasim Industries Limited, Vadodara 


In Personal Capacity 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 

Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 

Textiles Committee, Mumbai 

The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 

The Cotton Corporation of India Ltd, Navi Mumbai 

The Cotton Textile Export Promotion Council, 
Mumbai 


The Southern India Mills’ Association, Coimbatore 


The Synthetic and Rayon Textile Export Promotion 
Council, Mumbai 


The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research 


Representative(s) 


Dr P. K. MANDHYAN (Chairman) 
Dr A. ARPUTHARAJ (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI DEEPALI PLAWAT 
SHRI JIGAR DavE (Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. VERMA 


SHRI R. K. PACHERIWALA 
SHRI ROHIT PACHERIWALA (Alternate) 


Suri D. K. NAIR 
SHRI SHAJU MANGALAM (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DR M. S. Kamatu (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR YADAV 
SHRI Biswa RANJAN Das (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY SARDANA 
DR ROHITASVA KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. SATHEESAN 


SHRI SOURABH KULKARNI 
SHRI PRANAV PARASHER (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY GUPTA 
SHRI KESHAV PAAREEK (Alternate) 


Suri J. D. BARMAN 
SHRI P. N. S. SIVAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI R. A. SHAIKH 


SHRIMATI PRAGATI KULKARNI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. PILLEWAR 
SHRI V. K. SINHA (Alternate) 


SHRI SIDDARTHA RAJGOPAL 


SHRI D. SURESH ANAND KUMAR 
SHRI S. K. KHANDELIA 


SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR S. SADH (Alternate) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 


Association, Mumbai SHRIMATI ASHWINI A. SUDAM (Alternate) 


Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai DR (SHRIMATI) SURANJANA GANGOPADHYAY 


SHRI S. P. BORKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. BERA SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TXD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


BIS Director General 


Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. Bera 
SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (TEXTILES), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 31 (16103). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


