IS 13372 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard

SEISMIC TESTING OF ROCK MASSCODE OF PRACTICE
PART 1 WITHIN A BOREHOLE

UDC

622'245 : 624'042'7 : 620' 1

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Group 3 ZAFAR MARG t

BHAVAN,

NEW April 1992

Rock Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

CED 48

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 1 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards. after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. The seismic method is one of the most practical and convenient for obtaining a stratigraphic map It does this and information on the geological character and mechanical properties of the ground. by inference from the propagation velocities and attenuations of elastic waves. The velocities, frequency, attenuations and wave shapes of a propagating wave can be used as indices to important characteristic of the in-situ rock and soil, not only average mechanical properties but also structure, degree of weathering, etc. If ground is assumed to behave elastically, at least at the small strains imposed by propogating seismic wave, elastic constants such as Young's Modulus and Poisson's ratio could be computed It has been observed over the from the observed seismic velocities and measured density values. decades by conventional seismic technique using exclusively measured velocity values that the above modulus known as dynamic elastic modulus is always greater than the static modulus of deformability determined by plate loading or other static test. Dillerences in strain rate, strain level and the different response of joints to dynamic as opposite to Differences in static loading account for the disagreement between dynamic and static `constant'. rock quality have a significant effect on ratio between dynamic and static modulus which in principle is close to 1'0 when the rock is free from defects, but increases as the quality of the rock mass decreases. In many urban regions, the dynamic properties of soil and rock for the solution of a variety of earthquake engineering problems the boreholes is used extensively in these application. Seismic method Part Part Part 1 2 has been covered a borehole the boreholes methods: and detection in a borehole, or vice-versa; and in the following two parts: shall be determined as input data and seismic testing in and between

Within Between

1 deals with following a) generation b) generation

at the surface and detection

in the same borehole.

The first method in this part which is also called the `well shooting' or `downhole' or `uphole' seismic method is commonly used for determining rock structure and characteristics in the immediate vicinity of the hole. The depth of investigation obtained with this method is limited by the energy of seismic source. With powerful P and S waves the technique has been found to be capable of penetrating to depth of up to 1 000 m. Second method may be used at any depth and involves receiver in the same hole. The method International described in this standard Society of Rock Mechanics. is based on measurements with both seismic source and

suggested

methods

for

seismic

testing

by

In reporting the ,results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`.

IS 13372 ( Part 1) : 1992

Indian Standard

SEISMICTESTING OF ROCK MASSCODE OF PRACTICE
PART 1 SCOPE This standard describes methods for seismic testing of rock mass within a borehole by downhole method and uphold method for the purpose stratigraphic of either to locate and map boundaries, or to determine seismic and, by characteristics of the inference mechanical these individual rock or soil units between boundaries. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard definitions shall apply. 2.1 P Wave wave and is also called a compres,sional wave. The direction of particle motion coincides with that of wave propagation. The propagation velocity of a P wave is faster than that of an S wave. 2.2 S Wave S wave is a transverse wave and is also called a shear wave. The particle motion of an S wave is in the plane perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. An S wave can be classified into two types ( SH wave and SV wave ) according to the direction of particle motion. 2.3 SH Wave The particle motion of _.an SH wave is in the plane perpendicular to the dlrection of wave propagation and in the direction parallel to a boundary. The boundary is normally the ground surface. 2.4 SV Wave
The particle motion of an SV wave is in the plane perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation and in the direction perpendicular to that of particle motion of the SH wave. 2) SH wave

1

WITHIN

A BOREHOLE This method is classified into following two alternatives according to the arrangement of the seismic source and receiver as shown in Fig. 1: In a> the `downhole method', the seismic source is placed at the ground surface or at the rock surface of an underground and one or more receivers are opening, successively positioned at different depths in a borehole. the `uphole method', one or more receivers are planted at the ground surface or the rock surface of an underground and the source is successively opening, positioned at different depths in a borehole. Occasionally, one or more receivers are placed in the same hole above the source, and the source and receiver(s) are both moved.

b) In
following

P wave is a longitudinal

4 APPARATUS 4.1 Seismic Source A seismic source may either be an explosive or a mechanical device depending upon the type of wave required. See Table 1 for alternatives for both surface and downhole sources. Table 1 Seismic Source for Seismic Testing Within a Borehole
Surface Sonrccs explosives sledgehammer falling weight, etc plank hammering SH gun horizontal vibrator, etc sledgehammer falling weight, etc Borehole Sources explosive, sparker. air gun hammering device, etc horizontal hammering device vibrator, etc explosives air, gun, sparker hammering device yibrator, etc

SI Types of No. Waves 1) P wave

3)

SV wave

2.5 Quality

Factor

Quality factor ( e) is a dimensionless factor indicating the degree of attenuation of waves or vibrations. 3 PRINCIPLE OF TESTING

4.2 Seismic The seismic types:

Receiver receiver may be of the following

Seismic testing within a borehole consists of measuring the travel time of P and S waves and the distance from a source to receivers, along the walls of a single borehole, so as to determine the elastic wave velocity distribution in the borehole direction. Also attenuation characteristici of P and S waves may be estimated by measuring the amplitudes of seismic waves. 1

a) A geophone generating a voltage directly proportional to the particle velocity of the seismic waves. The most suitable frequency range is 10 Hz-2kHz. The natural frequency of the geophone shall be less *than one half of the predominant frequency of the seismic waves.

IS 13372 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

ElPUMP `GEOPHONE FOR TIME P WAVE SOURCE BREAK

e

TIME

BREAK

S. WAVE SOURCE I A FALLING 8:STRIKING C:BLASTING WEIGHT HORILONTALLI 2 3

c
' WAVE A FALLING WEIGHT B. BI.ASTING

BOREHOLE

IA

Downhole

Method

TIME

RHEAK

7lME

BRtAK

BLASTER

J

AMPLIFIER

-

RECORDER

c

v ______ .__-. __
RECEIVERS

______ ._-_. __

V

1 7 .I I' ANIJ 5 WAVES RECEIVERS 3 1 ?

I i
C-J

i

1

P WAVES

I BORE HOLE

BORE HOLE

1B FIG. 1

Uphole

Method

SEISMIC TESTINGWITHIN A BOREHOLE

2

IS 13372 ( Part

1 ) : 1992

b) A piezoelectric

accelerometer generating a voltage directly proportional to the particle acceleration of the seismic waves. The most suitable frequency range is 10 Hz-60 kHz. The natural frequency of the piezoelectric accelerometer must be at least twice as high as the predominant frequency of the seismic waves. generating a voltage directly proportional to the pressure in the wager surrounding it, acceptable only to measurements in water-filled boreholes. The most suitable frequency range is IOHZ-60 kHz.

e) A recorder, to give a visual, analog or digital, record of the seismic wave from each receiver. An electromagnetic oscillograph which is the most popular means of obtaining a hard copy of the visual record, shall be preferred. 5 PROCEDURE 5.1 For carrying out the test, holes shall be drilled at the most suitable location considering the topography and geology at the site. The depth, direction and deviation of the borehole shall be surveyed to determine the coordinates of receiver or source position. Accuracy of the survey shall be specified in accordance with the purpose of the measurement. 5.2 Procedure for Downhole Method

cl A hydrophone

4.3 To facilitate wave identification when geophones or piezoelectric accelerometers shall be used, each receiving unit should consist of at least three receivers combined orthogonally to form a triaxial array, that is, one vertical and two horizontal receivers mounted at right angles. 4.4 Both seismic source and receiver should have a sensitivity and frequency response suitable for A typical the purpose of the investigation. frequency band for well shooting is IO-500 Hz. For a more detailed study, higher frequencies are required. 4.5 Equipment for mounting the seismic source and receivers in the boreholes, and for surveying depth, direction and deviation of the boreholes and also location of the seismic source and receivers. 4.6 A data acquisition system as shown in Fig. 1, this should include the following:

5.2.1 One or any array of multiple receiver units shall be installed in the borehole at the required depth, and the seismic source shall be placed on the surface or in a supplementary hole near the main one so as to improve the coupling between the source and the ground and to avoid extremely weathered, soft or broken surface layers. The receivers shall be held in firm contact with the sidewall of the borehole, except for measurements in a water-filled hole, in which case a suspension type of receiver can be used. 5.2.2 Seismic waves measurements shall be of the receiver in the waves by the downhole detection of the recommended. shall be generated and made after each relocation hole. When measuring S method, generation and SH wave are strongly

a) An amplifier,

selected to match the type of receiver used. The maximum gain of an amplifier is normally 70-130 dB with a flat frequency response of 4Hz-2kHz.

b)

equipment, when Signal enhancement in a measuring in a `noisy' area and/or deep hole in order to improve the signalto-noise ratio of the record. Use of a highresolution digital data acquisition system with a signal enhancement function is strongly recommended. time mark. The interval of the time mark shall be normally either 0'1, 1 or 10 msec, depending on the size of the area to be surveyed.

5.2.3 The interval distance of measurement corresponds to the relocation interval of rhe receiver, or the geophone spacing of a multiple receiver system in the hole (see Fig. 1 ). Generally, it is selected in view of the required accuracy and efficiency of velocity measurement, and is usually in the range 0'5-5'0 m. 5.3 Procedure for Uphole Method

d A timing device to give an accurate

4

A time break unit, to give a time break signal on the record at the instant of wave generation. The time break mark shall be recorded on a separate channel and not superposed on the signal. When an explosive is exployed, firing current, contact break (wire coil around detonator ) or contact making ( through the explosion generated plasma ) is employed to obtain the time break signal, but for other seismic sodrces, the signal is obtained from a pick-up sensor or an electric signal from an electronically controlled source. 3

5.3.1 In this method, the seismic source shall be placed in the hole, and the receivers shall be planted on the surface near the hole, or in the same borehole above the seismic source. The receiver may be installed in a shallow supplementary hole drilled near the main one so as to avoid extremely weathered, soft or broken surface layers. 5.3.2 With this and arrangement, general measurement of the seismic wave should be carried out after each relocation of the seismic source ( or seismic source and receiver if both are in the satne hole ). 5.3.3 To obtain a good record of the SV wave, it is necessary to plant the receiver on the* surface at the appropriate position considering the radiation pattern of the SV wave.

IS 13372 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 5.3.4 The interval distance of measurement corresponds to the relocation interval of the seismic source, or the geophone interval of a receiver system in the hole (see Fig. 2 ). Generally it shall be determined according to the required accuracy and efficiency of velocity measurement, and shall be usually in the range of 0'5-5'0 m. 5.3.5 The signals from receivers should be recorded on magnetic media or displayed on a visual recorder. The signal amplitude and travel time should be adquate for reading the records with the required accuracy. Recording on magnetic tape or disk is strongly recommended. 6 CALCULATIONS AND INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS 6.1 The travel times of P and S waves from source to receiver shall be determined by measuring the time break to their first break in the record. For the S wave the travel time of predominant phase of S wave shall also be measured. The travel times should be corrected for actual distances and hence provide vertical travel times from .which the average velocity between the surface and receiver depth position shall be calculated. 6.2 A time-distance curve shall be drawn by plotting travel time versus travel distance ( see Fig. 3 ). 6.3 The propagation velocities of P and S wave shall be obtained from the time-distance curve as the inverse of the slope of the straight line best fitting the points within the range of interest. 6.4 By plotting the propagation velocity profile along the borehole, the seismic velocities may be correlated with the geological conditions of rock obtained by drilling. 6.5 The following dynamic elastic parameters may be calculated, using equations ( 1-4 ), from P and S wave velocities and the density of the corresponding rock mass: Dynamic Poisson's ratio, ( V&-8 )" Vd = l/2 ( Vp/Vs )" 2 1

. . . . ..( 1 ) . . . ..( 2 )

Dynamic modulus of rigidity, Gd = Pvs2 = Ed/( 2 -i- 2~ ) Dynamic bulk modulus, Kc1 = P ( V,," 4Vs2/3 ) = Ed/( 3 - 6v,1) Dynamic Young's modulus ,!?(I, -3 ( VP/V8)" - 4 Ed = PVs2 ( VP/VS)" - 1 =Pv~"(l+~~)(l-2v,l)(l--~)

. . . . ..( 3 )

. . . . ..( 4) where P = density of rock ( kg/m" ), V, = velocity of the P wave ( m/set ), and VS = velocity of the S wave ( m/set ).
NOTE - The dynamic elastic moduli are expressed in pascals, or more often in megapascals or gigapascals [ 1 megapascal ( MPa ) - IO6 pascals and 1 gigapascal ratio is dimen( GPa ) = 10U pascals 1. Poisson's sionless.

When the amplitudes of P and S waves are measured by the use of suitable apparatus, the Q value ( quality factor ), a measure of attenuation in rock mass by spectral ratio method and rise time method in their amplitude spectra, may be calculated from changes in their amplitude spectra. By comparing the velocity so obtained with the velocity measured from specimens, the properties of the rock mass may be evaluated.

DIGITAL -ANALOG

DATA DATA

?-----l
OSCICLOGRAPH

FIG. 2.

AN EXAMPLE OF OBSERVATION SYSTEM

4

IS

13372

( Part 1) : 1992

TRAVEl I TRAVEL I

TIME t TIME

(mjsec) 50 (m/set)

. p WAVE 100 . s WAVE

FIG. 3

AN EXAMPLEOF A TIME-DISTANCE CURVE

,

5

IS 13372 ( Part 1) : 1992 7 REPORTING 7.1 The report OF RESULTS shall contain the following:

4

Waveforms at each depth, and distance curves such as shown in and 1. log and velocity distribution dynamic Fig. 5 ). of computed values.

timeFig. 3 ( see elastic

a) The borehole location b) Drawings d

and length, diameter, direction and inclination, also the location and details of any casting and cement.

4 Drilling
modulus

f) A tabulation

showing the position of all seismic source and receivers and coordinates for all,points. A description and specifications of the methods of measurement and equipment including for frequency characteristics of each apparatus used. Reference may be made to this method, stating only any departures from these procedures, and the reasons from these.

g) A

description of any equations used in addition to those given in the suggested method, together with a statement of any assumptions used in the analysis.

a geotechnical interpreh) When required, tation of the results of measurement, considering the geological conditions in the test area.

6

IS 13372 ( Part 1) : 1992

E V I I-

TRAVEL

TIME(msed (p wave) 1qo 150

10

4A FIG. 4

Falling Weight Source

AN EXAMPLE OF SEISMIC RECORDER

7

IS 13372 ( Part 1) : 1992

TRAVEL

TIME s WAVE

( SECONDS)

qfi 4B

RIGHT

-!?,/\,--

LEFT

Plank Hammering

Source

FIG, 4

AN EXAMPLEOF SEISMIC RECORDER 8

IS 13372 ( Part 1) : 1992

-_I-_

p-WAVE VELOCITY '0 20

V,,(km/sec) POISSON'S 30 40 50 60 RATIO

YOUNG'S

MODULUS Ed(M%)

10000 RIGIDITY

20000 Gd(M%)

S-WAVE VELOCITY 1.0

300( L

V,(km/sec) 2.0 3.0 GO=60 Ed-180

4000

8000

1200

r-

c

IGd=980 T ;Ed=2650

L
1 V0L3.0

1v,= 14

-7
j

1

VP"39

2.5

, VSZ1.7

-_

..J

I I I I

;Gd=7370 ,Ed:20400

2.L

I V"L3,2 Vs -1.5 I , I , I I I I I , , I

I

I Go-5510
1Ed=15000

0 3L3

I-I Go=

3380 ?2:0

; Ed
I

L

-..--_

L
.: ROCK TYPE u

-.I_______

Ia
FIG. 5

ROCK

TYPE

A

CII

AN EXAMPLE OF DRILLING LOG AND VELOCITY DISTRILKJTION OBTAINEU BY SEISMICTESTING WITHIN A BORBHOLE

9

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark IS governed by the provlslons of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which IS devised and supervlsed by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be pranred to manufacturers or producers may be obtalned from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau q/ Indian Standards ACT, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright NO part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publications. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details. such as symbols and sizes, type or grade Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. designations. Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of issued from time to time. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Dot : No. CED 48 ( 4965 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

i 331 331 01 13 75 31

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M. V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDlGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Maniktola

37 86 62

Northern Southern Western

160036 600 113

53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus,

MADRAS

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BH BANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAQ. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. H Y DERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. ,

Printed at Printrade, New Delhi,

India

