**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 2195 (1964) : Code for inland packaging of man-made fibre 
fabrics and man-made fibre yarns [TXD 31: Man-Made Fibres, 
Cotton and their Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 2195 - 1964 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR INLAND PACKAGING 

OF MAN-MADE FIBRE FABRICS AND 

MAN-MADE FIBRE YARNS 

UDC 677-4: 62 1-798 




© Copyright 1964 by 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI I 

z^^'lfcf 2^0fr= December 1964 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 AUGUST 1966 

TO 

IS : 2195-1964 CODE FOR INLAND PACKAGING OF 

MAN-MADE FIBRE FABRICS AND 

MAN-MADE FIBRE YARNS 

Alterations 

( Clause 4.4, lines 3, 4 and 5, second sentence ) — Substitute the following 
for the existing sentence: 

* The cones shall be packed in cartons of corrugated board or grey 
board or any other board having equivalent properties, either 
individually or in multiples of not exceeding four. In the event of 
multiple cones being packed in a carton, they shall be well separated 
by the use of cardboard separators. ' 

[Clause 5.1(c) ] — Substitute * Commercial weight *for * Net weight \ 



PRINTED AT NBELKAMAL PBINTE&9, DELBI«6, INDIA 



IS : 2195 - 1964 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR INLAND PACKAGING 

OF MAN-MADE FIBRE FABRICS AND 

MAN-MADE FIBRE YARNS 

Man-Madc Fibre and Fabric Sectional Committee, TDC 10 

Chairman Representing 

8rbx D. N. Sbboff Silk & Art Silk MilU* Association Ltd., Bombay 

Mtmbtra 

Shbi S. K. Boss National Test House, Calcutta 

Db. H. R. Chipalkatti Shri Ram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 

Shbi S. K. Ranoanathak ( Alternate ) 
Db. E. D. D ABU VAX a Government of Uttar Pradesh 

Shbi O. P. Dhawan The Silk A Rayon Textiles Export Promotion 

Council, Bombay 
Shbi I. B. Dutt Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shbi D. H. Voba ( Alternate ) 
Db. M. p. Khbba Directorate General of Technical Development, 

Government of India 

Shbi Jastindbb Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Laxmichand Dulabhji The Silk Merchants* Association, Bombay 

Shbi S. P. Makdblia Association of Man-Made Fibre Industry, Bombay 

Shbi Thomas Moss The Sirsilk Ltd., Sirpur-Kaghaznagar 

Shbi I. H. Pabikh The Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing (Weaving) 

Co. Ltd., Nagda 

Srbi a. S. MeHTA ( Alternate ) 
Db. M. D. Pabbrk The National Rayon Corporation Ltd., Bombay 

Shbi J. G. Pabikb The Silk & Art Silk Mills* Research Association 

Bombay 
Shbi A. R. Ramakathan The Travanoore Rayons Ltd., Rayonpuram 

Sbbi S. Abuuuoham ( Alternate ) 
Shbi R, Sjjk Gupta Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Shbi P. T. Pajtdya ( AlUmate ) 
Db. S. I. Tabapobswala The National Rayon Corporation Ltd., Bombay 

Shbi J. K. Tubakhia Silk & Art Silk Mills* Association Ltd., Bombay 

Shbi S. J. Vazxadabes The Millowners* Association, Bombay 

Shbi T. Balakbishnan, Director, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Assistant Director ( Tex ) 

Secretary 

Shbi P. Venkatabaman 

Extra Assistant Director ( Tex ), ISI 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 1 



IS : 2195 - 1964 

( Continued from page I ) 

Man-Made Fibre Fabrics Subcommittee, TDC 10 : 2 

Convener Representing 

Shri D. N. Shroff Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association Ltd., Bombay 

Members 

Sh»i S. Abumuoham The Travancore Rayons Ltd., Rayonpuram 

Shri T. Krishnamachari ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ashok Ramanlal The New Vinod Silk Mills Private Ltd., Bombay 

Shri O. P. Dhawan The Silk & Rayon Textiles Export Promotion 

Council, Bombay 
Shri M. S. Kapadia Jasmine Mills Private Ltd., Bombay 

Shri V. G. Broker ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ramchand Khanna Khanna Silk Mills Private Ltd., Bombay 

Dr. M. p. Khera Directorate General of Technical Development, 

Government of India 
Shri Jastinder Sinoh ( Alternate ) 
Shri Krishankumab M. Mbhta Ambika Silk Mills Co. Ltd., Bombay 
Shri Shantilal M. Mehta Paragon Textile Mills, Bombay 

Shri Thomas Moss The Sirsilk Ltd., Sirpur-Kaghaznagar 

Dr. Ram K. Mulch and ani The Nanikram Sobhraj Mills Private Ltd., 

Ahmedabad 
Shri I. P. Parkkh Silk & Art Silk Mills' Association Ltd., Bombay 

Shri J. G. Parikh The Silk & Art Silk Mills* Research Association, 

Bombay 
Shri I. P. Poddar The Calcutta Silk Manufacturing Co. Ltd., 

Calcutta 
Shri R. K. Sonthalia ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. Sirkar Shree Shakti Mills Lti., Bombay 

Shri J. K. Turakhia Silk & Art Silk Mills* Association Ltd., Bombay 

Shri Jayantilal G. Vakharia Standard Silk Mills, Surat 



IS : 2195 • 19<4 

Indian Standard 

CODE FOR INLAND PACKAGING 

OF MAN-MADE FIBRE FABRICS AND 

MAN-MADE FIBRE YARNS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This ^ndian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion on 7 August 1964, after the draft finalized by the Man-Made Fibre 
and Fabric Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Textile 
Division Council. 

0,2 Packing plays a very important part in the safe transport of goods 
and their storage and marketing. Proper packaging with appropriate 
quality of packing materials protects the goods from the hazards of 
transit, provides for easier handling and preserves the contents from 
infestation and other deterioration. This code gives details of inland 
packaging of man-made fibre fabrics and man-made fibre yarns which 
would ensure adequate protection to the contents of the bale or case. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code prescribes the method of packaging man-made fibre 
fabrics andean-made fibre yarns intended for inland transport by rail 
or road. Section 1 of the code deals with packaging of man-made fibre 
fabrics and Section 2 deals with the packaging of man-made fibre yarns. 



SECTION I MAN-MADE FIBRE FABRICS 

2. PACKING PROCEDURE 

2.1 Grey Cloth in Bales 

2.1.1 Plait and fold each piece of cloth. Take a sufficient number of 
such pieces and arrange them on the table of the baling press over layers 
of packing materials listed in Table 1, arranging all layers in such 
a manner that when the bale is finally made up, the material listed first 
forms the innermost layer and the material listed last forms the outer- 
most layer. Place similar layers of packing materials over the top of 



IS: 2195 -1964 

the bale. The packing materials shall be in sound, clean and dry condi- 
tion and shall be of suflBcient size to cover the bale with adequate over- 
laps on all sides. 



TABLE 1 LIST OF PACKING MATERIALS 

{Clause 2,1, \) 



Sl 


Material 


Layers 


CONFORMINO TO 


No. 








1 


Kraft paper 


Single 


AS 


2 


Polyethylene film or 
cellophane paper 


Single 


A-lorA-9 


3 


Hessian-lined kraft 
paper 

or 


Single 


A-2 




Lightweight hessian 


Single 


A-3 




or 
Matting (or chattai) 


Single 





4 


Cloth heavy cee 


Single 


A.4 



2«1*2 Press the bale to form a rigid bale. 

NoTB — The bale should be sufficiently rigid so that it does not itself sag nor 
do its contents slip. 

2,1«3 While the bale is under pressure, sew the layer of cloth heavy 
cee around the bale with 3-ply double jute twine of adequate strength, 
taking care not to pierce the inner wrappings during stitching. Bind the 
bale (over wooden slats) at right angles to its length With 0'9 mm 
thick (or20SWG) and minimum 12*5 mm wide, fiat steel strips (or 
hoops ) conforming to the requirements of A-6 so that: 

a) the strips nearest the edges of the bale are approximately 15 cm 
away from the respective edges of the bale, 

b) the other strips arc positioned in such a manner that the 
distance between any two successive strips is not more than 
30 cm, and 

c) the strips are drawn taut and the loose ends of each fastened ( by 
rivets or other suitable means ) and the joints so formed wrapp- 
ed in pieces of hessian. 

2.2 Grey Cloth in Cases 

2.2.1 Plait and fold each piece of cloth or wrap it on woodc|i rollers 
or cardboard tubes of suitable si2e and thickness, and place a sufficient 



IS : 2195 * 1964 

number of them in a wooden packing case conforming to the requirements 
of A-7, which is lined with: 

a) one layer of kraft paper or sulphite paper,and 

b) one layer of hessian-lined kraft paper or two layers of water- 
proof paper or one layer of polyethylene film. 

The kraft paper or sulphite paper shall form the inner layer, and 
hessian-lined kraft paper or waterproof paper or polyethylene film shall 
form the outer layer, when the case is fully lined up with packing 
materials. The packing materials shall be of sufficient size to fully cover 
the contents of the case. They shall be in sound, clean and dry condition 
and shall conform to the applicable requirements of Appendix A. 
If necessary, the voids in the case may be stuffed with paper cuttings 
so as to prevent undue movement of the contents, 

2.2.2 Fold the packing materials over the contents of the case so as to 
overlap to an extent of at least 10 cm. When the outer layer is poly- 
ethylene film, the overlaps should be adequate for tucking to the sides of 
the wooden case. Seal the waterproof paper or hessian-lined kraft 
paper with a suitable waterproof adhesive. Nail the lid to the case. 
Bind the case with at least three *hard* grade 0*50 mm (or 25 SWG) 
thick and not less than 12' 5 mm wide, flat steel strips (or hoops) con- 
forming to the requirements of A-6, so that: 

a) at Jeast two strips are positioned parallel to the battens, 

b) at least one strip is positioned at right angles to the battens, and 

cj the strips arc drawn taut, and the two ends of each fastened 
( by rivets^ or other suitable mcaps ) and the joints so formed 
wrapped in pieces of hessian. 

2.3 Finished Ciotli in Bales 

2.3.1 Plait and fold each piece of cloth. Wrap each piece in materials 
such as strong paper, cellophane or polyethylene film, etc, which will not 
stain the fabric. Take a sufficient number of such pieces and arrange 
them on the table of the baling press over layers of packing materials 
listed in Table 2, arranging all layers in such a manner that when the 
bale is finally made up, the material listed first forms the innermost 
layer and the material listed last forms the outermost layer. Place 
similar layers of packing materials over the top of the bale. The 
packing materials shall be in sound, clean and dry condition and shall 
be of sufficient size to cover the bale with adequate overlaps on all 
sides. 

2.3«2' Follow the procedure detailed in 2.1.2 and 2.1.3. 

2.4 Finisiied Clotli in Cases 

^.4.1 Plait and fold or wrap each piece of cloth on a wooden or card- 
board roller or tube of suitable size and thickness. Wrap each piece, 



IS : 2195 - 1964 



TABLE 2 LIST OF PACKING MATERIALS 

{Clause 2.3.1 ) 



Sl 
No. 


Matekial 


Lavebs 


Conforming to 


1 


Kraft paper 


Double 


A-5 


2 


Polyethylene film or 
cellophane paper 


Single 


A-1 orA.9 


3 


Heasian-lined kraft 
paper 

or 


Single 


A-2 




Light weight hessian 


Single 


A.3 




or 
Matting (or ohattai) 


Single 





4 


Cloth heavy cee 


Single 


A.4 



roller or tube in materials such as strong paper, cellophane or polyethy- 
lene film, etc, which will not stain the fabric. Place a sufficient number 
of such pieces, rollers or tubes in a wooden packing case conforming to 
the requirements of A-7, which is lined with: 

a) one layer of kraft paper or sulphite paper, and 

b) one layer of hessian-lined kraft paper or two layers of water- 
proof paper or one layer of polyethylene film. 

The kraft paper or sulphite paper shall form the inner layer, and 
hessian-lined kraft paper or waterproof paper or polyethylene film shall 
form the outer layer, when the case is fully lined up with packing 
materials. The packing materials shall be of sufficient size to fully cover 
the contents of the case. They shall be in sound, clean and dry condi- 
tion and shall conform to the applicable requirements of Appendix A. 
If necessary, the voids in the case may be stuffed with paper cuttings to 
prevent undue movement of the contents. 

2.4.2 Follow the procedure detailed in 2.2.2. 

3. MARKING 

3.1 Bales or wooden cases containing fabrics shall be marked with the 
following: 

a) BaleNo./CascNo.; 

b) Gross weight; 

c) Net weight; 



IS : 2195 - 1964 

d) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; 

e) Destination; and 

f) Any other information required by the buyer or by the Law in 
force; 

3.2 All markings shall be stencilled, writing with hand being not permis- 
sible. 

3.3 Letters and figures shall be not less than 2*5 cm in height. 



SECTION 2 MAN-MADE FIBRE YARNS 
4. PACKING PROCEDURE 

4.1 If the yarn is in the form of hanks, take a sufficient number of hanks 
and press them to form a bundle. 

4.2 If the yarn is in the form of cones, wrap each cone in kraft paper 
conforming to A-5 or butter paper conforming to A-10 or cellophane 
paper conforming to A-9 or any other paper having equivalent 
properties. 

4.3 Wrap the bundles or cakes with kraft paper conforming to A-5. 

4.4 Take a sufficient number of bundles, cakes or cones and place them 
in a wooden case conforming to A-7, which is lined with one layer of 
kraft paper conforming to A-5, at the bottom. The cones shall be 
individually packed in cartons of corrugated board or grey board or any 
other board having equivalent properties. Place on the top of the 
bundles, cakes or cartons containing cones another layer of kraft paper 
conforming to A-5 with adequate overlaps so as to cover the top portion 
of the contents. Nail the lid to the case. Bind the case with at least three 
*hard' grade 0*50 mm thick ( or 25 SWG ) and not less than 12*5 mm wide 
or two *hard* grade 0*50 mm thick (or 25 SWG) and not less than 
16 mm wide flat steel strips (or hoops) conforming to the requirements 
of A-6, so that: 

a) the strips arc positioned parallel to the battens, and 

b) the strips arc drawn taut and the two ends of each fastened ( by 
rivets or other suitable means). 

NoTiD 1 — The total weight of the case with its oontents should not exceed 
150 kg. 

NoTB 2 — The maximum net weight of the yarn in the^case shall be 100 kg. 



tS : 2195 ' 1964 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Wooden cases containing yarn shall be marked with indelible ink 
with the following information: 

a) Case No.; 

b) Gross weight; 

c) Net weight; 

d) Make up of yarn whether packed in cones, cakes or hanks; 

e) Quality of yarn; 

f) Denier of yarn; 

g) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade mark; 

h) Destination; and 

j) Any other information required by the buyer or by the Law in 
force. 

5.2 All markings shall be stencilled, writing with hand being not per- 
missible. 

5.3 Letters and figures shall be not less than 2*5 cm in height. 

APPENDIX A 

( Tables 1 and! and Clauses 2.1.3, 2.2.1, 2.2.2, 2.4.1, 
4.2, 4.3 and 4A) 

REQUIREMENTS OF PACKING MATERIALS 

A-1. POLYETHYLENE FILM 

A^l.l Polyethylene film shall be of at least 40 microns in thickness and 
shall conform to the requirements of grade 123 of IS : 2508-1963*. 

A-2. HESSIAN-LINED KRAFT PAPER 

A-2.1 Hessian-lined kraft paper shall conform to the requirements of 
type 3 of IS: 1398-1960t. 

A-3. LIGHT WEIGHT HESSIAN 

A-3.1 Light weight hessian shall conform to the requirements of Type II 
of IS : 2818-1964t 



*Specifloation for low demity polyethylene film. 

tSpecifioation for packing paper, waterproof, bitumen laminated. 

tSpecifloation for In|Kan Hessian ( under print ). 

8 



IS : 2195 - 1964 

A.4. CLOTH HEAVY CEE 

A-4.1 Cloth heavy cec shall comply with the requirements of Table 3. 

TABLE 3 REQUIREMENTS OF CLOTH HEAVY CEE 

Threads per dm Weight, in g Brbakino Load, Wravx 



A^. 



PER Square in kg, on 10-0 x 20 cm 



Warp Weft Metre Strips 



Warp Weft 

Min Min 

68 35 675 160 180 Plain D.W. 



TOLBR. , . j_o +10 



ANOB 



±4 ±2 Z 7.5 percent 



A-S. KRAFT PAPER 

A-5,1 Kraft paper shall conform to the requirements of grade 2 of 
IS : 1397-1960*. 

A-6. STEEL STRIPS 

A-6.1 Steel strips shall conform to the applicable requirements of 
IS : 1029-1956t. 

A-7. PACKING CASE 

A-7.1 The packing case shall conform to the requirements of either 
style 2 (b) or style 3 (b) packing case prescribed in IS : 1503-l960t. 

A.8. WATE^IPROOF PAPER 

A-8.1 Waterproof paper shall conform to the requirements of type 1 of 
IS ; 1398.1960§. 

A.9. CELLOPHANE PAPER 

A-9.1 Cellophane paper shall be of suitable quality as agreed to between 
the buyer and the seller. 

A-IO^ BUTTER PAPER 

A-10.1 Butter paper shall be of suitable quality as agreed to between the 
buyer and the seller. 



'I'SpecidoatioD for kraft paper, 



JSpeoifioation for hot rolled steel strips ( baling ). 
Specification Cor ractangular solid wood packing oases. 
(Specifloation for packing paper, waterproof, bitumen laminated. 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



The Indian Standards Institution ( iSI ), which started functioning 
in 1947, Is the national standards organization for India. Its principal 
object Is to prepare standards on national and international basis, and 
promote their general adoption. 

The overall control of ISI, which is run and financed jointly as a 
non-profit making body by the Central Government and private enter- 
prise, Is exercised by a General Council, composed of representa- 
tives of Central and Mate Governments; leading trade, scientific and 
technological organizations; and subscribing members. The Minister 
of Industry is the ex-officio President of ISI. 

The present technical activity of ISI is carried out through Its 
Division Councils for Agricultural and Food Products; Building; Chemi- 
cal; Consumer Products; Electrotechnical; Mechanical Engineering; 
Structural and Metals; and Textile. All technical work relating to the 
formulation and revision of standards Is done by committees appointed 
by and under the direction of their respective Division Councils. These 
committees consist of experts drawn from manufacturing units, techni- 
cal institutions, purchase organizations and other concerned bodies. 

To make available benefits of Indian Standards to the common 
man, ISI has introduced Its Certification Marks Scheme under the/nd/on 
Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, I9S2, as amended by 
the Amendment Act, 1961. According to this Act, quality goods con- 
forming to Indian Standards can carry the ISI Certification Mark. This 
Mark is a third-party guarantee of quality of marked goods. Licences 
to use the ISI Certification Mark are granted to manufacturers using 
reliable methods of quality control and providing facilities for inspec- 
tion by ISI staff. 

In the International field, ISI represents India on the International 
Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) and the International Electro- 
technical Commission ( lEC ). ISO and lEC respectively link 50 and 
38 countries, and function through 107 and 53 technical committees; 
ISI participates In 74 technical committees of ISO and all the technical 
committees of lEC. The committees and subcommittees of lEC and 
ISO for which ISI holds the secretariat deal with: Electric Fans, Lac, 
Mica, Pictorial Markings for Handling of Goods, Liquid Flow Measure- 
ments In Op«n Channels. Spices and Condiments^ and Stimulants. 



nj 



PUBLICATIONS OF INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

INDIAN STANDARDS 

About 2 SCO Indian Standards, broadly olaoaified under the following main head«, 
have been issued so far: 



AgrJcDllnre St Food 
Building 
Ctiemical 
Consumer Products 



ElectroteciiDical 
Mechanical Engineering 
Stmctural A Metals 
Textile 



Of these* the standards belonging to the Textile Group fall under the following 
categories: 



Aircraft Textile Materials 

Carpets and Druggets 

Cbemioal Test Methods 

Cotton Fabrics, Handloom 

Cotton Fabrics, Mill-Made 

Cotton Hosiery and Knitted Garments 

Cotton Mill Accessories 

Cotton Spinning Machinery 

Components 
Grading of Fibres 
Jute Bags 
Jute Fabrics 
Jute Mill Accessories 
Man-Made Fibre Fabrics, Mill-Made, 

Man>Made Fibre Fabrics, Handloom 



Narrow Fabrics 

National Flag of India 

Packaging 

Physical Test Methods 

Ropes and Cordages 

Silk Fabrics, Handloom 

Sizing and Finishing Materials 

Terminology 

Twines 

Wool Fabrics* Handloom 

Wool Fabrics, Mill-Made 

Wool Hosiery and Knitted 

Garments 
Yarn and Similar Structures 



OTHER PUBLICATIONS 



ISI Bulletin ( Published Every Month ) 
Single Copy 
Annual Subscription 

Annual Reports ( from 1948-49 Onwards ) 



Rs 

2-00 
2-00 to 8-00 eaob 



Available from: 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Headquarters 
Bianak Bhavan» 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 



n»n»9 1 tmuAt 



Grsmt I M«uUn«Bttlie 



8 r anoh Offi o </i 
Grsmt : Maaebsmtha 



m Dr. DsdsUioy Neoreli Rosd 


BonlNiyl 


Phoas ISII4S 


11 Seaterkln Stre*! 


Cslciittt la 


- la^iass 


14/CS CfHl Um 


KaB»<r 


M ttWi 


S4 CUMfsl Pattort Rosd 


UmdrmM t 


M Mim 



PBIXTKD A9 STAHDABD PBTNTINO WOttKS, nw I>HI^m*l» XllDU 



