NAT Aa IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Tiga thea & fear 
Tua & fatter At fa RaT 
amt 5 sae Aafaa thet (uadi) 
( BRT GRIT ) 


Code of Practice for Steel Cylinders 
for Compressed Gases 


Part 5 Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 23.020.30 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM aa 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEMAR TH Ari, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2022 Price Group 4 


Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, MED 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on recommendation 
of the Gas Cylinders Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard was first published in 1976 and subsequently revised in 1984. In this revision necessary changes 
have been made for better implementation of this standard. Major changes are as follows: 


a) Reference standards have been updated; 
b) Reconditioning of cylinder and attachment has been introduced as per IS 13258; and 
c) Other general changes for smooth implementation of the standard. 
Liquefied petroleum gases are hazardous if allowed to escape. The low visosity of these gases compared to heavier 
petroleum fractions greatly aggravates the problem of containing them. To handle them as liquids they should be 
confined under pressure or be held at low temperature or both. 
If the liquid leaks from a cylinder, it vaporizes quickly, mix with air and probably develop a flammable mixture. 
The hazard here is increased because most liquefied petroleum gases are heavier than air and spreads along the 
ground where there are many possible sources of ignition. 
Manufacturers, fillers and users of the gas cylinders covered by this standard should be familiar with the precautions 
laid down in this standard in order to ensure safe and efficient operating conditions. For general information on 
LPG and other gases conveyed in cylinders, SP 9 : 1978 ‘Technical data sheet for gases conveyed in cylinders’, 
may also be referred. 
This Indian Standard is published in many parts. The other parts in this series are: Part 6 Liquefied chlorine gas 
Part 7 Ammonia gas 
Part 8 Common organic refrigerant gases 
Part 9 Sulphur dioxide gas 
Part 10 Methyl bromide gas 
Part 11 Methyl chloride gas 
Part 12 Gases for medical use 


Other related standard to this series is IS 8198 : 2004 ‘Steel cylinders for compressed gases (atmospheric gases, 
hydrogen, high pressure liquefiable gases and dissolved acetylene gases) — Code of practice’. 


In LPG trade, ‘Industrial Installations’ generally refer to the installations at factories and the ‘Commercial 
Installations’ relate to the larger type of catering establishments, such as hotels, restaurants and canteens. In these 
applications, the LPG installations generally consist of a large number of cylinders and are handled by relatively 
unskilled workers. 


Separate Indian Standards for such installations IS 6044 (Part 1) : 2018 ‘Liquefied petroleum gas storage 
installations — Code of practice: Part 1 Residential, commercial and industrial cylinder installations 
(third revision)’ and IS 6044 (Part 2) : 2001 ‘Code of practice for liquefied petroleum gas storage installations: 
Part 2 Commercial, industrial and domestic bulk storage installations’ have been prepared for the guidance of 
consumers. 


Manufacture, possession and use of liquefied petroleum gas when contained in cylinders is regulated under the 
Gas Cylinder Rules and LPG Control Order of the Government of India as amended from time to time. Although 
this standard has been prepared in consultation and agreement with the statutory authorities under these rules, 
should anything in the standard conflict with the provisions of Gas Cylinders Rules or the LPG Control Order, the 
latter shall be adhered to. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR STEEL CYLINDERS FOR 
COMPRESSED GASES 


PART 5 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LPG) 


( Second Revision ) 
UC OP IS No. Title 
This standard (Part 5) covers filling, inspection, testing 
and maintenance of portable steel cylinders for the 7241:1981 Glossary of terms used in gas 
storage and transportation of liguefied petroleum gas in cylinder technology (first revision) 
Ba S O AEE Weer pA 8737:2017 Valve fittings for use with liquefied 
2 REFERENCES petroleum gas (LPG) Cylinders for 
more than 5 litre water capacity — 
The standards listed below contain provisions which, Specification (second revision) 
through verenice in this TOX Consume PrOVISIONŞ of 9200: 1988 Methods of disposal of unserviceable 
this standard. At the time of publication, editions were : 
: : oO . compressed gas cylinders 
valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties Mean 
to agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate possibility of applying the most recent 9798 : 2013 Low pressure regulators for use with 
editions of the standards indicated below: liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) — 
Specification (second revision) 
Li tne 13258: 2014 Welded low carbon steel cylinders 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity 
3196 (Part 1) Welded low carbon steel cylinders for low pressure liquefiable gas — 
: 2013 exceeding 5 litres water capacity for Requirements for inspection and 
low pressure liquefiable gases: Part 1 reconditioning of used LPG cylinders 
cylinders for liquefied petroleum (first revision) 
ee Eo = ppeciicatot. “a60s4 20015: Penodi ihspschon: and testing = 
Welded low carbon steel cylinders 
3710 : 1978 Filling ratios for low pressure exceeding 5 litre water capacity for 
liquefiable gases contained in liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) — 
cylinders (first revision) Code of practice 
4379 : 2021 Identification of the contents 
of industrial gas cylinders 3 TERMINOLOGY 
(second revision) For the purpose of this standard, the terminology given 
4576: 2021 Liquefied petroleum gases — in IS 7241 shall apply. 
Specification (fourth revision) 
5903:2014  Regui f safi devi 4 APPROVED SPECIFICATIONS FOR 
f equirement of safety devices MANUFACTURE 
for gas cylinders — Specification 
(first revision) The cylinders used for the storage and transportation of 
7142:1995 Welded low carbon steel cylinders liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) shall conform to one of 


for low pressure liquifiable gases not 
exceeding 5 litre water capacity — 
Specification (first revision) 


the specifications approved by the statutory authority. 
A list of approved specifications is given in Annex A. 


IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 


5 FILLING 


5.1 Inspection Before Filling 


Before filling any cylinder, the filler shall subject it to a 
thorough examination to ensure that: 


a) The cylinder is manufactured to a specification 
approved by the statutory authority; 


b) The cylinder is not due for retesting as required 
under 7; 


c) All statutory requirements in respect of markings, 
valve fittings and painting are complied with; 


d) The valve and its parts including outlet threads are 
in good condition; and 


e) The cylinder does not have excessive dents 
(see IS 13258). 


5.2 Empty cylinders which have been involved in a 
fire should not be refilled. They should be carefully 
inspected by a competent person to assess the 
damage, if any, caused to the cylinders by the fire; 
and also to advise the repairs to cylinders, if required 
(see IS 13258). 


5.3 Filling Ratio 


Cylinders for liquefied petroleum gas shall not be 
filled in excess of the filling ratio specified by the 
statutory authority [see IS 3710] based on the design 
of the cylinder and the chemical composition of LPG 
being filled. The amount of gas charge into the cylinder 
shall be determined by weighing. The weight shall be 
checked after the cylinder has been disconnected from 
the charging line. 


5.4 Leakage 


All cylinders shall be carefully examined for leaks after 
filling. Leaky cylinders shall be emptied in approved 
safe location and inspected for cause of leakage. 


5.4.1 All the cylinders shall be depressurised to 
atmospheric pressure in a safe manner by using suitable 
adapters. Facilities for de-pressurising of the cylinders 
must be as per CCOE guidelines and approved by 
CCOE. 


5.4.2 The gas shall be cold flared by using a suitable 
adopter connected to a header. The gas so collected 
in the headers shall be finally vented through a piping 
above the roof level. 


5.4.3 The operation shall be carried out in an open 
space away from any building or drains with minimum 
10 metres clear distance around the cylinder and where 
the escaping gases shall disperse into the air without 
creating a hazard or constituting a public nuisance. 
Care shall always be taken to insure that no sources 
of ignition, of whatsoever nature, are brought into 
the cordoned area. Apart from excluding entry of all 
sources of ignition it shall be ensured that no sparks 


are created by tools, shoe nails, etc, striking metallic or 
concreted surfaces. 


The valve shall be removed carefully after ensuring 
complete depressurization. Degassing to be carried out 
in CCOE approved site. Cylinders shall be degassed 
by purging the same by inert gas, steam or by filling 
water till it overflows. The water shall be retained for 
not less than one hour to ensure that entire vapor or gas 
remaining in the cylinder comes out. 


5.4.4 All cylinders received without residual gas shall 
be either purged or evacuated at the filling plant before 
filling with LPG. 


5.4.5 Before a cylinder leaves any filling station, the 
filler shall ensure that the cylinder is not leaking from 
any part and valve and the cylinder is in order in all 
respects. 


6 MARKING AND LABELLING 


6.1 Marking 


Liquefied petroleum gas cylinders shall have the 
following markings in letter/figure, permanently 
stamped on them, either at footring or on any 
non-pressure part of the cylinder: 


a) Serial number and identification of owner and 
manufacturer; 


b) Specification has been 


manufactured; 


to which cylinder 


c) Maximum working pressure; 


d) Test pressure, month or quarter and year of last 
hydrostatic test; 


e) Tare of cylinder, (It shall be the weight of empty 
cylinder with valve fitted, but excluding cylinder 
cap and safety cap); 


f) Water capacity in litres; and 
g) Inspector’s official mark. 


6.2 Colour Identification 


Each cylinder shall be painted in accordance with 
the requirements of standards mentioned in Annex A, 
IS 4379, in use, or, if required, in accordance with the 
regulations indicated in the Red Tariff for conveyance 
by rail of explosives and other dangerous goods 
published by Indian Railway Conference Association. 


7 PERIODIC INSPECTION AND TESTING 


7.1 Cylinders are subjected to periodic inspection and 
testing to ensure that they are safe for further use. In the 
case of LPG, the periodic inspection interval shall be as 
per PESO norms. The periodic testing shall be done as 
per IS 16054. 


7.2 Periodic inspection shall also be carried out on 
cylinders whenever special circumstances necessitate 


it, as for instance, when the cylinder shows a serious 
damage or is exposed to fire. 


8 RECONDITIONING OF CYLINDERS AND 
ATTACHMENTS 


8.1 General 


Reconditioning and inspection of cylinders shall be 
undertaken by organizations approved by the statutory 
authority. It shall be done as per IS 13258. 


8.2 Cylinders shall always be checked to ensure that 
they are gas-free before hot work is carried out. 


9 VALVES AND PRESSURE REGULATORS 


9.1 Valve Fittings 


Valve fittings used on LPG cylinders shall conform to 
IS 8737. The part of the valve in contact with the 
contents of the cylinder shall be of metal which does not 
react with the gas and shall be capable of withstanding 
the test pressure of the cylinder. 


9.2 Pressure Regulators 


Pressure regulators used on LPG cylinders shall 
conform to IS 9798. 


10 HANDLING, USE, STORAGE AND 


TRANSPORTATION 


10.1 Handling and Use 


10.1.1 Those responsible for the handling and use of 
cylinders should understand the characteristics of LPG 
[see IS 4576] and it is essential that they be trained in 
good practices relating to their job. 


10.1.2 As empty cylinders are not in fact truly empty but 
contain LPG vapour, their handling and storage shall, 
in general, be subjected to the same considerations as 
for full ones. 


10.1.3 Cylinders represent a very heavy capital outlay, 
and their life depends almost entirely on the care 
with which they are handled and stored at all times. 
Cylinders shall, therefore, be well cared for. 


10.1.4 Cylinders shall not be rolled on their sides but 
shall always be carried or rolled on their footrings. 


10.1.5 Before cylinders are handed over for 
transportation, it shall be ensured that the cylinders are 
not leaking from any part and valve. Also it shall be 
ensured that the valve outlet is fitted with a safety cap 
and that the valve is in order in all respects. 


10.1.6 Cylinders shall not be handled in any way which 
shall cause the seal to break before the cylinder is 
required for connecting up. 


IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 


10.1.7 Cylinders shall not be dropped. 


10.1.8 Cylinders shall always be used in an upright 
position, and be so placed that they cannot be knocked 
over. Open flames, lights, lighting of fires and 
smoking shall be prohibited in close proximity of any 
cylinder containing liquefied petroleum gas, except 
those while in use for welding, cutting or heating. 


10.1.9 Unless proper means of attaching rope or chain 
slings are provided, slings shall not be used in the 
handling of cylinders. Magnetic devices shall not be 
used for lifting. 


10.1.10 When cylinders have to be vented, the 
operation shall be carried out in the open, under 
the supervision of a competent person, taking the 
necessary safety precautions. 


10.2 Storage 


10.2.1 Full and empty cylinders shall be stored only in 
places constructed in accordance with statutory rules. 


10.2.2 Cylinders shall always be stored with, valve 
protection caps, where provided, in position. 


10.2.3 Cylinders shall only be stored as mentioned in 
Gas Cylinder Rules. 


10.2.4 Cylinders shall not be stored near corrosive 
substances or vapours. 


10.2.5 Cylinders shall not be stored in positions or 
places where they are liable to become overheated, 
for example, near boilers. 


10.2.6 Cylinder storage places shall be adequately 
ventilated at floor level and at eaves level. 


10.2.7 Empty cylinders which have not been made 
gas-free shall be kept inside approved storage sheds. 


10.2.8 Cylinders shall be stored on solid floors; 
alternatively, the space beneath the flooring shall be 
adequately ventilated to the open air and not to any 
other room or compartment. 


10.2.9 Cylinder storage spaces shall be kept clean 
at all times in order to prevent the accumulation 
of combustible material. Particular attention shall 
be given to ventilating apertures to prevent their 
becoming blocked. 


10.2.10 All doors or gates giving direct access to the 
cylinder storage shall open outwards. 


10.2.11 Adequate precautions shall be taken’ to 
prevent unauthorized persons from having access to 
LPG cylinders kept in the storage shed or storage 
areas. 


IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 


10.2.12 Vehicles not specifically designed or adapted 
for operation in flammable atmospheres shall be 
forbidden from entering inside storage compartments 
or from approaching nearer than two metres from 
cylinder stacks in outdoor storage. 


10.2.13 Smoking and the use of naked flames, etc, 
in storage spaces, whether indoor or outdoor, shall 
be prohibited. Further a notice to this effect shall be 
permanently and prominently displayed immediately 
adjacent to any means of access to the storage space. 


10.2.14 If artificial lighting is used in the store or 
storage space, it shall be electric. Any electric fitting 
shall be of the flame-proof type and wiring shall be in 
robust conduit to protect it from damage. 


No storage shed shall be opened and no handling of 
LPG cylinders shall be permitted between sunset and 
sunrise except where approved lighting is exclusively 
used. 


10.2.15 If any accident, fire or explosion occurs 
involving the cylinder which is attended with loss of 
life or serious injury to person or property, this shall 
be immediately reported as required under the Gas 
Cylinders Rules. 


10.2.16 Methods of Stacking 


10.2.16.1 When LPG cylinders are stacked horizontally 
they shall be restrained (wedged) to prevent their 
rolling apart due to the weight of the stack or due to the 
removal of any cylinder. Only empty cylinders which 
are completely free of gas can be stacked horizontally. 


10.2.16.2 A gangway as mentioned in Gas Cylinder 
Rules (60 cm) shall be always maintained to permit 
access and manoeuvring of cylinders between stacks of 
single or double rows and between stacks and the walls 
of indoor storage compartments. 


10.2.16.3 Empty cylinders with valves which 
incorporate safety relief devices should be piled 
vertically. 


10.3 Transportation 


10.3.1 Every vehicle on which LPG cylinders are 
transported shall be of strong construction with sides 
and back of adequate height and shall be maintained in 
good condition. 


10.3.2 Every vehicle while engaged in the transport of 
LPG cylinders shall be constantly attended to by at least 
one person. The attendants shall have basic knowledge 
of fire hazards attached to LPG cylinders. 


10.3.3 The speed limit of the vehicle shall not exceed 
50 km/h. If a lower limit is imposed by the State 
Transport Authority, it shall be observed. 


10.3.4 No LPG cylinders shall be carried in public 
service vehicles carrying passengers, and no other 
goods shall be permitted on vehicles carrying LPG 
cylinders. 


10.3.5 A suitable dry powder or carbon dioxide type 
of fire extinguisher shall be provided on the vehicles 
used for carriage of LPG cylinders. 


10.3.6 No person in a vehicle carrying LPG cylinders 
shall smoke, and no fire or other source of ignition 
shall be permitted in the vicinity of the vehicle. 


10.3.7 LPG cylinders shall be so transported as not 
to project in the horizontal plane beyond the sides of 
ends of the vehicle in which they are transported. 


There shall be no sharp projection on the inside of 
the vehicle and adequate measures shall be taken to 
prevent cylinders falling off the vehicle and being 
subjected to rough handling, excessive shocks or local 
stress. 


10.3.8 Cylinders transported in the vehicles shall be 
blocked or braced and be so secured as to prevent 
movement or falling down. In no case cylinders shall 
be so loaded into vehicles that they may bounce or 
may strike each other or other objects. 


10.3.9 When cylinders are transported by rail, this 
shall be done in accordance with the Railway Red 
Tariff Rules. 


10.3.10 No lifting magnet or hook shall be used in 
loading or unloading of cylinders. 


10.3.11 Every cylinder containing LPG when 
transported, shall have its valve protected against 
damage in a suitable manner, unless it is securely 
packed in a box or crate. 


10.3.12 During transportation of cylinders, vehicles 
shall be parked in safe areas. 


10.3.13 Cylinders shall be stacked in vertical position 
during transportation. Only empty cylinders shall be 
stacked horizontally. and the maximum height of the 
stack shall be governed by consideration of the weight 
that a cylinder in the bottom tier is able to withstand. 


11 DISPOSAL OF CONDEMNED CYLINDERS 


11.1 Cylinders including the attachments, such as 
footrings and handle rings which do not comply with 
the requirements of inspection and testing and which 
have been rejected and recommended to be destroyed 
shall be disposed of in accordance with IS 9200. 


11.2 History sheets of such cylinders shall be closed 
and kept on record for period of one year. 


12 GENERAL 


12.1 The jointing compound used at different joints in 
the system shall be of a type which is resistant to LPG 
(In any joint in which the thread provides a gas-tight 
seal, jointing compound shall be used. 


IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 


12.2 In using the code, IS 4576, which lists the various 
types of LPG generally marketed in India, shall be 
borne in mind. 


12.3 Safety devices, if used, shall be of approved design 
(see IS 5903). 


IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.1 ) 
LIST OF APPROVED SPECIFICATIONS 


A-l The list of specifications approved by the statutory IS 7142 : 1995 Welded low carbon steel cylinders for 


authority for use in India is given below: low pressure liquifiable gases not exceeding 5 litre 
IS 3196 : 2013 Welded low carbon steel cylinders Water capacity — Specification (first revision) 
exceeding 5 litres water capacity for low pressure NOTE — The list is not comprehensive as new specifications 


are added from time to time. Up-to-date information on the 
subject can be had from the Chief Controller of Explosives, 
Nagpur. 


liquefiable gases: Part 1 Cylinders for liquefied 
petroleum gases (LPG) — Specification (sixth revision) 


IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Gas Cylinder Sectional Committee, MED 16 


Organization 


Petroleum And Explosive Safety Organization, 
Nagpur 


All India Industrial Gases Manufacturers Association, 
New Delhi 
Ashok Leyland Limited, Chennai 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Bhiwadi Cylinders Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


LINDE India Ltd, Kolkata 


Everest Kanto Cylinder Ltd, Mumbai 


Gujarat Gas Ltd, Surat 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd, 
Kolkata/Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Indraprastha Gas Limited, Delhi 


International Industrial Gases Ltd, Howrah 
Inox India Limited, Vadodara 

Kabsons Gas Eguipments Ltd, Hyderabad 
Kosan Industries Ltd, Mumbai/Surat 

LPG Eguipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 


Mahanagar Gas Limited, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Suri M. K JHALA (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Misura (Alternate I) 
SHRI JAMUNALAL Rout (Alternate ID) 


SHRI SAKET TIKU 
Suri K. R SAHASRANAM (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH GAUTAM 
Suri FAUSTINO V. (Alternate) 
SHRI SUCHISMITA CHATTERJEE (Young Professional) 


SHRI MANEESH PATNEY 
SHRI SUDIPTA SARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MANVINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAJNEESH CHOPRA (Alternate I) 
SHRI SUNIL K. Dey (Alternate II) 


SHRI RAMANA VUTUKURU 
SHRI PARDEEP (Alternate) 


SHRI GHANSHYAM GOYAL 
SHRI A. K. KHAMKAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI A. S. V. S. PRASAD (Alternate II) 


SHRI Ravi RAVIPALLI 


SHRI DEBASHISH CHAKRAVERTY 
SHRI DILIP KUMAR Ray (Alternate I) 
SHRI SIVA SHANKAR (Alternate II) 
SHRI MANIKANDAN M. (Young Professional) 


SHRI SOUMITRA CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI UJWAL BHANDARI 
SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI AVIRAL RAJEEV (Young Professional) 


SHRI DEVENDRA K. GARG 
SHRI NIKHILESH K. GarG (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK V. PATWARDHAN 
SHRI DEEPAK V. ACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KABRA 
SHRI S. GOPALAIAH (Alternate) 


SHRI GIRISHBHAI K. DESAI 
SHRI S. B. BOLMAL (Alternate) 


SHRI NARESH GERA 
Suri A. K. BERA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MURALI 
SHRI MILIND M. RANADE (Alternate) 
SHRI SACHIN GUMASTE (Young Professional) 


IS 8198 (Part 5) : 2022 


Organization 


Ministry of Defence DGQA , Pune 


Research and Development Estt (Engineers), 
Pune 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, 
New Delhi 


RDCIS, Steel Authority of India Ltd, Ranchi 
Supreme Cylinders Ltd, Delhi 
Tata Motors Ltd, Pune 


Tekno Valves, Kolkata 


The Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 
Trans Valves (India) Pvt Ltd Hyderabad 
Vanaz Engineers Pvt Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


JT CONTROLLER (JAG/NFSG) 
SHRI M. SATYANARAYANA PSCO (Alternate I) 
Suri S. B. ALHAT Acoa (EP) (Alternate II) 
SHRI SHRI Ram (Alternate II) 


DR SHANKAR BHAUMIK 
SHRI TAMHANKAR RAVINDRA (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI AMIT KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR 
SHRI M. L. FATHEPURIA 


SHRI PALLIPALAYAM GOWRISHANKAR 
SHRI SHAILENDRA DEWANGAN (Alternate) 


Suri Y. K. BEHANI 
SHRI ROHIT BEHANI (Alternate) 


Dr S. S. THIPSE 

Suri S. D. RAIRIKAR (Alternate) 
Suri A. K. JAIN 

Suri P. K. MATHUR (Alternate) 
SHRI S. J. VISPUTE 

Suri A. S WAGH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA SINGH, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI CHANDAN GUPTA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 16 (16636). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


