**•*•••••*•**••• 



A ♦ ^ 



^ 



TTH^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
The Right to Information, The Right to Live' 



Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



IS 4705 (1985): Dental Mercury [MTD 10: Precious Metals] 




^■^^^r 



^^s^iHf 









Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 




Bhartrhari — Nitisatakarri 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen' 




'^^^^rr 






BLANK PAGE 




/Ol 



<si£L»iL, 






PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DENTAL MERCURY 

(First Revision) 



UDG 616-314-74 : 669'791'5 



IS 4705 - 1985 
( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



m 



(g) Copf right 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MaNAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DFLHI 110007 

Gr2 jfunf 1983 



IS : 4705 - 1985 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DENTAL MERCURY 



(First Revision) 



Precious Metals Sectional Committee, SMDC 13 

Chairman Representing 

Shbi J. R. Siii Ministry of Finance 

Members 

Shbi B. G. K. Baliga Bharat Gold Mines Ltd, Kolar 

Shri D. K. Bakdvofadhi'Av Hindustan Copper Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri J. Naoesh Bhatt Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri A. Dwarakanath ( Alternate ) 
*^KXi' Ramanlal p. Ghoksi Bharat Bullion Go-o'5crative Refiner" Societ" Lt'' 

Ahmadabad 

Shut Ghinttbhai D. Sheth ( Alternate ) 
Shei Ravindba S. Choesi Ghoksi Contacts Pvt htd, Vdaipur 

Shbi Prakash S. Ghoksi ( Alternate ) 
Shri Shashikant S. Ghoksi Hindustan Platinum Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi Ghanurakant S. Ghoksi ( Alternate ) 
Db V. M. Desai Government Dental College and Hospital^ Bombay 

Shei M. P. Dubay National Test House, Calcutta 

Dr C. S. p. Iveb Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Dr T. p. RadhakrishnaN ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. N. Kansara Gujarat Bullion Refinery, Ahmadabad 

Shbi B> S. Kansara ( Alternate ) 
Shri Dharamveer Kapoor All India Sarafa Association, Delhi 

Shri Prem Nath Khaitna ( Alternate ) 
Shei S. C. Mawanti The Hutti Gold Mines Co Ltd, Hutti 

Shei J. S. GxjEtrRAJ Naik ( Alternate ) 
Shbimati Pushpa Motwani Consumer Guidance Society of India, Bombay 

Shrimati Sharda Joshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Nandagopal Tamil Nadu Jewellers' Federation, Madras 

Shri R. G. Palhan Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 

Shri J. P, Maikhari ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. Rajagofalan Regional Office of the Gold Control Administrator, 

Bombay 

Shri M. P. Regb ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 
I 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 4705 - 1985 

( Continued from page 1 ) 



Members 
Shbi K. S. RAiraABAJAN 



Represttaing 

Directorate General of Technical Development, 
New Delhi 
Shri M. K. Bambrjkb ( AUernaU) 
Repbeskn-tative All India Handicrafts Board, New Delhi 

Repbesentativb National Metallurgical Laboratory ( GSIR ), 

Jamshedpur 
Shbi G. K. Shah National Refinery Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi S. P. Sonawala ( Alternate ) 
Shri Ambitlax G. Sonawalla The Bombay Bullion Association Ltd, Bombay 

Shbi Shaktilai. Nakandas ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Natwab T- ZaVbri The Gem & Jewellery Export Promotion Council, 

Bombay 
Shbi Nirmal Kumab Rakvan ( Alternate ) 
Shbi K. Raghaveudban, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Struc & Met ) 

Secretary 

Shbi A. B. Tewari 
Deputy Director ( MetalsJ), ISI 



Dental Materials Panel, SMDG 13 : P6 



Convener 
Db V. M. Desai 

Members 

Db N. K. Aoabw al 
Shbi Ravindra S. Choksi 

Shri G. K, Choksi ( AUernaie 
Shbi A. Ghose 

Shri F. N. Madon ( Alternate 
Db F. D. Mirza 
Col S. K. Mitra 

Shri D. G. Patwardhan 

Db S. S, Sidhu 
Shri S. P. Sonawala 
Dr G. L. SubhabwaIi 



Government Dental College and Hospital, Bombay 



King George's Dental College, Lucknow 
Hindustan Platinum Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

) 

Dental Products of India Ltd, Bombay 
I 

Nair Hospital and Dental College, Bombay 

Directorate General of Armed Forces Medical 
Services ( Ministry of Defence) 

Directorate General of Technical Development, 
New Delhi 

All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 

National Refinery Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 



IS:<t70S.19«^ 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
DENTAL MERCURY 

( First Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 31 January 1965, after the draft finalized by 
the Precious Metals Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Structural and Metals Division Council. 

0.2 Dental mercury is used for preparing dental amalgam, which is 
made by mixing fillings of a suitable dental amalgam alloy with mer- 
cury. Need was, therefore, felt for this standard which defines the purity 
of dental mercury by its surface appearance, its residue after pouring 
and its non-volatile residue. 

0,3 This standard was first published in 1968. Based on the the experi- 
ence gained during the years, the standard has been revised. In the 
revision MKS units have been changed to SI Units. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accor- 
dance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value 
in this standard. 



1, SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies requirements for mercury used in the 
preparation of dental amalgam. 

2. REQjUIREMENTS 

2.1 Surface — The mercury shall have a bright mirror-like surface free 
from filra or scum when agitated in air. A slight film formed during 
storage shall be permitted provided it is removable by filtration of 
mercury as described in ' 3,3.1. It shall have no visible evidence of 
surface contamination. 



♦Rules for rounding oflF numerical values ( revised ). 

3 



IS : 4705 - 1985 

2.2 Pouring — The mercury shall pour freely from a thoroughly- cleaned 
glass container, without leaving any residue adhering to the glass. 

2.3 Non-Volatile Residue -^ The mercury shall not have a non- 
volatile residue of more than 0"02 percent by mass when tested in 
accordance with 3.3.2. 

3. SAMPLING, INSPECTION AND TESTING PROCEDURES 

3.1 In consignment 100 kg or part thereof constituted by containers of 
dental mercury shall constitute a lot. Each lot shall be tested separately 
for various requirements. For this purpose, from each lot one container 
for every 20 kg shall be opened and visual inspection shall be carried 
out on these containers. From each of the selected containers, 50 g of 
dental mercury shall be taken and these samples shall be thoroughly 
mixed to form a composite sample. This composite sample shall be 
tested for various requirements given in 3.3. 

3.2 The sample tested for visual inspection as well as the tests given 
in 3.3 shall satisfy the relevant requirements. 

3.3 Tests 

3.3.1 Condition of Surface — In case the mercury has developed slight 
film, it shall readily be separated from this film by filtration through 
chamois skin or through sintered glass of average pore diameter 20 to 30 
microns. When filtered the mercury shall remain bright after agitation 
with air. 

3.3.2 Residue — The determination of non-volatile residues shall be 
made on specimens weighing about 15 g. The mercury shall be evapo- 
rated from a porcelain crucible at a temperature of 345° ± 5°C and 
then the crucible shall be ignited at a dull red heat for approximately 
2 minutes, cooled in a desiccator, weighed, and the mass of residue 
calculated by deducting the tare mass of the crucible. 

Caution — The mercury should be evaporated in a hood to prevent 
inhalation of poisonous mercury vapour. 

4. PACKING 

4.1 The mercury shall be packed in non-metallic ( such as glass or 
polyethylene ) containers of sufficient strength to hold the contents under 
normal conditions of transport and handling. The containers with the:T 
closures shall be air-tight. The materials from which the containers and 
their closures are made shall have no deleterious effect on mercury. 



IS : 4705 - 1985 

5. MARKING 

5.1 Each container shall be marked legibly with the following: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Batch number and date of packing ( month and year ), and 

c) Net mass in grams or kilograms of the contents. 

5.1.1 Each container shall also be marked with the words ' POISON * 
and ' FOR DENTAL PURPOSES ONLY '. 

5.1.2 The container may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

NoTJC — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regu- 
lations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the require- 
ments of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality 
control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI 
marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, 
may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 



tNTWt^l^MNAh SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 
B«M Vuhm - 



QpAXt^ns^ 


Unit 


Stmboc 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


s 




Electric current 


ampere 


A 




Hiennodyxuunic 


kelvin 


K 




temporature 








Luminoxu intensity 


canHela 


cd 




Atnounit oC stibstiuice 


mole 


mol 




5tt|^«nMtttmry Units 








XH^iahftTY 


Unit 


Symbol 




FW»*4i^ 


radian 


rad 




SdHJ:itiiKl« 


steradian 


sr 




DMlvttd Uttite 








^QpA-innTY 


Unit 


Symbol 


DaJTlNITION 


Force 


newton 


N 


I N = 1 kg.m/s> 


Energy 


joule 


J 


1 J = 1 N.ra 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W=lJ/« 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 Wb = 1 V.I 


Flux density 


tesla 


T 


1 T = 1 Wb/m« 


Frequency 


hertz 


Hz 


1 Hz =- 1 c/s (s->) 


Electric conductance 


Siemens 


S 


1 S = 1 A/V 


Electromotive force 


volt 


V 


1 V = 1 W/A 


Pressure, stress 


pascal 


Pa 


1 Pa = 1 N/m» 



