INATA Ah IS 790 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


eich ch Urs ost ch fore Randy 


(FAT FRAT ) 


Guidelines for Preliminary Pages 
of a Book 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 37.100.99 


© BIS 2023 


YR HAH OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Se EECA HM, 9 FTL ME AHL AM, AS Feet - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2023 Price Group 6 


Publication and Graphic Technology, MSD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Publication and Graphic Technology Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and 
Systems Division Council. 


The preliminary pages of a book, which precede the text embody certain basic information about a book. This 
information enables librarians, bibliographers, documentalists and other users in cataloguing and bibliographic 
description work and also helps readers in the choice of reading material. It is, therefore, desirable to prescribe 
and follow a standard practice for the presentation of information in different constituents of preliminary pages. 
This practice will enable publishers and editors to produce them in a form which will facilitate their use. 


In first revision, these standards are being merged together in order to consolidate the information on preliminary 
pages. Hence IS 791 : 1956, IS 792 : 1964 and IS 794 : 1956 shall be superseded by this standard. First revision 
also updates the information to be provided to suit the needs of the prevailing practices in the publishing field. 


This revision has been brought out to bring the standard in the latest style and format of the Indian Standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given 
in Annex A. 


IS 790 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
GUIDELINES FOR PRELIMINARY PAGES OF A BOOK 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standards covers the essential and possible 
constituents of preliminary pages of a book, the 
preferred sequence in which these constituents 
should appear and their style of presentation. This 
standard deals with the subject in the following three 
sections: 


Section 1 General structure of preliminary 
pages of a book 
Section 2 Title leaves 


Section 3 Table of contents 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 11957 Guidelines for contents list 
: 1987 of periodicals 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.2 Title Leaves — The initial printed leaves of a 
book. They normally consist of two leaves, the half- 
title leaf followed by the title-leaf, but there may be 
only one title leaf or more than two tidy leaves. 


3.3 Title Leaf — The recto of the title-leaf 


3.4 Back of Title Page — The verso of the title- 
leaf 


3.5 Half-Title Leaf — The first leaf of a book 
usually preceding the title leaf having the half-title 


on its recto and other useful information about the 
book, and author on either its recto or verso or both. 


3.6 Half-Title Page — The recto of the half-title 
leaf 


3.7 Back of Half-Title Page — The verso of the 
half-title leaf 


3.8 Edition — All copies of, document produced 
from one unchanged type image whether by direct 
contact or photographic methods. 


3.9 Epigraph — Short statement or quotation 
placed at head of a chapter or opening of a book 
expressing its spirit or theme*. 


3.10 Foreword — Introductory remarks to a book 
or its author or both, usually written by someone 
other than the author*. 


3.11 Frontispiece — An illustration facing the title 
pages, either printed with the title page or printed 
separately and inserted in position later. 


3.12 New Edition — Reproduction of an earlier 
edition of a book with substantial changes in text or 
typography, each being distinguished from the other 
or others, either numerically or by some equivalent 
term, such as new, revised, enlarged edition, reset, 
etc. 


3.13 Impression — All copies of an edition 
printed at one time from one setting of type. 


3.14 Introduction — The opening discussion by 
the author on the subject of his work, often treated 
as the first chapter of the work itself whether or not 
it is so numbered**. 


3.15 Invocation — A prayer by the author for 
inspiration and assistance in the task taken up placed 
at the opening of a works***, 


*While this standard recommends a position for an epigraph at the end of the preliminary pages (3.3), it is often placed earlier amongst these 
pages, for example, on the half-title, title or dedication page. The position of an invocation is similarly variable. 


IS 790 : 2023 


3.16 Preface — Introductory remarks by the 
author explaining to the reader what he has 
attempted to do in the work, often including at the 
end, a statement of acknowledgements. 


3.17 Reprint — All copies of an edition reproduced 
at an interval after the original printing of the edition 
without alterations or with slight alterations. 


3.18 Table of Contents — The list(s) of heading of 
the contents of a volume or series of volumes of 
reading material. 


3.19 Simple Book — Book which is not 
composite, that is, which embodies work by a 
single author or by joint authors. It may also be 
anonymous. 


3.20 Composite Book — A book with two or 
more contributions, each with its own title, not 
forming a continuous exposition and often, though 
not necessary, by different authors. 


3.21 Ordinary Composite Book — Composite 
book, provided with a single generic title to denote 
all the contributions collectively. 

NOTE — Anthology of several authors, christomathy, 


hymn-book, prayer-book, song book, symposium, fest 
schrift and similar compilations come under this category. 


3.22 Artificial Composite Book — Composite 
book without a generic title to denote all the 
component works collectively. 


NOTE — An artificial composite book may be created by 
the publisher by issuing two or more different books within 
one and the same cover but without a common title page. It 
may also be created by a library by binding books together 
into a single volume. 


SECTION 1 GENERAL STRUCTURE OF 
PRELIMINARY PAGES OF A BOOK 


4 CONSTITUENTS 


4.1 The preliminary pages of a book will 


comprise the following essential and additional 
constituents, preferably presented in the sequence 
given below. 


4.2 Essential Constituents 


The essential constituents of the preliminary pages 
of a book are: 


a) Title page; and 
b) Contents page(s). 


NOTES 


1 The contents, page(s) may be omitted when irrelevant, 
such as in a novel without titled chapters and booklets in 
which identification and location of items of the contents 
presents no difficulty. 


2 The table of contents, if placed on the same page, will 
follow the title and author's name and will appear in the 
same order as if placed on separate pages. 


4.3 Additional Constituents 


The preliminary pages include additional pages such 
as: 
a) Half-title: 
b) Frontispiece; 
c) Copyright, edition and printer statements; 
d) Dedication; 
e) Foreword; 
f) Preface; 
g) Acknowledgements; 
h) List of abbreviations, symbols and notations; 
j) Publisher's note; and 
k) Epigraph. 


NOTE — Corrigenda should be given just before the text 
whereas addenda sh6uld be given at the end, just before the 
index. 


4.4 Sequence of Constituents 


The constituents should preferably be placed in the 
following sequence: 

a) Half-title; 

b) Frontispiece (see 4.4.1); 

c) Title page; 


* For the purpose of this standard, foreword, preface and introduction have been distinguished and in the interest of consistency, adherence to 
these distinctions is recommended. However, overlapping of meanings in general usage, even in dictionary definitions must be noted. 


It is useful to note that a feature distinguishing an introduction from a preface is that the former is a part of the main work and is not always 
changed for successive editions as a preface may be, even if only to note the fact and extent of the revision undertaken for the new edition. 


**For the purpose of this standard, foreword, preface and introduction have been distinguished and in the interest of consistency, adherence to 
these distinctions is recommended. However, overlapping of meanings in general usage, even in dictionary definitions must be noted. 


It is useful to note that a feature distinguishing an introduction from a preface is that the former is a part of the main work and is not always 
changed for successive editions as a preface may be, even if only to note the fact and extent of the revision undertaken for the new edition. 


***While this standard recommends a position for an epigraph at the end of the preliminary pages (4.4), it is often placed earlier amongst these 
pages, for example, on the half-title or dedication page. The position of an invocation is similarly variable. 


d) Copyright, edition and printer statements; 

e) Dedication; 

f) Foreword (see 4.4.3); 

g) Publisher's note; 

h) Preface or introduction or both (see 4.4.3, 
4.4.4 and 4.4.5); 

j) Acknowledgements (see 4.4.3); 

k) Table of contents; 

m) List of abbreviations, symbols and 

notations; and 


n) Epigraph. 


4.4.1 The frontispiece is placed between the half- 
title page and the title page, facing the title page. 


4.4.2 The verso of the dedication page may be left 
blank. 


4.4.3 The foreword [4.4 (f)], preface [4.4 (h)] and 
acknowledgements [4.4 (j)] may follow the table of 
contents [4.4 (k)], if they are lengthy. 


4.4.4 Preface 


If there is more than one preface such as preface to 
different editions, they shall follow the preface in the 
latest edition in the natural sequence. 


4.4.5 Introduction 


If the introduction is long and leads directly into the 
subject of the work, it is preferable to have it as the 
first item in the main text of the work, following the 
preliminary pages. If, however, the introduction is 
short, more in the nature of preface, it is best 
included amongst the preliminary pages. 


4.4.6 Pagination 
The preliminary and text pages may either be 
numbered in a single sequence of Hindu-Arabic 
numerals or in two separate sequences, using a 
distinct form of numerals for each, usually Roman 
numerals for the preliminary pages and Hindu- 
Arabic numerals for the text pages. 

SECTION 2 TITLE LEAVES 
5 CONTENTS OF TITLE LEAVES 


5.1 The title leaves of a book shall contain 


IS 790 : 2023 


the following minimum information: 


a) Name(s) of author(s), compiler(s) or 
editor(s), individual or corporate [see 5.3 (b) 
and 6.2]; 

b) Names of any other concerned, individual or 
corporate [see 5.3.1 (d) and 6.2]; 

c) Title of book (see 6.3); 

d) Title in the language of the original work if 

the book is a translation. When the alphabet 

of the original is different from that of the 
translation, it shall be transliterated into the 
alphabet of the translation; 

Alternative or earlier title, if the title is 

different from that of any other edition of 

the same work; 

f) Edition number [see 5.4 (c) and 6.4]; 

g) Place(s) of publication [see 5.3.1(a) and 
5.4.1]; 

h) Name(s) of publisher(s) [see 5.3 (c), 
5.3.1(b) and 5.4.1]; 

j) Date (year) of publication preferably in 
Hindu-Arabic numerals [see 5.3.1(a) and 
5.4.1]; 

k) Number of volume in a multi-volume work. 
preferably in Hindu-Arabic numerals 
(see 5.3.2); and 

m) Series title and the series number of a book 
forming part of a series (see 5.2.1.2). 


e 


wm 


5.1.1 In addition, it is desirable to include the 
following information: 


a) Date (year) of the original edition, if a new 
edition (see 6.4); 

b) Date (year) of the first impression 
(printing) of the edition and the number of 
the impression (printing) of a new 
impression (printing) (see 6.4); 

c) Translation of the title, sub-title and names 
of corporate bodies mentioned on the title- 
pages, if not in Roman script (see 6.3.2); 

d) International Standard Book Number 
(ISBN), [see IS 8310 and 5.4 (d)]; and 

e) Copyright [see 5.4 (b) and printer 
statements [see 5.4 (f)]. 


5.1.2 The presentation of this information on the 
half-title leaf, title page and back of title 
page shall be as given in 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4 
respectively. 


IS 790 : 2023 


5.2 Half-Title Leaf 


The following information should be given on two 
pages of the half-title leaf, that is, the half-title page 
and back of half-title page. 


5.2.1 Half-Title Page 


The half-title page should carry the following 
minimum information: 


a) The short title of the book; and 
b) The series statement, if the book belongs to 
a series. 


5.2.1.1 Short title 


The short title of the book shall be derived from the 
full title by omitting the secondary title, explanatory 
or evaluatory words and all other puffs, when these 
are present. 


The short title should appear more prominently than 
the series statement. 


Examples: 

1) Ranganathan, S. R. Library Legislation: 
Handbook to Madras Library Act, Madras 
Library Association (Short-title — Library 
Legislation). 

2) Ranganathan, S. R. Social Bibliography or 
Physical Bibliography for Librarians, 
Delhi. University of Delhi (Short title — 
Social Bibliography). 

3) Author's Guide for Preparing Manuscripts 
and Handling Proof, New York. John 
Wiley. (Short title — Author's Guide). 


5.2.1.2 Series statement 


The series statement shall comprise: 


a) Name of the series; 

b) Series number; 

c) Name of sponsoring body, if any; and 
d) Name(s) of the editor(s), if required. 


5.2.1.3 The name of the series and the series 
number may be given in one line; the name of the 
sponsoring body, if any, should be in a separate line 
above the name of the series, unless it is contained 
in the latter; and the name(s) of the editor(s) should, 
if required to be given, be placed below the name of 
the series. 


5.2.2 Back of Half-Title Page 


The back of the half-title page may be left blank or 
may carry one or more of the following: 


a) List of other or projected books in the 
series, if the book belongs to a series; 

b) List of other published and/or projected 
books by the same author; 

c) Frontispiece illustration or map; 

d) Extension of the title page; 

e) Short note on author or book or both; and 

f) Dedication, epigraph or invocation. 


NOTE — Items (e) and (f) are sometimes placed on the 
half-title page itself. 


5.3 Title Page 


The title page should carry the following minimum 
information: 


a) Full title of the book, with sub-title, if any 
(see 6.3); 

b) Name(s) of the author(s)/editor(s) (see 6.2); 
and 

c) Name of the publisher. 


5.3.1 The title page may also carry the following 
information: 


a) Place and year of publication; 

b) Colophon or emblem of the publisher; 

c) Name of sponsor or sponsoring body; and 

d) Name(s) of collaborator(s), such as 
illustrator(s), commentator(s), compiler(s), 
editor(s), translator(s), and person(s) 
contributing foreword, introduction, etc. 


5.3.2 Title Page of Volume of a Book 


The title page of a volume of a book in more than 
one volume should carry, in addition to the title of 
the whole work, the number of the volume, its 
specific title, if any, and the name(s) of the 
author(s)/editor(s) of the volume. 


5.4 Back of Title Page 
The back of the title page should normally carry the 


following information: 


a) ‘Author statement’ (see Note under 6.2.1); 


1) Surname, personal name; and 
2) Corporate author's name. 


b) Information about all the volumes of a 
multivolume book (see Note); 

c) In case of ordinary composite book, 
information about contributors and their 
contributions in the volume shall be given, 
whereas in case of artificial composite 
book the information about different 
publications in the same volume may be 
given; 

d) Copyright statement (obligatory, if 
copyright exists); 

e) Edition statement (see 6.4); 

f) International Standard Book Number 
(ISBN), when available: 

g) Country of origin statement; and 

h) Printer statement. 


NOTES 


1 ISBN and Copyright, if available, shall be given at the 
verso of the title page. 

2 Incase number of volumes of a book is large and it is not 
possible to include it on the back of the title page, this 
information may be included in the preliminary pages, 
preferably on the frontispiece. 


5.4.1 The back of the title page may also carry 
information on collaborators, place of publication, 
publishing history, publisher's address(es), 
reproduction of national library catalogue card, 
library classification (call) number and price. 


NOTE — The information to be given on back of title page 
should be so distributed on the page as to leave a blank 
space of about 25 mm across the middle of the page for use 
of libraries. The library call number of the book, if included, 
may be placed at the bottom of this vacant space which is 
intended to accommodate the accession number which will 
be entered by libraries. 


6 PRESENTATION OF INFORMATION 


6.1 The following information is intended as 
amplification for the publisher and refers to certain 
items given in above clauses. 


6.2 Author(s) 


The name(s) of the individual author(s), corporate 
author(s) or, in a composite or collective work, that 
of the responsible editor(s) or compiler(s) shall be 
given on the title page in full and in such form as to 
indicate clearly the part of the name under which the 
author should be entered in alphabetical lists. 


6.2.1 Titles and qualifications of the author(s), etc, 
useful as an indication of his authority on the subject 
of the book, should be included. 


NOTE — In various Indian names, it is often difficult for a 
person not familiar with the culture of the group to which 
the author belongs to decide what part of a name should be 
used for alphabetical arrangement in author catalogues, 


IS 790 : 2023 


bibliographies, etc. In such cases, an 'entry statement’ may 
be included. In this, the name of the author, omitting titles 
etc, which are not part of the proper name, and collating 
the part of the name to be used for alphabetization in a 
style distinct from the rest of the name, for example, in 
bold type should be given: 


Examples: 

Dewan Chaman 
Lal 

Sardar Vallabhbhai 
Patel 


Chaman Lal or Chaman 


Vallabhbhai Patel 


To assist libraries, it is suggested that the year of 
birth of an author (and year of death, if the author is 
deceased) should be given in parentheses with the 
entry statement. 


6.3 Title 


The title shall appear on the title page and shall be 
short and clear. It may be amplified by a sub-title 
which should normally be differentiated from the 
title typographically. 


6.3.1 In a multi-volume work, all volumes shall 
have the same general title: each volume may have, 
in addition, a separate title. In these cases, the title 
page should carry, in addition to the title of the 
whole work, the number of the volume, its specific 
title, if any, and the name(s) of the 
author(s)/editor(s) of the volume. 


6.3.2 When the title page is not written in Roman 
script, it is desirable to provide on the back of the 
title page, a translation/transliteration of the title in 
Roman script. 


6.3.2.1 If the translation is not made from the 
original work, the title of the work from which it was 
directly translated should also be indicated, 
transliterated into the alphabet of the translation. 


6.4 Edition and Impression (Printing) 


The number of the edition shall be given on back of 
title page. If the book is a reprint of an existing 
edition, this shall also be stated. Where it is not a 
first edition, the year of the first edition and, as far 
as possible, of subsequent editions and impressions 
shall be recorded. 


Examples: 


1) First edition May 2013 

2) Second edition Nov 2013 

3) 2nd impression 2006 or (Reprinted 
2006) 

4) 3rd impression 2007 

5) 4th impression 2008 

6) Third edition Oct 2009 


IS 790 : 2023 


SECTION 3 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
7 GENERAL 


7.1 This section covers rules for presentation of 
table of contents for a simple book, a composite 
book and an artificial composite book. 


7.2 This section does not cover rules for 
presentation of table of contents in serials which will 
be dealt in IS 11957. 


8 SIMPLE AND COMPOSITE BOOKS 


8.1 The table of contents shall include a separate 
entry for each chapter or major division in the matter 
of a book. 


8.2 The entry devoted to a chapter or major division 
shall give in succession: 


a) Its number; 

b) Its title (followed by the name of the 
author in case of a composite book); and 

c) The number of its first page only or the 
inclusive number of its pages. 


8.3 Each chapter entry may, if desired, be followed, 
by subentries listing the headings and page numbers 
of sections and sub-sections of the chapter or 
division concerned. 


8.4 Ifthe chapters of a book are grouped in parts (or 
any of their equivalents, like 'book’, sections, etc), 
the table of contents shall carry the titles of these 
parts above each group of entries specifying the 
chapters they respectively contain. 


8.5 If plates, maps and any other materials are 
inserted in the book without being included in 
itspagination, they shall be listed in a separate 
section in the contents pages. Each entry in this 
section shall give in succession: 


a) Serial number; 
b) Legend (shortened, if necessary); and 


c) Position of occurrence of the material 
listed. 


8.6 When a list of tables, charts, illustrations or any 
other special features is considered necessary, it 
shall be given in a separate section in the contents 
pages. Each entry in the list shall give in succession: 


a) Serial number; 
b) Legend (shortened, if necessary); and 


c) Page number of the table, chart, diagram, 
illustration or other material. 


8.7 Items mentioned under 8.5 and 8.6 may be 
given on separate pages. 


9 ARTIFICIAL COMPOSITE BOOK 


9.1 The table of contents for an artificial composite 
book shall be in one of the following two forms: 


a) A single table consisting of separate sub- 
tables (one for each constituent book) in the 
same sequence in which the constituent 
books appear in the text, each sub-table 
satisfying the requirements given under 8 
and its heading denoting in succession. 


1) The serial number of the 
constituent book 

2) Its author/editor, and 

3) Its title. 


b) A separate table for every constituent 
book, each satisfying the requirements 
given under 8 and appearing just before 
the opening of the text of its respective 
constituent book. 


NOTE — ff alternative (b) above is adopted, it would be 
desirable, if the volume is numbered in a single sequence 
throughout, to place a general table of contents immediately 
after the general (composite) title page giving the serial 
number, full title and the name of the author/editor of each 
constituent book and the page of the composite volume on 
which it commences. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


IS 790 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Publication & Graphic Technology, MSD 06 


Organization 


Guru Jambheshwar University, Hissar 

Authentication Solution Providers Association (ASPA) 
Former Hologram Manufacturers Association of 
India, New Delhi 


Avantika Printers Private Limited, New Delhi 


Central Pulp and Paper Research Institute (CPPRI), 
Saharanpur 


Delhi Printers Association, New Delhi 


Department of Printing Technology, Anna University, 
Chennai 


Department of Printing Technology, 
University, Kolkata 


Jadavpur 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), 
Bengaluru 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA), 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Future Schoolz, Kochi 


Government Institute of Printing Technology, Mumbai 


Indian Printing Packaging and Allied Machinery 
Manufacturers Association IPAMA), Noida 


IPP Services, Training and Research Private Limited 
(IPPSTAR), Noida 


Joy D-Zign Engineers Private Limited, New Delhi 
Kumar Printers Private Limited, Palwal 


Manipal University, College of Printing, Manipal 


Representative(s) 


DR ANJAN KUMAR BARAL (Chairperson) 


SHRI CHANDER SHEKHAR JEENA 
SHRI NITYANAND SHENOY (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKTNATH PANDEY 


SHRI SANJAY TYAGI 
SHRI R. D. GODIYAL (Alternate) 


SHRI B. D. MENDIRATTA 
SHRI SUNIL JAIN (Alternate) 


PROF N. RAJESWARI 


DR ARPITAM CHATTERJEE 


DR N. K. MURTHY 


COL M. MURALIDHARAN 
SHRI JANARDHAN K. (Alternate) 


SHRI KULAKKADA PRADEEP 
SHRI JOSE THOMAS (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER DESHPANDE 
SHRI S. DAYAKAR REDDY 


SHRI PRASHANT VATS (Alternate I) 
SHRI NAVEEN GUPTA (Alternate II) 


SHRI NARESH KHANNA 


SHRI N. S. MANKU 
SHRI SANDEEP BHARGAVA 


SHRI AMRUTHARAJ H. KRISHNAN 
SHRI RAMNATH SHENOY (Alternate) 


IS 790 : 2023 


Organization 


Map Printing Division, Survey of India, New Delhi 


Pressman Solutions, Chennai 

Principal, AGPC, Shivakasi 

Printing Technology, COET, Pune 

Production Manager, Sheetfed Module, ITC, Chennai 
RSG Solutions, New Delhi 


The Department of Printing Technology, Anna 


University, Chennai 


The Regional Institute of Printing Technology, Jadavpur, 


Trigon Digipack Private Limited, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity (Plot 12, Cross Road 2, 
Lokhandwala Complex, Andheri West, Mumbai — 
400053) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI B. K. GUPTA 
SHRI EQUERAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


SHRI K. PANTHALA SELVAN 
DR M. NANDAKUMAR 
PROF MADHURA MAHAJAN 
ER K. NATARAJAN 

SHRI ISHANT KALKAL 


DR K. SENTHIL VADIVU 


PROF SHANKHYA DEBNATH 


SHRI ASHOKAN KRISHNAMOORTHY 


PROF KIRAN PRAYAGI 


SHRI ANUJ SWARUP BHATNAGAR, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEMS) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


BIS Directorate General 


Member Secretary 
SHRI ASHISH V. UREWAR 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEMS), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 06 (21666). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8™ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.L.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


