IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


RAT HAF 
asa Ta at fessa sik frat — difè afear 
SI 4 Weel $1 AR TH 


(TAT IRS) 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PILE 
FOUNDATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 
PART 4 LOAD TEST ON PILES 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 91.100.30:93.020 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 7 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


Pile load test is the most direct method for determining the safe loads on piles including its structural capacity 
with respect to soil/rock in which it is installed. It is considered more reliable on account of its being in-situ test 
than the capacities computed by other methods, such as static formula, dynamic formulae and penetration test 
data. There are widely varying practices followed for load tests on piles. Particularly, the difficulties regarding 
the establishment of an acceptable criterion, for determining the ultimate and safe bearing capacity of piles, and 
predicting the pile group behaviour from the test data obtained from individual load test on single piles cannot be 
under estimated as the factors affecting are many. However, an attempt is made to bring out a unified approach to 
the various aspects of load test on piles. 


This standard (Part 4) was first published in 1979 to cover load test on piles. The other parts of this standard are 
as follows: 


(Part 1) Concrete piles 
(Part 2) Timber piles 
(Part 3) Under-reamed piles 


The standard was first revised in 1985 to give more details in regard to the rate of loading and unloading and the 
details of the situations when the different types of tests are conducted. Later Amendment No. | to the standard 
was issued in May 1989 modifying the test load for routine test of piles. 


It has now been felt that the provisions regarding the load test of piles should be further revised to take into 
account the recent developments in this field. This revision has been brought out to incorporate these developments. 


In this revision following major modifications have been incorporated: 


a) Definitions of various terms have been modified as per the prevailing engineering practice; 
b) The frequency for initial test has been modified; 
c) The test load for initial test pile has been added; and 


d) Incase of both vertical load test and pull-out test, separate criteria for determining safe load of piles 
have been specified on the basis of diameter of piles. 


For rock socketed piles and for piles through rock, assessment of safe load for different mode of loadings shall 
conform to IS 14593 : 1998 “Design and construction of bored cast in-situ piles founded on rocks — Guidelines’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex C. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF PILE 
FOUNDATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 
PART 4 LOAD TEST ON PILES 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 4) covers the load test on all 
types of piles coveredin IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 1), IS 2911 
(Part 1/Sec 2), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 3), IS 2911 (Part 1/ 
Sec 4), IS 2911(Part 2) and IS 2911 (Part 3) and 
provides guidelines for determination of safe load 
based on the following types of loadings: 


a) Vertical load test (compression), 
b) Lateral load test, and 
c) Pull-out test. 


1.1.1 High strain dynamic test, statnamic test and 
embedded load cell method are beyond the scope of 
this standard. 


1.2 Load tests under vibratory loads, moments and 
other forces and sequence of loading under special 
circumstances like yield load capacity of buckling piles 
are not covered in this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. AN standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 


1904 : 1986 Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundations in soils 
— General requirements (third 


revision) 


2911 Design and construction of pile 
foundations — Code of practice: 
(Part 1) Concrete piles, 


(Sec 1) : 2010 Driven cast in-situ concrete piles 
(second revision) 
Bored cast in-situ concrete piles 
(second revision) 
Driven precast concrete piles (second 


revision) 


(Sec 2) : 2010 


(Sec 3) : 2010 


IS No. Title 


(Sec 4): 2010 Precast concrete piles in prebored 
holes (first revision) 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Timber piles (first revision) 


Under reamed piles (first revision) 


2911 


(Part 2) : 1980 
(Part 3) : 1980 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Cut-Off Level — It is the level where a pile is 
cut-off in order to make structural connection to the 
pile caps or beams or any other structural components 
at that level. 


3.2 Datum Bar — A rigid bar placed on immovable 
supports. 


3.3 Total Elastic Displacement — This is the 
magnitude of displacement of the pile head during 
rebound on removal of a given test load. This comprises 
two components: 


a) Elastic displacement of the soil participating 
in the load transfer; and 
b) Elastic displacement of the pile shaft. 


3.4 Factor of Safety — It is the ratio of the ultimate 
load capacity of a pile to the safe load on the pile. 


3.5 Gross Displacement — The total movement of 
the pile top under a given load. 


3.6 Group Test — A minimum of three piles shall be 
considered as group for the purpose of testing. 


3.7 Initial Load Test — A test intended to be conducted 
on initial test pile at the initial stage of the project to 
determine the load carrying capacity of the pile by 
loading either to its ultimate load or to two and half 
times the estimated safe load whichever occur earlier. 


NOTE — In case of sites where large negative drag is 
anticipated and piles with deep cut-off levels, test load shall 
be selected by analytical approach. Wherever applicable, 
estimated negative drag shall be added to the test load while 
testing the initial test pile for initial load test. 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


3.8 Initial Test Pile — One or more piles, which are 
not working piles, may be installed to assess the load 
carrying capacity of a pile. 


3.9 Kentledge — Dead-weight used for applying a 
test load on piles. 


3.10 Net Displacement — The net vertical movement 
of the pile top after the pile has been subjected to a test 
load and subsequently released. 


3.11 Routine Test — It is carried out on a working 
pile with a view to check whether pile is capable of 
taking the working load assigned to it without 
exceeding permissible settlement. 


3.12 Safe Load — It is the load derived by applying a 
factor of safety on the ultimate load capacity of the 
pile or as determined from load test. 


3.13 Ultimate Load Capacity 一 The maximum load 
which a pile can carry before failure, that is when the 
founding strata fails by shear as evident from the load 
settlement curve or the pile fails as a structural member. 


3.14 Working Load/Design Load 一 The load 
assigned to a pile as per design. 


3.15 Working Pile — A pile forming part of the 
foundation system of a given structure. 


3.16 Constant Rate of Penetration (CRP) — In this 
method, test pile is made to penetrate the soil at a 
constant speed while the force applied at the top of the 
pile to maintain the rate of penetration is continuously 
measured. As a result of the pile movement the soil is 
progressively stressed until it fails in shear; when that 
occurs the ultimate load of the pile is reached. 


3.17 Cyclic Load Test — It is carried out on initial 
test piles to determine contribution from skin friction 
and point bearing load by loading and unloading in 
cycle. 


4 NECESSARY INFORMATION 


The following information is necessary for pile(s) on 
which test is proposed: 


a) Pile type including material and 
reinforcement details, group of piles, if any; 

b) Method of driving/installation with record 
including date of casting, date of testing, 
formation level, cut off level as per relevant 
pile data sheets given in IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 
1 to 4); 

c) Pile depth(s) and details of cross-section(s); 

d) Type of test desired; 

e) Layout of the pile(s) 一 Space available 
around and position in the group for single 
pile test; 


f) Depth of water table and sub strata details with 
applicable test results; 

g) Backup calculations for arriving the safe load 
and ultimate load capacity; 

h) Availability and provision of type of piles or 
anchors or kentledge for reaction; 


j) Nature of loading/loading plan with a 
particularly mention of pile(s) which may be 
free standing when scour is expected; 

k) Permissible load considered in design; and 

m) Any other information concerning planning 
and conducting the tests including the relevant 
past experience concerning similar test(s). 


5 TYPES OF TESTS 


There are two types of tests, namely, initial and routine 
test for each type (mode) of loading (that is, vertical, 
lateral and pull-out). 


5.1 Initial Test 


This test is required for one or more of the following 
purposes: 


a) Determination of ultimate load capacity and 
arrival at safe load by application of factor of 
safety, 

b) To provide guidelines for setting up the limits 
of acceptance for routine tests, 

c) To get an idea of suitability of piling system, 
and 

d) To have a check on calculated load by 
dynamic or static approaches. 


5.1.1 The number of initial tests may be selected as 
given below depending upon the nature of sub-strata, 
number of piles and past experience at the site. 


a) For small size projects (for piles less than 
1 000 numbers), a minimum of two tests. 

b) For large size projects (for piles more than 
1 000 numbers), a minimum of two tests for 
first 1 000 piles and additional one test for 
every additional 1 000 piles and part thereof. 


The frequency of testing stipulated above is applicable 
for each diameter of pile and rated capacity of pile in 
each type (mode) of loading. The number of tests may 
be increased/decreased depending upon whether the 
strata is erratic/uniform, subjected to a minimum of 
two tests. 


5.1.2 The test load provision in the initial load test shall 
not be less than the estimated safe load multiplied by 
the minimum factor of safety of 2.5. 


5.1.3 Initial test piles should be installed by the same 
technique, same type of equipment as that proposed 


for working piles. Separate test piles shall be installed 
for different type (mode) of loadings (namely, vertical, 
lateral and pull-out). Initial pile load tests shall 
preferably be carried out prior to execution of piling 
job. 


5.2 Routine Test 


This test is required for one or more of the following 
purposes: 


a) Checking the safe load as determined from 
static analysis [see IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 1 to 
4), IS 2911 (Part 2) and IS 2911 (Part 3)]; 

b) Detection of any unusual performance 
contrary to the findings of the initial test, if 
already done; and 


c) Workmanship. 


The number of tests shall be 0.5 percent of the total 
number of piles, subject to a minimum of one (1) test. 
The number of tests may be increased up to 2 percent 
in particular cases depending upon the nature, type of 
structure and sub-strata condition. 


5.2.1 The piles to be tested for routine tests may 
preferably be selected on the basis of the following: 


a) Abnormal variation in concrete consumption. 

b) Sudden drop in concrete level during 
construction of piles. 

c) Problems encountered during boring and 
tremie operation. 

d) Significant variation in depth of pile with 
respect to other adjoining piles and boring 
record. 

e) Anomalies observed during the driving 
operation in case of driven piles. 


f) Piles under sensitive locations of structures. 


g) Any doubt arising from non destructive test 
results. 


NOTES 


1 Number of tests mentioned in 5.1.1 (a), 5.1.1 (b) and 
5.2 are applicable separately for each type (mode) of 
loading (that is, vertical, lateral and pull-out), subject 
to design requirements. 


2 Number of tests mentioned in 5.1.1 (a), 5.1.1 (b) and 
5.2 are also applicable separately for each diameter of 
pile and rated capacity of pile. 


6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE 
TO ALL TYPES OF TESTS 


6.1 Pile test may be carried out on a single pile or a 
group of piles as required. In case of pile groups, caps 
shall be provided such that the required conditions 
of actual use are fulfilled. Pile cap can also be 
provided for single pile to accommodate load testing 
jacks, etc. 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


6.2 Generally the load application and deflection 
measurement should be made at the pile top. Datum 
bars should rest on firm ground. 


6.3 In particular cases where upper part of pile is likely 
to be exposed later on due to scour, dredging, 
liquefaction or otherwise then capacity contributed by 
that portion of the pile during load test shall be duly 
accounted for or simulated by provision of larger 
diameter casing around the pile up to scour depth, 
dredge level or liquefiable depth. The pile groups in 
these conditions shall be tested without their cap resting 
on the ground. 


6.4 The test should be carried out at cut-off level 
wherever practicable, otherwise suitable allowance 
shall be made in the interpretation of the test results/ 
test load, if the test is not carried out at cut-off level. 


6.4.1 Alternatively, in case of vertical load test 
conducted at a level higher than cut-off level or in case 
the soil parameters over the depth between the ground 
level and cut-off level is ambiguous, an annular space 
shall be created to remove the effect of skin friction 
above cut-off level by providing an outer casing of 
suitable diameter larger than the pile diameter. 
However, effect of over burden pressure may be taken 
into account for analysis of vertical pile load test. 


6.4.2 Whereas, in case of lateral load test, test load 
shall be applied at cut-off level; otherwise lateral 
displacement at cut-off level shall be determined based 
on measurements done at different level. However, the 
acceptance criteria of deflection shall be at cut-off level 
or scour level or dredge level or liquefiable depth, as 
the case may be. 


6.5 Load cells may be used for measuring load. 


6.6 In case of off-shore and marine piles, simulated 
load test may be conducted on-shore. 


6.7 Plotting of load displacement curve shall be done 
on rational basis by selecting suitable scale for load 
and settlement axis. 


7 VERTICAL LOAD TEST (COMPRESSION) 


7.1 General 


In this type of test, compression (vertical downward) 
load is applied to the pile top by means of a hydraulic 
jack against rolled steel joist or suitable load frame 
with adequate kentledge and the settlement is recorded 
by suitably positioned dial gauges/LVDTs. Maintained 
load method as given in 7.2 should be used for 
determination of safe load. However, for specific 
requirements cyclic and CRP methods, which are 
alternate methods, may be used as mentioned in 7.3 
and 7.4. The general requirements applicable for these 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


three methods are given from 7.1.1 to 7.1.6, as may be 
applicable. 


7.1.1 Preparation of Pile Head 


The pile head should be chipped off to natural 
horizontal plane till sound concrete is met. The 
projecting reinforcement should be cut-off or bent 
suitably and the top finished smooth and level with 
cement plaster or similar synthetic material where 
required. A bearing plate with a mark at the centre 
should be placed on the head of the pile for the jacks 
to rest. Finished pile head level may be measured prior 
and after the load test by suitable survey instrument. 


7.1.2 Application of Load (not Applicable to CRP 
Method) 


The test should be carried out by applying a series of 
vertical downward incremental load each increment 
being of about 20 percent of safe load on the pile. For 
testing of raker piles it is essential that load is applied 
along the axis of the pile. 


7.1.3 Reaction 
The reaction may be obtained from the following: 


a) Kentledge placed on a platform supported 
clear of the test pile. In case of load test below 
under-pinned structure, the existing structure, 
if having adequate weight and suitable 
construction may serve as kentledge. The 
centre of gravity of the kentledge should 
coincide with the axis of the pile and the load 
applied through the jack should also be 
coaxial with this pile. If multiple jacks are to 
be used, these shall be arranged in parallel 
and connected to a single hydraulic pump and 
pressure gauge. 


b) Anchor piles with centre-to-centre distance 
from the test pile not less than 3 times the test 
pile shaft diameter subject to minimum of 
2m. If the anchor piles are permanent 
working piles, it should be ensured that their 
residual uplift is within limits. Care should 
be exercised to ensure that the datum bar 
supports are not affected by heaving up of the 
soil. 

c) Rock anchors with distance from the nearest 
edge of the piles at rock level being 2 times 
the test pile shaft diameter or 1.5 m, whichever 
is greater. 

NOTE — In case wedge failure governs in the pile anchors/ 


rock anchors, the pile distance should be suitably maintained 
to avoid interference of the wedge with the test pile. 


7.1.3.1 The reaction to be made available for the test 
should be 25 percent more than the final test load 
proposed to be applied. 


7.1.4 Settlement (not Applicable to CRP Method) 


7.1.4.1 Settlement shall be recorded with minimum 
4 dial gauges of 0.01 mm sensitivity for both single 
pile and groups. The dial gauges shall be placed 
symmetrically and at equal distances from the pile(s) 
and normally held by datum bars resting on immovable 
supports at a distance of 3 D (subject to minimum of 
2.0 m) from the edge of the piles, where D is the pile 
stem diameter of circular piles or diameter of the 
circumscribing circle in the case of square or non- 
circular piles. 


7.1.4.2 From safety point of view and to minimize the 
disturbance to datum bars, it is preferable to use 
remotely controlled linear variable differential 
transducers (LVDT) with a digital read out for 
recording the settlement. The LVDTs shall be 
calibrated. 


7.1.4.3 Finished pile head level may be measured prior 
and after the load test by suitable survey instrument. 


7.1.5 The safe vertical load on single pile for the initial 
test should be least of the following: 


a) For piles up to and including 600 mm 
diameter: 
1) Two-thirds of the final load at which the 
total displacement attains a value of 
12 mm unless otherwise required in a 
given case on the basis of nature and type 
of structure in which case, the safe load 
should be corresponding to the stated 
total displacement permissible; and 
2) Fifty percent of the final load at which 
the total displacement equal to 10 percent 
of the pile diameter in case of uniform 
diameter piles and 7.5 percent of bulb 
diameter in case of under-reamed piles. 
b) For piles more than 600 mm diameter: 


1) Two-thirds of the final load at which the 
total displacement attains a value of 
18 mm or maximum of 2 percent pile 
diameter whichever is less unless 
otherwise required in a given case on the 
basis of nature and type of structure in 
which case, the safe load should be 
corresponding to the stated total 
displacement permissible; and 

2) 50 percent of the final load at which the 
total displacement equal to 10 percent of 
the pile diameter in case of uniform 
diameter piles and 7.5 percent of bulb 
diameter in case of under-reamed piles. 


7.1.5.1 However, routine test shall be carried for a test 
load of at least 1.5 times the working load; the maximum 


settlement at the test load being not greater than 12 mm 
for piles diameter up to and including 600 mm and 
18 mm or 2 percent of pile diameter whichever is less 
for piles of diameter more than 600 mm. 


7.1.6 The safe vertical load on groups of piles for initial 
test shall be least of the following: 


a) Final load at which the total displacement 
attains a value of 25 mm unless otherwise 
required in a given case on the basis of nature 
and type of structure; and 

b) Two-thirds of the final load at which the total 
displacement attains a value of 40 mm. 


7.1.6.1 However, routine test on group of piles shall 
be carried for a test load of at least equal to the working 
load; the maximum settlement of the test loading in 
position being not exceeding 25 mm. 


NOTE 一 For differential settlements, IS 1904 shall be referred. 


7.2 Maintained Load Method 


This is applicable for both initial and routine test. In 
this method, each stage of loading shall be maintained 
till the rate of movement of the pile top is not more 
than 0.2 mm/h or until 2 h have elapsed, whichever is 
earlier subject to a minimum of 1 h. The maximum 
test load shall be maintained for 24 h. 


7.2.1 Duration of Vertical Loading 


7.2.1.1 Vertical loading on single pile shall be 
continued till one of the following takes place: 


a) Incase of initial load test: 


1) Applied load reaches 2.5 times the safe 
estimated load; or 

2) Maximum settlement of pile exceeds a 
value of 10 percent of pile diameter in 
case of uniform diameter piles and 
7.5 percent of bulb diameter in case of 
under-reamed piles. 

b) Incase of routine load test: 


1) Applied load reaches 1.5 times the 
working load; or 

2) Maximum settlement of pile exceeds a 
value of 12 mm for piles diameter up to 
and including 600 mm and 18 mm or 
maximum of 2 percent of pile diameter 
whichever is less for piles of diameter 
more than 600 mm. 


7.2.1.2 Vertical loading on group of piles shall be 
continued till one of the following takes place: 


a) Incase of initial load test: 


1) Applied load reaches 2.5 times the safe 
estimated load; or 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


2) Maximum settlement of pile exceeds a 
value of 40 mm. 


b) Incase of routine load test: 


1) Applied load reaches the working load; 
or 


2) Maximum settlement of pile exceeds a 
value of 25 mm. 


7.3 Cyclic Method 


This method is used in case of initial test to find out 
separately skin friction and point bearing load on single 
piles of uniform diameter. The procedure as given in 
Annex A or by suitable instrumentation may be used. 


7.4 CRP Method 


This method which is used for initial test is generally 
considered to be more suitable for determining ultimate 
load capacity than by the maintained load test but the 
load/deflection characteristics are quite different from 
those of the maintained load test and cannot be used to 
predict settlement of the pile under working load 
conditions. This method should not be included in 
routine test. The procedure is given in Annex B. 


8 LATERAL LOAD TEST ON PILES 


8.1 The test may be carried out by introducing a 
hydraulic jack with gauge between two piles or pile 
groups under test or the reaction may be suitably 
obtained otherwise. If it is conducted by jack located 
between two piles or groups, the full load imposed by 
the jack shall be taken as the lateral resistance of each 
pile or group. The loading should be applied in 
increments of about 20 percent of the estimated safe 
lateral load. 


8.2 The next increment should be applied after the 
rate of displacement is less than or equal to 0.1 mm 
per 30 min subject to minimum of 30 min. 


8.3 In case of unapproachable cut-off levels, 
displacements shall be read by using at least two dial 
gauges or LVDTs of 0.01 mm sensitivity (see Fig. 1) 
spaced at 30 cm and kept horizontally one above the 
other on the test pile and the displacement shall be 
interpolated at cut-off level from similar triangles. 
However, for approachable cut-off levels, one dial 
gauge or LVDT placed diametrically opposite to the 
jack shall directly measure the displacement. Where, 
it is not possible to locate one of the dial gauges in the 
line of the jack axes, there two dial gauges may be 
kept at a distance of 30 cm at a suitable height and the 
displacement interpolated at load point from similar 
triangles. 


NOTES 


1 One of the methods for keeping dial gauge on pile surface is 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


to chip off uneven concrete on the side of the pile and to fix a 
glass piece of 20 to 30 mm square. The dial gauges tips shall 
rest on the central portion of the glass plate. 


2 In case the hydraulic jack is placed in between test pile and 
reaction pile, one dial gauge or LVDT shall be suitably placed 
on reaction pile to measure the displacement of reaction pile. 


8.4 The safe lateral load on the pile for initial test, for 
both free head and fixed head shall be taken as the 
least of the following: 


a) Fifty percent of the final load at which the 
total displacement increases to 12 mm; 


b) Final load at which the total displacement 
corresponds to 3 mm; and 


c) Load corresponding to any other specified 
displacement as per performance or design 
requirements. 


8.4.1 Routine lateral load test shall be carried out for a 
test load equal to the working load; the maximum 
deflection of test loading in position shall not exceed 
5 mm. 


NOTES 


1 The above displacement is at the cut-off level of on-shore 
piles and at the scour line/mud line of off-shore piles, as the 
case may be. 


2 In actual practice the piles are partially fixed or fixed. 
Accordingly, to derive the advantage of increased lateral load 
due to partial fixity/fixity condition, it is desirable to carryout 
(a) Lateral load test on group of piles with pile cap; or (b) 
Single pile may be tested for lateral load under sustained 
vertical load. 


3 Suitable analytical method may be considered to interpret 
load test results carried at free head condition to fixed head 
condition. 


DATUM BAR 
SUPPORT AL. 


DATUM BAR 
SUPPORT 


9 PULL-OUT TEST ON PILES 


9.1 Uplift force may preferably be applied by means 
of hydraulic jack(s) with gauge using a suitable pull- 
out set up. Pile top shall preferably be at cut-off level. 
Displacement measurement shall be made at pile top 
with at least two dial gauges placed at diametric 
opposite ends of pile. 


NOTE — One of the methods for pull-out tests that may be 
used is where hydraulic jack is made to rest on rolled steel 
joist(s) resting on two supports on the ground. The jack reacts 
against a frame attached to the top of the test pile such that 
when the jack is operated, the pile gets pulled up and the 
reaction is transferred to the ground through the supports which 
are at least 2.5 D away from the test pile periphery (where D is 
pile stem diameter of circular piles or diameter of the 
circumscribing circle in the case of square piles). The 
framework can be attached to the pile top with the 
reinforcement bars which may be threaded or to which threaded 
bolts may be welded. As an alternative it is sometimes 
preferable to use a central rod designed to take pile load and 
embedded centrally in the pile to a length equal to the bond 
length load required. It will have threads at top for fixing it to 
the framework. For larger loads the number of rods may have 
to be more and depending on the set-up these may be put in a 
line or in any other symmetrical pattern. For routine tests, the 
framework is normally attached to the reinforcing bars but a 
central rod may also be used in case the upper portion of the 
pile is required to be built up. 


9.2 The test pile shall have adequate steel to withstand 
pulling. In some cases, in order to allow for neck 
tension in a pull-out test, it may be necessary to provide 
additional reinforcement in the piles to be tested. 


9.3 The pull-out load increments and consequent 
displacement readings shall be read as in the case of 
vertical load test. 


DIAL GAUGE 


(1 No. DIAL GAUGE/LVDT Where 
CUT-OFF LEVEL IS APPROACHABLE 

2 No. DIAL GAUGES/LVDTs FOR 
UNAPPROACHABLE CUT-OFF LEVELS) 


Fic. 1 POSITION OF DATUM BAR SUPPORTS 


9.4 The safe uplift load shall be taken as the least of 
the following: 


a) For piles up to and including 600 mm 
diameter: 

1) “Two-thirds of the load at which the total 
displacement is 12 mm or the load 
corresponding to a specified permissible 
uplift; and 

2) Half of the load at which the load 
displacement curve shows a clear break 
(downward trend). 

b) For piles more than 600 mm diameter: 

1) “Two-thirds of the load at which the total 
displacement is 18 mm or maximum of 
2 percent of pile diameter whichever is 
less or the load corresponding to a 
specified permissible uplift; and 

2) Half of the load at which the load 
displacement curve shows a clear break 
(downward trend). 


9.5 The initial test shall be carried out up to 2.5 times the 
estimated safe uplift load or until the load displacement 
curve shows a clear break (downward trend). 


9.6 Routine test shall be carried out to 1.5 times the 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


working load or 12 mm total displacement for piles 
diameter up to and including 600 mm and 18 mm or 
maximum of 2 percent of pile diameter, whichever is 
less for piles of diameter more than 600 mm, whichever 
is earlier. 


9.7 Pull-out test shall be carried out preferably on 
initial test piles. In case it is found necessary to conduct 
pull out test on working piles the following 
considerations shall be made: 


a) To check that the pile shaft is designed to cater 
for such uplift load; and 

b) To limit the displacement within elastic 
deformation of pile beyond which the test 
should be discontinued. 


10 RECORDING OF DATA AND PRESENTATION 


10.1 The pile test data essentially contains three 
variables, namely, time, load and displacement. These 
are to be recorded sequentially for the tests under 
consideration and recorded in a suitable tabular form 
along with the information about the pile. 


10.2 The data may be suitably presented by curves 
drawn between the variables and safe loads shown on 
the graphs. Load displacement curve shall be an 
essential part of presentation. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 7.3) 


CYCLIC LOAD TEST METHOD 


A-1 METHOD 


Alternate loading and unloading shall be carried out at 
each stage as in 7.1.2 and each loading stage shall be 
maintained as in 7.2 and each unloading stage shall be 
maintained for at least 15 min and the subsequent 
elastic rebound in the pile should be measured 
accurately by dial gauges or LVDTs as in 7.1.4. 


A-2 ANALYSIS OF RESULTS FOR FRICTIONAL 
RESISTANCE 


A-2.1 Graphical Method 
A-2.1.1 The analysis shall be done as explained 
in Fig. 2. 


A-2.1.2 Assuming that there is no compression in the 
pile, plot a graph relating total elastic recovery and 
load at the pile top. 


A-2.1.3 Draw a straight line through the origin and 
parallel to the straight portion of curve I to divide the 
load into two parts and thereby obtain approximate 
values of point resistance and skin friction. 


A-2.1.4 From the approximate value of skin friction 
and knowing the loads on top of pile, compute the 
elastic compression of the pile corresponding to these 
loads, by the following formula: 


AE 
where 
A = elastic compression of pile, in cm; 
T = load on pile top, in kgf; 
F = frictional resistance, in kgf; 
L = length of the pile, in cm; 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


LOAD ON PILE TOP IN TONNES 


\ POINT 


ELASTIC COMPRESSION OF SUB-GRADE IN mm 


\ RESISTANCE \ III AND FINAL 
\ \ 
3*0 I 
\ \ 
\ 
\æ— PARALLEL _ 
\ \ 
\ \ 
\ \ 
4-0 \ l 
\ \ 
\ ` 
\ 
4.5 \ \ 
\ H 
I \ 


FIG. 2 ANALYSIS OF CYCLIC LOAD TEST DATA FOR SEPARATION OF SKIN FRICTION AND POINT RESISTANCE 


A = cross-sectional area of the pile, in cm”; and 
E 


modulus of elasticity of the pile material, in 
kef/cm2. 


(The value should normally be measured from an 
exposed portion of pile stem by means of 
compressometer during the load test itself.) 


A-2.1.5 Obtain values of the elastic compression of the 
sub-grade by subtracting the elastic compression of the 
pile from the total elastic recovery of pile and plot the 
graph relating these new values to the corresponding 
loads on pile top. When elastic compression of the 
subgrade works out negative, the negative value shall 
be ignored until the value is positive. 


A-2.1.6 Repeat the procedures given in A-2.1.3 to 
obtain new values of skin friction. 


A-2.1.7 The process of further approximations covered 
in A-2.1.6 may be repeated further to any desired 
extent, but usually the third curve would give 
sufficiently accurate values for skin friction for 
practical purposes. 


A-2.2 Analytical Method 


A-2.2.1 From straight line portion of curve (see Fig. 2) 
calculate the value of constant from the equation (1). 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


S, = elastic settlement at any point ‘b’ on the 
straight line; 
S, = elastic settlement at any point ‘a’ on the 


straight line; 
= change in applied load (T, —T,), in kgf; 
= applied load at the point ‘b’; 


Ar 
Ti, 
T, = applied load at the point ‘a’; 
L = length of pile, in cm; 

A = cross-sectional area of pile, in cm?; 
E 


= elastic modulus of the material of the pile, 
in kgf/cm?; and 


T = load on pile top, in kgf. 


A-2.2.2 Calculate the corrected settlement for different 
load increment by equation (2). 


S=mT ... (2) 
where 
S = corrected settlement, in cm; and 
T = total load on pile top, in kgf. 


A-2.2.3 Knowing value of m and S compute skin 
friction and point bearing by solving simultaneous 
equations (3) and (4). 


T= P+F ...(3) 
= e=) 
M= N YE 2 .. (1) T--- |L 
A, S = mP + 2 ...(4) 
where AE 
m = constant; where 
A, = change in total elastic settlement of pile top P = point bearing, in kgf; and 
(S, -S,), in cm; F = skin friction, in kgf. 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 7.4) 
CRP TEST 


B-1 PROCEDURE 


B-1.1 The load shall be measured by a load cell having 
sensitivity of at least 1 percent of the desired test load. 
If a pressure gauge is used, the same should be used 
with a loading ram to give the desired sensitivity. The 
penetration (deflection) should be measured by means 
of dial gauges/LVDTs held by a datum bar resting on 
immovable supports at a distance of at least 3 D (subject 
to a minimum of 1.5 m) away from the test pile edge 
where D is defined in 7.1.5. One of the dial gauges/ 


LVDTs will be selected for conducting the test. With 
continuous application of pressure on the pile top by 
operating of the jack, a person watches the rate of 
settlement of the dial gauge/LVDT against a stop watch 
held in his hand and directs the pump operator to pump 
faster or slower or at the same rate as needed to 
maintain the prescribed rate of settlement say at every 
0.25 mm settlement, he gives an indication to take 
readings. Immediately, other persons record the 
pressure gauge readings and other dial gauge/LVDT 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


readings. The pump supplying the jack may be hand 
or mechanically operated. For force up to 200 tonne 
hand pumping is convenient. If a mechanical pump is 
used, it should, for preference, have an ‘infinite 
variable’ delivery, controlled either by a bleed valve 
or a variable speed drive. 


B-1.2 The jack should be operated to cause the pile to 
penetrate at uniform rate which may be controlled by 
checking the time taken for small increments of 
penetration and adjusting the pumping rate accordingly. 
Readings of time, penetration and load should be taken 
at sufficiently close intervals to give adequate control 
of the rate of penetration. A rate of penetration of about 
0.75 mm per minute is suitable for predominantly 
friction piles. For pre-dominantly end-bearing piles in 
sand or gravel, rate of penetration of 1.5 mm/min may 
be used. The rate of penetration, if steady, may be half 
or twice these values without significantly affecting 
the results. The test should be carried out for the 


100 


LOAD, t => 


15 


penetration more than 10 percent of the diameter of 


the pile base. 


B-1.3 As the test proceeds a curve between load and 
penetration should be drawn to determine when the 


ultimate load capacity has been reached. 


B-2 ULTIMATE LOAD CAPACITY 


B-2.1 The curve of load versus penetration in the case 
of a predominantly friction pile will represent either a 
peak and the subsequent downward trend, or a peak 
and then almost a straight line, as shown in Fig. 3A. 
The peak load marked A in Fig. 3A will represent the 


ultimate load capacity of pile. 


B-2.2 In the case of predominantly end-bearing pile 
the curve will be similar to that shown in Fig. 3B and 
the ultimate load capacity may be taken as the load 
corresponding to the penetration equal to 10 percent 


of the diameter of the pile base. 


20 25 


3A PREDOMINANTLY FRICTION PILES 


Fic. 3 LoAD versus PENETRATION CURVE IN CRP TEST — (Continued) 


10 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


-一 一 ‘avon 


3B PREDOMINANTLY END BEARING PILES 


CRP TEST 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


Organization 
In personal capacity (188/90, Prince Anwar Shah Road, 
Kolkata 700045) 
A.P. Engineering Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 


AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 
Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), Bangalore 


Association of Piling Specialists (India), Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Central Designs Organization, Water Resources Department, 
Government of Maharashtra, Nashik 

Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 

Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 

Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Technological University, Delhi 
Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch (MES), New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


F.S. Engineers Pvt Limited, Chennai 


Gammon India Limited, Mumbai 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Ground Engineering Limited, New Delhi 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Hydraulic Engineering Instruments (HEICO), New Delhi 


Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 


Indian Institute of Technology Chennai, Chennai 


12 


Representative(s) 


Dr N. Som (Chairman) 


Suri P. SIVAKANTHAM 
SHRI P. JOHN VICTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. S. KULKARNI 
SHRI DHANANJAY ACHYUT BHIDE (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI V. T. GANPULE 
SHRI MADHUKAR LODHAIA (Alternate) 


SHRI C. PUSHPAKARAN 
SHRI HEMANT MALHOTRA (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 


SHRI A. GHOSH 
SHRI K. S. M. KARTHIGEYAN (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR (TCD) 
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (TCD) (Alternate) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (DESIGN) 
EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (DESIGN-V) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
SHRI VASANT G. HAVANGI (Alternate) 


DR R. CHITRA (CRO) 
SHRI MAHAVIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI DIPANKAR PAUL 
SHRI T. K. Roy CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYA PRAKASH 
SHRI K. A. RAJMOHAN (Alternate) 


PROF AsHOK KUMAR GUPTA 


SHRI A. K. JAIN 
CE/PD ADG (D&C) (Alternate) 


SHRI S. DEBNATH 
SHRI V. K. PANWAR (Alternate) 


DR A. VERGHESE CHUMMAR 


SHRI VENKATARAMANA. N. HEGGADE 
SHRI SANDEEP M. GHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI T. S. PANGTEY 
SHRI K. V. S. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI L. V. ASHARA 
SHRI K. L. DAVE (Alternate) 


SHRI JATTINDER SINGH 
SHRI H. B. SAHU (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 


PROF T. G. SITHARAM 
PROF G. L. SIVAKUMARA BABU (Alternate) 


PROF S. R. GANDHI 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 


Indian Institute of Technology Mumbai, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Uttaranchal 
ITD Cementation India Ltd, Kolkata 


Jadhavpur University, Kolkata 


Kirloskar Pneumatic Company Limited, Pune 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


M.N. Dastur Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


M/s Cengrs Geotechnica Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 
Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, New Delhi 


Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 


Nagadi Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 


National Institute of Disaster Management, New Delhi 


National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, Noida 

Pile Foundation Constructions Co (I) Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 

Research Designs and Standards Organization (RDSO), Ministry 
of Railways, Lucknow 


RITES Limited, Gurgaon 


Safe Enterprises, Mumbai 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Simplex Infrastructures Limited, Chennai 
Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 
TCE Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 
The Pressure Piling Co (D Pvt Limited, Mumbai 
University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur 


In personal capacity (C-2/155, West Enclave, Pitampura, New 
Delhi 110034) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 2911 (Part 4) : 2013 


Representative(s) 


DR G. V. RAMANA 
DR J. T. SHAHU (Alternate) 


DR SARVESH CHANDRA 
DR NIHAR RANJAN PATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI G. VENKATACHALAM 


PROF M. N. VILADKAR 
DR MAHENDRA SINGH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
DIRECTOR (T) (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI P. S. SENGUPTA 
SHRI MANISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


PROF SIBAPRIYA MUKHERJEE 
PROF RAMENDU BIKAS SAHU (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR K. S. RAMAKRISHNA 
SHRI JESUDOSS ASIRVATHAM (Alternate) 


DR ABHUIT DASGUPTA 
SHRI SUVENDU DEY (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 
SHRI RAVI SUNDARAM (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR RAY 


SHRI A. K. BANERJEE 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI R. S. HARDIKAR 
SHRI A. J. LOKHANDE (Alternate) 


Dr V. V. S. Rao 
SHRI N. SANTOSH RAo (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


DR D. N. NARESH 
SHRI R. R. MAURYA (Alternate) 


SHRI B. P. GUHA NIYOGI 
SHRI S. BHOWMIK (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI VIKRAM SINGH RAO 
SHRI SURYAVEER SINGH RAO (Alternate) 


PROF V. THIRIVENGADAM 


SHRI SHANKAR GUHA 
SHRI S. RAY (Alternate) 


SHRI N. GoPALA KRISHNAN 
SHRI J. RAJASANKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
SHRI B. K. RAJA GOPALAN (Alternate) 


SHRI V. C. DESHPANDE 
SHRI PUSHKAR V. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


SHRI G. R. CHOWDHARY 


DR K. G. BHATIA 


SHRI A. K. SAINI, Scientist ‘F’ & Head (CED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 
Scientist “B” (CED), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 43 (7678). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


