( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS:9823-1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED POTATOES

Fruits and Vegetables

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC 23

A-29, Members
AGRKXJLTURALMARKETING

DDA

DR I'. K. KYMAL Flats, Saket, New Delhi Representing

110017

( Ministry ADVISER TO THE GOVERNMENT OF I~or.4 DEPUIY AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISER ( Alrrrnare ) Bajaj Consultants, New Delhi SHRI S. R. BAJAJ SHRI BALJEET SINGH Department of Agriculture; Government of Haryana SHRI NARAIN DA= DULXJA ( Airrrmrc ) Central Fruit Products Advisory Committee SHRI M. BHATIA ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi Technical Standardization Committee ( Foodstuffs ) CHAIRMAN ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi SECRETARY ( Alternate ) Department of Agriculture, Government of West SHRI B. P. CHAKLADAR Bengal All India Cold Storages Association, New Delhi SHRI CHARANJ~TSINGH SHRJ S. K. MITTAL ( Alternate ) Directorate of Supplies & Transport, Army HeadCAL S. K. CHIB quarters, New Delhi UT-COL K. N. ACHARYA ( Alternate ) Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi DR B. C~?OUDHURY DK J. C. ANAND ( Akrnnte ) Ministry of Agriculture ( Department of Agriculture), SHR~ S. D. DEWAN New Delhi Export Inspection Council ( Ministry of Commerce ), SHRI 0. P. DHAMIJA Calcutta Department of Agriculture, Government of Tamil JOINT DIRECTOR OF AGRICULTURE ( COMMERCIALCROPS ) Nadu JON DJRECTOR OF AGKICULTURE ( INSPECTION, GENERAL AND ADMIMSTRATION) ( Alfernafe ) ( Conrinued on page 2 )

Directorate of Marketing & Inspection of Agriculture ), Faridabad

@ INDIAN

Copyr@r

1981 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

( XIV of 1957 ) and This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Art reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act

IS : 9823- 1981
( Conhhed

from puge I )

Represrrrting National Co-operative Development Corporation, New Delhi Department of Agriculture, Government of DR R. L. NAGPAL Maharashtra DEPUTYDIRECTOI~ OFAGRICULTURE CHORTICULTURE ) ( Altertiote ) All India Food Preservers' Association, New Delhi DR A. G. NAIK-KURADE SHRI M. S. KOHLI ( Alternute) SHRI K. R. NARASIMHAM The Metal Box Company of India Limited, Calcutta DR S. C. CHAKRAVAKTY ( Alter/rate) DR M. V. PATWARDHAN Central Food Technological Research Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore SHRI V. B. DALAL ( AIternnfe ) SHR~ S. RAMASWAMY Development Council for Food Processing Industries ( Directorate General of Technical Development ), New Delhi DR K. S. RANIDHAWA Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR G. S. NIJJAR ( Alternate) SHRI V. REC~UI\IATHAN Indian institute of Packaging, Bombay SHRI S. M. NWHANI ( Alternate) SIKXP~ARY Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry of Health & Family Welfare ), New Delhi ASSISTANT SBCREXARY ( PFA ) ( Alternate) DR T. R. SHARMA Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of Defence ), Mysore SHIUK. S. JAYAR~MAN ( Altern&) Export Promotion Cell, Ministry of Agriculture, SHIU S. S. SIoHU New Delhi Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi SHRI J. P. S~NC~H DR R. N. SINGH ( Alternate) Export Promotion Council, SHRI P. S. SKIMVA~AN Processed Foods New Delhi; nnd Ministry of Commerce SHRl B. K. IyENGAR ( AkTWIk? ) Directorate of Fruit Utilization, Government of DR S. S. TEAOTIA Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow DR S. K. Bosn ( Alterrude) Director General. IS1 ( Ex-officio Member ) Srw T. PURNANANDAM, DIRECTOR ( Agri & Food )
SHRI

Members B. C. MATHUK

Secretary SHRI V. S. MATHUR Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI

Processed
SHRI

Fruits and

Vegetables

Subcommittee,

AFDC

23 : 3

Central Fruit Products Advisory Committee ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi Directorate of Marketing & Inspection CMinistry of AGRICULTURALMARKETING Agriculture ), Faridabad ADVISER TO THEGOVE~NMIZN? OF INDIA Dmecroa OF LA~OXATORI~?.~ ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 16 )

Convener M. BHATIA

2

IS : 9823- 1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FQK CANNED POTATOES 0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 8 May 198 1, after the draft finalized by the Fruits and Vegetables Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Canned potatoes are prepared from mature potatoes of suitable varieties. The potatoes are peeled, processed in appropriate manner, packed in brine and sealed in containers to prevent their spoilage. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 and the Fruit Products Order, 1955. However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under these statutes, wherever applicable. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with The number of significant places retained in the rounded off IS : 2-1960". value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the requirements rosurn Linn. ) canned in brine. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. The which the for potatoes ( Solanurn tube-

2.1 Fill of Container - Expressed as water capacity of container. water capacity of container is the volume of distilled water at 20�C sealed container will hold when completely filled. 2.2 Drained Mass - Mass of the product obtained after cutting can and draining the liquid ( see 7 of IS : 2860-1964t ).
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rrvisrd ). tMethod of sampling and test for processed fruits and vegetables.

open

3

IS : 9823 - 1981 2.3 Absence of Defects - The degree of freedom from extraneous material such as peeling defects, eyes and the ends of potatoes and also freedom from damage due to mechanical injury. 2.3.1 Blemished Unit - Unit which is, blemished with injury like wormhole, insect damage, physiological disorder or any other abnormality, such as sun burn, scab and enzyme activity on the surface, of hard textural difference spongy core and ring formation visible to naked eye. A unit shall be considered blemished when aggregate blemished area exceeds area of a Uneven distribution of pigments and changes circle 0.32 cm in diameter. in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects. 2.3.2 Disintegrated Unit - Unit which has lost the normal shape or form, or from which some portion have been separated. 2.4 Can 3. STYLES 3.1 Potatoes used for canning shall be whole or cut. The size of longest dimensions shall be between 2.5 cm and 6 cm. These shall be of the following forms: a) b) c) Whole pieces, peeled, eyes removed Half pieces, peeled, eyes removed Quarter ; ; and Round open top sanitary can conforming to IS : 9396-1979".

pieces, peeled, eyes removed.

3.1.1 Only one style of pieces shall be filled in one can. 4. GRADES 4.1 Canned potatoes (see Table 1 ). 5. REQUIREMENTS 5.1 Hygienic Requirements - The material shall be prepared and handled under strict hygienic conditions inaccordance with IS : 6542-19727 by persons free from contagious and infectious diseases and only in premises maintained in a thoroughly clean and hygienic condition and having adequate and safe water supply. All workers shall use clean, white, washed clothing. Necessary *Specification for round open top sanitary cans. *Code for hygienic conditions for fruit and vegetable canning units. 4 shall be of two grades, namely, Grade 1 and Grade 2.

IS : 9823 - 1981 precautions shall be taken to prevent incidental contamination of the product from soiled equipment or from personnel suffering from injuries. 5.1.1 All equipment coming in contact with raw materials or products in the course of manufacture shall be kept clean. An ample supply of steam and water, and hose, brushes and other equipment necessary for proper cleaning of machinery and equipment shall be avaiiable. The equipment shall be properly cleaned by suitable chlorine solution having at least 50 mg/kg of available chlorine. 5.2 General --- The potatoes selected for canning shall be of good quality, of the proper stage of maturity practically free from green coloration and shall have the characteristic colour, flavour and texture, and shall be free from blemishes and damage by insects or disease. Potatoes in one can should be of the same variety. 5.3 Freedom from Preservatives, Artificial Colouring Matter and Flavouring Agents - The material shall be free from any preservative, artificial colouring matter or flavouring agents. Filling agents, such as calcium chloride, calcium sulphate, calcium citrate, mono-calcium phosphate or the combination of these salts may bc used. The total quantity estimated as calcium shall not exceed 0,051 pcrccnt by mass of total contents of the can. 5.4 Requirements for Covering Brine - The covering brine shall be clear. It It may also contain shall contain edible common salt from 1 to 2 percent. small quantity of sucrose, citric or tartaric acid or other permttted acidulants not more than 0.1 percent of the brine. 5.5 Rcquirem*nts for the Finished Product - The contents opening shall display the following characteristics : of the can on

4

Gradcl 1 -- The material shall possess a good characteristic and practically uniform colour; shall be practically uniform in size; shall be practically free from defects; free from green coloration shall be practically free from disintegration: shall possess good texture and a characteristic, flavour; and shall be of such quality with respect to clarity of covering brine as to score not less than 85 points. Grade 2 - The material shall possess a characteristic and reasonably uniform colour; shall be reasonably uniform in size; shall be reasonably free from defects; free from green coloration; shall be reasonably free from disintegration; shall possess reasonably good texture and a characteristic flavour; and shall be of such quality with respect to clarity of covering brine as to score not less than 75 points.

b)

IS : 9823 - 1981 c) Scoring shall be done according to the method prescribed and the minimum numbers in Appendix A. The maximum of points to be scored by different factors shall be as given in Table 1.
1 MAXIMUM AND THE MINIMUM NUMBERS OF POINTS TO

TABLE

BE SCORED ( Clauses 4.1 and 5.5 ) SL
No.
FACTORS

MINIMUM MAXIMUM ,Grade 1 (3) of size 15 25 :: (4) II 19 IS 30 \ Grade 2 (5) 9 17 13 26

(1) i) ii ) iii ) iv )

(2) Colour Texture and uniformity Taste and flavour Absence of defects

5.5.1 Colour a) Grade 1 - The units shall possess a good practically uniform colour, characteristic of potatoes of the proper maturity ( the colour of the units shall be creamish white or yellowish white). Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects. Grade 2 - The units shall possess a good, reasonably uniform colour, characteristic of potatoes at the right stage of maturity ( the colour of the units shall be creamish white or yellowish white ). Uneven distribution of pigments and change in colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects. Grade 1 - The units shall possess practically good texture that is just firm and hard. The units shall be practically uniform in size. Grade 2 - The units shall possess a reasonably good texture that is reasonably firm and hard. The units shall be reasonably uniform in size. Grade 1 - The units shall possess the characteristic taste and flavour of canned potatoes in brine. The units shall be completely devoid of any objectionable or off-taste, or objectionable smell and odour. 6

b)

5.5.2 Texture and Urliformity of Size a)

b)

5.5.3 Taste and Flavour a)

IS:9823

- 1981

b)

Grade 2 - The units flavour of the canned of any objectionable odour.

shall possess the characteristic taste and potatoes in brine. The units shall be devoid or off-taste, or objectionable smell and

4

b)

Grade i - The units shall be practically free from defects, which means that there shall not be present any extraneous material like the peels, eyes and there shall be present not more than 5 percent or one blemished unit whichever is more not more than 5 percent or one disintegrated unit whichever is more calculated It shall also not have more than 5 percent on the drained mass. or one deeply scooped unit whichever is more. The covering brine shall be thin, practically clear and practically free from cloudiness and suspended matter and shall be practically free from blackening or discoloration. Grade 2 - The units shall be reasonably free from defects which means that there shall not be present any extraneous material like the peels, eyes and there shall be present not more than 10 percent or two blemished units whichever is more and not more than 10 percent or two disintegrated units whichever is more calculated It shall also not have more than 10 percent on the drained mass. or two deeply scooped units whichever is more. The covering brine shall be thin, reasonably clear and reasonably free from cloudiness and suspended matter and shall be reasonably free from blackening or discoloration. shall also conform to the requirements prescribed in

5.5.5 The material Table 2. 6. PACKING 6.1 Packing

AND MARKING

6.1.1 The material shall be packed in cans made of electrolytic or any other suitable tinplate. The cans shall be either plain or internally lacquered and hermetically sealed. The side seam shall be externally side stripped The lacquer used internally shall be non-toxic and with a suitable lacquer. The lacquer shall be free from dents, rust, conform to IS : 581%1970*. The cans shall not show leaking, perforations and seam distortions. panelling or swell. The interior of the lacquered cans shall not show any visible black discoloration, rusting or pitting and the inside lacquer shall be in good condition. The interior of the plain cans may show visible black discoloration. Norma1 feathering shall not be considered as a defect. 6.1.2 The cans shall conform to IS : 9396-19787.

*Specification for lacquers and decorative finishes for food cans. tSpccification for round open top sanitary cans.

IS:9823

- 1981
TABLE 2 REQUIREMENTS FOR CANNED POTATOES
METHODS OF TEST, REF TO

(Clause 5.5.5)
SI No.

CHARACTERISTIC

RrounwMENTS

rCl

(1)

(2) (3) 175 Vacuum in the can in mm, Alin 90 ii ) Fill of the container, percent by mass, Min 60 iii ) Drained mass of the contents of the can, as pcrcentagc of net mass, Min 0.5 iv ) Arsenic, mg/kg, A4a.y I.0 Lead, mg/kg, Mtr.~ v) 5.0 vi ) Copper, mg/kg. n4a.v 5.0 vii ) Zinc, mg/kg, Ml1.v 250 viii ) Tin, mg/kg, MNT 15 ix ) Iron, mg/kg. MUX To satisfy Microbiological requirements x) requirements of the test

No.of IS : 2560196l* (4)
5

-I Appendix of IS : 773% 1975t (5)
-

i)

-

? 13 t;' 16 17 18 B

*Methods of sampling and test for processed fruits and vegetables. tspecification for apple juice. 6.1.3 Packitq i/z Cases - The cans shall be packed in wooden packing cases ( see IS : 1503-1979") or corrugated board boxes [ see IS : 2771 (Part 1 )-19777 or IS : 7149-1973$] or any other case as agreed to between the purchaser and the vendor.

6.2 Marking
6.2.1

Each can shall be marked

with the following

particulars

:

a) Name, packing medium and grade of the material with brand name, if any ; b) Name and address of the manufacturer ; c) Net mass of contents of can in grams ; d) Date of manufacture or code number indicating date of manufacture ; e) Manufacturing licence number ; and f) List of ingredients in dccending order of proportion.

NOTEAny other marking required under Fruits Products Order 1955 and Weights and Measures ( Packaged Commodities ) Regulations 1977 may also be given.

*Specitication for wooden packing cases f wcmti revi.vion ). tSpecifcation for fibre board boxes : Part I Corrugated fibre : Part 11 Board. $SpcciGcation for libre board boxes for sea foods for export. 8

IS : 9823- 1981 6.2.2 Each packing case shall also be marked with the following information : a) Name of the product, b) 4

Number of cans x mass of each can, Date of manufacture manufacture, or code number indicating and and gross mass. the date of

4

Manufacturing licence number,

9 Name and address of the manufacturer

6.3 The container may also be marked with the IS1 Certification Mark.
NOTE- The use of the IS1 CertiEcation Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The TSI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by IST and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

7. SAMPLING 7.1 Representative samples of the material shall be drawn and tested for conformity to this standard by the method prescribed in 3 of IS : 28601964*. 8. TESTS 8.1 The samples of canned potatoes shall be tested for conformity of the material to the requirements of this specification by the methods given in IS : 2860-1964* and IS : 7732-19757. Reference to relevant clauses is given in Co1 4 and 5 of Table 2.

*Methods of sampling and test for processed fruit and vegetables. *Specification for apple juice.

9

IS : 9823 - 1981

APPENDIX [ Clause 5.5 ( c ) ]
METHOD A-l. APPARATUS Big enough

A

OF SCORING

A-l.1 White Porcelain Bowls under examination. A-l 2 Stainless Steel Spoons -

to hold the contents

of the can

Table spoons.

A-2. PROCEDURE A-2.1 Panel of Judges - Scoring of the product shall be done by a panel of three to five judges. All the judges constituting a panel shall be conversant with the factors govcming the qua!ity of the product. The cans shall be opened and the contents poured separately into white porcelain bowls. Each judge shall independently examine the contents from each of the cans and assign scores for different characteristics. A-2.1.1 The judges shall consider the following characteristics : colour, texture and uniformity of size, taste and flavour, and absence of defects. A-2.2 System of Scoring - The variations within each described that the scores may be ascertained for each factor numerically. The relative importance of each factor has numerically on a scale of 100. Each Judge shall give a i,rdividual factors, by the method described in Table 3 observations in the Score Sheet for individual judge. factor are so and expressed been expressed score for the and record his

A-2.2.1 The scores as number of points given on the Score Sheet by the judges for the contents of each can for the four factors shall be recorded in a tabular form in the score card and the average score calculated for each factor with overall average for each can entered in the appropriate columns of the score card after complying with the conditions specified in A-2.3.1 and A-2.3.2. A-2.3 Ascertaining the Grade

A-2.3.1 Agreement Among Judges - To ascertain the consistency of judgement among the judges, the total score assigned by each of them for the contents of the same can shall be calculated by adding up the scores for the various individual characteristics. If the difference between the maximum and the minimum of the total score so obtained does not exceed ( K + 5 ), where K is the number of judges, the scoring shall be deemed as consistent If the difference exceeds ( K + S ), the for the can under consideration. 10

IS : 9823 - 1981 most outlying score, that is, the one which is farthest from its immediate neighbour ( the scores being arranged in one order ), shall be discarded and the consistency among the remaining judges shall be examined. A-2.3.2 When the consistency is thus established ( A-2.3.1 ), the overall average scores given by the judges, whose scoring has been found to be consistent, shall be calculated for each can. The average score for each of the individual characteristics shall also be calculated by taking into account the corresponding scores as given by the same judges for the contents of the same can. A-2.3.3 Assi,ynmrnt of Gradv of a can, the following procedure a) In order to assign a grade for the contents shall be adopted :

Grade I - The score for each factor individually ( A-2.3.2 ) shall be not less than 75 percent of the maximum score obtainable, and the overall average score shall be not less than 85 points. Grade 2 - The score for each factor individually ( A-2.3.2 ) shall be not less than 5.5 percent of the maximum score obtainable, and the overall average score shall be not less than 75 points.

b)

TABLE

3

METHOD

FOR GIVING

SCORES

FOR CANNED

POTATOES

( C`lrrir.\r A-2.2 )
SL

No.

OIGANOLEPTIC CHAKACT'ER-

REQUIREMENTS

MAXIMUM NUMDEII

PKoPEKnEs WHlCH RCDUCETHI: VALUE

POINTS REDUCING THE VALUE UP TO (6)

(1)
i )

(2)
Colour

(3) Good creamish to white, uniform, characteristic of the variety of potatoes and at proper maturity. uneven distribution of pigand change in ment colour normally associated with proper processing shall not be considered as defects

(4) 15 a)

(5) Not quite uniform, slightly varying shades of the characteristic colour. Very slight discoloration some b 1 Non-uniform, units may have greenish brown colour. Some d$;;lloration non-uniform, c) black bro\;n discoloration

1I

9

0

( Continued )

11

IS : 9823 - 1981
TABLE 3 METHOD FOR GlVING SCORES FOR CANNED POTATOES - Conrd
SL

No.

ORGANOLEPTIC CHARACTERSTICS

WHICH REQURIMENTS MAXIMUM PROPERTIES NUMBER REDUCE THE VALUE
POP&

POINTS
REDUCING THE VALUE UP TO (6)

(1 ) ii)

(2)
Texture and uniformity of size*

(3) Good texture, just firm and hard uniform in size

(4) 25

(5)

a)

b) c)

iii)

Taste and flavour

Pleasant flavour, characteristic of potatoes, free from any objectionable odour. Free from sourness, staleness or metallic taste

20

a) b)

cl
iv ) Absence of defectst Free from defects, no extraneous material present; free from blemished, disintegrated units. Covering brine shall be clear, free from cloudiness, blackening or thickening and free from sediment 40

a)

b)

c)

Texture not very good. Some units slightly firm and less hard. Almost uniform size Units rather spongy or soft, size varying within reasonable limits. Spongy or soft texture, pieces of units coming out, size not at all uniform Slightly variation in normal taste, a trace of metallic taste. Rather flat taste not typical of potatoes slight smell of sourness or sulphide odour Off taste, bad flavour, Strong offensive smell Blemished units up to 5 percent and disintegrated units up to 5 percent of the drained mass Blemished units up to 10 percent and disintegrated units up to 10 percent of the drained mass Blemished and integrated units ab%e 10 percent of the drained mass

19

17 0

15 13

0 30

26

0

*While rating for "Texture and uniformity of size", texture may be allotted 10 points and uniformity of size, 15 points. tWhile rating for "Absence of defects" a tentative maximum score of 15 points for the absence of blemished units, 15 points for the absence of disintegrated units and 10 points for the clarity of brine may be considered.

12

IS : 9821 - I')81
SCORE CARD

Sample No.

...........

DETAILS OF THE SAhfPLE CAN : a) Product ...............................

b ) Name of Manufacturer. .........................
e) Date of Manufacture. .........................

Date of Sampling ............................... c) Type

d) Batch No ..............................

................................

TOTAL

.kORES

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS: SCORE SHEET FOR INDIVIDUAL
Sample Date DETAILS a) c) e) OF THE SAMPLE CAN : b ) Name d) Ratch of No. Manufacturer. ..........

9823 - 1981

JUDGE
No..

..

.

. .

of Sampling..

Product Type.. Date

......................
.................... of Manufacture

.....................................

SAMPLE CANS

FACTOR S~ORF POINTS 1 2 3 4 5 6

Colour Grade 1 : II-15 T---7 ~~~~ CJrade ._ : Y-10

I

7

8

9

IO

-_
Texture and uniformit Y of size Grade Grade 1 : 19-X 2 : 17-I 8

-

Taste and I flavour -Absence tIf defects Grade Grade Grade Grade 1 2

-

-

: IS-20 : 13-14 -

2

I : 30-40 : 26-Z)

Place Date

: :

15

IS : 9823- 1981
( Continued from page 2 ) Representing

Members

DR J. C.
SHRI

ANAND

N. P. BHARGAVA

CHAIRMAW SECRETARY ( Alternate COL S. K. CHIR
SHRI

Indian Agricultural Research Institute ( ICAR ), New Delhi The Midland Fruit & Vegetable Products t India ) Pvt Ltd. New Delhi ( FoodStandardization Committee Technical stuffs ), ( Ministry of Agriculture ), New Delhi ) Directorate of Suoolies & Transoort, Army Headauarters. New `Delhi The `Canning Industries ( Cochin ) Limited, Trichur Surti Mango Pickles, Untdi
)

M. I. DAVID SHRI T. B. DESAI SHIP A. T. DESAI ( Alternate SHRI GIRDHAKI LAL SHRI K. S. JAYARAMAN

Provision Merchants' Association, Delhi Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of Defence ) , Mysore

SHRI L. A. RAMANATHAN ( Alferrx~tc ) Fruit'and Vegetable Co-operative Processing Society V. S. MAMADA~UR Limited Kushalnagar National Co-operative Development Corporation, SHRI B. C. MA~,HUR New Delhi All Tndia Food Preservers' Association, New Delhi DR A. G. NAIK-KURADE SHRI A. K. TIKOO ( Alternate) Food Technological Research lnstitute SHRI A. M. NANJLJNDASWAMY Central ( CSIK ), Mysore SHRI M. V. SASTRY ( Alternate ) Punjab State Co-operative Supply & Marketing SHRI M. K. REHMAN Federation Limited, Chandigarh Central Committee for Food Standards ( Ministry SECRETARY of Health & Familv Welfare ). New Delhi SECRETARY Development Council for Food Processing Industries ( Directorate General of Technical Development ), New Delhi SHRI V. L. SHARDA Tims Products Limited, Calcutta DR L. L. KHATRI t Alternure )
SHRI

16

AMENDMENT IS 9823 : 1981

NQ. 1 MARCH 1996 TO SPECIFICATION FOR CANNED POTATOES
hseft the folIowing clause 0.4 after 0.3

( Page 3, Foreword, clause 0.3 ) and renumber the subsequent clause:

`0.4 A scheme for labelling environment friendly products known as KU-Mark has been introduced at the insiance of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MEF), Government of India. The. ECO-Mark shall be administclcd by the Bureau of Indian Standards @IS) under tbe LIB Act, 1985 as per the ResoWon No. 71 dated 20 February 1991 and Resolution No. 425 dated 28 October 1992 published in the Gazette of the Government of India. For a product to be eligible for marking with the ECO-Mark it shall also carry the Standard Mark of BIS for quality besides meeting addiiional environment. friendly (EF) requirernentz.Thc environment friendly requirerxnts for canned potatoes are. !herefore, Included through Amendment No. 1 to this standard. This amendment is based on the Gazette Notification No. 624 (E) dated h September 1995 for Labelling Beverages, infant Foods, Processed Fruits and Vegetable Products as environment friendly, published in the Gazette of the Government of India.' ( Page 7, &use "5.6
5.6. L Additional

5.55 ) -- Insert the following new matter after 5.53:
for EGO-Mark

Hequit-ements

General Reqrrirements shall confoml to the requirements prescribed under 5.1

5.6.1.1 The product to 5.5.5.

5.6.1.2 The manufacturer shall produce the consem clirarancc as per the provisions of Water (PCP) Act, 1974, Wuter (PCP) Cess Act, 1977 and AiF (PCP) Act, 1981 along with the authorization if required under Enr~ironr;~~ (Protection) Act, X986 and the Rules made thereunder to Bureau of indian Standards while applying foe t.be ECO-Mark and the product shall stso ~JCin accordance with the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 and the RuIes made thereunder. Additiona!ly, FPO 1955 (Fruit Product Order} framed under Essentiui Commodities Act, 1955, Stunhrds of Weights and Measurer Act, 19'77 requirements wherever applicable has 10 be complied witb.

Amend No. I to IS 9823 : 1981 5.6.1.3 `Ik product packaging may also display in brief the criteria based on which the product has been labelled environment friendly.

5.6.1.4 The material biodegradable.

used

for

product

packing

shall

be

recyclable

OK

56.1.5 The date of packing and date ofexpiry package by the manufacturer.

shall be declared on the product

5.6.1.6 `T'heproduct shall be microbiologic!ly safe when tested as per IS 5303 : 1969 `Method for yeast and mould count' and IS 5887 ( Part S ) : 1976 `Methods for detection of bacteria resporsih!e for food poisoning: Part 5 isolation, identification and enumeration of Vibrio Gholerae and Vibrio Farahaemolyhas (jirs.s~revision )' and shall be free from bacterial and fungal toxins. 5.6.1.7 The pesticide residues, if any in ttte product shall not exceed the limit as prescribed in PF'L Arr, `to54 and the Rules made thereunder. 5.6.1.8 `The product package w leaflet accompanying ?Zmay disp!ay instructions of proper use, storage and transport (`including refrigeration. tentperatu~ cornpiiance) so as to masimizr. !he prodr~cl perfcmnancc, safety and n?inirrlize
WClStdgC. 5.6.2 5.6.2.1 excess Speci& The of' the

Requirmen
product

fs
wntamtrrants in

shall not contain any o.*-the heztvy mctai quantities prescribed in Table 2 "

The pmoduct may also be marked with the ECO-Mark, the details of which may be obtained from Bureau of Indian Standards.'

(FAD Ii) j 2

