Waa HTA IS 9500 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


360 feat det amarae 
amat Trifa caret 
Au — ahe 


( TEM YTA ) 


360 Degree Rotary Emergency 
Warning Lights/Special Warning 
Lamps — Specification 
( First Revision ) 


ICS No. 43.040.20 


© BIS 2017 


Ta AM R 
BUREAUOFINDIANSTANDARDS 
® AM HAT, 9 Terme TBT HM, Ae fercit-110002 
ze wili MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2017 Price Group 4 


Automotive Electrical Eguipment and Instruments Sectional Committee, TED 11 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Automotive Electrical Eguipment and Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1980. In this revision functional reguirements such as of photometric and 
colorimetric have been updated and specified in details, tests such as vibration test, life test, salt spray test, dust 
tests, resistance to oil test have been omitted. 


Emergency warning lights / Special warning lamps are essential safety feature for fitment for special vehicles. 
These roof mounted rotary emergency warning lights are used on authorized emergency vehicles such as police 
vehicles, hospital ambulances, fire brigade vehicles and aerodrome vehicles. The light is visible through a dome 
from all directions in the horizontal plane. 


This standard is in line with UNECE Regulation No. 65 ‘Uniform provisions concerning the approval of special 
warning lamps for power-driven vehicles and their trailers’. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 9500 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


360 DEGREE ROTARY EMERGENCY WARNING LIGHTS/ 
SPECIAL WARNING LAMPS — SPECIFICATION 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard applies to special warning lamps for 
vehicles of Categories L, M, N, O, and T and for mobile 
machinery as defined in IS 14272. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standard contains provision, which 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology (first revision) 
3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Special Warning Lamp — Special warning lamps 
are lamps, emitting blue or amber light, intermittently 
for use on vehicles”. 


3.1.1 Rotating or Stationary Flashing Lamp — A 
special warning lamp emitting light intermittently all 
around its vertical axis (Category T). 


3.1.2 Directional Flashing Lamp — A special warning 
lamp emitting light intermittently in a limited angular 
area (Category X). 


3.1.3 Complete Bar — A special warning lamp with 
two or more optical systems emitting light intermittently 
all around its vertical axis. 


3.2 Special Warning Lamps of Different Types 


Special warning lamps which differ intrinsically in such 
matters as: 

a) trade name or make; 

b) size and form of the coloured cover; 

c) optical system; 


1) Police vehicles (flying squads), hospital ambulances, fire 
brigade vehicle and aerodrome vehicles 


d) nature of the beam (for example rotating or 
stationary flashing); 

e) colour of the light emitted; 

f) light source; 

g) light source module; and 

h) Whether the special warning lamp has one 
level (class 1) or two levels (class 2) of 
intensity. 

3.3 Frequency (f) 


It is the number of flashes or groups of flashes 
(see D-2.5) within 1s. 


3.4 “On” Time ty 


It is the period of time within which the luminous 
intensity of the flashing light is superior to 1/10 of the 
maximum value (peak value) J, 


3.5 “Off” Time tp 


It is the period of time within which the luminous 
intensity of the flashing light is less than 1/100 of the 
maximum value (peak value) J,,, but not more than 
10 cd. In the case of groups of flashes the “Off” time 
shall be evaluated from the last flash of the group to 
the first flash of the next group; 


3.6 “Effective Intensity” J, 


Intensity in a fixed direction for both rotating and 
stationary flashing type is given by: 


J 


m 


C : Time constant, C=0 .2 


Peak intensity (cd) 


t= In 
7 C 
1+— 
FT 
T : time of period 
T 
F : Form factor F = [= 
> Jm.T 
J : Instantaneous intensity (cd) 


IS 9500 : 2017 


3.7 Reference Centre of the Special Warning Lamp 


Forarotating or stationary flashing lamp (Category T), 
the centre of the light source, and for a directional 
flashing lamp (Category X), the intersection of the axis 
of reference with the exterior light emitting surface. It 
should be specified by the manufacturer of the special 
warning lamp. In the absence of such specification, it 
means the centre of the light source. 


3.8 Reference Axis of the Special Warning Lamp 


a) For a rotating or stationary flashing lamp 
(Category T), a vertical axis passing through 
the reference centre of the lamp. 

b) Fora directional flashing lamp (Category X), 
a horizontal axis parallel to the median 
longitudinal plane of the vehicle. 


c) The manufacturer of the special warning lamp 
shall indicate the position of the special 
warning lamp in relation to the reference axis. 


3.9 Measuring Directions 


3.9.1 The effective intensities of rotating or stationary 
(Category T) lamps shall be determined in the directions 
within an angle of 360° around the reference axis of 
the special warning lamp. 


3.9.1.1 In a horizontal plane perpendicular to the 
reference axis and passing through the reference centre 
of the special warning lamp. 


3.9.1.2 In cones, the generating lines of which produce 
with the above mentioned horizontal plane angles, the 
values of which are indicated in the table in D-3.2. 


3.9.2 The effective intensities of directional flashing 
lamps (Category X) shall be measured in the directions 
indicated in D-3.3. 


4 APPLICATIONS FOR TYPE APPROVAL 


4.1. The application for approval of a special warning 
lamp shall be submitted by the owner of the trade-name 
or mark or by his duly authorised representative. It shall 
specify whether the special warning lamp is intended 
to emit Amber (A), Red (R) or Blue (B) light, whether 
it falls within the directional flashing lamp (X) category, 
or whether it falls within the rotating or stationary 
flashing lamp (T) category, and whether it has one level 
of intensity (Class 1), or two levels of intensity 
(Class 2). The requisite details are given in Annex A. 


4.2 For each type of special warning lamp, the 
application shall be accompanied by: 


a) Drawing, in triplicate, in sufficient detail to 
permit identification of the type of the special 
warning lamp and showing in what 
geometrical position the special warning lamp 


shall be mounted on the vehicle; 

b) A brief technical description stating in 
particular the light source provided by the 
manufacturer of the special warning lamp and, 
where applicable, the electronic control 
unit(s), the ballast(s) or the light control 
gear(s) or the light source module and the light 
source module specific identification code; 

c) Fora special warning lamp having two levels 
of intensity, an arrangement diagram and a 
specification of the characteristics of the 
system ensuring two levels of intensity; 

d) Fora special warning lamp device which is 
comprised of more than one separate unit, the 
intended geometrical arrangement when 
installed on the vehicle including the 
specification of each unit and the maximum 
distance between the units; 

e) Two samples, in principle for a rated voltage 
of 12 V and for only one colour, and eventually 
two other samples for any other rated voltage 
in the case where an application is submitted 
simultaneously or subsequently for approval 
of special warning lamps of other rated 
voltages. In this case, it is sufficient to carry 
out tests according to 6.5; and 

f) Two samples of the cover, provided that the 
construction of the special warning lamp with 
exception of the colour of the cover remains 
unchanged and the approval may be extended 
simultaneously or subsequently for special 
warning lamps of another colour. In this case, 
it is sufficient to carry out the photometric and 
colorimetric tests. 


5 MARKING 


5.1 Special warning lamp shall clearly, legibly and 
indelibly be marked with the following: 


a) Trade name or mark of the manufacturer; 

b) The rated voltage; 

c) Incase ofa special warning lamp device which 
is comprised of more than one separate unit, 
in brackets an identification mark for the 
specification of the individual separate unit 
followed by a “/” and the indication of the total 
number of separate units to meet the 
requirements; 

d) In case of a lamp with a replaceable light 
source, the category of light source according 
to the relevant Indian Standard; 

e) Incase ofa lamp with a non-replaceable light 
source or a light source module, the rated 
wattage; and 

f) Incase of directional flashing lamps having a 


“wide angle effect” shall bear an arrow 
indicating the “wide angle” side and the 
mounting position. The arrow showing in 
which position the device has to be installed 
shall be directed outwards from the vehicle 
when correctly installed. 


5.2 BIS Certification Marking 


5.2.1 Emergency warning lights / special warning lamps 
may also be marked with the Standard Mark. 


5.2.2 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Standards made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufactures or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


6 DESIGN CONSTRUCTION AND GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 The special warning lamps shall be so designed 
and constructed that in normal conditions of use, and 
notwithstanding the vibrations to which they may be 
subjected in such use, their satisfactory operation 
remains assured and they retain the prescribed 
characteristics. The special warning lamps shall be so 
designed and constructed that the relevant requirements 
with regard to voltage higher than 50 V are fulfilled. 


6.2 The special warning lamp shall be so designed that 
after it has been mounted correctly on the vehicle, no 
maladjustment is possible. The special warning lamp 
shall be powered directly from the voltage supply 
network of the vehicle by direct connection or usual 
connectors (for example cigarette lighter plug). 


6.3 When a non-replaceable light source is used it shall 
be permanently fixed to the special warning lamp. 


6.4 The design of the light source module(s) shall be 
such that even in darkness the light source module(s) 
can be fitted in no other position, but the correct one. 
The light source module(s) shall be tamperproof. 


6.5 In the case of a system that uses a special power 
supply, or a dedicated power supply, or light source 
control gear shall be part of special warning lamp. 


6.6 The frequency f, the ‘On’ time ¢,,and the ‘Off’ time 
tp shall correspond to the values indicated in the table 
in D-3.1. They shall be measured at an ambient 
temperature of 23 + 5°C and with voltages at the 
terminals of the device which are between 90 to 115 
percent of the rated voltage. Moreover, starting and 
correct functioning of the special warning lamp shall 
remain assured at temperatures between 
— 20° C and +50°C or if the special warning lamp is 


IS 9500 : 2017 


exposed to rain test, in accordance with Annex C. Under 
those conditions, 1 min after a voltage equal to 90 
percent of the rated voltage has been applied; the 
frequency shall remain between 2 and 4 H}. 


6.7 A rotating or flashing special warning lamp device 
of Category T may consist of more than one optical 
system. In this case, the requirements of D-4, shall be 
met. The lamp manufacturer shall supply mounting 
information to ensure that the various units are correctly 
mounted on a vehicle. 


7 PHOTOMETRIC REQUIREMENTS 


The special warning lamps shall comply with the 
requirements prescribed in Annex D. 


8 CHECKING THE COLOUR OF THE SPECIAL 
WARNING LAMP 


8.1 The colour shall comply with the colorimetric 
boundaries prescribed in Annex B. 


8.2 The colorimetric characteristics of the light emitted, 
expressed in CIE chromaticity co ordinates, shall be 
evaluated using the light source as designed, working 
at the voltage as specified in D-2.2. 


8.3 In case of a special warning lamp employing a 
Xenon flash tube, as an alternative the chromaticity co- 
ordinates may be deduced from the spectral distribution 
of the transmission of the cover and the transmission 
or reflection of any other optical effective elements 
which could impair the colour of the special warning 
lamp. The calculation then shall be based on a luminous 
source with a relative spectral distribution as given in 
Annex E. 


9 MODIFICATION OF A TYPE OF SPECIAL 
WARNING LIGHT FOR MOTOR VEHICLES 
AND EXTENSION OF APPROVAL 


9.1 Every modification of a type of special warning 
lamp shall be notified to the testing agency which 
granted the type approval. The testing agency may then 
either, 


a) consider that the modifications made are 
unlikely to have appreciable adverse effects 
and that in any event the special warning lamp 
still complies with the requirements, or 

b) require a further test report from the technical 
services responsible for conducting the tests. 


10 CONFORMITY OF PRODUCTION 


Special warning lamps approved under this standard 
shall be so manufactured as to conform to the type 
approved by meeting the requirements set forth in 6, 7 
and 8. 


IS 9500 : 2017 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.1) 
DETAILS TO BE SUBMITTED DURING TYPE APPROVAL 


A-1 Special warning lamp/rotating/stationary flashing 
lamp/directional flashing lamp/ complete bar/blue/ 
amber/red. 


A-2 Special warning lamp has one/ two levels of 
intensity 


Special warning lamp consists of ................. separate 
units. 


A-3 For special warning lamps having two levels of 
intensity, indicate the system used to obtain increased 
intensity at daytime 


A-4 Used light source, 


a) category of filament lamp or; 
b) gas discharge light source or; 


c) LED Yes/No or; 
d) Light source module: Yes/No 
e) Light source module specific identification 


AA AAA aaa asai eis 
A-5 Rated voltage of special warning lamp ............... 
A-6 Trade-name or mark 200.0... cee aaa kaka 


A-7 Manufacturer’s name and address ...................... 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 8.1) 


TRICHROMATIC COORDINATES FOR THE LIGHT EMITTED THROUGH THE AMBER OR 
BLUE FILTERS CONSTITUTING THE COVERS OF SPECIAL WARNING LAMPS 


B-1 Under the conditions of 8, the trichromatic co- 
ordinates of light emitted through the filters used for 
special warning lamps shall lie within the following 
boundaries: 


B-1.1 Amber 
a) Limittowards green: y < x-— 0.120 
b) Limit towards red: y 0.390 


c) Limittowards white: y 0.790 - 0.670 x 


B-1.2 Blue 


a) Limit towards green: y = 0.065 + 0.805 x 
y=0.400-x 


y = 1.667x — 0.222 


b) Limit towards white: 
c) Limit towards purple: 


B-1.3 Red 
a) Limittowards purple: y 0.980 -x 
b) Limittowards yellow: y 0.335 


NOTE — ‘Amber’ corresponds to a specific part of the “yellow” 
zone of the triangle of CIE colours. 


IS 9500 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.6) 
PROCEDURE FOR THE RAIN TEST 


C-1 A sample of the special warning lamp, fitted in its 
normal operating position, with all the drainage 
apertures open, if they exist, shall be subjected to a 
precipitation of 2.5 mm of water per min, the water 
being directed at an angle of 45° and from a nozzle 
producing a full conical jet. 


C-2 During the test, the device shall turn on its vertical 
axis at a rate of 4 turns/min. 


C-3 The test shall last for 12 h continuously after which 
the water jet shall be stopped. 


C-4 One hour later, the sample shall be examined and 
shall be regarded as having passed the test if the 
accumulated volume of water does not exceed 2 cm. 


ANNEX D 
(Clauses 3.3, 3.9.1.2, 3.9.2, 6.6, 6.7, 7 and 8.2) 
PHOTOMETRIC REQUIREMENTS 


D-1 GENERAL 


D-1.1 Measurements of the photometric characteristics 
shall be taken at a distance of at least 25 m. The angular 
diameter of the photoelectric receiver as seen from the 
special warning lamp shall be 10 min or arc maximum. 
The response time of the photometric system shall be 
adequate to the rising time of the signal to be measured. 


D-1.2 For special warning lamps having one level of 
intensity (class 1), the ‘by night’ level shall apply. For 
special warning lamps, having two levels of intensity 
(class 2), measurements shall be carried out for each 
of the two levels. The effective luminous intensities in 
various directions shall be as specified in D-3.2, 
and D-3.3. 


D-1.3 Ifa filament lamp is used that shall be a standard 
filament lamp as provided for in automotive filament 
standard corresponding to a lamp of the category 
specified for the special warning lamp. 


D-2 LIGHT SOURCE CONDITIONS FOR TEST 


D-2.1 In the case of replaceable light sources a 
standard lamp shall be used. 


D-2.2 All measurements on lamps equipped with 
replaceable or non-replaceable light sources (filament 
lamps, gas discharge light sources and other) shall be 
made at 6.75 V, 13.5 V or 28.0 V, respectively. In the 


case of a system that uses a special power supply, or a 
dedicated power supply, or light source control gear, 
the voltage declared by the manufacturer shall be 
applied to the input terminals of that power supply. 
Unless otherwise specified 6.75 V, 13.5 V or 28 V, as 
applicable shall be used. 


D-2.3 In the case of filament lamps it is allowed to 
make the measurements with a standard filament lamp 
at reference flux conditions nearly at 12 V and 
recalculate the measured values by a factor, which is 
determined with this standard filament lamp at 13.5 V, 
if applicable. 


D-2.4 For any lamp equipped with non-filament light 
source(s), the luminous intensities measured after 1 min 
and after 30 min of operation shall comply with the 
minimum and maximum requirements. The luminous 
intensity distribution after 1 min of operation can be 
calculated by applying the ratio achieved at HV between 
1 min and 30 min of operation. 


D-2.5 If the emitted light of a special warning lamp 
consists of groups of several flashes, the time distance 
A t between the immediately following flashes must be 
very short. If the peak to peak distance A t is less or 
equal to 0.04 s, then the pulses in between are evaluated 
as one flash. If this distance A t is longer only the flash 
with the highest effective intensity is valid. Moreover, 
the period is limited depending on the ratio between 


IS 9500 : 2017 


the effective intensities of the flashes within a group 
(I= maximum effective intensity of the highest peak, 
I, = maximum effective intensity of the lowest peak) 
as follows: 


a) Incase 
ty 10 Then At (s) EL 
1 3f 


b) In case 
Ty 1 
ce Then At (s)( i 
L f (5.50-0.25—) 
I, 


D-3 FREQUENCY, TIME AND INTENSITY OF 
THE EMITTED LIGHT 


D-3.1 The frequency, the “ON” time and the “OFF” 
time shall be as specified below: 


Colour Blue or Amber 


Rotating System or 
Flash Light Sources 
(Categories T and X) 


Frequency Fa) 


‘ON’ time fy (S) 0.4/f 
‘OFF’ time fp (s) 


D-3.2 The effective luminous intensities (J,) within the 
relevant vertical angles and a horizontal angle of 360° 
around the reference axis for a special warning lamp 
(Category T) shall be as specified below: 


Category T 


Vertical 
Angle 


Effective Luminous Intensity Je, Min 


Effective Luminous Intensity J. Max 


Outside 
the 
above 
areas 


D-3.2.1 In the case of a special warning lamp device 
which is comprised of more than one separate unit, the 
geometrical arrangement(s) as installed at the vehicle 
seems to be acceptable, if the partial light distribution 
of each single separate unit is overlapping with each 
adjacent partial light distribution inside a horizontal 
angular range of 360° and in a vertical angular range 
as specified for the relevant category in a geometrical 
position corresponding to a distance of 20 m, from the 
vehicle on a vertical plane that is perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the vehicle and located midway 
between the lamp units on a side of the vehicle. 


D-3.3 The effective luminous intensities in the 
reference axes for a directional flashing lamp 
(Category X) shall be as specified below: 


D-3.3.1 Table of standard light distribution for special 
warning flash lamp (Category X) 


D-3.3.2 In the case of a special warning lamp device 
of Category X which comprises of more than one 
separate unit, the geometrical arrangement(s) as 
installed on the vehicle, is (are) acceptable when the 
partial light distribution of each single separate unit is 
overlapping with each adjacent partial light distribution 
inside the horizontal and vertical angular range 
specified for the Category X. 


D-3.3.2.1 The direction H = 0° and V = 0° corresponds 
to the reference axis. (On the vehicle it is horizontal, 
parallel to the median longitudinal plane of the vehicle 
and oriented in the required direction of visibility). It 
passes through the centre of reference. The values 
shown in the table in D-3.3 give, for the various 
directions of measurements, the minimum intensities 


IS 9500 : 2017 


Category X 
Reference 
Axes 
Effective Luminous Intensity Je, | H = 0° by day 200 400 200 
Min Ye by night 100 200 100 
H=+10° by day 3 000 1 500 3 000 
V =A by night 1500 600 1500 
Effective Luminous Intensity J. | H = +20° by day 1500 1 500 1 500 
Max L by night 600 600 600 
Outside the by day 1 000 1 000 1 000 
above areas by night 300 300 300 
—— H 
0“ an- aD- >n- 105“ a 10“ > m- 207 am“ >20» 
nee Ris SSS AM eee 
ae | : i i PRE ! : 
S P ae a 50 75 so i i i 
a>— 20 TT 10 ITT 20— 
o-— so t- tt oo hr 2 so — w 
A4—— zo z0 — iji 100 CO | =o 20 20 — 
o“ 50 | 75 | so 
= so | so 


wide: car ceglie: 
StteSct 


ricareceyy ari: 
—TT—<-:T 


mazi = anoles 
<: fc < cl 


Minimum horizontal angular range of category ‘narrow angle effect’ is 30° left to 30° right and for category ‘wide angle effect’ 90° 


directed outwards the vehicle and 30° to the inside. 


as a percentage of the minimum required in the axis 
for each lamp (in the direction H = 0° and V = 0°). 


D-3.3.2.2 Within the field of light distribution 
schematically shown as a grid in D-3.3.1, the light 
pattern should be substantially uniform, that is the light 
intensity in each direction of lowest minimum value 
being shown on the grid lines surrounding the 
questioned direction as a percentage. 


D-4 INTEGRATION OF TWO OR MORE 
OPTICAL SYSTEMS 


If two or more optical systems are integrated in one 
special warning lamp, this unit has to comply with the 
requirements given in D-4.1 to D-4.3. 


D-4.1 Each optical system shall be in accordance with 


the requirements of this Annex within the horizontal 
angle which is not covered by one of the other optical 
systems. Furthermore, in each required direction at 
least one optical system shall be effective corresponding 
to the requirements of this Annex. 


D-4.2 If a special warning lamp contains two or more 
optical systems, all the optical systems shall work in 
phase. This applies only to each half of a complete ‘bar’ 
which is designed to extend on the width of the vehicle. 


D-4.3 As long as the efficiency of the special warning 
lamp is to be secured all around the car a detection of 
the failure of a part of a special warning system shall 
exist on the car. If it is designed by the special warning 
lamp manufacturer this detection shall be checked 
during the approval procedure. 


IS 9500 : 2017 


ANNEX E 
(Clause 8.3) 
XENON RELATIVE SPECTRAL DISTRIBUTION 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 11 (0931). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


