( Reaffirmed 2000 )

IS : 11134- 1984

Indian Standard

CODEOFPRACTICEFOR SETTINGOUTOFBUILDINGS
Building Construction Practices Sectional Committee, BDC 13
Chairman SHRI C. P. MALIE C-4/38, Safdariung Development New Delhi 1 lOOi Members
SHRI P. D. AQARWAL

Area

RePresenting Public Works Department,

Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI R. K. MATHUR ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI D. R. BATLIVALA Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI B. K. CHAKRABORTY SHRI S. M. GOEL ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras CHIEF ENGINEER ( BLDQS ) SUPERINTENDINGENGINEER ( SPECIAL BUILDING CIRCLE ) ( Alternate ) CHIEF ENGINEER-CUM-ADDITIONAL SECRETARY Public Works Department, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( Alternate ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIEF ENQINEER ( TRAININQ ) .. SUPERINTENDING ENQINEER ( TRAININQ ) ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi SERI K. DEVARAJAN SHRI A. V. GOPALKRISHWA ( Alternate ) Research, Designs and Standards Organization ( Ministry DIRECTOR, ARCHITECTURE Railways ), Lucknow JOINT DIRECTOR, ARCHITECTURE ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh SHRI S. S. GILL Builders' Association of India, Bombay SARI M. KARTIKAYAN Institution of Surveyors, New Delhi SHRI R. L. KUMAR SHRI G. V. PATWARDHAN ( Alternate ) Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SHRI M. Z. KURIEN Hindustan Prefab Ltd. New Delhi SHRI G. K. MAJU~DAR SHRI H. S. PASRICHA ( Alternate ) Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee SHRI R. C. MANQAL SHRI J. S. SHARYA ( Alternate ) Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI B. V. B. PAI SHRI P. SRINIVASAN ( Alternate ) State Bank of India, Bombay SHRI P. K. PANDARE Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun SHRI K. S. PRUTHI Indian Institute of Architects, Bombay SHRI S. G. RANADIVE SHRI RUMMY SHROET ( Alternate) Bureau of Public Enterprises, Ministry of Finance REPRESENTATIVE Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi REPRESENTATIVE Life Insurance Corporation of India, Bombay REPRESENTATIVE DEPUTY CHIEB ENGINEER ( NORTH ) ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SHRI K. S. SRINIVAS~ DEPUTY DIRECTOIZ ( Alternate ) National Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SHRI SUS~IL KUVAR Public Works & Housing Department, Bombay SHRI S. R. TANBE The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI B. T. UWWALLA Ministry of Shipping & Transport ( Roads Wing ), New Delhi SHRI G. VENKATESULU SHBI M. V. SASTRY ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oJ5cio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretary SHRI A. K. SAINI Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

(BR)

of

INDIAN

0 Copyright 1985 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

in whole or in This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 1

IS t Ill34

- 1984

Indian Standard

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SETTING OUT OF BUILDINGS
0. FOREWORD
This stantriangulation nets, polygons, etc ). dard applies to all usual types of building construction. Specialist operations, such as setting out of precision machinery, require individual treatment. 0.3 This standard is based on IS0 4463-1979 ` Measurement methods for building-setting out and measurement - Permissible measuring deviations ' published by International Organization for Standardisation ( IS0 ). 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2 - 1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( noised ) .

0.1 This Indian Standard wasadopted by Indian Standard Institution on 28 June 1984 after the draft finalized by the Building Construction Practices Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The setting out of building may be compared with the procedure for measuring topographic details for lgeneral mapping purposes. The purpose of setting out is to indicate the position of proposed features. This may be contrasted with the purpose of land surveying which is to determine the position of existing features ( topography or cadastral surveying ). Such a survey is based on a number of previous measuring operations according to a general procedure. Starting from first order triangulation points, the point to be located is usually reached after a long series of measuring operaand other lower order tions ( secondary

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard deals with the different stages of the setting out work, that is, the measuring of the primary framework ( traverses, grids, etc) on the site, the setting out of reference lines ( baselines ), the transfer ( plumbing up ) of reference lines to other floors, the setting out of position points and the levelling procedure for these different stages. It gives values for permissible deviations when measuring and setting out and recommends certain procedures Guidance is given and instruments to be used. on how inaccuracies can be controlled during the setting out process when using instruments and methods which are currently in common use in building construction. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For following the purpose of this definitions shall apply. standard, the

2.2 Secondary Point - The point which, on its own or in combination to form lines, constitutes a reference point for the setting out of position points. A structural grid may be constituted from a system of secondary points. 2.3 Position Point - The point which marks the position of a certain detail of a building. 2.4 Grid - Two sets of parallel horizontal lines which are at right angles to each other. 2.5 Primary Bench Mark - Bench mark which has been established by levelling. Primary bench marks are referred to the national, municipal or other agreed reference system and constitute the reference levels for the establishment of secondary bench marks. These may have been adjusted locally. 2.6 Secondary Bench Mark - Transferred bench mark established by levelling, which constitutes the reference level for setting out the position levels. 2.7 Position Level - The point which marks the level of a certain detail of a building. Measurement - Independent 2.8 Check measurement to check the correctness and accuracy of a previous measurement. 2

2.1 Primary Point - The point which has been established by measurement. Prirnary points are referred to the national, municipal or other agreed reference systems and constitute the reference points for setting out the secondary points. These may have been adjusted locally.

IS: 11134 - 1984 2.9 Anblock Method - Adjustment method by which adjacent local system of measuring points, for example those determined by the polar measuring method from a number of instrument stations, are connected together in one co-ordinate system ( a block ).
NOTE - This method allows the number of necessary instrument stations to be reduced (~88 Fig. 3 and 5 ).

agreed co-ordinate system. For large projects, it is often necessary to set up a local traverse or a network of triangles containing primary points. From these primary points, the secondary points ( points on base lines ) can be established by means of intersection, resection, polar method, etc. Finally, the locations of columns, walls, etc ( position points ) are determined from the secondary system. Setting out small projects will usually commence with the secondary system or even position points. This can also be the case when the setting out has to be related to grids on the building site ( see 9 ). As emphasized above, the accuracy of setting out should not be influenced by discrepancies in the surrounding official reference points. It may therefore be necessary to make the adjustment of the measurement values within the primary system, that is, as a free net, and not in relation to the points of the surrounding official reference system. In such cases, primary systems are only connected to the national, municipal or other agreed coordinate system. This standard also gives guidance on this aspect of setting out and recommends that the establishment of primary systems should be entrusted to personnel with relevant professional qualifications, as the accuracy of primary points depends not only on the accuracy of the measuring operations but also on the cofiguration of the primary system. For the setting out

2.10 Discrepancy - Difference between the measured and calculated values of point with given co-ordinates ( for example, between the points 10 and 320 in Fig. 3 and 5 ). 2.11 Deviation - The deviations in this Indian standard refer to the difference between the determined values of the distance, angles and levels and their given or calculated values ( see Fig. 1 ). 2.12 Permissible limit of deviation. Deviation (E) Specified

In this Indian standard, the permissible deviations for given or calculated distances, angles and levels ( vertical distances ) are specified. It is assumed that permissible deviations are both positive and negative and of equal numerical value ( see Fig. 2 ). 3. PRINCIPLES OF SETTING OUT 3.1 The setting out process can be controlled by dividing it into four stages. Figure 3 gives an example of the general principles. Most setting out begins at one or more points in the national, municipal or other

LENGTH DEVIATION

1\

B,

P-l

,(B)

(0)

1
1 I I I t D _--k!

T--

ANGLE DEVIATION

OFFSET
positions of points of points B and D respectively

A, B, C and D are given or calculated (B) and (D) are determined positions

FIG. 1

INTERNAL ACCURACIES OF SETTING OUT ARE CHECKED BY MEASURING ANGLES AND LENGTHS

3

i%:11134-w84 of the secondary and lower order engineer or su-veyor with detailed of building survey techniques engaged. The setting out of position usually be carried out by a foreman systems, an knowledge should be points can on the site. of errors ( see Fig. 4 ) . For all measuring work, it is therefore very important to keep the number of operation, as small as possible. For general topographic or cadstral surveys ( see Fig. 4 ), the accuracies obtained ( mean standard errors between 5 and 30 mm ) are usually sufficient, but they cannot be accepted for most technical work, for example, precision setting out and deformation measurements. When setting out buildings, the accuracy requirements have to be related to internal accuracies ( that is between points A, B, C and D in Fig. 3 and 4 ). The accuracy of setting out within a building is more critical then the accuracy of the location of a point, for example out of the national co-ordinate system. Using different polygons for the setting out of the main points of a building ( corner points or base lines as in Fig. 4 ) can lead to inaccuracies between the main points. This is because these polygons are often part of a measuring series, with different grade of accuracy. Corner and base line points must be set out so as to limit inaccuracies. It is from these that the building elements and components, such as walls and columns, are located. If this is disregarded, serious practical problems are likely to arise during the erection of the For example, building. windows or other components may not fit between columns. It is essential therefore that the setting out is carefully controlled throughout. 6. ESTABLISHMENT POINTS OF PRIMARY

Generally the connection of primary systems to the official co-ordinate system has to be carried out in consultation with the survey department of the local authority. The dard are ( E ) for as a result 4. accuracy requirements in this stanexpressed by permissible deviations lengths, angles and levels, obtained of measuring operations ( see Fig. 2 ),

MEASUREMENT

Measurement - Measuring 4.1 Distance conforming to IS : 1269-1964* shall be The values used for distance measurement. measured shall be corrected for temperature, sag, slope and tension. A tension device is to be used with the tape. In case of check measurement a different measuring tape but conforming to IS : 1269-1964* shall be used.

tape

4.2 Angles Measurement - Angles shall be measured with theodolite with accuracy of 20 seconds and 1 minute <for primary system respectively. The system secondary and measurement shall be made in at least one set. A set is formed by two observations, one on each face of instrument. For check measurement another instrument of same accuracy should be used if possible. 5; LIMITATIONS 5.1 As all these measuring operations are subject to inaccuracies, the accuracy of the determined position of a certain point generally decreases in proportion to the number of operations according to the law of propagation

6.1 Introduction - This clause specifies the accuracy requirements with regard to the relative position of primary points and applies to building projects where the primary points constitute the reference points for the placing of buildings and parts thereof.

PERMISSIBLE DEVIATIONS FOR LENGTHS

PERMISSIBLE FOR ANGLES

FIG. 2

THE PERMBSIBLE DEVIATIONS EXPRESSTHE ACCURACY REQUIREMENTSAS SHOWN

*Specification

for metric,

woven metallic

and glass fibre tape measure 4

( revised ).

320

A free net. Co-ordinates

of the primary

points are determined

from a network

of traverses.

"0
0

Reference Reference

point of the nations!,

municipal

or other agreed system

point of the primary system

w
0
---_-a At---+8 *-

Reference Direction

direction measurement

0

10

Reference

point

o--+--o

Length measurement Position check, not to be used in adjustment

the

-4
Reference point of the secondary system (baselines to be set out from the priman/ svttem)

-

t I I I I &AC

I I I I I

Main points of building (part of the secondary system)

+

Position points

(for example centre lines for columns)

to the official co-ordinate system by one reference point (10) and one Nom - This free net is connected reference direction ( lo-11 ). This implies that the accuracies of the main points are not influenced by existing inaccuracies of the points in the national, municipal or other agreed reference system.

FIG. 3

EWPLE

OF SETTING OUT RELATEDTO

AFREE NET

3

fS:11134-1984

Official system 1st order triangulation 2nd order triangulation Polygon stations Site system Mam points of building A-0 Site traverse Points on base lines net net

NOTE - This procedure is not recommended ( set6.2 ).

Fra. 4

EXAMPLEOF SETTING OUT RELATED TO DIFFERENTREFERENCE POINTSIN THE. SURROUNDING OFFICIALCO-ORDINATESYSTEM

IS:11134-1984 6.2 Primary System - Wherever possible, primary points shall, while being established, make up a framework which can be calculated and adjusted in its entirety. Points which cannot be formed by simultaneous adjustment into a framework may be determined from loop traverses ( see Fig. 3 ), by means of redundant resection, intersection, simultaneous polar method, anblock method ( see Fig. 5 ) or All the primary points any similar method. of a building site constitute the primary system. As the accuracy of the main points, for example, A, B, C, and D of the building is likelv to be influenced by inaccuracies in the official system, the principle of connecting the site system to the official system by more than one reference point is not generally recommended.

`A free net. Co-ordinates

of the primary

points are determined

by measuring lengths aod directions.

0
0

Reference Reference

point of the national,

municipal

or other agreed system

point of the primery system

_ D
b
[p1' BP IQ= -4-

10
Reference point and instrument station

11
Reference Instrument direction station measurement from instrument station

Length and direction

I 1

A

Double measurement Position check, not to be used in the adjustment

NOTE - The adjustment of the primary system has to be done in its Fntirety, according to the method of least squares. With the " anblock " method, the entire primary system is determmed from only a few instrument stations. Fm. 5 EXAMPLE OF " ANBLOCK " METHOD FOR MEASURING A FREE NET
( To BE COMPARED WITH FIG. 3 ) 7

is:

11134 0 1984 prevented as far as possible. Primary points are to be indicated by precise marking, for example, by punch marks. Whenever possible, primary points should be placed outside the actual working zone on the site. 6.6 Errors - Discrepancies in primary systems on building sites are often the result of centering errors during the measuring operations. Centering errors are caused by:

6.3 Connection to Existing Systems Information regarding suitable points in an official survey system which the primary points can be connected is to be obtained from the AS far as possible their appropriate authority. position should be checked. Any discrepancies in connecting the primary system to the official system are not normally adjusted in the primary system. They are not to be adjusted if this causes the relative positions of the primary points to be altered in such a way that the accuracy requirement of the position of points, specified in this Indian standard, is exceeded. 6.4 Permissible Deviations of the Position Primary Point - The accuracy of the position of a primary point may be assessed according to- 6.4.1 or 6.4.2.

of a

a) Instrument errors ( optical plummets in theodolites and targets and ` constrained or forced centering ' should be checked regularly; and b) Badly defined points, for example, rough marks, excessive diameters. 7. SETTING POINTS OUT OF SECONDARY

6.4.1 Measured and Calculated Values - The permissible deviations of the distances. and angles obtained while measuring the positions of primary points, and those calculated from the adjusted coordinates of these points shall not exceed the following: Distances f 0*75dz

Angles Jr 0*045/dz or f offset: where: L = the distance in metres between the primary points concerned; in the case of angles, the shorter distance. 1 gon = 0.9 degree. 6.4.2 Checked and Calculated Values- The permissible deviations of the distance and angles obtained while checking the positions of primary points, and those calculated from the adjusted co-ordinates of the points, shall not exceed the following: Distances f 2 dr (mm) degree O-05/ Jr gonl mm) ( see Fig. 1)

7.1 Introduction - This clause specifies the accuracy requirements with regard to the relative positions of points in the same secondary system, between points in different secondary systems and between primary points ( according to 6 ) and secondary points. 7.2 Secondary System - Secondary points constitute the reference points for setting out details of one or more buildings - unless a detail is set out directly from the primary points. Secondary points may be combined two-by-two to form base lines for detailed setting out. Secondary points can also be chosen as points of a site grid ( see 9 ). All the secondary points points ( see Fig. 3 ) of a building from a secondary system. 7.3 Permissible of a Secondary Deviations Point and the main taken together

( = O-8 dr

of the Position

Angles f or f offset: where: L = ( =

O-135/ dr

7.3.1 In Relation to a Primary Point - The permissible deviation for a checked distance from a given or calculated distance between a primary point a$ a secondary point shall not exceed f 22/L distance in metres. ( mm ), where L is the

O-15/ V/L gon 2.4 Jz mm) ( see Fig. 1 )

the distance in metres between the primary points concerned, in the case of angles, the shorter distance.

7.3.2 Between Points in the Same Secondary System - The permissible deviations for a checked distance from the given or calculated distance between two secondary points in the shall not exceed same secondary system in f 2 dr (mm), where L is the distance metres. For deviations 8 L less are f than 10 m, 6 mm. the permissible

6.5 Marking - Primary points shall be marked so that any displacement in their positions, due to external action, frost movement, etc, is

IS:11134-1984

The permissible deviations for a checked angle from the given or calculated angle between two lines in the same secondary system not ,exceed f 0*135/2/x degree shall (& 0-15/d/2 gon ), where L is the length in metres of the shorter side of the angle. 7.3.3 Between Points in Dgerent Secondary The permissible deviations for a checked distance from the given or calculated .distance between two points in different systems for the same building secondary project should not exceed & X,/t (mm), where L is the distance in metres and K is a constant according to the accuracy requirements as given in 8.
System -

K 10

Examples of Application

Earthwork without any particular accuracy requirement, for example, rough excavation, revetments, etc. Earthwork subject to accuracy requirements, for example, road works, pipe trenches, bases, etc.
In-situ

5

2 1

cast kerbs, etc.

concrete

structures, steel

Precast concrete structures, etc.

structures,

9.

SETTING

OUT -

OF POSITION

POlNTS

Where the accuracy requirements for setting out are different from these stated above, they shall be specified in the contract decuments. 8.3 Setting out - Setting out for values of II of 5 or less shall be carried out according to 4.1 and 4.2. 9. GRIDS
( see 2.4 )

.8.1 Introduction

This clause specifies the accuracy requirements of the relative positions *of position points.
Permissible Deviations of a Position Point - The permissible deviations of a

8.2

checked distance between a secondary point and a position point, or between two position points are f X 1/T, (mm), where L is the specified distance in metres and X is a constant according to Table 1. For L less than 5 m, the permissible deviation is f 2 X (mm). The permissible deviations for a checked angle between two lines, dependent upon each other, through adjacent position points are f O-067 K/dx ( f 0.075 K/z/E gon ), where L is the length in metres of the shorter side of the angle and K is a constant as given below:

Some of the different grids are as follows:

4

On sites with a large number of parallel building lines, the setting out work can often be simplified by secondary the choosing system ( see 7 ) such that a grid known as a site grid is formed. The centre lines of structural elements of a building, which together form the structural grid, are normally established with reference to base lines. The purpose of this grid is to locate the position of the structural elements of the building ( see Fig. 6 ).

b)

FIG.

6

LOCATION OFTHE POSITIONOFTHE STRUCTURALELEMENTS
9

IS:11134-1984 c) Planning authorities often make use of a system of reference lines, for example, location grids, to divide large built-up areas or development schemes into smaller sections. The main function of such a reference system is to indicate the legal position ( specified in planning laws or local regulations ) of boundaries of properties, buildings, axes of streets, kerbs, manholes, etc, in the area in question. Reference systems ( after they have been established within the site ) are therefore mostly regarded as error free. The accuracy requirements are given by national laws or other regulations and are often designed only in order to avoid disputes. This may imply, for example, that a location grid is not always considered as a secondary system in the sense of this Indian standard. In such a case, where requirements have to be ensured on both critical legal measurements from grid lines and internal accuracies, the following general method can be applied: For each square of the location grid, the setting out is related to one grid station as a reference point, and to one grid line as a reference direction ( see Fig. 7 ). This procedure, however, is the most general one, as objects other than buildings may influence the choice of a suitable procedure. It. is therefore very important that the appropriate authority is consulted before the setting out work takes place. Where accuracies of a location grid do not fulfil the requirements in this. Indian the internal. standard, accuracy of the building system can be ensured by relating the setting out. to one reference point and one reference direction. Before choosing suitable points and directions, the appropriate authority is to be consulted. 10. VERTICAL TRANSFER OF MAIN POINTS ( SECONDARY REFERENCE. POINTS ) TO OTHER LEVELS -. VERTICALITY DEVIATION ( PLUMBLINE DEVIATION ) clause specifies 10.1 Introduction - This the accuracy requirements for the relative position of transferred main points of buildingsto other levels. The deviation of the transferred point (the verticality deviation) is the horizontal distance between the transferred point and the: vertical line through the corresponding main point of the building ( see Fig. 8 ). ( see also 11 which gives information on distances between. levels ) . Deviations OP the 10.2 Permissible Position of Transferred Point - The per-. missible verticality deviations of the checked.

-+

t-

7
I
_-;

--t---I- t
I

--_I_
+

-+

+

--+

I

t

I
REFERENCE DIRECTION

-+

-t--t !
+I

--I- --I-

I

I

t-

t --fFro.
REFERENCE POINT

7 LOCATION GRID USED AS A REFERENCESYSTEMTO INDICATETHE POSITIONOF STRUCTURES,
ACCORDING TO LEGAL BUILDINGREQUIREMENTS

10

IS:11134transferred points are f 2Jz(mm), where L is the vertical distance in metres between the main point and the transferred point ( see Fig. 8 ). For L less than 5 m, the permissible deviations are f 4 mm ( see also 7 ). 10.3 Plumbing - Plumbing shall be carried out either with an optical plumbing instrument or a theodolite and, if possible, from the same secondary reference point. When plumbing with a theodolite which is set up away from the point to be transferred, it is necessary to take observations on both faces of the instrument and to use the mean value. When an optical plumbing instrument or a theodolite with the telescope pointing vertically is used, at least for observations are to be made at 100 gon ( 90� ) to each other on the horizontal circle. 10.4 Marking - A transferred point should, immediately after the measuring operation be marked so as to prevent displacement in its position. 10~5 Check Measurements - Optical plumbing operations shall be checked with an instrument with at least the same measuring accuracy as in 10.3. 10.6 Safety - Upward plumbing through sighting holes can give rise to safety risks. 11. LEVELLING OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY BENCH MARKS AND POSITION LEVELS 11.1 Introduction - This clause specifies the accuracy requirements with regard to the relative positions of the levels of primary bench marks, secondary levels, bench marks and of

1984 position the

11.2 Permissible Difference in Level

Deviations

11.2.1 Primary and Secondary Bench Marks When checking the difference in level between two bench marks, against the specified or calculated difference in level, the permissible deviations are as follows: f a> in 10 mm in the case of a bench mark an official system and a primary bench mark. Information regarding a suitable bench mark for use as the reference level in the setting out system should be obtained from the appropriate authority;

b) cl 4

-+ 5 mm in the case of any two primary bench marks in the same primary system; f 5 mm in the case of levels transferred from a primary to a secondary bench mark; f 3 mm in the case of any two secondary bench marks in the same system, if the difference in level does not exceed 3 m; of difference in level in any two secondary bench marks in the same system, if the difference in level is greater than 3 m.

f 1 mm/m e> the case of

Where the accuracy requirements for setting out are different from those stated above, they shall be specified in the contract documents.
VERTICALITY

TRApNO:F:RRED

MAIN

POINT

FIG. 8

VERTICALITY DEVIATION ( PLUMBLINE DEVIATIOX 1

11

IS : 11134 - 1984 11.2.2 Secondary Bench Marks and Position Levels - The permissible deviations for a check11.3 Setting out, Levelling and Check Level&g - Before an instrument is used for

ed difference in level between secondary bench marks and position levels or between arbitary fixed position levels, are as given below:

first time, it is to be checked thoroughly for accuracy and stability, and adjusted if necessary.' Thereafter it should be re-checked frequently.

Permissible Deviation

Examples of. Application

mm xk 30 & 12 z!I 5 f 2 Earthwork without any particular accuracy requirements, rough excavation, revetments, etc. Earthwork subject to accuracy works, pipe trenches, etc. requirements, for example, road

for example,

In-situ cast concrete structures, kerbs, etc.

Precast concrete structures, steel structures, etc.

12

