**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 10516 (1983) : Methods of test for internal pressure 
resistance for glass containers [CHD 10: Glassware] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 10616 - 1983 

( Reaffirmed 1998) 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR INTERNAL 

PRESSURE RESISTANCE OF 
GLASS CONTAINERS 



UDC 621 798' J 47:666 171:6201624 




■■ Copyright 198.! 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK liHAVAN, v BAHADUR SHAH ZAI'AR MAKii 

M W fJl-LHl IIO0O2 

Ur 2 September I9S3 



IS : 10516 - 1983 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR INTERNAL 
PRESSURE RESISTANCE OF 
GLASS CONTAINERS 

Glass Containers Sectional Committee, MCPD 13 

Chairman Representing 

Shri C K. Somany Hindustan National Glass & Industries 

Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 

Shri A. C. Jain ( Alternate to 
Shri C. K. Somany ) 
Shri C. G. Amin Alembic Glass Industries Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri R. P. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. G. Basak Directorate General of Technical Develop- 

ment, New Delhi 
Shri I. K. Kapoor ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. Bhatia Directorate of Food ( Ministry of Agriculture ), 

New Delhi 
Shri A. S. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Dr B. K. Chakraborty National Dairy Development Board, Anand 

Chief Chemist Department of Revenue ( Ministry of 

Finance), New Delhi 
Deputy Chief Chemist ( Alternate ) 
Shri Daya Nand All India Food Preservers' Association (Regd), 

New Delhi 
Director Directorate of Weights & Measures ( Ministry 

of Civil Supplies), New Delhi 
Deputy Director ( W & M ) ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. P. Ganatra Directorate of Food and Drugs Control 

Administration, Ahmadabad 
Shri J. G. Trivedi ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Grover Jg Glass Industries Limited, Pune 

Shri S, K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. K. Khosla Metal Box India Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri N. Sreeramulu ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1983 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 10516 - 1983 

( Continued from page 1 ) 



Members 



Representing 



Shri S. V. Krishnaswamy 

SHRI J. MUKERJI 



Wimco Limited, Bombay 

Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute 
( CSIR ). Calcutta 
Dr K. P. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. H. Parikh Vazir Glass Works Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. D. Marketkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. K. Ramachandani The Mahalakshmi Glass Works Pvt Ltd, 

Bombay 
Shri K. M. Samtani ( Alternate ) 
Shri L. K. Shah Herbertsons Limited, Bombay 

Shri M. S. Parikh (Alternate ) 
Shri N. D. Shetty All India Glass Manufacturers' Federation, 

New Delhi 
Shri H. K. Upadhyaya Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bomby 

Shri P. S. Das, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 



Secretary 
Shri A. R. Gulati 
Deputy Director ( MCPD), ISI 



IS : 10516 - 1983 



Indian Standard 

METHODS OF TEST FOR INTERNAL 

PRESSURE RESISTANCE OF 

GLASS CONTAINERS 



0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 30 March 1983, after the draft finalized by the Glass 
Containers Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, 
Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 The methods cover the determination of the breaking strength of 
glass containers when subjected to internal pressure. The methods 
are intended to determine the pressure strength of containers manufac- 
tured to contain products reasonably expected to develop a sustained 
pressure of 140 kPa or above. 

0,2.1 The test pressure limits for the containers have been specified 
in the relevant specifications on the glass bottles for aerated drinks 
and glass beer bottles. 

0.3 The methods detailed here are based on the ISO/DIS 7458 'Glass 
container internal pressure resistance — Test method', issued by the 
International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ). 



1. SCOPE 



1.1 This standard specifies the test methods for the determination of 
the internal pressure resistance of glass containers. 

2. SAMPLING 

2.1 The test is performed on a predetermined number of containers. 
The containers used for the test shall not have been subjected to any 
other mechanical or thermal test which could adversely affect their 
internal pressure resistance. 



IS : 10516 - 1983 

3. METHODS OF TEST 

3.1 Method A — Application of Uniform Internal Pressure for a Pre- 
determined Period 

3.1.1 Apparatus 

3.1.1.1 The apparatus shall comply with the following principles: 

a) The container to be tested shall be held in such a manner that 
it is suspended by the finish; 

b) There shall be a resilient seal between the sealing surface and 
the pressure head to retain the pressuring medium during the 
test; and 

c) There shall be means of applying fluid pressure to a prede- 
termined level at a rate of 1±0*2 MPa/s for maintaining that 
pressure constant during the t^st. 

3.1.2 Procedure 

3.1.2.1 Allow the containers to achieve ambient temperature and 
then fill them with water at a temperature ±5°C from ambient. 

31.2.2 Use one of the following test procedures, depending upon 
the purpose of the test: 

a) Pass Test — Apply the internal test pressure to the predeter- 
mined level and hold it constant for 60±2 s or for a different 
period, provided that the apparatus has the means for correct- 
ing the pressure values to those which would be obtained for 
a 60 s test. 

b) Progressive Test — Continue the test described in 3.1.2.2(a) by 
increasing the pressure by increments of 0*1 or 0.2 MPa until 50 
percent or/and 100 percent of containers are broken. 

3.1.3 Test Report 

3.1.3.1 The test report shall include the following: 

a) Number of this Indian Standard; 

b) The sample size and method of sampling; 



IS : 10516 - 1983 

c) Number of containers from each mould included in the sample; 

d) Type of test, that is, 3.1,2.2 (a) or (b); 

e) Test results: 

i) For the 'pass test' in accordance with 3.1.2.2 (a) 

Pressure used and number of containers that failed in the 
test with the respective pressure. 

ii) For the 'progressive test' in accordance with 3.1.2.2 (b) 

Pressure at which first failure occurred and number of 
containers that failed at that pressure: 

Pressure required to break the predetermined percentage 
of the sample, expressed to the nearest 0*01 MPa; and 

Mean breaking pressure and the standard deviation. 

3.2 Method B — Application of Internal Pressure Increasing at a 
Predetermined Constant Rate 

3.2.1 Apparatus 

3.2.1.1 The apparatus shall comply with the following principles: 

a) The bottle to be tested shall be held in such a manner that it is 
suspended by the finish. 

b) There shall be a resilient seal between the sealing surface and 
the pressure head to retain the pressurizing medium during the 
test. 

c) There shall be means of applying fluid pressure increasing at 
a rate of 1—0*2 MPa/s until the container fails or a predeter- 
mined level is reached. The rate of increase of pressure 
shall be reproducible^to ± 2 percent. 

d) The apparatus shall include means of indicating the pressure 
level at which the container failed or the maximum pressure 
reached during the test. 

e) The apparatus shall include means of indicating the relation- 
ship between the constant rate and fixed duration test. 

3.2.2 Procedure 

3.2.2.1 Allow the containers to achieve ambient temperature and 
then fill them with water at a temperature ± 5°C from ambient. 



IS : 10516 - 1983 

3.2.2.2 Use one of the following test procedures, depending upon 
the purpose of the test: 

a) Pass Test — Increase the internal test pressure at a rate of 
1—0*2 MPa/s until a predetermined level of pressure has 
been reached. 

b) Progressive Test — Increase the internal test pressure at a rate 
of 1—0*2 MPa/s until each container breaks. 

3.2.3 Test Report 
3.2.3.1 The report shall include the following: 

a) Number of this Indian Standard; 

b) The sample size and method of sampling; 

c) Number of containers from each mould included in the sample; 

d) Type of test, that is, 3.2.2.2 (a) or (b); 

e) Test results: 

i) For the 'Pass Test' in accordance with 3.2.2.2 (a) 

Pressure used and the number of containers that failed 
in the test with the respective pressure. 

ii) For the 'Progressive Test' in accordance with 3.2.2.2 (by 

Pressure level at which first failure occured. 

Number of containers that failed at that pressure. 

Pressure required to break the predetermined percentage 
of the sample, expressed to the nearest 001 MPa. 

Mean breaking pressure and the standard deviation. 



