eT d TT Ah IS 4910 (Part 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Фата а стах ча, 318 site 
стат St Hast — чогот % «її 
тт 1 эте Ay ЧЇИТӨТ 
(GAT чат ) 


Туге Үагпѕ, Согаѕ апа Туге Сога 
Fabrics Made from Man-Made 
Fibres — Methods of Test 


Part 1 Definition of Terms 
( Second Hevision ) 


ICS 83.160 ; 59.060.01 


© BIS 2023 


wig AH em 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Ч, 9 TEAK Me TH AMT, AE Ree - 110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


Wem. TUNES 


July 2023 Price Group 5 


Technical Textiles for Mobiltech Applications Sectional Committee, TXD 38 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Technical Textiles for Mobiltech Applications Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Textiles Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1970 and subsequently revised in 1989. The second revision has been made 
in the light of experience gained since its last revision and to incorporate the following major changes: 


a) The title of the standard has been modified; and 
b) The definitions of ‘cord’ and ‘pneumatic splice’ have been incorporated. 


This standard has been published in various parts. The other parts under this series are: 


Part 2 Linear density 

Part 3 Load and elongation characteristics 

Part 4 Dip pick-up 

Part 5 Heat shrinkage and heat shrinkage force 

Part 6 Wet contraction and contractile force 

Part 7 Heat degradation 

Part 8 Thickness 

Part 9 Sampling of tyre yarns, cords and tyre cord fabrics made from rayon 
Part 10 Creep 

Part 11 Commercial mass 

Part 12 Sampling of tyre yarns, cords and tyre cord fabrics made from polyamide 
Part 13 Static Adhesion of textile tyre cord to vulcanized rubber 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 
In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 


calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values (second revision)’. 


IS 4910 (Part 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


TYRE YARNS, CORDS AND TYRE CORD FABRICS MADE 
FROM MAN-MADE FIBRES — METHODS OF TEST 


PART 1 DEFINITION OF TERMS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) defines various terms used in 
the testing of tyre yarns, cords and tyre cord fabrics 
made from man-made fibres. 


2 DEFINITIONS 
2.1 Adhesion 


The property of treated tyre yarns or cords by which 
they tend to adhere to the rubber. It is expressed in 
terms of force (N) for a fixed cord linear density or 
in force per unit width (N/25 mm or kN/m). 


2.2 Air Wicking 


The passage of air longitudinally along or through 
yarns in a fabric that has been encased and cured in 
rubber or other elastomer, that is, air permeability in 
the plane of the fabric. 


2.3 Bow 


The greatest distance measured parallel to the 
selvedge, between a weft yarn and a straight line 
drawn between the points at which this yarn meets 
the selvedge. Bow may be expressed directly in 
millimetres or as a percentage of the width of the 
fabric at that point. 


2.4 Breaking Load 


The maximum tensile force observed during a test in 
which the specimen is stretched until it breaks. It is 
commonly expressed in newtons, centinewtons or 
millinewtons. 


2.5 Commercial Moisture Regain 


The agreed value to be added to the mass of a 
defined material (after drying it using prescribed 
methods) in order to obtain its commercial mass, 
linear density, or mass per unit area. It is expressed 
as a percentage of the mass of the dried material. 


2.6 Condition 


To bring a sample or specimen to moisture 
equilibrium for testing. 
2.7 Construction 


The geometrical configuration of a cord. 
2.8 Cord 


A term applied loosely to a variety of textile strands 
including: 


a) Cabled yarns, 

b) Plied yarns used in tyres; and 

C) Structures made by plaiting or braiding for 
example, parachute cords, tyre cords etc. 


2.9 Creep 


The increase in length of a specimen caused by the 
application of a continuing load or force under 
specified conditions. Creep is usually expressed as a 
percentage of the initial specimen length. 


2.10 Denier 


A unit of yarn number which is numerically equal to 
the number of grams per 9 000 m of yarn. 


2.11 Dip 


A material applied to a textile to improve its 
adhesion to rubber. 


2.12 Dip Pick-Up 


The amount of dip present in the specimen. It is 
expressed as the percentage of mass of the oven-dry, 
dip-free specimen. 


2.13 Dipping 


The process of impregnating a textile material with 
a compound to improve its adhesion to rubber. 


IS 4910 (Part 1) : 2023 


2.14 Elongation 


The increase in length of a specimen during a tensile 
test expressed in units of length, for example, 
millimetres. 


2.15 Elongation Percent 


The increase in length of a specimen during a tensile 
test expressed as a percentage of the nominal gauge 
length. 


NOTE — In a tensile test, the elongation percent is 
calculated on the basis of the nominal gauge length of pre- 
tensioned specimen. 


2.16 Elongation at Break 


The elongation produced by the breaking force (that 
is, the maximum force applied during the 
determination of breaking strength). 


2.17 Elongation at Specified Load, Percent 


The increase in length of a specimen at a certain 
desired load during a tensile test, expressed as a 
percentage of the nominal gauge length. 


2.18 Ends 


Warp threads, usually of tyre cord. The ends per 
decimetre are the number of cords per decimetre of 
width. 

2.19 Filament 


Elementary continuous constituent of yarn. 
2.20 Filament Yarn 


A yarn composed of continuous filament assembled 
with or without twist. 


2.21 Finish 


a) Verb — the process of impregnating yarns 
with a substance to facilitate further 
processing; and 

b) Noun — the substance used for finishing. 


2.22 Heat Degradation 


The drop in breaking load of tyre yarn or cord on 
exposure to an elevated temperature for a 
predetermined time. It is expressed as a percentage 
of breaking load of the conditioned specimen. 


2.23 Heat Shrinkage 


The maximum decrease in length of yarn or cord 
when exposed to an elevated temperature under a 


pre-tension, it is expressed as a percentage of the 
nominal gauge length. 


2.24 Heat Shrinkage Force 


The maximum force developed in the yarn or cord 
of fixed length when exposed to an elevated 
temperature. It is expressed as force per unit linear 
density g/tex or g/denier. 


2.25 Industrial Yarn 


A yarn usually of high tenacity, produced with or 
without twist and intended for applications in which 
functional properties are of primary importance; for 
example, in reinforcing material in polymeric 
products (tyres, belting hoses), protective coverings, 
ropes, nets, twines, filters and sail-cloths. 


2.26 Linear Density 


The mass per unit length.it is expressed in tex or its 
multiples or sub-multiples. 


2.27 Load at Specified Elongation 


The load or force required to produce a specified or 
pre-determined percentage elongation of a tyre yarn 
or cord. It is expressed in newtons. 


2.28 Mass 
a) Gross mass 


The total mass of a consignment, case, roll or 
sample, including the mass of packing 
materials, containers and of supports, such as, 
cones and bobbins and shell rolls. 


b) Tare mass 


The mass of all external and internal packing 
materials of a case, roll or other type of 
containers including the mass of bobbins, tubes, 
etc. 


c) Net mass 


The difference between the gross mass and the 
tare mass determined at the same time. 


d) Oven dry mass 


The mass of a sample of textile material dried to 
substantially constant mass in an oven 
maintained at (105 + 3) °C and supplied with air 
at standard atmospheric conditions 
[(б5 + 2) percent relative humidity and 
(27 + 2) °C temperature]. 


e) Commercial mass 


1) For undipped yarns and cords, the sum 
of oven-dry mass and the mass 
corresponding to the commercial 
moisture regain. 


2) For dipped cords, the sum of oven-dry 
mass and the mass corresponding to 
commercial moisture regain for the 
textile plus an increase for dipping. 


f) Invoiced mass 
The mass used for billing. 
2.29 Moisture Equilibrium 


The condition reached by a sample at a closely 
defined temperature and relative humidity when the 
net difference between the amount of moisture 
absorbed and the amount desorbed as indicated by a 
change in mass, shows no trend and becomes 
insignificant. 


2.30 Moisture Equilibrium for Testing 


A textile material is in moisture equilibrium with the 
ambient atmosphere when it does not exchange 
water with this atmosphere; its mass then remains 
constant as long as the experiment is carried out in 
an unchanged atmosphere. For test purposes, 
moisture equilibrium must be reached by absorption 
starting from a relatively low moisture content. 


2.31 Moisture Regain 


The amount of moisture in a specimen determined 
under prescribed conditions, and expressed as the 
percentage of oven dry mass of the specimen 


2.32 Monofilament 


A single filament with or without twist. 
2.33 Nominal Gauge Length 


The length of a specimen under specified pretension, 
measured from nip to nip of the jaws of the holding 
clamps in their starting positions. 


2.34 Package 


A length or lengths of yarn in a form suitable for use, 
handling, storing or shipping. Packages may be 
unsupported, such as, balls, skeins or cakes or 
supported, such as, beams, bobbins, cops, cones, 
pirns, spools or tubes. 


IS 4910 (Part 1) : 2023 


2.35 Plying 


The operation of assembling two or more single 
yarns of the same length maintained under same 
tension. 


2.36 Pre-Tension 


The initial force applied to remove kinks and crimp 
when preparing a specimen for test, and used to 
establish the nominal gauge length. 


2.37 Selvedge 


The woven edge portion of a fabric parallel to the 
warp. It may be of similar construction as the body 
of the fabric or differ from it in construction, weave 
or end spacing. 
NOTE — Closed selvedges usually have an increased warp 
end density at the edges than in the body of the fabric; cut 
(leno) selvedges are usually formed by weaving with 
projectile weaving machines. The leno ends are to prevent 
the selvedge ends from falling out of the fabric after the 


picks have been cut; and auxiliary selvedge is necessary 
until the weft has been cut. 


2.38 Splice 


The joining of two ends of yarn or cord. 


a) Sewn splice 


The term used for sewn joints in tyre cord trade. 
This is made by applying a zig-zag stitch on two 
cord ends lying side by side (see Fig. 1). 


| И ИУ, 


Fic. 1 SEWN SPLICE 


b) Pneumatic splice 


A splice is made by placing two yarns into a 
pneumatic splicer, in a flat ‘X’ arrangement. An 
air blast intermingles the fibres, and integral 
cutters trim off the waste ends. The completed 
splice is then withdrawn. 


IS 4910 (Part 1) : 2023 


2.39 Tab (or Header) 


Closely woven end portions of a tyre cord roll. 
2.40 Tabby 


A full-width sample of tyre cord, usually 1 m long, 
with two tabs at its ends to enable its removal from 
the roll. 


2.41 Tenacity 


The ratio of breaking load to the linear density of the 
unstrained specimen, usually expressed in 
centinewtons per tex (cN/tex). 


2.42 Tex 


The primary unit in a system of units expressing the 
universal count of yarn (see Note); the mass in grams 
of one kilometre of yarn. 


NOTE — This system is also intended to be used for 
expressing the mass per unit length of fibres and other 
textile products, such as, ropes and rovings. The following 
multiple and submultiples units may be used to avoid large 
numbers and small fractions, respectively: 


1 ktex (kilotex) = 1 000 tex 
1 mtex (millitex) = 0.001 tex 


2.43 Thickness 


The distance between the upper and lower surface of 
a textile measured under a specified pressure; for 
tyre cords, this is measured as the average thickness 
of a group of parallel tyre cords. 


2.44 Twist 


a) The number of turns about its axis per unit 
of length existing in a yarn based on the 
nominal gauge length before untwisting. It is 
usually expressed in turns per metre 
(turns/m). It may also be expressed as turns 
per centimetre (turns/cm). 


b) Cord Twist 


The amount of twist in a cord made from two 
or more single yarns, it is based on the initial 
length of a cord specimen and is usually 
expressed in turns per metre. 


c) ‘S’ Twist 
The twist in yarn due to which its spirals are 
in line with the central portion of the letter 


S, when the yarn is held in a vertical position 
(see Fig. 2). 


Fic. 2 'S' TWIST 


d) ‘Z’ Twist 


The twist in yarn due to which its spirals are in 
line with the central portion of the letter ‘Z’ 
when the yarn is held in a vertical position 
(see Fig. 3). 


ЕС. 3 'Z' TWIST 


2.45 Tyre Cord 


A particular construction of filaments or fibres of 
cotton, rayon, polyamide, polyester, or other suitable 
fibres, used as the structural reinforcement of 
pneumatic tyres. 


2.46 Tyre Cord Fabric (Warpsheet) 


A planar textile structure consisting of tyre cord 
warp with widely spaced weft threads. The 
latter merely serve to hold the cord in position for 
processing. 


IS 4910 (Part 1) : 2023 


2.47 Wet Contractile Force 


The maximum force developed in yarn or cord of 
fixed length when immersed in water. It is expressed 
as force per unit linear density (Newton/tex). 


2.48 Yarn 


A continuous strand of textile fibres or filaments 
with or without twist, suitable for plying, knitting, 
braiding, weaving or otherwise intertwining to form 
a textile and product. Varieties include single yarn, 
plied yarn, cabled yarn cord, thread, fancy yarn, etc. 


IS 4910 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Technical Textiles for Mobiltech Sectional Committee, TXD 38 


Organization 
Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 


Arvind Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Autoliv India Ltd, Mysore 
BMD Pvt Ltd, Banswara 
Century Enka Ltd, Pune 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Garware Technical Fibres Limited, Pune 


ICAR - Central Institute for Research on Cotton 
Technology, Mumbai 
Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Kusumgar Corporates Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Metro Tyres Ltd, Ludhiana 
Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 

SGS Ltd, Gurugram 

SRF Ltd, Gurugram 

Testtex India Laboratories Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

Textiles Committee, Mumbai 

The Synthetic and Art Silk Mills Research Association, 
Mumbai 


Uniproducts Pvt Ltd, Rewari 
VOICE, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
DR M. S. PARMAR (Chairperson) 


SHRI PABITRA SAHOO 
SHRIMATI MAMTA CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK RAO 
DR NAVDEEP K. PHOGAT 


SHRI MILIND ASHTAPUTRE 
SHRI KRISHNAGOPAL LANDSARIA (Alternate) 


SHRI TUSHAR PATEL 
SHRI MAHENDRA HADA (Alternate) 


DR ABHAY GUPTA 


DR G. KRISHNA PRASAD 
DR A. ARPUTHARAJ (Alternate) 


DR ANUP RAKSHIT 
SHRI ANKIT DESAI (Alternate) 


SHRI SIDDHARTH Y. KUSUMGAR 
DR M. К. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR MAYRA 
SHRIMATI NEHA KAPIL 


SHRI V. К. KOHLI 
SHRI HUMAYUN. K. (Alternate) 


SHRI GAURAV SARSWAT 
SHRI ASHISH SARSWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI ANKUR SHARMA 
SHRI BHARATH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI MEETA SHINGALA 
SHRI DIPTI RANJAN PRUSTY (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTIKAY DHANDA 
SHRIMATI SHILPI CHAUHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SAINI 
SHRI PREMNATH SURWASE (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKAS YADAV 


SHRIM. A. U. KHAN 
SHRI B. К. MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI J. К. GUPTA, SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 
HEAD (TEXTILES) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI BANOTHU RANGA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(TEXTILES), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 38 (18867). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


