IS 14269 : 1995

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES - INTEGRAL POWER STEERING GEAR - METHOD OF.TEST

UDC

629-113-014-5

: 620-l

@ BIS 1995

BUREAU
MANAX

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 Price Groq 3 ZAFAR MARQ

NEW August 1995

Automotive

Suspension and Steering Systems Sectional

Committee,

TED 5

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Automotive Suspension and Steering Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by Transport Engineering Division Council. When the gross vehicular weight increases, correspondingly the steering effort of the vehicle also increase and make maneuverability of the vehicle difficult. The integral power steering gear helps in the reduction of the driver's fatigue and thereby increases the safety. Now a days more and more vehicles are coming on the roads with power steering and the committee felt that there is an urgent need to specify the method of test to evaluate the performance of the steering gear. The power steering enables the driver to circumvent any obstacle in a critical situation and thereby reduces the risk of accidents due to tyre puncture and subsequent dragging/studding. The method of test for mechanical steering gear is covered separately in IS 13476 : 1992.
The committee

responsible

for the preparation

of this standard

is given in Annex A.

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : lgfj() `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 14269 : 1995

Indian Standard
A UTOMOTTVE VEHICLES - INTEGRAL POWER STEERING GEAR - METHOD OF TEST
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies methods to determ!ne/evaluate the performance of power steering gears in respect of functional reliability and operational safety under static and dynamic conditions. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The necessary IS No. 11948 :1986 following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard: Title Method of evaluation of steering effort of automotive vehicles vehicles Automotive Mechanical steering gear Methods of test are 3.2.3 Input Torque Input torque for internal leakage and unloading valve test shall be sufficient to close the control valve fully and shall be specified by the manufacturer. 3.2.4 Power Steering Gear Mounting

Unless otherwise specified, the test sample shall be mounted in such a manner that it keeps the input shaft horizontal and above the output shaft. 3.2.5 Drop Arm/Pitman Arm

13476 : 1992

Unless otherwise specified, the test sample shall be mounted in such a manner that it keeps the ir.put shaft horizontal and above the output shaft. 4 TESTS 4.1 The following tests shall be carried out to determine/evaluate the performance of po\ver steering gears. III general these tests shall be carried out on fresh samples in the order mentioned below, except where noted otherwise.
NOTE-The tests, loads, cycles specified in the standard are generally applicable. In particular cases, it may be often necessary to take into account the spectfic requirements of the vehicle operating conditions, environment so that the tests, loads, test cycles may be modified suitably by agreement between the manufacturer and the purchaser.

3 GENERAL REQUlREMENTS 3.1 The dimensions and physical requirements of the test samples shall be as agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 3.2 Test Media 3.2.1 For Low Immersion Test gas and Conditions Pressure External Leak Test by

Immersion 3.2.2

fluid

-

Dry gas (Nitrogen or air) at test pressures of 0.3 to and at 7 to O-7 kg/cm2 10 kg/cm2 shall be used Water with appropriate rust preventive

4.1.1

ClassiJication tests.

of Tests and

For Hydraulic

a) Hydraulic fluid

b) Filtration c) Hydraulic fluid temperature d) Test flow rate to the gear

Test ( Automatic trans- ATF mission fluid - Type `A' or `F' ). Unless otherwise agreed to between manuand purchaser facturer the fluid supplied shall be at rated pressure recommended by the manufacturer flow filtration of - Full 25 micron ( Max ) - 55 to 65�C

a) Type tests, b) Routine 4.2 Type Test The following

shall comprise

of type

tests:

a) Functional/kinematic tests, b) Static strength test, and c) Dynamic tests/endurance tests. 4.3 Routine Tests test

Functional/kinematic 5 TEST PROCEDURE 5.1 Functional/Kinematic

Tests

-

This shall manufacturer's mendation

be

as per recom-

The following tests shall be carried out on a test bench ( see Fig. 1 ) and the observations/ values shall be recorded after each test. The 1

fS 14269 : 1995

DIFFERENTIAL PRESSURE_ SYSTEM PRESSUR

LEAK FLOW 7

/-

OIL TEMPERATURE TEERING GEAR TEST FIX'TURE STEERiNG /&AR

TO POWER

PACK

-

CONTROLLED

/

//T

LOCKER ARM DROPARME

POWER PACK AND CONTROL PANEL

FIG. 1

TYPICAL F~JNCTIONAL/KINEMATIC TEST BENCHFOR POWER STEERING GEAR

requirements of these tests shall be as agreed between the manufacturer and the user. 5.1.1 Number of input from centre to right/left turns shall be recorded extremes.

5.1.6.1

External Leakage is permissible with as detailed below: gear

No external leakage statically pressurized

5.1.2 Friction torque shal1 be recorded at the centre and at the extremes without any assistance of power. 5.1.3 Input torque versus hydraulic pressure ( across the gear ) developed shall be carried out with hydrauIic supply at rated pressure and test flow. 5.1.4 Hydraulic free play at centre that is input rotation ( in degrees ) required to raise the inlet pressure by one bar above the neutral pressure shall be carried out with the gear at centre and supply at rated pressure and the test flow. 5.1.5 Lost Motion Test ( Backlash ) of travel, rotate to +30" with the to atmosphere. the input shaft Further there movement of the With the gear at the centre the input shaft through -30" inlet and outlet ports vented The output shaft shall follow movement without backlash. shall be no axial ( in and out ) worm/input shaft.

Low pressure leakage - with outlet port a> locked and gear submerged in immersion fluid, pressurize with test gas at 0.3 to 0.7 kg/cm2 for 20 seconds minimum. Increase the pressure to 7 to 10 kg/cm2 for 20 seconds minimum. Visually check for leaks during this procedure. Repeat this cycle 2 or 3 times and if the gear complies with the requirements then only it shall be subjected to high pressure test.

b)

High pressure leakage - as specified in 5.1.6.2, pressurize gear to rated pressure with hydraulic fluid and maintain pressure for 10 seconds minimum and visually examine for leaks. Internal leakage

5.1.6.2

5.1.6 Leakage When steering gear is equipped with a relief valve, replace valve with a suitable plug before leakage testing. 2

With gear at centre of travel, pitman arm located in centre and with the input shaft torque value as specified in 3.2.3, with supply at rated pressure, flow across the valve shall not exceed manufacturer's specification. Internal leakage to be checked 3 to 10 seconds after application of torque to input shaft. Perform the test for both directions of rotation of input shaft.

IS 14269: 1995 5.1.7 Unloading Valve Test ( when Provided ) With poppet adjusting screw positioned to ensure that the poppets are tripped and with the rack positioned at bottom against the internal stops and input shaft torque value conforming to the value specified in 3.2.3, the maximum differential pressure between inlet and outlet ports shall be half the rated pressure at test flow. Perform the test at both ends of travel. 5.1.8 Neutral Pressure Drop torque value shall not exceed the value recommended by the manufacturer throughout gear travel ( excluding zone of stroke limiter operation ). 5.1.10.2 Mechanical ejiciency

With the input shaft unrestrained, the differential pressure between inlet and outlet ports shall not exceed the value recommended by the manufacturer at that test flow. 5.1.9 Reversibility Test

With the gear filled with fluid and inlet and outlet ports vented to atmosphere, rotate the input shaft ( end to end ) at a uniform speed of 20 rev/min and measure the average input torque required for an output torque of l/3 of rated torque. The torque efficiency shall be ca.lculated as specified in 3.1.3 of IS 13476 : 1992 and the value obtained shall be greater than 60 percent. 5.2 Static Strength Test ( see Fig. 2 ).

With the input shaft unrestrained, the gear shall reverse from each extreme of recommended travel to centre within 5 seconds after applying a torque specified by the manufacturer to the output shaft with the test flow supplied to the gear. 5.1.10 5.1.10.1 Performance Rating Hydromechanical rating

With the gear assembly mounted on a suitable fixture, lock the output shaft at centre of travel, apply a torque corresponding to maximum hand force permissible at the steering wheel to the input shaft, in both directions. Gear assembly is to be filled with lubricant and inlet and outlet ports vented to atmosphere. 5.2.1 Performance After the test, Criteria

the gear shall be operable.

With test flow supplied to the gear and rated torque applied to the output shaft rotate the input shaft at a rate not exceeding 60 rev/min. Differential pressure between inlet and outlet ports shall not exceed rated pressure and input
SUPPLY OIL TEMPERATURE I-

NOTES 1 An operable gear assembly is defined as an which is rotatable in both directions of assembly, travel at full rated load with power on. 2 Maximum hand force permissible at steering wheel shall be as specified in IS 11948 : 1986.

HYDRAULIC MOTOR

TORQUE CELL

1 \
I

CONTROL PANEL AND POWER PACK

FIG. 2

TYPICAL HYDRAULIC TEST BENCH FOR STATIC AND DYNAMIC TESTSFOR POWER STEERINGGEARS

1:
OUT?UT LOAD r

INPUT TORQUE

HYDRAULIC TEST BENCH AND POWER PACK

"

3

IS 14269 : 1995 5.3 Dynamic 5.3.1
With

Tests -

( see Fig. 2 ).

Wear Test

( Power On )

c) Adjust load on the drop arm, so that supply pressure does not exceed rated pressure. 5.3.3.1 Performance criteria

the the

the gear assembly mounted on a suitable fixture, rotate the input shaft to cause the output shaft to travel through 5 degrees less than the maximum angle of travel either side of rentre as specified by manufacturer. Adjust the load on a drop arm so that supnly pressure does not exceed the rated pressure. With test flow and fluid temperature as in 3.2.2, rotate the input shaft at 60 rev/min ( MLIX ). 5.3.1.1 Performance criteria

The a> and

gear shall complete still be operable.

50 000 test cycles

b) c)

During test, external leakage and ing of fasteners are not permissible.

loosen-

a) The gear shall complete 30 000 test cycles and still be operable. One cycle is starting from centre, going to one extreme on to the other extreme and back to centre. b) During test. external ing of fasteners shall leakage and loosennot be permitted. 5.3.4

At the end of test, internal leakage carried out in the manner specified in 5.1.6.2 shall not exceed double the value before test. At the end of test, there shall not be any cracks or material detachments. However normal wear marks on the individual components shall not be considered as failure. impact Test ( Power On )

c) At the end of test, intern21 leakage carried out as specified in 5.1.6.2 shall not exceed double the value hefore test. d) At the end of test there shall not be any cracks or materia! detachments. However normal wear marks nn the individual components shall not be considered as failure. 5.3.2 Wear Tert ( Power 08)

With :he gear assembly mounted on a suitable fixture, lock the input shaft with the gear at centre of travel. Supply test flow at rated pressure as specified in 3.2.2. Apply load to output shaft through a drop arm at a nominal rise rate of 2 500 to 3 000 m-kg/set. Apply load to a level of two times the maximum operating torque and maintain for 0.7 second.
NOTE - Maximum operating torque for a particular application shall be specified by the user.

With a new gear assembly ( new sample ) mounted on a suitable fixture, the input shaft shall rotate to cause the output shaft to travel through 5 degrees less than the maximum angle of travel either side of the cenfre. With the assembly adequately lubricated, apply sufficient load on drop arm to reach an output torque equal to one-third of rated torque and cycle the gear. 5.3.2.1 Peyformance criteria

5.3.4.1

Performance

Criteria

a) This test shall consist of two impact loads

as detailed above in each direction. The gear `shall be operable at the end of test. At the end of test, there shall not be any cracks or material detachment?. Individual components may show indentation/defermations which shall not be considered as failure.

At the end of I 000 test cycles, the gear shall retain measurable pre-load as evidenced by friction torque values ( see 5.1.2 ) at the end of test and that after releasing the pre-load adjusters
NOTE - Rated torque for the gear be specified by the manufacturer. under test shall

b)

5.3.3

Fatigue

Test ( Power On )

a) With the gear assembly at the centre of travel, lock the input shaft and apply alternating load on drop arm. b) Gear shall be rated pressure 3.2.2. supplied with test and temperature flow as at in

Alternatively, instead of the dynamic tests specified in 5.3 the power steering gear may be tested for endurance which combines the effects of all the above tests as detailed below. 5.3.5 Endurance Test

The gear assembly mounted on a suitable test fixture shall be supplied with test flow at rated pressure and temperature as specified in 3.2.2. 4

IS 14269:1995

Rotate the input shaft at 60 rev/min and load the drop arm as below: SI
No. Input Rotation Resisting

maximum
Torque at Output Shaft No. of Test Cycles Remarks

1. &180 2. Maximum usable range 3. 4. &180 Maximum usable range

40 percent of rated torque 85 percent of rated torque 40 percent of rated torque 85 percent of rated torque 200 percent of rated torque (only 100 percent of rated torque shall be supported by hydraulic assistance remaining 100 percent shall be supported mechanically by the input drive to simulate manual loading )

30 000 7 500 55 000 7 500 10

Normal steering torque Dry parking torque Normal steering torque Dry parking torque Rut and Kerb jacking/ impact torque

5. Maximum usable range

5.3.5.1 Performance criteria

2.5 times, the value before test. d) Individual components may exhibit normal wear marks. At the end of test
there shall not be any cracks or material detachments visible on the gear assembly. However normal wear marks on the

a) At the end of test, the gear shall be
operable.

b)

During test, permitted.

external

leakage

shall not be

cl After the test internal leakage carried out
as specified in 4.1.6.2 shall not exceed

individual considered

components as failure.

shall

not

be

5

IS 14269 : 1995

ANNEX

A

( I;oreword )
COMMITTEE Automotive
Chairman
DR S. SATYAMURTHY Either Goodearth

COMPOSITION Committee,
TED 5
Representing
Limited, Ballabhgarh

Suspension

and Steering Systems Sectional

Members
SHRI R. JAGANNATHAN( Alternate Dr S. Satyamurthy ) SHRI M. BALAKUMAR SHRI S. SUNDARRAJ ( Alternate ) DR P. R. SAJANPAWAR SHRI S. RAJU ( Alternate ) SHRI B. BHAUMIK SHRI C. Y. DESHPANDE ( Alternate ) SHRI C. S. MAIKHURI SHRI A. A. KHINVASARA (Alternate SHRI S. R. TAPADE SHRI S. KUMAR ( Alternate ) SHR~ 0. P. NARULA SHRI K. C. GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. S. KHOSLA SHRI A. P. SINGH (Alternate

to
Ashok Leyland Limited, Madras of India, Pune

Automotive

Research

Association Pune Pune

Bajaj Auto Limited, Bajaj Tempo Central Ministry Limited,

)

Institute

of Road

Transport, (V),

Pune New Delhi

of Defence,

DGQA Dev,

)

Deptt of Technical Escorts Automotives Gabriel Kinetic

Ministry

of Industry,

New Delhi

SHRI K. C. JAIN SHRI RAIU AGARWAL (Afternate ) SHRI K. SUNDARARAMAN SHRI S. K. BHAUMICK ( Alternate ) SHRI V. N. SAHARSA BUDHE SHRI G. B. LAL SHRI G. S. KHUNNU ( Alternate ) SHR~ N. N. NEELAKANTA~ SHRI I. V. RAO SHRI DEEPAK SAWKAR (Alternate ) SHRI A. K. MALIK SHRI B. L. PATHARIYA SHRI M. K. MISHRA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. N. SRINIVASAN SHRI V. MURUGAN ( Alternate ) SHRI J. K. SUBRAMANIAN SHR I S. RADHAKRISHNAN DIRECTOR MOTIVE POWER SHRI T. K. PAL SHRI K. M. DESHPANDE (Alternate ) DR P. D. SINGHAL SHRI V. VISHWANATHAN (Alternate SHRI B. K. DE ( Alternate II )

Ltd, Faridabad Bombay Pune ), Pinjore

India Limited, Engg Limited,

HMT Limited Hydraulics Maruti Ministry Ministry

( `Tractor Division Madras Gurgaon

Limited,

Udyog

Limited,

of Surface of Defence

Transport, ( DGOF Limited, Madras

New Delhi ), Jabalpur Bombay

Premier Automobiles Rane ( Madras Research, ) Ltd,

Rane Power Steering Ltd, Pudukkottai Design and Standards Organization, Lucknow Sona Steering Systems Ltd, New Delhi Co Ltd, Pune

Tata Engineering

& Locomotive

I )
Ministry XL0 of Defence ( VRDE Bombay ), Abmednagar

SHRI B. S. MOHAN SHRI P. K. CHATTOPADHYAYA ( Alternate ) SHRI G. M. KISHINCHANDANI SHRI V. V. ATHAVALE ( Alternate ) SHRI J. H. MUNOT SHRI C. K. DANGE ( Alternate ) SHRI N. S. JUDGE, Director ( Transport

India Limited,

Z. F. Steering Gear (I) Ltd, Pune Director General, BIS ( Ex-officio Member )

Engg )
Member Secretary
SHRI M.V.S.D. Joint Director

PRASADA RAO Engg ), BIS

( Transport

6

Bureau

of Indian Standards Stundurh marking Act, 2986 to and quality

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or editon by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and Standards Monthly Addition'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. TED 5 ( 4813 ),

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publicatioo Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, Telephones 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar 331 13 75

OF INDIAN Marg,

STANDARDS 110002 Telegrams ( Common : Manaksanstha to all Offices ) Telephone

New Delhi

: 331 01 31,

Regional Central

Offices : Manak

: Bhavan, 9 Bahadur 110002 M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f37 84 99, I 37 86 26, t-60 3843. 160022 600113 Shah Zafar Marg

331 01 31 331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62

NEW DELHI Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIII CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 335-336, Sector

Northern Southern Western

34-A, CHANDIGARH MADRAS Andhcri

160 20 25; f2% 02 16, 1235 15 19, 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya, BOMBAY

IV Cross Road, Marol,

E9 MIDC, 400093

( East )

f632 92 95, 1632 78 91,

Branch

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LIJCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers. Aligarh. India

