( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 11353- 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR UNIFORM SYSTEM OF MARKING AND IDENTIFICATION OF CONDUCTORS AND APPARATUS TERMINALS
Basic Electrotechnical
Chaiqan
SHRI S.

Standards

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

ETDC

1

G. RAYACHANDRA

Rotating ETDC

Machinery 15, IS1

Sectional

Committee,

Mmbcrs SHRI V. K. BATRA SHRI V. S. BHATIA SHRI M. SESHADRI ( Alternate) SHXI A. DASWPTA NatigeonLi Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New

Low Voltage Switchgear & Controlgear Committee, ETDC 57, ISI

Sectional

Cells & Secondary Batteries Sectional Committee, ETDC 11, IS1 SEEI B. MUREOPADHYAY ( Alternate ) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta MAJ -GEN N. DAYAL Designs & Standards Organization, DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELEC- Research Lucknow TRICAL ) JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( ELECTRICAL)/~ ( Alternate ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( TED ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( TED ) ( Alternate ) Power Cables Sectional Committee, ETDC 59, SHRI M. L. DOPI'GRE IS1 SKRI M. M. HONAVAR ( Altemntr ) Electrical Appliances Sectional Committee, SHRI A. N. GHOSH ETDC 43, IS1 Conductors & Accessories for Overhead Lines SHRI R. D. JAIN Sl-ztional Committee, ETDC 60, IS1 Bharat Heavy Electricais Ltd, Bhopal SHRI K. C. KAUL SIIRI PRAKASH SINQH ( Alternate ) Solid Electrical Insulating Materials Sectional SHRI A. S. LAK~RMANAN Committee, ETDC 63, IS1 SHRI B. A. GOVINDARAJ ( Alternafe )

( Continued on pagt 2 )
Q Cyyrikht INDIAN This publication is protected STANDARDS 1986 INSTITUTION Act (XIV of 1957 ) and

under the Indian Cofpight

I 1

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. !

IS t11353-1985 (Continucdffom page
Members SERI KALYAN K. MONDAL SHRI B. C. NALIR Sam N. NATE SHRI B. S. SHAR~A ( SHRI H. M. PA1 1) R~prrsmting National Electrical Code Sectional Committee, ETDC 56, IS1 Industrial Process Measurement & Control Sectional Committee, ETDC 67, IS1 Relays Sectional Committee, ETDC 35, IS1 High Voltage Switchgear & Controlgear Sectional Committee, ETDC 58, IS1

Altcrnatc)

SHRI V. B. DESAI ( Alternate ) SERI S. PARAMESWARAN Central Power Research Institute, Bangalore SZKRIMATI SUJATZIA STJBEASH ( Altnnate ) Sectional SHRID.N. PURANDARE Wiring Acceaaorier Electrical Committee, ETDC 44, IS1 SRRI S.JEAVERI ( Alternate ) SHRI P. K. RAO Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi LT-COL AYARJIT SINGE ( Alternate ) SHRI C. R. VARIER Transformers Sectional Committee, ETDC 16,

IS1
SBRI M. L. MITTAL ( Alternate I ) --SHRI V. B. BHATIA ( Alternate II ) SHRI M. P. WAG-H Indian Electrical Manufacturer's Association, Bombay SHRI J. V. VAIDYA ( Alternate ) SHRI S. P. SACHDEV, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&i0 Membn ) Director ( Elec tech ) ( Secrefarp )

2

IS:11353 -1985

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR UNIFORM SYSTEM OF MARKING AND IDENTIFICATION OF CONDUCTORS AND APPARATUS TERMINALS
0.
0.1 This`

FOREWORD

lndian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 18 October 1985, after the draft finalized by the Basic Electrotechnical Standards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 In India, identification of insulated and bare conductors by colours is a predominant feature. A uniform system of colour identification is required to be evolved together with standard alphanumeric notations for marking of apparatus terminals so that installation and interconnection work is done with increasing safety.

0.3 A standardized system of terminal

marking is essential to apparatus standardization keeping in view the advantages that would be derived in the design, manufacture and operation of equipment. Such identifications are also frequently referred to in a variety of documents, such as diagrams, schedules and notices, and an uniformity in approach is highly desirable. 0.4 The rules for marking of conductors by colours given in this standard basically follows the recommendations of the International Electrotechnical Commission, except in respect of colours for neutral and midwire, the `black' colour is preferred in the Indian context in place of This is keeping in view the fact that `light blue' would `light blue'. hardly be distinguishable in practice from `blue' chosen for one of the pahses conductors ( in ac circuits ) and the negative conductor in the dc system; and is likely to cause confusion. 0.5 In current day technology, the increasing tendency for wiring diagrams to be replaced by computer printed lists and for schedules and descriptions to be transmitted by teletype systems indicates that such a standard system of terminal marking should also be compatible with these methods of communications. It is recommended that where terminal markings are considered necessary, the methods specified in this standard should be employed and in particular, that where letters/figures are used for identification, the uniform systems detailed in 5 should be employed. 3

IS : 11353- 1985 0.6 Colours and letter codes for main connections and bus-bars are originally covered in IS : 375-1963s *. This Indian Standard recommended then the British Standard practice of marking conductors by letter symbols and colours, which was also adopted in India. This standard is intended to supersede the corresponding requirements in IS : 375-1963*.
0.7 The correlation between alphanumeric and colours is given in Appendix A. notations, graphical symbols

0.8 In the preparation of the standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the following publications, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission: IEC Pub 445 (197.7) Identification of apparatus terminals and general rules for a uniform system of terminal marking, using an alp!:anumeric notation Identification of insulated ductors by colours and bare con-

TEE

Pub

446 (1973)

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard gives rules for the general application of marking conductors by colours in installations, assemblies, equipment and apparatus. 1.2 This electrical machines equipment conductors earthing,
standard also applies to the terminal markings for basic unit ( for exarriple, resistors, fuses, relays, transformers, rotating ) and for combinations of such units ( for example, motor control ). It also applies to the identification of the terminations of performing certain functions (for example, power supply; earthing to frame, etc ). dealing with identification

1.3 This standard serves as a guide when systems in particular type of equipment.

NOTE - In the context of this standard, the expression `terminal marking' refers to the markings applied to the conducting parts of a circuit or apparatus which are provided for electrical connection to external circuits.

2. GENERAL 2.0 Whenever

RULES colour coding is used, the rules given in 2.1 to 2.4 shall

apply.
*Marking and arrangement wiring (revised ). for switchgear bus-bars, main connections and auxiliary

4

IS :11353 2.1 Use of Bi-colour Combination Green-and-Yellow

-1985

2.1.1 The bi-colour combination green-and-yellow ( green/yellow ) shall be used for identifying the protective conductor and for no other purpose. This is the only colour code recognized for identifying the protective conductor. 2.1.2 Bare conductors or bus-bars, used as protective conductors, shall be coloured by equally broad green-and-yellow stripes, each 15 mm up to 100 mm wide, close together, either throughout the length of each conductor or in each compartment or unit or at each accessible position. If adhesive tape is used, only bi-coloured tape shall be applied. 2.1.3 For insulated conductors, the combination of the colours greenand-yellow shall be such that, on any 15 *mm length of insulated conductor, one of these colours covers at least 30 percent and not more than 70 percent of the surface of the conductor,the other colour covering the remainder of that surface.

NOTE- Where the protective conductor can be easily idcntificd from its shape, construction or position, for example concentric conductor, then colour coding throughout its length is not necessary but the ends or accessible positions should be clearly identified by a symbol or the bi-colour combination green-and-yellow.
2.2 Use of the Colonr 2.2.1 Black is intended Black for the neutral or mid-wire conductor. conductor be Black. conductor the black purposes,

2.2.2 Where a circuit includes a neutral or mid-wire identified by colour, the colour used for this purpose shall Black colour shall not be used for identifiying any other where confusion might arise. 2.2.3 In the absence of a neutral or mid-wire conductor, conductor in a multicore cable can also be used for other except as protective conductor.

2.2.4 If identification by colour is used, bare conductors or bus-bars, used as neutral or mid-wire conductors, shall be either coloured by a black stripe, 15 mm to 100 mm wide in each compartment or unit or at each accessible position or coloured black throughout their length. 2.3 Use of Colonrs for Internal Wiring with Single-core Insulated Conductors - For the internal wiring of apparatus and equipment, it is recommended that only one colour be used. This colour shall be so chosen that it is not one of the colours listed in co1 2 of Table 1 for designation of other conductors. The use of light blue colour for internal wiring is also not permitted. 5

IS:11353-1985 2.4 Busbars 2.4.1 It is recommended that individual busbars and similar conductors, whether insulated or not, should be identified where appropriate, by a graphical symbol or alphanumeric notation rather than by colours. 2.4.2 If, however, colours are used, the colours selected shall be in accordance with 2.1 and 2.2. When busbars or similar conductors are insulated, the preferred colour for the insulation is black. Identification of the phases shall be done using stripes or bands or other suitable means of colours given in co1 2 of Table 1. 2.5 Table 1 gives the recommended
TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED

colours for various conductors.
IDENTIFICATION OF

COLOURS FOR CONDUCTORS

(Clauses 2.3.1, 2.4.2 and 2.5 ) DESIONATION OF CONDUCTORS IDENTIFICATION BY COLO~R (2) r Phase 1 1 Phase 2 < Phase 3 [ Neutral r Phase 1 { Phase 2 1 Phase 3 r Positive { Negative 1 Mid wire Phase Neutral Red Yellow Blue Black Red Yellow Blue Red Blue Black Red Black Green and yellow No colour other than the colour of the bare conductor. If insulated, the colour for insulation so chosen to avoid those listed above for designation of other conductors. (clean ) earth Under consideration

(1)
Supply ac system ( three phase ) Apparatus ac system

dc system Supply ac* system ( single phase ) Protective Earth conductor

Noiseless

if the *For single phase ac systems, the colour of red and black are recommended In cases where the single phase conductors are associated with the circuit is in isolation. J-phase system from which they are derived, the phase conductor shall use the same cdlour as that phase from which it is derived.

6

IS : 11353 - 1985 3. METHODS OF IDENTIFYING TERMINALS

3.0 The purpose of identifying apparatus terminals is to provide information regarding the function of the terminal or its location with respect to other terminals or for other purposes. 3.1 Where the identification of apparatus terminals is considered necessary, it is recommended that this be effected by the use of one or more of the following methods: a) The physical location recognized system, of the terminals in accordance with a

b) A colour code in accordance

with a recognized system,

cl Graphical symbols in accordance with IS : 2032 ( Series )* in general, and with standard, graphical symbols for use on equipment, and notation d) An alphanumeric system laid down in 5. in accordance with the uniform

The various methods have equal status when applied to apparatus terminals. 3.2 Graphical symbols as recommended Appendix A) may be used as alternatives where appropriate. in relevant standards (see also to the alphanumeric markings,

3.3 The choice of method will depend upon the type of apparatus, the physical arrangement of the terminals and the complexity of the particular apparatus or installation. For example, the physical or relative location and shape of pins can be acceptable for a plug. Colour coding alone may be sufficient for the simplest application such as small units without fixed terminals where a colour code is applied to the insulated wiring and graphical symbols may be most suitable for equipment such as domestic appliances. 3.4 The alphanumeric system of marking will be necessary for the more complex apparatus or installations and its use is essential when the terminals are referred to in communication systems employing typescript. The adoption of the uniform system, referred recommended to the relevant Technical Committee.
*Graphical pymbols used in electrotechnology.

to in 5, is strongly

7

IS: 11353 - 1985 4. APPLICATION 4.1 The identifying
shall normally

OF IDENTIFICATION

MEANS
or alphanumeric notation apparatus terminal.

colour, graphical symbols be applied to the corresponding

in accordance with a recognized 4.2 Where an identifying colour, system, is applied to an apparatus terminal, the correlation between this colour and the equivalent graphical symbol or the alphanumeric notation shall, where necessary, be recorded on an associated drawing or document. 4.3 In those cases where the construction of an item of equipment does of any terminal identification not permit the physical application marking, the location of the terminal and its corresponding identification shall, where necessary, be recorded on an associated drawing or This drawing or document must be executed in such a way document. that the relative positions of terminals can be determined easily and without risk of error.

5. UNIFORM 5.1 General

SYSTEM

OF TERMINAL

MARKING

5.1.1 The uniform system of terminal alphanumeric notation employing Latin Arbic numeral characters.

marking shall be based on alphabetical characters and

5.1.2 The alphabetical characters used for the marking of terminals on apparatus and conductors shall be capital ( upper case ) Latin characters only. The letters I and 0 shall not be used.

NOTE 1 - Where reference is made to these terminal markings in correspondence, documents, etc, the use of capital (upper case ) letters is preferred, however, in these cases where difficulties would otherwise arise, the use of small ( lower case ) letters, which have the same significance, is permitted. NOTE 2 - Care should be taken when confusion might arise between two similar characters, for example, lower case `I' and the numeral `1'.

5.1.3 The complete notation is based on the use of combinations of alternate alphabetical and numerical character groups, each containing one or more letters or digits.
For some applications, where no confusion is possible, it will not be necessary to apply the complete alphanumeric notation and, in these cases, it is permissible to omit one or more of the character groups. 8

IS:11353-

1985

In those cases where character groups containing figures only or letters only are used and where it is necessary to distinguish between successive groups, a full stop shall be used to separate the groups. The complete notation lU1 may be simplified if the letter U is not necessary; the abbreviated notation is normally I.1 or, if there is no need to distinguish between successive groups, 11. If the complete notation is lull, the abbreviated notation is normally 1'11 or, if there is no need to distinguish between successive groups, 111. 5.1.4 Symbols teletype systems, 5.2 Marking such as + and -, may be used. which can easily be transmitted by

Principles system is based on the following marking principles: by 1 ).

5.2.1 The uniform a) The two successive

end points of a single element reference numbers, for example,

are distinguished 1 and 2 ( seeFig.

b) The intermediate points of a single element are distinguished by reference numbers, preferably in a naturally ascending sequence, for example, 3, 4, 5, etc. The reference numbers of the intermediate points are chosen higher than those at the end points: their numbering commences at the point which lies closest to the end point with the lowest reference number. Thus, for example, the intermediate points of an element with the end points 1 and 2 will be denoted by the reference numbers 3, 4,5, etc ( see Fig. 2 ). c) If several individual similar elements are combined elements can be denoted by: in a group, the ends of

i) Reference letters which will precede the reference numbers referred to in (a) and (b), for example, U, V, W, corresponding to the phases of a three-phase ac system ( see Fig. 3 ). ii) Reference numbers which will precede the reference numbers referred to in (a) and (b) where a phase identification is not necessary or possible (see 5.1.3), for example the ends of one element are marked by I.1 and 1.2 and those of the other elements by 2.1 and 2.2 or by 11, 12 and 21, 22 respectively where no confusion is possible. 9

IS : 11353 - 1985 d) Similar groups of elements having the same reference letters are distinguished by a numerical prefix to the reference letters ( see Fig. 4). e) The reference letters for dc elements chosen from the first part and reference from the second part of the alphabet. should preferably be letters for ac elements
and particular

NOTE - Figure 5, illustrates the interconnection of apparatus conductors, marked in accordance with the alphanumeric notation.

1:
2 FIG. 1 SINGLE ELEMENT WITH 2 TERMINALS 3 L i! FIG. 2 2

SINGLE ELEMENT WITIX 4 TERMINALS of Apparatus Connected to

5.3 Markings for Terminals Particular Condactors

5.3.1 Terminals of apparatus which are intended to be connected directly or indirectly to supply conductors of three-phase ac system shall preferably be marked with the reference letters, U, V, W, especially if the phase sequence is of significance. 5.3.2 The terminals for connection to neutral conductor, protective conductor, earth and noiseless earth conductors shall be marked with the letters N, PE, 2% and TE respectively. 10

I f
I
a)

r "' "' w' -I

I ._

Three-Phase Apparatus with 6 Terminals

Dk
I
I

I i

u2

. v2

.w2-

b)

Three-Element Apparatus with 6 Terminals

FIG. 3

APPARATUSWITH 6 TERMINALS
1 Vl .'

r
I I I I

1 Ul

2Wl `f'j

i
I 1
I

i iI lU2'

lVZ'_

..__'
2w2

i i

FIG. 4

THRBE PHASE APPARATUSCONTASNING 2 GTOUPS OF 3 ELEMENTS WITH 6 TERMINALS EACH
PARTICULAR CONDUCTORS &I

INTERMEDIATE

UNIT

i

i

.
FIG. 5

LOAD

.

L-J .-.-. INTERCONNECTION OF APPARATUSAND PARTICULARCONDUCTORS

IS :11353 - 1985 5.3.3 The terminal connected to the frame or chasis shall be marked The equipotential terminal shall be marked CC (see also Table 2 ). These markings shall apply only when it is not intended that these terminals shall be at the potential of the protective conductor or earth.

MM.

TABLE

2

MARKINGS

FOR TERMINALS

OF APPARATUS MARKINO BY ALPBANUMERIC NOTATION

APPARATUS TERM~Y~AL FOR f Phase 1 I Phase 2 4 Phase 3 i Neutral conductor ( clean ) earth terminal

ac system Protective Earth Noiseless

.N

PE
E TE
MM CC

Frame or chassis Equipotential

5.4 Markings

for Particular for particular
3 MARKINGS
CONDUCTORS

Conductors conductors
FOR

5.4.1 Markings
TABLE

shall be as in Table
CONDUCTORS

3.

PARTICULAR

DESIQNATION OF

MARKING BY ALPHANUMEBIO NOTATION

Supply dc system

f Phase 1 ' Phase 2 < Phase 3 L Neutral C Positive { Negative 1 Mid-wire

LI L2
L3 "V

s"~$,ymdc

L+ L-

Protective conductor Protective conductor unearthed Protective conductor and natural conductor combined Earth Noiseless (clean) earth Frame or chassis Equipotentially

M PE PU PEJI E TE Alh4
cc

IS t 11353- 1985

A ( Clauses 0.7 and 3.2 )
CORRELATION DESIONATION OP CoNDvoToas BETWiRN ALPHANUMBRIC NOTATION, SYMBOLS AND COLOURS GRAPHICAL

APPENDIX

I~CN~~B~OAT~ON BY -----L -------7 Graphical Alphanumeric Colour Symbol Notation
Red

Supply ac system

Phase 1 Phase 2 Phaee 3 Neutral Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 I Neutral Positive Negative { Midwiro Phase Neutral

3
N

Yellow Blue Black Yellow Blue Black
Red

Apparatus ac eyetern

u

svw
Ii+ LM
L

V

SuIply dc I) rteul Lpply ac system (single phase )

+

Red Blue Black Red Black Green and yellow

Protective conductor Earth

PE E
+

",~l~l~

o;the;h;hanhtg

conductor. If insulated, the colour for insulation so chosen to avoid those listed above for designation of other conductors Noisele:r (clean earth ) Frame or chaut Rqulpoteutial terminal
TE

Under consideration

MM cc

13

INTERNATIONAL

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS )

QUA.NTITY

UNIT

SYMBOL

Length M83SS Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of rubrtance Supplementary QUAIJTITI Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTXW Force Energy Power FluX Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, rtresa Units

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole
UNIT

m

h3
I

A K cd mol

SYMBOL

radian steradian

tad 8r
DETINITION 1N 1 kg.mjss 1 N.m

UNIT newton

SYMBOL N

joule watt weber terla hertz siemens volt paacal

J
W

1J
IT 1 Hz 1s 1v 1 Pa

-

Wb T HZ s V Pa

1w 1 Wb-

lJ/s

1V.s - 1 Wb/m* - 1 c/r (s-l) - 1 A/V - 1 W/A = 1 N/m'

