i ,/

1s/1s0 10019:2005

Indian Standard

GUIDELINES FOR THE SELECTION OF QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM CONSULTANTS AND USE OF THEIR SERVICES

ICS

03.120.10

(3 BIS 2006

BUREAU
MANAK BHAVAN,

OF
9 NEW

INDIAN
BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

January

2006

Price Group 7

Quality Management

Sectional

Committee,

MSD 2

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 10019:2005 `Guidelines for the selection of quality management system consultants and use of their services' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Quality Management Sectional Committee and approval of the Management and Systems Division Council. The text of the ISO Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as an Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be

In this adopted standard, normative reference appears to the following International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is listed below along with its degree of equivalence: /nternationa/ Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical

1s0 9000 : 2000 Quality management systems -- -Fundamentals and vocabulary

1S/1S0 9001 :2000 Quality management systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary (second revision)

In the adopted standard, references appear to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their places are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical

ISO 9001 management Requirements

:

2000 Quality systems --

1S/1S0 9001 :2000 Quality management systems -- Requirements (second revision)

1s0 9004 : 2000 Quality systems -- management Guidelines for performance improvements IS 19011 : 2002 Guidelines for quality and/or environmental management systems auditing

1S/1S0 9004:2000 Quality management systems -- Guidelines for performance improvements (fifth revision)

do

IS /lSO 19011:2002 Guidelines for quality and/or environmental management systems auditing (first revision) only.

do

Annexes A and B of this standard are for information

1S/1S0 10019:2005

Introduction
In the realization of a quality management system, some organizations choose to rely on their own personnel but some use the services of external consultants, The selection of a consultant by an organization is important for ensuring that the resulting quality management system is capable of meeting the organization's planned objectives in the mos{ efficient and effective manner. Even when using the services of a quality management system consultant, the involvement and commitment of the organization's top management are key factors for a quality management system realization. This International Standard aims to provide guidance on the factors to be taken into consideration when

selecting a quality management system consultant. It can be used byorganizations in the selection of a quality management system corrsultant who is able to meet their specific needs, expectations and objectives in the
realization a) b) of quality management system. It can additionally as guidelines be used by system consulting, and quality management system consultants to quality management

consulting organizations for the selection of quality management system consultants.

1s/1s0 10019:2005

/ndian

standard

GUIDELINES FOR THE SELECTION OF QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM CONSULTANTS AND USE OF THEIR SERVICES
1

Scope
provides guidance for the selection of quality rn.anagement system consultants and

This International Standard the use of their services.

It is intended to assist organizations when selecting a quality management system consultant. It gives.guidance on the process for evaluating the competence of a quality management system consultant and provides confidence that the organization's needs and expectations for the consultant's services will be met.
NOTE 1 This International Standard is not intended to be used for certification purposes. but, at the same time,

NOTE 2 This International Standard addresses the realization of a quality management system could be used with appropriate adaptation for the realization of any other management systems.

2

Normative

references

The following referenced documents are indispensable for the application of this document. For dated -references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies. ISO 9000:2000, Quality management systems -- Fundamentals and vocabulary

3 Terms and definitions
For the purposes of this document, the terms and definitions given in ISO 9000 and the following apply.

3.1 quality management system realization process of establishing, documenting, management system NOTE Quality management
a) b) c) identifying determining determining effective; the processes the sequence system realization

implementing,

maintaining

and

continually

improving

a quality

can include the following: system and their application processes: and control of the identified processes are throughout the organization;

needed for a quality management and interaction of the identified

criteria and methods

needed to ensure that both the operation

d)

ensuring the availability processes; monitoring, Implementing measuring

o-f resources

and information

necessary

to"support

the operation

and monitoring

of the identified

e) f)

and analysing

the identified

processes; improvement of the identified processes.

actions necessary

to achieve planned results and continual

3.2 quality
person

management
who assists

system

consultant
on quality management system realization, giving advice or information

the organization

NOTE 1 The consultant

can also assist in realizing

parts of a quality management

system.

kS/lSO 10019:2005

NOTE 2 This International Standard provides consultant from one who is not competent.

guidance

on how to distinguish

a competent

quality

management

system

4
4.1

Selection of a quality management
Inptito the selection process

system consultant

4.1.1

Organization's

needs and expectations

When selecting a quality management system consultant, the organization should identify its needs and expectations of the quality management system consultant, based on its overall objectives for the realization of a quality management system. Top management should be involved in the process of evaluation and selection

of the quality management system consultant.
4.1.2 Role of the consultant

The selection process should take into account the role of the quality management system consultant in the quality management system realization (see Annex A). The consultant's role generally includes the following:

a)

assisting the organization to-ensure that the design and the implementation of the quality management system is suited to the organization's culture, characteristics, level of education and specific business environment; illustrating the concepts concerning quality management in a clear and understandable way throughout the organization, paying special attention to the understanding and adoption of quality management principles; communicating with all relevant individuals, system realization; at all levels, involving them actively in the quality management

b)

c)

d)

advising and supporting the organization in identifying the appropriate processes management system and defining the relative importance, sequence and interaction assisting the organization in identifying operation and control of its processes; needs for documentation

needed for its quality of those processes;

e)

essential to ensure the effective planning,

f)

evaluating the effectiveness and efficiency of the quality management organization to look for opportunities for improvement; assisting in promoting a process approach within the organization; assisting in identifying system; the training and continual improvement

system processes

to stimulate

the

9) h)

of the quality management

system

needs to enable the organization

to maintain

the quality management

i)

assisting the organization, where applicable, to identify the relationship between its quality management system and any other relevant management system (e.g. environmental or occupational health and safety) and facilitate the integration of such systems.

4.1.3

Evaluation

of the competence

of the consultant due consideration should be given to

When evaluating the competence a) b) c) personal attributes (see 4.2.2), relevant education (see 4.2.3),

and suitability of a consultant,

knowledge and skills necessary to meet the organization's system (see 4.2.3, 4.2.4 and 4.2.5), work experience (see 4.2.6), and

overall objectives

for the quality management

d) e)

ethical behaviour (see 4.3).

2

1s/1s0 10019:2005

4.2

Competence of the consultant
General should evaluate whether services to be provided. in Figure 1. the

4.2.1

When selecting a quality management system consultant, the organization consultant maintains the competence appropriate to the scope of the consulting The concept of the competence of.a quality management system consultant

is illustrated

NOTE Competence is defined in ISO 9000 as the demonstrated ability to apply "knowledge and skills.

Competence

4.2.2 / 4.2.3 Education /

Personal attributes / 4.2.3 Skills / 4.2.6 Work experience

o
/ /

(

/

4.2.3
Knowledge

/

/1

I

I
I

I

I

I

1)
1/

4.2.7

Maintenance

and improvement

of competence

Figure 1 -- Concept of competence

of a quality management

system consultant

4.2.2

Personal

attributes of a quality management system consultant. A

Personal attributes contribute to the successful performance quality management system consultant, generally, should be a) b) ethical: fair, truthful, sincere, honest and discreet; observant: activities; perceptive: constantly and actively aware of organizational

culture and values, physical surroundings

and

c) d) e)

aware of and able to understand

the need for change and improvement and provide alternative and creative solutions;

versatile: able to adapt to different situations tenacious: persistent,

focused on achieving objectives; based on logical reasoning while interacting and analysis;

o
h)

decisive: capable of reaching timely conclusions able to act and function independently

9) self-reliant:

effectNely with others; confidently and

communicative: able to listen to, and effectively interface with, all levels of an organization, with sensitivity to its culture; practical: realistic and flexible with good time management;

i)

3

1S/1S0 10019:2005

j) k)

accountable:

able totakeresponsibility

forhis/her

own actions; and employees through the quality management

facilitative: able to assist an organization's system realization.

management

4.2.3

Education,

knowledge

and skills

Quality management system consultants should have the appropfate education needed to acquire the knowledge and skills relevant for the consulting services to be provided. A typical example is provided in Annex B.
NOTE In this context, knowledge of basic science and humanities. and skills are related to generic scholastic ability, such as linguistic ability and knowledge

4.2.4

Knowledge

and skills specific to quality management

4.2.4.1

Relevant

standards and apply relevant International

Quality management system consultants should be able to understand standards that can affect the organization, such as --

ISO 9000, Quality management systems ---Fundamentals and vocabulary, systems -- Requirements, systems -- Guidelines for performance management improvements,

-- ISO 9001, Quality management
-- -- -- ISO 9004, Quality management ISO 19011, Guidelines

for quality and/or environmental Standards

systems auditing, and

other relevant International the consultant

as listed in "the Bibliography. of other standards that are necessary for the consulting

In addition, services.
NOTE a) b) c) d) e) f) g)

should have knowledge

Typical examples

include

sector-specific measurement accreditation conformity

standards, control systems standards, standards,

assessment

standards,

product standards, dependability standards management standards, and

related to safety aspects.

Quality management system consultants should also have knowledge of the ISO guidance developed as part of the ISO 9000 family introduction and support package[161.

documents

4.2.4.2

National and international

certification/registration

and accreditation

systems

Quality management a)

system consultants

should have general knowledge of level, and the

the standardization, certification and accreditation systems at national and international requirements for certification for such systems (e.g. lSO/lEC Guide 62), and for national certification of products, systems and personnel.

b) the processes and procedures

4

}s/1s0 10019:2005

4.2.4.3

General quality management

principles,

methodologies

and techniques

Quality management system consultants should have knowledge of, and be able to apply, appropriate quality principles, methodologies and techniques. The following list indicates such fields where the consultant's
experience a) b) c) d) e) 9 9) h) i) j) k) 1) and ability may be valuable: principles tools and techniques; quality management continual improvement appropriate

statistical techniques; and techniques; of quality;

auditing methodologies principles for economics team work techniques;

PDCA (Plan-Do-Check-Act) policy deployment

methodology;

methodology;

process mapping techniques; problem solving techniques; techniques for monitoring techniques. customer/employee satisfaction;

brainstorming

4.2.5

Knowledge

and skills specific to the organization

4.2.5.1

Statutory

and regulatory

requirements

Knowledge of statutory and regulatory requirements relevant to the organization's activities and to the consultant's scope of work is essential for quality management system consulting. However, quality management system consultants should not be expected to have experience of the application of this knowledge prior to initiating their services. Relevant knowledge in this area should typically include the statutory organization's product as required by, for example, ISO 9001. arrd regulatory requirements for the

4.2.5.2

Product, process and organizational

requirements

Quality management system consultants should have a reasonable knowledge of the organization's products, processes and customer expectations prior to initiating their consulting services, and should understand the key factors relevant to the product sector in which the organization operates,
They should be able to apply this knowledge a) b) c) d) e) to identify the key characteristics to understand the sequence product requirements; to understand to understand to understand the terminology as follows: processes and related products; processes operates; within the organization; resource needs. and their effect on meeting

of the organization's

-and interaction

of the .organization's

of the sector in which the organization

the nature of the structure, functions and relationships

the strategic linkage between business objectives and competence

4.2.5.3

Management

practices

Quality management system consultants should have knowledge of -relevant management practices to understand how the quality management system integrates and interacts with the overall management system

5

lS/tSO 10019:2005

of the organization, including objectives of the organization.

its human

resources,

and how it will be deployed

to secure

the goals and

In some cases, additional competencies can be required to meet the organization's needs, expectations overall objectives for its quality management system, such as business and strategic planning, management, and business improvement tools and techniques (see Annex B).

and risk

4.2.6

Work experience

The quality management system consultant should have relevant work experience in managerial, professional and technical aspects of the consultant services to be provided. This work experience can involve the exercise of judgement, problem solving and communication with all interested parties (see Annex B).
Verifiable references to past work experience and achievements are important and should be made available to

the organization.

The consultant's a) b)
c)

relevant experience

can include a combination

of some or more of.the following:

practical work experience;
experience experience in management

in quality management; in quality management in implementing system auditing; system, in one or more of the following-capacities:

d) e)

experience experience 1) 2) 3)

a quality management

providing consultant

services; system management representative; of quality,

as a quality management performing

a function related to the management

4.2.7

Maintenance

and improvement

of competence

The quality management system consultant should maintain and improve competence through means such as additional work experience, auditing, training, continuing education, self study, coaching, attending professional meetings, seminars and conferences or other relevant activities. Continual professional development should be contingent upon the organization's needs, the provision quality management system consulting services, standards and any other relevant requirements.
NOTE This can be achieved through membership and proven continued body, organization or institute with regulatory or disciplining powers. personal development

of

with a relevant professional

4.3

Ethical

considerations the following ethical issues when selecting a quality management system

The organization should consider consultant. The consultant should a) b)
c) d)

avoid or declare any conflict of interest that affects the work to be carried out,
maintain maintain maintain the confidentiality independence impartiality of information from quality provided by or acquired system from the organization, or accreditation bodies, bodies,

management selection

certificationlregistration

in the organization's

of certificationlregistration

e) f) g)

provide realistic cost estimates for the consulting not create unnecessary dependence

services rendered,

on their services, and does not have the necessary competence.

not offer services where the consultant

6

1S/1S0 10019:2005

5
5.1

Use of the quality management Consultant's services

system consultant's

services

The organization may use consulting services to assist in one or more of the following activities within a quality management system realization (see A.2): a) b) c) d) e) f) g) h) definition of objectives and requirements;

initial evaluation; planning; design and development; implementation; evaluation; ongoing training and maintenance; improvement.

5.2

Contract for consultant's services

Organizations should ensure that they have a contract with the quality management system consultant that clearly defines the scope of work (including outputs), has realistic milestones -and is cost-effec%ve for the organization (see A. 1). When entering into a contract, activities such as the following (see A.2) should be considered: a) b) setting agreed contract objectives that are specific, measurable, setting out a detailed contract plan with agreed milestones achievable, realistic and time-limited;

and outputs;

c) communicating the plan to all interested parties;
d) identi~lng the training needs of relevant employees so they can maintenance and improvement of the quality management system; perform the ongoing evaluation,

e) implementing the plan;
f) monitoring and appropriate; evaluating the effectiveness of the plan and implementing contingent actions, as

g) h)

ensuring the agreed milestones

are met or redefined; contract.

defining a process to approve the outcomes oflhe

Meetings should be held to evaluate the progress in implementing the system and the performance of the consultant. At each of these meetings, progress in terms of the plan and the budget for quality management system realization activities should be reviewed. Documented progress reports should be submitted to the top management.

5.3

Useful considerations for consultant's services
system consulting services, the organization should consider the

In the process of using quality management following: a) b) the resulting system should not generate

unnecessary

administration

and documentation; and commitment of top

the success of a quality management system depends management and not on the consultant alone;

mainly on the involvement

c)

the organization should assign a staff member (usually the person who will eventually ensure that the quality management system is maintained) to coordinate and monitor the consultant's activities;

7

1S/1S0 10019:2005

d) e) f)

employees

are

organization's

involved at all levels, in order to integrate overall operations;

the quality

management management

system

within the at all

the consultant should be empowered to interact with the organization's levels in order to appraise the organization's processes;

and employees

even if quality management system consulting was in response to contractual or market requirements, there is an opportunity to use the realized quality management system as an effective and eficient management tool; there is a potential for the quality management organization's performance; system to provide a basis for continual improvement culture, the competence of the of its

g) h)

the consulting services should be compatible with the organization's employees, and existing processes andlor documentation.

8

1S/1S0 10019:2005

Annex
(informative)

A

Typical

activities

of quality

management

system

consultants

A.1
A.1.1 a) b)

Initial evaluation
Initial evaluation

and preparation

of a proposal

and establishment

of a contract should typically include the following: and objectives as presented by its top management;

identification

of the organization's

needs, requirements

initial evaluation 1) 2) 3) 4) 5)

of the organization's requirements,

identified needs, requirements and objectives with respect to

relevant customer conformity compliance

with relevant standard requirements, with relevant statutory and regulatory and operational methods, and current situation and the identified objectives to requirements,

present managerial

establishing the difference be achieved;

between the organization's

c) documentation of the activities needed to achieve conformity of the quality management system with the needs, requirements and objectives as stated in a) and established by b) 4); d) preparation and presentation of a proposal for the realization
management A.1.2 a)
b)

of the activities,

as defined

in c), to top

as the basis for the contract.

Contracts should include, in clear language, clauses concerning system consulting activity,

the scope of the quality management planning of quality management
the consultant's

system realization commitment,

activities, role, responsibilities and outputs,

c) d) e)
f)

and the organization's

commitment

of the organization's

internal resources, activities,

the organization's

costs needed to support the consultant's

methods for monitoring how changes to the contract will be managed, confidentiality, applicable milestones
terms

g)
h)

i) j) k) 1)

standards, /delivery dates,
and

of payment,

the time frame.

9

1S/1S0 10019:2005

A.2

Example of the realization

of a quality management
support.

system

See Table A. 1. Table A.2 gives an example of implementation Table A.1 -- Quality management Description of activity

system realization

activities

Responsibility

1. Information to top management of the rn@inConsultant requirements of the reievant quality management system standard, and the roles of the organization and the consultant in quality management system design and development. 2. Analysis of the needs and expectations of the Organization's top management organization% customers and other interested parties. assistance)
NOTE a) The results of the initial evaluation the organization's are generally used

(consultant

can provide

to establish

strengths

and weaknesses,

Opportunities and threats,
b) to understand objectives, and help to define its quality policy and

c) d)

as a basis for planning the quality management to assess the availability of the resources implement the quality management system, as a basis for initial auditing, for the establishment and objectives.

system, needed to

Ie)
f)

I

of measurable

3. Appointment of a management establishment of definitions of commitments for quality.

representative and the Organization's policy, objectives and assistance) levels and

top

management

(consultant

can

provide

Reference of such objectives to appropriate functions within the organization.

4. In-depth analysis of organizational structure, processes, channels of communication and existing interfaces. Identification of the processes and responsibilities to achieve the quality objectives. Definition of processes. sequence and interactions among needed such

Management representative and consultant, with the cooperation of the persons in charge of the various function: within the organization

5. Set up of a plan for. defining the quality management Management representative and consultant system architecture and for identifying and developing the procedures needed for the quality management system. To
assess the progress and quality of the implemented actions, appropriate milestones should be defined within the plan. The assessments may refer to a) consistency between what has been prepared developed. and the contractual objectives, work progress, and satisfaction of the organization services provided by the quality consultant). (with regard to the management system and

b) c)

6. Review of the results of the analysis carried out and of Organization's top management and consultant the plan +xepared in advance.
7. Identification of internal resources the organization's quality objectives. needed to achieve Organization Management (consultant can provide assistance) and consultant

8. Training of the persons responsible for developing ~ activities for the quality management system realization, `and of the organization's other personnel ("facilitators") involved.

representative

10

1S/1S0 10019:2005

Table A.1 -- Quality management Description of activity

system realization

activities

(Continued)

Responsibility representative (consultant can provide

9. Identification and definition of processes, interrelation of Management processes and preparation of the necessary procedures, assistance). including procedures for record maintenance.

10. Alignment of interrelated processes and relevant Management representative and consultant. procedures to avoid any inconsistencies, gaps and overlain.
11. Elaboration 12. Training management of the final version of the quality manual. involved with the quality Management assistance). representative (consultant can provide

of all personnel system.

Consultant and management representative, or management representative with the consultant's assistance. Training can also be delivered by other competent providers.

Implementation of the quality management system.

o
support forthe I
effective

Organization (consultant can provide assistance)

NOTE Abovethe arrow,the activitiesof the consultantstop.After the arrow,there is a slart-upof the implementationofthe quality managementeystemby the organization.

Table A.2 -- Implementation

quality management

system I
appointed' by

I

Description of activity

Responsibility
providers of training

1. Training of internal auditors, emphasizing auditing concepts, Consultant (or other audit question development and audit report preparation and the organization) other required training 12. Development of a programme for internal audits. I Management Consultant

representative

and consultant

I

3. Participation in an initial series of internal audits, together with internal auditors, to provide them with additional training (including writing audit reports and reports of nonconformities) and assistance in the formalization of detected nonconformities and their causes. 4. Assisting management top management review meetings. in conducting

Consultant

5. Assisting with any implementation difficulties, focusing on Consultant including action and preventive actions corrective nonconformities detected as a result of an audit. 6. Continual improvement of the implementation process. including Organization's assistance) Consultant top management (consultant can provide

7. Information about certification issues, pre-assessment or readiness audit.

if required,

11

1S/1S0 10019:2005

Annex B
(informative)

Evaluation

of quality

management

system

consultants

B.1 Example of education consultant

and work experience

for a quality management-system

The organization can use the education and work experience given in Table B.1 as a model when selecting quality management system consultants. This table is only an example, it is not appropriate in all circumstances, and may depend on the scope of the quality management system realization activities. In some cases, additional competencies may be required (see 4.2). Table 6.1 -- Education and work experience of a quality management system consultant

Education.and work experiences
Work experience segments (see Note 1) Complexity -- Fewer years may be applicable of quality management system realization + 4 years for people who have graduated from a More years may be applicable university (see Note 2), or 6 years for people who have graduated from secondary education (see Note 3)
At least 2 years More years may be applicable Completed may system participation and are not intended for certification purposes. Organizations can decide k at least three quality management More implementations

Total work experience

Work experience management Experience Implementation management in the

in quality

Fewer

years

may be

applicable Fewer implementations be applicable specified are not requirements

of a quality system

implementations

with adequate

may be applicable

3 Education and experience use them as requirements. NOTE 1 It is essential

that the experience

of the consultant

be relevant to the quality management education

system realization. level education with i

NOTE 2 University (higher) education duration of at least 3 years.

is a part of the national

system and comes after the secondary

NOTE 3 Secondary education is a part of the national completed rmor to entering the degree level education.

education

system and comes after the primary

or elementary

level, but that is

B.2

Evaluation of consultant's
should from be based

references
of objective evidence and can include the following:

The evaluation a) b) c) d) e) f) references publication references quality

on the examination

previous

assignments; dealing with the management of quality;

of books about

and articles

professional system

ethics; documentation that have developed by the consultant;

management

interviews

with organizations

used the consultant's

services; experience was acquired;

length of time of assignments experience

over which the consultant's of, similar organizations; and qualifications;

professional

9) h) i)

with, and knowledge

ccmsultant% professional

certifications

interviews with the consultant

to evaluate competence.

1S/1S0 10019:2005

Bibliography

[1] [2] [3]

ISO 9001, Quality management ISO 9004, Quality management ISO 10002, Quality organizations management

systems -- Requirements systems -- Guidelines -- Customer for petiormance improvements for complaints handling in

satisfaction

-- Guidelines

[4] [5] [6] [7]

ISO 10005, Quality management ISO 10006, Quality management ISO 10007,Quality management ISO 10012, Measurement measuring equipment lSO/TR 10013, Guidelines ISOITR 10014, Guidelines

systems -- Guidelines systems -- Guidelines systems -- Guidelines

for quality plans for quality management for configuration in projects

management processes and

management

systems -- Requirements

for measurement

[8] [9]

for quality management for managing

system documentation of quality

the economics

[1 O] ISO 10015, Quality management [11 ] [12] [13] lSO/TR 10017, Guidance ISO 19011, Guidelines

-- Guidelines

for training for ISO 9001:2000 management systems auditing and certification/registration of

on statistical

techniques

for quality and/or environmental

lSO/lEC Guide 62, General requirements quality systems Selection and use of ISO 9000 (brochure) Quality management ISO 9000, httr)://isotcl principles

for bodies operating assessment

[14] [15] [16]

and guidelines

on their application

(brochure) the official lSO/lC 176 website

Introduction and Support Package (obtainable 76sc2.elvsiu m-ltd. ne~ and http:llwww.iso. erg) subclause 1.2 `Application'

from

-- Guidance on ISO 9001:2000, -- Guidance on the documentation -- Guidance on the terminology

requirements

of ISO 9001:2000 and ISO 9004:2000 systems

used in ISO 9001:2000

-- Guidance on the process approach to quality management [17] ISO Handbook: ISO 9001 for Small Businesses �

What to do (Advice from LSO/TC 176)

13

Bureau of Indian Standards
61S is a statutory harmonious institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards of standardization, marking Act, 1986 to promote certification of

development

of the activities

and quality

goods and attending

to connected

matters in the country.

Copyright
61S has the copyright of implementing designations.
Review

of all its publications.

No part of these publications details, such as symbols

may be reproduced and sizes, type

in any

form without the prior permission the standard, relating Enquiries

in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of necessary to copyright or grade BtS. be addressed to the Director (Publications),

of Indian Standards
are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are

Amendments

also reviewed periodically; that no changes Users of Indian Standards

a standard along with amendments should ascertain

is reaffirmed when such review indicates of the latest amendmen~s Monthly Additions'. or

are needed; if the.review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. that they are in possession and `Standards:

edition by referring to the latest issue of '61S Catalogue' This Indian Standard has been developed

from Dot: No. MSD 2 (309). Issued

Amendments
Amend No.

Since Publication
Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters:
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 website: Telephones 23230131,23233375,2323 9402 www.bis.org.in Telephones 23237617 { 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 { 22542519,22542315 28329295,28327858 { 28327891,28327892 COIMBATORE. LUCKNOW. FARIDABAD. NAGPUR.

Regional Offices:
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/1 4 C.I.T. Scheme Vll M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 .: SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Eastern

Northern

Southern

: C.I.T. Campus,

IV Cross Road, CHENNAI

600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MlDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 BANGALORE. GUWAHATI. PATNA. PUNE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR.

Branches: AHMEDABAD.
GHAZIABAD. NALAGARH.

KANPUR.

RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

VISAKHAPATNAM.

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

