Indian Standard Oa AN ena 


Frater uan wae: URAT 
wat aa sit Yaa — fender 


Construction Project Management: 
Project Formulation and Appraisal — 
Guidelines 


ICS 03.100.40; 91.010.01 


© BIS 2016 


Ind AM ga 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
TM YA, 9 SEE TX Art, ae ferei-110002 
is MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2016 Price Group 10 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Construction 
Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


A construction project is an endeavour undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of the project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
inception to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project formulation and appraisal — Inception, feasibility, appraisal and strategic planning, 

b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of project proposals, 
procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bill of guantities, procurement documents, 

c) Planning for construction — Seguencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off: 

d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-gualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation if reguired and award of work, 

e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance, and 

f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 

The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of the project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the 
built facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time over-runs, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a project 
proposal is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, 
financial and other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions 
and technical processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top 
management commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some 
of the public domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through 
appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management a series of standards have been 
developed as a part of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for construction project management’, the scopes of which cover the 
stages subsequent to the stage of approval, when a decision to implement a project, including its financing, is 
taken. However, for successful management of construction projects, the earlier stages when the construction 
project is conceived, formulated and its feasibility assessed, leading to decision to implement the project, are 
equally important. 


This standard covers guidelines for project formulation and appraisal aspects of construction project management 
and covers activities for the same up to the stage of preparation of proposals for obtaining approval for implementing 
the project including financial approval. It does not cover the stages subsequent to the stage of financial approval, 
when a decision to implement the project including its financing is taken, which are covered in IS 15883 (Part 1): 
2009 ‘Guidelines for construction project management : Part 1 General’ and in its other parts. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general in all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the resultof a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that specified value in this standard. 


IS 16416 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGEMENT: PROJECT 
FORMULATION AND APPRAISAL — GUIDELINES 


(Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers guidelines for project 
formulation and appraisal aspects of construction 
project management. 


1.2 This standard covers aspects of project formulation 
and appraisal up to the stage of preparation of proposals 
for obtaining approval for implementing the project 
including financial approval. It does not cover the 
stages subseguent to the stage of financial approval, 
when a decision to implement the project including its 
financing is taken which are covered in IS 15883 
(Parts 1 to 8). 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Parts 1 to 8). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. 
7337 : 1985 


Title 
Glossary of terms in project network 
analysis 
Glossary of terms in inventory 
control 
Glossary of terms in human resource 
development 
Construction project management — 
Guidelines : General 
Time management 
Cost management (under print) 
Quality management (under print) 
Health and safety management 
Scope management (under print) 
Risk management (under print) 


10400 : 1992 
15198 : 2002 


15883 
(Part 1) : 
(Part 2) : 
(Part 3) : 
(Part 4) : 
(Part 5) : 
(Part 6) : 
(Part 8) : 


2009 
2013 
2015 
2015 
2013 
2015 
2015 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7337, IS 10400 and IS 15198 and the following 
shall apply. 


3.1 Project Formulation — It is systematic 
development of an idea, a need or an opportunity into 
a project proposal, outlining the project scope and 
objectives of the proposed project to be completed 
within the reguirements of time, cost, guality, safety, 
etc. 


3.2 Project Appraisal — It is the process of critically 
assessing and reviewing project proposals by validating 
the assumptions, conducting the necessary technical, 
and physical and financial feasibility studies before 
decision to implement the project is taken. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Overview of Project Formulation and Project 
Appraisal 


A construction project is generally a non-recurring 
unigue task having a definable beginning and end with 
a definite mission and a set of objectives to be achieved 
for creating the required facility. It is an endeavour 
undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client 
to create either a new facility or upgrade an existing 
facility suited to the defined functional objective. This 
also includes additions/alterations of existing facilities. 


Construction project formulation deals with assessing 
scope and requirements of the project meeting the 
client’s needs while meeting with environmental 
impact assessment (EIA), and sustainability aspects. 


Project appraisal involves checking of the basic data, 
assumptions and methodology used in project 
formulation; assessing techno-economic feasibility; 
review of the work plan, cost estimates and proposed 
financing, an assessment of the project’s organizational 
and management aspects; project risk assessment; and 
finally the viability of the project. 


Project objectives may be defined in terms of scope, 
time, cost, quality, safety and security requirements. 
These objectives serve as guiding factors in project 
formulation and appraisal stage. For the purpose of 
this standard, project formulation and appraisal 
objectives cover the preliminary stages, that is, 
inception, prefeasibility, feasibility, related project 
strategic planning and viability assessment and review 
prior to approval of project. 


IS 16416 : 2016 


A flow chart depicting various broad stages in the 
process of project formulation and appraisal is given 
in Fig.1. 


NOTE — A detailed flow chart is given at Fig. 2. 


Need for the Project 


Project 
Identification 


Scope Preparation 


Pre-Feasibility 


Feasibility 


Project 
Formulation 


Appraisal and 
Impact Assessment 


Fic.1 FLow CHART For PROJECT FORMULATION AND 
APPRAISAL 


4.2 Need for Construction Project Formulation and 
Appraisal 


Project formulation is necessary to frame the outline 
of the proposed project including the scope of the work 
involved, its duration, the preliminary costs involved, 
quality assurance as well as its viability so as to achieve 
the objectives of the owner/client. In order to ensure 
that a construction project meets its objectives, the 
proposal has to be based on reliable field data, proper 
assessment of financial and other resources 
requirements keeping in view the size, location, 
working environment of the project, etc. 


The appraisal by the owner/client is necessary for a 
review whether the basic assumptions have sound 
grounds and proposed proposal meets with the intended 
objectives and requirements; the cost indicated is 


reasonable and can be financed with the resources 
available; and the aspects of time, quality, 
sustainability; and other relevant items are taken care 
of. 


4.3 Organization Structure for 
Formulation and Appraisal 


Project 


The owner/client is primarily concerned with overall 
project formulation and appraisal and is required to 
coordinate from project inception to project 
formulation and subsequent project appraisal. In the 
process, various studies may have to be undertaken 
and coordination needs to be done with various input 
providers, customers, statutory bodies, appraising 
agencies, funding organizations, project affected 
people, etc. 


NOTE — Where there is more than one owner/client, the term 
owner/client shall mean the organizations representing them. 


The owner/client may get the entire work carried out 
in-house, or partly in-house and the remaining from 
other specialized agencies, or the entire work may be 
outsourced. Various items of work may be carried out 
as follows: 


a) Project inception — Generally, the 
preliminary work to start with project 
formulation is carried out in-house. However, 
in some cases decision is taken by the owner 
based on the ground work and studies done 
by aconsultant(s). Broad scope and objectives 
of the project are defined by the owner/client. 

b) Project formulation: 

1) Preparation of pre-feasibility report — 
This may be carried out in-house and/or 
through a consultant. In the case of 
outsourcing, supervision is generally 
done in-house. 

2) Undertaking various studies — This may 
be carried out in-house and/or through a 
consultant. In the case of outsourcing, 
supervision is done in-house. 

3) Feasibility report — This may be carried 
out in-house and/or through a consultant. 
In the case of outsourcing, supervision 
is done in-house. 


4) Coordination with external agencies — 
This may be carried out in-house and/or 
through a consultant. 

5) Project appraisal — It is done by the 
owner and/or wherever required, by 
specialized agencies well-experienced in 
such work, appointed by owner or 
funding agencies. Owner/client shall take 
the final decision to proceed with the 
project. 


To carry out above items, appropriate organizational 
structure is reguired for construction project 
formulation and appraisal, as follows: 


1) Organizational structure of owner for, 
a) works to be carried out in-house, and 
b) co-ordination with and supervision of 
work of consultants as per agreements 
entered with them. 


ii) Organizational structure of consultants, to 
fulfill their commitment as per agreements 
entered into by them for, 


a) works to be carried out in-house by 
consultants, and 


b) works to be carried out by consultants 
through sub-consultants and supervision 
thereof. 


The organizational structure for carrying out various 
activities related with project formulation and appraisal 
may vary from project to project depending upon their 
size and complexities. For large and medium value 
projects, it may be necessary to have separate team 
within the organization or work may be entrusted to 
an experienced consultant in the field. If considered 
expedient, work of project formulation and/or appraisal 
may be got done through combination of in-house 
expertise and consultants. In small size projects these 
functions may be entrusted to existing functionaries. 


Typical organizational charts for these activities to be 
taken up through in-house and outsourced teams are 
given in Annex A and may be modified to suit the 
needs of organizations and projects. 


5 PROJECT FORMULATION 


5.1 General Approach 


5.1.1 The project formulation shall start after the need 
of the project has been established. Interactions shall 
be held with the owner/client and stakeholders to assess 
and appreciate their requirements. The project specific 
site data shall be collected and assessment with respect 
to availability of land, finance and connectivity and 
all required services such as water supply, electricity, 
drainage and sewerage, etc, and other resources shall 
be made. 


The project proposal formulator shall ensure that the 
proposal summarizes the project rationale and design, 
and the same is communicated in very clear and precise 
manner. 


5.1.2 Project formulation shall incorporate the 
following: 


a) Project context, comprising project origin, 
relevance, conformity with owners/client’s 
objectives and priorities, relevance to the 


IS 16416 : 2016 


owner/client’s policies, description of the 
target beneficiaries, and expected outcomes 
on project completion. 


b) Project rationale and objectives, comprising 
stakeholder analysis, problem analysis, 
logical framework and specific objectives. 


c) Description of project parameters, 
comprising of scope of project, outputs related 
activities, implementation approaches and 
methods, work plan, budget, assumptions, 
risks and sustainability. 


d) Implementation arrangements, comprising 
organization structure and stakeholder 
involvement mechanisms, reporting, 
reviewing, monitoring and evaluation, 
dissemination of project details. 


5.2 Types of Project Proposals 


Projects may be broadly classified into following 
categories based on type of work, duration, project 
value and required pace of execution of project: 


a) With respect to type of work, construction 
projects may be categorized as: 


1) Building projects, 

2) Infrastructure projects, 
3) Industrial projects, and 
4) Other projects. 


b) With respect to project completion time, 
projects may be categorized as: 


1) Long duration projects (over 5 years), 
2) Medium duration projects (3 to 5 years), 
3) Short duration projects (1 to 3 years), and 
4) Special short term projects (less than 1 
year). 
c) With respect to project value, projects may 
be categorized as: 


1) Mega value projects, 

2) Large value projects, 

3) Medium value projects, and 

4) Small value projects. 

NOTE — The value depends upon the sector concerned. 
d) With respect to speed of project execution, 

projects may be categorized as: 

1) Fast track projects, and 

2) Normal pace projects. 


5.3 Factors Affecting Project Formulation 


Project formulation proposals may take into account 
the following factors: 


a) Relevance to the objectives of the owner/ 
client; 


IS 16416 : 2016 


b) Technical soundness, 
c) Environmental impact, 


d) Economic 
requirements; 


aspects and funding 


e) Project financing; 

f) Cost-effectiveness; 

g) Sustainability of the project; 
h) Scope for future expansion; 
j) Social and political aspects; 
k) Legal aspects; and 

m) Ethics. 


5.4 Stages 


5.4.1 Every project has certain stages during its 
formulation before it is approved for implementation. 
These stages provide a framework for clear 
understanding of resource allocation, scheduling 
project milestones for implementation, and 
subsequently establishing a monitoring system. 
Various stages during project formulation and 
associated activities are as follows: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Need for the project — This stage involves 
inception of idea, and establishment of project 
need through ‘need analysis’ keeping in view 
the existing facilities, demands and 
development goals. 

Project identification — This is the stage of 
the project formulation when an idea is 
evaluated and potential project proposals are 
identified. The purpose is to establish the basic 
objectives of the project and identify the 
priority of the project. Tools used are problem 
analysis, objectives setting and strategy. 
Scope preparation — The project scope 
establishes the type of works that need to be 
completed to deliver a product, service or a 
result with specified features and functions. 
It is the boundary of a project within which 
all activities in the project are required to be 
executed. Since the scope forms the basis of 
a project defining requirements and 
boundaries of work, it needs to be defined, in 
measurable parameter, without any ambiguity 
to avoid subsequent deviations and 
unnecessary work. It could accommodate 
minor variations that may arise during project 
execution. 

The purpose of scope preparation of proposed 
work is to achieve clarity of the project scope, 
including objectives and deliverables. It forms 
basis of the project formulation and has to be 
not only clearly defined but should be based 
on well thought out decisions in consonance 
with the detailed requirements of the owner/ 


d) 


client so that substantial changes in the scope 
at later stages are obviated. 

The concepts of projects identified are refined 
and elaborated further and components 

are examined in detail to see, if these merit 
prefeasibility studies and feasibility studies. 
Problems proposed to be solved, main 
beneficiaries, overall objectives and benefits 
to be derived, need to be clearly stated. 
Availability of land — Land is the single most 
important factor, without availability of 
which, the process of project formulation will 
be incomplete. A detailed survey of land has 
to be carried out before deciding upon the 
location and acquiring land. Following 
aspects pertaining to land need to be 
investigated and clearly brought out in the 
draft project formulation report: 

1) Description of land and its suitability — 
A brief description of the land required for 
the project including a plan(s) showing its 
location and detailed study of suitability of 
the land for the project. Whether the land is 
suitable for taking up the proposed 
construction project, that is, with reference 
to services, availability of materials and other 
resources, geotechnical investigations, etc. 
2) Status of availability of land — Whether 
the land is available or is to be acquired. 


3) Issues affecting utilization of land: 


i) Encumbrance of any religious buildings, 
graveyards or monuments on the land, 
trees, wells, etc. 


ii) Existence of HT/LT lines over land 
rendering part of area unfit for 
development. 


iii) Restrictions on utilization of land, if any. 
iv) Disputes pending settlement. 

v) Cultivation status of land. 

vi) Absence of clear title to land. 

vil) Land acquisition clearance. 

viii) Environmental issues. 

ix) Social issues. 

x) Permissible land use. 

xi) Encroachments and other encumbrances. 
4) Cost of land — Information in respect of, 
i) Cost already incurred. 

ii) Further cost anticipated. 


iii) Status of approvals required from 
government/local authorities for taking 
up the type of construction proposed on 
this land, including environmental 
clearance. 


e) 


5) Other relevant issues: 

i) Approach to land/connectivity of land 
including its distance from nearest 
railway station/airport/bus stand. 

ii) Availability of basic infrastructure in 
vicinity. 

iii) Whether the land is freehold or leasehold. 

iv) Legal clearance of title for land. 


v) Mutation of land in favour of owner/ 
client 

vi) Proper demarcation of land. 
vii) Existing trees on land. 
viii) Details of nearby properties. 
ix) Whether the land is contiguous. 
x) Any contamination of land. 
Prefeasibility study — This is the first attempt 
to examine the overall potential or viability 
of the project. The data and information 
gathered at the scope preparation stage are 
used also taking into account the local survey 
and preliminary investigations. The existing 
reports on the data and studies of similar 
projects in similar location in past, if any, shall 
be incorporated in the report. This is the stage 
for completing all the preliminary steps for 
going into a detailed feasibility exercise. 
The prefeasibility stage should normally 
comprise the following aspects: 
1) Demand and supply, 
2) Availability of suitable land, 
3) Technical or engineering requirements, 
4) Environmental impact, 
5) Manpower and administrative support, 
6) Socio-economic viability, and 
7) Financial aspects. 
A conscious decision needs to be taken after 
prefeasibility study whether next stage of 
feasibility study should be ventured into. Only 
if the outcome of modules mentioned above 
indicates positive results, the next stages 
should be considered for taking up. 

Feasibility study: 

1) The project is examined to see, if it shows 
promise of meeting the financial, 
economic, environmental, sustainability 
and social criteria that has been set for 
investment expenditure. Engineering 
investigations and detailed studies are 
carried out at this stage and the 
conclusion can be that the project is 
feasible or not feasible. The feasibility 
report will encompass following aspects 


2) 


3) 


4) 


IS 16416 : 2016 


and will form the basis for taking a 

decision whether to go in for detailed 

proposal or not by evaluating internal and 

external constraints. 

The feasibility study shall comprise the 

following: 

i) Scope of the project, 

ii) Proposed 
methodology, 


approach and 


iii) Demand and supply gap study, 

iv) Review of past studies, reports and 
data, 

v) Inventory of existing assets, 

vi) Infrastructure availability, 

vil) Material and engineering 
investigations, 

viii) Approvals required, 

ix) Sustainability, 

x) Time frame, 

xi) Risk analysis, 

xii) Consultancy services required, if 
any, 

xiii) Cost estimates of the project: 

a) Soft costs — Costs of consultancy, 
surveys, investigations, fees for 
obtaining approvals, overheads, 
miscellaneous expenditure, etc. 

b) Hard costs — Cost of actual 
construction including development 
of site and external services. 

xiv) Source of funding of the project and 
its timeliness with reference to 
requirement of cash flow. 

Techno-economic analysis — This 

analysis gives an idea of benefits of the 

project and provides a platform for 
preparation of detailed project design. 

Project plan including scheme design — 

It is the most important aspect of the 

project entity defining the sequence of 

each activity of the project in the form of 
network drawing. Once it has been 
determined that the project will continue, 
the design task should be completed in 
more detail. It involves detailing the basic 
programs, allocating tasks, determining 
resources and identifying the functions 
to be carried out along with their 
priorities. Technical requirements, such 
as skill wise manpower need, should be 
finalized at this stage. Upon completion 
of the scheme designs/drawings and 
specifications for construction of 


IS 16416 : 2016 


facilities and eguipment, operating plans 
and schedules along with contingency 
plans shall be prepared. It helps to 
identify project inputs, finance needed 
and cost benefit profile of the project. 

5) Resource analysis — It assesses and 
defines the inputs (material, machinery 
and human resources) reguired for each 
activity. It evaluates the feasibility of the 
project from the point of view of the 
availability of necessary resources. This 
aids in assessing the project cost. 

g) Financing and cost benefit analysis — It 
involves estimating the project costs including 
cost of capital, opportunity cost, operating 
cost and fund requirements for comparing 
various project proposals on a common scale. 
It also provides a platform for investment 
decisions involving commitment of resources 
in future, with a long time horizon. Cost 
benefit analysis gives idea of benefits of the 
project and provides platform for preparation 
of detailed project design. The overall worth 
of a project is evaluated by considering the 
cost and benefits connected with the project. 


The financing plan should provide details 
about how any anticipated negative net cash 
flows will be financed during both the 
investment and operating stages of a 
project.Cost of missing opportunities for the 
same investment need to be considered for 
informed decision. 


h) Pre-Investment analysis — The results 
obtained in previous stages are consolidated 
to arrive at clear conclusions. It helps the 
project sponsoring body, the project 
implementing body and the external 
consulting agencies to accept/reject the 
proposal. 


5.4.3 The guiding principle during project formulation 
is to take a first look carefully and critically at the 
project idea by weighing its various components in- 
house with the assistance of specialists or consultants. 
It is an important stage for assessing the various aspects 
of the project. Initial project formulation shall be 
submitted in the form of report named as project 
formulation report. 


5.5 Methodology 


5.5.1 The preparation of preliminary plans shall be 
started considering all inputs from the field data, 
requirement of owner/client and stakeholders, and 
existing reports and studies conducted in the past on 
projects of similar type and nature. The various 
alternatives for implementation of project may be 


specified. The construction methodology for execution 
of project for each alternative shall be described. The 
resources (material, machinery, financial and human 
resources) needed during execution of project shall be 
defined in terms of source, their quantity and costs. 
The methodology and resource planning should also 
be given in the form of charts, giving clear picture of 
the same. 


5.5.2 Environmental Impact Assessment 


The environmental impact assessment of the project 
shall be made taking into account activities and 
construction items of project which have the potential 
for making an adverse impact on environment. The 
report on environmental impact assessment shall be 
clearly indicative of general assessment on current 
status of environment at the project location and its 
surrounding area, sensitivity level of environment, 
proposing methods to reduce adverse impact on natural 
conditions, elements of natural environment, health of 
community and relevant socio-economic factors, etc. 
This is all the more important when the site might have 
been contaminated due to earlier use and may need 
extensive treatment for remedial measures. 


The social impact assessment of the project including 
resettlement problem, if any, shall also be projected. 


5.5.3 Cost Estimates 


The following components shall be considered while 
preparing the approximate cost estimates: 


a) Capital cost for land procurement and its 
development. 

b) Costs for site surveys, geotechnical 
investigations and other project site specific 
studies. 

c) Cost of project and enabling buildings, roads, 
development of site and other infrastructure 
services. 

d) Cost of engaging design professional and 
project management consultant. 

e) Supervision cost including testing and 
inspections. 

f) Fees for approval by municipal/development 
authorities. 

g) Taxes as per law of the land. 

h) Other costs chargeable to project such as 
insurance, essential items of furniture and 
fittings and equipment/appliances required to 
make project usable. 

j) Cost of resettlement and rehabilitation of 
project affected people. 

k) Financial costs and capital equipment cost. 


The various types of resources required for each 


activity shall be determined including their guantum 
and timing and these reguirements shall be converted 
into monetary terms. From the cost for carrying out 
various project activities, the estimated cost of 
obtaining the deliverables shall be worked out. 
Expected life of built assets and defect liability period 
suggested for the project, operation and maintenance 
costs have bearing on the costs and shall be accounted 
for. Acceptable levels of contingencies shall be added 
to account for unforeseen but essential expenses on 
the project. The cost estimates shall be based on current 
prevalent rates with suitable provisions made to allow 
for future escalation. 


Detailed methodology for preparation of cost estimates 
given in 6.2 of IS 15883 (Part 3) may be adopted for 
working out cost estimates for project formulation 
purposes. 


5.5.4 Reguisite Approvals 


The details of various approvals from municipal and 
other development bodies should also be listed 
specifying time frame and costs involved. 


5.5.5 Time Schedule — Activities to be Listed with 
Duration 


The various activities reguired to be carried out for 
the planning and execution of the project may be listed 
in seguence. In general, the list should indicatesome 
of the activities to be carried out in series. The list may 
also include activities which can be carried out in 
parallel, that is, simultaneously with other activities. 


The time schedule for the planning and execution of 
the various items listed for the project may generally 
provide for the following major activities: 


a) Acguisition of land. 

b) Obtaining necessary approvals from statutory 
bodies. 

c) Preparation of preliminary/scheme designs 
and estimates covering various components 
of the project. 

d) Drawing up a sequence for execution of 
various components of the project, and the 
time required for each. 

e) Where work is proposed to be carried out on 
contract, drawing up a sequence for call of 
tenders for various components at appropriate 
stages. 

f) Resettlement and rehabilitation of project 
affected people. 


5.6 Deliverables for Project Formulation 


5.6.1 The work of project formulation shall culminate 
in preliminary project formulation report, which will 
broadly include the following: 


IS 16416 : 2016 


a) Objectives of the project, 

b) Salient features of the project, 

c) Cost estimates and source of funds, 

d) Preliminary project cost 

e) Land for the project, 

f) Feasibility report, 

g) Preliminary quality and safety assurance plan, 
h) Procurement strategy, 

j) Project program and sequencing, 

k) Mobilization and staffing requirement, 
m) Statutory approvals required, 

n) Economic and financial analysis, and 
p) Conclusion and recommendations. 


6 PROJECT APPRAISAL 


6.1 General 


Project appraisal entails review of project formulation 
proposal that is, verifying the basic data along with 
approach and methodology. The items for the review 
include project costing, project financing and different 
components of feasibility studies. Project costing may 
include project cash flow, time value for money, net 
present value, internal rate of return, payback period, 
practices of investment appraisal, analysis of risks, etc. 
Project financing may deal with means of financing, 
role of financial institutions, special schemes, key 
financial indicators, etc. Feasibility reports review may 
include adequacy of details, sufficiency of 
investigations and appropriate focus in draft project 
formulation report commensurate with the defined 
scope of work. 


The project appraisal is the reassessment of various 
aspects of project formulation work described in the 
draft project formulation report justifying need for the 
project. It provides a comprehensive review of all 
aspects of the project and lays the foundation for 
implementing the project and evaluating it when 
completed. The factors for which the appraisal needs 
to be carried out are technical, institutional, economic, 
commercial and financial. 


The project appraisal may be done by in-house expert 
team of the client or third party having sufficient 
experience in the related field. 


6.2 Benefits of Project Appraisal 
Project appraisal would help in the following way: 


a) Appraisal justifies spending money on a 
project — Appraisal asks fundamental 
questions about funding requirement and 
whether a project offers good value for 
money. It can give confidence that money on 
the project is being put to good use, and help 


IS 16416 : 2016 


identify other funding to support the project. 


b) Appraisal is an important decision making 
fool — Appraisal involves the comprehensive 
analysis of a wide range of data, decisions 
and assumptions, all of which need adeguate 
evidence. This helps in assessing whether the 
project selected, 

1) will help the owner achieve its objectives. 

2) have been critically assessed such that 
project as conceived and formulated is 
deliverable. 


3) assess likely involvement of local people 
and benefits extended to them. 


4) are sustainable. 
5) have sensible ways of managing risk. 


c) Appraisal lays the foundations for delivery 
of the project — Appraisal helps ensure, 


1) that projects will be properly managed 
by ensuring that appropriate financial and 
monitoring systems are employed; 


2) that there are contingency plans to deal 
with risks; and 


3) Setting milestones against which 
progress can be judged. 
6.3 Objectives and Need 


The main objectives of project appraisal are: 


a) Justification of project. 

b) Evaluation of technical soundness of the 
project. 

c) Environmental impact assessment. 


d) Ensuring realization of programme benefits 
as intended. 


e) Verifying documentation to meet financial 
and audit requirements. 


f) Value engineering to ensure that the project 
offers good value for money. 


g) Review of energy consumption. 
h) Examination of sustainability of project. 
j) Involvement of stakeholders. 


6.4 Activities Required for Project Appraisal 


Project appraisal, whether carried out by owner/client 
or through consultant/third party appointed by the 
owner, shall involve, 


a) verification of necessity of the project; 

b) verification of basic data/ assumptions; 

c) checking of approach and methodology; 

d) review of cost estimates including value 
engineering; 

e) environmental impact and sustainability; 


f) review of financing; 
g) review constructability aspect; 
h) review of other resources; 


j) review of organizational structure/ 
management aspects; and 


k) views on viability of the project. 


6.5 Methodology 


The project may be examined by owner himself or got 
examined by consultant/third party from the technical, 
institutional/organizational/managerial, financial and 
economic point of view depending on nature of the 
project. The key criteria needing assessment shall be: 
relevance to the problem solving, feasibility of 
effectively achieving the project objectives and 
whether the project benefits will continue to flow 
during the project life cycle. On the basis of such an 
assessment, a decision shall be reached regarding 
technical soundness of the project, its financial 
justification and its viability from economic point of 
view. 


The rationale behind the project appraisal is to provide 
the decision-makers with financial and economic 
yardsticks for the selection/rejection of projects from 
among competing alternative proposals for investment. 


6.5.1 Financial Techniques of Project Appraisal 


The techniques of project appraisal may be divided 
under two heads, namely undiscounted and discounted 
techniques. 


Undiscounted techniques include payback period, and 
profit and loss account. Discounted techniques take 
into account the time value of money and include net 
present value (NPV), cost benefit ratio (CBR), internal 
rate of return (IRR), sensitivity analysis (treatment of 
uncertainty), and domestic resource cost (Modified 
Bruno Ratio). Different techniques for appraisal criteria 
are given at Annex B. 


During the operating life of a project, it is very 
important to measure all costs and benefits comparing 
the difference between cost-benefit scenario without 
project and with project. Considerable care shall be 
taken in defining a base case which realistically sets 
out the profile of costs and benefits expected, if no 
additional investment is undertaken. 


6.5.2 Key Issues in Appraising Projects 


Key issues in the appraisal of a project shall include 
the following: 


a) Need, targeting and objectives — The starting 
point for appraisal shall be to provide a 
detailed description of the project, identifying 
the need it aims to meet. Appraisal shall help 


b) 


c) 


show, if the project is the right response, and 
highlight the project objective and the 
intended beneficiaries. 

Context and connections — Appraisal shall 
evaluate whether a project is consistent with 
the objectives of the relevant funding 
programme and with the aims of the 
stakeholders. It shall show, if there are links 
between the project and other local 
programmes/projects and whether it adds to 
such links or compete with the same. 
Consultation — Local consultation may help 
determine priorities and secure community 
acceptability and identification with the 
project/ownership. More targeted 
consultation, with potential project users, may 
help ensure that project plans are viable. 
Appropriate consultation shall therefore be 
done; and the appraisal shall show whether 
the same has been done and how it has helped 
shape the project. 


6.5.3 Options Analysis 


Options analysis is concerned with establishing 
whether there are different ways of achieving 
objectives. Such different ways of meeting local need 
and key objectives shall be reviewed. This shall be 
done as follows: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Inputs — It is important to ensure that all the 
necessary people and resources are made 
available to deliver the project. This may 
require considering options for funding from 
various sources and other inputs. Appraisal 
should include the examination of 
appropriately detailed budgets, and life cycle 
costing wherever required. 

Outputs and outcomes — Detailed 
consideration shall be given in appraisal of 
intended achievements of the project, that is, 
its outputs and its long-term outcomes. 
Appraisal shall consider benefits to 
neighbourhoods and their residents in terms 
of improved quality of life outcomes (jobs, 
better housing, safety, health, etc).Projects 
also produce outputs, and appraisal shall 
consider a more realistic view of output 
forecasts. 

Value engineering — This is an important 
criteria against which projects are appraised, 
which is a major concern for the owner/client. 
It is also important for all stakeholders and it 
may be necessary to take into account the local 
factors, which may affect costs. 

When moving forward in time to compute 
future values, analysts shall allow for the 


d) 


e) 


IS 16416 : 2016 


compounding of cash flows. Conversion of 
future values in terms of the present value, 
for comparison purposes, shall be done by 
discounting the same. 

Implementation — Appraisal shall involve 
scrutinizing the practical plans for delivering 
the project, such as, adequacy of staffing, 
practicality of the timetable for the work, 
availability of adequate resources, and 
capability of the organization for delivering 
the project. 

Risk and uncertainty — Appraisal shall carry 
out proper identification of risks, estimation 
of the scale of risks evaluation and mitigation 
of the risks to the project. There shall also be 
contingency plans to minimize the risk of 
project failure or a major gap between the 
intended and actual deliverables. The risks 
may be categorized as follows: 


1) Market risk. 

2) Financial and foreign exchange risk. 
3) Government policy. 

4) Resources. 

5) Natural and manmade disasters. 


6) Relationship between prices and 
quantities. 
7) Technology risk. 
8) Law and order. 
9) Stakeholder resistance. 
Forecasts used for market, technical, 
financial, economic and distributional 
analysis, are based on the prices of inputs and 
outputs, wages, rate of inflation, and exchange 
rate, etc, values of which cannot be 
ascertained with certainty over the life of 
project. 
Sensitivity analysis — It identifies the 
parameters which are significant for the 
outcome of the project. These become risk 
variables. For each risk variable, a probability 
distribution and range of values shall be 
assigned. Correlations among variables shall 
also be built into the model. Finally, a 
Monte Carlo simulation shall be performed 
and the model results analysed. The risk 
analysis yields a distribution of results, such 
as expected values of the desired outcomes, 
the probability of negative returns and the 
variability of outcomes. 
To manage a risk, a way shall be found to 
redesign or reorganize a project to reallocate 
risk efficiently. The solution is to reallocate 
risk to those parties who can best bear it. 


IS 16416 : 2016 


g) Sustainability — Sustainability appraisal shall 
include an assessment of environmental, 
social and economic impact of the project, 
with its positive and negative effects. 


The appraisal shall encompass each of the above areas, 
with some of the areas being inter-linked. A realistic 
assessment of outputs shall be necessary for calculation 
of value for money. The final judgment shall depend on 
a balanced consideration of all these important factors. 


6.6 Project Appraisal Outcome 
6.6.1 Important Features of Project Appraisal 
An appraisal system shall ensure that, 


a) project formulation, appraisal and approval 
functions are dealt with separately. 

b) all the relevant information is gathered for 
appraisal; those involved in appraisal have 
appropriate information, competence and 
training to make proper use of technical and 
other information gathered. 

c) original scope of work and intended benefits 
are adhered to. 

d) there are realistic allowances for time involved 
in project development and appraisal. 

e) decisions are within the powers of the 
implementing persons. 

f) there are appropriate arrangements for very 
small projects. 

g) there are appropriate arrangements for dealing 
with new technologies, or particularly risky 
projects. 

h) environmental clearances. 

j) statutory laws/regulations are complied with. 


6.6.2 Project appraisal helps project initiators and 
designers to, 


a) beconsistent and objective in choosing projects. 
b) ensure that desired benefits are achievable. 


c) ensure availability of documentation for 
financial and audit requirements. 


6.7 Deliverables of Project Appraisal 


The deliverables of project appraisal shall be as given 
below: 


a) Verification of Basic Data/Assumptions Made 
for the Proposed Project, etc: 
1) Verification of meeting the basic 
objectives of the project. 
2) Verification of basic data considered/ 
assumptions made while drawing up the 
project. 


b) 
c) 


d) 


e) 


3) Verification of necessity of the proposed 
project. 

4) Verification of availability of land and 
its suitability and approvals required from 
government/local bodies. 

Review of project formulation report. 

Technical Items: 

1) Sufficiency of material and geotechnical 
investigations. 

2) Availability of external services. 

3) Suitability of scheme design. 

4) Availability of technical personnel/ 
supervisory personnel/consultancy 
organization for planning and execution 
of the project. 

Financial Appraisal — A financial appraisal 
enables the project analyst to establish the 
financial sustainability of the project by 
identifying any financing shortfalls that are 
likely to occur during the investment and 
operating stages of the project. The financial 
cash flow statement of a project is a profile 
of the project receipts and expenditures over 
time. Financial analysis should be carried out 
from different points of view, that is, from 
the point of view of owner, all investors 
combined, budget, and other perspectives, 
such as, effect on other groups like 
competitors, suppliers of inputs and 
downstream processors. Following factors 
merit consideration: 

1) Cost of the project. 

2) Source of funding of the project and its 
timeliness with reference to reguirement 
of cash flow. 

3) Role of financial institutions — urgency 
of payback period. 

4) Internal rate of return on investment made. 

5) Analysis of risks, etc. 

Viability of the project — Based on the 

verification of basic data/assumptions made 

for the proposed project, and the review of 
project formulation proposal, the owner may 
be in a position to come to a view whether 
the proposed project is viable and may be 
approved for detailed planning and execution. 

Criteria or results which may help to assess 

whether the project is viable, or can be made 

viable, shall be, 

1) technical, 

2) economical, 

3) financial, and 

4) social. 


6.8 Checklist for Project Appraisal 


The checklist may vary from project to project. It shall 
include the following: 


a) Are appraisals systematic and disciplined with 
a clear seguence of activities and operating 
rules? 

b) Is there an independent assessment of the 
project by someone who has not been 
involved with the development of the project? 
c) Does the appraisal process culminate in clear 
recommendations that inform approval (or 
rejection) of the project? 

d) Is the appraisal stage clearly distinct from 
project formulation? 

e) Is the appraisal process well documented, with 
key documents signed, showing ownership 
and agreement, and allowing the appraisal 
documentation to act as a basis for future 


management, monitoring and evaluation? 


Does the appraisal system comply with any 
relevant government guidance? 


g) Are the right people involved at various stages 


IS 16416 : 2016 


of the process and, if necessary, how can 
involvement of people be widened? 


After studying the alternate proposals, the most viable 
project proposal shall be selected and project proposal 
formulated and appraised in accordance with 
methodology outlined above. If the project is found to 
satisfy the criteria laid down by the owner/client by 
way of scope and meeting of the basic objectives and 
project is found to be viable, the project is approved 
for implementation. However, before the project 
implementation is taken up, a detailed project report 
(DPR) shall be prepared to have detailed technical 
study, evaluate actual resource reguirements and 
prepare work schedules so as to ensure seamless 
operations and arrange for financial and other resources 
inputs. The investigations done, pre-feasibility report 
and feasibility reports shall form integral part of the 
DPR. Contents to be covered in a DPR for a typical 
project to be taken up are listed in Annex C and may 
be modified to suit specific projects. 


A typical flow chart depicting various stages in the 
process of project formulation and appraisal is given 
in Fig. 2. 


IS 16416 : 2016 


Need for the Project 
Project Identification 


Scope Preparation 


Activity in Activity in 
Order? Order? 
Pre-Feasibility 


Order? 
Tes 


Activity in 
Order? 
YES 
Project Formulation 
Cost Benefit Analysis 


Activity in 
Order? 
Appraisal 
Risk Analysis 
Activity in 
Order? 

YES 


Approval | DPR | 


Fic. 2 DETAILED FLOW CHART FOR PROJECT FORMULATION AND APPRAISAL 


NO 


Cost Estimates Resource Analysis 


Engg Investigation 


Pre Investment Analysis Action Plan 


NO 


Impact Assessment Viability Assessment 


el 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.3) 
ORGANIZATION CHARTS 


A-1 TYPICAL ORGANIZATION CHART (IN HOUSE-PROJECT FORMULATION) 


Client/Owner 


— ot. ..!| = — = oy -i s —— my wee mm See s 


| HOD (Project į | HOD ] HOD 1 1 HOD | HOD | HOD 1 1 HOD(HR) 


} Planning) — 4 | (Projects) | (Finance) j | (Quality) L | (Engg) I (Contracts) | I 
i 


HOD (Land 

Acquisition/ R&R) - —-——. L m = = 
HOD (Project l HOD (Liasioning) ! 
Formulation) L l 


= a l = | . 
1 Functional areas in the organization not | Expert Engg Sea Cost Expert HSE a aA 
i directly related to Project Formulation l Engg studies) 

i 


Functional areas in the el Study Team Study 
el related to Project Formulation Study Team Team 


NOTE — Other combinations may be possible depending upon the requirements of the project. Various departments as above may be developed stage-wise as the work 


progresses and may also be combined as may be needed. 


Li (Commercial) I 


9107 : 91591 SI 


vI 


A-2 TYPICAL ORGANIZATION CHART (IN HOUSE-PROJECT APPRAISAL) 


Client/Owner 


PE DE eM adler ike | ae 


5 == 
I HOD (Project į} | HOD | HOD ı | HOD(HR) | 1 HOD | 
| Planning) — | (Projects) I (Contracts) p | į 1 (Commercial) 


DEE KE la ea maa AN 


-—-—1 — = — = =- -J 


: | 
| Finance) į I (Quality) | 


Lee eet Ee ee 


HOD (Land — 


Nae I 
Acquisition/ R&R) HOD (Project | Legal Cell l 
Appraisal) | 
LEGEND: 


I Functional areas in the organization not I 
I directly related to Project Appraisal l 


eee 


Functional areas in the organization 
directly related to Project Appraisal 


NOTE — Other combinations may be possible depending upon the requirements of the project. Various departments as above may be developed stage-wise as the work progresses and may also be 
combined as may be needed. 


9107 : 91591 SI 


SI 


A-3 TYPICAL ORGANIZATION CHART (OUTSOURCE-PROJECT FORMULATION) 


Client/Owner 
NA aa ca ee DA aan 


acing = | 
I HOD I | HOD (HR) I I HOD 
I (Contracts) I I I | (Commercial) i 
Cana ale ee By 


| HOD 
| Finance) į I (Quality) 1 


pac op nem ee ee oe od 


1 
I HOD (Project I 
| Planning) i 


Gas 


HOD 
(Projects) 


HOD (Land 
Acquisition/ R&R) 


p Å= = = -= = 


ziz i | Legal Cell I 


| HOD 
I (Liaoning) yo - === 


— = = = ol 


LEGEND: 
l Functional areas in the organization not | 
I directly related to Project Formulation : 


Consultant (Project 
Formulation) 
| EN E S 
Functional areas in the organi ; i 
ganization nance Site Team 
directly related to Project 
Team 


NOTE — Other combinations may be possible depending upon the requirements of the project. Various departments as above may be developed stage-wise as the work progresses and may also be 
combined as may be needed. 


9107 : 91591 SI 


91 


A-4 TYPICAL ORGANIZATION CHART (OUTSOURCE-PROJECT APPRAISAL) 


Client/Owner 


I HOD (Project l HOD | HOD 
| Planning) | | Projects) | Finance) | 


Bea Pe anna 


HOD (Land 


Acguisition/ R&R) 


LEGEND: 


l Functional areas in the organisation not I 
I directly related to Project Appraisal | 


Functional areas in the organisation 


directly related to Project Appraisal 


NOTE — Other combinations may be possible depending upon the requirements of the project. Various departments as above may be developed stage-wise as the work progresses and may also be 


combined as may be needed. 


ge eee. a ra 1 mn Asa ne ae Be | ee ee es ee ank | 

| HOD ; | HOD | HOD ı THOD(HR) y IL HOD | 

I (Quality) 4 | (Engg) I (Contracts) | | y 1 Commercial) 
— = = oe ol U eee | ag 


peak 

I Legal Cell į 
l 

| 


aa 


Consultant (Project 

Appraisal) 
Engg. Finance Cost Site Team 
Team Team Team 


9107 : 91591 SI 


IS 16416 : 2016 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 6.5.1) 
TECHNIOUES OF ECONOMIC APPRAISAL OF PROJECT 


B-1 PAYBACK PERIOD 


The payback period is the number of years it takes to 
payback the initial investment of a capital project from 
the cash flows that the project produces. For example, 
an investment of Rs 1 000 which returned Rs 400 per 
year would have a two and half year (1 000/400) 
payback period. 


Payback Period Example 1: 


Two mutually exclusive real estate investment 
proposals involving investment of Rs 100 Crore has 
net cash flow from lease rental income is as indicated 
in table below 


(Amount in Rupees Crores) 


Year Investment Cash flow of Proposal 

A B 
0 100 — — 
1 50 10 
2 40 15 
3 30 20 
4 25 25 
5 20 30 
6 15 40 
7 10 50 


Payback period for proposal A is 2/4 years and for 
proposal B is 5 years. Investment decision would thus 
go in favour of proposal A if the payback criterion were 
to be applied in project selection. 


This technique is easy to compute, easy to understand 
and provides some indication of risk by separating 
long-term projects from short-term projects. It doesn’t 
measure profitability, doesn’t account for the time 
value of money and ignores financial performance after 
the break-even period. 


In nut shell payback period intuitively measures how 
long something takes to pay for itself. All else being 
equal, shorter payback periods are preferable to longer 
payback periods. 


B-2 PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT 


This is a financial statement that summarizes the 
revenues, costs and expenses incurred during a specific 
period of time, usually a fiscal quarter or year. These 
records provide information that shows the ability of a 
company to generate profit by increasing revenue and 


reducing costs. The P&L statement is also known as a 
statement of profit and loss, an income statement or 
an income and expense statement. 


The basic formula for the profit and loss statement is: 
Revenues — Expenses = Net profit 
P&L statements generally follow this format: 


a) Revenues — Operating/variable expenses = 
Gross profit/Operating margin 

b) Gross profit/Operating margin — Overhead/ 
fixed expenses = Operating income 


c) Operating income + Other/Non-operating 
income or expense = Pre-tax income 

d) Pre-tax income — Income tax = Net income 
after taxes 


B-3 RATE OF RETURN (ROR) METHOD 


Rate of return is the return realized (either cash profit 
or net profit after taxes including or excluding interest) 
in any one year on the total capital employed 
(investment + working capital) on the project. This is 
a very crude index used to measure the productivity of 
assets in providing returns to the investors. The method 
is used now mainly in making intra-industry 
comparisons in the ratio analysis of enterprises. This 
short-cut method of capital budgeting under certain 
conditions, result in reasonably good evaluation (may 
lead to the same accept-reject decision as the 
discounted cash flow method) but has severe 
shortcomings and cannot in general be expected to 
provide a sound basis for project evaluation and 
selection. 


Discounted techniques take into account the time value 
of money and include the following: 
a) Net Present Value (NPV), 


b) Cost Benefit Ratio (CBR) or Benefit Cost 
Ratio (BCR), 


c) Internal Rate of Return (IRR), 
d) Sensitivity Analysis 
uncertainty), and 


(treatment of 


e) Domestic Resource Cost (Modified Bruno 
Ratio). 


B-3.1 Net Present Value (NPV) 


NPV compares the value of an amount today to the 
value of that same amount in the future, taking inflation 
and returns into account. If the NPV of a prospective 


IS 16416 : 2016 


project is positive, it should be accepted. However, if 
NPV is negative, the project should probably be 
rejected because cash flows will also be negative. 


When cash inflows are even, 


“E Raog 


NP Initial Investment 
i 
where 
R = netcash inflow expected to be received each 
period, 
i = required rate of return per period, and 
n = number of periods during which the project 


is expected to operate and generate cash 
inflows. 


NPV Example 1: Even Cash Inflows 


Initial investment in a= Rs 200 Crore 
real estate project 


= Rs 5 Crore each month 
for 120 months 


= 12 percent per annum or 
1 percent per month i.e 
0.01 


Assume that the salvage value of the project is zero 


Net Present Value = [5 x {1 — 1+ (1 + 0.01)!9} + 


Rental returns, R 


Rate, i 


0.01] — 200 
= [5 x 69.7] — 200 
= 348.5 — 200 


Rs 148.5 Crores 


l 


When cash inflows are uneven, 


R, R, R, 
Tg EES st... 
(+i! (+i +a 


NPV 


—Initial Investment 


where 
i = target rate of return per period, 
R, = net cash inflow during the first period, 
R, = net cash inflow during the second period, 
R, = net cash inflow during the third period, and 


so on... 
NPV Example 2: Uneven Cash Inflows 


Initial investment = Rs 10 Crores 


Cash inflows of R; = Rs 3.4 Crores, R,= Rs 4.07 
Crores, R,= Rs 5.8 Crores and R4 = Rs 2.0 Crores at 
the end of first, second, third and fourth year, 
respectively. 


At the end of the fourth year, the Building will be sold 
for Rs 4 Crores. 


The present value of investment shall be calculated as 
follows if the discount rate is 18 percent. 


PV Factors for year 1, 2, 3 and 4 are: 


a) Year 1=1=+(1 +0.18)! = 0.847 5 
b) Year2=1+(1+0.18)= 0.718 2 
c) Year3=1~+(1 + 0.18) = 0.608 6 
d) Year4= 1 =+(1 +0.18) = 0.515 8 
NPV to be calculated as below 
Year 1 2 3 4 
Net cash inflow Rs3.4 Rs4.0 Rs5.8 Rs2.0 
Crores Crores Crores Crores 
Salvage value Rs 4 
Crores 
Total cash inflow Rs3.4 Rs4.0 Rs5.8 Rs6.9 
Crores Crores Crores Crores 
x Present value 0.847 5 0.718 2 0.608 6 0.515 8 
Factor 
Present value of Rs2.8 Rs2.9 Rs3.5 Rs 3.55 
cash flows Crores Crores Crores Crores 
Total PV of cash Rs 12.75 Crores 
inflows 
(—) Initial —) Rs 10 Crores 
Investment 


Net present value Rs 2.75 Crores 


NPV Example 3: 


The NPV of the cash flows of the two proposals A and 
B of payback period example | can be computed 
manually as follows: 


(Amount in Rupees Crores) 


Year Capital Cash Factor PV of Cash 
Cost Flowof @12 Flow 
Proposal Percent 
m Discount GS 
A B B 
Rate 
0 100 — — 1.0000 
1 50 10 0.8926 44.63 8.93 
2 40 15 07972 31.89 11.96 
3 30 20 07119 21.36 14.24 
4 25 25 0.6355 15.89 15.89 
5 20 30 0.5674 11.35 17.02 
6 15 40 0.5066 7.60 20.26 
7 10 50 0.4523 4.52 22.62 
Total 10000 190 190 137.23 110.91 


NPV of proposal A and B would thus be Rs 37.23 
Crores and Rs 10.91 Crores assuming that investment 
in the zero" year is not discounted. The project with 
higher NPV is selected. 


This method has the advantage of giving a direct 
measure of the rupees contribution to the stockholders 


but does not provide information regarding the project 
size. 


B-3.2 Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) 


BCR is the ratio of discounted value of all benefits to 
the discounted value of all the costs (including social 
benefits and costs of a public sector project) at a chosen 
discount rate k. The formula for BCR would be: 


Bi Bo Bı 
[estat =: Hil 
acr= 1 
Ci C2 Ci 
+ Biases cle 
Wes (+k) ase 


The generalized formula for BCR would be: 


IS 16416 : 2016 


where 
B, = Benefit (revenue), in year t; and 
C, = Capital and operating/recurring cost, in year 


t. 


Project is selected, if BCR > 1 and rejected, if BCR < 
1. If BCR = 1, there will be no effect whether the project 
is selected or not. 


In case BCR is determined by using discounting 
technique it would simply be a variation of NPV 
method. However, governments may sometimes use 
undiscounted benefit-cost ratio analysis to evaluate the 
desirability of initiating projects that have large social 
benefits and costs since such costs are difficult to 
quantify, especially over a large time span and there is 
some justification that the social discount rate should 


N Bi be very low or zero. 
> t X kB BCR Example: 
sA Ie | 7 
—N = Calculate the BCR @15 percent discount rate for initial 
>D Ct £ C Real estate investment of Rs 100 Crores each in three 
(l +k ) t a (1+k)' projects A, B and C yielding net rental income as 
l follows: 
(Amount in Rupees Crores) 
Year PV IF Net Cash flows of Present Value of Cash flow 
aea aA 
@15 percent X B C A B C 
0 1.000 (-)100 (-)100 (-)100 (—)100 (—)100 (—)100 
1 0.870 20 30 30 17.4 26.1 26.1 
2 0.756 30 30 30 22.68 22.68 22.68 
3 0.658 40 30 20 26.32 19.74 13.16 
4 0.572 50 30 20 28.6 17.16 11.44 
5 0.497 60 30 10 29.82 14.91 4.97 
Column No. A B C 
Discounted value of benefits 124.82 100.59 78.35 
Initial Investment 100 100 100 
BCR 1.248 2 1.005 9 0.783 5 


Project A with higher BCR gets selected. 


B-3.3 Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 


IRR is the discount rate at which NPV for the project 
will be zero. 


Internal rate of return (IRR) is the interest rate at which 
the net present value of all the cash flows (both positive 
and negative) from a project or investment eguals zero. 


Internal rate of return is used to evaluate the 
attractiveness of a project or investment. If the IRR of 
a new project exceeds a company’s required rate of 
return, that project is desirable. If IRR falls below the 


required rate of return, the project should be rejected. 
The formula for IRR is: 


When cash inflows are uneven the NPV is calculated 
with the following formula as explained above 


R 
NPV = Ss : Sa +... 
(+i) d4) 441) 
— Initial Investment 
where 
i = IRR, if NPV is equal to zero in above 
formula, 


IS 16416 : 2016 


R, = net cash inflow during the first period, 
R, = net cash inflow during the second period, 
R, = net cash inflow during the third period, and 


so On... 


IRR value cannot be derived analytically. Instead, IRR 
IRR Example 


must be found by using mathematical trial-and-error 
to derive the appropriate rate. 


In the NPV Example | above if the value of i is kept as 
35.15 percent, the NPV is approx. equal to zero, that 
is, IRR is 35.15 percent. 


For NPV Example-3, the IRR may be computed as below: 


Year PV Interest Factors for Discount Rate Cash flow of proposal, 
a in Rupees Crores 
10 percent 15 percent 20 percent 25 percent 30 percent A B 

0 1.000 0 1.000 0 1.000 0 1.000 0 1.000 0 (-)100 (-)100 

1 0.909 1 0.869 6 0.833 3 0.800 0 0.769 2 50 10 

2 0.826 4 0.756 1 0.694 4 0.640 0 0.591 7 40 15 

3 0.7513 0.6575 0.578 7 0.512 0 0.455 2 30 20 

4 0.683 0 0.571 8 0.482 3 0.409 6 0.350 1 25 25 

5 0.620 9 0.497 2 0.401 9 0.327 7 0.269 3 20 30 

6 0.564 5 0.432 3 0.334 9 0.262 1 0.207 2 15 40 

7 0.513 2 0.375 9 0.279 1 0.209 7 0.159 3 10 50 


PV at various discount rates for proposal A and B and NPV is tabulated below: 


Proposal A Proposal B 
Year 10 15 20 25 30 10 15 20 25 30 
percent percent percent percent percent percent percent percent percent percent 
0 (-)100 (-)100 (-)100 (-)100 (-)100 (-)100 (-)100 (-)100 (-)100 (-) 100 
1 45.5 43.5 41.7 40.0 38.5 9.1 8.7 8.3 8.0 T-T 
2 33.1 30.2 27.8 25.6 23.7 12.4 11.3 10.4 9.6 8.9 
3 22.5 19.7 17.4 15.4 13.7 15.0 13.2 11.6 10.2 9.1 
4 17.1 14.3 12.1 10.2 8.8 17.1 14.3 12.1 10.2 8.8 
5 12.4 9.9 8.0 6.6 5.4 18.6 14.9 12.1 9.8 8.1 
6 8.5 6.5 5.0 3.9 3.1 22.6 17.3 13.4 10.5 8.3 
7 5.1 3.8 2.8 2.1 1.6 25.7 18.8 14.0 10.5 8.0 
SUM 
Year 144.1 127.9 114.7 103.8 94.6 120.5 98.5 81.8 68.9 58.8 
(1-7) 
NPV 44.1 27.9 14.7 3.8 -5.4 20.5 -1.5 —18.2 —31.1 —41.2 
IRR = 25% + (5% /(103.8—94.6)) x 3.8 =25% + 2.07% selection. 


= 27.07% 


IRR of Proposal A: NPV @ 25% = 3.8 and NPV @ 
30% = (—) 5.4 


IRR = 10% + (5% /(120.5 — 98.5)) x 20.5 = 10% + 
4.66% = 14.66% 


IRR of Proposal B: NPV @ 10% = 20.5 and NPV @ 
15% =(-) 1.5 


IRR is calculated based on extrapolation. 


Project with higher IRR gets preference during 


B-3.4 Sensitivity Analysis (Treatment of 
Uncertainty) 


Sensitivity analysis is an analysis that finds out how 
sensitive an output is to any change in an input while 
keeping other inputs constant. 


In finance, it refers to an analysis of how each of the 
input variables in a capital budgeting decision (such 
as discount rate, cash flows growth rate, tax rate, etc.) 
affects the net present value, IRR or any other output 
while keeping other variables constant. 


20 


Sensitivity analysis is useful because it tells the model 
user how dependent the output value is on each input. 
It gives him an idea of how much room he has for 
each variable to go adverse. It helps in assessing risk. 


Some of the advantages of sensitivity analysis include 
impressing management that there is a range of possible 
outcomes, decision making is more realistic, though 
perhaps more complex. And the relative importance 
of each variable examined is readily apparent. Some 
weaknesses are that variables are treated individually, 
limiting the extent to which combinations of variables 
can be assessed. 


Sensitivity analysis is a quantitative risk analysis 
technique that involves analyzing the potential impact 
of risk on the project and filters risks with greatest 
potential. This is done by relative comparison of the 
uncertain elements while holding all other elements at 
their baseline values. 


B-3.4.1 Measurement of Sensitivity 


We conduct sensitivity analysis by an approach 
outlined below: 


a) Find the base case output at the base case 
value of the input (i,) for which we intend to 
measure the sensitivity. We keep all other 
inputs in the model constant 

b) Find the value of output at a new value of the 
input (say i,) while keeping other inputs 
constant. 

c) Find the percentage change in the output and 
the percentage change in the input. 

d) Find sensitivity by dividing the percentage 
change in output by the percentage change in 
input. 

In second round, we test sensitivity for another input. 
We carry on this process till we get the sensitivity figure 
for each of the inputs. The higher the sensitivity figure, 
the more sensitive the output is to any change in that 


input and vice-versa. 


Let output ‘O’= (A+2B+3C)’ 


Input Input Input Output Input Output Sensitivity 


1 2(B)3(C) ‘O’ percent percent Output/ 
(A) change change Input 

1 1 1 36 Base Case 

2 1 1 49 100 36.11 0.388 

1 2 1 64 100 77.7 0.777 

1 1 2 81 100 125 1.25 


21 


IS 16416 : 2016 


From the above it implies that output is most sensitive 
to input 3. 


B-3.5 Domestic Resource Cost (Modified Bruno 
Ratio) 


DRC is the cost in domestic currency required to earn 
a unit of foreign exchange through a proposed project. 
This concept compares the opportunity costs of 
domestic resources (primary factors such as labour, 
capital, land) committed to the extraction of natural 
resources like crude oil etc., with prices at which these 
natural resources can be exported or imported, the latter 
prices (the foreign exchange gained or saved) being 
considered as the ensuing benefits from production. 
The rationale for using the foreign exchange gained 
(through exports) or saved (through imports) as a 
standard of reference is that foreign exchange is 
relatively, and often critically, scarce in many 
developing countries. The project is accepted, if the 
domestic resource cost is less than the exchange rate 
in financial analysis. 


Consider an economy which faces the question of 
whether it should locally extract the crude oil, or 
whether it should be imported from outside the country. 
The equilibrium exchange rate is assumed to be 1$ = 
Rs 60 Now suppose that the Crude Oil, if imported, 
costs the country $ 100 Crores (that is Rs 6 000 Crores 
when converted at the equilibrium exchange rate). In 
the alternative case of - extracting the crude oil locally, 
the country has to import International construction 
services for exploration and extraction at say $ 85 
Crores (Rs 5 100 Crores), while using domestic labour 
and capital which cost, say, Rs 400 Crores. This means 
that a domestic value added of (6 000 — 5 100 — 400 = 
Rs. 500 Crores) Rs 500 Crores ($ 8.3 Crores) is 
generated through extracting the crude oil, which is 
lower than the international value added embodied in 
the crude oil import ($ 15 or Rs 900 Crores). Obviously, 
the extraction of crude oil locally would be efficient 
from a social point of view. Had the same amount of 
labour and capital cost the country, say, Rs 1 000 
Crores (instead of Rs 500 Crores), which could be 
employed elsewhere, it would have been profitable for 
our country to import Crude oil and to shift the 
domestic resources to other activities in which it is a 
relatively more efficient in production vis-a-vis the rest 
of the world. 


IS 16416 : 2016 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.8) 
DETAILED PROJECT REPORT — SAMPLE FORMAT 


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY (SYNOPSIS OF REPORT) 


1 INTRODUCTION 


1.1 Project Background 
1.2 Project Definition and Scope 
1.3 Salient Features 


2 SOCIO-ECONOMIC PROFILE 


2.1 Overall Approach and Objective 
2.2 General Features 
2.3 Infrastructure 


A) Present requirements including land 
B) Projection of future requirements 
2.4 Conclusions 


3 ENGINERING SURVEYS AND 
INVESTIGATIONS 


3.1 Topographic Survey 

3.2 Geotechnical Investigation 

3.3 Material Survey 

3.4 Hydrological and Drainage Investigation 


3.5 EXTERNAL SERVICES FOR 
DEVELOPMENT 


A) Already existing 
B) Additional/augmentation reguired at 
present 


C) Additional/augmentation reguired in 
future 
4 APPROVALS 


(A) Statutory approvals 
(B) Other approvals 


5 DESIGNS 


5.1 Architectural Designs 

5.2 Structural Designs 

5.2 Designs Of Internal Services 
5.3 Designs Of External Services 


6 VALUE ENGINEERING 


6.1 Introduction 

6.2 Objective 

6.3 Approach 

6.4 Suggestions for Savings 


7 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT 


7.1 Introduction 

7.2 Methodology 

7.3 Regulatory Framework 

7.4 Anticipated Impacts 

7.5 Potential Impacts and Mitigation Measures 
7.6 Environmental Management Plan 

7.7 Environmental Budget 


8 SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND 
RESETTLEMENT PLAN 


8.1 Introduction 

8.2 Social Impact Assessment 

8.3 Measures for Minimizing Resettlement 

8.4 Resettlement Policies and Legal Framework 
8.5 Public Consultation and Group Discussion 
8.6 Magnitude of Impact on Properties and People 


8.7 Mechanism of Income and Livelihood 
Restoration 


8.8 Relief and Rehabilitation Budget 


8.9 Institutions for Implementation of 
Resettlement Plan 


8.10 Grievance Redress Mechanism 
8.11 Monitoring And Evaluation System 


9 COST ESTIMATE 


9.1 General 

9.2 Methodology 

9.3 Unit Rate 

9.4 Cost Components 

9.5 Supervision Costs 

9.6 Maintenance During Construction 
9.7 Contingencies 


10 PROJECT FRAMEWORK FOR 
IMPLEMENTATION 


(A) Methodology 
(B) Organizational structure 
(C) Resource assessment & Deployment 


11 PROJECT PHASING 


11.1 Introduction 
11.2 Project Package Size 
11.3 Period(s) of Construction 


12 PROJECT O & M PLANNING 


13 PROJECT FINANCIAL VIABILITY & 
SUSTAINABILITY 


13.1 Economic Analysis 

13.2 Financial Analysis 

13.3 Minimum Return Criteria 
13.4 Model Adopted 


14 CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 


14.1 General 
14.2 Package Size 


23 


IS 16416 : 2016 


14.3 Period of Construction 

14.4 Land Acguisition 

14.5 Project Cost 

14.6 Result Of Financial Analysis 
14.7 Model Adopted 


14.8 Social Impact Assessment and Resettlement 
Action Plan 


14.9 Compliances 


15 ANNEXES 


ANNEX A PROJECT FORMULATION 
REPORT 


ANNEX B PROJECT APPRAISAL REPORT 


IS 16416 : 2016 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (103, CharakSadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 


Aecom India Private Limited, Noida 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


CentralBuilding Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, New Delhi 
Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

M.N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 
Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 


Branch, Army Headguarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, 
New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 
National Institute of Construction Management and Research, 


Mumbai 


NirmanVikasAnusandhanSansthan, Raipur 


24 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 


Suri PAWAN JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARAVIND AGARWAL (Alternate) 


Suri PRADEEP KUMAR 
Suri S. SREEKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri SANJAY Soni (Alternate) 


DR SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
Suri PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


Dr Acuat K. MITTAL 
Suri AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
Suri SANJEEV Rastoci(Alternate) 


Suri P. R. Swarup 
Suri Ravi JAIN (Alternate) 


Suri AMAN DEEP 


Suri ASHOK KHURANA 
Cuier ENGINEER (DEsIGN) (Alternate) 


Suri DALJEET SINGH 


Suri Jose KURIAN 
Suri VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. Das 
Suri M. D. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


Suri D. M. KupTarKaR 
Suri RAJENDRA SAWHNEY (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Suri S. K. Jaw (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHabua (Alternate) 


Pror B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr K. N. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. Namu 
Suri R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. Guna 
Suri Goswoa PaL Cuoupuury (Alternate) 


Bric Manos KUMAR 
CoL M. K. Prasan (Alternate) 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri D Sara (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMRAJ 
Suri H. K. Duawan (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. N. CHowouary (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


Organization 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 
Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, VasantKunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16416 : 2016 


Representative(s) 
Suri ANIL KAPOOR 
Dr RANJEET MEHTA 
Suri S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri Trjas Sura (Alternate) 


Suri PAWAN CHOUDHARY 
Suri M. D. Josui (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PauL 
Suri MANos KUMAR MITTAL 


Lr Gen (RerD) Hari UNIYAL 
Suri O. P. Gost (Alternate) 

DR VANITA AHUJA 

Suri R. P. LAHIRI 

Suri A. K. SHARMA 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri B. K. Sinua, Scientist E & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SANJAY PANT 
Scientist E (Civil Engg), BIS 
and 
SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist C (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 
In Personal Capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 

NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, VasantKunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay Khand-II, 
Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, 
LP. Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


25 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
Suri SANJEEV RAsTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI Jose KURIAN 
Suri VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 

Suri S. MUKHERJEE 

Suri M. P. Napu 

SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 

Dr V. K. PAUL 

Suri Manos Kumar MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


SHRI [ĪFTIKHAR A. DRABU 


SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


SHRI KRISHNA KANT 


Dr S. N. MANDAL 


Suri A. K. SHARMA 


IS 16416 : 2016 


Organization Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


Working Group on Risk Management, CED 29/P1/WG9 


Organization Representative(s) 

In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, VasantKunj, Suri Krisuna Kant (Convener) 
New Delhi) 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi Suri SANJEEV RASTOGI 
Planning Commission, New Delhi SHRI SHATRUGHAN LAL 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 

NTPC Limited, New Delhi SHRI HARBANS SINGH 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) SHRI CHANDRA PAL 
In personal capacity (B-9/6259 Vasant Kunj New Delhi) SHRI DEEPAK NARAYAN 


26 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enguiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7962). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


