IS 14773 ( Part 1 ) : 2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard MECHANICAL VIBRATION OF NON-RECIPROCATING MACHINES - MEASUREMENTS 0-N ROTATING SHAFTS AND EVALUATION CRITERIA
PART

1 GENERAL

GUIDELINES

ICS 13.160

0 BIS 2000

BUREA-U
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

April2000

Price Group

8

Mechanical

Vibration

and Shock Sectional

Committee,

ME 28

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 7919 -1 :1996 `Mechanical vibration of non-reciprocating machines - Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluation criteria - Part 1 : General guidelines' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval of Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The text of IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. In the adopted standard certain conventions are not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is especially drawn to the following : a) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard'appear referring to this standard, they should be

_b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, to use a full point (.) as the decimal marker.

the current

practice

is

In this adopted standard, reference appears to an International Standard for which Indian Standard also exists. The corresponding Indian Standard which is to be substituted in its place is listed below along with its degree of equivalence for the edition indicated : lnterna tional Standard IS0 10816-l :1995 Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence on Identical

IS 14817 ( Part 1 ) : 2000 Mechanical vibration Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements rotating parts : Part 1 General guidelines

IS 14773(Partl):2000 IS0 7919-l : 1996

MECHANICAL VIBRATION OF NON-RECIPROCATING ON ROTATING MACHINES - MEASUREMENTS SHAFTS AND EVALUATION CRITERIA
PART 1 GENERAL GUIDELINES

1

Scope

ements are found to be more suitable, provided that the guidelines are respected. For the purposes of IS0 7919, operational monitoring is considered to be those vibration measurements made during the normal operation of a machine. IS0 7919 permits the use of several different measurement quantities and methods, provided that they are well defined and their limitations are set out, so that the interpretation of the measurements will be well understood. This part of IS0 7919 does not apply to reciprocating machiner\j.

This part of IS0 7919 sets out general guidelines for measuring and evaluating machinery vibration by means of measurements made directly on rotating shafts for the purpose of determining shaft vibration with regard to a) b) c) changes in vibrational excessive kinetic load; of radial clearances. behaviour;

the monitoring

It is applicable to measurements of both absolute and relative radial shaft vibration, but excludes torsional and axial shaft vibration. The procedures are applicable for both operational monitoring of machines and to acceptance testing on a test stand and after installation. Guidelines are also presented for setting operational limits. NOTES 1 Evaluation criteria for different classes of machinery will be included in other parts of IS0 7919 when they become available. In the meantime, guidelines are given in annex A. 2 The term "shaft vibration" is used throughout IS0 7919 because, in most cases, measurements will be made on machine shafts; however, IS0 7919 is also applicable to
measurements made on other rotating elements if such el-

2

Normative

reference

The following standard contains provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of IS0 7919. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this part of IS0 7919 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 10816-l : 1995, Mechanical vibration - Evaluation on nonof machine vibration by measurements rotating parts - Part 7: General guidelines.

IS 14773 ( Part 1) : 2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1998

3

Measurements

3.1.2

Frequency range

3.1

Measurement

quantities

The measurement of relative and absolute shaft vibration shall be broad band so that the frequency spectrum of the machine is adequately covered. 3.2

Types of measurement
Relative vibration measurements

3.1.1

Displacement 3.2.1

The preferred measurement quantity for the measurement of shaft vibration is displacement. The unit of measurement is the micrometer
(1 pm = 10S6 m). Displacement is a vector quantity and, therefore, NOTE 3 when comparing two displacements, it may be necessary to consider the phase angle between them (see also annex D).

Relative vibration measurements are generally carried out with a non-contacting transducer which senses the vibratory displacement between -the shaft and a structural member (e.g. the bearing housing) of the machine. 3.2.2 Absolute vibration measurements are carried out by

Since this part of IS0 7919 applies to both relative and absolute shaft vibration measurements, displacement is further defined as follows: a) relative displacement, which is the vibratory displacement between the shaft and appropriate structure, such as a bearing housing or machine casing; or absolute displacement, which is the vibraton/ displacement of the shaft with reference to an inertial reference system.

Absolute vibration measurements one of the following methods:

a1 by a shaft-riding probe, on which a seismic transducer (velocity type or accelerometer) is mounted so that it measures absolute shaft vibration directly; or b) by a non-contacting transducer which measures relative shaft vibration in combination with a seismic transducer (velocity type or accelerometer) which measures the support vibration. Both transducers shall be mounted close together so that they undergo the same absolute motion in the direction of measurement. Their conditioned outputs are vectorially summed to provide a measurement of the absolute shaft motion.

b)

It should be clearly indicated ~whether displace NOTE 4 ment values are relative or absolute.

Absolute and relative displacements are further defined by several different displacement quantities, each of which is now in widespread use. These include: SC,) vibratory direction displacement peak-to-peak of measurement; in the

3.3 3.3.1

Measurement
General

procedures

SmaX maximum vibratory displacement plane of measurement.

in the

Either of these displacement quantities may be used for the measurement of shaft vibration. However, the quantities shall be clearly identified so as to ensure correct interpretation of the measurements in terms of the criteria of clause 5. The relationships between each of these quantities are shown in figures 6.1 and B.2.
At present, the greater of the two values for NOTE 5 peak-tocpeak displacement, as measured in two orthogonal directions, is used for evaluation criteria. In future, as relevant experience is accumulated, the quantity SC,,),,,, de I fined in figure 8.2, may be preferred.

It is desirable to locate transducers at positions such that the lateral movement of the shaft at points of importance can be assessed. It is recommended that, for both relative and absolute measurements, two transducers should be located at, or adjacent to, each machine bearing. They should be radially mounted in the same transverse plane perpendicular to the shaft axis or as close as practicable, with their axes within + 5" of a radial line. It is preferable to mount both transducers 90" + 5" apart on the same bearing half and the positions chosen should be the same at each bearing. A single transducer may be used at each measurement plane in place of the more typical pair of orthogonal transducers if it is known to provide adequate information about the shaft vibration.

2

iS

IS0

14773 (Part 1) : 2000 7919-1 : 1996

It is recommended that special measurements be made in order to determine the total non-vibration runout, which is caused by shaft surface metallurgical non-homogeneities, local residual magnetism and shaft mechanical runout. It should be noted that, for asymmetric rotors, the effect of gravity can cause a false runout signal. Recommendations annex C. for instrumentation are given in

shall be rigidly mounted to the machine structure (e.g. the bearing housing) close to. the non-contacting transducer so that both transducers undergo the same absolute vibration of the support structure in the direction of measurement. The sensitive axes of the non-contacting and seismic transducers shall be parallel, so that their vectorially summed, conditioned signals result in an accurate measure of the absolute shaft vibration. 3.3.4 Procedures for absolute vibration measurements using a sha.ft-riding mechanism with a seismic transducer The seismic transducer (velocity type or accelerometer) shall be mounted radially on the shaft-riding mechanism. The mechanism shall not chatter or bind in a manner modifying the indicated shaft vibration. The mechanism shall be mounted as described for transducers in 3.3.1. The shaft surface against which the shaft-riding tip rides, taking into account the total axial float of the shaft under all thermal conditions, shall be smooth and free from shaft discontinuities, such as keyways and threads. It is recommended that the mechanical runout of the shaft should not exceed 25 % of the allowable vibration displacement, specified in accordance with annex A, or 6 pm, whichever is the greater. There may be surface speed and/or other limitations to shaft-riding procedures, such as the formation of hydrodynamic oil films beneath the probe, which may give false readings and, consequently, manufacturers should be consulted about possible limitations.

3.3.2 Procedures for relative vibration measurements Relative vibration transducers of the non-contacting type are normally mounted in tapped holes in the bearing housing, or by rigid brackets adjacent to the bearing housing. Where the transducers are mounted in the bearing, they should be located so as not to interfere with the lubrication pressure wedge. However, special arrangements for mounting transducers in other axial locations may be made, but different vibration criteria for assessm,ent wiii then have to be used. For bracket-mounted transducers, the bracket shall be free from natural frequencies *.~h~h adversely affect the capability of the transducer to measure the relative shaft vibration. The surface of the shaft at the location of the pick-up, taking into account the total axiai fioat of the shaft under all thermal conditions, shall be smooth and free from any geometric discontinuities (such as keyways, lubrication passages and threads), metallurgical nonhomogeneities and local residual magnetism which may cause false signals. In some circumstances, an electroplated or metallized shaft surface may be acceptable, but it should be noted that the calibration may be different. It is recommended that the total combined electrical and mechanical runout, as measured by the transducer, should not exceed 25 % of the allowable vibration displacement, specified in accordance with annex A, or 6 pm, whichever is the greater. For measurements made on machines already in service, where provision was not originally made for shaft vibration measurements, it may be necessary to use other runout criteria. 3.3.3 Procedures for absolute vibration measurements using combined seismic and non-contacting relative vibration transducers If a combination of seismic and non-contacting relative vibration transducers is used, the absolute vibration is obtained by vectorially summing the outputs from ~both transducers. The mounting and other requirements for the non-contacting transducer are as specified in 3.3.2. In addition, the seismic transducer

3.4

Machine operating conditions

Shaft vibration measurements should be made under agreed conditions over the operating range of the machine. These measurements should be made after achieving agreed thermal and operating conditions. In addition, measurements may also be taken under conditions of, for example, slow roll, warming-up speed, critical speed, etc. However, the results of these measurements may not be suitable for evaluation in accordance with clause 5.

3.5

Machine

foundation

and structures

The type of machine foundation and structures (for example piping) may significantly affect the measured vibration. In general, a valid comparison of vibration values of machines of the same type can only be made if the foundations and structures have similar dynamic characteristics.

3

IS 14773(Part1):2000 IS0 7919-1:1996

3.6 Environmental vibration of measurement system

and evaluation

5.3 If the evaluation criterion is the kinetic load on the bearing, the relative shaft vibration shall be used as the measure of shaft vibration. 5.4 If the evaluation antes, then criterion is stator/rotor clear-

Prior to measuring the vibration of an operating machine, a check with the same measuring system and stations should be taken with the machine in an inoperative state. When the results of such measurements exceed one-third of the values specified for the operating speed, steps should be taken to eliminate environmental vibration effects.

4

Instrumentation

a) when the vibration of the structure, on which the shaft-relative transducer is mounted, is small (i.e. less than 20 % of the relative shaft vibration), the relative shaft vibration shall be used as a measure of clearance absorption; b1 when the vibration of the structure, on which the shaft-relative transducer is mounted, is 20 % or more of the relative shaft vibration, the relative shaft vibration measurement may still be used as a measure of clearance absorption unless the vibration of the structure, on which the shaftrelative transducer is mounted, is not representative of the total stator vibration. In this latter case, special measurements will be required. 5.5 The shaft vibration associated with a particular classification range depends on the size and mass of the vibrating body, the characteristics of the mounting system, and the output and use of the machine. It is therefore necessary to take into account the various purposes and circumstances concerned when specifying different ranges of shaft vibration for a specific class of machinery. Where appropriate, reference should be made to the product specification. 5.6 General principles for evaluation of shaft vibration on different machines are given in annex A. The evaluation criteria relate to ~both operational monitoring and acceptance testing, and apply only to the vibration produced by the machine itself and not to vibration transmitted from outside. For certain classes of machinen/, the guidelines presented in this part of IS0 7919 are complemented by those given in IS0 10816-I for measurements taken on non-rotating parts. If the procedures of both International Standards are applied, the one which is more restrictive shall generally apply. Specific criteria for different classes and types of machinery will be given in the relevant parts of IS0 7919 as they are developed. 5.7 The evaluation considered in this basic document is limited to abroad-band vibration without reference to frequency components or phase. This will in most cases be adequate for acceptance testing and operational monitoring purposes. However, in some

The instrumentation used for the purpose of compliance with this part of IS0 7919 shall be so designed as to take into account temperature, humidity, the presence of any corrosive atmosphere, shaft surface speed, shaft material and surface finish, operating medium (e.g. water, oil, air or steam) in contact with the transducer, vibration and shock (three major axes), airborne noise, magnetic fields, metallic masses in proximity to the tip of the transducer, and power-line voltage fluctuations and transients. It is desirable that the measurement system should have provision for on-line calibration of the readout instrumentation and, in addition, have suitable isolated outputs to permit further analysis as required.

5 5.1

Evaluation

criteria
factors by which shaft

There are two principal vibration is judged: a) b) absolute vibration vibration ements.

of the shaft; el-

of the shaft relative to the structural

5.2 If the evaluation vibration, then a)

criterion

is the change in shaft

when the vibration of the structure, on which the shaft-relative transducer is mounted, is small (i.e. less than 20 % of the relative shaft vibration), either the relative shaft vibration or absolute shaft vibration may be used as a measure of shaft vibration; when the vibration of the structure, on which the shaft-relative transducer is mounted, is 20 % or more of the relative shaft vibration, the absolute shaft vibration shall be measured and, if found to be larger than the relative shaft vibration, it shall be used as the measure of shaft vibration.

b)

4

IS 14773(Partl):2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996

cases the use of vector information for vibration assessment on certain machine types may be desirable. Vector change information is particularly useful in detecting and defining changes in the dynamic state of a machine, which in some cases could go undetected when using broad-band vibration measurements. This isdemonstrated in annex D. The specification of criteria for vector changes is be yond the present scope of this part of IS0 7919.

icant. In other cases the vibration sensitivity may be such that, although the vibration magnitude for a particular machine is satisfactory when measured under certain steady-state conditions, it can become unsatisfactory if these conditions change. It is recommended that in cases where of the vibration sensitivity of a machine agreement should be reached between and supplier about the necessity and testing or theoretical assessment. some aspect is inouestion, the customer extent of any

. 5.8

The vibration measured on a particular machine may be sensitive to changes in the steady-state operational condition. In most cases this is not signif-

5

IS 14773 ( Part 1) : 2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996

Annex A (normative) General principles for adopting evaluation criteria for different types of machine
Introduction The specification of evaluation criteria for shaft vibration is dependent upon a wide range of factors and the criteria adopted will vary significantly for different types of machine and, in some cases, for different rotors in the same coupled line. It is important, therefore, to ensure that valid criteria are adopted for a particular machine and that criteria which relate to certain types of machine are not erroneously applied to other types. (For example, evaluation criteria for a high-speed compressor operating in a petrochemical plant are likely to be different from those for large turbo-generators.) At present, there are a limited number of published standards on shaft vibration. Many of these are for specialized machinery and do not have widespread applications in other fields. This annex establishes a basis for specifying evaluation criteria in terms of peak-to-peak vibration values (see annex B). No attempt has been made to specify vibration values; these will be given for different classes and types of machinery in the relevant parts of IS0 7919 as they are developed.

e) the rotational frequency of the shaft;
f) 9) the bearing type, clearance and diameter; the function, output der consideration; the relative flexibility and foundations: and size of the machine un-

h)

of the bearings,

pedestals

i)

the rotor mass and flexibility.

Clearly, this range of factors makes it impossible to define unique evaluation criteria which can be applied to all machines. Different criteria, which have been derived from operational experience, are necessary for different machines, but at best they can only be regarded as guidelines and there will be occasions where machines will operate safely and satisfactorily outside any general recommendations.

A.2

Evaluation criteria

A.1

Factors affecting evaluation

criteria

Two evaluation criteria are used to assess shaft vibration. One criterion considers the magnitude of the observed broad-band shaft vibration; the second considers changes in magnitude, irrespective of whether they are increases or decreases. A.2.1 rated Criterion I: Vibration magnitude at

There are a wide range of different factors which need to be taken into account when specifying evaluation criteria for shaft vibration measurements. Amongst these are the following:

speed under steady operating conditions
This criterion is concerned with defining limits for shaft vibration magnitude consistent with acceptable dynamic loads on the bearing, adequate margins on the radial clearance envelope of the machine, and acceptable vibration transmission into the support structure and foundation. The maximum shaft vibration magnitude observed at each bearing is assessed against four evaluation zones established from international experience. FigureA. shows a plot of allowable vibration, ir terms of peak-to-peak shaft vibration, against the op

a) the purpose for which the measurement

is made (for example, the requirements for ensuring that running clearances are maintained will, in general, be different from those if the avoidance of excessive kinetic load on the bearing is the main concern); made absolute or

b) the type of measurement
relative vibration;

cl the quantities measured (see annex B);
/ d) `the position where the measurement is made;

6

IS 14773(Partl):2000 IS0 7919-l : 1999

erating spemedrange. It is generally accepted that limiting vibration values will decrease as the operating speed of the machine increases, but the actual values and their rate of change with speed will vary for different types of machine. A.2.1.1 Evaluation zones

is specified on the basis of the change in broad-band vibration magnitude occurring under steady-state operating conditions. When Criterion II is applied, the vibration measurements being compared shall be taken at the same transducer location and orientation, and under approximately the same machine operating conditions. Significant changes from the normal vibration magnitudes should be investigated so that a dangerous situation may be avoided. Criteria for assessing changes in broad-band vibration for monitoring purposes are given in other parts of IS0 7919. However, it should be noted that some changes may not be detected unless the discrete frequency components are monitored (see 5.7). A.2.3

The following typical evaluation zones are defined to permit a qualitative assessment of the shaft vibration on a given machine and provide guidelines on possible actions. Zone A: The vibration of newly commissioned chines would normally fall within this zone. ma-

Zone B: Machines with vibration within this zone are normally considered acceptable for unrestricted longterm operation. Zone C: Machines with vibration within this zone are normally considered unsatisfactory for long-term continuous operation. Generally, the machine may be operated for a limited period in this condition until a suitable opportunity arises for remedial action. Zone D: Vibration values within this zcne are normally considered to be of sufficient severity to cause damage to the machine. A.2.1.2 Evaluation zone limits

Operational

limits

__

For long-term operation, it is common practice for some machine types to establish operational vibration limits. These limits take the form of ALARMS and TRIPS. ALARMS: To provide a warning that a defined value of vibration has been reached or a significant change has occurred, at which remedial action may be necessary. In general, if an ALARM situation occurs, operation can continue for a period whilst investigations are carried out to identify the reason for the change in vibration and define any remedial action. TRIPS: To specify the magnitude of vibration beyond which further operation of the machine may cause damage. If the TRIP value is exceeded, immediate action should be taken to reduce the vibration or the machine should be shut down. Different operational limits, reflecting differences in dynamic loading and support stiffness, may be specified for different measurement positions and directions. Where appropriate, guidelines for specifying ALARM and TRIP criteria for specific machine types are given in other parts of IS0 7919. A.2.3.1 Setting of ALARMS

Numerical values assigned to the zone boundaries are not intended to serve as acceptance specifications, which shall be subject to agreement between the machine manufacturer and the customer. However, these values provide guidelines for ensuring that gross deficiencies or unrealistic requirements are avoided. In certain cases, there may be specific features associated with a particular machine which would require different zone boundary values (higher or lower) to be used. In such cases, it is normally necessary to explain the reasons for this and, in particular, to confirm that the machine will not be endangered by operating with higher vibration values. A.2.2

Criterion magnitude

II: Change in vibration

This criterion provides an assessment of a change in vibration magnitude from a previously established reference value. A significant increase or decrease in broad-band vibration magnitude may occur which requires some action even though zone C of Criterion I has not been reached. Such changes can be instantaneous or progressive with time and may indicate that damage has occurred or be a warning of an impending failure or some other irregularity. Criterion II

The ALARM values may vary considerably, up or down, for different machines. The values chosen will normally be set relative to a baseline value determined from experience for the measurement position or direction for. that particular machine. It is recommended that the ALARM value should be set higher than the baseline by an amount equal to a

,

-7

IS

IS0

14773(Partl):2990 7919-l : 1996

proportion of the upper limit of zone B. If the baseline is low, the ALARM may be below zone C. Where there is no established baseline, for example with a new machine, the initial ALARM setting should be based either on experience with other similar machines or relative to agreed acceptance values. After a period of time, the steady-state baseline value will be established and the ALARM setting should be adjusted accordingly. If the steady-state baseline changes (for example after a machine overhaul), the ALARM setting should be revised accordingly. Different operational ALARM settings may then exist for different bearings on the machine, reflecting differences in dynamic loading and bearing support stiff nesses.

A.2.3.2

Setting of TRIPS

The TRIP values will generally relate to the mechanical integrity of the machine and be dependent on any specific design features which have been introduced to enable the machine to withstand abnormal dynamic forces. The values used will, therefore, generally be the same for all machines of similar design and would not normally be related to the steady-state baseline value used for setting ALARMS. There may, however, be differences for machines of different design and it is not possible to give guidelines for absolute TRIP values. In general, the TRIP value will be within zone C or D.

Zone 0

I
I
4

Relewnt

speed range
J

I
I

I

i
Rotational frequency of shaft -

NOTE - The actual values for vibration at the zone boundaries and the relevant speed range will vary for different types of machine. It is important to select the relevant criteria and to avoid incorrect extrapolation. Rgure

A.1 -

Generalized sxample of evaluation criteria

IS 14773(Part1):2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996

Annex B (informative) Derivation of measurement quantities

B.l

Mechanics of shaft vibration

The vibration of a rotating shaft is characterized at any axial location by a kinetic orbit, which describes how the position of the shaft centre varies with time. Figure 6.1 shows a typical ~orbit. The shape of the orbit depends upon the dynamic characteristics of the shaft, the bearings and the bearing supports or foundations, the axial location on the rotor and the form of vibration excitation. For example, if the excitation takes the form of a single-frequency sinusoidal force, the orbit is an ellipse, which can in certain circumstances be a circle or straight line, and the time taken for the shaft centre to complete one circuit of the ellipse is equal to the period of the excitation force. One of the most important excitation forces is rotor unbalance, in which the excitation frequency is equal to the rotational frequency of the shaft. However, there are other forms of excitation, such as rotor crosssection asymmetry, for which the frequency is equal to multiples of the rotational frequency of the shaft. Where the vibration arises as a result of, for example, destabilizing self-excited forces, the orbit will not normally be of a simple shape, but will change form over a period of time and it will not necessarily be harmonically related. In general, the vibration of the shaft may arise from a number of different sources and, therefore, a complex orbit will `be produced, which is the vectorial sum of the effects of the individual excitation forces.

the vibratory motion of the non-rotating parts. If the transducers measure relative vibration, then the measured orbit will be relative to that part of the structure upon which the transducers are mounted.

B.3
B.3.1

Measurement
Time-integrated

quantities mean position

The mean values of the shaft displacement dx,j4, in any two specified orthogonal directions, relative to a reference position, as shown in figure B. 1, are defined by integrals with respect to time, as shown in the following equations:

y=A-

4, - t1 ,,

Ir,

x(t)dt

. . . (B.1)

B.2

Measurement

of shaft vibration

At any axial location, the orbit of the shaft can be obtained by taking measurements with two vibration transducers mounted in different radial planes, separated by 90" (this is the preferred separation, but small deviations from this do not cause significant errors). If the angle between the transducer locations is sub stantially different from 90". a vector resolution into the orthogonal directions will be required. If the transducers measure absolute vibration, then the orbit will be the absolute orbit of the shaft independent of

where x(t) and y(t) are the timedependent alternating values of displacement relative to the reference position, and (t2 - t,) is large relative to the period of the lowest frequency vibration component. In the case of absolute vibration measurements, the reference position is fixed in space. For relative vibration measurements, these values give an indication of the mean position of the shaft relative to the non-rotating parts at the axial location where the measurements are made. Changes in the values may be due to a number of factors, such as bearing/foundation movements, changes in oil film characteristics, etc., which normally occur slowly relative to the period of the vibration components which make up the alternating values. It should be noted that, in general, the time-integrated mean position in any direction differs from the position defined by taking ~half the summation of the maximum and minimum displacement values (see figure B.2). However, when the shaft vibration is a single frequency and sinusoidal, then the locus of the shaft centre will be an ellipse. In such circumstances,

9

IS 14773 ( Part 1) : 2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996

the time-integrated mean position in any direction of measurement will be the same as the position identified by taking half the summation of the maximum and minimum displacement values.

Peak-to-peak vibration
6.3.2

displacement

of the

approximation for the maximum peak-to-peak displacement value to .be obtained. For more precise determinations, it is necessary to examine the shaft orbit in more detail, as for example with an oscilloscope. The three most common methods for obtaining satisfactory approximations are described in 8.3.2.1 to B.3.2.3. 6.3.2.1 Method A: Resultant value of the peak-to-peak displacement values measured two orthogonal directions The value of So,),,,,, following equatron: I can be approximated

The primary quantities of interest in shaft measurements are the alternating values which describe the shape of the orbit. Consider the kinetic shaft orbit shown in figureB.2 and assume that there are two transducers A and B mounted SO" apart, which are used to measure the shaft vibration. At some instant, the shaft centre will be coincident with the point K on the orbit and the corresponding instantaneous value of shaft displacement from the mean position will be S,. However, in the plane of the transducers A and B, the instantaneous values of shaft displacement from the mean position will be S,, and Sa,, respectively, where s: = S& + s,2, . . , (8.3)

in

from the

. . . (B.4) The use of equation (8.4) as an approximation when the vibration is predominantly at rotational frequency will generally over-estimate the value of S@,),,, with a maximum error of approximately 40 %. The maximum error occurs for a circular orbit and progressively reduces as the orbit becomes flatter, with a zero error for the degenerate case of a straight line orbit. B.3.2.2 Method B: Taking the maximum value of the peak-to-peak displacement values measured in two orthogonal directions The value of SC,),,, following equation: can be approximated from the

The values of S,, S,, and Sa, will vary with time as the shaft centre moves around the orbit; the corresponding waveforms measured by each transducer are shown in figure B.2.
NOTE 6 If the orbit is elliptical, then these waveforms would be pure sine waves of the same frequency.

The peak-to-peak value of the displacement in the plane of transducer A (SAcr,_$is defined as the difference between the maximum and minimum displacements of transducer A and similarly for Sa for transducer B. Clearly SAtppJ and SafppJ values will not be equal and, in general, they will be different from similar measurements made in other radial directions. Hence, the value of the peak-to-peak displacement is dependent on the direction of the measurement. Since these measurement quantities are independent of the absolute value of the mean position, it is not necessary to use systems which can measure both the mean and alternating values. Peak-to-peak displacement is the unit which has been used most frequently for monitoring vibration of rotating machines. Whereas measurement of the peak-to-peak displacement in any two given orthogonal directions is a simple matter, the value and angular position of the maximum peak-to-peak displacement shown in figure 8.2 is difficult to measure directly. However, in practice, it has been found acceptable to use alternative measurement quantities which enable a suitable

s(,)rnax = sA(~) OrsB(~)
whichever The the will with is the greater.

...

use of equation (B.5) as an approximation when vibration is predominantly at rotational frequency generally under-estimate the value of Sf,),,,, a maximum error of approximately 30 %.

The maximum error occurs for a flat orbit and progressively reduces as the orbit becomes circular, with a zero error when the orbit is circular. B.3.2.3 Method C: Measurement of S,,,

The instantaneous value of the shaft displacement can be defined by S,, as shown in figure B.2, which is derived from the transducer measurements SA, and SB1_ using equation (B.3). There is a point on the orbit, defined by point P in figure B.2, where the displacement from the mean position is a maximum. The value of S, corresponding to this position is denoted bY St-n,,* which is defined as the maximum value of displacement

10

IS 14773 (Part 1) : 2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996 3

. . .(B.6)

The point on the orbit where S,,, occurs does not necessarily coincide with the point where S, and Sa are at their maximum values. Clearly, for a particular orbit, there is one value of S,,, and this is independent of the position of the measuring transducers provided that the mean position 0 does not change. The value of SC,,),,, following equatron: S@,)fn,X = 2 4-n,, can be approximated from the

Equation (B.71 will be correct when the two orthogonal measurements from which S,,, is derived are of single-frequency sinusoidal form. In most other cases, this equation will over-estimate So,),,, since this depends on the nature of the harmonic vibration components present. It should be noted that implicit in the definition of smax is the requirement to know the time-integrated mean value of the shaft displacement. The measurement of S,,, is, therefore, limited to those measuring systems which can measure both the mean and alternating values. Furthermore, the evaluation of S,,,, from the signals produced by two vibration transducers, is a relatively complex computational procedure requiring specialized instrumentation.

. . . (B.7)

Y

F

Kinetic orbit of shaft

\

-Reference

axes

_L
0 K x L Z 44 r(t) 1 Mean values of shaft displacement Mean position of orbit instantaneous position of shaft centre

I

X

Time-dependent

alternating

values of shaft displacement

Figure B.l -

Kinetic orbit of shaft

11

IS 14773(Partl):2OOQ IS0 7919-1 : 1996

TransducerB

Transducer

A waveform

i

wavetorm

X

x, Y
0

Fixed reference axes Time-integrated mean position of orbit Time-integrated mean values of shaft displacement instantaneous position of shaft centre Position of shaft for maximum displacement from time-integrated mean position Instantaneous value of shaft displacement Maximum value of shaft displacement from time-integrated mean position 0 Instantaneous values of shaft displacement in directions of transducers A and B, respectively Maximum value of peak-to-peak displacement Peak-to-peak values of shaft displacement in directions of transducers A and B, respectively

2, y K P
Sl %-KiX sA1n sBl sb-dm= SAW) sB~~)

Figure B.2 -

Kinetic orbit of shaft -

Definition of displacement

12

IS 14773 (Part 1) : 2000 Iso 7919-l : 1996

Annex C (informative) Recommendations for instrumentation to be used for measuring relative -and absolute shaft vibration
dependent alternating displacement value over the frequency range of interest and the mean position of the shaft relative to the support structure. The latter provides a means of setting the transducer at the correct gap position and assessing the amount of runout obtained at low speed when stable bearing oil films have been established but centrifugal effects are negligible. (For example, on a machine of rated speed 3 000 r/min, the runout could be assessed at a speed of the order of 200 rImin.) It is recognized that other measuring systems, as shaft-riding relative motion probes, are used. such

Introduction Three types of measurement system are in common use for the measurement of transverse shaft vibration, each using either one or two measuring directions. One type uses non-contacting transducers which measure the relative motion between the shaft and a bearing; another uses shaft-riding seismic transducers which measure the absolute motion of the shaft; and the third provides measurement of the absolute motion of the shaft by combining the outputs of non-contacting transducers and structurally mounted (e.g. on the bearing housing) seismic transducers.
NOTE 7 In the examples given inclauses C.l to C.3, two transducers are described mounted 90' apart in the same transverse plane perpendicular to the shaft axis. However, in certain cases, measurement in one direction will suffice. Bee 3.3.)

NOTE 8 Caution should be exercised when interpreting slow-roll runout measurements, as they can be affected by. for example, temporan/ bows, erratic movements of the journal within the bearing clearance, axial movements, etc. \,

C. 1 Relative-motion measurement system (non-contacting transducers)
FigureC.l presents a schematic diagram of a typical instrument system used to measure the relative motion between the shaft and a structural member (for example, the bearing housing). This system consists of a non-contacting transducer, a local signal conditioner and a readout instrument. During initial installation of the transducer, it is desirable to conduct an in situ calibration of the transducer output versus the gap. It should be noted that machine operating conditions can alter the average gap position. Therefore, care should be taken to ensure operation within the linear range of the transducer. When mounting non-contacting transducers, care should also be taken to ensure that they sense only the shaft vibration and that the accuracy is not affected by any conductive material or magnetic fields in proximity to the transducer. It is recommended that the measurement system should be capable of indicating both the time-

C.2 Absolute-motion measurement system (shaft-riding with seismic transducers)
FigureC.2 instrument presents a schematic diagram of a typical

system used to measure the absolute motion of the shaft. This system consists of a seismic transducer (velocity type or accelerometer) mounted on a shaft-rider, a shaft-rider support system which permits the shaft-rider to follow accurately the motion of the shaft, and a readout instrument.
NOTE 9 No measurement of the shaft mean position relative to the structure is possible with this system.

The shaft-riding mechanism should accurately transmit the shaft vibration to the seismic transducer, and should be free from chatter or natural frequencies which could adversely affect, or distort, the measurements of shaft vibration within the frequency range of interest. The output of the seismic transducers should be suitably conditloned to provide a signal which gives an accurate measure of the time-dependent alternating displacement value for the shaft.

13

IS 14773 ( Part 1) : 2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996

C.3 Absolute-motion measurement system kombined non-contacting and seismic transducers)
Figure C.3 presents a schematic diagram of a typical instrument system used to measure absolute shaft motion, and which can also be used to measure the absolute motion of the bearing housing and the relative motion of the shaft. This system consists of a non-contacting type of relative-displacement transducer, a seismic transducer (i.e. velocity type or accelerometer), a signal conditioner and a readout instrument. The two transducers should be mounted on a common rigid structure close together with their sensitive axes parallel to ensure that both undergo the same absolute structural motion. The non-contacting transducer portion of the system should be similar to that described in clause C.l, and should provide an output proportional to the relative shaft vibration displacement, as well as gap distance. This output is the resultant of two motions: the motion of the shaft, and the motion of the structure on which the non-contacting transducer is mounted. The output of the seismic transducer, which is proportional to the motion of the structure to which it and

the non-contacting transducer are mounted, should be processed as is necessary to provide a displacement signal. The amplitude and phase of this signal, together with that of the non-contacting relativemotion transducer, should be adjusted and vectorially combined to provide an accurate measure of the absolute motion of the shaft. It should be noted that individual measuring systems can modify the phase and amplitude of the basic signal. Therefore, corrections should be made for these inherent characteristics before vectorial addition. The seismic transducer also provides an output proportional to the absolute vibration of the non-rotating member (for example, that of the bearing housing). The measurement system should be capable of indieating the mean position of the shaft relative to the support structure and the time-dependent alternating displacement value of absolute shaft vibration, which is the vectorial sum of the absolute motion of the structure and the relative motion of the shaft.

C.4 Overall instrument system performance and environmental considerations
System performance and environmental considerations will form the subjects of future International Standards.

local signal
conditioner

Remote readout instrument

+-Optional
.._-

output for alarms/trips, recordingand/or analysis Instruments

.!- Non-contacting transducer
Figure C.l Schematic diagram of a relative-motion measurement transducers (see clause C.l) system using non-contacting

14

IS 14773 ( Part 1) : 2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996

Seismic Signal conditioner Remote readout instrument Optional output for alarms/trips. recording and/or analysis instruments

Machine structure

~Figure C.2 -

Schematic diagram of an absolute-motion measurement system using a shaft-rider mechanism with seismic transducers (see clause C.2)

Local signal conditioner

Local signal

Remote readout instrument

-__-,__I

I
I

Optional output `for alarms/trips, -recording and/or analysis instruments

LNon-contacting

transducer

I

,_-__-.

i
I of

I-

Seismic transducer

-..-_.

Figure C.3 -

Schematic

diagram of an absolute-mojion measurement system using a combination non-contacting and seismic transducers (see clause C.3)

15

IS 14773 ( Part 1) : 2000 IS0 7919-l : 1996

270'

Initial steady-state

vector
4 1-1 =

30 pm, a = 40"

Steady-state vector after change =25pm,a=180" A2 1-1 Change in vibration Vector of change IA;-41 Figure D.l =52pm magnitude /$I - /{I =-5lrn

Comparison

of vebtor change and change in magnitude

for a discrete frequency

component

17

IS 14773 ( Part 1) : 2000 IS0 7919-1 : 1996

Annex E (informative) Bibliography
[l] IS0 2041 :1990, Vibration and shock lary. Vocabu/and-based steam cess of 50 MW. [8] turbine generator sets in ex-

[2]

IS0 5348: 1987, Mechanical vibration and shock - Mechanical mounting of accelerometers. IS0 79192: 1996, Mechanical vibration of nonreciprocating machines Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluation criteria - Part 2: Large /and-based steam turbine generator sets.

[3]

IS0 10816-3:-J, Mechanical vibration - Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements on non-rotating parts - Part 3: Industrial machines with nominal power above 15 kW and nominal speeds between 120 rAmin and 15000 r/min when measured in situ. IS0 10816-4:--", Mechanical vibration - Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements on non-rotating parts - Part 4: Gas turbine driven sets exciuding aircraft derivatives. IS0 10816-5:- 11, Mechanical vibration - Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements on non-rotating parts - Part 5: Machine sets in hydraulic power generating and pumping p/ants. IS0 10816-6:1995, Mechanical vibration Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements on non-rotating parts Part 6: Reciprocating machines with power ratings above 700 kW. Rotating shaft vibration IS0 10817-I :--`I, measurement systems - Part 1: Relative and absolute signal sensing of radial vibration from rotating shafts.

[9] [4] IS0 79193:1996, Mechanical vibration of nonreciprocating machines Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluation criteria - Part 3: Coupled industrial machines. [lo] [5] IS0 79194.1996, Mechanical vibration of nonreciprocating machines Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluation criteria - Part 4: Gas turbine sets. [l l]

:

[S] IS0 7919-5:-l', Mechanical vibration of nonreciprocating machines Measurements on rotating shafts and evaluation criteria - Part 5: Machine sets in hydraulic power generating and pumping p/ants. [7] IS0 10816-2:1996, Mechanical vibration Evaluation of machine vibration by measurements on non-rotating parts Part 2: Large

[12]

1) To be published.

18

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established-under the Bureau oflndian StandardsAct, 1986 to promote harmoniaus development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade dekignations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbcrok' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'.
This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. ME 28/LM 04 ( 0393 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 32376 17 323 3841 3378499,3378561 337 86 26, 337 86 62 I 60 38 43 1 60 20 25 23502 16,2350442 I 235 15 19,235 23 15 8329295,8327858 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31,323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIFARH 160022

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at New India Printing Press, Khuja; India

