UMATA Ah IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


AMA ted pang area (AU) — 
ATA SENT 


ATT 1 AT SAA SATA 


Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) — 
General Reguirements 


Part 1 Applications Other Than Military 
Purposes 


ICS 49.020 


O BIS 2023 


AAA AH OT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Se ey WAH HAT, 9 TETU IE THK AMT, Ag Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2023 Price Group 7 


Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Sectional Committee, TED 32 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division 
Council. 


It is the responsibility of the owners, users or manufacturers who intend to design, build or maintain a UAS for 
Indian context to comply with requirements of this standard. The intent is to lay a foundation of requirements which 
enables the manufacturer to produce safe and reliable UASs in the interest of all stakeholders. 


This standard is being published in two parts. The first part in this series is applicable for design of UAS other 
than military application (with or without armament, explosives, weapons, EM emitters etc). The other part in this 
series is under consideration by the committee for military applications. 


The design of an UAS is done with a specific operational context and mission in mind, the materials are chosen 
accordingly and the maintenance procedure is thus designed as per reliability computations. 


The manufacturer is advised to understand the scope of standard, the mission requirements, and the context of 
operation when designing a UAS. The certification process can be overwhelming, especially for manufacturers 
intending to perform BVLoS operations. The requirements are stringent due to required safety, reliability and 
security measures and UASs shall also comply with prevailing rules and regulations in the country as notified by 
the government. 


UAS operations impose several risks. It is evident that safety and security of involved people, organizations and 
the environment are of prime importance and pure business objectives shall not take precedence. A good 
knowledge of disciplines involved, engineering maturity and a sense of responsibility is expected from the 
manufacturer to create safe and reliable products. 


Considerable assistance has been derived from following references: 


a) Equipment, systems, and installations, SC-RPAS.1309-03; 
b) DO-178C — Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and Equipment Certification; and 
c) DO-254 — Design Assurance Guidance for Airborne Electronic Hardware. 


The manufacturer is also advised to follow IS/ISO 9001 : 2015 for process and quality compliance. 

The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 2022 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded-off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


Indian Standard 


UNMANNED AERIAL VEHICLES (UAV) — GENERAL 
REQUIREMENTS 


PART 1 APPLICATIONS OTHER THAN MILITARY PURPOSES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard applies to all the constituent elements 
of a unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) or unmanned 
aircraft systems (UAS); for design, fabrication and 
maintenance of all the categories of UASs such as 
nano — up to 250 g, micro — 250 g to 2 kg, small — 
2 kg to 25 kg, medium — 25 kg to 150 kg and large — 
greater than 150 kg MTOW (maximum take-off 
weight). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard given below contains provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of the 
standard given below: 


IS No. Title 
IS 16046 (Part2): Secondary cells and batteries 
2018 containing alkaline or other 


non-acid electrolytes  — 
Safety requirements for 
portable sealed secondary 
cells and for batteries made 
from them for use in portable 
applications: Part 2 Lithium 
systems (second revision) 


3 UAS CONFIGURATION 


Airframe is the main body of a UAS. It is typically 
where all the components of a UAS are housed. The 
classification of UAS is given in Table 1. 


4 POWER SOURCES 


According to the type of use, the power sources for 
any UAS, the classification is given in Table 2. 


Table 1 UAS Types 


(Clause 3) 
SI No. UAS Type Classification 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Multi-copter (tri, quad, hexa, octa, etc), including tethered UASs MC 
11) Fixed wing FW 
iii) Tilt wing TW 
iv) Helicopters HE 
v) Gyrocopter GC 
vi) Fixed wing multi-copter hybrid (VTOL) including tilt rotor VT 
vii) Others OT 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


Table 2 Power Sources 


(Clause 4) 
SI No. Power Source Classification 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) Battery 
ii) Fuel cell F 
iii) Internal combustion engine (ICE) 
iv) Turbine T 
v) Internal combustion engine (ICE) — Battery hybrid IBH 
vi) Turbine-battery hybrid TBH 
vii) Internal combustion engine (ICE) — Fuel cell hybrid IFH 
viii) Turbine-fuel cell hybrid TFH 
ix) All A 
x) Any other X 


5 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 General 


5.1.1 The manufacturer shall define the operational 
context of the UAS. 


5.1.2 The manufacturer shall take into account the 
operational environment constraints of the UAS. 
This could be due to the zone in which it operates 
such as railway infrastructure, electrical wires, 
prohibited flying zones, the weather/climate and any 
other imposed or implied constraints. 


5.1.3 The manufacturer shall perform a hazard 
analysis and take the results into account to improve 
the system design. 


5.1.4 The result and actions identified by hazard 
analysis shall be used to eliminate risk by including 
safety features in the design and operational 
procedures. 


5.1.5 The overall design shall demonstrate and 
provide confidence in its operational capability. 


5.1.6 The manufacturer shall ensure the quality of 
material selected and used for manufacturing of parts 
meets the design criteria. 


5.1.7 The manufacturer shall demonstrate that the 
size of the UAS has been derived mathematically by 
considering mission requirements (for example, 
required endurance, sensors/payload tocarry, range). 


5.1.8 The manufacturer shall compute the payload 
capacity of the UAS. 


5.1.9 The manufacturer shall determine the MTOM 
(maximum take-off mass) for the UAS. 


5.1.10 A factor of safety (preferably 1.5) for 
computing ultimate loads shall be used. (ultimate 
load = 1.5 x limit load). 


5.1.11 The manufacturer shall determine the CG of 
the UAS, changes due to variation in payload, fuel 
usage, and movement of articulated mechanism if 
any and associated operating limitations. 


5.1.12 The design conditions of the UAS at the time 
of determining its mass and center of gravity shall be 
well defined and easily repeatable. 


5.1.13 The structural design shall be such that it is 
immune to the vibrations caused by the rotors/ 
fans/propellers over all the speed ranges of the UAS 
operation. 


5.1.14 The structural design shall account for loads 
and changes caused by additional accessories and 
systems (for example, camera gimbal, spray system 
etc), their malfunctions, failures on the UAS 
performance. 


5.1.15 The loads resulting from a likely failure of a 
system, component, engine, rotor or propeller shall 
be determined. 


5.1.16 The manufacturer shall establish critical 
flight loads for symmetrical and asymmetrical 
loading at all speeds and load factors at and within 
the boundaries of the maneuver and gust envelope. 


5.1.17 Pressurized compartments shall be designed 
to sustain pressurization and depressurization 
fatigue cycles. 


5.1.18 Pressurized compartments shall withstand 
the pressure differential loads corresponding to the 
maximum relief valve setting multiplied by a factor 
of 1.33. 


5.1.19 The UAS structure shall be designed to 
withstand pressure differential loads from zero to a 
maximum setting of the relief valve. 


5.1.20 When a hydraulic system is used, the 
manufacturer shall assure that they are designed for 
all loading conditions in flight. 


5.1.21 When a hydraulic system is used, its fluid 
shall be an approved for aviation usage. 


5.1.22 When a hydraulic system is used, it shall be 
leak proof. 


5.1.23 The system containing high energy rotating 
parts shall be designed to contain failure, fragments 
within itself without damaging any other structure or 
component to ensure a continued safe flight. 


5.1.24 The mechanical design shall be such that it is 
impossible to assemble the product incorrectly. 


5.1.25 Tethered UAS manufacturer shall perform 
the aerodynamic, mechanical load on the UAS 
created by winds to demonstrate structural integrity 
of tether and UAS. 


5.2 Failure Condition Classification 


The classification of different failure conditions is 
given below and corresponding failure probability is 
given in Table 3. 


5.2.1 Catastrophic — A failure condition which 
results in loss of life, fatality, damage to RPA 
(remotely piloted aircraft), loss of RPA, property. 


5.2.2 Hazardous — A failure condition which 
would result in heavy work load for remote pilot, 
struggle to control the RPA and no possibility of 
fatality, no damage to RPA or property. 


5.2.3 Major — A failure leading to reduction of 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


safety margin, reduced efficiency of pilot, 
respecting airspace rules, capability reduction. 


5.2.4 Minor — A failure not impacting safety, may 
lead to change of flight plan, increase in workload of 
remote pilot. 


5.2.5 No Effect — A failure that has no impact on 
safety of RPA operational capability. 


6 FLIGHT ENVELOPE 


6.1 The manufacturer shall determine the flight 
envelope of the UAS. 


6.2 The manufacturer shall determine the flight 
loads resulting from a likely failure of a UAS 
system, component, engine, rotor or propeller. 


6.3 The manufacturer shall establish critical flight 
loads for symmetrical and asymmetrical loading 
from all combinations of flight loads at speeds and 
load factors at and within the boundaries of the 
maneuver and gust envelope. 


6.4 The manufacturer shall demonstrate that 
vibration, including air resonance, and buffeting 
does not result in structural damage up to the 
maximum design speed. 


6.5 The manufacturer shall determine the structural 
design loads resulting from taxi, take-off, launch, 
landing, handling, and transportation conditions on 
the applicable surfaces in normal and adverse 
attitudes, configurations, and conditions. 


6.6 The designed flight envelope shall demonstrate 
the inclusion of safety margins as specified by the 
standard. 


6.7 A means shall be provided to prevent exceeding 
the approved flight envelope. 


Table 3 Failure Condition Mapping 


(Clause 5.2) 
SI No. Design Assurance Level (DAL) Failure Probability (Per Flight Hour) 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Catastrophic (A) < 10° 

ii) Hazardous (B) < 10° 

iii) Major (C) < 10% 

iv) Minor (D) < 10° 

v) No effect (E) No requirement 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


7 CONTROL AND STABILITY 


The UAS shall be controllable and maneuverable, 
within the designed flight envelope. This shall be 
demonstrated: 


a) During all phases of flight, including ground 
phases where applicable; 

b) At all loading conditions for which 
certification is requested; 

c) During configuration changes where 


applicable; 
d) With likely propulsion system failure; 


With reversible flight control if likely to 
occur; 


O 
— 


f) In all degraded operating modes of the flight 
control system(s); and 


= 


Considering all effects of sensors, and 
computational errors and delay. 


g 


8 PERFORMANCE 


8.1 The maximum range travelled in still air shall be 
determined at MTOM. 


8.2 The maximum endurance capability shall be 
determined in still air at MTOM. 


8.3 The maximum operational altitude shall be 
determined at MTOM. 


8.4 The ceiling height shall be determined at MTOM. 


8.5 The manufacturer shall determine the minimum 
safe steady flight speed for each flight configuration 
and phases of flight for the UAS. 


8.6 The minimum safe speed determination shall 
take into account the most adverse conditions for 
each flight configuration within the designed flight 
envelope. 


8.7 Where applicable, the stall speed of the UAS 
shall be determined. 


8.8 The manufacturer shall generate performance 
data in view of the flight envelope, accounting for 
varying atmospheric conditions, cooling needs, and 
other demands on power sources. 


8.9 The manufacturer shall determine the most 
critical flight phase for the UAS and generate 
minimum performance data for that phase. 


8.10 The minimum performance operating limitations 
shall be shared with the operator along with the 
operating procedure in the user or flight manual. 


8.11 The manufacturer shall demonstrate the 
minimum performance within operating limitations 
as per the user or flight manual. 


9 PROPULSION 
9.1 General 


9.1.1 The manufacturer shall compute the power, 
thrust and energy requirements for the mission 
profile. 


9.1.2 The manufacturer shall select the power/ 
thrust device to meet mission requirements with 
adequate safety margins. 


9.1.3 Functions/systems that affect available power 
shall be taken into account for sizing the 
propulsion system. 


9.1.4 The power source shall meet the mission 
requirements with reserves for at least 10 minutes 
of flight time. 


9.1.5 For vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) 
designs, thrust to MTOM ratio greater than 
1.5 shall be used. 


9.1.6 The manufacturer shall determine the total 
thrust generated by the rotor(s), propeller(s), a 
turbine engine used for propulsion to demonstrate 
the thrust to weight ratio. 


9.1.7 The electronic speed controller shall be selected 
by considering a safety factor greater than 1.5 above 
the peak current consumption of the motor. 


9.1.8 The propeller speed and pitch of the propeller 
shall be computed for safe operation under all 
conditions. 


9.1.9 Propulsion system startup and shutdown 
procedure shall be clearly documented and supplied 
to the operator. 


9.1.10 Propulsion system operation conditions and 
operating limits shall be clearly documented and 
supplied to the operator. 


9.1.11 Emergency recovery procedure for propulsion 
system shall be clearly documented and supplied 
to the operator. 


9.1.12 It shall be possible to shut down an engine or 
restart a stopped engine to ensure a safe sustained 
flight in case of undesired event. 


9.1.13 All critical parameters for safe operation of 
propulsion system shall be available to the operator 
on the ground. 


9.1.14 A UAS intended to be flown in heavy rain, 
snow, ice conditions shall: 


a) Prevent accumulation of water, snow, ice in 
the engine; and 


b) Demonstrate sustained power plant 
operations due to ingested water, snow and 
ice under such conditions. 


9.1.15 A UAS not designed to fly in rain, snow, ice 
conditions shall: 


a) Offer protection of the propulsion system by 
avoiding exposure to such conditions; and 


b) Define operating limitations to prevent any 
inadvertent entry into rain, snow, ice 
conditions during the flight. 


9.1.16 Where applicable, the transformed high 
energy gases shall leave the propulsion system 
unobstructed without adversely affecting the 
structure and/or any other subsystem on board. 


9.1.17 For all the power sources, the manufacturer 
shall demonstrate the UAS for steady output and fail 
safe/protection mechanism shall be available in case 
of abrupt output. 


9.2 IC Engine 


9.2.1 A UAS using IC engine(s), turbine engine(s) 
shall ensure that appropriate cooling measures are 
part of design and exhaust gases are removed so as 
not to create hazard for other components and 
structure. 


9.2.2 The IC engine performance parameters shall 
be monitored to sustain optimal and safe operation 
over different flight phases and alert pilot about 
abnormal operation. 


9.3 Turbine Engine 


9.3.1 A UAS using turbine engine(s) shall ensure 
that appropriate cooling measures are part of design 
and exhaust gases are removed so as not to create 
hazard for other components and structure. 


9.3.2 The turbine engine performance parameters 
shall be monitored to sustain optimal and safe 
operation over different flight phases and alert pilot 
about abnormal operation. 


9.4 Fuel Cell System 


9.4.1 A UAS using turbine engine(s) shall ensure 
that appropriate cooling measures are part of design 
and exhaust gases are removed so as not to create 
hazard for other components and structure. 


9.4.2 The fuel cell system shall monitor its 
performance parameters to sustain optimal and safe 
operation over different flight phases to alert pilot 
about abnormal operation. 


9.5 Battery Systems 


The battery system shall comply with requirements 
of IS 16046 (Part 1). 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


9.6 Energy Storage 


9.6.1 The energy source could be liquid, gaseous 
fuel or a rechargeable battery. 


9.6.2 Energy source shall be placed in such a way as 
to minimize the heat exposure to electronic and 
structural elements. 


9.6.3 Energy source shall be placement and designed 
to prevent any hazardous event (fuel leak, fire, 
explosion risk). 


9.6.4 Energy storage system shall be designed to 
store energy required for the mission profile with 
required safety margins. 


9.6.5 Energy storage system shall be designed to 
be redundant and independent to avoid single event 
linked failure. 


9.6.6 Ignition source shall be placed as far as 
possible from the energy storage. 


9.6.7 It shall be possible to isolate a faulty energy 
storage system. 


9.6.8 Energy storage system shall ensure 
uninterrupted supply of energy to all required 
systems under all conditions except if an equipment 
fails and it requires isolation. 


9.6.9 Energy distribution system shall sustain 
varying energy demands or fluctuations due to 
system needs. 


9.6.10 Energy storage system shall be designed to 
sustain lighting strikes when lightening exposureis 
likely and certification is requested. 


9.6.11 Energy storage shall be designed and 
manufactured to avoid occurrence of hazardous 
event during refill/recharge. 


9.6.12 Energy storage system shall be designed to 
prevent contamination during storage and supply of 
energy. 


9.6.13 Energy storage system shall be capable of 
jettisoning energy safely if this function is 
provided. 


10 FUNCTIONS AND SYSTEMS 
10.1 General 


10.1.1 The sensor(s) shall be chosen such that 
they meet or exceed the minimum mission 
reguirements and as laid down for the data provided 
by sensors in flight data recorder (FDR) 
reguirements. 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


10.1.2 The system design shall be such that the DAL 
requirement is satisfied. 


10.1.3 All critical flight data required for safe 
operation of the UAS shall be communicated over a 
secure data link to the operator. 


10.1.4 All critical flight data required to monitor 
system operational state and performance shall be 
communicated over a secure data link to the 
operator. 


10.1.5 Operational limitations of the systems shall be 
clearly specified in the operator flight manual. 


11 CYBERSECURITY, DATA, COMMAND 
AND CONTROL 


11.1 Radio link used for communication, the data 
exchanged thereof shall be determined and stated. 


11.2 Cybersecurity, threat and risk analysis shall be 
performed for UAS systems and network. 


11.3 All cybersecurity risks identified shall be 
mitigated as part of design. 


11.4 UAS systems and network shall be protected 
from unauthorized access. 


11.5 Radio link shall use AES 256 encryption or 
better. 


11.6 Radio link used for communication shall be 
jam and spoof proof. 


11.7 Radio link used for communication shall 
comply with EMI/EMC criteria. 


12 ALTITUDE SYSTEM 


12.1 The UAS shall have barometric system with 
capability for sub-scale calibration and setting. 


12.2 Barometric altitude measurement shall be 
compensated for change in air density. 


12.3 A UAS intending to fly long distances and 
integrating to commercial airspace ATM shall be 
installed with a precision altimeter. 


12.4 The altitude shall be reported in feet. 


12.5 Rate of change of altitude shall be reported in 
feet per minute. 


13 SPEED SYSTEM 


13.1 A UAS shall be equipped with reliable and 
redundant speed measurement devices. 


13.2 The speed shall be measured and reported in 
knots. 


14 ANGLE OF ATTACK SYSTEM 


14.1 A fixed wing UAS shall be equipped with an 
angle of attack measurement system. 


14.2 Angle of attack shall be reported in degrees. 
15 NAVIGATION SYSTEMS 


15.1 The UAS shall be equipped with a compass to 
inform the operator of its heading. 


15.2 The compass system shall take into account 
local magnetic variation to correct directional 
information. 


15.3 The heading shall be reported in degrees. 


15.4 The UAS shall be equipped with reliable and 
redundant position determination systems such as 
navigation with Indian constellation (NavIC). 


15.5 The position accuracy shall be better than 5 m. 


15.6 A UAS expecting to be integrated in 
commercial airspace and infrastructure shall be 
equipped with very high frequency omni-directional 
range (VOR), distance measuring equipment 
(DME), instrument landing system (ILS), and 
microwave landing system (MLS) as per regulatory 
requirements. 


16 FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM 


16.1 The flight control system shall be designed 
taking into account the mission requirements, flight 
phases, navigation sources, UTM interfaces, 
integrated sensor characteristics, collision 
avoidance, operating infrastructure and other 
systems intended to be operated. 


16.2 The flight control system behavior shall be 
predictable and follow pilot input for manual flight. 


16.3 A fixed wing UAV FCS shall be designed such 
that the UAS never enters a stall condition. 


16.4 The flight control system shall keep the UAS 
within the designed and defined flight envelope. 


16.5 The flight control system shall impose limits 
for pitch, roll and yaw axes as per UAS design 
parameters to avoid performing aerobatic maneuver. 


16.6 The flight control system shall keep the UAS 
on the pre-defined flight path except in case of 
collision avoidance maneuver, after which it should 
return back to the pre-defined flight path. 


17 GEO-FENCING 


17.1 The UAS may have Geo-fencing capability to 


avoid entering restricted airspaces and perform 
operations in predefined approved area. 


17.2 Based on trajectory parameters, the 
geo-fencing function shall generate alerts for the 
pilot to prevent violation. 


17.3 In case the UAS is approaching the 
geo-fence, an alert shall be given by the UAS to the 
user. 


17.4 In the event of geo-fence violation, the UAS 
shall generate an alert to the pilot for taking 
corrective action in less than 5 s. 


18 LIGHTS 


18.1 The UAS intended for night operations shall 
be eguipped with flashing anti-collision strobe 
lights: 


a) Aviation green on the right extreme edge, 
b) Aviation red on the left extreme edge, and 


c) Aviation white on the longitudinal center 
line, aft of the UAS. 


18.2 The green and red lights shall be placed as far 
apart laterally as possible on the UAS. 


18.3 The white light shall be placed as far as 
possible, towards aft, on the UAS. 


18.4 Taxi and landing lights when reguired shall be 
installed to provide clear visibility and guidance to 
the operator for intended operations. 


18.5 UASs intending to use commercial airspace 
shall comply with civil aviation reguirements (CAR) 
for color, field of coverage, light intensity, flash rate. 


19 ENVIRONMENT SENSING AND 
COLLISION AVOIDANCE 


19.1 An aircraft environment surveillance system 
(AESS) shall be designed to provide the UAS and 
the operator situational awareness supporting 
obstacle detection and avoidance decisions 
including detection of other UASs, flying objects, 
and respect minimum air separation conditions. The 
collision avoidance trajectory shall be generated to 
respect the minimum air separation requirements. 


19.2 The AESS intended for collision avoidance 
shall be able to generate advisory alerts for the 
pilot and provide distance, size and direction of 
movement information on detected objects to the 
operator. 


19.3 The UAS shall use the other UAS trajectory 
information to perform dynamic collision 
avoidance. 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


19.4 When the UAS performs a collision avoidance 
maneuver, the UTM system shall be informed 
automatically about the incident. 


19.5 A collision avoidance system independent of 
UTM shall be available for safe fallback in case 
UTM systems or network failure. 


19.6 The AESS sensors/system selection process 
shall take into account the UAS performance 
parameters to compute sufficient time for safety 
maneuver. 


19.7 The AESS vision sensors/system selection 
process shall take into account the atmospheric, 
weather conditions in which the UAS is designed to 
operate. 


20 ENERGY MEASUREMENT 


20.1 The UAS shall compute the energy remaining 
onboard and communicate to the operator. 


20.2 The UAS shall alert the operator about 
abnormal energy consumption or loss. 


21 LIGHTNING PROTECTION 


21.1 A UAS intended for flying in all weather 
conditions and susceptible to lightning exposure 
shall utilize lightning protection system. 


21.2 The UAS shall be designed to avoid any 
failure and demonstrate sustained flight despite 
lightning exposure. 


21.3 Operating limits shall be clearly specified by 
the manufacturer when the UAS is not certified for 
managing lightning exposure. 


22 ELECTRICAL POWER 


22.1 Power distribution system shall ensure 
uninterrupted supply of power to allrequired systems 
under all conditions except if an equipment fails and 
it requires isolation. 


22.2 Power distribution shall ensure each connected 
system receives power as per its rating and variation 
tolerance limits. 


22.3 It shall be possible to isolate a faulty energy 
distribution system/path. 


22.4 Power distribution system shall sustain varying 
energy demands or fluctuations due to system needs. 


22.5 Electrical wires/cables shall take into account 
the peak voltage and current transmitted over 
electrical cable, its characteristics to size the power 
conductor for the application, including a safety 
factor of 1.2. 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


22.6 The electrical wires carrying strong currents, 
susceptible to heating shall be monitored for 
temperature. 


22.7 Power distribution systems shall be designed to 
sustain lightning strikes if lightning exposureis likely 
as part of mission. 


22.8 Electrical wires shall be fire-resistant. 


22.9 The routing of electrical wires shall be done to 
eliminate interference with electronic signals. 


22.10 Electronic signal shall be transmitted over 
twisted shielded wires to avoid electromagnetic 
interference. 


23 DOORS AND HATCHES 


23.1 Doors, access hatches and canopies shall be 
protected against inadvertent opening in flight. 


23.2 Doors, access hatches and canopies shall be 
monitored for their closed/open state to generate 
alert for the pilot. 


23.3 Doors and hatches designed to be opened 
during flight shall be shown to create no hazard, 
when opened in flight. 


24 FLIGHT DATA RECORDING 


24.1 The UAS shall have the capability to record 
the flight data. 


24.2 The flight data recorder shall maintain a record 
of at least 2 flights, the current and the previous. 


24.3 The recorded values shall meet the designated 
range, resolution and accuracy requirements during 
static and dynamic conditions. 


24.4 The flight data parameters shall be encoded 
and recorded in unicode character set. 


24.5 The manufacturer shall make available the 
flight data recorder data for incident investigation. 


24.6 The manufacturer shall make available the 
flight data decoder for incident investigation. 


25 MOVABLE PAYLOAD (GIMBAL, VIDEO 
SYSTEMS, ETC) 


25.1 Where a video system is used on the UAS, it 
shall be demonstrated not to have any adverse effect 
on the stability and control when the camera 
orientation is changed. 


25.2 Where a moving payload system like gimbal, 
video system etc is used on the UAS, it shall 
not affect the stability and control under all 


circumstances. 
26 SMOKE AND FIRE SAFETY 


26.1 A smoke detection system shall be installed 
onboard to provide an alert to the pilot for taking 
action for avoiding any damage and land the UAS in 
a safe zone. 


26.2 A fire detection system shall be installed 
onboard to provide an alert to the pilot for taking 
action for avoiding any damage and land the UAS in 
a safe zone. 


27 SOFTWARE AND HARDWARE BASED 
RECONFIGURATION 


27.1 Where a UAS” configuration is modifiable 
through software setting, the manufacturer shall 
ensure by design that an invalid setting, combination 
cannot be used for operations. 


27.2 Where a UAS” configuration is modifiable 
through hardware setting, the manufacturer shall 
ensure by design that an invalid setting, combination 
cannot be used for operations. 


28 ONBOARD DIAGNOSTICS 


28.1 Where onboard built-in test, diagnostics are 
implemented, the manufacturer shall ensure the 
results availability to the operator in comprehensible 
language. 


28.2 Where onboard built-in test, diagnostics are 
implemented, the manufacturer shall ensure that 
RPA cannot be flown when safety impact is 
observed. 


28.3 The manufacturer shall ensure that onboard 
built-in test, diagnostics results are securely stored 
and available for incident investigation. 


28.4 Onboard built-in test, diagnostics results 
shall aid the defect resolution and maintenance 
activity. 


29 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 
29.1 General 


29.1.1 The UAS shall have a safety mechanism 
onboard to bring it down automatically and safelyif 
it loses radio contact. The following safety 
mechanism shall be followed: 


a) If the navigation systems are still operation 
fly back to operation base, and 


b) Identify a safe landing spot and land itself. 


29.1.2 The UAS shall find and land in a safe 
location if a smoke/fire event is detected. 


29.1.3 The UAS manufacturer shall ensure the 
following by design for a forced landing, controlled 
crash or autonomous flight termination into a 
designated area as an emergency recovery, the 
procedure should be designed as far as practical so 
that: 


a) Any explosion after the forced landing shall 
not constitute a hazard for people outside the 
designated area; 


b 


= 


Projection of parts (items of mass to be 
considered include, but are not limited to 
engines and payloads), which may 
constitute a potential injury to people, 
outside the designated area, is unlikely; and 


c) The UAS does not constitute a source of 
ignition or leak of flammable fluids in 
hazardous quantities. 


29.1.4 The UAS shall have autonomous flight 
termination system or return to home (RH) option in 
case of safe flight capability degradation or safety 
incident. 


29.1.5 The UAS manufacturer shall ensure that 
systems are operated in safe temperature range as 
specified by the manufacturer. 


29.1.6 It shall be possible to over-ride any 
automatic function to continue safe flight at any 
point of time. 


29.1.7 The automatic system shall not interfere with 
manual operations once the over-ride has been 
selected. 


291.8 The UAS shall find and land in a safe 
location in case of sudden power loss and inability 
to recover. 


29.2 Electronics Installation 


29.2.1 Allthe electronics shall be installed ina way 
to avoid exposure to fire and high-temperature areas. 


29.2.2 Allthe electronics shall be installed in a way 
to limit interference from and to sources of 
electromagnetic interference. 


29.3 Cargo Transportation 


29.3.1 The manufacturer shall design cargo 
compartments to properly secure the cargo to 
prevent shifting and creating a hazard. 


29.3.2 The compartment shall be able to support the 
loads induced by the cargo. 


29.3.3 The cargo compartment shall avoid carrying 
any control and electrical lines to ensure safe flight 
and power controls. 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


29.3.4 A UAS designed to carry cargo shall ensure 
that suspension and securing mechanism is designed 
to carry targeted payload including safety margins 
as specified in mechanical design section. 


29.3.5 A UAS designed to carry external cargo 
shall ensure that suspended cargo does not create 
a hazardous flight situation or to the people on 
ground. 


29.3.6 The manufacturer of a UAS designed to 
carry external cargo shall determine the maximum 
angle of roll and pitch during operation of UAS for 
safe flight control. 


29.3.7 The manufacturer shall clearly indicate in 
the user manual, the capacity and performance limits 
of UAS with the payload. 


29.4 Logistics, Storage, Reconfiguration 


29.4.1 Where a UAS or part of the system is 
designed to be transportable, assembled, 
disassembled, or reconfigured for transportation, the 
following shall apply: 


a) The mechanical design shall be such that 
it is impossible to assemble/reconfigure 
the product incorrectly, 


b 


= 


The conditions defined for the storage and 
transportation shall not adversely affect the 
air worthiness of the UAS, 


c 


wm 


A reconfigurable design shall ensure that a 
bad reconfiguration is not possible for 
mechanical design; and 


d 


= 


A reconfigurable design shall ensure that a 
bad reconfiguration generates an error in 
case of software and electronic 
reconfiguration and flight is not possible. 


29.5 Launch and Recovery Systems 


29.5.1 Launch and recovery system shall comply 
with the design requirements stated in the standard. 


29.5.2 Launch and recovery system shall not create 
a hazardous operating environment or situation 
during the operation. 


29.6 Design Reliability Analysis 


29.6.1 Any single failure or likely combination of 
failures of a power, thrust control, flight control 
system shall not prevent continued safe flight and 
landing of the UAS or the emergency recovery 
procedure. 


29.6.2 Maximum shelf life of the individual 
components shall be determined. 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


29.6.3 Maximum shelf life of the product shall be 
determined. 


29.6.4 The manufacturer shall 
aero-elasticity and fatigue analysis. 


perform an 


29.6.5 The manufacturer shall perform FMECA 
(failure mode, effects and criticality analysis) and 
FMEDA (failure modes effects and diagnostic 
analysis). 


29.6.6 The manufacturer shall determine the 
MTBF (mean time between failures) of electrical, 
electronics, mechanical, batteries and constituent 
elements necessary for safe operation of the UAS. 


30 MANUFACTURING AND ASSEMBLY 
REQUIREMENTS 


30.1 Materials 


30.1.1 The manufacturer shall provide evidence 
that selected material meets the required design 
assurance criteria. 


30.1.2 The housing for electronics components 
shall be of fire-resistant material. 


30.1.3 The structure shall be made of materials 
which can resist deterioration or loss of strength in 
operation due to any cause that is, weathering, 
corrosion and abrasion for the specified life of the 
UAS. 


30.2 Process 


30.2.1 All parts shall be clearly identifiable by 
numbering according to product configuration 
management system of the manufacturer. 


30.2.2 All parts shall be clearly identifiable with 
marking according to product configuration 
management system of the manufacturer. 


30.2.3 Energy storage shall be installed to avoid 
occurrence of hazardous event during refill/ 
recharge. 


30.2.4 Energy storage shall be clearly labeled for 
the type to be recharged/refilled. 


30.2.5 Energy storage shall be clearly labeled for its 
maximum capacity. 


30.2.6 The manufacturing process shall ensure that 
electrical joints are secure and safe to avoid any 
hazardous event. 


30.2.7 Electronics soldering shall be ensured to 
make proper contacts and sustain vibrations induced 
during operations. 


30.2.8 Electrical wires shall be routed such that 
directional change maintains conducting and safety 
characteristics of the cable. 


30.3 Flight Manual 


30.3.1 The manufacturer shall produce and supply 
all necessary and advisory information to the 
operator for safe operations in the flight manual. 


30.3.2 The flight manual shall: 


a) Show the UAS, identify all parts with which 
user can interact, unambiguously state their 
purpose; and 

b) Show the relation to the RPS, identify all 
parts with which user can interact, 
unambiguously state their purpose. 


30.3.3 The flight manual shall describe procedures 
for launch and recovery systems or equipment. 


30.3.4 The flight manual shall describe procedures 
for managing system malfunction during flight and 
recovery. 


30.3.5 The manufacturer shall produce and supply 
emergency procedures to the operator in the flight 
manual. 


30.3.6 The manufacturer shall produce and supply 
operational limitations of the UAS to the operator in 
the flight manual. 


30.3.7 When a launch and recovery system is used, 
the manufacturer shall specify the safe zone 
requirements for operations. 


30.3.8 The manufacturer shall produce and supply 
UAS maintenance procedure to the operator in the 
maintenance manual. 


30.3.9 Clear, unambiguous illustrations and 
instructions for disassembling/assembling, 
reconfiguration, storage, the respective handling 
guidelines, and transportation shall be documented 
in the appropriate manual and supplied to the 
operator. 


31 MAINTENANCE 


31.1 Where the operator can perform maintenance 
of UAS, a maintenance manual shall be provided. 


31.2 Maintenance procedure shall be specified in the 
operator maintenance manual with unambiguous 
instructions. 


31.3 Maintenance procedure specified in the 
operator maintenance manual shall be supported by 
unambiguous and clear illustrations. 


31.4 Replacement parts required to perform 
maintenance on the UAS shall be clearly identified 
and listed. 


31.5 The manufacturer shall identify hazardous 
Operations during maintenance procedure and 
specify them clearly in the maintenance manual. 


32 GROUND HANDLING/SUPPORT SYSTEMS 


32.1 The ground support systems required for UAS 
shall be designed according to the onboardsystem 
handling, installation location and support 
requirements. 


32.2 The ground support systems required for UAS 
shall be designed to prevent any hazardous event to 
the operator or the UAS. 


32.3 Energy storage system ground handling shall 
be designed to avoid occurrence of hazardous event. 


32.4 The manufacturer shall take into account the 
human factors and limits for the design of ground 
support systems. 


33 REMOTE PILOT STATION (RPS) 


33.1 The UAS manufacturer shall determine and 
specify the number of operators needed to safely fly 
the UAS within regulatory constraints, in the flight 
manual. 


33.2 The manufacturer shall specify the physical 
parameters of the required infrastructure to create a 
ground control station, in the flight manual. 


33.3 The manufacturer shall define the 
infrastructure requirements (network, security, 
safety, power, backup power, heating, cooling, 
ventilation, temperature, humidity, noise suppression 
requirements etc) to create an RPS, in the flight 
manual. 


33.4 The manufacturer shall define the operating 
environment conditions for a movable/open 
air/handheld RPS. 


33.5 The manufacturer shall determine the 
human factors and limits for both movable and 
immovable RPS and communicate in the flight 
manual. 


33.6 The RPS elements shall be designed to allow 
the operator accomplish its tasks efficiently. 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


33.7 The RPS elements shall be designed taking 
into account human physiology. 


33.8 The RPS elements shall be color coded and 
labeled to allow the operator to identify and 
interpret them quickly. 


33.9 The ambient lighting in an indoor RPS shall 
be designed to provide clear readability of 
information on indications, display devices, 
markings. 


33.10 The interior or an indoor RPS shall be 
designed to avoid direct and indirect reflection of 
light to operator's eyes. 


33.11 The RPS display(s) shall be readable under 
all ambient light conditions without causing fatigue. 


33.12 The RPS display(s) shall be selected to avoid 
reflection of projected shadows to maintain 
readability under all ambient light conditions. 


33.13 RPS shall be under strict access control. 


33.14 The information shall be presented in a clear, 
unambiguous way to the operator. 


33.15 The information shall be organized 
according to criticality, usage frequency, and 
duration of associated task. 


33.16 The choice of labels shall indicate the 
function, method of operation of controls, except 
when it is obvious. 


33.17 The RPS shall allow the operator to 
perform tasks without fatigue and unreasonable 
concentration. 


33.18 RPS controls shall be designed to allow 
operator to intervene in a manner appropriate to a 
task in normal and emergency situation. 


34 MARKING 


The UAS should have following labeled 
information: 


a) Year of manufacture; 

b)Type of UAS; 

c) Serial number, if any; 

d)Maximum payload capacity, kg; and 


e) UIN (unique identification number). 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Sectional Committee, TED 32 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 


Adani Aerospace and Defence Limited, Bengaluru 


Aerospace and Aviation Sector Skill Council, Bengaluru 
Airdonex Technologies Private Limited, Chennai 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 

Anna University, Chennai 


Centre for Military Air worthiness and Certification, 
Bengaluru 


CyPhySignals India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


DeTect Technologies, Chennai 


Directorate General of Aeronautical Quality Assurance, 
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 


Drone Federation of India 


Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Bengaluru 


Honeywell Technology Solutions, Bengaluru 
Indhra Dhanush Autonomous Platforms, Mangaluru 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay 

Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur 


Indian Space Research Organization, Bengaluru 


Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
Standards Association 

International Air Transport Association 

International Centre for Automotive Technology, 
Manesar 


Representative(s) 


DR S. N. OMKAR (Chairperson) 


SHRISAMPATHKUMARANS. T. 
SHRISWAPNIL JALUNDHWALA (Alternate) 


WG CDR RACHIT BHATNAGA 
SHRICHANDRU RAJENDRAN 
SHRID. DILIP KUMA 

DR K. SENTHIL V ADIVU 


SHRIL. N. RAGHAVENDRA 
SHRI ADITYA KUMAR MISHRA (Alternate) 


SHRID. SRINIVASAN 
SHRIWG. CDR A. S. SATISH RETD. (Alternate) 


SHRI KARTHIK RAJASEKARAN 
SHRIG. D. SUNIL (Alternate) 


SHRI GANESH PRASAD SAHU 
SHRI MANISH GUPTA 
SHRI PRAVEEN KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SMIT SHAH 
SHRI VIPUL SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI NISHA GANESH 
SHRI PRATAP PANDA (Alternate) 


DR JEPPU YOGANANDA 
SHRI NEVILLE RODRIGUES 
DR HEMENDRA ARYA 

DR ABHISHEK 

SHRI MANISH SAXENA 


SHRI SRIKANTH CHANDRASEKARAN 


SHRI PRASHANT SANGLIKAR 


SHRI DEVESH PAREEK 


Organization 


IdeaForge Technology Private Limited, Mumbai 


International Institute of Aviation, Bengaluru 


LDRA Technology Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Next Leap Aeronautics, Bengaluru 


Nokia India, Gurugram 


Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


Reverence Tech, Mumbai 


Robert Bosch Engineering and Business Solutions, 
Bengaluru 


Sanganak Labs, Bengaluru 
System Level Solutions (India) Private Limited, Anand 
Vidhya Sangha Technology, Bengaluru 


Wavekids India, Bengaluru 


IS 18381 (Part 1) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRIRAGHAV MALLICK 


SHRI SUMEET SUSEELAN 
SHRIMATI SMILEY SOOD (Alternate) 


SHRI SHINTO JOSEPH 
SHRI GAJENDRA KASHYAP 


SHRI SATISH KANUGOVI 
SHRI SAURABH SINGH (Alternate) 


DR MANISH PANDE 
SHRI C. S. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI NITISH SAWANT 


SHRIMATI PRIYAMVADHA VEMBAR 
LT CDRP. V. J. HARSHA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJ ASHISH 
SHRI ANAND PUROHIT 
LT A. T. KISHORE 


SHRI ANIMA AGARWAL 


BIS Directorate General SHRI R. R. SINGH, SCIENTIST “F'/SENIOR DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (TRANSPORT ENGINEERING) 


[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI SHIVAM AGGARWAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C’/DEPUTY DIRECTOR 
(TRANSPORT ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 32 (16884). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


