**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8906 (1987) : Ice Axe-Cum-hmmer for Mountaineering [PGD 
27: Mountaineering Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 796*52022:685727 



IS : 8906- 1987 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2001 ) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
ICE AXE-CUM-HAMMER FOR MOUNTAINEERING 

( First Revision ) 



1. Scope — Covers the requirements for ice axe-cum-hammer for mountaineering. 

2. Nomenclature and Dimensions — See Fig. 1. 

3. Material— The various components of ice axe-cum-hammer shall be manufactured from the 
following materials: 



Components 
Head and spike 



Ferrule 



Rivets 



Handle 



Material 

Steel Grade 40 Ni3Cr65Mo55 of IS : 5517-1978 
'Specification for steels for hardening and 
tempering ( first revision )'. 

Mild steel sheet to Type D of IS: 513-1986 
'Specification for cold rolled low carbon steel 
sheets and strips ( third revision )\ 

Conforming to IS: 2155-1982 'Specification 
for cold forged solid steel rivets for hot closing 
( 6 mm to 16 mm diameter ) ( first revision )'. 

Ash or compreg. Compreg shall conform to 
Grade GM Type V of IS : 3513 ( Part 3)-1966 
'Specification for high and medium density 
wood-based laminates (compreg): Part 3 
General purposes'. 



4. Hardness 



4.1 Head — 1 he ice axe-cum-hammer shall be evenly hardened and tempered and shall have a hardness 
of 35f> to 450 HV. 

4.2 Sfrike —The spike shall be evenly hardened and tempered to hardness of 350 to 450 HV. 
5. Manufacture 



5.1 
be 
but 



Head- 



5.2 

the 
length 



— The head including the straps shall be soundly forged in one piece. The rivet holes shall 
properly countersunk to receive the rivet heads. The serrations on the pick shall be well-finished 
shall not be sharp. 

sU« 



e _ Spike shall be soundly forged to shape. The spike shall be forced into the taper hole at 
bbttom of the handle after fitting the ferrule so that the spike shall be tight fit throughout the 
of shank without splitting or weakening the handle. 



5.3 

ferrul^ 
point 
of 
with 



tho 



Ferrule — The ferrule shall be either solid drawn or brazed or welded. The larger end of the 

shall be reasonably flush with the handle after fittings, without weakening the handle at this 

To achieve this, under cutting of the handle may be avoided and at the broad end, the inside 

ferrule may be given small radius. The ferrule shall be tight and further secured to the handle 

the screw. The ferrule shall be tight fit and shall be driven on the end of the handle before 

inserting the spike* 



8. Handle 

6.1 Timber Ash — The blank for the handle shall be quarter sawn and free from centre heart ( pith ), 
knots shakes, curls, rot, check, rammy figures, splits, warp, brashness, insect attack, borer holes, 
discoloration ovSrW isnt decay. The timber shall have a rate of growth between 4 to 10 rings 

per 2!> mm measured radially and the proportion of the summer wood to spring wood shall be not less 



Adopted 1 S«ptemfc*r 19S7 



O April 1988, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAK SHAVAN. • BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
law DELHI 11M0S 





to 

■a 

00 
CD 

o» 

I 



All dimensions In millimetres. 
FIG. 1 DIMENSIONS FOR ICE AXE-CUM-HAMMER FOR MOUNTAINEERING 



IS: 8906-1987 

than 50 percent. (The timber ash meeting these requirements is expected to have a density of more 
than 0'65 g per cubic centrimetre at 15 percent moisture content. ) The timber shall be straight grained 
and the maximum inclination of grain and fibre shall not exceed 1:20 and less than 10 percent and not 
more than 15 percent. 

6.2 The handle shall be tightly fitted into the recess in the head. The straps of the head shall be 
snugly fitted and bedded down sufficient with the handle and securely riveted. Care shall be taken 
to ensure that the rivet holes are at right angle to the growth rings and veneers of ash and compreg 
handles respectively. The rivet holes shall be properly countersunk to allow flush fitting of the strap 
with the surface. 

7. Workmanship and Finish 

7.T The head, spike and ferrule shall be free from cracks, pits, rust, flaws, seams and other defects. 

7.2 The brazing or welding of the ferrule shall be even, continuous and sound. 

7.3 The handle when finished to the dimensions, shall be coated at the head end and spike end 
with bituminous paint before further assembly. 

7.4 All sharp edges shall be removed. 

7.5 The head, ferrule and spike shall be finished bright. The head and spike, if made from 40Ni3Cr65Mo55 
steel, shall be nickel-chrome or cadmium-plated. The nickel chrome plating shall conform to Service 
Grade 2 of IS : 1068-1985 'Specification for electroplated coatings of nickel plus chromium and copper 
plus nickel plus chromium on iron and steel ( second revision )' and cadmium plating shall conform to 
Service Condition No. 2 of IS : 1572-1968 'Specification for electroplated coatings of cadmium on iron 
and steel ( first revision )\ The metal components of the ice axe shall be coated with suitable grease 
and wrapped in waxed paper, when not in use, to protect against rust or corrosion. 

8. Tests 

8.1 Flaw Test — The head shall be laid flat on a steel block and struck several ligfit blows at different 
places with a ball pein hammer of 500 g. The test shall be repeated for the spike also. There shall 
be no sign of damage or crack. 

8.2 Crack Test— Each head shall be subjected to crack detection test before plating or assembly. 

8.3 Beam Test — The axe shall be supported at two places, one at 40 mm from the head end and the 
other; at 60 mm from the tip of the spike, with the major axis of the handle lying horizontally. A load 
of 800 N shall be applied downwards at the point midway between the supports. The load shall be 
gradual and shall be maintained for one minute. There shall be no sign of damage or fracture at the 
handle or deformation of head or spike. 

8.4 Cantilever Test — The pick end shall be firmly held in a vice at a distance of 40 mm from the 
junction of the handle in a such a way that the handle extends over the edge of the vice but does not 
rest 6n it. A load of 300 N shall be applied gradually at the junction of the ferrule and spike and 
maintained for one minute. There shall be no sign of damage. 

8.5 Performance Test — The axe shall be held in one hand (the holder in a standing position ) just 
above the larger end of the ferrule and the hammer shall be struck with full force from a height of 1 m 
on to) a mild steel plate 500x300x25 mm having a hardness 90 to 120 HV- The strike shall be such 
that ihe hammer strikes roughly perpendicular to the steel plate. This test shall be repeated 12 timBS 
for tqe hammer end. Similar test shall be conducted for the pick end for 12 times. The spike end 
shall jalso be struck 12 times on the same steel plate in a similar manner by holding the head. There 
shall pe no sign of damage at the completion of the above test. 

8.6 Impact Test — The test shall be carried out at head at — 40°C and shall field 27 J, Min. 

8.7 A^fter completing the above tests, the axe shall be thoroughly examined for any sign of fracture or 
deformation or loosening or displacement of head and rivets or pick. There shall be no defects. The 
handfc shall also show no sign of damage or fracture. 

9. Marking — The ice axe-cum-hammer shall be legibly and indelibly stamped/marked with the 
manufacturer's name, initials or recognized trade-mark, the year of manufacture and the size of the axe. 

9.1 Standard Marking — Details available with Bureau of Indian Standards. 

3 



18: 8906-1987 

EXPLA N ATOR Y NOTE 

This standard was first published in 1978. The major changes in this revision relate to the 
material of head and spike and their hardness. The changes in the materials have been recommended 
by the Research and Development Organization, Defence Metallurgical Reasearch Laboratory after actual 
investigations on the imported components received from Research and Development Establishment 
( Engrs ) ( Report No. 5/83 ). The requirements of mass has also been deleted. The requirements for 
ice axe for mountaineering have been coverd separately, in IS : 8648-1987 'Specification for ice axe for 
mountaineering {first revision )\ 



Printed at Arcct Pr«t». N«w Delhi, India 



