INATT Wah IS 16238 : 2017 
Indian Standard Wepre 2022 


WAM чей эй — 
ТезпіІН ез 


Planning of Parallel Canals — 
Guidelines 


ICS 93.160 


O BIS 2017 


я 74% = 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM CT, 9 четче WH BL ae І5еей-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2017 Price Group 5 


Canals and Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee, WRD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Canals and 
Cross Drainage Works Sectional Committee had been approved by the Water Resources Division Council. 


Canals have played an important role in creating assured irrigation supplies to agricultural fields and contributed 
substantially to the green revolution in the country. With the increase in demand of food and fodder, demand of 
water for irrigation is also rising. To meet the increasing requirement of water, need for constructing new canals 
has become obvious. For cost effectiveness, a parallel canal to the existing canal is a judicious choice by utilizing 
one of the banks of the existing canal. 


Only general guidelines with regard to planning and construction of parallel canals are given in this standard, for 
the assistance of the designer. But each project should be individually analyzed taking into consideration its 
peculiar features. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16238 : 2017 


Indian Standard 
PLANNING OF PARALLEL CANALS — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard deals with various aspects which are 
generally considered while planning and construction 
of parallel canals particularly of large capacities. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

3873 : 1993 Laying cement concrete/stone slab 
lining on canals — Code of practice 
(second revision) 

4558 : 1995 Code of practice for under-drainage 
of lined canals (second revision) 

7112 : 2002 Criteria for design of cross-section 
for unlined canals in alluvial soil 
(first revision) 

10430 : 2000 Criteria for design of lined canals and 


guidelines for selection of type of 
lining (first revision) 


3 CONSIDERATIONS IN REGARD TO 
PARALLEL CANAL PROPOSITION 


3.1 The construction of parallel canal under 
modernization programme has the following 
advantages: 


a) No closure of canal is required when the 
works on modernization of canal is 
undertaken by constructing a new parallel 
canal; in this way, the agricultural production 
of the command area of the canal does not 
suffer due to lack of irrigation water. 


b) Even if the existing canal is re-modelled for 
increasing its discharge capacity or improving 
its conveyance efficiency by closing it 
intermittently or otherwise for different 
construction activities, the proposal becomes 
time consuming and uneconomical in 
comparison to the construction of a new 
parallel canal. 

c) It is normally seen that the problems 
associated with land acquisition and 


relocation of displaced populations would be 
least in comparison to a new alignment as land 
adjoining existing canal alignment are seen 
to be government land, not presently under 
cultivation, at the disposal of irrigation 
departments in most cases. 


3.2 Though the aspects indicated in 3.1 demonstrate the 
desirability and to some extent the economics of the 
parallel canal, certain inherent technical problems should 
be carefully looked into in all such proposals. These are: 


a) Problem of increased pore pressure 
development in the common bank of the twin 
canals surfaces as a technical off shoot. This 
increase is for all conditions of the running 
of the canal(s). 

b) Stability problem of the common bank due 
to increased pore pressure is not accounted 
for in the original design, resulting in the 
instability of the banks of the separating bunds 
of the parallel canals. 

c) In some cases, the old canal is found to be 
unlined, in general or even if lined, proper 
provision for releasing hydrostatic pressures 
behind lining are not made at the time of its 
initial design. This causes problems of lining 
failure due to an increase in the pressure 
behind the lining. 


3.2.1 For uninterrupted and efficient operation of 
parallel canal the following aspects should be carefully 
addressed in the different phases of the project: 


a) Investigation feasibility report/detailed 
project report (DPR) ; and 

b) Planning an appropriate alignment and design 
of the canal considering the type of soils 
encountered along the alignment/terrain 
keeping in view as to whether the existing 
canal runs in, 


1) Cutting; 
2) Filling; or 
3) Partly in cutting and partly in filling. 


4 INVESTIGATIONS 


Before planning any parallel canal, a programme for 
detailed soil investigations along canal alignment at 
suitable intervals should be launched to assess the 
classification, strata and engineering properties of sub- 
strata, ground water table, etc. 


IS 16238 : 2017 


4.1 Properties of Sub-Grade 


The soil investigations should include determination 
of type of soil by taking bore hole logs 10-20 m deep 
(or up to impervious layer, if encountered earlier), 
spaced at about a kilometer for large canals. Where 
soil strata are variable, intermediate bore holes should 
be located to define the soil profile, as best as possible. 
If the soil stratum continues to be pervious for large 
depth as indicated by a few deep borings, the stratum 
may be assumed as extending to infinity for seepage 
computations. Soil tests to be carried out on bore hole 
samples should, in addition to usual classification tests, 
include tests for expansive nature of sub-grade material 
and chemical tests to guard against presence of any 
possible deleterious substances, which may adversely 
affect the lining materials. Sulphates of sodium and 
magnesium are known to be the worst enemies of 
concrete and brick. Suitable remedial measures should 
therefore be adopted in the reaches where total 
dissolved solids are more than 0.25 percent by weight. 
Where soils are susceptible to be dispersion, sufficient 
tests shall be undertaken to assess the situation for 
evolving remedial measures. 


4.1.1 CH/ Sandy/Gravelly Soils 


Generally, the types of soil that are likely to have the 
heaviest seepage losses are relatively clean sand and 
gravel. Uniform gravel have the highest permeability 
followed by well-graded gravel, uniform and well- 
graded sand. Another type of material that is usually 
questionable is highly plastic clay (Casagrande CH 
type) because of its tendency to develop large shrinkage 
crack upon drying. This type of soil has small seepage 
losses when continually wet. 


4.1.2 Silt/Fine Sand 


Other soils that will have moderately heavy seepage 
losses are very find sands. Silt is inherently unstable, 
particularly when moisture is increased, with a 
tendency to become quick when saturated. It is 
relatively impervious, difficult to compact, highly 
susceptible to frost heave, easily erodible and subject 
to piping and boiling. Bulky grains reduce 
compressibility; flaky grains, that is, mica, diatoms, 
increase compressibility and produce elastic silt. The 
classification of soils and their properties in the context 
canal construction are indicated in Annex A. 


4.2 Ground Water Table 


Data of water table in monsoon and spring for a few 
years shall be collected. Large number canal failure 
has been on account of high water table and therefore, 
the design of canal section should be such that in most 
of the reaches, the bed level of canal is fixed above 
highest ground water table, to the maximum extent 


possible. Where this is not feasible, extensive drainage 
arrangement is called for. 


4.3 Drainage for Banks 


4.3.1 The parameters that should be investigated for 
planning of a parallel canal in a certain area include 
type and permeability of the sub-grade in different 
reaches, water table conditions, quantitative assessment 
of seepage losses and area likely to be waterlogged. 


4.3.2 In such cases, the operational conditions and 
engineering properties of the sub-grade material of the 
two canals should be studied in detail; physical model 
studies by electrical analogy method or numerical 
modelling using finite difference/element method. The 
results of model studies are to be used to design suitable 
treatment work for the common bank and drainage 
behind lining of canal. 


5 PLANNING AND DESIGN ASPECTS OF 
PARALLEL CANALS 


5.1 Bank Width 


The top width of common bank should be kept as twice 
the width of inspection path for the corresponding 
range of discharges given in IS 10430. However, this 
may be changed suitably in order to ensure that the 
phreatic line (Hydraulic gradient line) is below the beds 
of existing as well as new canal. The hydraulic gradient 
(H.G.) line through bank, though actually curved is 
assumed to be straight and slopping at 1: 4 to 1:6 
gradient, depending upon the prevailing boundary 
condition at sites (see IS 7112). 


5.2 Side Slopes 


For side slopes for unlined canal and lined canal, see 
IS 7112 and IS 10430, Respectively 


5.3 Canal in Filling 


When the canal is in filling, the following options can 
be studied to ensure proper drainage and to avoid back 
pressures which can cause failures of slopes/canal 
lining in the other parallel canal. The strategy for 
planning shall differ for various reaches of canals 
depending on the canal reaches in filling or cutting 
below the new canal. 


5.3.1 Method-1 Provision of Suitable Filter Layer 
Below the New Canal 


This filter shall not allow development of unnecessary 
high pore pressures in the common bank. It will reduce 
the pore pressures which would have developed in the 
far end bank of the new canal, as the filter will work as 
a source of pressure release path for both the affected 
banks in all cases of operation of the twin canals. 
Figure 1(A) shows the details for a typical section. 


5.3.2 Method-2 Impervious Barriers апа Drains 
Between Parallel Canals 


The provision of a trench filled-up with filter material 
having an open jointed AC or perforated PVC pipe in 
the centre can operate as impervious barrier/drain. This 
open jointed pipe shall work as pore pressure reducer 
and seepage collector. The size and location of the 
trench, which depends on the permeability of the sub- 
grade, should be decided by electrical analogy model 
studies or numerical modeling using finite difference/ 
element method. The seepage may be discharged into 
the side drains at suitable locations of the canal with 
the help of cross drain or the outlet provided in some 
local drain, crossing the canal system. The arrangement 
for a typical section is shown in Fig. 1(B). 


5.3.3 Method-3 Provision of Horizontal Filter Layers 
in Fill for New Canal 


If the new canal is in embankment then for the release 
of pore pressures, filters should be provided. 
Depending on the height of fill, these filters may be 
provided at different locations on the common bank 
and at the far end bank of the new canal. The 
arrangement for a typical section is shown in Fig. 1(C). 


5.3.4 Method-4 Lined Canals 


When lining is provided, depending upon sub-grade, 
drainage arrangements shall be provided. The 
arrangement for a typical section is shown in Fig. 2. 


5.4 Canal in Cutting 


When the new canal is in excavation and the spring 
levels are low, the methods suggested in 5.3 may not 
be practically possible to construct. In such cases, for 
general guidance for side slopes, see IS 7112 and 
IS 10430 for unlined canal and lined canal, 
respectively. For the lined canals extra provisions of 
filter behind the lining, extensive network of drains 
with pressure release valves (non-return) or provision 
of dwarf regulators are suggested. Figure 3 indicates 
drainage arrangements for a typical section for non- 
free drainage and free drainage sub-grade. 


5.5 Provision of Outlets, Cross Drainage (CD) 
Works and Control Structures 


Whenever a parallel canal is planned alongside the 
existing canal, those outlets which are towards the 
common bank will need to be replaced and provided 
through the other bank of the new parallel canal unless 
the bed level of the new parallel canal is sufficiently 
above the outlet level. 


Extension of CD works and control structures which 
18 required only in case of super-passage, canal siphon 
and road bridge crossings, the width of common bank 


IS 16238 : 2017 


as suggested under 5.1 (that is 8 to 12 m) shall suffice 
the purpose. In case of aqueduct, siphon aqueduct and 
falls, a separate structure for new parallel canal shall, 
in any case, be provided. 


5.6 Connectivity of Old and New Canals 


Interconnectivity between the parallel canal (old and 
new reach) shall be of immense help in the event when 
major repair/renovation work in one canal is to be 
attended while keeping the supply of water un- 
interrupted through the other for various compelling 
reasons. To achieve the inter-connectivity, wherever 
cross regulator (CR) cum escapes in the existing old 
canal towards the common bank has been provided, a 
similar CR cum escape shall be provided in the new 
parallel canal. In other cases a set of CR cum escape 
structure (towards common bank side) shall be 
provided at suitable interval of parallel canal reach that 
is at every one-fifth of the total reach length. 


Further, while attending any repair/renovation work 
under such condition adequate precautions shall be 
taken by putting well points, etc, to check building up 
of pore pressure in the common bank. 


5.7 Pressure Release Valves 


5.7.1 Pressure release valves (which open into the 
canal) are provided to relieve excessive hydrostatic 
pressure behind lining. The valves should be provided 
in pockets filled with graded filter underneath the 
lining. The pockets may be cylindrical with diameter 
as 850 mm or cubical with sides as 850 mm. Horizontal 
and vertical pressure release valves are installed. 
50 mm to 75 mm diameter valves are normally used 
in the side slopes and 100 to 150 mm diameter valves 
are used in the bed. The number of rows of pressure 
release valves in the slopes of canal should be such 
that for each 4 m width along the slope, a row is 
provided. The first row should be provided at the 
junction of the curve and the sides. The number of 
rows on the bed of the canals shall be such that for 
very 10 m bed width a row is provided. The spacing of 
the pressure release valves in a row should be decided 
on the basis of experiments carried out on models 
simulating site conditions. Valves in adjacent rows 
should be staggered. The longitudinal drains consisting 
of open jointed pipes encased in graded filter should 
have outlets in a trench of width 45 cm and depth 
50 cm. The trench should be filled with graded filter 
and have outlet into the canal through pressure release 
valves. The outlet may be provided through precast 
concrete boxes collecting water from drains with 
pressure release valves on the top of boxes. 


5.7.2 Pressure release valves may, however, be useful 
in case of slow operational variations, as also serve to 


IS 16238 : 2017 


release excessive pressure built up through seams of 
pervious material present in the sub-grade bank 
material. Furthermore, the moving part of pressure 
release valves may get damaged or get rusted in course 
of time so each one of them must be inspected and 
repaired (if required) at least once a year. 


5.7.3 Where the lining is subjected to differential 
pressure due to very high spring level or large 
operational conditions, requiring variation as in the case 
of power channels, the most effective measure to 
release excess pressure on the lining is to provide 
continuous filter with adequate outlets to release 
seepage water. 


5.8 Boulder Set Pocket 


Where the sub-grade material is not free draining, 
1 m x 1 m filter pockets with open jointed boulder set 
encased in G.I. wire shall be provided at 5 m c/c in 
longitudinal drains and on side slopes to replace 
conventional pressure release valves. Figure 4 shows 
the typical details of such an arrangement. 


5.9 Dwarf Regulators 


Dwarf regulators are regulators of part height 
constructed across lined canals at suitable interval for 
pounding up water to counteract excess uplift pressure 
below the lining. These are provided in areas where 
the water table remains continuously high and the 
conventional pressure release arrangements are not 
likely to prove effective. The height and spacing of 
the dwarf regulators shall depend upon the minimum 
depth of water required to be maintained inside the 
canal for counter balancing residual pressures for safety 
of the canal. The regulators also help in maintaining 
minimum water depth inside the canal even when the 
canal is operated at part capacity with lower normal 
depths. Their disadvantage is that the canal made stable 
with dwarf regulator cannot be emptied for repairs (till 
the water table goes down to bed level) and these may 
cause additional head loss in the canal. Under drainage 
arrangement shall be as per the recommendation of 
IS 4558. 


5.10 Rate of Draw-Down 


For long term stability of lined/unlined canals, the rate 
of draw-down of water level in the canals has to be 
judiciously decided based on the experience and data 
of canals in similar formations. The canal lining is not 
designed for very fast rate of lowering which may result 
in greater differential head due to difference between 
rate of lowering of water in the canal and the rate of 
reduction in the pore pressure behind the lining due to 
time lag in the drainage of sub-grade. Thus the first 
30 cm from FSL may be lowered in 1h but thereafter 


this rate may be as low as 3 cm/h. Data of ground water 
table particularly in monsoon and type sub-grade (in 
cutting and filling), drainage arrangements, if any, shall 
be kept in view while fixing the rate of draw down. 


5.11 Saturation of Common Bank 


The common bank of the parallel canals is likely to be 
saturated due to standing water in the canals and/or 
rainfall. This ultimately leads to sloughing of banks 
and further leading to collapse of lining. Silty soils are 
prone to such a phenomenon. To prevent saturation of 
the common bank, top of the bank may be provided 
with a clayey gravel/clayey sand or the same may be 
covered with a plastic film/membrane (with soil cover) 
to make it impermeable. Catch water drains may be 
provided parallel to the canal bank and suitably drained 
into the canal at about 30m interval and should be 
maintained regularly. 


5.12 Compaction of Sub-Grade 


Inadequate compaction of sub-grade also results in 
failure of the banks as well as failure of lining. As such, 
the compaction of sub-grade depending on the type of 
soil should be ensured during execution. For sub-grade 
consisting of soil, compaction is to be done at optimum 
moisture content (OMC) in layers not more than 15 cm 
thick where dry density of natural soil is not less than 
1.8 tonne/m’, the initial excavation is to be done up to 
about 30 cm above the final section. Lip cutting of 
50 cm to 100 cm in banks should be provided. The 
cutting to final shape should be done immediately 
before lining. The preparation and compaction of sub- 
grade shall be done as per IS 3873. 


5.13 Provision of Top Coping 


In case of lined canals, the top coping at the end of 
lining should be sufficient to cover the filter provided 
behind the lining, otherwise the soil particles along 
with rain water clog the filter. Also the rain water shall 
not flow along the back side of the lining due to the 
adequate length of the coping. In case of parallel canals, 
the coping width could be kept as 350 mm to 600 mm. 
Top coping for a typical section is given at Fig. 5. 


5.14 Leakage Through Joints 


In lined canals the velocity of flow is between 1.8 to 
2.2 m/s. Where the joints are weak, the soil particles 
of the embankment may be sucked and a cavity may 
form behind the lining, which ultimately may result 
in the collapse of lining over a period of time. As 
such suitable steps have to be taken to provide durable 
joints in the lining like providing strips of PVC or 
other appropriate material in joints or slipper below 
the joint. 


SI 
No. 


(1) 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
у) 
уі) 


уп) 


viii) 
ix) 
x) 
xi) 
xii) 


xiii) 


Soil Classification 
and Relative Rating 


(2) 


GP 
GW 
SP 


SW 
CH 
ML 


MH 


GC 
SC 
GM 
CL 
OL 


OH 


ANNEX A 


IS 16238 : 2017 


(Clause 4.1.2) 
CLASSIFICATION OF SOILS AND THEIR SUITABILITY FOR CANAL LINING 


Soil Description 


(3) 


Poorly graded gravel or gravel 
Well graded gravel, gravel 


Poorly graded sands or gravelly sands, little 
or no fines 

Well graded sands, gravelly sands, little or 
no fines 


Inorganic clays of high plasticity 


Inorganic silts and very fine sand, silty or 
clayey fine sand with little/no plasticity 
Inorganic silts of high compressibility 
micaceous or diatomaceous fine sandy or 
silty soils, elastic silts 

Clayey gravels, poorly graded 
Gravel-sand-clay mixtures 

Clayey 
mixtures 


sands, poorly graded sand clay 


Silty gravel, poorly graded gravel sand silt 
mixtures 


Inorganic clays, gravelly/sandy silty clays, 
lean clays of low plasticity 


Organic silts and silts clay of low plasticity 


Organic clays of medium to high plasticity 


Remarks 


(4) 


Extremely permeable needs lining 
Extremely permeable need lining 


Moderate to highly permeable, usually requires lining 
Moderately permeable, usually requires lining 


Very impermeable when wet or extremely permeable after 
drying. Needs special consideration 


Fairly impervious, but bank section is difficult to hold in 
place. Need consideration 


Fairly impervious, but bank section difficult to hold. Needs 
special consideration 


May range from moderate to very low permeability 
Usually impermeable, good stability 


Usually fairly impermeable but hard to hold on bank. 
Lining requirement is minimal 


Usually very impermeable. Lining requirement is minimal 


Permeability fairly low but stability is questionable. 
Provision of lining needs judicious consideration 

Low permeability if soil is kept wet but stability is 
questionable and shrinkage cracks are probable. Provision 
of lining needs judicious considerations 


l Q OF NEWC ANAL 


Q OFEXISTING CANAL 


200 EXTRA FOR ANTICIPATED 


SETTLEMENT 


DOUBLE TILE LINNG 
ОМО САТ! УЕ) 


EXTRA FORLIP 
CUTTING 


"y 266775 _ 


26 3202. 


zOoNE'C' 


AT LEAST ONE LAYER 300 TH.COMPARATIVELY 
COARSE MATERIAL 5М/ МІ. ABOVE ZONE'A ' 


NEW CANAL 


TRENCH SIZ E DEPEND 
ON SUBGRADE 


VARIE S FROM 150007025000 
COMMON BANK WIDTH 


3TO4M.C/C LONGITUDINALLY 


2M. IP CLAYE 
SOIL OTHER WIS E MORE 


1:60 — 
100004 
EARTH sp-SM/SM/SP. 


TED COHESIVE 50ІЦ GC-SC A 
ROTH: COBEN iM Lt SC) UNDER LAIN BY 
BOK ХЗООСАТ Н, DRAUN 
8000. ; 2 750 oo 


м 6Q 


MATERIA 
К REAR SLOPE OF 
EXISTING CANAL 


VARIES FROM 15000 TO 25000 
Lo" BU BANK WIDTH 


E. 


OLD CANAL 


270X300 C ATCH DRAIN 
SUI TABLE FILTER 


OPEN JO INTED AC/ PVC. PIPE 


OLD CANAL 


270X300 CATCH DRAIN SUITABLY DRAINED INTO CANAL AT 30M. 


INTERVAL 
REAR SLOPE OF EXISTING CANAL 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 1 DRAINAGE ARRANGEMENT BELOW COMMON BANK OF PARALLEL CANALS 


300TH. а Тер COHESIVE SOIL(GC-SC) UNDER LAIN BY 
—_ — xE SL. ISOTH.LOPE FILM. 


: 8Є@9Т SI 


110 


IS 16238 : 2017 


COMMON BANK OF % OF NEW САМА t- 
PARALLEL CANAL IO MM. C C.TILE LINING 


— 300 75ММ.ТНІСК POROUS CONCRETE (1:12) ' 
1:60 «- 


COMPACTED 
EARTH 


N.S.L. 


REAR SLOPE OF EXISTING CANAL 


75MM О PLASTIC PRESSURERELIE 
VALVE@ 5M C/C. 


600) Lr 
75 MM OP.R.V.@ IOM.C/C- 


(А1 FREE DRAINING SUBGRADE 


COMMON BANK OF 
PARALLEL CANAL ПО MM.C.C.TILE LINING 


| 75MM.TH. POROUS CONC.t1:12) 
> —— 150 MM.TH.FILTER 


ee een ee ge ee 


750MM.FREE BOAR 


BY ISOTH.LDPE FILM. 
COMPACTED 


EARTH 
N.SL. 


REAR SLOPE OF EXISTING CANAL 
BOULDER SET T 225X 225X225M M. 


Rz6400 


1 50. MM. Ф A.C. PERFORATED 
PIPE 


(B) NON FREE DRAINING SUBGRADE 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 DETAILS OF LINING AND DRAINAGE IN FILLING SECTION 


IS 16238 : 2017 


275X300 CATCH DRAIN AT THE END OF SERVICE 
ROAD OF EXISTING CANAL 


COMMON BANK OF 
PARALLEL CANAL NOMMC.C.TILE LINING 
75 MM PORQUS СОМС.(1:21 
ISOMM THICKFILTER 
75MM. TH.FILTER 


SS 


ESIVE SOIL (GC- SC) UNDER LAN SSX. 
BYISOTH.LDPE FILM. 


BOULDER SETT 
225Х225 X225 MM. 


(A) NONFREE DRAINING SUB-GRADE 


COMMON BANK OF 
PARALLEL CA NAL 


Q OF NEW CANAL 


ПОММ. THICK TILE 
LINING 


75MM. THICK jdn 
СОМ CRETE 1:1 
75MM. WELASTIC PRESSURE 
RELIEF VALVE 5M С/С. 


ISOMM THICK COARSE FILTER 
75MM.THICKFINE FILTER 


6385 


Rz 


75MM 
IOM. 


75 MM Q PLASTIC PRESSURE RELIEF VALVE 
5 M. C/C. 
(B) FREE DRAINING SUB-GRADE 


АП dimensions in millimeters. 


Fic. 3 DETAILS OF LiNING AND DRAINAGE IN CUTTING-SECTION 


PR.V. 
/C. 


IS 16238 : 2017 


WIRE NET(I2 S. W. б) OF 100 XICOMM. ME SH 


225X 225X225 MM. BOUL DER SET ENCASED 
IN WIRE NET 


Ve 


+ 
77774 'OMM.CC.DOUBLE TILE LINING 


 мм.ғовои5 CONCRETE 1:12 


150 MM. FILTER 


45MM. FILTER 


(Sub-Grade Comprising of Very Fine Sand, Mixture of Sand, Silt & Clay and Clays. 
Permeability less than 10% cm/s and Grater Than 10% cm/s) 


All dimensions in millimeters. 


Fic. 4 DETAILS OF BOULDER SET POCKETS IN NON-FREE SUB-GRADE 


01 


REFERENCE CUM | BRICK WORK IN 1:4 


CURING DRAIN TOP COPING BURNT CLAY TILES 


(2mm, GAP FILLED WITH BITUMINOUS 
MASTIC WITH PRIMING COAT 


“> 


— 300X150 X'SOBURNT CLAY TILES IN !:3CM. 
ons 5mm. THICK CEMENT MORTAR IN 1:3 


15mm.THIC K SAND WITC HED PLASTER IN 1:5 
(—300X150X50 BURNT CLAY TILES 


š IOOmm. THICK GRADED SHINGLE 4:75 TO 2Omm. 
IOOmm.THICK ‘COARSE SAND 015 40:3 mm. 
DETAIL OF COPING ; ; 


PRIMER @ILITER/4M 
CANAL BED 


ІООтт.ТН. 
GRADED SHINGLE 


lOO mm.TH.COARSE — Ы ЧАС «а 


SAND D!5 £ O: 3mm. с.С.міо.200х200 
(FM. 1-5 & ABOVE) 


CONTRACTION JOINT CONTRACTION JOINT 
(GROOVE JOINT) - (BUTT JOINT) 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 5 DETAILS ОЕ COPING AND JOINTS 


C. C. M-15 

FACES OF THE PRE VIOUSLY PLACED C.C. 
SHALL BE PAINTED WITH SEALING 
COMPOUND 


COARSE SAND (F.M.1:5& ABOVE) 


02: 8Є09Т SI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 13 (0542). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme УП M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : С.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


