NAT Alan IS 17451 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Tale Herat sweat — dag 
& feru zeng fifa — opt elëter 


Smart Community 
Infrastructure — Best Practices for 
Transportation — Guidelines 


ICS 13.020.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda get tt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR vo. 9 serere TH AMT, +ç ect 110002 


Np asia MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 8 


Smart City Sectional Committee, CED 59 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart Cities 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A well-functioning community infrastructure, of which energy (power), water and wastewater, solid waste 
disposal, information and communication technology and transportation are essential elements and are critical to 
the quality of life and economic productivity of any city or human settlement. Transportation plays a highly visible 
role in the lives of residents, ensuring people can get to work, engage in social activities, take part in commerce 
and access cultural institutions and any other amenity the city offers. In addition, transportation networks are 
needed for the distribution of goods throughout a city or region. Inadequate or poorly designed transportation 
systems can create significant economic costs from lost productivity, environmental impacts and health problems. 


The features and services provided by such infrastructures are intended to assist people in communities with 
their businesses and lives, and to help stimulate activities to promote their businesses and enhance their lives by 
providing opportunities to come to, stay in and move within/outside communities. People do not want to spend all 
their time at home or in workplace, even though improved information and communication technologies would 
bring them possibilities to do business or take action anywhere they like and anytime without moving. There is 
more to life than just business supported by electronic communication. People want to be able to move around 
independently and see, hear, touch, taste and smell directly what they have an interest in. 


Transportation networks can be very complex, interweaving many different modes, by air, ship, ferry, train, truck 
and passenger vehicle, and by human-powered modes, like walking or biking. In particular, transportation services 
for intra-/inter-city communication by commuter rail, inter-city rail, high-speed rail, metro, trams, monorail, light 
rail transit, automated guideway transit systems, buses, trucks, ferries and air vehicles is popular and convenient 
for people, including the persons with disabilities, the elderly and those whose physical performance is declining, 
working or living in communities and coming to or out from there. This is because such means of transportation 
successfully convey passengers, delivery items and freight in large lots, punctually and at low cost, supported by 
established basic technologies that have developed over a long period and that are still being steadily improved 
even now. Cities need to have transportation systems that meet the needs of a diverse group of users, including 
commuters both within and outside the city, persons with disabilities and the elderly, and those shipping freight 
or other goods and parcels. 


This standard describes how transportation is planned, designed, implemented, operated, maintained and upgraded 
to take into account the points of view of different stakeholders, including the residents and governing authorities 
of communities, as well as the needs of the environment. This standard also outlines minimum conditions to be 
respected in the performance of transportation systems, even after they have been installed, in order to realize 
the objectives of a smart transportation infrastructure, which is economically efficient transportation systems that 
meet or exceed user needs while minimizing environmental impact. 


In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from ISO 37154 : 2017 'Smart community 
infrastructures — Best practice guidelines for transportation”. 


Decisions ranging from large-scale planning and investments to individual choices can shape the impact of 
transportation systems on a city. Decision makers need to think critically about transportation modes, as well as 
the features and services of those modes, to ensure the positive impacts of transportation infrastructure outweigh 
the potential negative impacts. In addition, given that populations and technologies change, decision makers 
need to monitor transportation systems to ensure that they continue to meet transportation goals. This standard 
describes the smart transportation objectives and offers support for the development of integrated urban mobility 
plans, including the selection and application of transportation services. 


This standard is a part of the series of Indian Standards being formulated on sustainable development of habitats 
including on smart cities. In fact, smartness acts as an accelerator to the sustainable development which is the 
ultimate objective, hence, the various concepts and standards relating to smart cities being evolved including this 
standard should be understood from the same consideration. 


An Indian Standard IS 17000 : 2019 ‘Sustainable development of habitats — Indicators’ has since been published. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


IS 17451 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


SMART COMMUNITY 
INFRASTRUCTURE — BEST PRACTICES FOR 
TRANSPORTATION — GUIDELINES 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard provides general guidance on 
the planning, design, development, organization, 
monitoring, maintenance and improvement process 
of smart transportation systems and infrastructures, 
which can help promote solutions for intra and inter- 
city issues, that is, for issues both within and outside 
the city that impact quality of life, the environment 
or any other areas of city performance. This standard 
applies to transportation infrastructures used for the 
movement of people, freight or other goods, including 
items transported for delivery. 


1.2 This standard is intended for use by city planners 
and other community decision makers, government 
officials, insurance providers, investment and 
financing organizations, transportation operators and 
service providers and manufacturers of transportation 
equipment. In particular, this standard is intended to 
be used by those involved in making decisions about 
transportation modes to meet the objectives related to 
affordability, convenience, low environmental impact 
and reliability, while satisfying the needs of a diverse 
group of stakeholders, including city residents, visitors, 
government authorities, transportation operators. 


1.3 This standard addresses smart transportation by 
considering the factors that shape communities, such 
as population, demographics, locations, local culture 
and history. It addresses the scope of services, features 
and objectives to be met through smart transportation 
solutions. 


1.4 This standard does not contain technical 
specifications for the construction of transportation 
assets of facilities. 


2 REFERENCE 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute the provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 
IS 17457: Sustainable development of habitats — 
2020 Vocabulary 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this document, the terms and 
definitions as given in IS 17457 : 2020 and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 City Issue — A problem or challenge that negatively 
impacts the quality of life for residents, visitors and 
workers in cities, the environment or any other aspects 
of city performance. 


3.2 Transportation Mode — The specific means by 
which passengers, freight or goods, including delivery 
items, move throughout a city or area. 


3.3 Transportation Feature — A feature of 
transportation technologies, for example, a feature ofa 
light rail transit (LRT) system is that it can transport a 
specified number of passengers each hour. 


3.4 Transportation Service — A service provided by 
transportation features. 


3.5 Transportation Infrastructure — The 
infrastructure platforms that support transportation 
services. 


3.6 Smart Transportation Solution — A solution 
to one or more city issues provided by transportation 
systems that meets the needs of various city users 
efficiently. 


3.7 Smart Transportation — A transportation that 
provides smart transportation solutions given by 
transportation services. 


3.8 Private Transportation — A transportation that is 
personally owned. 


3.9 Public Transportation — A transportation 
provided to the public. 


3.10 Transportation Modality — Modality by single 


IS 17451 : 2020 


or multiple modes of public and/or private transportation 
for passengers, delivery items and freight. 


4 FUNDAMENTALS 


4.1 Basic Ideas and Goals 


4.1.1 The suitability or applicability of any particular 
technology or services to a smart transportation 
solution depends on the transportation mode and its 
technical and/or business case characteristics. Smart 
transportation solutions support sustainable community 
development and align with the standards and existing 
framework that also support that goal. Six areas which 
are critical for the development of smart and sustainable 
communities are as follows: 


a) Attractivenes; 

b) Preservation and improvement ofthe environment; 
c) Resilience; 

d) Responsible use of resources; 

e) Social cohesion; and 

f) Well-being. 


4.1.2 Objectives to be considered when evaluating 
the performance of transportation in the context of 
achieving smart transportation are as follows: 


a) To provide all persons, including children, the 
disabled, the elderly and those whose physical 
performance is declining, and economic actors 
with the means for convenient and productive 
lives and economic activity; 


b) To promote lifestyles that are not dependent on 
private automobiles; 


c) To promote transit-oriented development; 


d) To ensure convenient access to city markets, 
resources and amenities; 


e) To stimulate economic activity in downtowns or 
economically depressed areas of the city; 


f) To increase the city's competitiveness and status 
compared to other cities regionally, nationally or 
globally; 


g) To decrease the impact of human activities on the 
environment; 


h) To plan and develop transportation facilities 
and services based on well-sourced, stakeholder 
driven plans that consider budget resources and 
pay-back periods, safety and security, facility 
capacity versus projected need and environmental 
impacts; and 

J) To preserve and enhance the scenic, aesthetic, 
historic, cultural and environmental resources of 
the community. 


The objectives listed above, 
smart transportation | solutions, 
Table 1 and Table 2 (see Annex A). 


which demand 
are indicated in 


4.1.3 In addition, the 14 community needs that 
infrastructure performance should be measured against 
(availability, accessibility, affordability, safety and 
security, quality of services, operational efficiency, 
economic efficiency, performance information 
availability, maintainability, resilience, effective 
resource use, climate change mitigation, pollution 
prevention, and eco-system conservation) align 
with one or more of the objectives listed in 4.1.2 
[see Table 3 and Table 4 (see Annex A)]. 


4.2 Location and Objective for the Development 
and Installation of Transportation Infrastructures 
to Provide Smart Transportation Solutions 


4.2.1 General 


Transportation features and services should be 
selected and applied to achieve smart transportation 
solutions either within a single community or between 
communities within a larger region. 


Transportation investments should be prioritized to 
achieve one or more of the objectives listed in 4.1.2, 
when the transportation is subsidized. To aid in 
the process of prioritizing the issues transportation 
infrastructures should address, community decision 
makers should develop an integrated urban mobility 
plan that identifies factors that shape transportation 
needs and choices and compares these factors to those 
that shape the smart community objectives. 


4.2.2 Location where Transportation Infrastructures 
should be Installed to Achieve Smart Transportation 
Solutions 


4.2.2.1 Transportation infrastructures for smart 
transportation solutions may be installed in the 
following locations: 


a) Within a region or a community; 
b) On routes connecting regions; 


c) On interfaces of transportation inside/outside 
communities; and 


d) As improvements 
infrastructures. 


to existing transportation 


4.2.2.2 An integrated urban mobility plan should, to 
the maximum extent practicable, identify for users the 
factors that shape the locational needs of transportation 
infrastructures, such as: 


a) Size, location and demographics of residential 
population centres within and surrounding the city 
or community; 


b) Location of low and moderate income households 
andthe distance to affordable public transportation, 
as well as the potential impact improvements 
to transportation infrastructures could have on 
housing affordability; and 


c) Size and location. of areas of commercial 
activity and employment within and outside the 
community. 


4.2.2.3 Travel characteristics of the city are as given 
below: 
a) Flow offreight and/or goods through a community; 
b) Inventory of existing transportation facilities and 
assets; 
c) Current transportation patterns, including mode 
use and traffic levels; 
d) Current costs of the transportation system; and 
e) Environmental impacts of current transportation 
activity. 
NOTE — Travel characteristics of a city includes its vehicle 
ownership, mode share, travel patterns/movement patterns/ 


origin-destination data, road inventory data, traffic volume 
data. 


423 Objectives 
Infrastructures 


Smart 


for 


Transportation 


4.2.3.1 When making decisions about transportation 
infrastructures, planners should identify the following 
options: 


a) To transport people, freight and goods 
safely, reliably, conveniently, efficiently and 
economically; 


b) To provide transportation services that satisfy 
demand; 


c) To reduce environmental impact without reducing 
the quality of the transportation services; 


d) To improve the efficiency of connections between 
different modes of transportation; 


e) To reduce the total energy usage of the 
transportation infrastructure; 


f) To make transportation operation economically 
sustainable while ensuring it is affordable and 
accessible to all users; and 


g) To improve communication to the public about all 
aspects of transportation services. 


4.2.3.2 The objectives mentioned in 4.2.3.1 can be 
achieved by ensuring the transportation systems to be 
installed: 


a) To convey passengers, delivery items and freight 
safely; 

b) To convey passengers, delivery items and freight, 
especially when they are in a large lot; 

c) To convey passengers, delivery items and freight 
at a time; 

d) To convey passengers, delivery items and freight 
on time; 


IS 17451 : 2020 


€) To convey passengers, delivery items and freight 
as planned; 


f) To convey passengers, delivery items and freight 
at a low cost; 

g) To provide dense networks for transport; 

h) To provide frequent services for transport; 

]) To provide successful and easy connection for 


transport between different transportation systems 
or modes; 


k) To communicate where no public transportation is 
available; 


m) To communicate anytime, especially without 
being concerned about public transportation 
schedules; 


n) To communicate at convenience of passengers and 
senders/recipients of delivery items and freight; 


p) To communicate personally while 
privacy; 


securing 


q) To control total energy saving/consumption for 
transportation; 


r) To lower environmental load without degradation 
in service quality of transport operation. With 
planning integrated urban transportation, the plan 
should enable: 


s) Transport of people and goods safely, reliably, 
efficiently and economically; 


t) Provision of networks appropriate for 
transportation needs, especially investing in and 
improving existing infrastructures; 


u) Creation of frequent services for transport; 


v) Provision of efficient connections for transport 
between different transportation systems or 
modes; 


w) Lowering of the total energy saving/consumption 
for transportation; 


y) Lowering of environmental impact without 
degradation in service quality of transport 
operation; and 


z) Economically stable operation of transportation 
with fares that are reasonable or payable by local 
citizens. 


4.3 Consideration of City Planning 


Selection of transportation features and services should 
fit together with city or regional planning and planning 
covering national boundary areas to provide smart 
transportation solutions in communities including 
national boundary areas. Such planning includes plans 
listed below: 


a) Master plans for a city and a region 
(for example, urban structures, use of land); 


IS 17451 : 2020 


b) General plans for transportation in a city and a 
region; 

c) Master plans for a city and a region including 
national boundary areas (for example, urban 
structures, use of land, sightseeing and exchange 
induction, welfare, local economy, housing and 
the residential environment, natural environment 
preservation, disaster prevention); 


d) General plans for an area having cities; 


e) Developing plans using transportation services for 
a huge area fondly called a megalopolis; 


f) General plans for inter-city transportation 
networks; 
g) Economy-developing ^ plans for specific 


areas having cities connected by high-speed 
communication; and 


h) Co-operative developing plans for national 
boundaries. 
5 SELECTION OF TRANSPORTATION 


MODES, FEATURES AND SERVICES FOR 
SMART TRANSPORTATION SOLUTIONS IN 
COMMUNITIES 


5.1 General 


This clause helps those with an interest in introducing 
transportation as solutions or smart transportation (for 
example, transportation operators) find the features 
of smart transportation to be set up by selecting 
transportation modes and features. 


To solve specific city issues by introducing suitable 
transportation, transportation modes, features and 
services should be selected and installed to meet the 
needs of stakeholders and for the convenience for 
transportation users and to achieve smart transportation 
solutions. From the potential options identified in the 
integrated urban transportation plan, planners including 
stakeholders should determine which modes, features 
or services best advance smart transportation goals. 
Those goals should be designed and chosen to address 
city issues. 


A planning phase is necessary to install transportation 
features and services that are deduced by transportation 
modes to be selected. This is because each 
transportation has its own transportation features that 
bring specific transportation services. The selection of 
transportation modes should carefully be determined 
by smart community governors, planners or developers 
to have public transportation carriers or private 
transportation holders/users successfully introduce 
smart transportation solutions aiming at solutions to 
the issues. 

NOTE — The selection of transportation mode is a critical step 

in introducing smart transportation into communities since the 


investment in transportation infrastructures can create path 
dependencies that will shape and effect the community far into 


the future. Care can help to emphasize modes that reduce the 
use of private vehicles and made the best possible use out of 
existing assets and facilities. 


5.2 Selection Criteria 


5.2.1 General 


The following criteria should be taken into consideration 
when selecting appropriate transportation modes, 
features and services. 


5.2.2 Parameters to be Considered in the Selection of 
Public Transportation Modes 


In making decisions about public transportation 
investments, transport capacities between different 
potential modes (that is rail or bus) should be compared, 
as well as potential routes, the number of anticipated 
riders, transporting distances, the availability of land 
(for rail), carrying performance required (number of 
riders per hour), service speed (km/h), and budget scale. 
For good selection, some of such parameters should be 
combined for comparison. 


5.2.3 Subsidization 
Business 


to Transportation Operating 


Basically, transportation business is run with two 
aspects, one is as public work and the other as private 
business. The former is nowadays common, including 
private company-operating business partly subsidized, 
while the latter is not easy or successful due to 
difficulties in operating transportation business with 
good financial management. In case private business is 
partly or fully subsidized, it is not necessarily private 
business but sort of public work. Private business is 
run to seek profit while public work is organized for 
public welfare. Then, the direction of operation of 
transportation business depends on management with/ 
without subsidized. Also, a public-private partnership 
model brings in the efficiency of a private transport 
business while keeping in mind the public interest. 


Transportation decision makers should analyze the 
business cases and the availability of funding to 
determine how different funding models will affect 
transportation services, maintenance and other aspects 
of transportation systems. 


5.2.4 Transportation Mode 


Transportation modes for smart transportation solutions 
on surface to be selected to apply as a smart community 
infrastructure, which are included in this standard are: 


a) Rail; 

b) Commuter buses/bus rapid transit/inter-city buses; 
c) Trucks; 

d) Ferries; 

e) Pipelines; 

f) Air vehicles; 

g) Walking; 


h) Bicycles; 

j) Motorbikes; 
k) Automobiles; 
m) Boats; 


n) Transportation devices assisting passengers, 
delivery items and freight in moving in stations 
and terminals (for example, elevators, escalators, 
moving walkways, conveyers); and 


p) Vehicles or systems and their additional 

instruments assisting mobility-impaired persons 
(for example, scooters, segways). 
NOTE — Rail includes commuter rail, high-speed rail, inter- 
and intra-city rail, rail serviced directly among key cities, 
metro, trams, light rail transit (LRT), monorail, automated 
guideway transit (AGT), high-speed surface transport (HSST), 
aerial tramways, magnetic levitation trains and linear induction 
motor trains. 


5.2.5 Technical and Business 
Transportation Modes 


Contents of 


5.2.5.1 General 


Smart transportation solutions will be developed 
by using particular modes of transportation. The 
information below describes some of the technical 
or business contents of particular transportation 
modes to be selected to build up smart transportation. 
This information is helpful in deriving expected 
services from transportation features that individual 
transportation modes have. 


5.2.5.2 Public transportation 


Services to be provided by public transportation depend 
on what the transportation conveys are given below. 
Technical and business aspects in public transportation 
depend on public transportation modes, which support 
smart transportation solutions. 


a) Rail mode 


1) Passenger, delivery items and freight services 
(for example, customer services at stations and 
freight yards, refrigerators for delivery items/ 
freight to be kept at low temperature); 


2) Accommodation, preparation and management 
(for example, water supply, cleaning, air- 
conditioning, coach brightness adjustment); 


3) Train. operation. (for example, scheduling, 
dispatching, refueling, train crew); 


4) Rolling stock (for example, accommodations, 
maintenance, refrigerators for delivery items/ 
freight to be kept at low temperature); 


5) Power/signalling; 
6) Ommunication for train operation; 


7) Facilities (for example, stations, tracks, civil 
engineering structures); 


8) Safety (for example, surveillance); 


IS 17451 : 2020 


9) Environment (for example, noise, vibration, 
pollutant and greenhouse gas emission, 
sunlight); and 


10) Information availability (for example, making 
real-time information available to passengers 
about service frequency, destinations and 
cost). 


b) Bus/truck mode 


1) Passenger, delivery items and freight services 
(for example, customer services at bus stations, 
refrigerators for delivery items/freight to be 
kept at low temperature); 


2) Bus and truck operation (for example, 
scheduling, dispatching, drivers and 
conductors); 


3) Refueling/power charging 

NOTE — Power charging will also mean provision of charging 
for Electric vehicles. 

4) Signalling/bus or truck tracking systems; 

5) Communication for bus/truck operation; 


6) Vehicles (for example, accommodations, 
maintenance, refrigerators for delivery items/ 
freight to be kept at low temperature); 


7) Facilities (for example, bus stations, freight 
yards, taxi stands, bus and truck lanes on 
public roads, bus tracks, civil engineering 
structures for bus/truck operation); 


8) Information availability (for example, making 
real-time information available to passengers 
about service frequency, destinations and 
cost); and 

9) Fast charging infrastructure at parking lots. 

c) Ferry mode 

1) Passenger, delivery items and freight services 
(for example, customer services at ports, 
refrigerators for delivery items/freight to be 
kept at low temperature); 

2) Ferry operation (for example, scheduling, 
dispatching, crew); 

3) Refueling/power charging; 

4) Signalling; 

5) Communication for ferry operation; 

6) Vessels (for example, accommodations, 
maintenance, refrigerators for delivery items/ 
freight to be kept at low temperature); 

7) Facilities (for example, ports, ferry terminals, 
civil engineering structures for ferry operation); 
and 

8) Information availability (for example, making 
real-time information available to passengers 
and senders/recipients about service frequency, 
destinations and cost). 


IS 17451 : 2020 


d) Air vehicle mode 


1 


2 
3 


4 
5 


) 


YS x 


YS x 


passengers, delivery items and freight services 
(for example, customer services at airports, 
refrigerators for delivery items/freight to be 
kept at low temperature); 

refueling/power charging; 

air vehicle operation (for example, scheduling, 
dispatching, crew); 

aircrafts; and 

facilities (for example, airports, civil 
engineering structures for aircraft operation). 


5.2.5.3 Private transportation 


For private transportation, services listed below should 
be provided to the owners and the drivers or operators 
of the transportation by the responsible governmental, 
government-related organizations or manufacturers in 
charge. 


a) General 


1 


2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


7 
8 


9 
10 


) 


) 
) 
) 
) 
) 


) 
) 


) 


— 


Work by road administrators (for example, 
traffic surveillance, road maintenance); 


Work by channel administrators; 
Work by air traffic authorities; 
Work by police departments; 
Work by fire departments; 


Work by vehicle, boat and air vehicle 
manufacturers; 


Work by driving or operating licensors; 


Green spaces or complete streets for walking 
and bicycles; 


Bicycles sharing services; and 
Dedicated bicycles lanes. 


b) Public Transportation for Personal Use 


1) Rental bicycles; 
2) Rental motorbikes; and 
3) Rental cars. 


5.2.6 Services Provided by Transportation 


5.2.6.1 General 


Services to be provided for the users are as listed 
below when a transportation mode is selected for smart 
transportation solutions. 


5.2.6.2 Public transportation 


a) Passenger Services 


1) Train/bus/ferry/air vehicle operation; 


2) Safety for driving; 


3) Weather forecast and information; 


4) Communication of emergencies; 


5) Travel planning; 


6) 


7 
8 


— aH 


9 
10) 
11) 


— 


12) 


13) 


14 


— 


15) 
16) 


17) 
18) 
19) 
20) 
21) 


22) 


23) 


24 


— 


25) 
26) 


27 
28 
29) 


— — 


30) 


Easy access to stations, ferry terminals and 
airports (for example, pathways with roofs, 
access formation to connect stations, bus stops, 
ferry terminals and airports, introduction of 
passengers); 


Ticketing; 

Ticket inspection (for example, at stations, in 
coaches); 

Fare collection; 

Connection and change; 


Inter-modal connection (for example, rail and 
buses/trucks, rail and ferries, buses/trucks and 
ferries); 


Direct through operation (for example, 
between different rail carries, between sections 
with different-gauge tracks); 

Information provision and indication 
(for example, announcement in stations 
and coaches, languages, frequency, timing, 
indication of operation and connection 
conditions); 

Control of passenger flows and goods delivery 
routes in stations, ferry terminals and airports; 
Assistance to the disabled, the elderly and those 
whose physical performance is declining; 
Food business (for example, cafeterias, 
restaurants, dining cars, minibars on trains); 
Shop operation; 

Advertisements; 

Internet connection; 

Convenient location of stations, bus stops, 
ferry terminals and airports in a city; 
Appropriate station and bus stop intervals in 
distance; 

Business introduced into transportation 
facilities other than transportation services (for 
example, nurseries, polling places); 
Coach accommodations — (for 
formation, service equipment); 


example, 


Clean vehicle bodies and accommodations (for 
example, no graffiti, no trash, no odours); 


Delay minimization; 

Optimization of the passenger capacity of 
coaches or train sets/buses/ferries/air vehicles; 
Electronic fare payment through banks; 
Varieties of choices of travelling means; 


Arrangements at emergency (for example, 
providing detours by other carries or 
transportation modes); 


Fare adjustment at accidents (for example, 
ticket refund, free change of tickets, extension 
of ticket valid periods); 


31) Fare selection. depending on a variety of 
customers' demand and trends; 


32) Flat-rate fare in a specific zone; 

33) Freight (fare) pool systems; and 

34) Affordable fare. 

b) Delivery Items/Freight Services 

1) Train/bus/truck/ferry/air vehicle operation; 
2) Safety for driving; 
3) Weather forecast and information; 
4) Communication at emergency; 
5 
6) Pick-up/delivery services; 


— 


Shipping/receiving planning; 


7) Storage services; 
8) Delivery items/freight tracking (for example, 


registering at picking-up, shipping and 
delivery); 
9) Packing/unpacking services; 

10) Safe-handling for fragile or flammable items 
(for example, item packing with transparent 
materials for easy recognition of contents); 

11) Time and date appointment for pick-up and 
delivery; 

12) Electronic fare payment through banks; 

13) Pick-up/delivery services in a building or an 
area; and 

14) Door-to-door pick-up/delivery services with 


containers in cities. 


5.2.6.3 Private transportation 
a) Common Vehicles 
1) Safety for driving; 
2) Control of private transportation; 


3) Comfortable road conditions 
(forexample, line shapes, visibility, pavement); 

4) Traffic information (for example, congestion, 
traffic control, road maintenance work); 


5 


— 


Service information (for example, energy 
station and shop location); 


6) Information on connection to other 
transportation (for example, train, bus and 
ferry timetables); 


7 
8) Information signs; 
9 

10) 


— 


Weather forecast and information; 


x 


Emergency calls; 


Energy stations (for example, gas, LPG, 
electric power, hydrogen); 


11) 
12 
13 


Parking lots; 


— 


Vehicle sharing; 


— 


Rental vehicles; 


IS 17451 : 2020 


14) Green spaces or complete streets for walking 
and bicycles; 


15) Bicycles sharing services; and 
16) Dedicated bicycles lanes. 
b) Pooling Vehicles 
1) Rental bicycles; 
2) Rental motorbikes; and 
3) Rental cars. 


5.2.7 Feasibility of Transportation Business 


When providing smart transportation solutions in 
communities, feasibility of transportation business 
technically and financially supporting such smart 
transportation solutions should be confirmed in advance 
from the viewpoints of, 


a) Payability (for example, forecast for demand, 


estimation of costs required, financing 
arrangements); and 
b) Business cases expected by installing 
transportation. 
6 APPLICATION OF SELECTED 
TRANSPORTATION FEATURES AND 
SERVICES 


6.1 General 


In order to enable transportation features and services 
to effectively work to solve specified city issues and to 
realize smart transportation solutions in communities, 
certain conditions should be respected when applying 
transportation features and services to transportation 
operation. 


This clause will help those organizing smart 
transportation (that is, the transportation carriers and 
operators) to solve specified city issues by using features 
and services provided by selected transportation modes. 


6.2 Conditions for Transportation Features 


Transportation features should allow transportation 
services to offer smart transportation solutions on a 
user-oriented basis. Transportation carriers should 
provide such services for their customers or users from 
the viewpoint of citizens. 


6.3 Conditions for Transportation Services 


6.3.1 General 


Transportation services in communities should be 
established by preparing, combining, assembling or 
introducing appropriate transportation features to 
provide transportation services that directly offer smart 
transportation solutions to the users. The transportation 
services should satisfy the 14 needs as mentioned in 
4.1.3 for the benefit of the users. 


IS 17451 : 2020 


6.3.2 Services in the Same Transportation Mode 


For any particular mode of transport, the transport 
services should be provided to its users as listed below: 


a) Through train operation (performing availability, 
accessibility, operational efficiency and economic 
efficiency) (for example, conventional rail and 
metro or LRT, electrified and non-electrified 
sections); 


b 


x 


Operation with good connection in time and place 
between different carriers (performing availability, 
accessibility, quality of services, operational 
efficiency and economic efficiency) (for example, 
connection between private and government- 
operated rail carriers); 


c 


w 


Ticketing for travelling to other carriers 
(performing availability, accessibility, quality 
of services, operational efficiency and economic 
efficiency); 


d) Arrangements for shipping to other carriers 
(performing availability, accessibility, quality 
of services, operational efficiency and economic 
efficiency); 


e) Long distance and high-speed transportation 
(performing availability, accessibility, quality of 
services and economic efficiency) (for example, 
inter-city high-speed trains, magnetic levitation 
trains); 

f) Strategic commuter services (performing 
availability, accessibility, quality of services 
and operational efficiency) (for example, direct 
connection of key stations downtown and in the 
suburbs); and 


— 


Large network transportation systems (performing 
availability, accessibility, operational efficiency 
and economic efficiency) (for example, multiple 
inter-rail carrier through train operation to bring 
people from a huge area to specific spots). 


6.3.3 Inter-Modal Services 


Among different transportation modes, inter-modal 
transport should be performed as transportation 
services for the users as listed below: 


g 


a) Inter-modal operation or operation with good 
connection in time and place between/among 
different transportation modes (performing 
availability, accessibility, quality of services, 
operational efficiency and economic efficiency) 
(for example, connection of rail and buses, train 
operation to send/receive passengers, delivery 
items and freight to/from bus and ferry services); 


b) Ticketing for travelling using inter-modal transport 
(performing availability, accessibility, quality of 
services and operational efficiency); 

c) Ticketing for travelling to other carriers 
(performing availability, accessibility, quality of 
services and operational efficiency); 


d) Communication with other carriers on the travel 
needs of the disabled, the elderly and those whose 
physical performance is declining (performing 
availability, accessibility and quality of services); 


e) Arrangements for shipping to different-mode 
carriers (performing availability, accessibility and 
quality of services); and 


f) Reshipment of delivery items and fright at 
junctions (performing availability, accessibility, 
quality of services and economic efficiency). 


6.3.4 Services on Interfaces between Public and 
Private Transportation 


Between public and private transportation, easy 
changes from public to private transportation and vice 
versa should be organized as transportation services for 
users as listed below: 


a) Temporary stops for private vehicles (performing 
availability, accessibility and quality of services); 

b) Assistance to the disabled, the elderly and those 
whose physical performance is declining with 
changes between public and private transportation 
(performing availability, accessibility and quality 
of services); 


C 


— 


Parking lots for private vehicles including bicycles, 
motorbikes and cars (performing availability, 
accessibility and quality of services); 


d) Return delivery services for private vehicles 
including bicycles and motorbikes (performing 
availability, accessibility, quality of services and 
economic efficiency); 


€) On-board services for private vehicles including 
bicycles, motorbikes and cars (performing 
availability, accessibility and quality of services); 


f) Private vehicle shipment (performing availability, 
accessibility, quality of services and economic 
efficiency); 


g) Safe access for persons walking to/from 
transportation facilities (performing availability, 
accessibility, affordability, safety and security, 
quality of services and economic efficiency) (for 
example, skywalks, pedways, sidewalks); 


h) Easy access for persons walking to/from 
transportation facilities (performing availability, 
accessibility, affordability, safety and security and 
quality of services) (for example, elevators, the 
escalators, moving walkways, sidewalks with a 
roof or protectors); and 


J) Convenient access for persons walking to/from 
transportation facilities (performing availability, 
accessibility, quality of services, operational 
efficiency, economic efficiency, effective use of 
resources) (for example, kiosks, convenience 
shops, travel item shops, shoes and umbrella 
shops, first- aid stations, clinics, post offices, posts, 
stationary shops, internet access areas, fast food 


shops, restaurants, public phones, bank automated 
teller machines). 


6.4 Monitoring of the Performance of Smart 
Transportation 


Transportation systems in a community should be 
regularly monitored to determine whether smart 
transportation solutions are still being provided and 
where improvements should be targeted. 


7 OPTIMIZATION OF TRANSPORTATION 
SERVICES, FEATURES AND MODES ALONG 
WITH GENERATION AND SOCIAL TREND 
CHANGES 


7.1 General 


In general, technologies will be improved or discarded 
along with changes in demands, taste and culture while 
generations alternate or social trends change. Then, 
transportation services should be optimized to follow 
the latest states or situations taking place to communities 
currently existing and expected in the future. To 
optimize transportation service contents and quality 
for such a situation, transportation services, features 
and modes should be improved, changed or discarded 
to successfully provide smart transportation solutions 
even while such changes come up in communities. 


IS 17451 : 2020 


7.2 Optimization of Transportation Services for 
Current and Future Communities 


To continuingly make smart transportation solutions 
advantageous to the users, transportation services 
supporting smart transportation solutions should be 
optimized for the situations of communities currently 
existing and expected in the future by choosing/ 
discarding transportation features, improving them or 
introducing new features created with developed or 
innovated technologies. 


7.3 Holding/Discarding Transportation Features 
Used for Currently Existing Communities 


To prepare suitable transportation services for smart 
transportation solutions, transportation features 
should be chosen/discarded, employed or changed, 
if necessary. Transportation features currently used 
should be checked at a certain time interval for their 
suitability and applicability to transportation services 
supporting smart transportation solutions offered/to be 
offered to the current and expected communities. 


7.4 Reselection of Transportation Modes Used for 
Currently Existing Communities 


To successfully organize smart transportation 
solutions by making its performance suitable to 
communities currently existing and expected in the 
future, transportation modes that have been used 
should be reconsidered. The decision to hold or 
reselect transportation modes should be made by smart 
community governors, planners or developers. 


IS 17451 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.1.2 ) 


POTENTIAL OR EXPECTED SMART TRANSPORTATION PERFORMANCE OR FEATURES 


A-1 Table 1 and Table 2 show the potential or A-2 Table 3 and Table 4 show the potential or 
expected smart transportation performance or features expected smart transportation performance or features 
corresponding to the six purposes indicated in 4.1 corresponding to the 14 needs identified in 4.1.3. 


Table 1 Potential or Expected Smart Transportation Performance or Features for Public 
Transportation Corresponding to the Six Purposes 


SI Purposes 
No. 


a) Q) 


( Clauses 4.1.2 and A-1 ) 


Public Transportation 


Bus Ferry Air vehicle Others 
(4) (5) (6) (7) 


i) Attractiveness 


ii) Preservation 
and 
improvement 
of the 
environment 


Hi) Resilience 


iv) Responsible 
resource use 


a) 


b) 
a) 


b) 


c) 


b) 


c) 


Places (stations) 
to invite citizens 
to provide 
convenience and 
opportunities 
thereto 


Steady transport 


Transport 
preserving 
nature by 
electric rail 
operation 


Transport 
preserving 
nature by 
battery-powered 
rail operation 


Low greenhouse 
gas emission 
operation 


Large capacity 
transport 


Recycled rolling 
stock 


Adjustable 
voltage 
adjustable 
frequency train 
running 


a) Places (bus stations a) Distant (Truck)- Easy 
and stops) to invite transport shipping 
citizens to provide 
convenience and 
opportunities 
thereto 


b) Easy rides 


b) Rapid delivery 


Transport preserving Transport Rapid delivery 
nature by battery-powered preserving nature 
bus 


Capacity to take detour Capacity to take (Truck) 


detour - Capacity to take 


detour 


Recycled rolling stock Large capacity Large capacity 


transport transport 


10 


SI Purposes 
No. 


Table 1 ( Concluded ) 


Public Transportation 


IS 17451 : 2020 


Rail Bus Ferry Air vehicle Others 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
v) Social a) Easy a) Easy accessibility a) Low price a) Low price (Truck) 
cohesion accessibility to to dense networks transport transport a) Easy 
dense networks b) Low price transport b Service b Service accessibility 
b) Networks c) Service availability availability availability to b) Networks 
covering large to all citizens to all beer covering 
areas citizens c) Mass transit large areas 
C) Mass transit c) Low price c) Low price 
d) Low price transport transport 
transport a t d) Service 
ransi 
e) Service availability 
availability to all to all citizens 
citizens e) Mass transit 
f) Mass transit 
vi) Well-being a) Networks Easy accessibility to Mass transit 3) Mass transit (Truck) 
covering large dense networks b) Rapid a) Networks 
agas communication covering 
b) Rapid large areas 
communication b) Mass transit 
c) Mass transit 


11 


2020 


IS 17451 


]o^21 peSueure-10je1odo 


Paen 
posueire-10je19do 


/-I9ALID/-ISUAQ (q /-I9ALID/-ISUAQ (q 
paeen peSueue oA?) posuere posae posuere pey ypeoy ueumnq 
-10je1odo/-19ALIp/-ISUM Q -1oj&1odo/-19ALp/-I9UA QO -I0j&1edo/-IoALip/-IieuM() — ueumu oj suopnqrguo;) (e ojsuognquguo) (e Suloq-[[9M (A 
ey 
yeay uewny 0} suonnqrugjuo;) ueumuojsuonnqujuo;  uorsegoo [ero (A 
Əsn oo1noso1 
epqisuodsow (AL 
oui Aug je po1oA0901 our Aug je po1oAooo1 
oq ued gormp[« uomgejuodsueip oq ueo oun uonejodsuei eouenmow (HI 
peor 
-ImuəuuuorAuə uonejodsued uoneyiodsuey uomnejiodsueq 
ON = K[pueng-[ejuseurnoriAug (q K[pueng-[ejueumurAug (q A]pusLy-yeyuouuOIAUT (q juoumuoJIAuo oq) 
IJIYA oinjeu omu SurAToso1d oinjeu SurA1osoqd o juoursAO0Jduir 
py ! I J I 
]]99 ueSo1pAH) SuIAIosoid uonvejodsuei[ (e uonejodsueip (e uonejuodsueip (e pue uongAlsso1q (1 
uonejodsuer, 19440 uomejrodsuer 1oulo uoneyiodsuey 19010 uoneyiodsuey 19u1o 
Aue YIM ]2ouuoo ueo Aue uA joouuoo uto Aue ym joouuoo ueo Aue ym joouuoo ueo 
yorym uonejodsueip (p uonejodsuen qonpa ` uonejuodsueip (p qon ` uoneuodsueip (p ymm  uonejndsueip (p 
Ároedeo 03 1depe ueo lego Aug q^ joeuuoo Kiyroedeo o 3depe ues Ároedeo 03 1depe ueo Áiroedeo 03 3depe ues 
yorym uonejodsueip (o ue» qom voneyodsuery (p qonpa ` uonejodsueip (° yorym ` uonejodsueip (9 ymm  uonejndsueip (9 
ojno1 Aue Áyoedeo o) eps ojnoi ojnoi ojnoi 
Jo} poguer oq uto ueo yom uoneuodsuwi (o Aue Jo} poguelre oq ueo Aue 10J poguelr oq ueo Aue 10} posuer oq ueo 
yorym uonejodsueip (q ano1 Aue 103 pogue oq yoym ` uonejuodsueip (q ymm — uoneodsueip (q ymm  uonejodsueip (q 
oum Kue ueo qom uoneuodsueip (q oum oum oum 
je po[npeuos oq ueo our Aue je po[npouos oq Aue ye po[npouos oq ueo Aue ye po[npouos oq ueo Aue ye po[npouos oq ueo 
yorym uonejdsuei (e ueo yorum uonejrodsueig (e yorym ` uomgejuodsueip (e yom ` uonejuodsueip (e ymm  uonejodsueip (e ssoucAnoenjy (1 
(8) () (9) (s) (p) (©) © (D 
Bue IPA 1IV jeog əpqowomy exrq10joJA pue spoAo1g SUDEM 
“ON 
uonejodsue 9EALId sosodunq IS 


( I-V pub 7 y səsnpjO ) 


sosod.inq XIS 94} 0} Surpuodso.r10;) uonej.aodsueJ], 9)JEALId 10} So1n3€9,[ 10 92uguri0J.Iod uonejaodsue.g, Ups pojyoodx'q 10 [(erju930gd C AQEL 


12 


2020 


IS 17451 


suosiad po[qesrp 


suosiad po[qesrp 


JOJ posueue Yoo}s Sujoy 10} poSuenue »oojs SUNJOY Ájunoos pue Aale (At 
Suiuue[d Aj (q Suiuue[d Aj (q Suruue]|d A3 (q 
Suruuejd AyD uonezrumndo yep (e uonezrundo yep (e uongzrumdo jur (e ÁypIqepiogry (u 
SUOHLJS UI SOOTAIOS 
Suomms uy seorAres uonejodsuen  [eonioA (S 
uogejuodsuen qeonijA (J SOOTAIOS uoneunju] (J 
SHODSS ur soorA1ss uoneulju[ (o epu pue yreg (9 
SOdIAJOS uoyeyodsuey peonio (o 
epu pue yed (p Suuequinu uongejg (p 
soras uoneuuoju[ (p 
Suuequinu uogejs (9 uone1edo gsnogq (9 
opu pue yeg (9 
SyIOMjou asuaq (q Sowa osuoq (q 
Suuequmnuuogejs (q 
Surur|oəp Suiuioop 
Suruioop st ooueuuojrod st sourwood jeorsAud SI əoupguuojiod [eorsAud 
]eorÁud əsoym sou pue ƏsouA oso pue Á[1opjo əsoym əsoy} pue Á[1opjo 
Apopo oy} 'pejqesrp ou 104 (e eu 'pejgesrp oy} 104 (v eq “pəlqesip ou 104 (e Ay[qissooo y (u 
suonejs ursseursng (3 
sosodznd oytoods suonejs urssoursng (J SUOT]EJS UI SOOTAIOS 
Joy Jiodsuen mat Araq (o SUONIE]S UI SƏƏIAI9S uoneuodsuen — [eonioA G 
sootjd ogroods ye reiron D eT i uogejuodsuen qeonioA (9 soorAIes uoneuuoju[ (9 
soorA1es ÁAioAr[op pue dn-xoiq (p apos ui SOOIAIOS uoneunngju] (p epu pue yed (p 
Jiodsuen 100p-0}-100q (° SOOIAIOS uonpliodsue. |EODI9A (9 epu pue yeg (9 uone1edo gsnouq (° 
yiodsuen po[npouos (q SOOTAIOS uonpuuroju] (q SyIOMjou əsuoq (q Sowa əsuoq (q 
Axoatop/dn-yord yuonbery (e syiodne ut ssoursng epu pue»eq (e senio joeduioo 104 (e senio joeduioo 104 (e Ayyiqeyreay (1 
(O) (9) (s) (p) © a 
Bue! ƏYA ITV Aua sng Tey 
uonvjodsuea[ 20004 SDaaN ‘ON IS 


( T-V PUD £p səsnpjO ) 


SPOON PI 4} 0) Surpuodsə 1100 uon ej.rodsuev. , 
3mqng 10} $9.1njVIy 10 əəuguri0Ji9q Don Oodeug 11. Ligue pojoodx'q 10 IEHuaI04 ç AQEL 


13 


2020 


IS 17451 


ulo]sÁsooo 


jo uogeAlssuO) (AIX 
uonnjpdjo uogueAe1q ` (ux 
ogueuo 

apuwo Jo uonesnyy (X 

Ssooinoso1jo ƏSN ƏAB29JJd (ix 

(Lag) usuen pide: sng (Lag) usuen pide: sng (149) usuen pider sng IDUIS (x 

juouidinbo juouidinbo 
juoudmbo jo [emouo1[eorpouoq jo emouol [gorpouoq Jo [£A ouo1 [£orpouoq Ky[rqeurejurepA (xt 
AypIqepreAe 
uogeuuojgurooueuljloq ` (INA 
AouəoluJo ormuouooq (mA 
oam) 0j 

poors sure ssoidxq (q 

uonei»do qgnomq[ (e Aouorujo [euoneredo) ` (a 

SUOT]EJS ut SUOT]E]S UI SODTAIOS SUOT]E]S UI SOOTAIOS 

soorAIes uorejiodsuei eor (o uogeuodsuen qeonioA (o uogeuodsueng peona (o 
SAIAS ssooo? jouroju[ (p SOOTAIOS ssooo? jouroju] (p soolAIes ssoooe jouroju] (p 
Suruonipuoo-1y (9 Suruonipuoo-ry (9 Suruonipuoo-ry (o 
juoeuroounouue uwez (q jueuroounouue uwez (q juoeurounouue urpi, (q 

Sunoqumu uonges (e Suuequimu uones (e Suuequimnu uones (e Soo1AJoS Jo DEn (^ 

(O) (9) (s) (qp) (€ (c) 
s1940 YAA ITV AJ sng Tey 
uonej1odsuei] qnd Spa3oN ‘ON IS 


( pəpn]ouoO ) £ NALL 


2020 


IS 17451 


Ulo]sÁs-009 


jo uoneA1ssuo;) (AIX 
sojorgoA uni-Aiojegq so[oroA uni-Á1ojjeq so[orgoA uni-Aiojegq uognpjodjo uoguseAeiq (Ix 
ogueuo 
apuwo Jo  uone3nnw — (ux 
SuLeys-opry soomosor1joosnoAnoogq (Ix 
EREM (x 
Aypiqeureyureyy ` (xi 
uonejiodsuen uonejiodsuen 
onqnd oj uonooeuuoo otrjqnd oj uomnoouuoo uonejiodsue orqnd oi uonejodsuej oiqnd oi uonejiodsue orqnd oi uonejodsuei omqnd oi 
10} Juəouidinbə — 10] juəouidmbə  uonoeuuoo 10j jueuidinbo uonoəuuoo 10] juouidmbə — uonoouuoo 10; juouidinbo | uonoeuuoo 107 jueuidmbo Ayiqeyreae 
uonguriojur [Puosiod  uomeullojur [eUOSIOg UOTJeULIOJUT [euosiag | uoreuiojur [Puosioq ` uomeuiojur Jeuosiag | uomeuiojur [Puosioq  uogeunojur ooueuuojioq (MA 
Áouorogje omuouooq — (HA 
sode pue spodi pue 
Situa) Alij 'snq spumo; Aua 'snq Sj1odure pue seuru} spodne pue s[euruioj Sy1odure pue Sjodure pue 
[suonejs je soSueqgo  /suonejs je soëupu Alloy  snq/suonejs ye Aua  sng/suonejs je s[euruuo) ÁN snq/suonejs SPEU} ÁJ *sng/suonejs 
/uonoouuoo Aseq  /uonoouuoo Aseq  segueqoyuonoeuuoo = Aseq  soSuego/yuonoouuoo seq je səšueuo/uonoouuoo Áseq e səšueuo/uonoəouuoo Asp Áouerorngo [euoneg1ed() (IA 
SOOTAIOS JO ATEN?) (A 
Aytinoas pue Koes (Al 
Aupqeprogy (M 
sulo]sÁs 
uonejodsueng 1ogjo suiojsÁs uonejiodsuem surojsÁs uorejiodsuem surojsÁs uonej1odsueg surojsÁs uonejiodsuemn surojsÁs uonej1odsue 
o  ssooo Asp Joo o ssoooe Áseg Joyo o  ssoooe  Áseq Wyo o ssoooe Aseq 90 o sang Aseq logo o sang Aseq Kjpqissooo y (u 
Aupqepeay ` (1 
(8) (O) (9) (s) (p) (&) © (D 
Stau IYA ary jeog e[qourojny exrq10joJA pue opoAo1g SUDEM 
uonejgodsueJ] 9)EALId SpooN "ON IS 


( T-V PUD € oy səsnpjO ) 
SPOON PI ?1 0) Surpuodso.Li0?) uon ej.rodsue 9JEALId 40J SƏ1In)EƏ4 40 9o2ueurroJroq uonej1odsue. JABS poy2odxzq 10 [epuəolod p AQEL 


15 


IS 17451 : 2020 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Smart Cities Sectional Committee, CED 59 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (G -/602, Pioneer Park, 
Sector — 61, Gurugram-122001) 


AECOM India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, New Delhi 
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 

All India Institute of Local Self Government, Mumbai 
Bhubaneshwar Smart City Limited, Bhubaneshwar 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, 


New Delhi 


Builders Association of India, New Delhi 


Central Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


Cochin Smart City Limited, Kochi 
Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Confederation of Real Estate Developers' Association 
of India, New Delhi 


Corporation of Chennai, Chennai 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development 
Corporation Ltd, Mumbai 


Department of Telecommunication, Ministry of 
Communications, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry, New Delhi 


Greater Vishakhapatnam Smart City Corporation 
Limited, Vishakhapatnam 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Company Ltd, 
Ghandinagar 


Guwahati Municipal Corporation, Guwahati 

Indian Concrete Institute, Chennai 

Indian Green Building Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehradun 

Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 


Institute of Town Planners, India, New Delhi 


Jabalpur Smart City Limited, Jabalpur 


Jammu Municipal Corporation, Jammu 


16 


Representative(s) 


Dn Supuir KRISHNA (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN KUMAR JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI ADVAIT AUNDHKAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri J. K. PRASAD 


SHRI DHARMESH AWASTHI 
SHRI ARUN SAna! (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI VIRENDER SINGH 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI B. V. BABU 
SHRI S. SUDHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI LEENU SEHGAL 
SHRIMATI MANJU Paur (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
Suri Director (NT-IID (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYANT KOHALE 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI LOVELEEN GARG 


REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRI K. P. ABRAHAM 

Ms SHEETAL RAKHEJA 
REPRESENTATIVE 

PRoF UTTAM K. BANERJEE 


Suri B. C. DATTA 
PROF KULSHRESHTHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Organization 
Karki Associates, New Delhi 
Ministry of Commerce & Industry, New Delhi 


Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, New Delhi 


Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, New Delhi 
Ministry of Earth Sciences, New Delhi 


Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy, New Delhi 


Ministry of Panchayati Raj, New Delhi 
Ministry of Power, New Delhi 
Ministry of Rural Development, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Tourism, New Delhi 
Ministry of Transport, New Delhi 


Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


National Association of Software & Services 
Companies, Noida 


National Real Estate Development Council, 
New Delhi 


National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad 


North East Space Application Centre, Umiam, 
Shillong 


Office of the Registrar General & Census 
Commissioner, New Delhi 


Ranchi Municipal Corporation, Ranchi 
Saviram Engineering Consultants Pvt Ltd, Noida 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Shillong Smart City Limited, Shillong 
Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Sulabh International Social Service Organization, 
New Delhi 


Surat Smart City Development Limited, Surat 
Survey of India, Dehradun 


Svayam National Centre for Inclusive Environment, 
New Delhi 


17 


IS 17451 : 2020 


Representative(s) 
SHRI RAJNISH KARKI 
SHRI SUDHANSHU PANDEY 


Ms Kavita BHATIA 
SHRI Mayank (Alternate) 


Director (BIS) 
UNDER Secretary (BIS) (Alternate) 


SHRI D. RAJSHEKHAR 
SHRI G. BALASUBRAMANIYAM (Alternate) 


DR M. MOHAPATRA 
Dn O. P. Misura (Alternate) 


SHRI KUNAL KUMAR 


Dr A. K. TRIPATHI 
Dn G. PRASAD (Alternate) 


JOINT SECRETARY 
SECRETARY 
REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri K. S. REJIMON 


Dn Ravi KANT BHATNAGAR 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI R. K. JAIN 
Suri G. C. Pati (Alternate) 


Suri N. KISHORE NARANG 


Suri MANOJIT BOSE 
Ms Rama VEDASHREE (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVIN RAHEJA 
Bric R. R. Smeu (Alternate) 


Dr K. VENUGOPAL 
DR MURALIKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI GIRISH MISHRA 


Dr Vinay MAITRI 
Dn SANJUKKTA S. BHADURI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI DEBASHISH Roy 


Pror K. J. NATH 
Dn N. B. Mazumpar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SuBHASH CHANDRA V ASHISHTH 
Suri J. M. Svar (Alternate) 


IS 17451 : 2020 


Organization 


Town and Country Planning Organization, 
New Delhi 


Jdaipur Smart City Limited, Udaipur 


e c 


nified Traffic & Transportation Infrastructure 
(P. & Engg.) Centre, New Delhi 


niversity of Delhi, New Delhi 


Urban Development Department, Town & Country 
Planning Branch, Kolkata 


c 


Urban Governance, Administrative Staff College of 
India, Hyderabad 


V. V. Giri National Labour Institute, Noida 
WRI India, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (8-399, 2nd Floor, Meera Bagh, 
Paschim Vihar, New Delhi 110063) 


In personal capacity (Apartment No. 3203, Verona Cliff 
Avenue, Hiranandani Gardens, Powai Mumbai 
400076) 


In personal capacity (//5 Shabd Pratap Asharam, 
Lashkar, Gwalior 474012) 


In personal capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida) 


In personal capacity (L/109, Sarita Vihar, 
New Delhi 110076) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
Suri Nitin Kumar Azan (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRIMATI MANJU PAUL 
SHRI MaNisH VERMA (Alternate) 


Dn C. R. BABU 


SHRI SATANU PRASAD KAR 
Ms SANDHYATRA SAHA (Alternate) 


PROF SRINIVAS CHARY VEDALA 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Ms PRERNA V. MEHTA 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR 


SHRI V. SURESH 


Suri S. P. BANSAL 


Dr SANDEEP GARG 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C? (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Smart Cities Working Group, CED 59/WG 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (G-1602, Pioneer Park, Sector 61, 
Gurugram-122 001) 


Gujarat International Finance Tec-City Limited, 
Gandhinagar 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 
School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 
Smart Cities Next, New Delhi 


Town and Country Planning Organization, New Delhi 


WRI India, New Delhi 
In personal capacity (374, Sector 28, Noida) 


18 


Representative(s) 
Dr SupHuiR KRISHNA (Convener) 


SHRI LOVLEEN K. GARG 


Dr SoMNATH MITRA 

SHRI SAMPATH KUMAR S. 
PROF SANJUKKTA BHADURI 
SHRI DEBASHISH Roy 


SHRI R. SRINIVAS 
SHRI SUDEEP Roy (Alternate) 


Ms PRERNA V. MEHTA 


SHRI SANDEEP GARG 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 59 (15247). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


