RAT AAF IS 14344 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


fara raat && fre gsar ater AT 
fesrea aar Frater — fifa afear 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Design and Construction of 
Diaphragms for Under-Seepage 
Control — Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 8 


Foundations and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee, WRD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by Foundations and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Water Resources 
Division Council. 


Construction of conventional rolled earth fill cut-off benches can be a prohibitively expensive operation 
depending on the required depth and the existing natural ground water condition. The recent trend has been 
towards application of diaphragm walls in the control of under-seepage. 


Diaphragm walls can be constructed by a variety of methods that do not require foundation dewatering and 
greatly reduce the amount of excavation from that required for a rolled earthen cut-off. 


In theory, all the major types of diaphragm walls can be designed to provide a positive seepage cut-off. 
However, there are certain uncertainties in the design and construction of all types of diaphragm walls. Each 
application of a diaphragm wall is unique and depends largely on the intended function as on the foundation 
conditions, hydraulic gradients and economic considerations. In this standard the design and construction 
aspects of diaphragm walls have been addressed to the situation where the diaphragm wall is used as a measure 
for under-seepage control. 


This standard was first published in 1996, however, the Committee responsible for the formulation of this 
standard decided to revise it based on the new designing technique available of numerical analysis. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of revision of this standard is given at 
Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14344 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF 
DIAPHRAGMS FOR UNDER-SEEPAGE 
CONTROL — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the design and construction of 
diaphragm walls to be used as positive impervious cut- 
offs for dams, weirs and barrages as an under-seepage 
control measure. 


1.2 Diaphragm walls required for other structures are 
not covered in this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


2.1 The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreement based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


2.2 For the definitions of various terms used in this 
standard, reference may be made to relevant parts of 
IS 4410. 


3 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
DIAPHRAGM WALL AS AN UNDER-SEEPAGE 
CONTROL MEASURE 


3.1 Under-seepage control measures for dams, weirs 
and barrages have two independent functions: 


a) To reduce the loss of water by seepage, through 
sub-surface, to an amount compatible with the 
purpose of the project; and 

b) To eliminate the possibility of structural failure by 
piping. 

3.2 The quantity of seepage can be reduced appreciably 
by intercepting the pervious strata by means of 
diaphragm wall. Bottom of the diaphragm wall should 
be embedded in continuous impervious stratum. Top 
of the diaphragm wall should be connected with an 
impervious member of the structure like the impervious 
core of embankment. 


3.3 Chances of failure of dam by piping increases 
rapidly with increasing value of hydraulic gradient. 
Careful selection of the type of diaphragm wall can 
reduce the probability of piping failure to a minimum. 


3.4 Selection of under-seepage control measures is 
dependent on the following factors: 

a) Heterogeneity of sub-surface strata, 

b) Uncertainties in foundation characteristics, 

c) The economic value of the water stored, 


d) The risk element as influenced by the height of 
dam, 


e) Reservoir volume, and 


f) Potential damage to -downstream areas. 
4 NECESSITY OF DIAPHRAGM WALL 


4.1 Where construction of positive cut-off trench 
by conventional open excavation is not feasible on 
account of the situations described below, construction 
of diaphragm wall as an under-seepage control measure 
can solve the problem: 


a) Excessive depth of the impervious stratum 
overlain by pervious or heterogeneous strata; 


b) Construction difficulties, like heavy dewatering; 

c) Instability of side slopes of excavations; 

d) Paucity of construction materials; and 

e) Time constraints, etc. 
4.2 It is, however, imperative to study the cost factor, 
water loss that can be tolerated, risk involved in case 
of failure of structure, ease in construction, time factor, 


and any other inherent issues for the project, prior to 
selecting the under-seepage control measure. 


5 TYPES OF DIAPHRAGM WALL 


5.1 Depending on the use of construction materials 
there are the following types of diaphragm walls: 


a) Rigid type 
1) Reinforced cement concrete. 


IS 14344 : 2021 


b) Flexible type: 
1) Plastic concrete, 
2) Cement bentonite slurry trench, and 
3) Earth backfilled slurry trench. 


5.2 Diaphragm wall, single line or two lines spaced 
about 3 to 4 m apart can be provided as per the 
requirements of water tightness and site conditions. In 
the latter case, the alluvium contained between the two 
diaphragm walls is also grouted to achieve better water 
tightness, if warranted. 


6 SELECTION 
WALL 


OF TYPE OF DIAPHRAGM 


6.1 Selection of type of diaphragm depends upon a 
number of factors, such as: 


a) site conditions; 

b) heterogeneity/perviousness of sub-surface strata; 
c) geological features; 

d) depth of overburden; 


e) anticipated stresses and deformations due to 
embankment construction and reservoir loading 
conditions; 


f) availability of construction materials; and 


g) techno-economic considerations, etc. 


6.1.1 Guidelines given in this standard are only an 
indication of the preferred type of diaphragm wall. The 
decision of the design engineer backed by assessment of 
various factors, past experience and his own judgment 
are important in selecting a type of diaphragm wall to 
suit the project requirements. 


6.2 Where the foundation strata consists of bouldary 
deposits, open gravel pockets, zones of talus, slide 
areas, contacts of formation of different geological 
age, fractured zones or similar features, it is obvious 
that voids/openings may be larger and contact with 
diaphragm wall face may not be continuous. Under 
such circumstances it is important to see that bending 
stresses between contact free lengths are taken care of. 
Any flexible type of diaphragm wall which undergoes 
large deformations at low stress levels is not suitable. 
Rigid type diaphragm wall is preferable under such 
conditions. 


6.3 If stratum in the foundation is fairly uniform and 
pervious, the contact of soil particles with the face of 
diaphragm wall will be continuous. Application of rigid 
diaphragm wall in such strata induces higher stress 
level due to low deformability of the fill material of the 
diaphragm wall, when pervious strata undergoes strain 
on load application. This causes interface problems 
between diaphragm wall faces and surrounding strata 
which may ultimately result in cracks between soil 


and face of diaphragm wall leading to probability of 
hydraulic fracturing. Under such circumstances the ideal 
material for the diaphragm wall would be one which 
possesses deformation characteristics compatible with 
the surrounding soil mass. Flexible type of diaphragm 
wall is, therefore, preferable in such circumstances. 


6.3.1 Depending on stress-strain behavior of strata and 
anticipated stress level upon loading, selection should 
be made on either plastic concrete or cement bentonite 
diaphragm wall or earth back filled slurry trench 
diaphragm wall. 


6.3.2 If sub-surface strata consists or gravelly or 
bouldary deposits with the interstices filled up with finer 
soil particles forming a tight matrix of relatively low 
permeability, plastic concrete diaphragm is preferable 
to rigid or cement bentonite slurry trench diaphragm. 


7 NECESSARY INFORMATION 


7.1 Following information is generally necessary for 
the design and construction of a diaphragm wall for 
under-seepage control: 


a) Contoured site plan and detailed drawings of 
embankment dam/barrage/weir with properties 
of soil in various zones of embankment dam, 
showing FRL, MWL, LWL, TWL, etc. 


Detailed sub-soil investigations along the proposed 
alignment of diaphragm wall as laid down in IS 
1892 and IS 6955 with particular reference to the 
bouldary/gravelly formations. 


Longitudinal section along the proposed 
alignment of diaphragm wall marked with ground 
levels, sub-surface geological features, type of 
structure(s) at both ends of diaphragm wall and 
any other pertinent details. 


b 


ma 


c 


ma 


d 
e 


© 


In-situ permeability test data. 


Stress-strain curves of embankment and 
overburden soils obtained in triaxial shear test in 
appropriate test conditions, covering full depth of 
overburden. 

f) Physical, physico-chemical and engineering 
properties of the sub-soil and chemical properties 
of ground water. 


wm 


g) Modulus of sub-grade reaction of the sub soil in 
horizontal direction. 


h) Stage of construction or details of the construction 
sequence and construction schedule of the 
embankment dam/barrage/weir. 

j) Ground water table, its probable fluctuations and 
subterranean flow conditions, if any. 

k) Size, weight, capacity and working principle of 
the trenching and concreting machinery intended 
to be used. 


m) Quality and amount of local materials available 
economically at, or near, the site of construction 
for preparing the slurry, plastic concrete, R.C.C. 


n) Complete details of auxiliary construction 
equipment like lifting cranes, tower cranes, 
hauling units, mixing devices, pumping devices, 
etc, intended to be used. 


8 MATERIALS 


8.1 Cement 


Cement shall be ordinary Portland cement conforming 
to IS 269 or rapid hardening Portland cement 
conforming to IS 8041, blast furnace slag cement 
conforming to IS 455 or Portland pozzolana cement 
conforming to IS 1489 (Part 1) or IS 1489 (Part 2). 


8.2 Aggregate 


The aggregates shall conform to IS 383. Well graded 
coarse aggregate of 20 mm size shall normally be used 
in reinforced concrete diaphragm walls. For plastic 
concrete diaphragm walls, a smaller size of aggregate 
may be used. 

8.3 Sand 


Well graded sand consisting of 50 percent coarse sand 
shall be used. 

8.4 Water 

Clean water free from deleterious impurities, as 
specified in IS 456, shall be used in preparing the 
concrete mix and for preparation of bentonite slurry. 
Water shall be free from salinity when used with 
bentonite. 

8.5 Admixtures 

If required, chemical admixtures in concrete shall be 
used as specified in IS 456. 

8.6 Reinforcement 

Mild steel bars conforming to IS 432 (Part 1) and cold 
worked bars conforming to IS 1786 shall be used. 

8.7 Bentonite 

Bentonite used shall conform to IS 12584. 


8.8 Clay 


Clay shall conform to IS 1498. Clay is generally 
used to reduce consumption of bentonite. Clay is also 
required to be used in earth-backfilled slurry trench 
cut-off walls. 


9 DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 


9.1 General 


9.1.1 Utmost consideration shall be given, while 
designing the diaphragm wall, so as to achieve: 


IS 14344 : 2021 


a) perfect embedment at both the ends, to avoid/ 
minimize possibilities of cracking both within and 
surrounding the diaphragm wall; and 


b) imperviousness or water tightness. Water 
tightness is mainly adjudged with the value 
of permeability (k). If the water is sufficiently 
expensive to justify a high cost of diaphragm 
wall then the diaphragm may be constructed to 
achieve a permeability of 1, 2 or 3 lugeons. If the 
seepage loss is little or of negligible value, then 
water tightness up to a permeability of 3 lugeons 
is preferred to prevent piping of the foundation 
material. Permeability of 3 to 5 may be permitted 
in exceptional cases where an inordinately 
high expenditure is anticipated for achieving of 
reduction of up to 3 lugeons. 


These considerations will take care of the intended 
functions of the diaphragm wall as an under seepage 
control measure. 


9.1.2 Diaphragm wall is a component of the structure 
for which dimensions are predetermined. The most 
important consideration in the design of a diaphragm 
wall is to form an impervious wall having flexibility 
to avoid cracking. The potential for cracking induced 
by stresses in the diaphragm wall as construction 
progresses and during first filling of the reservoir 
shall be considered, particularly for rigid type of wall. 
Stresses are usually not a problem unless they cause 
excessive cracking which would negate the purpose of 
the wall. For flexible type of wall, its imperviousness, 
deformability compatible with surrounding soil and 
required unconfined compressive strength are the 
governing factors. 


9.2 Location 


9.2.1 The best location for a diaphragm wall within a 
structure is where the loads are reasonably balanced 
on both sides of the wall. In case of new earth/rockfill 
dam, the axis at top of the dam will be an ideal location 
due to more or less symmetrical design. At this 
location bending moments about the horizontal axis 
will be minimum and the horizontal deformations will 
also be minimum. However, for any location of the 
diaphragm wall, the junction of diaphragm wall with its 
surroundings has to be properly taken care of to avoid 
piping problems through interfaces (see 9.4.2). 


9.2.2 An alternative location of the diaphragm wall 
is at the upstream toe of earth dam which minimizes 
the possibility of compressive failure of the wall due 
to negative skin friction developed by settlement of 
foundation strata under the weight of embankment. For 
this location, however, construction of embankment 
shall be carried out first followed by construction of 
the diaphragm wall. Top of diaphragm wall should be 
connected with a horizontal impervious blanket which 


IS 14344 : 2021 


shall be linked with the upstream toe of impervious 
core. 


9.2.3 Location of diaphragm wall is often influenced 
by site conditions. Location shall, therefore, be decided 
after careful study of site requirements and localised 
features. 


9.2.4 Locations of the diaphragm wall required for the 
barrage/weir are fixed from design point of view. These 
are generally provided at upstream and downstream 
ends of the floor of the barrage/weir. However, the 
junction of the diaphragm wall, other than rigid type of 
diaphragm wall, with the concrete/masonry work has 
to be properly thought of; generally the barrage/weir 
floor is constructed of rigid concrete or masonry with 
concrete cover. The junction of rigid concrete in the 
floor with the flexible type of diaphragm wall may not 
be monolithic and hence, in such cases seepage can take 
place through such joints. It is, therefore, preferable to 
use rigid concrete diaphragm walls to act as cut-offs for 
barrage/weir structures. 


9.3 Choice of Panel Dimensions 


9.3.1 Choice of panel dimension depends on various 
considerations as below: 


a) Stability : In general, short panels are stable than 
long panels. However, in soft ground short panels 
are preferred. 


b) Concreting : It shall be possible to place the total 
volume of the concrete for a panel before setting, 
or significant stiffening, takes place. 


c) Excavation Equipment : It shall be ensured that 
the panel length shall not be shorter than a single 
bite of the grab. 


d) Number of Stop-End Tubes : Placing and extraction 
of stop-end tubes is costly. 


e) Reinforcement Size and weight of each 
reinforcement cage must allow easy handling with 
available equipment at site. 


9.3.2 Each joint is a potential source of seepage. It is 
desirable, therefore, that the number of panel joints 
shall be kept to the minimum. An appropriate size of 
the panel shall be selected on the basis of considerations 
(a) and (b) above. This sizes hall then be analyzed for 
consideration (c) and then the remaining considerations 
taken care of. Panel volume shall be of reasonable 
size and moderate in length because of the possible 
shrinkage of panels. Final checks shall be made on the 
closing panels. 


9.3.3 A practical maximum panel length shall be of 
the order of 10 m wherein concrete can effectively be 
placed using two tremie pipes in a panel of 600 mm 
thickness. Minimum panel length shall be limited to 


5 m, or single bite of the grab, with one tremie pipe for 
ensuring due concreting operations. 


9.3.3.1 In case of flexible type of diaphragm wall 
possibility of seepage through joints gets reduced to 
a greater extent. In such cases panel length of 3 m to 
5 m will be convenient. Problems of instability of sides 
of trench and handling/circulating the slurry will be 
minimum with these panel lengths. 


9.3.4 In general diaphragm walls are of thickness 
500 mm, 600 mm, 750 mm and 900 mm. These widths 
have been found to be satisfactory up to a depth of 
50 m. For greater depths thicker walls (1 000 mm to 
1500 mm) may be used ensuring trench stability and 
resistance to hydro-fracturing. 


9.3.5 Depth of the wall will depend on the depth to 
an impervious layer, or a layer that satisfies the 
designer’s criteria for allowable seepage losses, and 
flow pattern. 


9.4 Joints, Junctions and Sub-surface Grouting 
9.4.1 Joints 


9.4.1.1 In case of rigid diaphragm wall, joints between 
the primary and secondary panels are generally 
achieved by use of form tubes (stop-end tubes). The 
concrete faces of the primary panels are roughened 
using special tools prior to concreting the secondary 
panels. 


9.4.1.2 In case of a rigid type single diaphragm wall, 
the joints between the successive panels are generally 
grouted in accordance with IS 4999 on upstream face, 
by method of grouting .through tubes with sleeves 
(tube-a-manchette grouting method) which is usually 
adopted for grouting of alluvium. In doing so, joints 
between the panels are sealed from the upstream 
side. 


9.4.1.3 In case of two lines of rigid type of diaphragm 
walls, alluvium in between the two walls shall be 
grouted, if warranted, by the method described in 
9.4.1.2 to achieve better reduction in permeability. 


9.4.1.4 Flexible type of diaphragm walls can be 
constructed without any joints as a continuous 
construction process. However, faces of primary panels 
are required to be roughened by grab teeth or by special 
tools, prior to filling the secondary panels to get a better 
joint. 


9.4.1.5 Interface between the bottom end of diaphragm 
wall and bedrock/impervious strata shall be grouted to 
achieve water tightness. This will be achieved while 
grouting the strata below the bottom of the diaphragm 
wall. 


9.4.2 Junctions 


9.4.2.1 Junctions of the diaphragm wall will generally 
be at the following locations: 


a) Junction of the bottom end of the diaphragm wall 
with sub-surface strata. 


b) Junction of the diaphragm wall at both ends with 
hill abutment/any structure. 


c) Junction of the top end of the diaphragm wall 
within the structure. 


9.4.2.2 Bottom end of the diaphragm wall shall be 
keyed to a depth of 600 to 1 000 mm into impervious 
soil or rock. 


9.4.2.3 At the junctions of rigid and flexible types 
of wall with hill abutments, or any structure, it is 
necessary to provide adequate creep length to get safe 
exit gradients. Diaphragm walls shall, therefore, extend 
into the abutment or any structure to a minimum length 
which provides safe seepage gradient not exceeding 
4 horizontal to 1 vertical. Panel length adopted for 
construction of diaphragm walls should, however, be 
adjusted according to the required extension. 


9.4.2.4 Top end of diaphragm wall, whether of rigid or 
flexible type, will remain either below the ground level 
or will extend above the ground level into an impervious 
core. Extent of the embedment of diaphragm wall 
into the core can be better decided with the help of 
any suitable numerical analysis. Without such study, 
extension of the diaphragm wall into core will be based 
on the designer’s judgment. Excessive internal hydraulic 
gradient can be avoided by proper selective treatment 
around the diaphragm wall in core, type of impervious 
soil, width of impervious core, downstream drainage 
arrangement, etc. In absence of numerical analysis, it 
is apprehended that the diaphragm wall can damage 
the impervious core as the foundation settles under the 


PLASTIC CLAY 
LIQUID LIMIT>50 7 


IS 14344 : 2021 


weight of the embankment and subsequent loadings. 
During earthquake, top portion of the diaphragm wall 
will be more vulnerable to damage. Extension of rigid 
type of diaphragm wall is not desirable from such 
considerations. Hence, precautions shall be taken to 
prevent possible damages along the extended length of 
diaphragm wall into the core. Alternatively, it would 
be preferable to provide a partial cut-off-trench below 
impervious core to a depth required by permissible 
internal hydraulic gradient considerations, and to keep 
the top of diaphragm within the impervious backfill of 
the partial cut-off-trench up to ground level, or below. 
This also reduces the possibility of damage to the 
diaphragm wall near the ground during earthquake. 


9.4.2.5 Top end of the diaphragm wall shall be rounded 
to avoid stress concentration at the corners. 


9.4.2.6 Whether the diaphragm wall is extended into 
the impervious core, or is kept below the ground 
level within partial cut-off-trench, a cover of plastic 
clay shall be provided around the diaphragm wall to 
safeguard against any possible damage to the wall or to 
the impervious core. This cover shall consist of clayey 
soil of relatively high plasticity with its liquid limit 
more than 50. This clay cover will act as a deformable 
‘cushion’ and will reduce stress concentration. It will 
also improve the interface contacts. Dimensions of 
cover above top of diaphragm wall shall, however, be 
decided on available literature/experience/model study, 
etc. Such treatment will be required for both the rigid 
and flexible type of diaphragm walls. 


9.4.2.7 Junction of flexible type of diaphragm walls 
with rigid structures shall be avoided. 


9.4.2.8 Typical junction details of rigid/flexible 
diaphragm wall with impervious core are shown in 
Fig. 1. 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL JUNCTION DETAILS OF DIAPHRAGM WALL WITH IMPERVIOUS CORE 


IS 14344 : 2021 


9.4.2.9 Typical junction details for diaphragm-wall 
located upstream of the toe of earth dam are shown in 
Fig. 2. 


9.4.3 Sub-subsurface Grouting 


9.4.3.1 The bed rock below the rigid and flexible type of 
diaphragm wall is generally grouted to a required depth 
by providing pipes inside the panels while casting, to 
reduce the permeability of bed rock. Drilling the holes 
directly into the diaphragm wall after its casting shall 
be avoided as it is practically impossible to keep the 
holes within the wall. Also in doing so there is a risk of 
disturbing the panel material and thereby damaging the 
wall during drilling. 


9.5 Loading on Diaphragm Wall 


9.5.1 A diaphragm wall is a structural component 
embedded in soil, analysis shall, therefore, involve 
soil-structure interaction. A diaphragm wall, whether 
rigid or flexible, is subjected to various loading 
conditions, such as construction of structure for which 
diaphragm wall is provided, first reservoir filling and 
subsequent operating conditions. Hence, loading 
conditions on a diaphragm wall are complex and need 
careful consideration. Loading considerations also 
depend upon method of analysis selected for assessing 
the behaviour of diaphragm wall as well as its location. 
End of construction condition may not be of much 
importance if diaphragm wall is so located that loading 
on either side is reasonably symmetrical. However, the 
diaphragm wall located near the upstream toe of the 
dam/barrage/weir and constructed prior to construction 
of dam/barrage/weir, may undergo deformations in 
horizontal and vertical directions. In such cases, loads 
due to stresses in horizontal direction, on account 
of post construction of dam/barrage/weir, are of 
importance. 


9.5.2 In subsequent stages, the maximum loads on 
diaphragm wall are expected when reservoir is fully 
charged to full reservoir level (FRL) and the structure 
as well as the foundation soil on the upstream of the 
diaphragm wall are in completely saturated state 


DIAPHRAGM WALL 


KEY TRENCH BACK 
FILLED WIEM I. A SUIL 


with development of steady state of seepage within 
the embankment. Loads acting on the upstream 
face of the diaphragm wall may be considered as 
follows: 


a) Effective lateral pressure exerted by the foundation 
soil over the depth of diaphragm wall between 
ground level and its bottom. 


b) Effective lateral stress component contributed 
by the structural load over the entire depth of 
diaphragm wall. 


c) Hydrostatic pressure acting perpendicular to the 
face of the diaphragm wall considering head of 
water corresponding to FRL. 


9.5.3 If an analysis is carried out by finite element or 
similar type of method, it is possible to incorporate 
all the intermediate loading stages involving effect 
of sequential construction. Otherwise wall loadings 
mentioned in 9.5.1 and 9.5.2 may be adopted, as the 
case may be. 


9.6 End Conditions 


9.6.1 Flexible types of diaphragm walls are designed 
to undergo deformations under loading. Hence 
their structural behaviour in bending is not of much 
importance. Only rigid types of diaphragm walls need 
structural analysis to take care of bending stresses 
without developing appreciable deformation which 
may result in cracking. 


9.6.2 Structural behaviour of rigid type of diaphragm 
wall is different from any isolated structural member, 
as it involves soil structure interaction. Till date, it 
has remained a matter of debate about end conditions 
to be adopted for structural design of the diaphragm 
wall. Considering the embedment depth in impervious 
stratum negligible at bottom as compared to the total 
depth of diaphragm wall and upper end embedded in 
soil, the end conditions can be considered as hinged at 
both the ends. This shall be considered as a guide only. 
Depending upon his own experience and/or with the 
help of any suitable numerical analysis, the designer 
may select suitable end conditions. 


KEY TRENCH 


Fic. 2 JUNCTION DETAILS OF DIAPHRAGM WALL LOCATED IN THE UPSTREAM OF THE TOE OF EARTH DAM 


10 GUIDELINES FOR STRUCTURAL DESIGN 


10.1 Rigid Type of Diaphragm Wall 
10.1.1 Structural Analysis 


Rigid type of diaphragm wall is to be analyzed either 
by the method of beam on elastic foundation or by any 
suitable numerical analysis. 


10.1.2 Concrete Mix 


10.1.2.1 Concrete for rigid type of diaphragm wall 
shall be minimum of M20 grade (see IS 456). 
Where required, concrete mix design for rigid type 
of diaphragm wall shall be done to obtain specified 
compressive strength. 


10.1.2.2 Concrete for rigid type of diaphragm wall 
shall be minimum of M20 grade (see IS 456). The 
water-cement ratio of concrete used shall ensure easy 
flow through tremie pipe used in concreting. However, 
the water-cement ratio shall not be greater than 0.6. The 
concrete mix shall have the required slump. 10 percent 
extra cement shall be added for under water work. 


10.1.3 Design of Reinforcement 


10.1.3.1 Steel reinforcement is required to be provided 
in case of rigid type of diaphragm wall to resist bending 
moments and shear stresses computed as mentioned 
in 10.1. The design of reinforcement that is, size and 
spacing of bars, minimum steel requirements etc, shall 
be carried out in accordance with IS 456. 


10.1.3.2 An allowance of 10 percent to 20 percent shall 
be made for a reduction in bond strength due to the 
probability of lodging of sand-laden gelled slurry in 
case of deformed bars. 


10.1.3.3 Reinforcement cage shall be designed for 
sufficient strength to resist handling stresses. Cages 
shall be able to resist uplift pressures during tremie 
concreting and as such adequate tic bars shall be 
provided. It is imperative that the tremie pipe passes 
between faces of the reinforcement cage freely, so that, 
it is possible to lift and lower the tremie pipe frequently 
during concreting. 


10.1.3.4 Spacers shall be provided to the outside 
horizontal main reinforcement bar at frequent intervals 
along the height of cage, to place the cage in centre of 
the trench, and for easy lowering of the cage. 


10.1.3.5 Reinforcement in the diaphragm wall is placed 
in the form of cages. A single cage can be prepared if it 
is practicable to lift the cage and to place it in position 
without distorting the cage. Where it is not feasible to 
lower the cage in one section of full height, due to the 
limitations of the equipment, site considerations etc, 


IS 14344 : 2021 


the cage shall be fabricated in sections. After lowering 
the first cage section and keeping it just projected 
above the guide walls the following cage section 
shall be welded keeping it suspended above the lowered 
one. 


10.1.3.6 Connections between the reinforcement 
bars and other steel sections shall be welded with 
design considerations as well as to withstand handling 
stresses. 


10.1.3.7 To ensure easy flow of concrete, minimum 
spacing between reinforcing bars shall not be less than 
100 mm. 


10.2 Flexible Types of Diaphragm Wall 
10.2.1 Structural Analysis 


10.2.1.1 Plastic concrete diaphragm wall or cement 
bentonite slurry trench diaphragm wall or earth 
backfilled slurry trench diaphragm wall are relatively 
flexible and capable to deform under stresses in the 
surrounding soil. Hence, development of stresses is 
not a design problem. These diaphragm walls shall, 
therefore, be designed to undergo deformations 
compatible with those in the surrounding soil without 
development of cracks. 


10.2.1.2 As a whole, the diaphragm wall will deform 
due to the following reasons: 


a) Due to the settlement of the structure, that is, dam/ 
barrage/ weir under its own weight; 


b) Due to the settlement and deflection of the 
foundation beds under the weight of the structure; 


c) Due to the horizontal deflections during first filling 
of the reservoir; and 


d) Subsequently to the alternating loads related to the 
use of the reservoir water. 


Diaphragm walls shall, therefore, be constructed of 
materials which possess characteristics to withstand/ 
adjust with such deformations imposed without 
cracking. Ideal materials are those which give the 
deformation characteristics similar to those of the 
surrounding soil. In case of homogeneous sub-surface 
soil, or when the variation of Young’s Modulus of 
overburden soil with depth is of low magnitude, 
materials having Young’s Modulus 4 to 5 times greater 
than the over-burden soil are adequate. 


10.2.1.3 Evaluation of the behaviour of the diaphragm 
wall shall be made either by any suitable non linear 
numerical analysis. 


10.2.2 Concrete Mix 


10.2.2.1 For plastic concrete diaphragm wall the water 
cement ratio shall not be greater than 0.5. 


IS 14344 : 2021 


10.2.2.2 Mix design for flexible types of diaphragm 
wall needs careful consideration. Modulus of elasticity 
of surrounding soil shall be obtained by conducting 
adequate number of triaxial shear tests in conditions 
appropriate for loading. Mix shall have modulus 
of elasticity 4 or 5 times greater than that of the 
surrounding soil. The modulus of elasticity of the mix 
shall be obtained by conducting triaxial shear tests 
in the same condition under which surrounding soil 
specimens are tested. 


10.2.2.3 Mix shall have adequate unconfined 
compressive strength to take the weight of the 
structure, to resist the soil stresses at depth and to resist 
erosion. 


10.2.2.4 In addition to requirements stated above, 
the mix shall also possess other properties, that is, 
durability, erodibility and workability. 


10.2.2.5 Mix for plastic concrete/cement-bentonite 
shall have permeability of 10° to 107 cm/s. 


10.3 Earth Backfilled Slurry Trench Diaphragm 
Wall 


10.3.1 In this type of diaphragm wall the backfill 
is generally made by mixing the in-situ materials 
obtained with slurry during excavation of the trench 
and earth material from additional sources, if required. 
As cement is not used, it will not be possible to obtain 
compressive strength. Hence, imperviousness is the 
governing criteria. 


10.3.2 Material to be used from additional sources shall 
be impervious clay. Moreover, materials excavated 
from the trench with slurry shall be the finer material 
obtained after screening to remove the coarser fractions. 
Thus, as such, mix design is not required for this type 
of diaphragm wall. 


11 SLURRY TRENCH AND REQUIREMENTS 


11.1 Requirements of Slurry 


11.1.1 Bentonite slurries, used for supporting excavation 
shall fulfill the following requirements: 


a) Support the excavation by exerting hydrostatic 
pressure on its walls; 


b) Remain in the excavation area and not flow into 
the soil; 


c) Suspend detritus to avoid sludgy layer building up 
at the excavation base; 


d) Clean displacement by concrete; 


e) Screening or hydrocycloning to remove detritus 
and enable recycling; and 


f) Easy pumping. 


To achieve these requirements the slurry shall have 
properties as given in Table 1. However, they shall be 
confirmed to suit the site conditions. 


11.1.2 Sodium bentonite powder shall be thoroughly 
mixed with potable water to form a fully dispersed 
lump-free homogeneous slurry. Suitable slurry tanks 
shall be used for this operation. Use of a slurry pump 
with special nozzle (see Fig. 3) is suggested for 
preparing bentonite slurry. Use of paddle stirrer or 
other mechanical devices such as colloidal grout mixer 
(see Fig. 4), may also be made for proper mixing of 
slurry. Temperature of water and the slurry used shall 
not be less than 5°C. 


11.1.3 Relationship between concentration C of 
bentonite slurry expressed as percentage by mass and 
the density r , is given below: 


r=1.0+0.006 C 


NOTE — This relation is valid for Indian bentonites and 
represents an average sample. There may be some variation 
of bentonites. Laboratory calibration may be prepared for the 
bentonite samples actually used. 


Table 1 Requirements of Slurry 
( Clause 11.1.1) 


SI No. Property Method of Test Permissible Value at 20°C 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Density Mud balance or hydrometer 1.04 to to 1.25 g/ml 
ii) pH value pH indicator paper strips 9.5 to 12 
ili) Viscosity Marsh cone method 28 to 42 s 
iv) Plastic Fann viscometer <20 cP 
v) Viscosity Shearometer 1.4 to 10 N/m? 
vi) 10 — Minutes gel strength or vane shear apparatus (14 to 100 dyne/cm?’) 


vii) Sand content 


75- microns sieve 


lpercent to 25 percent 


SLURRY TO TRENCH OR PIT 
OUT | 
CLAMP 


`‘ 


FOLDED WIREMESH OR EXPANDED 


METAL SHAPEDTO FORM FILTER 


IS 14344 : 2021 


BENTONITE IN 
WATER SUPPLY IN 
INSET A 


SLURRY 
RECIRCULATING 


CONE MIXER 


L DIAPHRAGM PUMP 


Fic. 3 SPECIAL NOZZLE AND SLURRY MIXING PLANT 


ENTRANCES SET 


TANGENTIALLY TO INDLICFE VERTEX 


CEMENT WATER MIX 


PASSED THROUGH TO SECOND DRUM 7 


CEMENT 


GROUT PASSED THROUGH THIS 
CIRCUIT FOR INITIAL MIXING 


WATER 


"SECONDARY MIXING OF 
CEMENT SAND AND 
WATER 


CENTRIFUGAL PUMP 


TRAP TO COLLECT 
SMALL STONES AND OTHER 
FOREIGN MATTERS 


L CENTRAL SHAFT FROM PRIME 


MOVER DAWING PUMP 


Fic. 4 FLow DIAGRAM OF CONCRETE DOUBLE DRUM COLLOIDAL GROUT MIXER 


11.1.4 Table 2 gives guidance on the proportion of 
bentonite suspension to be used for different sub-soils 
based on Marsh Cone viscosity. 


11.1.5 Tests-to determine density, viscosity, shear 
strength and pH value shall be carried out until a 
consistent working pattern is established, taking into 
account the mixing process, blending of freshly mixed 
bentonite slurry with previously used slurry and any 
process which is to be employed to remove impurities 
from previously used bentonite slurry. 


Table 2 Proportions of Bentonite Suspension 
for Different Sub-soils 


( Clause 11.1.4) 


SI Type of Sub-soil Proportion of Viscosity by 


No. Slurry, Min Marsh Cones, s 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Sand coarse or mixed 1:10 40-42 
with pebbles 
ii) Sand medium 1:12 35-40 
iii) Silty sand or loam 1:16 33-35 
iv) Soft rocks 1:20 26-32 


11.1.6 When results show consistent behavior, the tests 
for shear strength and pH value may be discontinued 
and tests required to determine density and viscosity 
be carried out. 


11.1.7 Frequency of testing shall be on panel to 
panel basis where bentonite slurry becomes heavily 
contaminated with fine sand during its first use, and on 
a daily basis where slight contamination is expected. 
In cases where a mechanical process is employed 
to remove contaminating solids from the slurry, 
frequency of slurry testing shall depend on equipment 
employed. 


11.1.8 Prior to placing of concrete in any panel a 
bentonite slurry sample shall be taken (about 0.2 m 
from the trench bottom) and the same shall be tested 
for density. The sampling shall be done carefully by an 
appropriate method. The density thus determined shall 
not be greater than 1.25 g/ml to ensure satisfactory 
placing of concrete. If the slurry is found to have 
heavier density, the same shall be thinned till the 
required density is achieved. 


IS 14344 : 2021 


11.1.9 Suitable slurry pumps, submersible pumps 
or air lift pumps shall be used for replacing the 
contaminated slurry at the bottom of trench by fresh 
bentonite slurry. 


11.2 Stability of Slurry Filled Trenches 


11.2.1 Mixing of bentonite in water forms slurry, which 
is used during excavation of the trench for diaphragm 
wall. Water from the slurry bleeds into the sides of 
the trench and leaves behind a thin densely packed 
collection of colloidal particles commonly referred to 
as a ‘filter cake’. Hydrostatic force of the slurry, acting 
in combination with filter cake, provides stability to the 
sides of trench. 


11.2.2 Bentonite slurry filled in the trench imparts 
stability mainly by applying hydrostatic pressure on 
the wall, against the impermeable thin film formed 
along the wall. Secondly, the slurry filled in the 
trench provides passive resistance against failure of 
the trench, and thirdly, the shearing resistance of the 
slurry saturated zone and the plastering effects of the 
filter cake also contribute towards trench stability. 
Hydrostatic pressure alone represents 65 percent to 
80 percent of the total stabilizing forces. If the density 
of slurry used can provide a factor of safety of one, due 
to hydrostatic pressure, then the factor of safety of the 
actual trench shall be between 1.25 to 1.50. Therefore, 
taking only hydrostatic pressure and considering F= 1, 
the density of slurry may be calculated as indicated by 
the following formula. This formula shall be used as a 
guide only. 


a) For clayey soils : 


_ NC, 
H(r-r,) 


H= depth ofthe trench, 
C = undrained shear strength of clayey soils, 


r= natural density of saturated soil, 
r = density of the slurry needed for the trench, and 
N = bearing capacity factor which varies from 4 


at the ground surface to 8 for deeper depths, 
depending upon D/B and L/B ratio of the 
trench. This factor accounts for arching action 
in horizontal as well as vertical directions (see 
Fig. 5). 


b) For sandy soils : 


Where, 


I = enka tano 


7 2nk, tan b 


K = tan’(45° — &/2), 
@ = angle of internal friction, 
r= effective unit weight of the sandy soil, 
Fi ie 
r „= saturated unit weight of soil, and 
r = unit weight of water. 


The value of A depends upon depth/length ratio of 
the trench (=n) (see Fig. 6). As a general rule, level of 
bentonite slurry in the trench shall be adequately higher 
than the water level. 


LENGTH 


L 
oF cuts) = 


WIDTH 


œ 


N 


Q 


a 


BEARING CAPACITY FACTOR nc) 


DEPTH 
WIDTH 


OF CUT = 
B 


Fic. 5 STABILITY FACTOR Nc FoR RECTANGULAR CUTS 
IN CLAY 


REDUCTION FACTOR 


0.2 0.4 0.6 0. 0 
TTi T T Jagr] 
uE AAA 


DEPTH FACTOR 


n= Z/ 2b 


Fic. 6 REDUCTION FACTOR A FOR EARTH PRESSURE 
IN TRENCH OF LENGTH 2 B (CD = 0) 


10 


11.3 Additives 


11.3.1 Where saline or chemically contaminated ground 
water is present, special additives as listed below, 
have to be used to render bentonite slurry fit for use. 
These additives shall be used in very small amounts of 
0.1percent to 0.5 percent by mass of the slurry. 


a) Ferrochrome lignosulphonate in combination with 
soda ash or bichromate of soda, shall be used for 
effective bentonite hydration, if hardness of sea 
water exceeds 200 ppm. 


b 


wm 


Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (SCMC) is 
another additive sometimes used. It protects 
slurry against effects of electrolytes, accelerates 
filter cake formation, and reduces fluid loss by 
increasing the viscosity of slurry. 

c) Cement contamination is counteracted by 
phosphates. Calcium gets removed and clay solids 
get dispersed. Phosphates decrease pH value 
thereby lowering viscosity and yield value of 
slurry. 


d 


wa 


Carboxymethyl cellulose, gums or presheared 
asbestos may be used to increase viscosity and 
reduce filter loss. 


e 


wma 


To remove fine silty solids and clay solids from 
the slurry, flocculants such as vinylacetate maleic 
anhydride co-polymer or polyacrylamides shall be 
used. Guar gum can flocculate clays, carbonates, 
etc. 


Pregelatinized starch can be employed as a fluid 
loss control. It can also he used as a protective 
colloid against the effect of electrolytes. 


12 EQUIPMENT AND ACCESSORIES 


12.1 Trenching Equipment 


Depending upon the type of soil encountered at the site 
and the depth, length and thickness of the diaphragm 
wall to be constructed, suitable trenching equipment 
shall be chosen. General trenching equipment shall 
include rotary boring rigs, percussion boring rigs, 
trenching bucket type shovels, mechanical grabs, 
hydraulic grabs, grabs with Kelly bars, grabs controlled 
by suspended wire ropes of a crane, direct mud 
circulation boring rigs, reverse mud circulation rigs and 
submersible mortar drills for trenching equipment. For 
gravelly soils, boulder deposits and rock formations, 
specially designed chiseling equipment shall be 
considered. If required, methods in combinations of the 
above may be used. 


12.2 Slurry Preparation and Testing Equipment 


Tanks of suitable sizes and slurry pumps of suitable 
capacity shall be used for storage, mixing and 
circulation of bentonite slurry at the site. A separate 
water pump shall be used for water supply to slurry 


11 


IS 14344 : 2021 


tank. Equipment for sampling the slurry from deep 
trenches and testing its concentrations, viscosity, pH 
value and hardness of ground water, in which the 
bentonite slurry and concrete are prepared, shall also 
be used. Testing of slurry after contamination with soil 
or cement indicates the need of disposal or reuse as 
the case may be. Vibrating screens, hdrocyclones and 
centrifuges for cleaning the bentonite slurry for reuse 
shall be employed. 


12.3 Concreting Equipment 


Concrete mixers, tremie pipes of suitable length and size 
and concrete pouring devices (manual or mechanical) 
shall be used according to the need of the work. Lifting 
arrangement for tremie pipes shall be capable of doing 
the work with desired speed. 


12.4 Lifting Devices 


Cranes of suitable capacity and boom length, derrick 
or any other suitable auxiliary rig shall be used for 
lowering the reinforcement cage in trench. If the weight 
of the reinforcement cage and height are small, this 
work can also be done by winch and pulley arrangement 
provided on the diaphragm walling rig. Cranes or rigs 
with winches of adequate capacity may be used for 
operating the trenching grabs as necessary. 


12.5 Grouting Equipment 


Panel joints and bed rock below the concrete diaphragm 
wall have to be grouted. Necessary equipment to 
perform this job efficiently shall be used. 


12.6 General Guidelines 


Selection of trenching shall be made to suit the soil 
conditions. Vibrations produced during construction 
shall not have any damaging effect or cause any sort 
of instability to existing structures. Consideration 
shall be given to selection of equipment which are 
required to work on a site with restricted space or head 
room. 


13 STAGES OF CONSTRUCTION 


13.1 Pre-trench and Guide Walls 


A trench is excavated in advance for about 1 m to 
2 m depth. Reinforced concrete guide walls of 
100 mm to 250 mm thickness are constructed on both 
the faces of pre-trench (see Fig. 7), they act as guides 
to trenching equipment during excavations. They 
also provide support over the trench area subjected to 
heavy construction surcharge pressures. Besides, guide 
walls define the planned path of excavation. 


13.2 In soft ground or fill, guide walls have to be taken 
deeper. When ground water table is close to surface, 
guide walls higher than the surface level shall be 
constructed to maintain additional slurry head. 


IS 14344 : 2021 


þa— 600- 


Ø 10 mm STIRRUPS 
AT 300 CC 


#10 mm 


All dithensions in 


millimetres. 


Fic. 7 PRE-TRENCH AND GUIDE WALLS 


13.3 Clearance between finished diaphragm wall and 
guide wall shall be 50 mm minimum, for straight 
panels. Clearance shall be suitably increased when the 
panels are curved. 


13.4 Finished faces of the guide walls towards the 
trench shall be vertical. 


13.5 Guide walls after construction shall be suitably 
propped to maintain specified tolerance. 


13.6 Mesh or cage reinforcement shall be used in guide 
walls. 


13.7 Level of slurry in the trench shall be maintained 
at least up to bottom level of guide walls. However, 
the level shall be increased if groundwater table is 
higher. 


13.8 For heavy trenching machinery, guide walls shall 
be constructed with suitable ground slab (on both sides 
of the walls). 


13.9 Guide walls get support from adjoining panels 
and, therefore, their construction shall be done 
continuously. 


13.10 Cast In-Situ Diaphragm Wall 


13.10.1 Rigid type of diaphragm wall, or plastic concrete 
diaphragm wall, shall be constructed by resorting 
to either successive panel method or alternate panel 
method. For cement bentonite slurry trench diaphragm 
wall, or earth backfilled slurry trench diaphragm wall, 
alternate panel method of construction is suitable in 
view of the time that is required to achieve hardness of 
the mix put in the trench. 


12 


13.10.2 Successive Panels Method 


In this method, a panel shall be cast in continuation 
of the previously completed panel. Only one form 
tube is needed for creating a joint with the preceding 
panel. However, with larger width and greater depth of 
diaphragm wall, it may not be possible to use form tubes 
due to handling, lowering and extraction difficulties. In 
such cases, special tools, like semi-circular chisels, are 
used to form a joint with the preceding panel. Thus, 
use of form tubes is eliminated. Rapid construction 
is possible with this method. However, there is a 
probability of insufficient hardening of the concrete in 
the preceding panel with the subsequent possibility of 
damage. 

NOTE — Form tubes of | m diameter and 30 m length have 

been successfully used. 


13.10.2.1 Excavation of successive trench panels 
(see Fig. 8A) shall be done with the help of suitable 
machinery. Trench panels shall be kept filled with 
bentonite slurry of suitable consistency and viscosity 
during the excavation period. 


13.10.2.2 A stop end tube with a smooth surface or a 
structural section shall be inserted in the trench at the 
end of the successive panel to support concrete and to 
form a suitable joint with the next panel. 


13.10.2.3 The reinforcement cage shall then be 
lowered into the trench panel and shall be suitably 
supported. Concrete cover for the reinforcement shall 
be maintained by use of spacers. 


13.10.2.4 Before placing concrete in the panel, the 
trench shall be properly flushed to clean the bottom 
and to remove thicker suspension from the bottom and 
lower levels. Density of the slurry shall be checked by 
taking a sample about 0.2 m from the bottom. If the 
density of the sample is found to exceed 1.25 g/ml, 
flushing shall be carried out with fresh bentonite slurry. 
Concreting in the trench panel shall be done through 
one or more tremie pipes with suitable funnels (see 
Fig. 8B). 


13.10.2.5 Stop end tubes shall be taken out gradually 
after initial set of concrete. This has to be done 
carefully with the help of a suitable crane, or any other 
lifting device, so as not to cause any damage or cracks 
in concrete at the panel end. 


13.10.2.6 Suitable joints shall be adopted to form a 
watertight joint between the panels. 


13.10.3 Alternate Panel Method 


13.10.3.1 With Alternate panel construction using 
primary and secondary panels, strength developed 
in concrete will be sufficient before excavating the 


adjoining panel. Thus, there is no danger of damage to 
the concreted panel. In this method, primary panels are 
cast first leaving suitable gaps in between. Secondary 
panels are then cast in these gaps (see Fig. 9). Two stop 
end tubes are used at the ends of the primary panels to 
support concrete and to form a joint with the secondary 
panels. 


13.10.3.2 Due to the space left by stop-end tubes, 
primary and secondary panels are of different sizes. The 
end shape of the panels will also be different. However, 
shape of the primary end panel shall be such as to form 
a good joint with secondary panels. Other construction 
techniques are similar to those of the successive panel 
method. 


8B CONCRETING 


Fic 8. SUCCESSIVE PANEL CONSTRUCTION 
(EXCAVATION AND CONCRETING) 


IS 14344 : 2021 


ae I 
EED 74 00 A OT al Pe 


I = Primary Panels 
Il= Secondary Panels 


NOTE — Due to space left by stop end tubes primary 
and secondary panels are of different sizes and panel end 
shape. 


Fic. 9 CONSTRUCTION OF PANELS 


13.10.4 Direct Circulation Method 


13.10.4.1 This method is used with -rotary or 
percussion type of rigs where drilling fluid (bentonite 
slurry) is pumped through drilling rods. It can be used 
for successive panel or Alternate panel construction. 
Stages of construction are shown in Fig. 10. Simple 
trenching rigs for excavation are used. Circular 
concreting tremie pipes for backfilling the trench panel 
have to be used. This method is suitable for shallow 
depths and for bringing up lighter cuttings. 


13.10.4.2 The trench panel is excavated by making 
overlapping bore holes with bentonite slurry- jet in 
combination with percussion and to and fro rotary 
motion of jetting pipe, having a suitable cutter at the 
tip. A special semi-circular cutter shall be used for 
providing appropriate shape at each panel end to form 
a suitable joint. 


13 


IS 14344 : 2021 


STAGE 1 


BORE HOLE STAGE STAGE 3 


REINFORCEMENT 
CAGE INSERTION 
STAGE 4 


CONCRETING H 
SPECIAL TREMIE PIPE 


STAGE2 
SERIES OF 
OVERLAPPING BORE 


Fic. 10 STAGES oF DIAPHRAGM WALL CONSTRUCTION 
BY DIRECT CIRCULATION METHOD 


13.10.4.3 Operations of filling bentonite slurry in 
the trench and lowering of reinforcement cage into 
the trench panel are similar to those described under 
successive panel method. 


13.10.5 Reverse Circulation Method 


13.10.5.1 The reverse circulation method shall be used 
to make trench panels as shown in Fig. 11. Forward 
and backward movement of the rig from one end of the 
panel to the other, increases the depth of the panel in a 
zigzag manner. 


13.10.5.2 High capacity pumps shall be used to suck 
the loosened soil in the slurry filled trench. Separators, 
or sedimentation tanks, shall be used to retain the soil 
cuttings and to pass the slurry for circulation and reuse. 


13.10.5.3 This method is suitable for greater depths and 
to bring up heavier cuttings. 


13.11 Cement Bentonite Slurry Trench Diaphragm 
Wall 


13.11.1 For cement bentonite slurry trench diaphragm 
wall it is preferable to use reverse circulation method 
so that bentonite slurry at the bottom of the trench is 
sucked out along with the chiselled material. 


13.11.2 At the end of excavation, the bentonite slurry 
in the trench may have much higher density than fresh 
bentonite slurry due to contamination of soil. This 
bentonite slurry shall therefore have to be replaced by 
fresh bentonite slurry having predecided concentration. 


13.11.3 The contaminated slurry is to be replaced by 
keeping the volume of fresh slurry flowing in to the 


14 


trench, equal to the volume of contaminated slurry 
being pumped out from the bottom of the trench. This 
is possible as contaminated slurry is heavier than fresh 
slurry. 


13.11.4 After complete replacement with fresh 
bentonite slurry, samples of the bentonite slurry shall 
be collected from one-third, two-thirds and bottom 
depths of the panel to check uniformity of the slurry 
in the trench. 


13.11.5 After filling the trench completely with fresh 
bentonite slurry, a required quantity of cement shall be 
added. Estimation of quantity of cement required for 
a panel has to be done considering full depth of wall, 
that is, up to platform level and actual width of trench 
formed. For this purpose, slurry from the trench shall 
be pumped out from the bottom of the trench into a 
mixing tank having proper arrangements for mixing 
with cement. In this tank cement shall be added bag by 
bag till the entire predetermined quantity of cement gets 
mixed. While adding cement there shall be a continuous 
flow of cement bentonite slurry from the trench to the 
mixing tank and from the mixing tank to the trench 
by gravity, that is, pumped out and pumped in volume 
to remain equal. This process shall be continued till 
required quantity of cement is added to the panel. 
Cement bentonite slurry shall be kept in circulation for 
a further 15 min to ensure uniformity of mix. At the 
end of circulation, samples shall be collected from one 
third, two-thirds bottom depths of panel to check the 
uniformity. 
NOTE — For proper mixing of cement and bentonite slurry 
it is very essential to have powerful pumps so that complete 
circulation of cement bentonite slurry can be achieved for the 
entire depth of trench within 10 min. 


13.11.6 After mixing of the cement in a particular panel, 
excavation for the adjacent panels can be carried out 
after allowing minimum 7 days for cement bentonite 
slurry to attain sufficient strength. No form tubes are 
used for joints. 


13.11.7 Cement bentonite slurry trench diaphragm wall 
is constructed without any joints between the panels. 
Hence, while excavating the adjacent panel, over- 
cutting of the earlier cast panel shall be carried out. In 
order to ensure proper over-cutting the excavating tool 
shall be so selected that verticality is maintained. 


13.11.8 Bleeding occurring on setting of cement 
bentonite slurry shall be replaced by fresh cement 
bentonite slurry, generally after 7 days of casting. 


13.12 Earth Backfilled Slurry Trench Diaphragm 
Wall 


13.12.1 An earth-backfill slurry trench diaphragm wall 
is constructed by excavating a narrow vertical trench 
having width of 600 mm to 1500 mm. The process of 


excavating such narrow trenches is similar to those 
described in 13.10.2, 13.10.3, 13.10.4 and 13.10.5. 


13.12.2 After the trench has been excavated to the 
final grade, it shall be backfilled with earthern backfill 
materials. This can be achieved by mixing in-situ 
materials obtained with slurry during excavation of the 
trench and earth materials from additional sources, as 
required, to obtain the desired engineering properties. 
The backfill is placed by use of tremie, clam-shell or 
direct pushing into the trench, displacing the slurry. 


14 TOLERANCES 


14.1 Guide Walls 


Finished faces of the guide walls towards the trench 
shall be vertical. There shall-be no ridges or abrupt 
changes on the face of the guide wall and variations 
from a straight line or a specified profile shall not 
exceed 25 mm in 3 m. 


14.2 Diaphragm Wall 
14.2.1 Verticality 


Faces of the wall and ends of the panel shall be vertical 
within a tolerance of 1 : 80. 


IS 14344 : 2021 


14.2.1 In positioning of reinforcement, longitudinal 
tolerance of cage head at top of the guide wall, 
measured along the trench, shall be 75 mm and vertical 
tolerance at cage head in relation to top of guide wall 
shall be 50 mm. 


15 TESTING 


15.1 Testing of materials to be used for the work shall 
be done in a laboratory to confirm their usability. 


15.2 Mix for rigid concrete, plastic concrete and 
cement bentonite slurry shall be designed in a 
laboratory and testing shall be done to ascertain various 
parameters like compressive and tensile strength, 
permeability, modulus of elasticity, erodibility, pH 
value, etc, to confirm that the design mix satisfies the 
design requirements. 


15.3 Samples of the mix at the time of placing shall be 
collected and kept in airtight sealed moulds of specified 
size till due dates of various tests. Important tests to be 
performed are as under: 


a) Compressive Strength: This is the defined stress at 
which the material will fail. Tests shall be carried 
out at 7, 28 and 90 days. 


uu 


FIG. 11 TRENCH Excavation By REVERSE CIRCULATION METHODS 


15 


IS 14344 : 2021 


b) Triaxial | Compressive Strength: Triaxial 
compressive strength tests shall be carried 
out on filling materials like plastic concrete, 
cement, bentonite, etc, to determine stress-strain 
characteristics, modulus of elasticity and shear 
parameters. Tests shall be carried out at 7, 28 and 
90 days in consolidated undrained conditions. 


c) Permeability: Permeability tests on samples 
shall be conducted after 28 days in a membrane 
permeameter. 

16 INSTRUMENTATION 


16.1 Placement of instruments simultaneously with 
casting of the panel is difficult, as there is a possibility 
of damaging the instruments, wires, etc, or losing their 
sensitivity due to vibrations generated during placement 
of concrete. It is, therefore, preferable to install the 
instruments outside the completed diaphragm wall to 
measure in-situ performance. 


16.1.1 Deformation of the Structure 


16.1.1.1 For the purpose of measuring deformation 
behaviour of the diaphragm, inclinometers at various 
locations shall be installed close to the diaphragm wall. 


16.1.2 Settlement Gauge 


Settlement gauges may be installed at selected locations 
to measure vertical displacements. Gauges shall not 
have an error of more than 1 mm. 


16.1.3 Piezometric Levels 


Tojudgetheefficiency in water tightness ofthediaphragm 
wall, residual discharge collected downstream of the 
cut-off wall is the essential measurement. This can be 
determined by a double network of piezometers placed 
on either side of the wall and well protected by filters. 
Chemical and physical analysis of the water may be 
useful to pinpoint its source. Observation frequency 
shall not be more than 15 days. 


16 


16.1.4 Permeability 


100 mm diameter tubes extending to random depths, 
shall be placed at the centre of the thickness of the 
diaphragm panels at randomly chosen locations. After 
a period of 28 days bore holes may be drilled into the 
diaphragm below the tubes and permeability tests by 
pumping in method carried out. The in-situ permeability 
of the diaphragm shall be compared with the specified 
limit as per requirements. 


17 RECORDS 


17.1 Following records shall be maintained in a manner 
approved by the Engineer-in-charge: 

a) Name of project/work; 

b) Panel No. and reference drawing No; 


c) Date of commencement and completion of 
excavation; 


d) Date of concreting of panel; 
e) Length of panel; 

f) Thickness of panel; 

g) Top of guide wall level; 

h) Depth of guide wall; 


j) Top level of wall as cast, in relation to top of guide 
wall at the edges and at the centre; 


k) Depth of panel from base of top of guide wall; 
m) Strata encountered; 


n) Volume of panel and volume of concrete used, 
slump, water-cement ratio; 


p) Cubes taken and their results; 

q) Details of reinforcement (Cage type); 

r) Details of any obstructions/peculiar conditions 
encountered and time spent and measures taken in 
overcoming them; 

s) Amount of bleeding observed; and 

t) Type and proportion of any additives used and 
reasons for use. 


IS No. 
269 : 2015 


383 : 2016 


432 (Part 1): 
1982 


455 : 2015 


456 : 2000 


1489 (Part1) : 


2015 


1489 (Part 2) : 


2015 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 2.1 ) 


IS 14344 : 2021 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Ordinary Portland cement — 
Specification (sixth revision) 


Coarse and fine aggregates for 
concrete — Specification (second 
revision) 


Specification for mild steel and 
medium tensile steel bars and 
hard-drawn steel wire for concrete 
reinforcement: Part 1 Mild steel 
and medium tensile steel bars 
(third revision) 


Portland slag cement — 
Specification (fourth revision) 


Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 


Portland pozzolana cement — 
Specification: Part 1 Fly ash based 
(fourth revision) 


Portland pozzolana cement — 
Specification: Part 2 Calcined clay 
based (fourth revision) 


17 


IS No. 


1498 : 


1786 


1892: 


2116: 


4999 : 


6955 


1970 


: 2008 


1979 


1980 


1991 


: 2008 


8041:1990 


12584 : 1989 


Title 


Classification and identification 
of soils for general engineering 
purpose (first revision) 


High strength deformed steel 
bars and wires for concrete 
reinforcement — _ Specification 


(fourth revision) 


Code of practice for sub-surface 
investigations for foundations 
(first revision) 


Specification for sand for masonry 
mortars (first revision) 


Recommendation for grouting of 
pervious soils (first revision) 


Code of practice for sub-surface 
exploration for earth and rockfill 
dam (first revision) 


Specification for rapid hardening 
Portland cement (second revision) 


Specification for bentonite for 
grouting in civil engineering 
works 


IS 14344 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 


Foundations and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee, WRD 08 


Organization 


Central Soils and Material Research Station, 
New Delhi 
AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 
Central Board of Irrig & Power, New Delhi 
Central Soil & Material Research Station, New Delhi 
Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
Ferro Concrete Construction (I) Pvt Ltd, Indore 
Gammon India Ltd, Mumbai 
Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 
Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Maharashtra 
In personal Capacity C-3/3188, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi 110070 
Irrigation Department Dehradun, Uttarkhand 
Irrigation Works Punjab, Chandigarh 
Irrigation Department, Govt of Andhra Pradesh, 
Hyderabad. 


ITD Cementation India Ltd, Mumbai 


Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd, Uttrakhand 
Jaypee Infraventures Pvt Ltd, Noida 


L&T ECC, Faridabad 
M/S Tata Consulting Engineers, Mumbai 


Maharashtra Engineering Research Institute, Nashik 


Representative(s) 


SHRI HASAN ABDULLAH (Chairman) 


Dr SUNIL BASARKAR 
SHRI PRAKASH SHANKAR Bansop (Alternate) 


Dr V. M. SHARMA 
SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN (Alternate) 


Suri A. C. GUPTA 
Suri M. L. Bawesa (Alternate) 


Dr R. CHITRA 
Dr ManisH Gupta (Alternate) 


Suri K. R. DHAWAN 
Suri A. K. Guosu (Alternate) 


Director (FE&SA) 
DIRECTOR EMBANKMENT (N&W) (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHAVIR BIDASARIA 
Er Manisu ValsH (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK B. BHUTADA 
Suri AsHISH GUPTA (Alternate) 


Suri B. M. GOIROLA 
SHRI PRADIP SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri DiıGViJAY M.KĶUDTARKAR 
SHRI AARIF SHAIKH (Alternate) 


Dr A. K. DHAWAN 


CHIEF ENGINEER 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (Alternate) 


SHRI KULDIP SINGH TAKSHI 
SHRI JATINDER PAL SINGH (Alternate) 


CHIEF ENGINEER 


SHRI S. R. BHATTACHARYA 
SHRI R. Y. Putty (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


Suri P. K. ALAGH 
SHRI VIPIN Kumar (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
Suri Kiran D. A. Lar (Alternate) 


SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH OFFICER 
ASSISTANT RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


18 


IS 14344 : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 

NHPC LTD, Faridabad SHRI A. K. JAIN 

SHRI VIVEK TRIVEDI (Alternate) 
North Eastern Electric Power Corporation Ltd, SHRI AMIT PAUL 

Shillong 

NTPC LTD, Noida SHRI NAVEEN KuMAR JAIN 

SHRI NIRAJ Kumar (Alternate) 
Public Works Deptt, Tamilnadu ER P. RAMALINGAM 

Er N. Pannan (Alternate) 
THDC India Ltd, Rishikesh SHRI RAJEEV VISHNOI 


SHRI NEERAJ AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


Water Resources Deptt, Govt of Madhya Pradesh, CHIEF ENGINEER (BODHI) 
Bhopal Suri H. K. SHarma (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SMT RACHNA SEHGAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (WRD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 
SHRI DUSHYANT PARJAPATI 
Scientitst ‘D’ (WRD), BIS 


19 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 08 (12480). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


