UDC 661.2677

IS: 11547(Part Indian Standard

2)-1985

L

( Reaffirmed 2000 )

1 [s1

I

s

SPECIFICATION FOR ELECTRONIC WEIGHING-IN-MOTION
PART 2 REQUIREMENTS

SYSTEMS

I. Soope -This
C

standard

( Part 2 ) covers requirements

of electronic-in-motion

weighing

systems.

8 .,

2. Performance

Requirements
to Static Tests

E.1 Errors Applicable

2.1.1 GeneralIn general, the performance requirements specified in IS: 9281 (Part 3)-1981 `Specification for electronic weighing systems : Part 3 Requirements', are applicable to weighing-inmotion instruments when tested statically. Also, if load cells are used, they shall comply with the requirements of IS : 9281 ( Part 3)-1981 when tested individually. 2.1.2 Off-centre load tests load tests shall be carried out with a test load equal to the placed transversely on the load receptor and at longitudinal position

a) Axle weigher-Off-centre maximum axle capacity on the receptor.

b) Bogie WeigherOff-centre load tests shall be carried out with a test load equal to the maximum bogie capacity placed transversely on the load receptor and over any part of the load receptor covering a length equal to the bogie axle spacing. the total mass of a train is obtained 2.2 Errors Applicable to Dynamic Tests -Where bogies or axles, or individual wagon masses :ion of individual masses of wagons, measured, the following dynamic errors are applicable. 22.1 Maximum permissible dynamic errors -After the instrument 10 load, the maximum permissible dynamic errors, at any speed within )e greater than the following: a) Tote/ train mass b) Wagon mass f0'2 percent of the total train mass. mass. by the summain any train are

has been adjusted to zero at the specified range, shal I not

f1'0

percent of the wagon

2.22 Dynamic repeatability errors -The difference between any two indications obtained with espect to the same load measured under the same conditions shall not be greater than the absolute lalue of the maximum permissible dynamic errors. 2.3 In Service Errors - The maximum permissible errors applicable in service for static tests are twice ;hose specified in 2.1 and for dynamic tests are the same as specified in 2.2. 2.4 Rules for the Determination 2.4.1 Errors - The static oad in standard masses. of Errors errors are the difference between the indicated mass and the equivalent

The dynamic errors are the difference between the mass of the wagons when weighed statically, and the mass of the same wagons Jncoupled and in a single weighing on a verified weighbridge, Nhen weighed dynamically in the train. 2.4.2 Wagon mass -The mass of the wagons. dynamic wagon mass errors are applicable fo the gross mass or tare

Adopted

24 December

1985

6 I
INDIAN MANAK

August

1986,

ISI

Gr 3

I
STANDARDS INSTITUTION BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR NEW DELHI 110 002 MARG

IS : 11547 (Part

2) -1985

2.4.3 Total train mass-The dynamic total train mass errors are applicable to the total tare or gross mass of the train obtained from the summation of the individual wagon masses irrespective of the number, type or capacity of the wagons. 2.4.4 Net mass additional permissible If net mass isobtained by subtraction errors shall apply to the calculation. of a tare mass from the gross mass, no

2.4.5 Speed-The dynamic errors are applicable mum specified for the installation. 2.4.6 speed of the tests shall be 2.4.7 years.

at all speeds

between

the maximum

and mini-

Number of dynamic tests - At least 5 test runs shall be carried out at the normal operating If the normal operating speed is not at one limit of the speed range then the installation. At least 3 test runs shall be carried out at the limit nearest the normal operating speed. carried out at a speed at the other end of the speed range from the normal operating speed. Service periodStatic tests are repeated every two years and the dynamic tests every four

2.4.8 Modifications - The static test shall be repeated if any modification ing the accuracy and system performance is carried out on the static weighing load cell is replaced.

or service work effectsystem. For example, a

The dynamic test shall be repeated if any modifications are made to that part of the system which affects the dynamic performance, for example, the alignment of the track is varied or additional points are installed. 3. Construction

Requirements

3.1 Suitability
shall be designed to be suitable for the purpose 3.1 .I Suitability for purpose - An instrument for which it is intended to be used, and shall be constructed to be suitable for service under normal conditions of use. 3.1.2 Suitability for verification - An instrument requirements of these rules to be applied. 3.2 Operational Safeguards use Instruments shall have builtin safeguards to prevent fraudulent use. shall be designed to enable the performance

3.2.1 Fraudulent

3.2.2 Breakdown or accidental adjustment of breakdown or accidental incorrect adjustment

Instruments shall be constructed is selfevident.

so that the effect

3.2.2.1 Multi-segment indicators - When the mass is displayed by means indicators, provision shall be made of manual or automatic testing of all digits.

of

multi-segment

3.2.3 Operational controlsControls of instruments shall be designed in such a manner that they cannot come to rest in positions other than those intended, unless during manipulation of the controls indication or printing is made impossible. 3.2.4 Speed controlsProvision shall be made to prohibit the maximum speed for which an instrument was verified. weighing if the vehicle speed exceeds

3.2.5 Roll-back controls-An instrument may operate with the vehicle moving tion but once weighing has commenced in one direction, weighing is prohibited direction until the weighing has been completed. 3.2.6 Weighed vehicles-An vehicles in the train for which instrument shall it was not verified, weigh all wagons once only for example, locomotives.

in either direcin the reverse

and shall

not weigh

3.2.7 It is desirable that the system should beyond the specified limits.

indicate/print

if the supply voltage

and frequency

go

2

IS:11547(Part2)-1985
3.3 indication and Printing Requirements 3.3.1 printings point Clarity of indication shall be indelible. indicators means Indications or printings shall be clear that the and unambiguous and

On digital is stable.

shall be provided

for ensuring

indication

at changeover

3.3.2 Arrangement tion of the digits. The digits The decimal

of digits -

Indications

or printings

shall

permit reading

by

simple

juxtaposi-

of a numerical

indicator

shall be aligned

in the direction

of reading. by a zero digit.

marker on numbers

less than unity

shall be preceded or printings `International

3.3.3 Denomination of indications - Indications ment or their symbols, as listed in IS : 10005-1980 use it'. 3.3.4 Height of digits

shall include the units of measuresystem of units (SI) and guide to

a) Displays - The height of digits on digital the minimum reading distance in metres)

shall be not less than 3Xf but not less than 8 mm.

millimetres

(where

L is

b) Tickets - The digits printed on a ticket to indicate the massshall be not less than 2'5 mm high. Words or symbols designating mass shall be not less than 2 mm high. Where the symbols are printed by the instrument in a limited character set symbols for units of measurement may be expressed in capitals. 3.3.5 Scale intervals - The value of the scale interval shall be in the form 1, 2 or 5 times IOn kilograms or tonnes, where n is a positive or negative whole number or zero. 3.3.6 In order that the digital ted due to power failure during supply source may be provided. representation of the masses weighed weighment, it is recommended that by the system is not interrupan uniterrupted stand power

3.3.7 Suppression of digital indication - When the indication tion, controlled by the operator or automatically by the instrument, while the instrument is oscillating.

appears only after a special operathe indication shall be suppressed

Above maximum capacity a digital indicator shall blank out or display non-numerical characters. The indicated maximum capacity m&y exceed the maximum capacity marked on the instrument by up to IO scale intervals. Below zero a digital indicator preceded by a minus sign. shall blank out, display non-numerical characters or indicate mass

3.3.0 Printing requirements - A permanent record of the individual wagon masses and train mass shall be provided. The following minimum information shall be provided: a) An indication measurement b) c) Individual Identification that the totalizer (see 3.4.2 ). masses, number or vehicle number, and has been cleared and that zero has been set

the total

prior to a new

wagon

of each mass either by consecutive of non-weighed

d) Identification e) Total mass.

masses due to an error ( including

overspeed),

If net mass is provided, the gross, tare and net individual wagon together with a specific identification number marked on the wagon. 3.4 Zero-Setting Devices A zero-setting device shall comply with

masses

shall be recorded

the following

rules. capacity range, 0.25 e. of the

3.4.1 Range - The range shall instrument, and it shall be possible An automatic 3.4.2 zero correction

not be greater than 4 percent of the maximum to adjust zero to the middle of the range. device shall not function outside the zero-setting

Accuracy of zero-setting devices -It

shall be possible 3

to set zero to within

IS:11647(Part2)-1985
3.4.3 Instruments with digital indication be provided with an additional zero-indicating a) Not fitted with an analogue b) fitted with an analogue scale interval, or mass indicator An instrument device if it is: or the scale interval is greater than the digital feature designed scale interval of on which with digital indication or printing shall

mass indicator,

c) not fitted with an automatic zero-correction device with a self-checking to provide a fail safe indication when zero is not acquired to within f0'25 zero.

This device shall indicate whenever the instrument is balanced to within f0'25 scale interval of zero, and if it is an analogue device its scale interval shall not exceed the digital scale interval of the instrument, it shall be located adjacent to the mass indicator. f0'25 If the zero indicator e. is a light, it shall be illuminated only when indicating zero to within

3.4.4 Control for zero-setting device -The control for the zero-setting device shall be separate from the taring device control, and shall be arranged so that the user can observe the zero indicator. 3.4.5 Automatic device - If the instrument is designed to operate automatically that is without an operator, zero shall be automatically set prior to a weighing. An indication that zero has been set correctly shall be shown on a permanent record of the weighing. 3.5 Taring 3.5.1 GeneralWhere taring is provided, it shall operate in conjunction with a vehicle tion code if the tare has been stored from a previous weighing of the empty vehicle. 3.5.2 Accuracy of setting to f0'5 e. The scale intervals indicating or printing device. 3.53 indication -The the permanent record with 3.6 Auxiliary Devices 3.6.1 Genera/The instrument shall have an indicator available for verification purposes. The digital taring device shall permit subtraction of (e) of the taring device shall be the same as the scale identifica-

the tare value interval of the

indications the words

of gross, tare and net masses GROSS, TARE, NET or G.T.N.

shall be clearly

identified

on

However, auxiliary indicating devices such as ticket printers and digital displays may be located either at or remote from the load receptor and any additional indicator requirements specified in this standard. 3.6.2 Vehicle identification - A vehicle identification provided that the identification number is recorded and same vehicle. system may be fitted to the instrument corresponds to the recorded mass of the

mark in the 3.7 Verification Marks - Provision shall be made for a verification plug or a destructible adhesive label, which shall be located so that the mark: a) Can be easily affixed b) Is visible without without affecting the metrological when properties moving the instrument it is in use.

form of a stamping or

of the instrument,

If a stamping plug is used, it shall consist of a lead plug securely set below the surface of an under cut hole, and so secured that it cannot be removed from the instrument without defacing the verification mark. The lead plug shall have a circular face of not less than 12 mm diameter or a rectangular face of dimensions not less than 8 X 25 mm and be accessible for stamping by means of a 50 mm long stamping tool. If a destructible adhesive lable is used a space of not less than 25 mm diameter shall be provided for affixing the label. The space shall be flat, flush with the surrounding surface or raised, but not recessed into the surface. 3.8 Markings 3.6.1 Instruments shall be clearly and premanently name plates with the following information: 4 marked on one or more permanently . attached

.

IS:11547,(Part2)-1985
Accuracy class Manufacturer's name or trade-mark Serial number Maximum capacity Minimum capacity Verification scale interval Scale interval Maximum additive tare ( if applicable ) Maximum subtractive tare Maximum axle or bodie capacity Speed range 3.8.2 Style of markings-All markings and notices III (for example) ............ ............ Max ...... Min ...... :: or e = d ......... T=+ .............
T=--

. .. .. . ... .. . . .. . .. ... ... shall be clear and permanent. Numbers and symbols of units regulations and IS : 10005-1980

Capital letter and numbers shall be not less than 2 mm, high. shall be presented in accordance with the weights and measures `International system of units (SI) and guide to its use'.

EXPLANATORY
While preparing for weighing-in-motion

NOTE

this standard,

system for trade

assistance has been derived from Manual No. 8 `Design manual use,' issued by National Standards Commission of Australia. 5
Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press. New Delhi India

