( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 11454 - 1985

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF CARBON DIOXIDE IN THE INTERGRANULAR ATMOSPHERE
Storage Structures and Storage Management Sectional Committee, AFDC 28 c%airrnan
DR K. KRISHNAMURTHY
Members Representing

Department of Food, ( Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies ), New Delhi to Indian Agricultural New Delhi Research Institute ( ICAR ),

DRG. K. GIRISH ( Alteraate Dr K. Krishnamurthy ) DR R. A. AGARWAL DR T. D. YADAV ( Alternate ) AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISER

Directorate of Marketing &Inspection, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, Faridabad

SHRI A. P. BHATNAGAR( Alternate ) Indian Council of Agricultural Research, DR A. ALAM New Delhi Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana DR A. P. BHATNAGAR Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIEF ENGINEER Defence Materials & Storage Research & DR C. D. DWIVEDI Development Establishment, Kanpur SHRI V. K. MATHUR ( Alternate ) QMG's Branch, Army Headquarters ( Ministry BRIG V. N. KAPOOR of Defence ,, 1. New Delhi BRIG R. N. VARMA ( Alternate) Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI K. PANDITHURAI SHRI P. K. MOORJANI ( Alternate ) Planning Commission, New Delhi SHRI M. V. PAVATE SHRI RAMESHCHANDRA( AIternate ) PLANT PROTECTION ADVISER TO Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage, Faridabad THE GOVERNMENTOF INDIA SHRI T. R. SHARMA( Alternate )
( Continued @) Copyright on page 2

)

1986 INSTITUTION

JNDIAN

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

( Continued from page 1 ) Members Representing

SHRJK. S. N. RAJU

National Cooperative Development tion, New Delhi

Corpora-

SHRI R. L. GAUR ( Alternate ) Central SHRJ P. R. VJSHWAMBHARAN SHRJ AJAY KHERA ( Alternate I > SHRJ A. P. MATHUR ( Alternate II ) Director SHRJ T. PURNANANDAM

Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi
General, ISI ( Ex-officio

Member )

Director ( Agri & Food )
SHRIMATJ SHASHI SAREEN

Secretary

Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), ISI

Grain
Convener

Storage

Data

Subcommittee,

AFDC

28 : 10

PROF A. P. BHATNAGAR

Punjab Agricultural

University,

Ludhiana

Members
PROF MALVINDER SINGH ( Alternate to Prof A. P. Rhatnagar ) PROP N. G. BHOLE Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur JOINT DIRECJOR ( WS ) Planning Commission, New Delhi SHRI K. V. S. MURTHY Triveni Structurals Ltd. Naini SHRI M. N. PAUL ( Alferlrafe ) DR T. P. OJHA Centr;\JtpJsfitute of Agricultural Engineering, SHRI K. PANDITHURAI Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SHRI P. K. MOORJANI ( Alternate ) SHRI K. T. RAMANATHAN Larsen & Toubro Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. V. GADEKAR ( A/ternate ) SHRI M. V. SHARANGAPANI Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore DR B. P. N. SINGH G. P. Pant University of Agriculture & Technology, Pantnagar PROF C. K. TECK~HANDANI J. N. Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya, Jabalpur SHRI B. K. VERMS Indian Grain Storage Research Institute, Hapur SHRI S. R. AGARWAL ( Alternate )

IS : 11454- 1985

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR MEASUREMENT OF CARBON DIOXIDE IN THE INTERGRANULAR ATMOSPHERE
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 October 1985, after the draft finalized by the Storage Structures and Storage Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Grain is a living material continually absorbing oxygen and prod~ucing carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is a heavy gas and if it accumulates above a few percent, the intergranular atmosphere becomes heavy enough to leak quite rapidly through unsuspected cracks, loosely fitting sides, etc, at the bottom of the bin. However, if carbon dioxide production is accompanied by heating, the expansion of the intergranular atmosphere as a result of heat lowers its density and thus tends to nullify the effect of carbon dioxide accumulation. 0.3 In the process of exchange of gases in grains, water is also produced which affects the moisture content. The moisture and heat resulting from the process create conditions for mold growth and spoilage. 0.4 In order to check carbon dioxide concentration, moisture content and growth of mold, ventilating the mass by a fan, a process called aeration can be used. The extent to which the aeration is done depends on carbon dioxide concentration in the intergranular atmosphere. 0.5 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publication: Oxley ( TA ). ScientificPrinciples of Gram Storage. The Northern Publishing Co Ltd, Liverpool.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard

prescribes sampling and methods of carbon dioxide in the intergranular atmosphere. 3

for determination

IS:

11454-1985

2. SAMPLING
2.1 Apparatus 2.1.1 Sampling Tube - The sampling tube is made of steel or lead reinforced with a steel wire rope. The internal diameter of the tube is about 0'7 to 0'8 mm which gives a total volume of between 0'4 and 0'5 cubic centimetres per metre length so that a preliminary draw-through need not exceed 2 ml on a 35 metre length. As the diameter of the tube is small, fit a filter at the point in order to prevent entry of grain dust. This takes the form of a cotton wool plug, contained in a short length of about 5-mm diameter brass tubes, which forms a ferrule similar to that used on the temperature ropes by which t'he tube is temporarily attached to the screwed iron rods for insertion into the grain.

2.2 Drawing of Samples - The samples are most conveniently drawn into evacuated glass bottles up to 100 ml capacity. These may be evacuated by a portable pum-p immediately before use, and supplementry supply ones may be used for the preliminary draw-through. The latter are only necessary, however, if it is important to keep the size of the draw-through to a minimum and constant in volume, as when samples are being taken very close together. Otherwise, the mouth may be used to suck through a small quantity of air. 3. METHODS 3.1 Determination 3.1.1 Apparatus
3.1.1.1 The assembly of the apparatus consists of the following components:

of Carbon Dioxide %y Haldane's Gas Analyser is illustrated in Fig. 1. It

a) b)

Burette ( A > Compensating bulb ( B ) -

c>

capacity approximately 20 ml. Water Jacket and air tube - the water jacket % shall consist of a glass tube, the lower end of which shall be closed by means of a water tight bung having a hole bored through it ( off-centre > to accommodate the lower end of the burette. The upper end shall be provided with a suitably bored and split rubber bung to accommodate the stem of the compensating bulb, the upper end of the burette and an air tube D to supply the stream of air bubbles to stir the water. This bung shall have an additional hole as an air vent. d) Mercury reservoir ( E ) - capacity approximately 100 ml. e> Potash pipette ( F ) - the potash pipette for absorbing carbon dioxide shall have reference lines L1 and La on the capillary
4

IS : 11454 - 1985 tubing above the body the same level.
f ) Potash reservoir ( G )

of the pipette and on the side arm at

id
h)

Cortnecting piece ( N) - this F and compensating bulb B. Sample intake tube ( T)

shall connect the potash pipette

3
k) d

Telescope or magnifier - this shall be suitably supported to avoid parallax error and shall enable burette readings to be observed to 0'001 ml. Fine adjustment devices -these shall enable the positions of the mercury reservoir E and the potash reservior G to be set to 0'05 mm. Support - the apparatus should be mounted on a suitable support, for example, a rigid adjustable framework of rods. The method of mounting should enable the positions of the components to be easily adjusted, thus facilitating the butting together of the various pieces. Mercury tray and shields - the use of these accessories is advisable to keep within bounds any mercury accidentally split.

n>

For further

details of the apparatus

see IS : 6261 - 1971*.

3.1.1.2 Assembly - Thoroughly clean the interior of the glass components, using concentrated nitric or sulphuric acid containing a small proportion of chromic acid. Rinse them thoroughly with distilled water and dry by passing clean air through them. Do not use an organic solvent to clean the glassware. Place 1 ml of the 0'5 percent sulphuric acid in the compensating bulb B and assemble the apparatus as shown in Fig. 1. Do not grease the stopcocks at this stage but remove the keys from them. Connect the mercury reservior E to the burette A and the potash reservior G to the pipette F, using odourless, inert, transparent o trranslucent 5-mm bore plastic or sulphur-free rubber tubing. For sleeves, use 40 mm lengths of suitable rubber or plastic tubing and ensure that the components are butted together. Lastly fit the connecting piece N. Position the potash reservior G so that the midpoint of the stem is approximately level with the reference marks LI and L, on the arms of
*Methods of analysis for detection and milled products. of insect and rodent 5 contamination in grains

IS : 11454- 1985

the pipette F. Add the potassium hydroxide until the reagent reaches L1 and L,.

reagent

to the reservoir

Place sufficient mercury in the burette reservoir E so that, when the burette is full, a few millilitres of mercury remain in the reservoir. Add the mercury in small quantities and, after each addition, expel any air trapped in the flexible tubing. Leave the burette almost full of mercury. Grease and insert the keys of stopcocks S, ( see Note $. Grease and insert the key of stopcock S1 (see Note >. Draw into the burette, from T, 2-3 ml of the 0'05 percent sulphuric acid. Lower and raise the mercury reservior E several times so that the sulphuric acid thoroughly wets the interior of the burette. Lower the reservoir so that the mercury meniscus in the burette is Nearly close the screw clip K to restrict below the 21-ml graduation. mercury flow. Raise the reservoir and allow mercury to flow slowly into the burette, to fill it and eject surplus sulphuric acid through T. The amount of acid remaining should be insufficient to form a layer which completely covers the mercury in the stem. Place sufficient water in the jacket C to of the burette and compensator. Connect the compressed air source and keep the water nuously by means of a steady slow stream of cover completely the bulbs air tube D toa low pressure in the jacket stirred contibubbles.

NWE -Use the minimum quantity of a good quality stopcock grease free from silicons; do not leave grease in the capillaries or in the bores of the keys.

3.1.1.3 Checking the apparatus - Turn stopcock S1 to open the burette to air and draw about 20 ml of air into the burette A through T. Pass the gas six times between the burette and the potash pipette. With stopcock Sz open to air, and using the fine adjustment devices for the mercury reservior 17and potash reservoir G, adjust the potashin the arm of the pipette F to Ll. Turn S, to isolate the compensating system from the air and to connect the compensation bulb B to the potash pipette. If necessary, readjust the potash to L, and L, and read the burette.

Pass the gas six times between the burette and the potash pipette, adjust the potash to LI and L, and read the burette. The reading should not have changed by more than 0'001 ml. 3.1.1.4 For the successful operation of the Haldane apparatus, all taps shall be properly greased and the stopcocks and capillaries free from droplets of mercury and potash. The burette shall be free from grease and dirt and contain sufficient dilute sulphuric acid to wet the walls but insufficient to drain and form a layer covering the mercury in the stem. 6

IS : 11454- 1985

Only when gas is being taken into or expelled from the apparatus should mercury be allowed to pass &; at no other time should mercury or any reagent be allowed to reach any stopcock. When passing gas to and fro between the burette and a pipette, mercury should not be allowed to reach S1 and potash should not allowed to pass beyond LI. When gas is being passed between the burette and the potash pipette, stopcock SZ should be shut temporarily to isolate the pipette from the compensating bulb. This reduces the movement of potash solution in the arm of the pipette connected to the compensator and thus minimizes possible drainage errors. Whilst setting the level of potash to the appropriate reference mark, the capillary should be gently tapped to eliminate `sticking', as also should the burette jacket before readings dare taken. Before reading the burette, the compensating bulb is connected to the potash pipette through stopcock SZ. All burette readings shall be made to 0'001 ml, with the burette connected to the potash pipette. During checking or the analysis of a portion of sample, the compensating system shall not be reopened to the atmosphere. If at any stage volume changes greater than 0'002 ml are obtained, that part of the procedure shall be repeated and, if necessary, the responsible fault located and eradicated. Consistent v&me changes not greater than 0'002 ml during the combustion process may be treated as `blanks' and corrections applied accordingly. 3.1.2 Reagents 3.1.2.1 Mercr!ry - Pure redistilled mercury. 3.1.2.2 Potassium hydroxide solution - 20 percent. Dissolve 290 g of potassium hydroxide in water and dilute to 1 litre. Store in a polyethylene bottle. 3.1.2.3 Sulphuric acid ( 0'5 percent v/v ) - Pour 10 ml of sulphuric acid ( d = 1'84 > into 2 litres of cold water. Add a trace of wetting agent which has a negligible vapour pressure. 3.1.3 Procedure - With the compensating system open to the atmosphere, adjust the level of potassium hydroxide to LI and Lz. Isolate the compensating system from the atmosphere. Connect one of the stopcocks of the sampling tube to the intake tube T. Connect the 250 ml mercury reservoir M to the other stopcock of the sampling tube as shown in Fig. 1. Eject any air trapped between M and the sampling tube through the spare limb of its lower stopcock. The gas to be withdrawn from the sampling tube may then be repiaced by mercury without contamination of the remainder of the sample. Raise the mercury reservoir E and fill 7

fs : 11454 - 1985

FIG. 1 GENERALARRANGEMENTOF THEMODIFIED HALDANE APPARATUSFOR CARBON DIOXIDE ONLY

8

IS -: 11454 - 1985 the burette and tube T with mercury, ejecting the nitrogen and a few droplets of mercury through the spare limb of the upper stopcock of the sampling tube. Flush out the burette and intake tube with the sample, discharging Open the sampling tube to the burette, the gas used to the atmosphere. lower the mercury reservoir E until the level of the mercury in the burette is below the 21-ml mark and close clip K. Raise the mercury reservoir A4 to exert a pressure on the gas in the sampling tube and burette of about 10 mm Hg. Close the upper stopcock of the sampling tube,`open clip K and raise the mercury reservoir E until the level of the mercury in the burette is between the 20-ml and 21-ml graduations. Close clip K and momentarily vent the burette to air through the upper stopcock of the sampling tube to blow off the excess sampling. Read the ~burette, close S,, open clip K and adjust the height of reservoir E until the same burette reading is obtained. Cautiously open stopcock If any sudden moveS1 to connect the burette with the potash pipette. ment of the potash mensicus from L1 occurs, readjust the position of the mercury reservoir E. The total movement of the potash from L1 and L2 should not be allowed to exceed 1 cm. Adjust the potash to L, and L, and read the burette. This is the initial volume of the sample. Pass the gas six times between the burette and the potash pipette, adjust the potash to L1 and L, and read the burette. Repeat the procedure until two successive readings differ by not more than 0'001 ml. 3.1.4 Calculations Carbon dioxide, percent by volume = V, - V, v x 100
1

where VI = initial volume of the sample in the burette, and V, = volume of the sample after absorption ofcarbon dioxide. 3.2 Determination of Carbon Dioxide by Catharometer

3.2.0 General - Only the principle of the apparatus is given. The construction is very specialized and can be carried out only by a suitable instrument making firm. 3.2.1 Principle - The catharometer is an electrical intrument for determining the concentration of various gases. In this instrument, two identical platinum wires are mounted similarly in similar glass tubes and heated by an electric current which passes through them in series. The temperature which the wires reach depends on the ability of the gas surroundlng them to remove heat, so that if they are surrounded by 9

IS : 11454 - 1985 identical gases, their temperatures, and also their electrical resistances will be equal. If the gases differ only in one constituent, the effect of this constituent in removing heat from the wire is thus reflected directly in its resistance and can be indicated directly on a meter which records the out-of-balance current of a wheatstone bridge, two of whose arms are the platinum wires. 3.2.1.1 One wire is sealed permanently with dry air and the other is surrounded by the dried, unknown gas sample. Since water vapour has been removed from the gas surrounding both wires, it may be assumed that the sample differs from the standard only in having carbon dioxide in it. It is possible to calibrate the indicating instrument directly in percentage of carbon dioxide. It usually requires about two minutes for the wires to reach steady temperature and for the instrument to give steady reading.

10

