IS 13372 ( Part 2 ) : 1992

( Reaffirmed 2001 )
mm

lndian Standard

SEISMIC TESTING OF ROCK MASS CODE OF PRACTICE
PART 2 BETWEEN THE BOREHOLES

UDC

622'245

: 624'042'7

: 620'1

0

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

t

NEW

April 1992

Price Group 3

Rock Mechanics

Sectional

Committee,

CED 48

FOREWORD This Indian Standard the Rock Mechanics Council. was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division

The seismic method is one of the most practical and convenient for obtaining a stratigraphic map It does this and information on the geological character and mechanical properties of the ground. by inference from the propagation velocities and attenuations of elastic waves. The velocities, frequency, attenuations and wave shapes of a propagating wave can be used as indices of important characteristic of the in-situ rock and soil, not only average mechanical properties but also structure, degree of weathering, etc. If ground is assumed to behave elastically, at least at the small strains imposed by propagating seismic wave, elastic constants such as Young's Modulus and Poisson's ratio could be computed from the observed seismic velocities and measured density values. It has been observed over the decades by conventional seismic technique using exclusively measured velocity that the above modulus known as dynamic elastic modulus is always greater than the static modulus of deformability determined by plate loading or other static test. Differences in strain rate, strain level and the different response of joints static loading account for the disagreement between dynamic and static rock quality have a significant effect on ratio between dynamic and static is close to 1'0 when the rock is free from defects, but increases as the decreases. to dynamic as opposite to `constant'. Differences in modulus which in principle quality of the rock mass

In many urban regions, the dynamic properties of soil and rock shall be determined for the solution of a variety of earthquake engineering problems and seismic testing the boreholes is used extensively in these application. Seismic Part Part method 1 2 has been covered a borehole the boreholes in the following two parts:

as input data in and between

Within Between

Part 2 deals with the method in which generation is in a borehole and detection is in one or more nearby holes. This method is also called `cross hole' seismic method. Theoretically, in this method the depth is unlimited, but in practice the accuracy is limited by borehole alignment deviations in the case of deep holes. Very precise borehole surveying is required in such cases. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 13372 ( Part 2 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

SEISMICTESTING OF ROCK MASSCODE OF PRACTICE
PART 1 SCOPE 2 BETWEEN THE BOREHOLES

This standard describes method for seismic testing between borehole for the purpose of either to locate and map straightgraphic boundaries, or to determine seismic and, by inference, mechanical characteristics of the individual rock or soil units between these boundaries. 2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 P Wave
P wave is a longitudinal wave and is also called a compressional wave. The direction of particle motion coincides with that of wave propagation. The prppagation velocity of a P wave is faster than that of an S wave.

Variations in the velocity of P and S waves can indicate the physical and mechanical properties and the degree of weathering, fracturing and jointing of the rock mass between boreholes. 4 APPARATUS 4.1 The following apparatus shall be required for carrying out the seismic testing. a) A seismic source, either an explosive, a mechanical device or an electrical device should be selected to generate the type of wave required. Table 1 shows alternative seismic sources for crosshole measurements.
Table 1 Seismic Source for Seismic Testing Between Boreholes

2.2 S Wave is a transverse wave and is also called a shear wave. The particle motion of an S wave is in the plane perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. An S wave can be classified into two types (SH wave and SV wave ) according to the direction of particle motion.
S wave

SI No. 1.

Types of Waves P wave source

Sources
air gun, explosives, sparker, downhole hammel mg device, piezoelectric vibrator, magnetostrictive source, etc downhole hammering device, piezoelectric vibrator, etc explosives, air gun, sparker, downhole hammering device, piezoelectric vibrator, ctc

2.
3.

SH wave source
SV wave source

2.3 SH Wave The particle motion of an SH wave is in the plane perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation The and in the direction parallel to a boundary. boundary is normally the ground surface. 2.4 SV Wave The particle motion of an SV wave is in the plane perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation and in the direction perpendicular to that of particle Totion of the SH wave. 2.5 Quality Factor Quality factor (Q) is a dimensionless factor indicating the degree of attenuation of waves or vibrations. 3 PRINCIPLE OF TEST METHOD following types:

b) A Seismic Receiver may be any one of the i> A geophone generating a voltage directly

proportional to the particle velocity of the seismic waves. The most suitable
frequency range is 10 Hz-2kHz. The natural frequency of the geophone shall be less than one half of the predominant frequency of the seismic waves.

ii) A piezoelectric

In this method, also called as "crosshole" seismic method, dynamic elastic properties are calculated from the velocities of the P and S waves and the density of rock mass. The velocity distribution of the rockmass is measured between boreholes from the travel times of P and S waves and the distances from the source to several receivers.
1

accelerometer generating a voltage directly proportional to the particle acceleration of the seismic waves. The most suitable frequency range is IO Hz-60kH. The natural frequency of the piezoelectric accelerometer shall be at least twice as high as the predominant frequency of the seismic waves.

cl A hydrophone

generating a voltage directly proportional to the pressure in the water surrounding it, acceptable only fon measurements in water-filled boreholes. The most suitable frequency range is IO Hz-60kH.

IS 13372 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 d) To

facilitate wave identification when geophones or piezoelectric accelerometers are used, each receiving unit-should consist of at least three receivers combined orthogonally to form a triaxial array, that is, one vertical and two horizontal receivers mounted at right angles.

Both seismic source and receiver should have a sensitivity and frequency response suitable for the purpose of the investigation. A typical frequency band. for general purpose crosshole measurement is between lOHz-2kHz. For a more detailed study, higher frequencies are required. e) Equipment for mounting the seismic source and receivers in the boreholes, and for surveying spacing depth, direction and deviation of the borehole and also the locations of seismic sources and receivers.

4

and not superposed on the signal. When an explosive is used, firing current, contact breaking (wire coil around detonator ) or contact making explosion generated (through the plasma) shall used to obtain the time break signal, but for other seismic sources, the signal shall obtained from a pick-up sensor or an electric signal electronically controlled from an source. A recorder to give a visual, analog or digital record of the seismic wave from An electromagnetic each receiver. oscillograph is the most popular means of obtaining a hard copy of the visual record.

5 PROCEDURE

5.1 Test holes shall be drilled at the most f) A data acquisition system, shown in Fig. 1 suitable locations considering the topography and for example, should include the following: geoIogy at the site. Measurements shall perferably made in an uncased hole. In case of cased 9 An amplifier, selected to match the be hole preferably a low velocity material such as a type of receiver used. The maximum gain of an amplifier is normally 70-130 high impact PVC should be used for casing and it ~BHzw~~H; flat frequency response of is essential that it should be well grouted behined in order to make an intimate contact with wall Other requirements of the hole shall when material. ii) Signal enhancement equipment be as follows: measuring in. a `noisy' area and/or in the case of a wide hole spacing in order a) The number and spacing of holes shall be to improve the signal-to-noise ratio of determined by the nature of the project so the record. Use of a high resolution as to obtain good results. digital data acquisition system with a With an increase in the borehole spacing, signal enhancement function is strongly the probability of measurement of refracted recommended. waves `rather than direct waves in each iii) A timing device to give an accurate layer increases. time mark. The interval of the time mark is normally either, 0'1, 1 or 10 b) The positions, directions, depths and deviations of each hole shall be surveyed msec, depending on the size of the area to determine the coordinates for all shot to be surveyed. and receiver positions. Accuracy of the iv) A time break unit, to give a time break survey should be specified in accordance signal on the record at the instant of seismic the the purpose of with wave generation. The time break mark measurements. shall be recorded on a separate channel
DIGITAL _ ANALOG DATA DATA

r_---.~..-

-

-..___-.-

_

..__

__

-

_

_-_-~--

-

AMP

UNIT

1

SIGNAL ENHANCEMENT UNIT

01 SPLAY UNIT I

PROCESSING DISK UNIT COMPUTER

AoNxG RECORDER

OSCICLOGRAPH

FIG. I

SYSTEM A TYPICAL EXAMPLEOF OBSERVATION 2

9

IS 13372 ( Part 2 ) : 1992 5.2 The seismic source shall be installed in one of the boreholes and one or any array of multiple receiver units shall be installed in the others at the required depth. Receivers shall be held in firm contact with the sidewall of the hole, except for measurements in water filled holes, in which case a suspension type of receiver may be used. and waves shall be generated 5.3 Seismic measured after each relocation of the seismic source, the receiver or the array of multiple receiver units. 5.4 The interval distance of measurement corresponds to the relocation interval of the source and/or the receivers, or the geophone spacing of a multiple receiver system in the hole ( Fig. 2 ). It shall generally be determined according to the required accuracy and efficiency of velocity measurements, and shall be usually in the range of 0'5-5'0 m. 5.5 The signals from receivers shall be recorded on magnetic media or displayed on the visual recorder. The signal amplitude and travel time should ,be adequate for reading the records with the required accuracy. Recording on magnetic tape or disk is strongly recommended. 6 CALCULATION
AND INTERPRETATION

Dynamic modulus of rigidity, Cd = PVs2 = &I/( 2 + 2vd ) Dynamic bulk modulus, Kd = P ( v,: 4 vs2/3 ) = Ea/ ( 3 - 6 Vd ) Dynamic Young's modulus. -3( v,/vs)"`- 3 Ed = Pvs2 ( v,/vs )" - 1

(2)

(3) ( 4 ).

where P = the density of rock ( kg/m3 ), V,, = the velocity of the P wave ( m/set), and Vs = the velocity of the S wave ( mlsec ).
NOTE -`The dynamic elastic moduli are express4 in pascals, or more often in megapascals [ 1 megapascd ( MPa ) = 10" pascals ] or gigapascals [ 1 gigaPascal ( GPa ) = lO> pascals 1. Poisson's ratio is dimcnsionlcss.

6.5 When the amplitudes of P and S waves are measured by the use of suitable apparatus and also the waves which travel through the formation are identified, the Q-value ( quality factor ), a measure of attenuation in the rock mass may be calculated by spectral ratio method and rise time method in their amplitude spectra. 6.6 By comparing the velocity so obtained with the velocity measured from specimens, the properties of the rock mass may be evaluated. 7 REPORTING OF THE RESULTS

The reports shall contain the following: a) The borehole location and length, diameter, direction and inclination, also the location and details of any casing and cement. b) Drawings showing the positions of all seismic sources and receivers, and the coordinates for all points. c) A description and specifications of the methods of measurement and equipment including the frequency characteristics of each apparatus used. 4 Waveforms for each source and receiver positions. 4 The average computed propagation velocities between shot points and receiving points (see Fig. 3 ), and also between boreholes, when multiple receiver holes in a same plane are used. f ) A tabulation of computed dynamic elastic modulus values. 8) A description of any equations used in addition to those given in this method, together with a statement of any assumptions used in the analysis. h) When required, a geotechnical interpretation of the results of measurement, considering the geological conditions in the test area. t

6.1 The travel times of P and S waves from the source to each receiver shall be determined by measuring the time from the time break to their first break in the record. When two or more receivers are located in the same ray path, the travel times of P and S waves between receivers shall be determined by measuring the time between their first breaks in the respective record. For the S wave the travel time of the predominant phase of S wave shall also be measured.

6.2 For both P and S waves, the distance from the source to each receiver or the distance between receivers when these are located in the same ray path is divided by the travel time, to obtain the `average velocity' from the shot point to the receiving point and also between receivers. 6.3 The average velocity holes shall be plotted. distribution between

6.4 The following dynamic elastic parameters may be calculated, using equations ( l-4 ), from P and S wave velocities and the density of the corresponding rock mass. Dynamic Poisson's ratio,
"d = + t

VrJIVs )"

-`2

(Vp - Vs)" - 1

(1)

3

IS 13372 ( Part 2 ) : 1992

HAMMERING

RECEIVER

2

NO. 1

_l

WAVES

_I
NO. 2 BOREHOLES NO. 3

RECEIVERS

BOREH

OLE

FIG. 2

SEISMIC TESTING BETWEEN BOREHOLES

4

FIG. 3 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAMOF SHSMICTESTINGBETWEEN BOREHOLES SHOWINGONE WAY OF GRAPHICALLYDISPLAYINGAVERAGE VELOCITIES FOR EACH LINE OF MEASUREMENT

5

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark IS governed by the provrsrons of the Bureau of Indian The Standard Mark on Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that.they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence for the to that standard as a further safeguard. use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Burearc of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade course of implementing designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards
are of the

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession issued from time to time. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the latest amendments or edition. following reference :

Dot : No. CED 48 ( 4966 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend

No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 13 `75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg. New Delhi

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002 Shah Zafar Marg

i 331 331 01 13 75 31

Eastern

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. 1. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Maniktola

37 86 62

Northern Southern Western

160036 600113

53 38 43 235 02 16 6 32 92 95

: C. I. T. Campus,

MADRAS

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. LUCKNOW. PATNA. SRINAGAR. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATORE. JAIPUR. KANPUR.

t

Printed at Printrade,

New Delhi, India

