( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 10181- 1982

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF MAGNETIC PERMEABILITY OF IRON AND STEEL
Methods
Chairman Sa~1p.K. CEAKBAVARTY Members SERI SUJITKUMARBASU M. N. Dastur & Co ( P ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI J. N. BHATTACHARJEE National Test House, Calcutta SHRI K. L. BARUI ( Alternate ) DR A. CHARRABOR~Y Usha Martin Black ( Wire Ropes ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI H. MAEESWARY ( Alternate ) SHRI K. K. CHERIAN Indian Aluminium Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI PANKAJ DE ( Alternate 1 SRRI 0. P. CEUGR ' ' Associated Instrument Manufacturers' ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI V. N. NANDA ( AItcrnatc ) SHRI M. K. DAS GUPTA National Phvsical Laboratory ( CSIR ). New Delhi ' ' " DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( MET )-2 Ministry of `Railways ASSISI.ANT DIRECTOR ( MET ) ( Alternate ) SHRI S. A. HAQUE Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI A. S. WALIA ( Alternate ) SHRI s. B. IDNAN Blue Star Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. L. CHADRA ( Alternate ) SERI S. V. KULKARNI Fuel Instruments & Engineers Pvt Ltd, Ichalkaranji SHRI J. V. KULKARNI ( Alternate ) SHRI M. C. KUMARASWAEZY The Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI D. DUTTA ( AZternatc ) Avery India Ltd, Calcutta SERI K. S. LAESHMINARAYAN SERI R. D. SRARMA ( AZtcrnate ) Sax1 S. R. M~ZUMDAR Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SERI M. P. MITTAL Bharat Steel Tubes Ltd. Ganaur SHRI KANWALJIT SINGE ARORA ( Alternate ) SHRI R. A. PADMANABEAN Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Durgapur SHRI M. PRASAD Steel Authoritv of India Ltd. Ranchi SHRI K. BISHNOI ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

of Physical

Tests

Sectional

Committee,
Representing

SMDC

3

The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur

@ Copyrtght 1982 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION I'his publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher .shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act I

IS : 10181- 1982
( ContinuedfTompaga Members
SHRI

1) Representing National Aeronautical Bangalore Laboratory ( CSIR ),

S. RAUHAKRISHNAN

Da V. SXINIVASAN ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence. ( R&D ) SKRI J .RAMESAM SHRI I. N. BHATIA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New SRRI R. N. S.4Hh Delhi SHRI S. K. PANDEY ( Ait nate ) Ministry of De-fence ( GOF ) SHRI D. N. SARKAR SHRI A. K. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI F. C. SH.~RMA Indian Register of Shipping, Bombay SHRI H. K. T~NEJA SHP.I V. N. PANDEY ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd, Bokaro Steel Ltd, SHRI S. G. TUDEKAR Bokaro SHRI J. C. ERRY ( Alternate) Directorate General of Technical Development and SHRI UXAMAHESWARAN Production ( Air ), New Delhi SHRI P. RAGIIOTHAMRAO ( Alternate ) National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), DR VED PRAEASH Jamshedpur DR D. J. CHAKRAVARTI ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ogicio Member ) SHRI C. R. R~x.4 RAO, Director ( Strut & Met ) SHRI S. K. GUPTA Assistant Director ( Metals ), IS1

2

IS : 10181- 1982

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF MAGNETIC PERMEABILITY OF IRON AND STEEL
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 12 April 1982, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Physical Tests Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 The need for the preparation of an Indian Standard for determining magnetic permeability was felt as a number of material specifications require such properties to be determined. The magnetic properties of any specimen of material may be considered to be defined by the Normal The method described in this stanInduction and the Hysteresis data. dard is applicable to iron and steel product in any form provided the dimensions are such that necessary test pieces may be obtained. Magnetic properties of sheet specimens, however, are to be determined in accordance with IS : 649-1963*. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard the following standards: BS 2454-1954 Methods meability of iron and Standards Institution. assistance has been derived from

for the determination of magnetic persteel bars, forgings and castings. British

ASTM A341-69 Method of test for direct current magnetic properties of materials using DC permeameters and the ballistic test methods. American Society for Testing and Materials. ASTM A342-lo64 magnetic materials. Methods American of test for permeability of feebly Society for Testing and Materials. accordance with is to be rounded this off,

0.4 In reporting the result of a te:t made in standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. --.
`Mdthod of testing steel sheets for magnetic circuits ( revisrd ). tRules for rounding off numerical values ( rrtiqed ).

of power

electrical

apparatus

3

IS : 131311. SCOPE

1982

1.1 This standard deals with the determination of normal magnetization curve connecting flux density and magnetizing field of iron and steel in the form of bars, rods or strip specimens which may be cut, machined or ground from cast, compacted, sintered, forged, extruded, rolled or other fabricated materials. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For apply. 2.1 Magnetic Flux Density ( B ) - The total steady magnetic lines of force along the test length of a specimen divided by the normal crossThe unit of magnetic flux density sectional area in square centimetres. in SI units is Tesla, which is equal to 10 000 gausses, the unit in cgs system. potential gradient along 2.2 Magnetizing Field ( H ) - The magnetic the test length of a specimen. The unit of magnetic field strength in SI system is ampere turn per metre, which is equal to 47r x 10-a or 0.012 57 oersted. 2.3 Normal Magnetization - The co-related maximum values of flux density ( B ) and magnetizing force ( H ) acting under uniform, reproduceable cycle conditions of magnetization, established in successively increasing magnitudes. The graph of B against H is termed the magnetization curve. 2.4 Magnetic Permeability to the field producing it ( B/H ). The ratio of the magnetic flux density the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall

2.5 Magnetic

- Material having, under conditions of normal Material magnetization, flux densities appreciably greater than the corresponding magnetizing field that is B/H appreciably greater than 1 gaussloersted. upon which

2.6 Specimen - A test piece, representative of the material the test for magnetic properties is to be made.

2.7 Ballistic Galvanometer - A galvanometer serving to measure small quantities of electricity represented by transient currents, the free period of the moving parts being long compared with the duration of the transient current. 2.8 Permeameter - An apparatus for determining the relationship between flux density and magnetizing field in a specimen under steady conditions of magnetization. 4

IS z 10181-

1982

external to the specimen, 2.9 Yoke - The part of the permeameter, which provides a return path for the flux from one end of the specimen to the other. 2.10 Main Magnetizing Winding - A coil provided in the meter for the magnetization of the test length of the specimen. permea-

2.11 Area Turns - The product of the number of turns ( .N) of wire in a search coil and the mean effective area ( A ), in square centimetres enclosed by them, that is N x A. 2.12 Maxwell Turns - The product of the number of turns of wire a flux search-coil and the number of flux lines passing through them. 2.13 Hysteresis Loss - The energy expended in carrying under examination through one complete magnetic cycle. 3. APPARATUS 3.0 The apparatus box and Scale power supply shall comprise the following: the material of

a) Permeameter b) Control d) Lamp f) D.C. c) Galvanometer e) Rheostats Figure 1 gives the general arrangement of the permeameter and control box, and connections between the two internal electrical circuits of the control box are given in Fig. 2. 3.1 Permeameter - Figure 1 shows the permeameter made up of a comprising of a yoke portion with core magnetic core of U-shape, arms C and C, the latter having slotted extensions. The polar faces of the core arms and the extensions are bridged by the specimen, X, under Upon the yoke portion of the core is located a magnetizing test. winding, M. A test coil, B, which encircles the specimen under test, is A second test coil, H, is situated between the ends of the core arms. affixed between the upper ends of two magnetic contact shoes I and I. These two coils are connected to the binding posts B and H, respectively, Clamps E serve to hold the test the connections being detachab!e. specimen firmly in place between the sheets I and I and the polar faces of the core arms. 3.2 Control Box - The control switches, galvanometer adjusting inductance. box comprises an resistances, ammeter arrangement of and calibrating

GALVANOMETER

CONTROL

BOX I SIMPLEX 1 PERMEAMETER

IjJ

RHEOSTATS

FIG. 1

ASSEMBLYOF FAHY SIMPLEX PERMEAMETER

D.C. POWER

9
Al \
Multirange Multirange Indication Calibrate Calibrating Induction Induction Reversing

_

ammeter ammeter

( main current

) )

( hysteresis current

test position for switch Ss position for switch S, or fluxmeter test position for switch Ss mutual coil force sensing coil control resistors control resistors inductor calibrating resistor current control secondary resistor winding resistor resistor for mutual damping circuit circuit or fluxmeter calibrating inductor

Galvanometer Magnetizing Magnetizing Magnetizing Main current Substitution Galvanometer Magnetizing

sensing coil

Hysteresis current

switch for magnetizing switch reversing switch circuit test switch

Shunting switch for hysteresis current Test-calibrate Galvanometer Galvanometer

Test position for switch Ss

FIG. 2

BASIC CIRCUIT USING PERMEAMETER 7

3.3 Galvanometer or Flusmeter - The fluxmeter for measuring induction and magnetizing force may be of either the ballistic-galvanometer or torsionless-fluxmeter types. It should be designed for high fluxlinkage sensitivity. The moving coil should have a free ( undamped ) period of at least 25 s. 3.3.1 When ballistic galvanometers are to be used it is often difficult to obtain adequate flux-linkage sensitivity. Under these conditions it is better to purchase long-period galvanometers of very high sensitivity to micro-ampere currents and which also have low-resistance moving coils. 3.4 Power Supply - The power supply should be able to supply direct-current power at a steady rate and be capable of quickly returning to this steady rate after a switching operation. Experience has shown that a battery of electrochemical cells of the lead-acid or nickel-iron and other types are acceptable sources when the maximum current and voltage requirements are coordinated with adequate storage capacity and the number of cells respectively. Motor-generator sets or sets or rectifier-filter type supplies may also be used but care should be taken to prevent the occurrence of excessive current reversal times or transient overvoltages which may appear at the time of the test during switching In case rectifier-set is used, ac component of the output operations. voltage shall not exceed 2 mV for 50 volts dc supply. The power supply and its leads should be well isolated from ground by the use of insulators which provide a very high resistance to ground. 4. TEST SPECIMEN

4.1 The test specimens shall consist of straight bars, rods, or strips of The cross sectional area shall not be less than uniform cross-section. The length shall be not less than 25 cm and 4.00 square centimetres. ratio of length to diameter or equivalent diameter shall be as follows: Permeability Under I * 1 1.1 to 2.0 Over 2.0 to 4-O 4.1.1 Under than 30 cm. no circumstances AND the length Dimensional Ratio 4 or over 20 or over 30 or over of the bar shall exceed more

5. CALIBRATION

STANDARDIZATION Circuit - The calibration from the following equation: of the

5.1 Calibration of the Induction B or induction circuit is determined 1, = BJVB A/ ( L, where IC 7 current required B circuit, A; for 8

x 10' )
reversal in Lm to calibrate the

Is : 18181-1982

B

= flux density

of calibrated

deflection, 2;

gausses;

NB = number
A
E

of turns in coil .Nz of Fig. area of test specimen, of calibrating

cross-sectional mutual

cm"; and mH.

I-m=

inductance

inductor,

Using this equation, substitute the value of B corresponding to the desired maximum value for a calibrated B value or range. Set the proper value of calculated current and with switch S`S in the B position reverse this current through the mutual inductor. The value of Rg is then adjusted to make the galvanometer, on current reversal, swing from zero to the desired scale reading. -5.2 Calibration of the H Circuit - The calibration ofthe magnetizing or H circuit is accomplished by following the above procedures and use of the following equation:

IC = H.&AH/(
where Ic =

L, x 10" )
for reversal force in for

current required H circuit, A; value of oersteds;

Lm to calibrate
calibrated

the

HflH =

magnetizing

deflection

number

of turns in coil .A$, of Fig. 2;

AH = effective area of coil .I'&, of Fig. 2, cm2; and Lm = mutual inductance
of calibrating inductor,

mH.

Using this equation, substitute in the value of H corresponding to the desired maximum deflection for a calibrated H value or range. Set the proper value of calculated current and with switch S's in the H position The value of R,q is reverse this current through the mutual inductor. then adjusted to make the galvanometer deflection on current reversal, swing from zero to the desired scale reading. 5.3 Calibration Curves and Scale Deflection Multipliers

5.3.1 When the light-beam path lengths are short or the angle of .deflection is large a tangency error may appear in deflection magnitude. The ballistic-galvanometer or fluxmeter deflections shall be examined to determine the deviation from linear behaviour. An instrument whose calibrated deflections over the useful scale range stays within 0.1 percent when compared with the graduations of a linear scale shall be considered to have a linear calibration. Under these conditions a single B or H scale multiplying factor may be used for all of the scale deflection when 9

IS:10181-1982
deviation from sary to calibrate then combined 0'1 percent. linearity is found to exceed 0.1 percent it may be necesThese are at a number of different scale deflections. to provide calibration curves which are correct within

5.3.2 For quality control or for material testing where the permeameter is used under conditions which do not require a close precision of test a single scale factor may be used. 6. PROCEDURE 6.1 In Fig. 2 the dc power source supplies either calibrating or testing Resistors R, and Rz and switches & current measured by ammeter Al. and S, determine the magnitude and direction of the current as required by various operations. In general, three kinds of switching operations First operation is reversal of magnetiare required in ballistic testing. zing current direction, without change of magnitude, as required for This is establishing a cyclic condition and in normal magnetic tests. The accomplished by throwing switch S,, from one side to the other. second operation is reduction of magnitude of magnetizing current without change of direction, which may be done by opening switch &. The third operation combines reversal of direction of magnetizing current with reduction in magnitude, obtained by simultaneously throwing switch S, from one side to the other and opening switch &. It should be ensured that S, is opened before S, is closed for reversal. 6.2 Switch Sz connects the battery to mutual inductor L, for calibrating Switch Si or to the magnetizing coil N, for testing, whichever is desired. connects the galvanometer to the B winding for calibration and measurement of induction, or to the H winding for calibration and measurement of magnetizing force. Resistor Rc and switch, S, are provided for control of galvanometer damping and direction of throw, respectively. Means for calibrating the galvanometer as a fluxmeter and mapnetjzing force-meter is provided by the mutual inductor L, and the resistors RB and RH. Control and measure the current in Lm with Sa in the calibrated position in the same way as for current in the magnetizing coil .N1. Reverse S, without change of magnitude. Since this current is usually of small magnitude, ammeter Al may have to be a multirange instrument. 6.3 Before test, demagnetize the specimen in the permeameter or by some other acceptable means. Demagnetize by first establishing a magnetizing force sufficiently large to cause induction in the test specimen to reach a point well above the knee of the magnetization curve. Then simultaneously, while continuously operating the reversing switch at half second or longer intervals, slowly reduce the magnetizing current to zero in small increments.

10

IS : 10181- 1982 6.4 To obtain
a test point, establish the proper magnetizing current then follow the appropriate procedure for the test point. Determine the H and B values of the test point in separate independent measurements at Since these measurements are the same value of magnetizing current. independent either may be determined first without loss of testing for accuracy provided the same magnetizin g current may be established both test points. 7. CALCULATIONS

7.1 The sample
mass, length,

area shall normally be determined and density using the equation:

from

test

specimen

A = mild
where

A = cross-sectional

area, g;

cm'; g/cm'; and

m = mass of specimen,

d = density of material,
1 = specimen length,

cm.

In many permeameters the B-coil area is much larger than the test specimen area, when this occurs a correction for air flux in the B-coil is ( This correction is applicable to ring specimen only. ) This required. correction Xshall be made as shown below:

K=(a-A)/A
where a = cross sectional area of test coil, ems; and area of test sample, cm*.

A = cross-sectional B = Bobs where

KT,H

B -_ induction H = magnetizing

in test specimen, force, oersteds;

gausses; and I, = 1

constant Ttn = magnetic gauss oersted ). For hysteresis loops:

of free space ( in cgs system

B `VA6= &I where

( Bob8 -

KT,

H)

B,r,,

= induction

at the test point on hysteresis 11

curve,

gausses.

IS : 10181.1982 B, = maximum value SCM induction for hysteresis, gausses;

B&J, = change in induction from B, to Btrue, gausses;

H

5 change in magnetizing

force, oersteds; and ( in the cgs system

Trill = magnetic constant of free space T,,, = 1 gauss/oersted ). 8. REPORT

8.1 When normal induction or hysteresis tests are made in a permeameter the following shall be reported along with the test data: a) Name or type of permeameter used; b) Size and shape of the test specimen; c) With hysteresis data, when coercive force residual induction or other specific hysteresis test points are reported, the value of cyclically symmetrical peak magnetizing force or induction is required; and d) When values are reported, as those for saturation induction, the corresponding value of magnetizing force should also be reported.

12

