Indian Standard (Reatfirmed:2019) 


гг — peA HEA A sree 
эйч зч-этет WA ch wu di 
See бге en чао ent 
veru en feng fesse 


Geosynthetics — Guidelines for 

Installation of Geogrids Used as 

Reinforcement of Base and Sub- 
Base Layers in Pavement Structures 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ТЯ 9799 mu 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"IW чач, 9 етте wer Art, Чї feeei-110002 
a МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2015 Price Group 2 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Geogrids are single or multi-layer materials usually made from extruding and stretching high density polyethylene 
or polypropylene or by weaving or knitting and coating high tenacity polyester yarns with polyvinylchloride 
(PVC). The resulting grid structure possesses large openings called apertures that enhance interaction with the 
soil or aggregate. The high tensile strength and stiffness of geogrids make them especially effective as soil and 
aggregate reinforcement. These can be uniaxial or biaxial. Biaxial geogrid is normally used for roadbed stabilization 
and reinforcement while uniaxial geogrid is commonly used for reinforcement of wall and earth retaining structures. 


A large variety of detrimental factors such as environmental conditions, sub-grade conditions, traffic loading, 
utility cuts, road widening, ageing, etc contribute to an equally wide variety of pavement conditions and problems 
which need to be addressed in the maintenance or rehabilitation of the pavements, if not dealt with during initial 
construction. Pavement maintenance treatments are often ineffective and short lived due to their inability to both 
treat the cause of the problem and renew the existing pavement condition. The main cause of distress in pavements 
is that they are quite permeable with 30 to 50 percent of precipitation surface water infiltrating through the 
pavement, softening and weakening the pavement sub-grade and base thus accelerating pavement degradation. 
Existing pavement distress such as surface cracks, rocking joints and sub-grade failures cause the rapid reflection 
of cracking up through the maintenance treatment. 


Therefore, the preferred strategy for long-term road and pavement performance is to build in safeguards during 
initial construction. These performance safeguards include stabilizing the sub-grade against moisture intrusion 
and associated weakening; strengthening road based aggregate without preventing efficient drainage of infiltrated 
water; and, as a last resort, enhancing the stress absorption and moisture proofing capabilities of selected 
maintenance treatments. 


Geosynthetics (geogrids and geotextiles) are the most cost effective tools for safeguarding roads and pavements. 
Their four main applications in roads are sub-grade separation and stabilization, base reinforcement, overlay 
stress absorption and overlay reinforcement. Sub-grade stabilization and base reinforcement involve improving 
the road structure as it is constructed by inserting an appropriate geosynthetic layer. Sub-grade separation and 
stabilization applies geosynthetics to both unpaved and paved roads. Base reinforcement is the use of geosynthetics 
to improve the structure of a paved road. Both geotextiles and geogrids thus can play an important role in 
extending the life of a roadway system. 


The general rules for use of geogrids and geotextiles in roadway system are as follows: 


a) Temporary Roads — Used for hauling and access roads that are subject to low volume of traffic including 
working platform for permanent road construction: 


1) Clayey or silty sub-grade with California Bearing Ratio (CBR) < 4 — If a clean base aggregate is 
used, then a non-woven separator geotextile shall be used. If a “choked aggregate” like general 
crusher run is used, then use either a geotextile or a biaxial geogrid that has good aperture stability 
and appropriate size for a design ESAL (Equivalent Single Axle Loading) less than 1 000, a woven 
geotextile designed for both separation and membrane roles — that is, consider the geotextile's 
modulus. For larger ESAL, use a woven or non-woven geotextile designed simply for separation. 
The reinforcement role of the geogrid seems safe for approximately 10 000 ESAL. 

2) Sandy sub-grade with CBR < 3 — Select a biaxial geogrid with good aperture stability and appropriate 
size or a woven geotextile that has a reasonable interface friction with the sand and the aggregate. 
If a woven geotextile is considered, care should be taken to ensure that it does not actually create a 
slick slip-plane beneath the aggregate. 


(Continued on Third Cover) 


IS 16349 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GUIDELINES FOR 
INSTALLATION OF GEOGRIDS USED AS 
REINFORCEMENT OF BASE AND SUBBASE LAYERS 
IN PAVEMENT STRUCTURES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes guidelines for installation of 
geogrids used as reinforcement of base and subbase 
layers in pavement structures 


2 REFERENCE 


The standard given below contains provision which, 
through reference in this text, constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the edition 
indicated was valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent edition of the standard. 


IS No. Title 
IS 16341:2015 Geosynthetics — Standard practice 
for exposure and retrieval of samples 
to evaluate installation damage of 
geosynthetics 


3 SURFACE PREPARATION 


3.1 The geogrid shall be laid out smooth without 
wrinkles or folds on the prepared sub-grade in the 
direction of the construction traffic. Adjacent geogrid 
rolls shall be overlapped a minimum of 300 mm, ends 
of rolls shall be overlapped 900 mm. On curves, the 
material may be cut to conform to the curves. The 
overlap shall be in the direction of construction and 
shall be held in place by staples, pins or aggregate piles. 
Damaged areas shall be repaired by overlaying the area 
with sufficient material to overlap on all edges by at 
least 600 mm. 


3.2 The aggregate base material shall be placed by end 
dumping onto the geogrid from the edge or over 
previously placed base aggregate. The construction 
equipment shall not be allowed directly on the geogrid. 
A minimum of 100 mm of aggregate shall be placed 
on the geogrid prior to the movement of construction 
equipment and turning movements shall be carefully 
monitored. Any ruts occurring during construction 
shall be filled with additional gravel aggregate and 
compacted to the specified density. If placement of 
the backfill causes damage to the geogrid, the damaged 
area shall be repaired as described above 


3.3 Fill Placement Over Geogrid 


Backfill shall be placed in minimum 150 mm lifts 
compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. 
Backfill shall be placed in a manner that minimizes 
the development of wrinkles and/or movement in the 
geogrid. Construction equipment shall not operate 
directly on geogrid. A minimum of 300 mm of fill shall 
be placed prior to equipment operating on top of 
geogrid. Ends of geogrid rolls shall be spliced by the 
use of an extruded rod or bar of the same material as 
the geogrid, supplied by the geogrid supplier. 
Overlapping ends of geogrid rolls shall not be allowed 
in lieu of a mechanical connection. 


3.4 The sub-grade soil shall be prepared as indicated 
on the construction drawings or a directed by the 
Engineer. 


4 INSTALLATION 


4.1 The geogrid shall be laid smooth without wrinkles 
or folds on the prepared sub-grade in the direction of 
construction traffic. Adjacent geogrid rolls shall be 
overlapped, sewn or joined as required in the plans 
Overlap shall be in the direction as shown on the plans 
or as given below: 


Soil CBR Method of Joining 

(1) (2) 
Greater than 3 300 - 450 mm overlap 
1-3 600 -1 000 mm overlap 
0.5-1 1 000 mm overlap or sewn 
Less than 0.5 Sewn 
All roll ends 1 000 mm overlap or sewn 


4.2 The base reinforcement geogrid shall be laid 
directly on the sub-grade. The reinforcement geogrid 
shall be laid beneath or within the base course as 
directed by the engineer. 


4.3 On curves, the geogrid may be folded or cut to 
conform to the curves. The fold or overlap shall be in 
the direction of construction and held in place by pins, 
staples, or piles of fill or rock. 


IS 16349 : 2015 


4.4 Prior to covering, the geogrid shall be inspected 
by a certified inspector of the engineer to ensure that 
the geogrid has not been damaged during installation. 
Damaged geogrid shall be repaired immediately. Cover 
the damaged area with a geogrid patch which extends 
an amount equal to the required overlap beyond the 
damaged area. 


4.5 The subbase or base shall be placed by end dumping 
onto the geogrid from the edge of the geogrid, or over 
previously placed subbase or base aggregate. On soils 
with CBR>3, most rubber-tired vehicles can be driven 
at slow speeds, less than 16 km/h and in straight paths 
over the exposed geogrid without causing damage to 
the geogrid. Sudden braking and sharp turning should 
be avoided. Tracked construction equipment should 
not be operated directly upon the geogrid. A minimum 
fill soil thickness of 15 cm 1s required prior to operation 
of tracked vehicles over the geogrid. Turning of tracked 
vehicles should be kept to a minimum to prevent tracks 
from displacing the fill and damaging the geogrid. 


4.6 For soils with CBR<1, construction vehicles shall 
not be allowed directly on the geogrid. The subbase or 
base shall be placed such that at least the minimum 
specified lift thickness shall be between the geogrid 
and equipment tires or tracks at all times. Turning of 
vehicles shall not be permitted on the first lift above 
the geogrid. 


4.7 On sub-grades having a CBR value of less than 1, 
the subbase or base aggregate should be spread in its 
full thickness as soon as possible after dumping to 
minimize the potential of localized sub-grade failure 
due to overloading of the sub-grade. 


4.8 Any ruts occurring during construction shall be 
filled with additional subbase or base material, and 
compacted to the specified density. 


4.9 If placement ofthe backfill material causes damage 
to the geogrid, the damaged area shall be repaired as 
previously described above. The placement procedure 
shall then be modified to eliminate further damage from 
taking place. 


4.10 The geogrid shall be laid at the proper elevation 
and alignment as shown on the construction drawings. 
The geogrid shall be installed in accordance with the 
installation guidelines provided by the manufacturer 
or as directed by the engineer. The geogrid may be 
temporarily secured in place with ties, staples, pins, 
sand bags or backfill as required by fill properties, fill 


placement procedures or weather conditions or as 
directed by the engineer. 


5 GRANULAR BASE REINFORCEMENT 


5.] Place geogrid at the proper elevation and alignment 
as shown on the construction drawings. Provide 
minimum overlap per manufacturers recommendations. 
Install the geogrid in accordance with the guidelines 
provided by the manufacturer or as directed by the 
engineer. Geogrid may be temporarily secured in place 
with ties, staples, pins, sand bags or backfill as required 
by fill properties, fill placement, weather conditions, or 
as directed by the engineer. 


5.2 Place, spread, and compact granular fill material 
in such a manner that minimizes the development of 
wrinkles in or movement of the geogrid. 


5.3 A minimum loose fill thickness of 15 cm is required 
prior to operation of tracked vehicles over the geogrid. 
Keep the turning of tracked vehicles to a minimum to 
prevent tracks from displacing the fill and damaging 
the geogrid. Rubber-tired equipment may pass over 
the geogrid reinforcement at slow speeds (less than 16 
kmph) when integrally-formed geogrids are used if 
sub-grade conditions permit. Do not use rubber-tired 
equipment directly on the geogrid when woven, multi- 
layer, or welded strip geogrids are used. Avoid sudden 
braking and sharp turning movements. 


5.4 Replace at no additional cost to the Department 
any roll of geogrid damaged before, during, or after 
installation. Proper replacement consists of replacing 
the affected area and overlapping the geogrid one foot 
on all sides adjacent to the damaged area. IS 16341 
for exposure and retrieval damages done during 
installation of evaluation samples. 


6 INSPECTION 


6.1 The owner or owner's representative may randomly 
inspect geogrid before, during and after (using test pits) 
installation. 


6.2 Any damaged or defective geogrid (that is frayed 
coating, separated junctions, separated layers, tears, 
etc) shall be repaired / replaced in accordance with 7. 


7 DAMAGE REPAIR 


Any roll of geogrid damaged before, during and after 
installation shall be replaced by the contractor at no 
additional cost to the owner. Proper replacement shall 
consist of replacing the affected area adding 1m of 
geogrid to either side of the affected area. 


ANNEX А 
(Foreword) 


IS 16349 : 2015 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. К. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SuniMATI Ritika Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Suri NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri ManisH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr О. S. SARMA 
Suri М. Kumaraswamy РшгАҮ (Alternate) 


Dn SWAPAN GHOSH 
Suri К. R. Gurra (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (ОА) 


Suri R. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRI S. Masoop Husain 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Cuirnis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. AsHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri Р. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Kousurk Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. К. KUSUMGAR 
Dn М. К. TaLukpar (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri К. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. Swan (Alternate) 


Suri Т. SANYAL 
Suri A. К. Kuastaair (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. ВАГОСНАМҮ (Alternate) 


Dr SANJEEV К. VERMA 
Suri HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH ВАСИ (Alternate) 


Suri С. К. CHAUDHURI 
Suri С. К. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Dr SauraBu Vyas (Alternate) 


IS 16349 : 2015 


Organization 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SuDAM (Alternate) 


SHRI JANAK NANAVATY 
Suri S. P. BORKAR 


SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. К. GUPTA 


Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


(Continued from Second Cover) 


b) Permanent Roads (ESAL>200 000) 


1) Clayey or silty sub-grade with CBR < 3 — Consider building a working platform using the temporary 
road methods upon which conventional road can be constructed. 

2) Clayey or silty sub-grade with 3 < CBR < 8 — If there is any potential for degradation due to water 
intrusion, frost heave, etc. then include a separator geotextile to protect the base aggregate during 
these periods. 

3) Sandy sub-grades with CBR < 3 — Use a biaxial geogrid that has good aperture stability and 
appropriate size to reinforce the base aggregate. This is particularly helpful when poor quality 
stone and small aggregate thickness is used, less than 25 cm. 

A geosynthetic element that functions primarily as a separator (typically when the sub-grade CBR>3) will increase 
the allowable bearing capacity of the sub-grade by 40 to 50 percent. (separation geotextile). A geosynthetic 
element that functions primarily to provide confinement of the aggregate and lateral restraint to the sub-grade 
(typically when the sub-grade CBR<3) will both increase the allowable bearing capacity of the sub-grade and 
provide an improved load distribution ratio in the aggregate. The combined benefit can enhance load carrying 
capacity of the road by well over 50 percent (stabilsation geogrids and geotextiles) as a separator (typically 
when the sub-grade CBR>3) will increase the allowable bearing capacity of the sub-grade by 40 to 50 percent. 
(separation geotextile). 


Geosynthetics can be also used as inter layers by placing them below or within the overlay (asphalt concrete) and 
are thus helpful in rehabilitating distressed road surfaces. These may also provide a moisture barrier. 


Survivability is defined as resistance to mechanical damage during road construction and initial operation. The 
ability of a geosynthetic to survive installation and reasonable service loads shall be assured if it is to perform as 
designed. Installation damage to a geogrid is a function of the following: 

a) Geogrid thickness, 

b) Compactive effort and lift thickness, 

c) Type and weight of construction equipment used for fill spreading, 

d) Grain size distribution of backfill, 

e) Angularity of backfill, 

f) Polymer used in the manufacture of geogrid, and 

g) Geogrid manufacturing process. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1077). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


