**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 14702 (1999) : Sunflower Oilcake as Livestock Feed 
Ingredient [FAD 5: Livestock Feeds, Equipment and Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 14702 :1999 

(Superseding IS 10147 : 1982 

and IS 10165: 1982) 

o ( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 

Indian Standard 

SUNFLOWER OILCAKE AS LIVESTOCK FEED 
INGREDIENT — SPECIFICATION 

ICS 65.120 



© BIS 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1999 Price Group 1 



Livestock Feeds Sectional Committee, FAD 5 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Livestock Feeds Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 

The oilcake derived from Sunflower (//e//a«r/?w5 5/7) is a feed of high nutritive value. It may be manufactured 
by expeiler or hydraulic pressed process or by solvent extraction process. Sunflower oilcake may be either 
undecorticated (with hull) or decorticated (without hull), depending upon the user's requirement. 
Decortication of oil seeds, besides improving the oil recovery and efficiency of solvent extraction process, 
reduces the crude fibre content, thereby improving the nutritive value of the oilcake. 

Earlier, the requirements of sunflower oilcake as livestock feed ingredient were covered under separate 
standards, namely, IS 10147 : 1982 'Specification for undecorticated sunfloweroilcake as livestock feed ingre- 
dient' and IS 10165 : 1982 'Specification for decorticated sunflower oilcake as livestock feed ingredient'. As 
decorticated sunflower oilcake and meal are hardly available in India, therefore, these are not considered for 
inclusion in the present standard. 

In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the Provisions of the Solvent 
Extracted Oil, De-oiledMeal& Edible Flour (Control) Order, 1961. Uo\ve\Qr, this st^ndeirdis subject to the 
restrictions imposed under that, wherever applicable. 

For the purpose ofdeciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2:1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values (revisec/)' . The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 14702 : 1999 



Indian Standard 

SUNFLOWER OILCAKE AS LIVESTOCK FEED 
INGREDIENT — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

This standard prescribes the requirements, methods 
of sampling and test for undecorticated sunflower 
oilcake, manufactured by expeller or hydraulic 
pressed process and solvent extracted undecorticated 
sunflower oilcake. 

NOTE — This standard does not cover the sunflower oilcake 
manufactured by Ghani process. 

2 REFERENCES 

The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 



IS No. 


Title 


2052 : 1979 


Compounded feeds for cattle 




{third revision) 


7874 (Parti): 


Methods of test for animal feeds 


1975 


and feeding stuffs : Part 1 




General methods 



3 TYPES 

The material shall be of the following two types: 

a) Type I Undecorticated sunflower oilcake 

(expeller or hydraulic pressed) 

b) Type II Solvent extracted undecorticated 

sunflower oilcake. 

4 REQUIREMENTS 

4.1 General Requirements 

The material shall be free from rancidity, insects, 
visible fungus infestation and from fermented, musty 
or other objectionable odours. It shall also be free from 
dirt, adulterants and other extraneous matter. 

4.2 Specific Requirements 

The material shall conform to the requirements 
prescribed in Table I . 

5 PACKING AND MARKING 

5.1 Packing 

Unless agreed to between the purchaser and the 
vendor, the material shall be packed in clean and sound 
jute bags. 



Table 1 Requirements for Sunflower Oilcake as Livestock Feed Ingredient 

{Clause A2) 



SI 


Characteristic 

(2) 






Requirements 




Method of Test, 


No. 

(0 


Type I 
(3) 




Type II 
(4) 


Ref to CI No. of 

IS 7874 (Part 1) 

(5) 


i) 


Moisture, percent by mass, Max 




10.0 




10.0 


4 


ii) 


Crude protein (N x 6.25), percent 
by mass, Min 




25.0 




28.0 


5 


iii) 


Crude fat or ether extract, percent 
by mass, Min 




n.o 




- 


7 


iv) 


Crude fibre, percent by mass, Max 




28.0 




32.0 


8 


V) 


Acid insoluble ash, percent by mass. 


Max 


1.0 




1.0 


10 


vi) 


Castor husk 




Absent 




Absent 


I 1 


vii) 


MAHUA oilcake 




Absent 




Absent 


12 




NOTE — The value specified for requirements (ii) to (v) 


are on moisture basis. 





IS 14702 : 1999 



5.2 Marking 

5.2.1 Each bag shall be indelibly and legibly marked to 
give the following information : 

a) Name and type of the material; 

b) Name of the manufacturer; 

c) Batch or code number; 

d) Net mass, in kg; and 
je) Date of packing. 

5.2.2 BIS Certification Marking 

The product may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 



5.2.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards 
Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made 
thereunder. Details of conditions under which a license 
for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 

6 SAMPLING 

Representative samples shall be drawn and conform- 
ity of the material in the lot to the requirements of this 
specification shall be determined according to the 
method prescribed in Annex C of IS 2052. 



