UDC

621*791'65'053'6

: 669'14

: 620'177 Jndian Standard

IS : 3600 ( Part 7 ) - 1985
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

METHOD
PART

OF TESTING FUSION WELDED JOINTS AND WELD METAL IN STEEL
7 LONGITUDINAL TEST ON ROOT AND BUTT WELDS FACE BEND (Second Revision)

1. Scope - Specifies two methods for making longitudinal root and face bend tests on test pieces taken from a fusion welded butt joints in order to assess ductility or absence of defects on the surface in tension of the joint itself. It also gives the dimensions of the test piece. 2. Field of Application fusion welding process. 3. Principle 3.1 Submitting
bending

-This

standard

applies

to

ferrous

materials

with

butt joints

made by any

a test

it, without

reversing

piece, taken longitudinally the bending direction,

from a welded joint, to plastic deformation by in such a way that one of the surface of the weld

is in tension. 3.2 The test may be made according to either former ) and 7 ( bending test using a roller ). 4. Taking of Test Piece Of two methods described in 6 ( bending test using a

4.1 The test piece shall be taken from a part of a welded fabrication or a welded test assembly longitudinally to the welded joint in such a way that after machining the weld axis will be parallel to the length of the specimen.
but are made for purposes of Note - "Test assemblies' are welded joints which do not belong to a construction approval (for example, procedure qualification), control (for example, production test coupons) or studies and research.

4.2 Each test piece shall be marked in such a way that after its removal exact position in the fabrication or in the test assembly from which it treatment shall be applied to the test assemblies unless it is specified or standard for the welded joint to be tested. Details of any heat treatment report.

it is possible to identify its has been taken. No heat allowed by the application shall be recorded in the test

4.3 The test piece shall be taken by appropriate means. Shearing is excluded for thicknesses of more than 6 mm. If thermal cutting or other methods which could affect the cut surfaces are used, the cuts shall be at a distance from the test piece greater or equal to 8 mm, but in any case sufficient according to the process used, not to induce alterations which could modify the test results. An exception to this may be the case when the bend test is made only to ascertain the possible presence of weld defects, in which case the edges of the specimen shall be dressed smooth. 5. Machining of the Test Piece

suitable precautions being taken to 5.1 The test piece shall be finished by machining or grinding, avoid superficial strain-hardening or excessive heating of the material. Within the length L (see 6.3) :he surfaces shall be free from scratches or notches. 5.2 The test piece shall have a rectangular cross-section practically constant for all its length. The :ross-sectional shape and dimensions shall conform to Fig. 1. The length of the specimen shall be ruch that it will satisfy the specified test requirements. When the weld is made from one side only, the bend test pieces are called: contains contains the largest width of the weld; and

a) face bend test pieces, when the surface in tension b) root bend test pieces, when the surface in tension

the root of the weld. which welding commenced first is

When the joint is made from both sides, then the side from :alled the face. The other side is called the root. 5.3 The upper and lower surfaces of the weld he parent metal. Machining of the undercuts application standard.
Adopted 14 February 1985

shall be dressed flush with the original surfaces of is not permitted, unless otherwise specified in the

I INDIAN
MANAK

Q November STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

1985,

ISI I

Or 2

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 3600 ( Part 7 ) - 1985

R ONLY ON THE FACE IN TENSION

FIG. 1

DIMENSIONS

AND

SHAPE

OF TEST

PIECE

5.4 Generally

the

test

piece

thickness

a shall be equal to the thickness

of the parent metal near the

welded joint.
When the joint thickness exceeds 30 mm, it is permissible, instead of a single test piece having the full joint thickness, to take several test pieces from the welded joint, provided the thickness a of each test piece is not less than 30 mm and that they cover the full thickness of the joint (see Fig. 2 ). In such a case the position of the test piece in the welded joint thickness shall be identified.
Note -A reduced number of test pieces or test pieces taken application standard concerning the welded joint to be tested. in different positions

may be required by the

5.5 The corners of the test piece on the face in tension radius R not exceeding 0'2 a ( maximum 3 mm ).

shall

be rounded

by filling

or grinding

to a

HIS SURFACE

TO BE It: TEXSiON 7

-yTHIS

SURFACE

TO BE IN TENSION

--_ __~~~~R~--------__--_

f THIS SURFACE

TO EE IN TENSKIN

All dimensions FIG. 2 METHODS OF CUTTING

in millimetres. BEND TEST SPECIMENS

TRANSVERSE OR LONGITUDINAL FROM FULL PLATE THICKNESS

2

IS : 3600 ( Part 7 ) - 1985
6. Method for Bend Testing Using a Former (see Fig. 3 )

FIG. 3

BEND

TEST

METHOD

USING

A FORMER

6.1 The test shall be carried out, by placing the test piece on two supports consisting of parallel rollers. The test piece shall be slowly and continuously bent by applying in the middle of the span;a concentrated load (three point bending) perpendicularly to the test piece surface. 6.2 The load shall be applied by means of a former having an end diameter D that conforms requirements of the application standard concerning the welded joint under examination. 6.3 The distance L (see Fig. 3 ) between rollers shall be not greater than L = D + 3a. reaches the value given in the to the

6.4 The test is completed when the bending angle c( (see Fig. 3 ), appl,ication standard concerning the welded joint under examination. 7. Method of Bend Testing Using a Roller (see Fig. 4 )

FIG. 4

BEND

TEST

METHOD

USING

A ROLLER

3

IS : 3600

( Part

7 ) - 1985
one end of the test piece in a testing

7.1 The test shall be carried out by firmly clamping two parallel rollers.

device having

The test piece shall be slowly and continuously bent by applying a concentrated load on the test piece by means of the rotation of the outer roller, having a radius R,, through an arc centred on the axis of the inner roller. 7.2 The diameter D of the inner roller shall conform concerning the welded joint under examination. 7.3 The test is completed when the bending application standard concerning the welded joint 8. Results 8.1 After bending, both the external surfaces and the sides of the test piece shall be examined. with the appropriate application to the requirements of the application standard

angle a (see Fig. 4) under examination.

reaches the value given in the

8.2 The evaluation of the bent test piece shall be made in accordance standard for the welded joint under examination. 8.3 In the test report the method'of bending shall be recorded.

EXPLANATORY

NOTE

This standard was first published in 1966 and subsequently revised in 1973 covering various tests on fusion welded joints and weld metal in steel. In view of the experience gained and in order to bring the test and test requirements in line with other international standards published so far, it has been decided to revise the standard in the following parts: Part 1 Part 2 Part 3 Part Part Part Part 4 5 6 7 Cruciform fillet weld-tensile test

Beam impact ( Charpy V-notch ) test Transverse tensile test on butt welds Longitudinal tensile test on cylindrical weld metal test pieces on butt welds Transverse root and face bend test on butt welds ( corresponding to IS0 5173-1981 Transverse side bend test on butt welds ( corresponding to IS0 5177-1981 ) Longitudinal root and face bend test on butt welds Nick break test and fillet weld fracture test Macro and micro examination. )

Part 8 Part 9

In this revision free bend test has been deleted as the ductility of the weld zone is being assessed more and more by other bend tests. Special tests such as tests for the susceptibility to lamellar tearing, reheat cracking, brittle fracture and creep fatigue will be covered in separate standards. The main purpose of this standard is to recommend test procedures and test specimens that should be quoted or incorporated in engineering application standards that deal with welded constructions primarily for the qualification of welding procedures and operators. Where differences still exist between application standards, the methods of test given in this standard should be preferred. A general indication is given of the purpose served by the tests specified in this standard, but this standard does not indicate the choice of test method nor a particular application nor the number of specimens to be tested or the repeat tests to be allowed in the event of failure. Such requirements are matters to be dealt with in the particular application standards where they exist or to be agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser. It should be realized that variations in welding can give rise to variations in the test results. procedure and the preparation of test specimens

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960. 4
Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India

