( Reaffirmed 2003 )

IS:10815- 1984

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE APPLICATION OF ADHESIVES IN FOOTWEAR INDUSTRY
Adhesives Sectional
Chairman SHRI G. R. INAMDA~

Committee,

PCDC 15
of Technical Development,

Rcpresrnting Directorate General New Delhi

Members DR V. R. B. MATHUR (Afternate Shri G. R. Inamdar ) SHRI A. R. BASU Ssnr SHRI H. MITRA (Alternate ) T. L. BHATIA to Printing and Stationery Department, of India, Calcutta Indian Posts Jabalpur and Telegraphs Government Department,

DIVIBIONAL ENQINEER ( TELEORAPHS ) ( Alternate ) SHRI D. CHAKR~VARTY SARI S. SAHQAL (Alternate ) SHRI A. K. CHA~DRA

Dunlop India Ltd, Calcutta ( P) Ltd,

Chandras' Chemical Enterprises Calcutta SHRI N. G. BANERJEE (Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta DR D. K. DAS SHRI ANILENDU Gnosa (Alternate ) Indian Gum Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI C. GORDHA~ DAS SRRI D. K. MEROHANT ( Altrrnatr I ) SHRI J. S. PALAV (Alternate II ) Johnron &Johnson Ltd, Bombay DR S. N. IYER DR P. K. MANNA ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) DR L. D. KHANDPAL DR AMAR SINEW I Alternate ) Kondivita Pvt Ltd, Bombay DR N. R. KONDEKAR` Carona Sahu Co Ltd, Bombay SIIRI K. S KULKARNI SHRI A. R. PARIKH ( Alternate ) Sulekha Works Ltd, Calcutta SHRI N. G. M,\ITRA DR S. D. NANDY (Alternate)

( Continued on page 2 ) 0 Copyright1984 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Cepyight Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the raid Act.

IS: 10815- 1984 ( Continuedfrom page 1 )
Members SHRI N. G. MAITRA
SHRI P. R. h$ALEIAN

Representing Stationery and Office Equipment Association of India, Calcutta Office of the Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industry, New Delhi

SHRI D. P. SIN~H ( Alternate DR W. MILLNS

)

Indian Rubber Manufacturers' Association, Bombay

Research

SEEI N. B. FE~ADE ( Alternate ) Ciba of India Ltd, Bombay DR H. A. MONTEIRO SHRI A. P. BAJI (Alternate) Bata India Ltd, Calcutta SilRI S. K. PAUL SHRI D. BANERJI ( Alternate ) \ Corn Products Co ( India ) Ltd. Bombay SHRI A. S. RAJADRYARSHA SERI S. R. PALEKAR (Alternate J Aeronautical Laboratory ( CSIR ), National SLRI R. M. V. G. K. RAO Bangalore Indian Space Research Organization, Trivandrum DR R. RAMASWAMY Ds S. K. GUPTA (Alternate) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), New Delhi SHRI T. N. RAWAL SHRI 0. P. GUPTA (Alternate ) India Security Press, Nasik S'RI N. P. SABNAYAH SHHI GANC~A PARKASH ( Alternate ) Industries Research Ahmadabad Textiles DR H. C. SRIVASTAVA Association, Ahmadabad SRRI M. M. GHARIA (Alternate ) The Paper Products Ltd, Bombay DR RAW TALWAR Director General, ISI ( Ex-o&o Member) SHRI M. S. SAXENA, Director ( P&C ) Secretary SHRIMATI VIJAY MALIE Assistant Director ( P&C ), IS1

Adhesives for Leather
Convener Dn L. D. KRANDPAL Members

Industry

Subcommittee,

PCDC. 15 : 3

Ministry of Defence ( R&D )

SHRI D. K. CEAKRAVARTY SHRI S. SAH~AL ( Alternate ) SHRI A. K. CHANDRA SERI N. G. BAXERJEE (Ahnate) &RI P. B. G. DASTI~AR SHRI S. K. PAUL ( AlfCY?U&) SHRI K. J. JANAKAR SHRI N. D. DESAI ( Alternate )

SHRI I. L. MUNJE (Alternate to DR L. D. Khandpal )

Dunlop

( India)

Ltd, Calcutta

Chandras' Chemical Enterprises Pvt Ltd, Calcutta Bata ( India ) Ltd, Calcutta Bayer ( India ) Ltd, Bombay ( Continued on page 10 )

2

IS : 10815- 1984

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE APPLICATION OF ADHESIVES IN FOOTWEAR INDUSTRY
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 8 February 1984, after the draft finalized by the Adhesives Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 0.2 Several adhesive formulations based on different materials exist in market. In footwear manufacture natural rubber solution and adhesives based on polychloroprene, polyurethane, nitroceIlu!ose ( pyroxylin ) and natural rubber latex are extensively used in cementing and pasting operations. Of these, polychloroprene based adhesives are used widely. 0.3 To obtain good bond strength, preparation of the surface and proper application of the adhesives are as important as the adhesive formulation. This standard lays down guidelines for footwear manufacturers for proper handling and application of adhesives. In the preparation of this standard considerable assistance has been taken from the SATRA Memorandum T.M. 1229 " Introductory Notes on the Stuck-on Process " published by Shoe and Allied Trade Research Association ( U K ).

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays down guidelines the footwear industry. for application of adhesives in

1.2 This standard does not cover the specification of the material. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, definitions given in IS : 2050 - 1967* shall apply.
*Glossary of footwear terms.

3

IS : 10815 - 1984 3. APPLICATION OF ADHESIVE The surface of the matter which might

3.1 Preparation of Surface to be Bonded material to be bonded shall be free from extraneous adversely affect the bond strength.

3.1.1 Upper Leather -. With all upper leathers the grain layer shall be completely removed. This implies that not only the surface should be broken but it is necessary to get down to the strong fibres beneath the grain layer also. 3.1.1.1 With full chrome upper leather the correctly roughened surface (Jee Note ) should present a coarse nap with no trace of the grain layer of finish remaining. The roughened surface should be the characteristic green/blue chrome colour except, of course, where the dyestuff has penetrated deeply into the leather. `Furrow' in the surface generally indicate insufficient roughening.
NIX E - The leather should be roughened in a direction subsequent direction of peeling or bond separation. parallel to the

3.1.1.2 Certain semi-chrome leathers and most vegetable tanned leathers have a grain layer of thickness greatar than full chrome leathers. Unless the grain is roughened away, not only will the adhesive have difficulty in penetrating ( owing to the closer fibre weave there ), but the weaker fibres of the grain, or possibly the weak stratum between the grain and corium layers, will cause the bond to break down relatively low loads. It is thus extremely important to remove all this grain layer, even though the leather is apparently being weakened. Semi-chrome, chrome retanned and vegetable tanned leathers are more difficult to stick even when the grain has satisfactorily been removed. With suedes, it is not normally essential to rough but in some cases a light roughening is advantageous mainly to remove dust. 3.1.2 Sole Leather - With sole leather ( and insole leather ) while adhesive lasting or rib attaching, it is necessary to ensure that all the loose flesh fibres are removed. In firmar or horny leathers loose fibres may not be present but in such cases it is necessary to break up the leather surface into a coat-se nap. This permits the adhesive to penetrate and provide greater surface area for adhesion. 3.1.3 Rubber Soling - With rubbers ( microcellular, resin composition and translucent or gristle ) used for outer soles, middle-soles and heels, the surface ` skin ' of rubber has to be removed. This ` skin ' may contain ingredients that have migrated from the bulk of the rubber, as well as dirt and grease picked up by handling, etc. A good bond may not be possible unless this is removed and the rubber surface is roughened to 4

IS : 10815 - 1984 increase the surface place shortly before area. Ideally, the removal of this skin should take the adhesive is to be applied.

3.1.4 Plastic U#per.s - These are usually PVC and polyurethanes coated fabrics. In general the surface should be roughened to clean off dirt and grease and to increase the surface area as with rubber solings but in some cases the surface may be wiped over with solvent ( see Note ) or a specially prepared solution instead of removing the plastic surface.
NOTE - Methyl ethyl ketone is a suitable solvant to remove any surface finish and extraneous dirt. Apply the solvent with a damp pad avoiding flooding, level the wiped surface for 15 f 5 minutes at room temperature before applying the adhesive.

3.1.5 Fabric except for the With certain remove both adhesive may attachment of

Uppers - Normally no preparation is required for fabrics dressing, which may need to be removed if it is very loose. Sudene and Chatola fabrics, however, it is necessary to the flock or sequins and the base adhesive as the base be very tacky and weak, and may be a weak link in the the sole.

3.1.5.1 Fabrics made from man-made fibres such as rayon, nylon and polyester often present difficulty in sticking due to the adhesives not readily adhering to the fibres. This is especially true if the fibres are continuous filament as opposed to staple. It is usually necessary in this case to prepare the surface of the fibre by coating with special solution ( like the adhesive along with isocyanate ) that will adhere well to it. 3.2 Method of Preparation

tool 3.2.1 Wire Brusfi Roughening - The wire brush is the most versatile and probably the best for most materials. For upper leathers it is the only satisfactory tool for removing the grain surface of the leather. The wire brush has the further advantage that it removes plasts and irregularities from the lasted margin much more effectively than scouring or cleaning with solvent. It is also one of the most effective tools for removing loose fibre from fleshy sole leather and can be used on all other soling materials. 3.2.2 Chisel-Needle Roughening - This type of tool is particularly useful for hard and horny sole leather for which it is better than a wire brush. Also with certain rubbers such tools can give at least as good roughening as a wire brush. It is not very suitable for loose fibred leather soles and In such cases comparative test against a certain poorer quality rubbers. wire brush may be desirable. 3.2.3 Scouring - A coarse paper ( 30 grit or less ) is used for scouring. This method of preparation is suitable for most rubbers. It is essential to watch that the paper does not clog and that it is replaced when worn, before contaminating the prepared surface. In cases where handling is 5

IS : 10815 - 1984 unavoidable, as in stitching through a sole, it is a good the surface of the rubber with ligroin or white spirit solvent to dry before applying the adhesive. practice to wipe and allowing the

3.3 Adhesive Application - The adhesive manufacturer should provide alongwith the adhesive instructions as to the quantity of material to be used, the method to be employed for preparation and duration of curing period. As regards the application, the guidelines given in 3.3.1 to 3.3.4 may be followed. 3.3.1 Method of Application - Application of the adhesive may be done by machine or brush ( see Note ). Solvent based adhesive are applied by an extruder type of machine although in some cases a rollar type of The latices can usually be applied by a machine may be used. roller type machine (two component adhesives are almost invariably applied by brush, because they will cause the applying machines to clog up if not cleaned out frequently ).
of adhesive may be done to both the adherends by brush NOTE -Application stokes or machine in both the directions parallel to the direction of roughening.

amount of adhesive should be 3.3.2 Absorbent Material - Adequate applied on leathers, fabrics and other absorbent materials. It would be a good practice to apply two coats of the adhesive on such materials, but adhesive applying machine are designed for single coat working and With brush application in general a single coat is quite satisfactory. It is essential that a film of adhesive of a second coat is often required. remains on the surface after drying. and other non-absorbent 3.3.3 Non-absorbent Materials - On rubber materiais a lighter coat is sufficient to give, adequate dry film on the surface and it is advisable not to use too thick a solution ( some adhesives are supplied in ` thick ' and ' thin ' grades ). 3.4 Attachment

3.4.1 Press - For sole attaching a press designed for this purpose should be used to obtain a good overall bond. The presses in use operate pneumatically consist of an airbag, water bag or a pad of soft rubber. The pressure should be applied through the pad box or through the arm holding the last. Whatever system is used the press should be capable of applying sufficient pressure, without the pad wrapping round the shoe bottom, and with the pad extending to the whole area of the shoe bottom. 3.4.2 Press Dwell - The modern technique is to reduce the press dwell. Present two station presses operate at between 15 to 20 seconds dwell per shoe. The length of press dwell depends on the rate of set-up of the adhesive; this will vary to some extent with the type of footwear,

IS :10815- 1984 Solutioncharacteristics of the adhesive, method of reactivation, etc. activated adhesives require the longest press dwell, hence the use of multi-station presses; the heat reactivated and non-reactivated types of adhesives require a shorter press dwell than solvent-activated adhesives. The length of time the shoe needs to be in the press may be determined in the factory by examining some shoes for any evidence of ` creep' in the bond. After they have been left for a day, the creep will show as legging of the adhesive at the points of greatest stress and may indicate that the press dwell was too short. 3.4.3 Open Time - Open time is the time interval between applying the The appropriate open time depends adhesive and assembling the bond. on the properties of adhesive and to some extent on the nature of adherends. Use an open time recommended by the adhesive manufacture. 3.4.4 Green Strength - The minimum length of time which should be allowed between sole attaching and the next operation, will depend on the type of adhesive used and normally it is a matter of minutes. 4. HAZARDS IN USING SOLVENT BASED ADHESIVES

e majority of solvents used in the 4.1 Inflammability of Solvents-Th adhesives are inflammable. Adhesives, therefore, should not be stored or used in the vicinity of flame, an electric fire, or other hot surfaces. Adhesive that are inflammable may be labelled accordingly. - The vapours of practically all solvents used 4.2 Toxicity of Solvents in adhesives are liable to cause toxic effects if confined to small space. It is advisable to use adhesive with some form of extract system, or failing this, in a room with adequate ventilation. It is obviously, not a good practice to confine the use of adhesives to a corner of a room where there is no flow of air, thus enabling the concentration of the vapours to increase. When adhesives are applied by brush it helps if the adhesive is used from the dispenser rather than from an open tin or other open The advantage of a dispenser is that the exposed surface area of vessel. the adhesive is small thus minimizing both fire and toxicity risks. -It has been found that most adhesives 4.3 Dermatitis from Adhesive can cause dermatitis if allowed to be in contact with skin for an appreciable length of time. It is probable that the trouble usually occurs when the adhesive is allowed to dry on the skin and is left for many The principal danger is that repeated hours without being removed. exposure may produce sensitization ( allergy ) of the skin. Any further brief contact with the adhesive then causes skin irritation and People who have not developed the allergy may not be inflammation. affected.

7

IS : 10815 - 1984 4.3.1 The prevention of dermatitis arising from adhesive .is not difficult and is essentially a question of cleanliness. The hands may be protected by using suitable barrier creams followed, after work, by hand cleaning creams which facilitate, the removal of the adhesive. This system of protection, and cleaning is preferable to the common practice of using solvent to remove adhesive after work. If a solvent is used, it should be an effective solvent for the adhesive and should be followed the natural oils removed with an ` afterwork cream `, to replace from the skin. 5. TESTING 5.1 Toe Testing - After effecting a satisfactory bond, it is advisable to make regular check tests of normal production shoes. A suitable method for conducting adhesion test of sole has been given in IS : 8085 This is a non-destructive process control test, in which ( Part 1) - 1976*. shoes are taken up to a pre-determined load which is less than the load that should be required to cause separation at the toe. If more than an occasional failure occurs a check-up is required; for this purpose some further shoes should be tested to failure and the soles should be stripped right back for examination of the bond, 5.2 Examination of the Bond - Having tested adhesion at the toe much information may be gained by peeling back the sole to the waist and studying the type of breakdown occurring. This gives a rough assessment of the bond strength and the cause of weakness, if any, may be ascertained. This kind of examination coupled with a small scale wear trail, in which the shoes are pulled up on completion of the trial, will give a very good assessment of the quality and durability of the bond. 5.3 Type of Failure in Testing - A brief summary of the types of failure likely to occur and the reasons for these failures are given in 5.3.1 to 5.3.6.
of the sole Ieather 5.3.1 Sole Leather Failure - This is due to breaking A layer of these fibres may be seen adhering to the adhesive. If the test result is good, for example above 18 kg on the SATRA adhesion tester, this type of failure is quite usual and satisfactory. If the test result is low, this may often be due to too much loose flesh fibre being present. fibres.

shows itself in just the same way as 5.3.2 Upper Leather Failure -This sole leather failure ( 5.3.1 ) though the fibres adhering to the adhesive are usually shorter and fewer in number. If upper leather failures occur at low loads this may indicate failure to remove the grain layer in *Methods of test for footwear : Part I Demensions fitting and adhesion test.
8

i

IS : 10815 - 1984 roughening but this may also be an indication that the leather is unsuitable for adhesive work ( for example certain semi-chromes and also goat skin leather ). This type of failure may occur at high loads if the strength of the bond itself is exceptionally good. 5.3.3 Rubber, Plastic and Fabrics Failure - This means the materials tears and that the adhesive bond is stronger than material. If the peeling load is low, the quality of the material is unsuitable for stuck-on work. With rubbers, especially microcellulars, the tearing may not run deep into the material but may be confined to the tearing off a discontinous surface layer. This may sometimes indicate undue weakening of surface by the roughening operation, and a different method of preparation may then be desirable. 5.3.4 Lack of Adhesion to One of the Materials - When the film of adhesive comes away from the surface of one of the materials, this usually denotes that the adhesive is not suitable for the material or that the material has had insufficient preparation. 5.3.5 Adhesion Failure of Adhesive - This is characterised by ' legging' of the adhesive and is often an indication of ( a) too short a drying time, (b) too short a dwell time, (c) joint tested before it has reached full strength, and/or ( d ) softening of the adhesive due to migration of plasticiser from PVC coated fabrics, or that of grease and oil from leathers. ( Other impregnants that are now being used in leathers may have the same effect ), Even if none of these causes are responsible, cohesion failures will occur if the adhesive is inherently the weakest link in the bond. Adhesive giving cohesion failures should generally be regarded as unsuitable for sole attachment. 5.3.6 Non-coalescence of Two Adflesive Films - This may be identified if shiny patches of the adhesive are seen where the two surfaces have not adhered, and may be due to (a) the adhesive being left too long between applying and pressing when no reactivation is used, ( b) insufficient reactivation, ( c ) insufficient press time or pressure, or ( d ) application of insufficient adhesive ( particularly with leather which may give a starved joint by soaking up the adhesive and leaving insufficient quantity on the surface. Insufhcient pressure, may really be due to an application of uneven pressure, caused by an uneven lasted margin, or due to an unsuitable or incorrectly adjusted pad box on the press. It is important to look for such causes as to boost the air or pressure on the - hydraulic machine.

9

IS:10815 - 1984 (Csntinurd
from page 2 ) Mmbcrs Representing
GOPA& JO~LEKAR

SERIATMARAY
Sari

K. S. KULEARNI SEIRI A. R. PARIEH ( Afternate SERI R. N. MISRA

Prasanna Industries, Pune Carona Sahu Co Ltd, Bombay

)

Tannery and Footwear Corporation Kanpur

of India Ltd,

SHRI S. D. Josar (Altcrnatc) Nanrec Adhesive ( P ) Ltd, Bangalore SERI B, C. NANAVATI SHRI S. J. NANAVATI ( Alternate ) The National Tannery Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI J. SINEA ROY SHRI A. CHAKRABORTY (Altrrnatr ) Shaw Leiner Ltd, Calcutta SERI G. THAN~RAJ SHRI A. KRISHNASWAMY ( Akvnatc)

10

