Indian Standard

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

1I Is)
National Foreword

DEFINITIONS OF TOLERANCES ROLLING BEARINGS
( IS0 Title
: Rolling

FOR

Bearings

- Tolerances

-

Definitions

)

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IS0 1132-1980 ` Rolling bearings - Medefinitions ' issued by the International Organization for Standardization was adopted rynFli Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Rolling Bearings Sectional Committee and approved by the Engineering Division Council.

-

In the adopted

used in Indian Standards;

standard certain terminolcgy and conventions attention is specially drawn to the following in

are not identical : Standards

with those the current

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while practice is to use full point ( . ) as the decimal marker. Wherever the words ` International should be read as ` Indian Standard `. Additional lnform+tion Standard

Indian

' appear,

referring

to this standard,

they

English original

This Indian Standard is the national implementation of IS0 1132-1980; as such only the If the French text is required, reference should be made to text has been reproduced. IS0 publication.

Adopted 10 September

1984 I INDIAN MANAK

@ January 1985, ISI

Gr 3

STANDARDS BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION SHAH 119009 ZAFAR MARG

IS: 11027-1984 ISO 1132-1980

1

Scope

and field of application

radial direction : Direction through the bearing or ring axis in a radial plane.

3.6

This International Standard defines terms used in International Standards specifying tolerances for boundary dimensions, running accuracy and internal clearance for rolling bearings. In addition, it specifies general conditions under which these tolerances apply and gives symbols for a number of the concepts defined.

3.7

axial plane : Plane containing the bearing or ring axis.

2

General

conditions

3.8 axial direction : Direction parallel with the bearing or ring axis. It is, however, acceptable to consider axial directions referred to in the definitions as being perpendicular to the plane tangential to the reference face of a ring or back face of a thrust bearing washer. 3.9 middle of raceway : Point or line on a raceway surface, halfway between the two edges of the raceway.

At a temperature of + 20 `X, and provided that the bearing parts are completely unstressed by external forces, including measuring loads and the gravitational force on the part itself, a boundary dimension of a bearing or bearing part should not deviate from the nominal dimension by more than the tolerance to be applied. Only the low deviation of a bore diameter tolerance and the high deviation of an outside diameter tolerance apply to the entire width of the bore and outside surfaces of bearing rings. In other respects, the definitions in clauses 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 only concern the surfaces between ring chamfers. Unless there is an indication to the contrary, the terms "ring", "inner ring" and "outer ring" as used in this International Standard, include washer, shaft washer and housing washer, respectively.

3.10

raceway

contact

diameter

:

Diameter

of

the be-

theoretical circle through the nominal points of contact tween the rolling elements and the raceway.

NOTE - For roller bearings, the nominal point of contact is generally at the middle of the roller.

3.11

cylinder and cone : Cylinder and cone, respectively, circular in sections perpendicular to its axis.

4

Boundary

dimensions

3

Axes,

directions,

planes

Diameter (width) variations and mean diameters (width) defined in this clause, are the differences and arithmetical means of the actual largest and smallest single dimensions, not of the permissible limits for the single dimensions.

3.1 inner ring axis : Axis of the cylinder inscribed in a basically cylindrical bore or of the cone inscribed in a basically
tapered bore.

4.1

Bore diameter

4.1.1 nominal bore diameter, d : Diameter of the cylinder containing the theoretical bore surface of a cylindrical bore. 3.2 outer ring axis : Axis of the cylinder circumscribed around a basically cylindrical outside surface. Diameter, in a designated radial plane, of the cone containing the theoretical bore surface of a tapered bore.
NOTE surface. For rolling bearings, the nominal bore diameter for deviations is generally

3.3

bearing axis : Identical to the inner ring axis.

the reference

value (basic diameter)

of the actual bore

reference face of a ring : Face so designated by the manufacturer of the bearings and which may be the datum for measurements.

3.4

4.1.2 single bore diameter, ds : Distance between two parallel tangents to the line of interssction of the actual bore surface and a radial plane. 4.1.3 deviation of a single bore diameter, Ads (of a basically cylindrical bore) : Difference between a single bore diameter and the nominal bore diameter, Ads = d, - d.

3.5 radial plane : Plane perpendicular to the bearing or ring axis. It is, however, acceptable to consider radial planes referred to in the definitions as being parallel with the plane tangential to the reference face of a ring.

2

IS : 11027-l 984 IS0 1132-1980

4.1.4 bore)

bore diameter

variation,

V,, (of a basically cylindrical

4.2.6

mean outside diameter deviation, AD, (of a basical-

: Difference between the largest and the smallest of the
of an individual ring.

single bore diameters

ly cylindrical outside surface) outside diameter and the

: Difference
nominal

between outside

the mean diameter,

Am
4.1.5 bore) mean bore diameter, d, (of a basically cylindrical

= 3,

- D.

: Arithmetical, mean of the largest and the smallest of the
of an individual ring.

single bore diameters

4.2.7 single plane mean outside diameter, D,, : Arithmetical mean of the largest and the smallest of the single outside diameters in a single radial plane.

4.1.6 mean bore diameter deviation, Ad,,, (of a basically cylindrical bore) : Difference between the mean bore diameter and the nominal bore diameter, Ad,,, = d,,, d.

4.2.8

single

plane

mean

outside

diameter

deviation,

~~~~ (of a basically cylindrical outside surface) : Difference between a single plane mean outside diameter and the nominal outside diameter,

4.1.7 mean

single plane mean bore diameter, d,,,,, : Arithmetical of the largest and the smallest of the single bore in a single radial plane.

ADmp = Dmp - D.

diameters

4.2.9 outside diameter variation in a single radial plane, Vh : Difference between the largest and the smallest of the
diameter deviation:, L&,,, single outside diameters in a single radial plane.

4.1.8

single plane mean bore

(of a basically cylindrical bore) : Difference between a single plane mean bore diameter and the nominal bore diameter,

4.2.10

mean

outside

diameter

variation..

VDmP (of a

A dmp 4.1.9

=

dmp

-

d.

basically cylindrical outside surface) : Difference between the largest and the smallest of the single plane mean outside variation in a single radial plane, diameters of an individual ring.

bore

diameter

v& : Difference between the largest and the smallest of the single bore diameters in a single radial plane.

4.3
4.3.1

Form
deviation from circular form (of a basically circular

4.1.10 mean bore diameter cylindrical bore) : Difference smallest dividual ring.

variation, vdmp (of a basically between the largest and the bore diameters of an in-

line on a surface) inscribed

: Greatest radial distance between the circle

of the single plane mean

in the line (inside surface) or circumscribed around the line (outside surface) and any point on the line.

4.2

Outside
nominal surface)

diameter
outside diameter,

4.3.2 deviation from cylindrical form (of a basically cylindrical surface) : Greatest radial distance, in any radial plane, between the cylinder inscribed in the surface (inside surface) or circumscribed around the surface (outside surface) and any point on the surface. D iof a basically cylindrical
cylinder containing the

4.2.1 outside

: Diameter

of the

theoretical

outside surface.

NOTE - For roiling bearings, the nominal outside diameter is generally the reference value (basic diameter) for deviations of the actual outside surface.

4.3.3 deviation from spherical form (of a basically spherical surface) : Greatest radial distance, in any equatorial plane, between the sphere inscribed iri the surface (inside surface) or circumscribed around the surface (outside surface) and any point on the surface. 4.4 Width and height

4.2.2

single

outside

diameter,

D, : Distance between two
of the actual outside

parallel tangents to the line of intersection surface and a radial plane.

4.4.1 nominal ring width, B (inner ring) or C (outer ring) : Distance between the two theoretical side faces of a ring.
NOTE - For rolling bearings, the nominal width is generally the reference value (basic dimension) for deviations of the actual width.

4.2.3

deviation

of a single

outside

diameter,

dB

(of a

basically cylindrical outside surface) : Difference between a single outside diameter and the nominal outside diameter,

A Ds = D, - D.
4.2.4 outside diameter variation, Vk (of a basically cylin4.4.2 single ring width, B, or C, : Distance between the points of intersection of the two actual side faces of a ring and a straight line perpendicular to the plane tangential to the reference facr, of the rirlg.

drical outside surface) : Difference between the largest and the smallest of the single outside diameters of an individual ring.

4.2.5 mean outside diameter, D, (of a basically cylindrical outside surface) : Arithmetical mean of the largest and the smallest of the single outside diameters of an individual ring.

4.4.3 deviation of a single ring width, Am or Aa : Difference between a single ring width and the nominal ring width, A Os=Bs-BandA~

=C,-C.

Is : ii0274984 Is0ii324980
4.4.4 ring width variation, VBsor V,, : Difference between the largest and the smallest of the single widths of an individual ring.

4.5

Ring chamfer

dimension r : Chamfer dimension

4.5.1 nominal chamfer dimension, value used for reference purposes.

4.4.5 mean ring width, B, or C, : Arithmetical mean of the largest and the smallest of the single width of an individual ring.

(see 4.5.3) for referencepurposesin InterNOTE - Replacedby rsmin nationalStandardspublishedafter 1974. 4.5.2 single chamfer dimension, rs

4.4.6 nominal bearing width, B, C or T (radial bearing) : Distance between the two theoretical ring faces designated to bound the bearing width.
NOTE - The nominal bearing width is generally the reference value (basic dimension) for deviations of the actual bearing width. Symbol B is used where the nominal width is the distance between the inner ring faces, as well as where inner and outer rings are equally wide and their faces nominally flush. Symbol C is used where the nominal width is the distance between the outer ring !aces (providing symbol B is not applicable). Symbol 7 is used where the nominsl width is the distance between one inner ring face and the outer ring face on the opposite side.

radial dimension : Actual distance, in a single axial plane, from the imaginary sharp ring corner to the intersection of the chamfer surface and the ring face. axial dimension : Actual distance, in a single axial plane, from the imaginary sharp ring corner to the intersection of the chamfer surface and the bore or outside surface of the ring.
4.5.3 smallest single chamfer dimem-ion, rs,i, (minimum limit) : In addition to defining the smallest permissible radial and axial single chamfer dimension, this is the radius of an imaginary circular arc, in an axial plane, tangential to the ring face and the bore or outside surface of the ring, beyond which no ring material is allowed to project.

4.4.7 actual bearing width, r, (radial bearing where one inner ring face and one outer ring face are designated to bound the bearing width) : Distance between the points of intersection of the bearing axis and the two.planes tangentiai to the actual ring faces designated to bound the bearing width.
NOTE - For a single-row tapered roller bearing this is the distance between the points of intersection of the bearing axis and two planes, one tangential to the actual back face of the cone and one tangential to that of the cup, the cone and cup raceways and the cone back face rib being in contact with all the rollers.

4.5.4 largest single chamfer dimension, r,,, (maximum limit) : The largest permissible radial or axial single chamfer dimension.

5

Running

accuracy

5.1
4.4.8 deviation of the actual bearing width, AT, (radial bearings where one inner ring face and one outer ring face are designated to bound the bearing width) : Difference between the actual bearing width and the nominal bearing width, ATS = T, - T.

Radial runout

4.4.9 nominal bearing height, T (thrust bearing) : Distance between the two theoretical washer tiack faces designated to bound the bearing height.
NOTE - ihe nominal bearing height is generally the reference value (basic dimension) for deviations of the actual bearing height.

5.1.1 radial runout of assembled bearing inner ring, Ki, (radial bearing) : Difference between the largest and the smallest of the radial distances between the bore surface of the inner ring, in different angular positions of this ring, and a point in a fixed position relative to the outer ring. At the angular position of the point mentioned, or on each side and close to it, rolling elements are to be in contact with both the inner and outer ring raceways and (in a tapered roller bearing) the cone back face rib, the bearing parts being otherwise in normal relative positions.

4.4.10 actual bearing height, Ts (thrust bearing) : Distance between the points of intersection of the bearing axis and the two planes tangential to the actual washer back faces designated to bound the bearing height.

4.4.11 deviation of the actual bearing height, Ars (thrust bearing) : Difference between the actual bearing height and the nominal bearing height, ATs = T, - T.

5.1.2 radial runout of assembled bearing outer ring, A,, (radial bearing) : Difference between the largest and the smallest of thi$ radial distances between the outside surface of the outer ring, in different angular positions of this ring, and a point in a fixed position relative to the inner ring. At the angular position of the point mentioned, or on each side and close to it, rolling elements are to be in contact with both the inner and outer ring raceways and (in a tapered roller bearing) the cone back face rib, the bearing parts being otherwise in normal relative positions.

4

IS : 11027-l 984 IS0 1132-1980

5.2

Face runout

with

raceway

5.4

Raceway

parallelism

with

face

5.2.1 assembled bearing inner ring face runout with raceway, Si, (groove type radial ball bearing) : Difference between the largest and the smallest of the axial distances between the reference face of the inner ring, in different relative angular positions of this ring, at a radial distance from the inner ring axis equal to half the inner ring raceway contact diameter, and a point in a fixed position relative to the outer ring. The inner atid outer ring raceways are to be in contact with all the balls.

5.4.1 raceway parallelism with face, ring of groove type radial ball bearing, ference between the largest and the distances between the plane tangential and the middle of the raceway.

Si or S, (inner or outer reference face) : Difsmallest of the axial to the reference face

5.5

Outside

surface

inclination

5.5.1 variation of outside surface generatrix inclination with face, So (outer ring basically cylindrical surface, reference
face) 5.2.2 assembled bearing cone back face runout with

: Total variation of the relative position, in a radial direc-

raceway, Si, (tapered roller bearing) : Difference between the largest and the smallest of the axial distances between the cone back face, in different angu!ar positions of the cone, at a radial distance from the cone axis equal to half the cone raceway contact diameter, and a point in a fixed position relative to the cup. The cone and cup raceways and the cone back face rib are to be in contact with all the rollers, the bearing parts being otherwise in normal relative positions.

tion parallel with the plane tangential to the reference face of the outer ring, of points on the same generatrix of the outside surface at a distance from the side faces of the ring equal to the maximum limit of the axial chamfer dimension.

5.6 5.6.1
(radial

Thickness

variation Ki

inner ring raceway to bore thickness variation,
bearing)

between the largest and the smallest of the radial distances between the bore surface and the middle of a raceway on the outside of the ring.

: Difference

5.2.3

assembled

bearing

outer

ring

face

runout

with

5.6.2

S,, (groove type radial ball bearing) : Difference raceway, between the largest and the smallest of the axial distances between the reference face of the outer ring, in different relative angular positions of this ring, at a radial distance from the outer ring axis equal to half the outer ring raceway contact diameter, and a point in a fixed position relative to the inner ring. The inner and outer ring raceways balls. are to be in contact with all the

outer ring raceway to outside surface variation, K, (radial bearing) : Difference between

thickness
the largest

and the smallest of the radial distances between the outside surface and the middle of a raceway on the inside of the ring.

5.6.3

washer raceway to back face thickness variation, Si or S, (thrust bearing shaft or housing washer, flat back

face) : Difference between the largest and the smallest axial distance between the back face and the middle of a raceway on the opposite side of the washer. 5.2.4 assembled bearing cup back face runout with

raceway,

S,, (tapered roller bearinyi

: Difference between the

largest and the smallest of the axial distances between the cup back face, in different angular positions of the cup, at a radial distance from the cup axis equal to half the cup raceway contact diameter, and a point in a fixed position relative to the cone. The cone and cup raceways and the cone back face rib are to be in contact with all the rollers, the bearing parts being otherwise in normal relative positions.

6
6.1

Internal
Radial

clearance
clearance

6.1.1

radial internal clearance, G, (bearing capable of taking purely radial load, non-preloaded) : The arithmetical mean of the radial distances through which one of the rings may be

displaced relative to the other, from one eccentric extreme position to the diametrically opposite extreme position, in different angular directions and without being subjected to any external load. The mean value includes displacements with the rings in different angular positions relative to each other and with the set of rolling elements in different angular positions in relation to the rings. NOTE - At each limiting eccentric position of the rings in relation to each other, their relative axial position, and the position of the rolling elements relative to the raceways, are to be such that the one ring has actually assumed the extreme eccentric position in relation to the other ring.

5.3

Face runout

with

bore

5.3.1

face runout

with

bore, S, (inner ring, reference face) :

Difference between the largest and the smallest of the axial distances between a plane perpendicular to the ring axis and the reference face of the ring, at a radial distance from the axis of half the inner ring raceway contact diameter.

6

IS : 11027-1984 IS0 1132-1980

6.1.2 bearing) raceway

theoretical diameter

radial

internal

clearance

(radial contact

mean of the axial distances through which one of the rings may be displaced relative to the other, from one axial extreme tion to the opposite extreme position, without posibeing subjected

: Outer ring raceway

diameter minus the inner ring minus twice the rolling element diameter.

NOTE - For a master bearing, i.e. a bearing having negligible form errors, the clearance defined in 6.1.1 is identical to the theoretical clearance, providing that a roiling element is positioned in line with the angular direction of displacement.

to any external load. The mean value includes displacements with the rings in different angular positions relative to each other and with the set of rolling elements positions in relation to the rings. in different angular

6.2
6.2.1

Axial

clearance

axial internal

clearance,

G, (bearing capable of taking

axial load in both directions,

non-preloaded)

: The arithmetical

NOTE - At each limiting axial position of the rings in relation to each other, their relative radial position, and the position of the roiling elements relative to the raceways, are to be such that the one ring has actually assumed the extreme axial position in relation to the other ring.

6

Printed at Slmco Prlntlng Prerr, Delhi, India

