IS 12970 ( Part 6/&c 2 ) : 1992 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

SEMICONDUCTOR INTEGRATED
PART 6 ANALOGUE INTEGRATED Section 2 Linear

DEVICES CIRCUITS
MEASURING METHODS Amplifiers

CIRCUITS,

UDC 621'3'049'77'037 : 621'375

Q

BP3 1992

BUREAU
MANAK December 1992

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAPAR MARG

9

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Price Group11

Semiconductor

Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee, LTD 010

CONTENTS

SCOPE REFERENCES TERMINOLOGY LETTERSYMBOLS SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS POWERSUPPLYCURRENTS ( 22 ) SMALL-SIGNAL INPUT IMPEDANCE ( 23 ) OUTPUT IMPEDANCE ( 24 )

.. . .. . . .. . .. . .. .. . ... .. .

... .. .. . . .. .. ... . . ..

.. . .. . ... ... .. . . .. ...

PAGE 1 1 1 1 1 3 3 5

INPUT OFFSET VOLTAGEOF A DIFFERENTIAL-INPUT LINEARAMPLIFIER AND BIAS VOLTAGEOF A SINGLE-ENDED-INPUT LINEARAMPLIFIER ( VIO ), ( 25 ), ( 26 ) ...

7 9 11 14 14 14 16 17 20 22 23 23 25 26 27 28 30 30

10 11 12 13 14

INPUTOFFSET CURRENT( 110 ) ( 27 ) INPUT BIAS CURRENT( ZIB) ( 28 )

.. . .. .

.. . ..
.. . .. . ...

.. . ... .. . .. . ... .. ... . .. ... .. .. . ... . .. ... ...
..a

INPUT OFFSET VOLTAGETEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT (.0/o ) ( 29 ) INPUT OFFSET CURRENTTEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT ( 30 ) OPEN-LOOP VOLTAGEAMPLIFICATION ( 31 ) .. .

( FREQUENCIES ) (SC ) ( 32 ) 15 CUT-OFFFREQUENCY

16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26

COMMON-MODE REJECTION RATIO (

~CMR

) (

33 )

.. .
.. .

SUPPLYVOLTAGEREJECTION RATIO ( ksv~ ) ( 34 )

OUTPUT VOLTAGERANGE ( D.C. MEASUREMENT ONLY ) FORDIFFERENTIAL ... AMPLIFIERS ( 35 ) ... RESPONSE TIMES( 39 ) COUMON-MODE INPUTVOLTAGERANGE ( 42 ) .. . ... ...

SHORT-CIRCUIT OUTPUT CURRENT( OF AN OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER ) ( 43 ) CROSS-TALK ATTENUATION ( FORMULTIPLEAMPLIFIER ) ( 44 ) UPPER LIMITING FREQUENCY FORFULL OUTPUTVOLTAGESWING( 45 ) MAXIMUM RATE OF CHANGEOF THEOUTPUT VOLTAGB( SLEW RATE ) .. . .. . ( &`OM ) ( 46 ) INPUT BIAS CURRENTTEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT ( 47 ) CUT-OFF FREQUENCY, UNIT-GAIN FREQUENCY ( fc,
fi ) (

.. .

55 )

.a.

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Part 6/Set 2 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Semiconductor Devices and Integrated Circuits Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunications Division Council. ( Continued on thirdwover )

IS 12970 ( Part OSec 2 ) : 1992

Indian Standard

SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
PART 6 ANALOGUE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS, MEASURING METHODS Section 2 Llnear Ampllflen
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 6ISec 2) provides measuring methods for Analogue Integrated Circuits Linear Amplifiers including Operational Amplifiers. 2 REFERENCES 2.1 The lndian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard : IS No. 1885 (Part 71 Set 5) : 1971 Title Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part 7 Semiconductor devices, Section 5 Integrated circuits and microelectronics Letter symbols for semiconductor devices: Part 1 General aspects Semiconductor devices Integrated circuits: Part 1 General b) they may not measure a characteristic under the same conditions (for example a.c. method only or d.c. method only). Furthermore, some methods (usually labclled as "method a") are suitable as laboratory methods, whilst others (usually labelled' as "method b") arc those particularly suited to be used in automatic test equipment. In the latter context, it should be noted that the following methods can be grouped together as forming a sequence of tests using basically a fixed measurement set-up: differential input resistances (method 7.2 b); input input

input offset voltage of a diffemulial amplifier (metbod 9.2 b); input offset current of a diffcrcutial amplifier (method 10.2 b); input bias current of a differential plifier (method 11.2 b); d.c, voltage amplification input amplifier (method

3715 (Part 1): 1971 12970 (Part 1) : 1990 3 TERMINOLOGY

input am-

of a diffcrcntial 14.2 b);

3.1 For tbe purpose of this standard, terms and definitions given in IS 1885 (Part 7/Set 5) : 1971 and provisions of 3 of IS 12970 (Part 1) : 1990 apply. 4 LETTER SYMBOLS 4.1 For the purpose of this standard letter symbols given in IS 3715 (Part 1) : 1971 shall be applicable. 5 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS 5.1 Genernl The following methods of measurement arc intcndcd as general methods applicable to most types of linear amplifiers, including operational amplifiers. For many characteristics, two different methods of measurement are given. It should be noted that these methods may not be directly equivalent, in that either:

d.c. value common-mode rejectiou ratio of a differential input amplifier (method 16.2 b); supply voltage rejection ratio (for mc or more supplies) (method 17.2 b); and output voltage range (for a differcutial amplifier) (method 18). input

This group of methods requires the use of an additional amplifier (labelled A in this standard), IIIC rcquiremeuts of which arc giveu in 5.3. Furthermore, this group of.methods the characteristics being mcasurcd by calculation. usually requires to bc obtained

The list of measurement methods is not intended to be complete and may be extended in IIIC fuuturr. In certain measurements (for cxamplc "offset voltage" and "offset current") the specified characteristics imply measurement at the input of the amplifier. The methods actually use mcasuremcuts made 31 the output in order to use the gain of the amplifier to reduce the effect of impedance ou the measurcmcut point. 1

4

they may be applicable to different types of amplifiers (e.g. single-ended or differential input types), or

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 5.2 General Precautions influence of the environmental conditions, particularly temperature. Where several d.c. measurements are to be made in order to determine the value of a characteristic, the time interval between such measurements should be as short as possible. 5.3 Requirements A (Null Amplifier) for the Additional Amplifier and Associated Components

5.2.1 Care should be taken during all measurements to ascertain that no parasitic oscillations occur. 5.2.2 Any auxiliary by the manufacturer or stabilizing circuits shall be connected. specified

52.3 All power supplies should have essentially zero impedance at the signal frequencies used in the measurements. 5.2.4 When the measurement is to be made under small-signal conditions on a linear part of the integrated circuits characteristic, the a.c. signals employed should be such that a progressive decrease in their amplitudes results in negligible changes in the parameter value within the desired accuracy. 5.2.5 Unless otherwise stated, the ambient or reference-point temperature should be within 2 2OC of the specified value during all measurements. 5.2.6 When the integrated circuit is connected to or disconnected from the measurement circuit, care must be taken to ensure that the limiting conditions of use are not exceeded during such operations. 5.2.7 Where required, the supply voltages switched on in the correct sequence. must be

The group of methods suitable for automatic testing use the amplifier under measurement and an additional differential input amplifier A in a closed-loop arrangement, shown in block form in Fig. 1. This amplifier A together with its associated ponents constitutes a "null amplifier". The required characteristics the basic circuit within follows: Amplifier A com-

for the components of the dotted lines are as

It should preferably have characteristics similar to those of the amplifier under measurement, but particularly : an open-loop 60 dB; an adequate amplification output voltage greater swing; than

5.2.8 In making d.c. measurements, it is possible that some parameters may change under the

input voltage an adequate common-mode range for the output voltage of the integrated circuit under measurement.

E,

= common-mode voltage squrce.

Va = reference voltage.

R,=

-

RR RI +R*

FIG. 1 BASIC BLOCK hGRAM

FOR

AUTOMA~C %lTNG

2

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992
Other The (~onqmnents

7.1.1 Purpose To measure the values of the real and imaginary (without regard to sign) parts of the input impedance of a linear amplifier. 7.1.2 Circuit Diclgmm
NOTES

resistors R, and R, arc added to provide suitable gain and input characteristics for amplifier A. They ghould m&t the following rcquiren&ts. R, >> output resistance measurcmcnt. of amplifier under

R, >> any load resistance across the output of amplifier under measurement. R, << R,. %

1 2, is equal attenuator.

IO the characteristic

impedance

of

the

2 For single ended output, P should be earlhed. symmetrical outputs, P should not be earthed. resistance resistance of amplifier of amplifier A. A. 7.1.3 Circuit Description and Requirements

For

>> output

Rr >> output

Furthermore, R, sbould have as small a value as possible, consistent with the other requirements. Capacitor C may need to be added to avoid any parasitic oscillation in the measurement set-up. 6 POWER 6.1 Purpose mcasurc the value of the current drawn from the power supply under zero and/or maximum output signal conditions.
To

In general, the linear amplifier may be considered as a three-input terminal network, and measurement of input impedance may be required between any pair of input terminals. Figure 2 shows the basic measurement set-up, in which the input terminals are unbalanced. The measurement will normally be made with the terminal 2 earthed, but may be made with a specified bias circuit connected between terminal 2 and the reference terminal if so required by tbe specification. The basic arrangement may be modified to permit measurement of input impedance under balanced conditions (for example, for the two input terminals of a differential input amplifier), as shown in Fig. 3. The reminder of the equipment remains as shown in Fig. 2. Resistor R, is a high-accuracy calibrated resistor. The object of the measurement is to obtain two known values of the resistor R, which, together with known settings of the attenuator, maintain the output voltage V, at a fixed value. The value of the input impcdante may then be calculated as follows: The input circuit Fig. 4. may be represented as sbown in

SIII'PI,Y CURRENTS

(22)

6.2 Precautions

to be Observed precautions. Procedure arc set to the specified values.

SL'C'5.2 on general 6.3 Measurement The supply voltages

Any ncccssary biasing circuits intcgratcd circuit as required, lions are set to thr specified

arc connected to the and the bias condivalue(s). load are

A specified signal source and a specified applied to the integrated circuit.

With zero output signal and/or maximum output signal, the values of current from each supply are noted. 6.4 Specified Ambient Power Conditions or refercncc-point supply voltage(s). imfiedancc and output load tempcraturc.

It may be showli that :

1

+

4 (= + 4)
R= t Xz
impedance.

where R t jX is the input

Input source impcdancc.

Bias and/or offset compensation Input signal level, frcqucncy Conditions at other

network(s).

and waveform.

terminals.

Loop conditions. 7 SMAILSIGNAl, 7.1 Mrthotl n 3 INI'IJT IMI'I~I)AN(11~ (23)

This equation contains two unknowns (R and X) and they may be evaluated by finding two values of R, for known ratios of VJV . The method selects values of 2 and 4 for the ratio V,f V, corresponding to changes in the attenuator setting &on, the initial setting) ol 6 dB and 12 dB. The value of V2 is maintained constant, V, only being altered. The load Ihr circuit dilions. resistor R, should bc chosen so thal is operating well within specified COII-

IS 12970 ( Part (C/See 2 ) : 1992 The value of the attenuator impedance should be very low compared with the input impedance, that is : z 1 <<+= 100 7.1.4 Precautions to be Observed precautions. Procedure

See 5.2 on general 7.1.5 Measurement

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown either in Fig. 2 or Fig. 3.

O.C.

SUPPLIES

-

AttENUAtOP

. INTEGRAM CIRCUIT RL f "0 4 B2 1 LPI I I o------------REFERENCE 1

UNOER ~ASURE.*ENI

2Q I I

FIG. 2 MEASUREMENT CIRCUIT~~HINWT TERMINALS UNEMIANCED

2

INTEGRATED "RW
UNDER LCASUREHENT

NOTE-Z,

is equal to the characteristic impedance of the attenuator.

FIG.3 I~~~UREMENT CIRCUITWITH INPUT TERMINALS BALANCED

-

ATT ENUAtOA

FIG.~ EQUVALENTCIRCUITREPRESENTATION

4

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 The bias and supply voltages are set to the specified values. With switch S closed, the signal generator is set to the specified frequency, and its output and the setting of the attenuator are adjusted such that an undistorted output signal V, is obtained. A check should be made to. ensure that the circuit is operating within its linear operating region, as stated in the general precautions section. Switch S is then opened, and the attenuator setting reduced by 6 dB. A value of 8, is obtained so that the output level of V, is established again. The attenuator setting is reduced by another 6 dB (that is, 12 dB on the initial setting), and a second value of R, obtained so that the output level of V0 is maintained. The values of the input lation. It will graphs from off directly. of the real and imaginary COI~~IKX~~S impedance can be obtained by calcuusually be convenient to construct suitable which the required values can be read input mately equal to ri,, the differential resistance of the integrated circuit under mc;~surement; the value of resistor R0 should be smaller than R, which in turn should bc smaller I~;III
'id' -

capacitor C must have a very low admittance at the frequency of mcasurcmcnt.

The ratio between R, and R0 should be chosen so that voltage V does not exceed the output voltage swing of amp kifier * A. 7.2.4 Prectrutions See 5.2 01: gcnenl 7.2.5 Mensurement to be Observed precautions. Procedure

The integrated circuit is comtected in the mcasurcment circuit as shown in Fig. 5. The supply voltage are set to the specified values. to earth source.

NOTE If the input impedance is essenrially resistive (for example, at a sufficiendy low frequency), the measurement may he simplified. In this case only the first 6 dB change of the altenualor selling is made and the value of R, required IO maintain ihe output voltage V. is then directly equal IO the input resistance.

Switch S, is closed, switch S, is conncctcd and switch S, is connected to the signal Switches S, and S, are first closed, vollagc VuR_O, is mcasurcd. Switches S, and S, are then opened voltage VuR+ is measured. The differential rcsista ncc input r ad =
[

and the OUI~UI

7.1.6 Specified Ambient Power

Condifions or reference-point supply voltage(s). network(s). temperature.

and ~hc

OUI~UI

2R VLiR.OI/VUH&,]-'

Bias and/or offset compensation Input signal

level and frequency. output voltage. R,. 7.2.6 appropriate Specified Ambient Power Condilions

Reference Output

load resistance at other networks,

for reference-point supply voltages(s).

tcmpcraturc.

Conditions Additional

terminals. where

Bias voltage(s). Input Input Output signal source level and frcqucncy. impedance R,.

7.2 Method b (Applicable Input Ampllflers) 7.2.1 Purpose

only to Differentid

To measure the value of the differential input resistance of a differential input amplifier.
NOTE In order to be able to consider the input impedance as a pure resistance, the measurement signal frequency must be sufficiendy low so that there are no oignificanl phase differences between the voltages at Ihe input terminals of the amplifiers lo be measured with or without the series resistor R.

load resistance at other networks,

Conditions Additional

terminals. where (24) appropriate.

8 OIJ-l'l'llT IMPEDANCE 8.1 Method a

7.2.2 Circuit Dinpm 7.2.3 Circuit Descripion and Reqrrirements

0.1.1 PirrJmc To measure the values of the real and imaginary (without regard to sign) parts of the output impcd. ancc of a linear amplifier. 8.1.2 Ciruril Dicrgrtrm

AmplifierA should conform to the rcquiremcnts given in 5.3. In addition, the value of the resistors should be chosen as follows: the value of resistor R should bc approxi-

IS 12!970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 8.1.3 Circuit Description and Requirements

where R + jX is the output impedance. For two values of the ratio [ Vo(Rk,/V4RLroDJ, for which the output voltage change 1s respectively 6 dB and 12 dB, the corresponding values of R, are noted: then the values of R and X may be determined by calculation,
8.1.4 Precautions to be Observed

The method is similar in principle to that used for measuring input impedance (7.1); and may be explained by means of Fig. 7. For the equivalent circuit of Fig. 6 it may be shown that :

See 5.2 on general precautions.

.-------.
RR

NOTE-R,

is equal IO 1

4 +% FIG. 5 GENERALMEASUREMENT CIRCUIT

cl c SUPPLIES A I'

INTEGRATED

CIRCUIT

UNDER MEASUREMENT

7h //
NOTE For single-ended output P should be earthed. For symmetrical outputs. P should not be earthed. FIG.

6 MEASUREMENT CIRCUIT FOR OUTPUT IMPEDANCE 6

IS 12970 ( Part 6JSec 2 ) : 1992

FIG. 7 E~UIVALEM CIRCUIT

FOR

OUTPUTIMPEDANCE

MEASUREMENT

8.1.5 Measurement Procedure The integrated
ment circuit circuit is connected in the measureas shown in Fig. 6.

9 INPUT OFFSET VOLTAGE OF A DIFFERENTIAL-INPUT LINEAR AMPLIFIER AND BIAS VOLTAGE OF A SINGLE-ENDEDINPUT LINEAR AMPLIFIER (V,,,) (23, (26) 9.1 Purpose To measure the value of the d.c. voltage required between the input terminals to bring the quisceut d.c. output voltage to zero or a specified value. 9.1.2

The bias and supply voltages are set to the specified values. With switch S open, the output level of the signal generator is adjusted to give a suitable level of output voltage VO. Switch S is then closed and two values of R are obtained so that the output voltage drops by h dB and 12 dB respectively compared with its opencircuited value. The values of R and X may then be obtained calculation as shown above.
NOTE -

Circuit Diagrams

9.1.3 Circuit Description and Requirements
The linear amplifier under measurement is connected iu the measurement circuit under recommended operating conditions, and the iuput offset or bias supply voltage is adjusted until the output voltage is brought to zero (or a specified value). Where the singleended input amplifier has no inverted output, an inverting amplifier with a gain of one is inserted in the circuit as shown in Fig. 9.

by

If the output impedance is essentially resistive (for example at a sufficiently low frequency), the measurement may be simplified. In this case, only the first change of output voltage (by 6 dB) is needed, and the value of R, required to reduce the output voltage by 6 dB is then directly equal to the output resistance.

R, should be selected

8.1.6

Specified Conditions
Ambient Power or reference-point supply voltages(s). network(s). temperature.

Bias and/or offset compensation Input Input signal source level

to be neither larger than the nominal input impedance nor less than ten times the output impedance of the amplifier. R, should be equal to R, divided by 100 or by one-tenth the minimum open-loop gain, whichever is the smaller. The d.c. source resistance presented to the input terminals should be low enough to ensure insignificant error due to the maximum specified offset (or bias) current compared with the maximum specified offset (or bias) voltage.
NOTE Where an with a non-inverting impedance should be of the circuit under inverting amplifier is required for use single-ended input amplifier, its input at least ten times the output impedance measurement.

and frequency.

impedance. voltage. terminals. where appropriate.

Reference Conditions Additional

output

9.1.4

Precautions to be Observed
precautions.

at other networks,

See 5.2 011 general
9.1.5

Measurement Procedure

8.2 Method b (Applicable only to Differential Input Amplifier with Single-Ended Output) Under consideration. 7

NOTE -In this clause, the term "bias" refers to single;ended input amplifiers only.

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurcment circuit as shown either in Fig. 8 or in Fig. 9.

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 The supply voltages are set to the specified values. Nominal output resistance.

Any necessary as specified.

additional

networks will be connected

Load resistance. Conditions Additional at other networks, temrinals. where appropriate.

The offset (or bias) voltage supply V, is adjusted to bring the output level to zero voltage (or to a specified value V,) and the value is noted. The offset (or bias) voltage is calculated by: R VI, = v* 9.1.6 Specified Ambient Power Nominal Minimum Reference 2 RI + R, Conditions or reference-point supply input voltage(s). resistance. gain. temperature. + vo and is given

9.2 Method b (Applicable only to Differential Input Linear Amplifiers) 9.2.1 Purpose To measure the value of the d.c. voltage required between the input terminals to bring the quiescent d.c. output voltage to zero. 9.2.2 9.2.3 Circuit Circuit Diagram Description and Requirements

RI R, + R,

open-loop output

voltage.

The linear amplifier under measurement is inserted in a measuring loop including amplifier A ZIIKI a divider bridge consisting of resistors R, aud RO. The output voltage of amplifier A, V , is read on a high impedance voltmeter. Resistors k are short circuited by switches S, and S,.

/

I
lNTEGRATED UNDER CIRCUIT f MEASUREMENT

I I

I
V, = auxiliary offsetsupply. FIG. 8 DIFFFBENTIAL IN-PUTS

REFERENCE

`N~EGRATED UNDER

CIRCUIT 1 I "0 I I

MEASUREMENT

V, = auxiliary bias supply.

FIG. 9 SINGLE-ENDED INPUT

8

I!3 12970 ( Part 4/Set 2 ) : 1992 Amplifier A compares VO,the output voltage of the amplifier under measurement, and the reference voltage V,,. Voltage V0 should be equal to zero. Under these conditions, the output voltage of amplifier A, Vm, is noted and this voltage is l/k times the input offset voltage. V, = kV, where k The value of the voltage V, is noted; let this be VID' The input offset voltage is given by V,, = k V,. 9.2.6 Speci@d Condihons Ambient or reference-point Power supply voltage(s). Output load impedance. Conditions at other terminals. Additional networks, where appropriate. (1J [271 temperature.

Ro
= R, + R,

-

Amplifier A should conform to the requirements given in 5.3. Resistor R, should be much larger than RO.The ratio between R, and R. should be chosen in such a way that voltage V does not exceed the output voltage swing of ampkier A. The accuracy of the method of measurement depends on the p=cision of the values of resistors R, and RO. 9.2.4 Precautions to be Observed

10 INPUT OFESET CURRENT 10.1 Method a 10.1.1 Purpose

See 5.2 on general precautions. 9.2.5 Measurement Procedure The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown Fig. 10. The supply voltages are set to the specified values. With switches S,, S, and S, closed, switches S, and Ss are connected to earth.

To measure the value of the difference between the input currents of a differential input amplifier required to bring the output voltage to zero or another specified value, the offset voltage being previously compensated. 10.1.2 Circuit Diagrams 10.1.3 Circuit Description and Requirements The linear amplifier under measurement is connected in the measurement circuit under recommended operating conditions, and the input offset supply voltage is adjusted until the output voltage is brought to zero (or i specified value).

NOTE-R, is equal to -

4 +%
FIG.10 GENERAL MEASUREMENT Cmcurrs 9

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 R, should be selected to be not larger than the nominal input impedance nor less than ten times the output impedance of the amplifier. R, should be equal to R, divided by 100 or by onetenth the minimum open-loop gain, whichever is the smaller. R, should pedance. not be larger than the nominal input im10.1.6 Specijied Ambient Power Nominal Minimum Nominal Conditions or reference-point supply input voltage(s). resistance. gain. temperature.

open-loop output

resistance.

The resistance of the switches S, and S , when they are in the open-circuit conditions, shou fd be greater than 100 times the values of resistors R,. The resistance of the offset supply shall be low enough to ensure insignificant error due to maximum specified offset current as compared with maximum specified offset voltage. 10.1.4 Precautions to be Observed precautions. Procedure

Load resistance. Reference Conditions Additional output voltage. terminals. where appropriate.

at other networks,

10.2 Method b 10.2.1 Purpose To measure the value of the difference between the input currents of a differential input linear amplifier required to bring the output voltage zero, the offset voltage being previously compensated. 10.2.2 Circuit Diagrams 10.23 Circuit Description and Requirements

See 5.2 on general 10.1.5 Measurement

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 11. The supply voltages are set to the specified values. as speci-

Any additional networks shall be connected fied, where appropriate. The switches S, and S, are closed.

The offset voltage supply is adjusted to bring the output voltage to zero voltage (or to a specified value), and its value is noted; let this value be V,,. The switches S, and SJ voltage supply is again put voltage to zero (or and its value is noted; The input I lo offset current are now opened. The offset adjusted to bring the outthe same specified value), let this value be V,,. is given by :

The linear amplifier under measurement is inserted in a measuring loop including amplifier A and a divider bridge consisting of resistors R, and RO. The output voltage of amplifier A, VL, is read on a high impedance voltmeter. Amplifier A compares V,, the output voltage of the amplifier under measurement, and the reference voltage VR. Voltage V, should be equal to zero. Amplifier A should conform to the requirements given in 5.3. In addition, resistor R, should be much larger than R . The ratio between R, and R0 should be chosen in suck a way that voltage V does not exceed thz output voltage swing of amplifier A. The accuracy of the method of measurement depends on the precision of the values of resistors R, and RO.

=

-A- ":
R, R, R,

(V.1 - v.3

INTEGRATED UNOER +

CIRCUIT

t
"0 i

MEASUREMENT

I

REFEROWE

v, = offsetvoltage.
Frc;

11 hiFA.WREMENT CIlKXIT 10

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992

10.2.4 Precautions to be Observed See 5.2 on general
precautions.

11 INPUT 11.1

BL4S CURRENT

(I,& [28]

Method a

10.2.5 Measurement Procedure The integrated
ment circuit The supply circuit is connected in the measureas shown in Fig. 12. are set to the specified values.

11.1.1 Purpose To measure the value of the current(s) flowing through the input terminal(s) of a similar amplifier. 11.1.2 Circuit Diagrams 11.1.3 Ciralit Description and Requirements

voltages

With switches S,, S, and S, closed, switches S, and S, are comlected to earth. The value of the voltage

V, is noted; let this be

VLO'
The

switches

S, and S, are opened.

The value of the voltage be V,,.

VL is again noted; let this
is given by:

The linear amplifier under measurement is comlected in the measurement circuit under recommended operating conditions, and the input offset or bias supply voltage is adjusted until the output voltage is brought to zero (or a specified value). When the single-ended input amplifier has no inverted output, an inverting amplifier with a gain of one is inserted as shown in Fig. 14. R, should be selected to be not larger than the nominal
input impedance nor less than ten times the output impedance of the amplifier.

The input offset current
I 10 = k

VLl- Y.&T where
R

k =

R0 Rc. + Rf

10.2.6 Specified Conditions Ambient Power Output or reference-point supply voltage(s). temperature.

R, should be equal to R, divided by 100 or by onetenth the minimum smaller. open-loop gain, whichever is the

R, should not be larger than the nominal
pedance.

input im-

load impedance. .at other networks, terminals. where appropriate. The resistance of switches S, and S , when they are in the open circuit conditions, shoul d be greater than 100 times the value of resistor R,.

Conditions Additional

NOTE-R, isequal to -

4 +4
FIG. 12 GFNERAL MEASUREMENT CIRCUIT 11

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 The resistance of the offset supply shall be low enough to ensure the insignificant error due to maximum specified offset (or bias) current as compared with maximum specified offset (or bias) voltage. The effect of inserting a known resistance into each input lead is noted. The input bias current is obtained by calculation.
NOTE - Where an inverting amplifier is required, its input impedance should be at least ten times the output impedance of the circuit under measurement.

to zero (or the specified value value noted; let thus be V,,.

V,), and its

S, is now closed and S, opened. The offset
voltage supply is again adjusted to bring the output voltage the zero (or to a specified value VO) and its value noted; let this be

VS2'
The

bias current
= m, R2

is given

by :

11.1.4 Precautions to be Observed See 5.2 on general
precautions.

I

IB

K CR, + R2)

-

Y2)

NOTE terminal.

This gives the average

bias current

in each

11.1.5 Measurement Procedure Differential a>

b)
input amplifier :

Single-ended

input

amplifier.

lhe integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 13 or in 14. The supply values. voltage are set to the specified

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 13 or in 14. Power and bias supplies are connected and set to the specified value and, where appropriate, additional networks will be connected as specified. With S closed, the bias voltage is adjusted to bring the output voltage back to zero (or

With S, open and S, closed, the offset voltage supply is adjusted to bring the output voltage

INTEORATED UNDER +

ClRCUlT

HEAIUREYENT

REFERENCE

VS = offset

supply.

FIG.13 ~~EAZXJREMENT CIIWJIT FORDIFFERENTIAL INPUTS

VS = bias supply.

FIG. 14 SINGLE-ENDED INPUT 12

IS 12970 ( Part OSec 2 ) : 1992 specified value this be V,,. V,) and its value noted; let 11.2.1 Purpose To measure the value of the average of a differential input linear amplifier, output voltage to zero. 11.2.2 Circuit Diagrams 11.2.3 Circuit Description and Requirements bias current to bring the

With S opened, the bias voltage is again adjusted to bring the output voltage back to zero (or the specified value Vo) and its value noted; let it be Vst. The bias current I IB = is given by :

R2
&CR, + RJ
Conditions

(v,, -

u
temperature.

11 .1.6 Specified Ambient Power

The integrated linear amplifier under measurement is inserted in a measuring loop including amplifier A and a divider bridge consisting of resistors R, and RO. The output voltage of amplifier A, V , is read on a high impedance voltmeter. Resistors `R can be short-circuited by switches S, and S,. Amplifier A compares V,, output voltage of the amplifier under measurement, and the reference voltage VR. Voltage V, should be equal to zero. AmplifierA shall comply with the requirements given in 5.3. In addition, resistance R, should be much larger than RO. The ratio between R, and R should be chosen in such a way that voltage V does not .kler A. The exceed the output voltage swing of amp11 accuracy of the method of measurement depends on the precision of the values of resistors R, and RO. 11.2.4 Precautions See 5.2 on general to be Observed precautions. Procedure

or reference-point supply voltage(s).

Bias voltage(s). Nominal Nominal Minimum Output Output input output impedance. resistance. gain,

open-loop reference

voltage.

load resistance. at other networks, terminals. where appropriate.

Conditions Additional

11.2.5 Measurement

11.2 Method b (Applicable Input Amplifiers)

only to Differential

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 15.

NOTE-R, Frc;. 15

is equal IO -

R,4 4 +R,

w

WcIRaJlT
13 \

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 The supply voltages are set to the specified values. 13 INPUT OFFSET CURRENT TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT 13.1 Purpose To measure the value of the temperature of input offset current. 13.2 Circuit Description coefficient

(W

With switches S, open and S, closed, and switch S, opened, switches S, and S, are connected to earth. 7%~ value of voltage V,_ is noted; let this be V,,. Then switch S is opened and switch S, is closed, all other switc h es remaining unaltered. The value of volt;ige VL is again noted; let this be VL3. The average ,
Ill

and Requirements

bias current

is given where k =

by :

The methods of measurement described in 10, either method a or method b, are applicable for this measurement.

_
-

k K.3 - VL2)
2R

Ro
RO + Rf

13.3

Measurement

Procedure is measured as described circuit stabilized at the T,.

11.2.6 Specified Ambient Power Output

Conditions or reference-point supply voltage(s). temperature.

The input offset current I in 10 with the, integrate1 first specified temperature

load impedance. at other terminals. networks, where appropriate. TEMPERA-

Conditions Additional

The integrated circuit temperature is then raised and stabilized at the specified second temperature T2 and the input offset current is measured again; let this be I,,*. The input offset current given by :
a 110 T2 T, = I `02 II01

temperature

coefficient

is

12 INPUT OFFSET TURE COEFFICIENT 12.1 Purpose

VOLTAGE (0,J (29)

13.4

Specified

Conditions

To measure the value of the coefficient of change of input offset voltage caused by a change in integrated circuil temperature. 12.2 Circuit Description and Requirements

As in 9.1 or 9.2 according to the method used, plus the values of temperatures T, and T,. 14 OPEN-LOOP (31) 14.1 Method a 14.1.1 Purpose To measure the value of the small-signal voltage amplification of a linear amplifier at a specified reference frequency.
NOTE - This method may not be applicable to some types of amplifiers, for example amplifiers employing a field-effect lransistor input stage.

VOLTAGE

AMPLIFICATION

The mclhods of measurement described in 9, either mclhod a or method b, are applicable for this measurement. 12.3 Meusurement Procedure

The input offset voltage is measured as described in 9 with the integrated circuit stabilized at the first spccificd temperature T,; let this value of offset vollagc be V,,,. The integrated circuit temperature is then raised and srabilizcd at Lhe second specified temperature T2 and Ihc input offscl voltage is measured again; let this bc v,,,,. The input offscl voltage given by: temperature coefficient is

14.1.2 Circuit Diagrams 14.1.3 Circuit Description and Requirements

(XV,"

=

voq - v,",
-

T2 - T,
12.4 Specified Conditions

The linear amplifier under measurement is connected in the measurement circuit under recommended operating conditions. The signal input to the attenuator is set to a known level, the attenuator is adjusted to give the same signal level at the output of the integrated circuit. The amplification is then equal to the value of the attenuation. The attenuators impedance should be insignificant compared with the input impedance of the amplifier under measurement, that is, the attenuator impedance should be less than one-hundredth (If the input impedance.

As in 9.1 or 9.2 according to the method used, plus lhc values of tempcraturcs T, and T?.

14

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 Each of the two resistors R, in the measurement circuit should be equal, to minimum, d.c. input impedance of the amplifier. Where the amplifier has a single-ended input with one terminal connected to the reference line, one resistor, equal in value to the input impedance of the amplifier shall be used in series with the signal generator only. Refer 14.2.1 Purpose To measure the value of the d.c. voltage amplification of a differential. input linear amplifier. 14.2.2 Circuit Diagrams 14.2.3 Circuit Description and Requirements

to the Note in 14.1.1.

The two capacitors should offer negligible impedance at the frequency of the signal specified for the measurement, that is, capacitor impedance should be less than one-hundredth of the input impedance. 14.1.4 Precautions to be Observed precautions. Procedure

The linear amplifier urfder measurement is inserted in a measuring loop including amplifier A and a divider bridge consisting of resistors R, and R`,. The output voltage of amplifier a high impedance voltmeter. Resistors SY Amplifier A compared V,, output voltage of the amplifier under measurement, and reference voltage VR. Amplifier A should conform with the re,quire.ments given in 5.3. In addition, resistor R should be much larger than RO. The ratio between k and R should be chosen in such a way that voltage VL does not exceed the output voltage swing of amplilier A. The accuracy of the method of measurement depends on the precision of the values of resistors R, and Ro. 14.2.4 Precautions to be Ohserwd precautions. Procedure R are short-circuited A, I/,_, is read on

by switches

S, and

See 5.2 on general 14.1.5 Measurement

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 16, together with any additional networks. The supply voltages are set to the specified values.

With the specified signal input, the attenuator shall be adjusted to give the same level of output. The amplification of attenuation. 14.1.6 Specified Ambient Power Output will be then equal to the value

See 5.2 011 general 14.2.5 Measwement

Conditions or reference-point supply voltage(s). temperature.

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 17. The supply voltage are set to the specified Switch S, is connected to earth. values.

load impedance. offset compensating networks.

Bias and/or

Input signal level, frequency Conditions Additional 14.2 Method Input Linear at other networks,

and waveform.

With switches S,, S, and S, closed, and S, connected to earth, the reference voltage is set to zero. Switch S, is then connected to + VK. The value of V, is noted; let this be VL4. Switch S, is then connected to -VR. The value VL is again noted; let this be VL5. of

terminals. where only appropriate. to Differential

b (Applicable Amplifiers)

NOTE - Z, is equal to the characterislic FIG.

impedance of the attenuator. CIRC~IIT

16 ~UREMENT 15

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992

I-

---i

NOTE-H,

is equal to ~ H, +R,

FIG. 17 GENERALh4mmmmr The d.c. voltage amplification 2va Av = kCVl_4 - VJ
where k = 15.3

Cmam
Circuit Description and Requirements

is given

by:

15.2

See Fig. 16. Circuit Description and Requirements

Ro
RO + R, Conditions or reference-point supply voltage(s). temperature.

The methods of measurement a is applicable. 15.4
Precautions

described

in 14, method

14.2.6 Specified -Ambient Power Output Value

to be Observed

See 5.2 on general

precautions. Procedure

15.5

Measurement

load resistance. of reference at other networks, voltage terminals. where appropriate.
(f'

VR.

The integrated circuit is connected in the mcasurement circuit as shown in Fig. 16, together with any specified additional networks. The supply voltages are set to the specified value's.

Conditions Additional

15 CUT-OFF

FREQUENCY

(FREQUENCIES)

(32)
15.1 Purpose

With all other input conditions remaining constant, the input frequency is raised until the output level has fallen to 0.707 of the output level at the reference frequency. The input frequency is noted. These two frequencies are the upper and when appropriate, the lower cut-off frequencies (3 dB points) of the integrated linear amplifier. 15.6
Specified Conditions

To measure (frequencies)

the value of the cut-off of a linear amplifier.

frequency

NOTE - This method may not be applicable to some types of amplifiers having very high input impedance, for example. amplifiers employing a field-effect transistor input stage.

As in 14.1.6, 16

plus the reference

of fr<quel:cy.

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 16 COMMON-MODE (kc,,) (33) 16.1 Method REJECTION RATIO 16.1.4 Precautions to be Observed precautions. Procedure

See 5.2 on general a (a.c. Measurement) 16.1.5 Measurement 16.1.1 Purpose To measure the value of the common-mode rejection ratio of a differential-input linear amplifier.
NOTES
1 This method

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 18. The supply voltages are set to the specified values. With the specified input signal, adjusted to give the same level integrated circuit. The common-mode amplification to the value of the attenuation. The differential, amplification in 14.1.5. the attenuator is of output of the

amplifiers amplifiers

may not be applicable to some types of having very high input impedance, for example, employing a field effect transistor input stage.

will then be equal

2 This method is intended as a laboratory method capable of giving a accurate result (certainly better than 2 10 percent), but it may not be suitable for amplifiers having a high value of open-loop gain (for example, in excess of 60 dB) due to the problem of instability.

is measured as described

16.1.2

Circuit Diagram Description and Requirements

16.1.3 Circuit

The common-mode rejection ratio is calculated as the ratio of differential amplification to commonmode amplification.
NOTE - It is possible that the common-mode might be relatively small. 111 amplification

The attenuator impedance should be insignificant compared with the input impedance of the amplifier under measurement, that is, it should be less than one-hundredth of the input impedance. The capacitor impedance should be insignificant compared with the attenuator impedance.

this case, the measurement circuit should be modified as shown in Fig. 19, to include a second attenuator. The common-mode amplification is then the difference between the attenuator readings for a given output voltage.

NOTE -28

is equal to the characteristic FIG.

impedance of the attenuator.

18 MEASUREMEN T CIRCUIT

FIG. 19

~~EASUREMENT CIRCUIT

17

IS 12970( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 16.1.6 Specified Ambient Power Source Conditions or reference-point supply voltage(s). temperature. where r = internal supply network(s). For T >> t, cp is very small; therefore, the phase difference between signals at supply terminals of the amplifiers being measured : AT = `pl - (p2 is also very small. 16.2.4 Precautions See 5.2 on general to be Observed precautions. with the measuring resistance of the power supply

C' =

capacitance of the filter shunted at the power

and load impedance.

Bias and/or offset compensating Input signal level, frequency Conditions Additional 16.2 Method

and waveform.

at other terminals. networks, where appropriate.

b (d.c. and ax.

Measurement)

16.2.1 Purpose To measure the value of the conunon-mode rejection ratio of a differential-input linear amplifier. 16.2.2 Circuit 16.2.3 Circuit Diagrams Description and Requirements

The sources of error associated methods are due to : a) the tolerance and

on resistors

R0 and R,; associated with

b) the measurement error VCM ' Vs and AVL.

The linear amplifier under measurement is inserted in a measuring loop including amplifier A and a divider bridge consisting of resistors R, and RO. The output voltage of amplifier A, VL, is read on a high impedance voltmeter. Resistor R are shortcircuited by switches S, and S,. Amplifier A compares V,, output voltage of the amplifier under measurement, and refetence voltage V,. Voltage V, should be equal to zero. Amplifier A should conform with the requirements given in 5.3. In addition, resistor R, should be much larger than RO. The ratio betweeu R, and R should be chosen in such a way that voltage V does not exceed the output voltage raugc of amp11 + ler A. The accuracy of the method of measurcmeut depends on the precision of the values of resistors R, and RO. V, is the output voltage from a signal generator whose frequency is much lower than the 3 dB cut-off frequency of the integrated linear amplifier being measured and whose period is much larger than the time constant of the power supplies of the amplifier being measured. The magnitude of voltage VcM and the amplitude of Vs should be less than the specified common-mode input voltage range of the integrated linear amplifier being measured.
NOTE - In the ax. method II (see below), the phase shit'1 between the supply terminals of the amplifier being measured and the signal source is: =

In the case of methods I (d.c. and a.c. below), the mismatching of the resistor network at input terminals of the amplifier being measured will introduce error. The relative mismatching for RO.and R, at the IWO input terminals of the amplifier being measured shall be: AR R I cc 1 2 R0 + R, R0 1 .- k CMR

I

Any error in the measurement of output voltage affects the error in determining the common-mode rejection ratio in proportion to the value of this ratio itself. For d.c. methods, this error is also proportional the input offset voltage. to

For a.c. methods, the output noise vollagr Illily bc a significant source of measurement error. Hence, the magnitudes are as follows : d.c. methods Error = I and II: measurement error. of the errors which cau occur

`1" ' kCh4R x voltage VCM I and II: '
kCMR R x A+

a.c. methods
Error =

V

"@-P'

2 x(tiT)

v, 16.2.5 Menswement

4 Procedure

tolerance oii voltage measurement

where
z

= =

time constant period

of the power

supply signal

T

of the common-mode as: t = rc'

16.2.5.1 d.c. Method I : The integrated circuit connected in the measurement circuit as shown Fig. 20. * The supply voltages 18 are set to the specified

is in

t can be estimated

values.

IS 12970 ( Part OSec 2 ) : 1992 Switches S,, S, and S, are closed, and switch S, and S6 connected to earth. Switch S is connected to + VW Tbe value of V, is noted; let this be VU Switch S, is then connected to -VcM. The value of V,_ is again noted; let this be VL7. Tbe common-mode rejection ratio is given by: 16.2.5.3

a.c. Method I

Switches S,, S, and S, are closed, and switches S, and S, are connected to earth. Switch S is connected to Vs,the conespondiug change AVU in d.L IS measured. Tbe common-mode the expression: rejection ratio is calculated using

k CMR
NOTE network.

R,
= 4 VI_7

2VC,
vL6

kCMR
where v, =

R fa
= Ro

V
Avl.1

This method requires

the use of a highly accurate

16.252

d.c. Method II

peak-to-peak age.

value of the signal value

voltof

Switches S,, S, and S4 are closed and switch S, is connected to earth. Swltcbes S, and S6 are connected to +I&. Tbe value of V, is noted (VJ Switches S, and S, are connected of V, is again noted (VJ. Tbe common-mode the expression: to -V,,.

AVL, =

corresponding peak-to-peak change in VL.

The value
using

NOTE - This method requires resistor network.

the use of a highly accurate

16.2.5.4 rejection ratio is calculated

a.c. Method II

k CMR

4 + Ro 2 5,
= 4 vl.7 vL6

Switches S,, S, and S, are closed, and switch S, is connected to earth. Switches S, and S, are comlected to vs. Tbe corresponding Tbe common-mode changes AVL2 in V, is measured. rejection ratio is calculated using

NOTE - The method requires the use of floating power supplies, that is having no earth return for a.c. signals.

NOTE-R, is equal to ___
4 +4

FIG.20 GENERAL MEASUREMENT CIRCUIT 19

IS 12970 ( I'urt 6/Set 2 ) : 1992
the expression: 4 %MH = where Vs = peak-to-peak age AVL2 = NOTE supplies.

+ R0 R0

V. AVL2

NOTE Where an inverting amplifier is required for use with a non-inverting amplifier, its input impedance should be at least ten times the output impedance of the circuit under measurement.

17.1.4 Precautions
value of the signal voltof

to be Observed

See 5.2 on general precautions.

17.1.5 Measurement
value

Procedure

corresponding peak-to-peak change in V,_

This method requires the use. of floating power that is having no earth return for a.c. signals.

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown either in Fig. 8 or in 9. The supply voltages are set to the specified values.

16.2.6

Specified Ambient Power Output

Conditions or reference-point supply voltage(s). temperature. Any additional network will be connected as specified.

-

load impedance. of voltage V,, (for d.c. methods). to signal voltage (for a.c. methods). of the signal (for a.c. methods).

The voltage of the offset or bias supply is adjusted to bring the output voltage to zero (or the specified value) and ita value noted. Each supply voltage is raised in turn by a specified amount, and each time the output voltage is brought back to zero (or the specified value) by an appropriate change of the offset (or bias) supply voltage whose value is noted in each case. The change in supply voltage is divided by the change in offset or bias voltage and the result gives the rejection ratio in each case.

Magnitude Amplitude Frequency Conditions Additional

at other terminals. networks, where appropriate. RATIO

17 S1JPPLY (k,,,) 04

VOLTAGE

KEJECTION

17.1 Method n 17.1.1 Purpose
To measure the value amplifier to a change 17.1.2 Circuit Diagrams of the rejection ratio of an of the supply voltage.

17.1.6 Specified
Ambient Power Output Output Nominal Nominal Minimum

Conditions or reference-point supply voltage(s). temperature.

load resistance. reference input output voltage. resistance. resistance. gain. for measurement.

See Fig. 8 (dil'l'cren~ial inputs). See Fig. 9 (single-ended 17.1.3 Circuit Description input). and Requirements

-

open-loop

Change of supply Conditions Additional

voltage

The linear amplifier under measurement is comiected in the measurement circuit under recommended operating conditions, and the input offset or bias supply voltage is adjusted until the output voltage is brought to zero (or a specified value). Where the singleended input amplifier has no inverted output, an inverting amplifier with a gain of one is inserted in the circuit as shown in 9. R? should be selected to be neither larger than the nominal input impedance nor less than ten times the output impedance of the amplifier. R, should be equal to R, divided by 100 or by one-tenth the minimum open-loop gain, whichever is the smaller. The rcsistancc of the offset supply should be low enough IO ensure insignificant error due to the maxinlum spccificd offset (or bias) current, compared with Ihc lll~xiIlltII11 spccificd oflkrt (or bias) voltage. 20

at other networks,

terminals. where appropriate.

-

17.2 Method b 17.2.1 Purpose
To measure the value of the supply voltage rejection ratio of a differential input linear amplifier to a change of all supply voltages simultaneously. 17.2.2 Circuit Diagrams 17.2.3 Circuit Description and Requirements

The linear amplifier under measurement is inserted in a measuring loop including amplifier A and a divider bridge consisting of resistors R, and RO. The output voltage of amplifier A, V,, is read on a high

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 impedance voltmeter. Resistors are short-circuited switches S, and S,. by Then specified changes to supply voltages:

V,, = B 1 Vcc 1 are applied
of of

Amplifier A compares VO,the output voltage of the amplifier under measurement, and reference voltage V,. Voltage V0 should be equal to zero. Amplifier A should conform to the requirements given in 5.3. In addition, resistor R, should be much larger than RO. The ratio between R, and R should be chosen in such a way that voltage e does not exceed the output voltage swing of ample +ter A. The accuracy of the method depends on the precision of the values of resistors R, and R,. 17.2.4 Precautions to be Observed precautions; in addition, if the changes in the supply voltages are also applied to the additional amplifier A, then it is necessary to ensure that the supply voltage rejection ratio of A is not less than that of the amplifier under measurement.

a) in the positive direction, and the value voltage V,_ is noted; let this be Vr,; b) in the negative direction, voltage V, is noted; let this be V,,,. and the value

The two values of the supply ratio are given by: kSVRl
I
= k

voltage
t

rejection
A&

Avccl+
Avccl t

AVcc2 t VLQ T.8

See 5.2 on general

I

AV,,,

+ VI3

t

AVcc,

k SVRZ= k
where

VLlO

k = R0 I (RO + RJ

17.25 Measurement Procedure The integrated
ment Supply circuit circuit is connected in the measureas shown in Fig. 21. are set to the specified values.

voltages

This procedure gives the values of the supply voltage rejection ratio for the case when all supply voltages are changed simultaneously. In order to obtain the values for the cases when only one supply voltage is changed, the remaining supply voltages are maintained at their nominal values; the equations given above should be modified accordingly. 17.2.6 Specified Conditions

With switches S,, S, and S, closed, and S, and S5 are connected to earth. The value of voltage V,_ 1s noted; let this be VU.

-

Ambient

or reference-point

temperature.

NOTE-R, is equal IO -

44
4 +4

FIG. 21 GENERAL WUREMENT Qacurr 21

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 Power Output supply voltage(s). In addition, resistor R, should be much larger than Ro. The ratio between R, and R. should be chosen in such a way that voltage V,_ does not exceed the output voltage swing of amplifier A. 18.4 Precautions to be Observed

load impedance.

Relative supply voltage change for measurement, B. Conditions Additional at other terminals. networks, where appropriate.

18 OUTPUT VOLTAGE RANGE @.C. MEASUREMENT ONLY) FOR DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIERS (35) 18.1 Purpose To measure the value of the output voltage range of a linear amplifier for maximum clipping. 18.2 18.3 Circuit Circuit Diagram Description and Requirements

See 4.2 on general precautions; in addition, care should be taken to avoid excessive output currents of the integrated circuit under measurement, if it has no means for current limitation. To avoid error due to excessive by resistor R,, it is necessary 18.5 Measurement Procedure current being drawn to make R, >> R,.

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 22. Supply voltages are set to the specified values.

The linear amplifier under measurement is inserted in a measuring loop including an amplifier A and a divider bridge consisting of resistors R, and Ro. The output voltage V, is read on a high-impedance voltmeter. Resistors R are short-circuited by switches S, and S,. Amplifier A compares V,, the output voltage of the amplifier under measurement, with a known value of the reference voltage V,. AmplifierA in 4.3. should conform to the requirements given

With switches S,, S, and Sq closed, switch S, is connected to earth, switch S> IS connected to a positive reference voltage tV, (which should be greater than 50 percent of the expected output voltage range) and the output voltage V, is noted; let this be V,,. Switch S, is then connected to an equal negative reference voltage -V, and the output voltage V, is again noted; let this be V,,. The output voltage range I %I provided that is given by :

I + I vo2 I V, and 1 Vo2 1 c VR.

1 V,,, 1 <

INTEGRAIEO ClRtUl
UNOER WASUREMENT

;

il.-._._.__-._I

I_

NOTE-R,

is equal

to .R, +R,

FIG.22 GENERAL h4~~mmm-r CIRCUIT
22

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 18.6 Specified Conditions Ambient Power Input Output or reference-point supply source voltage(s). impedance. temperature. 19.4 Precautions to be Observed

Tbe output signal amplitude shall be sufficiently small for the slope times not to be limited by the maximum available rate of change of output voltage, i.e. smll signal conditions apply. 19.5 Measurement Procedure temperature is set

load impedance. voltage at other networks, TIMES VR. terminals. where appropriate.

Reference Conditions Additional 19 RESPONSE 19.1 Purpose

The ambient or reference-point to the specified value.

(39)

circuit is comiectcd in the The integrated measurement circuit, as shown in Fig. 23. The supply voltages are set to their specified values, wbcn appropriate. The offset voltage supply is adjusted to bring the output voltage to zero (or to a specified value). The pulse generator is set to give the spccificd pulse duration and frequency and the amplitude is adjusted so that small-signal conditions apply (set 18.4 011 precautions). Tbe following characteristics (delay time, slope time, ripple time and total response time) can be measured by a time measuring instrument from the output pulse, e.g. a dual-beam oscilloscope, as shown in the cxamplc of Fig. 24. 19.6 Specified Conditions Ambient Supply Value or reference-point voltages. of resistors R, and R,. tcmpcrature.

To measure the value of the response times (delay time, ripple time and total resp~~sc time) of operational amplifiem under small-signal conditions. 19.2 19.3 Cireuit Circuit Diagram Description and Requirements resistor R, and

For unity amplification configuration, feedback resistor R, are equal.

For amplification A, greater than unity, those resistors are such that : - (RJR) = (V/V) = A 21 0 1 I' Tbe two resistors R and R should bc chosen so that, together with the capac\tance across tbc input terminals, they produce a time constant at the input terminal that is negligible compared with tbc rise time of tbe amplifier being measured. III addition, reistors R and R, should be very much greater respective 1y than the output resistance R of tbc pulse generator and the output resistance of the integrated circuit. Tbe value of R, = [(R, R,)I(R, + RJ]. For amplifiers with separate null offset terminal(s), tbc manufacturer's instructions for offset compensation should be followed. Any phase compensation network the amplifier shall be connected. to be used with

-

and inductance Output load; resistances and/or capacitance; the value of the capacitance include should stray capacitance and input capacitance of the time measuring instrument. Initial output voltage, Value of E. frequency, duration, slope, if diffcrcnt from zero.

-

Pulse conditions; time. Conditions

-

at other

terminals. details of offset network, where

Capacitor C shall offer a negligible impedance at the pulse repetition frequency compared with the values of resistors R, and R,. The pulse duration should be long compared the total response time of the amplifier. with

Additional network(s), voltage compensation appropriate.

20 COMMON-MODE RANGE (42) 20.1 Purpose

INPUT

VOLTAGE

The pulse generator rise and fall times shall be negligible in comparison with tbc delay timr of the integrated circuit being measured. Care should be taken to ensure of tbe pulse generator. correct termination

To nxasure the most positive and most nrgativc common-mode input voltage under the conditions of maintaining the commonmode rejection ratio wigs specification. 23

IS 12970 ( Part (i/See 2 ) : 1992 20.2 20.3 Circuit Circuit Diagram Description and Requirements 20.5 Measurement Procedure

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 25. The supply voltages are set to the specified values.

See 16.2.3.
20.4 Precautions to be Observed

See 5.2 of this section on general precautions.

Switches S,, S, and S, are closed; switches S, and S are connected to earth. The value of V, is noted CkJ.

SUP&V 0

VOLTAGES 0

TO TIME

UCASURlNG

l*STRUMEWl

LOAD

OFFS0

SwPtv

n i

G

VOLTAGE

I

REFERENCE

A, = amplifier being measured.

FIG. 23 MYEASUREMENT CIRCUIT

RELATIVE OUtPU

f

FIG.24

EXAMPLE

OF RESPONSE TIMES

24

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992

NOTE-R,

is equal to -

RIR2
4 +4

FIG. 25 ~~EASURFMENT Switch S, is then connected to +Vc . The commonmode input voltage +V is slowly tahn more positive until the common-mo Y e rejection ratio reaches the specified value. The common mode rejection ratio is calculated using the expression:
k CMR =

CIKCUT

21 SHORT-CIRCUIT AN OPERATIONAL 21.1 Purpose

OIJTPUT CURRENT AMPLIFIER) (43)

(OF

R,
R.

V V, -'"v,,

To measure the value of the short-circuil current of an operational amplifier.

output

The value

of +VcM is then recorded.

NOTE - Inthis measuring method the current llo\ving out through the output terminal is usually measured. llowcver the current flowing into the ourpul terminal may he mcawrcd it necessary. 21.2 21.3 Circuit Circuit Diagram Description snd Requirenleuts

Switch S, is then connected to -VcM which is then taken slowly more negative until the common-mode rejection ratio reaches the specified value. The value of -V is then recorded. The common"rtage range is that range from -V,, mode input vo to +Vc.. 20.6 Specified Ambient Power Load Conditions or reference-point supply resistance voltage(s). R,. rejection ratio ICCMR. temperature.

The input d.c. voltage V should be at least ten limes larger than the input 01fsct vollage, less lhilll the maximum differential input voltage. IJsually, \I,., = + 1 V is chosen as a preferred condition. The resistance 1Q. 21.4 of the ammeter should bc less Ihall

Precautions

to be Observed

Common-mode Values

See 5.2 of this section on general prrcautions. In addition, care should be taken on the measuring time to avoid the influence of beat dissipation. 21.5 Measurement Procedure

of R. and R,. at other terminals. networks, where appropriate. 25

Conditions Additional

The integrated circuit is connected in the m:asurcment circuit as shown in Fig. 26. The supply voltages are set to the specified values.

IS 12970 ( Part OSec 2 ) : 1992

L/ cc

INTEGRATED BEING

ClRtu11

MEASURED

The input voltage The value

V, is set to the specified

values.

of I,, is noted.

large compared to both the load resistance the amplifier output resistance.

R, and

For positive V,, I,, flows out through the oulput terminal, which gives a negative short-circuit output current (source current). For negative V,, lop flows into the output terminal, which gives a positive short-circuit output current (sink current). 21.6
Specified Conditions

The output signal levels of the amplifiers are read on a selective voltmeter having a wide dynamic range to ensure the measuring accuracy. 22.4
Precautions to be Observed

See 5.2 of this section

on general precautions. In addition, the output signal level should be choosen in such a way that it does not exceed the nlaxiniuitt output voltage swing of the amplifier. In the case of nteasurentent at high frequency, particular care should be given to the frequency characteristic of the negative feedback loop and the distortion of the output signal. 22.5
Measurement Procedure

Anibicnt Power Input

or reference-point supply voltage(s). (V,).

temperature.

-

voltage

Measuring

time. (FOR

22 CROSS-TALK ATTENUATION MULTIPLE AMPLIFIERS) (44) 22.1
Purpose

The integrated amplifiers (channel A and B) being measured are connected as shown in Fig. 27. The supply voltages are set to the specified values. The switches S, , Sz and S, are set to the position (1. The output signal VoA is set to the specified value by means of adjustment of the input signal amplitude Vi. The switch S) is then changed to positiop the output signal VOB is obtained. 26 b, so that

To measure the value of the cross-talk between two amplifiers of a multiple amplifier. 22.2
22.3 Circuit Circuit Diagram Description and

attrnuation operational

Recruitments

The value of resistor R, should be at least 100 times the value of resistor R,, aud should also be very

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 separation between The channel channel B is given by : 20 log channel A and large compared to both the load resistance the amplifier output resistance. R, and

-sL

V

Vokl

NW

By carrying out a similar measurement with switches S, and S, set to position b and S, starting at position b first, the channel separation between channel B and channel A is given by : 20 log 22.6 Specified Ambient Power Load Values Signal

The signal generator which supplies the input signal should have the required range of the output level and frequency, and its harmonic distortion shall be substantially lower than 1 percent. The output signal is observed by a distortion and an oscilloscope. 23.4 Precautions to be Observed precautions. Procedure as shown networks. in analyser

A

V GW

See 5.2 on general 23.5 point temperature. Measurement

VOA

Conditions or reference supply resistance

The integrated circuit is connected Fig. 28 together with any additional The supply voltages

voltage(s). R,

are set to the specified

values.

of R, and R,. frequency. Vd of output signal. appropriate.

Amplitude Additional Coriditions

Switch S closed, a low-frequency input signal is applied, and its amplitude is increased until the harmonic distortion of the output signal grows to 1 percent (or another specified value). This output signal level is the full output voltage swing. The input signal frequency is then harmonic distortion increases to a (usually 3 percent) with the output kept at the same value. This frequency gives the upper limiting frequency voltage swing. 23.6 Specified Ambient Power Output Values Conditions or reference-point supply voltage(s). load impedance. of R, and R,. distortion networks, factor of output signal. where appropriate. temperature. raised until the specified level voltage swing is noted, which for full oulput

networks, at other

where

amplifiers. FOR FULL

23 UPPER LIMITING OUTPUT VOLTAGE 23.1 Purpose

FREQUENCY SWING (45)

To measure the upper limiting frequency for full output voltage swing of an operational amplifier. 23.2 23.3 Circuit Circuit Diagrams Description and Requirements

-

Harmonic Additional Condition

The value of resistor. R should be at least 100 times the value of resistor R 1, and should also be very

at other amplifiers.

NOTE -R,

is equal to ~ 4 +%

*

FIG. 27 ~UREMENT

C~CUIT FORTwo AMPLIFIERS ( A AND B ) OF A MULTIPLE OPERATIONAL AMIUREK

21

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 24 MAXIMUM RATE OF CHANGE OF THE OUTPUT VOLTAGE (SLEW RATE) (S,,) (46j 24.1 Purpose To measure the value of the maximum rate of change of the output voltage (slew rate) of an operational amplifier under large-signal conditions. 24.2 24.3 Circuit Circuit Diagrams Description and Requirements resistor R, and The pulse duration should be long compared the slew rate of the amplifier. with

The pulse generator rise and fall times should be negligible in comparison with the slew rate of the integrated circuit being measured. Care should be taken to ensure of the pulse generator. 24.4 Precautions correct termination

to be Observed

For unity-amplification configuration, feedback resistor R, are equal. For amplification A", these resistors

are such that:

The output signal amplitude should be sufficiently large for the slope times to be limited by the maximum available rate of change of the output voltage, that is, large-signal conditions apply. 24.5 Measurement Procedure temperature is set

R2
R,

= v;

"0 =

Av

The ambient or reference-point to the specified value.

The two resistors R and R should be chosen so that, together with the capac:tance across the input terminals, they produce a time constant at the input terminal that is negligible compared with the slew rate of the amplifier being measured. In addition, resistors R, and R, should be very much greater respectively than the output resistance R of the pulse generator and the output resistance of t&e integrated circuit. For amplifiers with separate null offset terminal(s), the manufacturer's instructions for offset compensation should be followed. Any phase compensation network to be used with the amplifier should be connected. Capacitor C should offer a negligible impedance at the pulse repetition frequency compared with the value of resistors R, and R,.

The integrated circuit is connected in the measurement circuit, as shown in Fig. 29. The supply voltages are set to their specified values. The offset voltage supply is adjusted to bring the output voltage to zero (or to a specified value). The pulse generator is set to give the specified pulse duration and frequency and the amplitude is adjusted so that large-signal conditions supply (see 24.4 on precautions). The slew rate can be determined by a time measuring instrument displaying the output pulse, for example, a dual-beam oscilloscope, as shown in the example of Fig. 30. It can be calculated using the expression: A" -= At "0, - "01 `2 - 5

R?

D = distortionanalyser. NOTE-R, is equal to -

R,4
RI +4

FIG. 28 MEASUREMENT CIRCUIT 28

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 24.6 Speclfled Conditions Ambient Supply Values or reference-point voltage(s). of resistors R, and R,. temperature. Initial output voltage, Values if different from zero.

of VO, and V,,. duration, slope

Pulse conditions; frequency, time and amplitude. Conditions

and inductance Output load : resistances and/or capacitance; the value of the capacitance should include stray capacitance and input capacitance of the time measuring instrument.

at other terminals.

Additional network(s), details of offset voltage compensation network and phase compensation network, where approprialc.

A, = amplifier being NOTE-R,
is equal IO -

measured.

44
4 +R*

FIG. 29 MEASUREMENT CIRCUIT

FIG. 30 EXAMPLE OFREWNSETIMES
29

IS 12970 ( Part 6/Set 2 ) : 1992 25 INPUT BIAS CURRENT COEFFICIENT (47) 25.1 Purpose To measure the value of the coefficient of change of input bias current caused by the chauge in integrated circuit temperature. 25.2 Circuit Description and Requirements TEMPERATURE
2 This method makes it possible to determine'whether the cut-off frequency or the unity-gain frequency lies above a specified limit.

26.2 26.3

Circuit Diagrams Circuit Description and Requirements

`The measuring methods described in 11, either method a or method b, are applicable. 25.3 Measurement Procedure

The input (I, J is measured as described in 11 with the integrate a circuit stabilized at the first specified temperature T,. The integrated circuit temperature is then raised and stabilized at the secoud specified temperature T2 aud the input bias current is measured again. (I,&. The input bias current temperature calculated using the expression : I IB.2
-

The value of resistor R, should be less than one hundredth of the value of input impedance of the amplifier at the frequency of measurement. Resistor R, should be approximately equal to R . Resistor R, should be at least 100 times the value of R,. (In practice the ratio R /R, determines the lowfrequeucy voltage gain o f the amplifier. This ratio should be kept as high as possible consistent with stability and repeatability of measurements). The value of R, should also be large compared to both the load resistauce R, aud the amplifier output resistaiice. The impedance of capacitor C should be lrss than 1 prrcrut of the value of R, at the measurement frequency. The output impedance of the attenuator should negligible with respect to the value of R,. bc

coefficient

is

llRt

Ti? - T*
25.4 Specified Conditions As in 11.1 or 11.2 according to the method used, plus the values of temperatures T, and T,. 26 CUT-OFF FREQUENCY 26.1 Purpose To determine the cut-off frequeucy of the unity-gain frequency of au integrated operational amplifier by measurement of the gain-bandwidth product.
NOTES 1 This method i's only applicable to amplifier whose frequency response curve has a 6 dB per octave roll-off between the points of cut-off and unity-gain frequencies, whether this is achieved by a conlpensating network or not.

The impedances of meters V, and V2 should br high compared to the impedance of the attenuator and the load respectively. Au oscilloscope, or a single meter with a suitable switching system, may be used in place of V, and V2. 26.4 Precautions to be Observed

FREQUENCY, (f, , j,) (55)

UNIT-GAIN

See 5.2 011 general precautions. III addition, since the frequency used may be very high (for example, up to 100 MHz), a suitable test jig should bc used so as to eusure that stray capacitance across the iuput terminals is low enough to avoid influencing the measurement result. 26.5 Measurement Procedure

The integrated circuit being measured is connected iu the measurement circuit as shown in Fig. 31 together with any specified additional networks such as for phase compensation.

ATTENUATOR

-

D
-+

G, = offset vollage supply. FIG. 31 h4EASUREhENT ClRCUHS

30

IS 12970 ( Part OSec 2 ) : 1992 The supply voltages are set to the specified values. Where required, the offset voltage supply G is adjusted to bring the d.c. output voltage to specs+ red reference level. The generator is set to the specified frequency and the attenuator adjusted to produce the specified value of input voltage as indicated by meter VI. A check should be made to ensure that the circuit is operating within its linear operating range. A further check should be made to ensure that the frequency of measurement lies in the linear slope range (- 6 dB per octave) of the frequency response above the cut-off frequency by either curve doubling or halving the frequency and verifying that the product of gain and frequency varies by less than 10 percent. The output voltage as indicated For an operational product is given frequency obtained The extrapolated f=by meter V2 is noted. 26.6 frequency is given by and the unity-gain limit cf,) if: frequency exceeds the specified where

f

=

frequency

of measurement. at a very

40 =
Therefore, fied limit

open-loop voltage amplification low frequency. the cut-off frequency @ if: exceeds

the speci-

v, '
The typical Fig. 32. frequency

<y

..o!f
curve is shown in

response

amplifier, the gain-bandwidth by the product of gain and above. unity gain frequency is given by

Specified Conditions Ambient Power or reference-point supply voltage(s). output voltage. of R, and R,. temperature.

Jl

fv,
Vl
cut-off

Quiescent

reference

Load resistance Input signal

and values

and the extrapolated f, =

frequency

and amplitude.

v;
1

vo

Details of any additional circuit to be connected externally, especially compensating networks.

NOTE - The real unity-gain frequency can be measured by increasing the frequency of measurement until the amplitude of the output voltage V, decreases to be equal to the input voltage V,. FIG.

32 TYPICAL FREQUENCY

RESPONSE CURVE t

31

( Continued from second cover ) This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on measuring methods of analogue integrated circuits. This section of the standard provides measuring methods for Analogue Integrated Circuits Linear Amplifiers including operational amplifiers. Variour sections of this part are: Section Section Section I 2 3 General Linear Voltage Amplifiers Regulator of a particular characteristic is described, it is These methods may vary considerably in regard to

When more than one method of measurement implied that any one method will be suitable. accuracy desired, ease of measurements, etc.

While preparing this standard, assistance has been derived devices, integrated circuits Part 3 : Analogue integrated Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ).

from IEC Pub circuits', issued

748-3 `Semiconductor by the International

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

I

Standnrd Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BlS for conformity Details of conditions under which a licence for the to that standard as a further safeguard. use of the St;rndard Mark may he granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau

of lndlrn

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization. marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected mattera in the country.
Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced in BIS has the copyright of all its publrcations. any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the such as symbols and sizes, type or grads course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ). BIS. designations. Revision of Indian Standards

if any, are Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the the latest amendments or edition. following reference : Dot : No. LTD 010 ( 1267 ) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones : 331 01 31. 331 I3 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices 1 Telephone Zafar Marg 331 01 31 i 331 13 75 Maniktola 37 84 99, ( 37 86 26, 53 38 43, { 53 23 84 235 02 16, { 235 15 19, 632 92 95, i 632 78 91, 37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40, 235 04 42, 2!5 23 15 632 78 58, 632 78 92

Regional Central

Offices: : Manak Bhavan, 9 BahadmShah NEW DELHI I 10002

Eastern

: l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445446, : C. 1. T. Campus, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH IV Cross Road, Marol,

Northern Southern Western

I60036 600113

MADRAS

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC. BOMBAY 400093

Andheri

( East )

Branches

: AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

COIMBATOBE, JAIPUR, KANPUR.

Printed at

Printrade, New Delhi, India

