IS/IS0 8686-l : 1989 ( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian Standard

CRANES - DESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR LOADS AND LOAD COMBINATIONS
PART 1 GENERAL

ICS 63.020.20

0 BIS 1995 BUREAU
MANAK

OC

INDI-AN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 1 IO 002

November

1995

Price Group

10

Cranes, Lifting Chains and its Related Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

HMD 14

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 8686-l : 1989 `Cranes - Design principles for loads Organization for Standand load combinations-Part 1 : General', issued by the International ardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Cranes, Lifting Chains and Its Related Equipment Sectional Committee and approval of the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. This standard Part 2 Part 3 Part 4 Part 5 is being published in five parts. Other parts of this standard are as follows:

Mobile cranes Tower cranes Jib cranes Overhead travelling cranes and portal bridge cranes

The text of IS0 standard has been approved for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain terminology and conventions are, however, not identical to those used in IndianStandards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should

b) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, is to use full stop (.) as a decimal marker.

the current practice

In this adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated:

International Standard

Corresponding~lndian Standard

Degree ot Equivalence

IS0 4306-l

: 1990

IS 13473 (Part 1) : 1992 Cranes Vocabulary : Part 1 General IS 13473 (Part 2) : 1992 Cranes Vocabulary i Part 2 Mobile cranes ' IS 13473 (Part 3) : 1993 Cranes Vocabulary : Part 3 Tower cranes

-

Identical Identical

IS0 4306-2 : 1985

IS0 4306-3 : 1991

-

Identical

The concerned technical committee IS0 4310 : 1981 referred in this adopted in conjunction with this standard.

has reviewed the provisions of IS0 4302 : 1981 and standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off,it shall be done in accordance with IS 2:1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`.

IS/IS0

8888-l

: 1989

CRANES - DmESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR LOADS AND LOAD COMBINATION~S
PART 1 GENERAL

1

Scope

This part of IS0 S6S6 establishes general methods for calculating loads, and principles to be used to select load combinations for proofs of competence for the structural and mehanical components of cranes as defined in IS0 4306-l. It is based on rigid-body kinetic analysis and elasto-static analysis but it expressly permits the use of more advanced methods (calculations or tests) to evaluate the effects of loads and load combinations,_and the values of dynamic load factors, where it can be demonstrated that these provide at least equivalent levels of competence. This part of IS0 8686 is intended for two distinct kinds of application : a) It provides the general form, content and ranges of parameter values for more specific standards to be developed for individual lifting appliance types. b) It provides a framework for agreement on loads and load combinatTons between a designer or manufacturer and an appliance purchaser for those types of lifting appliances where specific standards do not exist. When applying this part of IS0 8686 to different types of lifting appliance, operating in the same service and environmental conditions, equivalent resistance to failure should be sought.

agreements based on this part of IS0 8686 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards listed below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 4302 : 1981, Cranes Wind load assessment.

IS0 4306 fall published parts), Lifting appliances - Vocabulary IS0 4310 : 1981, Cranes Test code and procedures.

3

Definitions
given in

For the purposes of IS0 8686, the definitions ISO4306, together with the following, apply.

3.1 loads : External or internal actions in the form of forces, displacements or temperature, which cause stresses in the structural or mechanical components of the lifting appliance. 3.2 kinetic analysis of rigid bodies: The study of the movement and the inner forces of systems modelled by elements that are assumed to be non-elastic.

3.3 kinetic analysis for elastic bodies: The study of the relative elastic displacements (distortion), movement and the inner forces of systems modelled by elements that are assumed to be elastic.

2

Normative

references 4 Symbols

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in thii text, constitute provisions of this part of IS0 8686. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to

The main symbols used in this part of IS0 8686 are given in table 1.

1

IS/IS0 8686-l :I989

Table 1 Symbol @
@l

Main symbols Description Reference Various 6.1.1 6.1.1 6.1.2.1 6.1.2.3 6.1.3.2 6.1.4 6.3.2 6.3.3 6.1.2.1 6.1.2.1 6.1.2.3 6.1.2.2 6.3.3 7.3.2 7.3.3 Annex A 7.3.6 6.1.2.3, 6.3.1 6.3.1

Factors for dynamic effects Factors for hoisting and gravity effects acting on the mass of the lifting appliance Term used in determining the value of @1 Factor for hoisting a grounded load Factor for dynamic effects of sudden release of part of load Factor for dynamic effects of travelling on an uneven surface Factor for dynamic loads arising from acceleration of crane drives Factor for effects of dynamic load tests Factor for elastic effects arising from collision with buffers Hoisting classes assigned to lifting appliances Factor assigned to hoisting class Term used in determining the value of 03 Steady hoisting speed, in metres per second Buffer forces Coefficients for calculating allowable stresses Partial load coefficient Resistance coefficient Coefficient for high-risk applications Mass of the load Am Mass of that part of the hoist load remaining suspended from the appliance

a @2 @3 94 @5 @6 97 HC, to HC4 P2 83
"h

Fx r Fx2, Fx4
YfA I

YfB,
YP Ym Yn m

YfC

qm = m NOTE -

Further symbols are used in the annexes and are defined therein.

5
5.1

General
The objective of proof of competence calculations carried

The effects of differences mechanical and structural

between systems

actual and ideal geometry (for example the effect

of of

out in accordance

with this part of IS0 8686 is to determine

tolerances, settlements, etc.) shall be taken into account. However, they shall be included specifically in proof of competence calculations only where, in conjunction with applied loads, they may cause stresses that exceed specified limits.

mathematically that a lifting appliance will be competent to perform in practice when operated in compliance with the manufacturer's instructions. The basis for such proof against failure (by yielding, stability or fatigue, calculated stresses calculated mechanical elastic in-

5.2

There are two general approaches calculations

to structural

design or

proof of competence

:

for example) is the comparison between induced by loads and the corresponding and

strengths of the constituent structural components of the lifting appliance. failure may also be required Here, the comparison

a) The allowable stress method, where the design stresses induced by combined loads are compared with allowable stresses established for the type of member or condition being examined. The assignment of allowable stress is made on the basis of service experience with consideration for

Proof against turning

in respect of overbetween the

stability.

is made

protection against failure due, elastic instability or fatigue.

for example,

to yielding,

calculated overturning moments induced by loads and the calculated resistance to overturning provided by the lifting appliance. In addition, there may be limitations on forces that are necessary to assure the stability and/or to avoid unwanted displacement of portions of the appliance or of the appliance itself, for example the jib support ropes becoming unloaded or the appliance sliding.

b) The limit state method, where partial load factors are used to amplify loads before they are combined and compared with the limit states imposed,for example, by yielding or elastic instability. The partial load coefficient for each load is established on the basis of probability and the degree of accuracy with which the load can be determined. Limit

2

IS/IS0

8686-l

: 1989

state values comprise the characteristic member reduced to reflect statistical strength and geometric parameters.

strength variations

of the in its

against fatigue. They result from gravity and from acceleration or deceleration produced by drives and brakes acting on the masses of the lifting appliance and the hoist load, as well as from displacements.

The limit state method generally permits more efficient design because it takes into account greater certainty in determining appliance mass and lesser certainty in values selected to reflect applied loads. Annex A gives a more detailed description of the application the allowable stress method and the limit state method. of

b) Occasional loads and effects which occur infrequently are usually neglected in fatigue evaluations. They include loads induced by in-service wind, snow and ice, temperature and skewing. c) Exceptional loads and their effects are also infrequent

5.3

To calculate stresses from applied loads, an appropriate model of the appliance shall be used. Under the provisions of this part of IS0 8666, loads which cause time variant load effects are assessed as equivalent static loads from experience, experiments, or by calculation. A rigid-body kinetic analysis can be used with dynamic factors to estimate the forces necessary to simulate the response of the elastic system. Alternatively, either elasto-kinetic analysis or field measurements can be carried out, but to reflect the operating regime, a realistic model of the actions of the appliance operator may be required.

and may likewise usually be excluded from fatigue consideration. They include loads caused by testing, out-ofservice wind, buffer forces and tilting, as well as from emergency cut-out, failure of drive components, nal excitation of the lifting appliance foundation. and exter-

d) Miscellaneous loads include erection and dismantling loads as well as loads on platforms and means of access. The category in which a load is placed is not an indication of the importance or criticality of that load. For example, erection and dismantling loads, although in the last category, shall be given particular attention as a substantial portion of accidents occur during those phases of operation.

For both the allowable stress method and the limit state method, and for considerations of stability and displacements, loads, load combinations, load factors, allowable stresses and limit states should be assigned either on the basis of experience, with consideration of other International Standards or, if applicable, on the basis of experimental or statistical data. The parameters used in this part of IS0 8666 are considered to be deterministic. Where a specific loading cannot occur (for example wind loading on an appliance used indoors) then that loading can be ignored in the proof of competence calculations. Similarly, loadings can be modified a) b) conditions features when they result from in the appliance in the design; or suppressed by the instructions;

6.1

Regular

loads
effects acting on the mass

6.1.1

Hoisting and gravity of the lifting appliance

The mass of the appliance includes those components which are always in place during operation, except for the payload itself (see 6.1.2). For some appliances or applications, it may be necessary to add mass to account for encrustation of materials, such as coal or similar dust, which build up on the appliance its parts. The gravitational (dead weight) force induced shall or

prohibited

by the mass of the appliance by the factor @t, where

not present

be multiplied

c) conditions which are prevented design of the appliance.

@t = 1 f a, 0 < a < 0.1. In this way the vibrational excitement of the lifting appliance structure, when lifting the gross load off the ground, is taken into account. There are always two values for the factor in order to reflect both the upper and lower reaches -of the vibrational pulses. The factor @t shall be used in the design of the appliance structure and its supports; in some cases, both values of the factor shall be applied in order to find the most critical loadings in members and components. a general comment on the application of

If a probabilistic proof of competence calculation is used, the relevant conditions, particularly the acceptable probability of failure, shall be stated.

6

-Loads and applicable

factors

This clause gives loads and ranges of values for the factors used in proof of competence load effects. calculations when determining Annex C gives r$ factors.

Individual values for specific types of appliance, selected from these ranges, will be found in the parts of this International Standard covering those appliances.

6.1.2

Inertial load

and

gravity

effects

acting

vertically

on

the-gross

The'loads acting on a lifting appliance are divided into the categories of regular, occasional, exceptional, and miscellaneous. Individual loads are considered only when and if they are relevant to the appliance under consideration or to its usage: a) Regular loads, occurring during normal operation, shall

The mass of the gross load includes the masses of the payload, lifting attachments and a portion of the suspended hoist ropes.

6.1.2.1

Hoisting

class are assigned

For the purposes of this clause, lifting appliances

be considered in proof of competence calculations against failure by yielding, elastic instability and, when applicable,

to hoisting classes HC, to HC, according to their dynamic characteristics. The hoisting classes of appliances are given in

3

IS/IS0

8686-l

: 1989

table 2 and shall be selected on the basis of ex'perience. Corresponding values of B2 and @2 are also given in table 2 and illustrated in figure 1. The selection of the hoisting class depends on the particular type of lifting appliance and is dealt with in the other parts of this International Standard. Equally, values of @2 can be determined by experiment or anafysis without reference to hoisting class.

6.1.2.2.1

For normal operation

a) Where a steady creep speed can be selected by the crane driver, this speed shall be used in determining the value of 92. b) Where a stepless variable speed control is provided or such control can be exercised by the crane driver, the value of $2 minfor the appropriate hoisting class shall be selected from `figure 1. 6.1.2.2.2 For exceptional occurrences

Table 2 -

Values of 82 and 92
@2 s2 @2.min @2,rnax

Hoisting class of appliance

For appliances with control of type a) as in 6.1.2.2.1, the value ~of@2,rnaX shall be based on a value of vh derived from the maximum nominal speed of the unloaded motor or engine. For appliances with control of type b) as in 6.1.2.2.1, the value of 92Ymax for the hoisting class shall be based on a value of vh derived from a value of not less than 0,5 times the maximum nominal speed of the unloaded motor or engine. Annex C gives a general comment on the application of @ factors. 6.1.2.3 Effects of sudden release of part of payload

"Cl MC2 HC3

0.2

1

1.3 1.6
1.9 2.2

0.4
0.6

I,05
1.1 1.15

~HC4

0.8

6.1.2.2

Hoisting an unrestrained grounded load

In the case of hoisting an unrestrained grounded load, the dynamic effects of transferring the load from the ground to the lifting appliance shall be taken into account by multiplying the gravitational force due to the mass of the gross load by a factor e2. (See figure 1.1 NOTE - The dynamic effects covered by this clause occur when the drive comes up to speed before the lifting attachment engages the load and are the result of the build-up of kinetic energy and the drive torque. The factor #2 shall be taken as follows :

For lifting appliances that release or drop part of the payload as a normal working procedure, such as when grabs or magnets are used, the peak dynamic effect on the appliance can be simulated by multiplying the payload by the factor $3 (see figure 2). The value of @3'isgiven by 1 -?I1

@3=

+/33)

where Am 42 = @2,min, for vh < 0,2 m/s
m @2 = @2,min + b2 (vh 0,2), for vh > 0,2 m/s

is the released or dropped part of the payload; is the mass of the payload;

where vh is the steady hoisting speed, in metres per second, related to the lifting attachment, derived from the steady rotational speed of the unloaded motor or engine; /32 is a factor assigned to the hoisting class (seetable 2); 4 2,.,,rn is given in table 2 for the hoisting class. Where the hoist drive control system ensures the use of a steady creep speed, this speed only shall be taken into account to cover normal operation in determining the value of @2. Where this is not the case, two conditions shall be considered by taking a value of rj2 to cover normal operation, as in 6.1.2.2.1, and a value of 92, max to cover exceptional occurrences, as in 6.1.2.2.2.

j3s = 0.5 for appliances equipped with grabs or similar slowrelease devices, = 1 for appliances equipped with magnets or similar rapid-release devices. Annex C gives a general comment on the application of 4 factors. 6.1.3 6.1.3.1 Loads caused by travelling on an uneven surface

Lifting appliances travelling on or off roadways

The effects of travelling, with or without load, on or off roadways, depend on the appliance configuration (mass distribution), the elasticity of the appliance and/or its suspension, the travel speed and on the nature and condition of the travel surface. The dynamic effects shall be estimated from experience, experiment, or by calculation using an appropriate model for the appliance and the travel surface.

4

lS/ISO

8686-l

: 1989

vh

0,2

1

Figure

1 -

Factor

@2

F

t

a

2

/

/

,' / /'

4
w
-1
Factor @3

Figure

2 -

5

IS/IS0

8888-l

: 1989

6.1.3.2

Lifting appliances travelling on rails

where applicable, to the appliance and the gross load as well. (See figure 3.) The range of values for @s is 1 < $s < 2. The value used depends on the rate of change of the drive or braking force and on the mass distribution and elastic properties of the system. In general, lowervalues correspond to systems in which forces change smoothly and higher values to those in which sudden changes occur. For centrifugal forces, 4s may be taken as 1.

The effects of travelling with or without load on rail tracks having geometric or elastic characteristics that induce accelerations at the wheels of the appliances depend on the appliance configuration (mass distribution, elasticity of the appliance and/or its suspension), travel speed and wheel diameter. They shall be estimated from experience, experiment, or by calculation using an appropriate model for the appliance and the track. The induced accelerations may be taken into account by multiplying the gravitational forces due to the masses of the lifting appliance and gross load by a factor G4. International Standards for individual types of appliance may specify tolerances for rail tracks and indicate conditions within which the value of rp4may be taken as 1. Annex C gives a general comment @ factors. on the application of

Where a force that can be transmitted is limited by friction or by the nature of the drive mechanism, the limited force and a factor @sappropriate to that system shall be used. Annex C gives a ,general comment on the application of @ factors. Annex E gives an example of a determination ~of the loads caused by acceleration of a bridge crane having unsynchronized travel gear and non-symmetrical load distribution. 6.1.6 Loads induced by displacements

Annex D gives an example of a model for estimating the value of G4 to take account of the vertical accelerations induced at the wheels of an appliance travelling on rail tracks with nonwelded steps or gaps.

6.1.4 Loads caused by-acceleration including hoist drives

of all crane drives

Account shall be taken of loads arising from displacements included in the design such as those resulting from pre-stressing and those within the limits necessary to initiate response of skewing and other compensating control systems. Other loads to be considered include those that can arise from displacements that are within defined limits such as those set for the variation in the gauge between rails or uneven settlement of supports. 6.2 6.2.1 6.2.1.1 Occasional loads

Loads induced in a lifting appliance by accelerations or decelerations caused by drive forces may be calculated using rigidbody kinetic models that take into account the geometric properties and mass distribution of the lifting appliance drive and, where applicable, resulting inner frictional losses. For this purpose, the gross load is taken to be fixed at the top of the jib or immediately below the crab. A rigid-body analysis does not directly reflect elastic effects. To allow for these, the change in drive force (@I, inducing either the acceleration or deceleration, may be multiplied by a factor es and algebraically added to the force present before the acceleration or deceleration takes place. This amplified force is then applied to the components exposed to the drive force and,

Climatic effects In-service wind

Loads due to in-service wind shall be calculated in accordance with IS0 4302.

Drive force A

Load effects on lifting appliance causedby drive forces A r\

I
Motor force

Speed w

/

Brakeforce

Figure 3 -

Factor @5 6

IS/IS0

8888-l

: 1989

6.2.1.2

Snow

and ice loads

necessary.

In this case the dynamic test load shall be multiplied

by a factor @~a, given by Where relevant, snow and ice loads shall be taken into account. The increased wind exposure surfaces due to encrustation shall be considered. #a = 0,5 (I + &I in accordance comment with 6.1.2. on the application of

where 4~~is calculated

6.2.1.3

Loads due to temperature

variation

Annex

C gives

a general

Loads caused by the restraint of expansion or contraction of a component due to local temperature variation shall be taken into account. 6.2.2 Loads caused by skewing

# factors. 6.3.3 Buffer forces

This sub-clause covers skewing loads that occur at the guidance means (such as guide rollers or wheel flanges) of a guided, wheel-mounted appliance while it is travelling or traversing in steady-state motion. These loads are induced by guidance reactions which force the wheels todeviate from their free-rolling, natural travelling direction. by acceleration acting on asymmetrical' which can also cause the appliance account under 6.1.4. Similar loads induced mass distribution and are taken into

Where buffers are used, the forces on the crane structure arising from collision with them shall be calculated from the kinetic energy of all relevant parts of the appliance moving in general at 0,7 to 1 times the nominal speed. Lower values may be used where they are justified by special considerations such as the existence of an automatic control system of demonstrable reliability for retarding the motion or where there would be limited consequences in the event of a buffer impact.

to skew

The calculation may be based ona rigid body model.The actual behaviour of the crane and buffer system shall be taken into account. Where the lifting appliance or component is restrained against rotation, for example by guide rails, the buffer deformations may be assumed to be equal, in which case if the buffer characteristics are similar, the buffer forces will be equal. This case is illustrated in figure 4 a) in which Fti = Fx4 = &I2

Skewing loads as defined above are usually taken as occasional loads but their frequency of occurrence varies with the type, configuration and service of the appliance. IKindividual cases, the frequency of occurrence will determine whether they are taken as occasional or regular loads. Guidance for establishing the magnitude of skewing loads and the category into which they are placed is given in the parts of this International Standard covering those individual appliance types. Annex F gives an example of a method for analysing skewing loads on a rigid lifting appliance structure travelling at a constant speed. For appliances with structures that are not rigid in respect of applied skewing forces or that have specially controlled travel guidance, appropriate models shall be used which take the system properties into account.

Where the appliance or component is not restrained against rotation, the buffer forces shall be calculated taking into account the distribution of the relevant masses and the buffer characteristics. This case is illustrated in figure 4 b). The resulting forces as well as the horizontal inertia forces in balance with the buffer forces shall be multiplied by a factor $7 to account for elasticeffects which cannot be evaluated using a rigid body analysis. G7 shall be taken as 1,25 in the case of buffers with linear characteristics (for example springs) and as 1,6 in the case of buffers with rectangular characteristics (for example hydraulic constani force buffers). For buffers with other characteristics other values justified by calculation or by test shall be used. (See note 2 and figure 5.1 NOTES 1 In calculating buffer forces, the effects of suspended loads that are unrestrained horizontally (free to swing) should not be taken into account.

6.3 6.3.1

Exceptional
Out-of-service

loads
wind conditions

When considering out-of-service wind conditions, the gravitational force on that part of the mass of the hoist load remaining suspended from the appliance, qrn, shall be taken into account:

qm = m - Am
where

m - Am
m Wind 6.3.2

is that

part of the gross load remaining

sus-

2

Intermediate values of (~7 can be estimated as follows

:

pended from the appliance, is the mass of the gross load. loads shall be calcuiated Test loads with IS0 4310. in accordance with IS0 4302.

47 = 1,25 if 0 < c < 0,5
@7 = 1.25 + 0.7 (c 6.3.4 Tilting forces 0.5) if 0.5 < r < 1

The values of test loads shall be in accordance

If an appliance with horizontally restrained load can tilt when it, its load or lifting attachment collides with an obstacle, the resulting static forces shall be determined. If a tilted appliance can fall back into its normal position uncontrolled, the resulting impact on the supporting structure shall be taken into account.

Where values for dynamic or static test loads are required that are above the minimum given in IS0 4310, proof of competence calculations for these test conditions may be

7

IS/IS0 8888-l : 1989

r=' " F, du = relative buffer energy
Pa () For a buffer with linear characteristics: ( = 0.5 For a buffer with rectangular characteristics : r = 1

s

Figure 5 - Factor @7

6i3.6 Loads caused by emergency cut-out
Loads caused by emergency cut-out shall be evaluated in accordance with ~6.1.4, taking into account the most unfavourable state of drive (i.e. the most unfavourable combination of acceleration and loading) at the time of cut-out. The value of the factor @s shall be chosen from the range 1.5 < r& < 2. 6.3.6

In some cases it may also be necessary to take account of loads occurring during transport. 6.4.2

Loads on platforms and other means provided for access

Loads caused by failure of mechanism or components
Where protection is provided by emergency brakes in addition to service brakes, failure and emergency brake activation shall be assumed to occur under the most unfavourable condition. Where mechanisms are duplicated for safety reasons, failure shall be assumed to occur in any part of either system. In both these cases, resulting loads shall be evaluated in accordance with 6.1.4, taking into account any impacts resulting from the transfer of forces.

The loads are considered to be local, acting only on the facilities themselves and on their immediate supporting members. The following loads shall be taken into account: 3 Ooo N where materials can be deposited; 1 500 N on meansprovided for access only; not less than 300 N horizontally on railings, depending on location and use.

7

Principles of choice of load combinations

External excitation of the lifting appliance foundation
6i3.7 Examples of lifting appliance foundation excitation are earthquakes or wave-induced movements. Loads caused by such excitations shall be considered only when they constitute a significant risk. NOTE - Special requirements given in regulations or specifications may apply.

7.1 Basic considerations
Loads shall be combined to determine the stresses an appliance will experience, during normal operation, as simulated by an elastostatic calculation. To achieve this, a) the appliance is taken in itsmost unfavourable attitude and configuration while the loads are assumed to act in magnitude, position and direction causing unfavourable stresses at the critical points selected for evaluation on the basis of engineering considerations, and b) conservatively, loads can be combined at the values defined in this part of IS0 8686 or, when appropriate, they can be combined with some loads factored to more closely reflect loading conditions actually found in practice. The load combinations appropriate to individual types of appliances shall be in accordance with the pr&iiles set out in 7.1.1 to 7.2 and in table 3.

8.4 Miscellaneous loads 6.4.1 Loads due to erection, dismantling and transport

The loads acting at each stage of the erection and dismantling process shall be taken into account, including those arising from a wind speed of 8,3 m/s or greater. Higher values may be specified for individual types of crane covered by the other parts of this International Standard. Theyshall be combined in accordance with 7.2.

9

Load combinations Al and Bl ~ii appliances under normal service conditions, hoisting and depositing loads, without in-service wind and loads from other cllrnatic effects (Al), and loads from other climatic effects (Bl). and with in-service wind

ln general, hoisting, travelling, &wing and luffing movements are possible simultaneously. The various loads resulting fromthese movements shall becombiried to correspond with the specified working conditions. A2 and 02 Lifting appliances under normal service ccinditions, sudden releasing of a partof the hoist load, without in-service wind and loads from other climatic effects (A2), and with inservice wind and loads froth other climatic effects (62). Drive forces shall be combined as in Al and Bl . AS.and 83

Lifting appliinces under normal service conditions, accelerating the suspended load, without in-service wind and loads from other climatic effects fA31, and with in-service wind and loads from other climatic effects (83).
Other drive forces shall be cornblned as in Al and 81.

A4 and 84

Liiing appliances under normal service conditions, travelling on an uneven surface or track, without in-sewice wind and loads from other climatic effects fA41, and with in-service wind and loads from other climatic effects (84). Drive forces shall be combined as in Al and Bl.

85 Cl C2 C3

Lifting appliances under normal service condition, travelling on an uneven surface at constant speed and skewing, with in-service wind and loads from other climatic effects. Liiing appliances under in-service conditions hoisting a grounded load under the exceptional circumstance applying to d2 in 6.1.2.2.2. Lifting appliances under out-of-sewice conditions, including out-of-service wind and loads from other climatic effects. Lifting appliances under test conditions. Drive forces shall be combined as in Al and Bl.

C4 to C6

Lifting appliances with gross load in combination with loads such as buffer forces K4), tilting forces K5), emergency cut-out (C6), failure of mechanism (C7), excitation of the lifting appliance foundation (C6). For erection and dismantling loads, see 7.2.

NOTE -

IS/IS0

8686-i

: 1989

7.1.1

Basic

load

combinations

7.3.3

Limit state

method

Basic toad combinations are given in table 3. In general, load combinations A cover regular loads, load combinations B cover regular loads combined with occasional loads, and load comwith occasional and binations C cover regular loads combined exceptional loads.

The various loads shall be multiplied by the partial load coefficients yp depending on the type of load and load combinations A, B or C before being applied to the model. The partial load coefficients columns 3, 4 and 5. Ranges of values of partial yp to be selected are listed in

load coefficient

yp are given

in

7.2

Load combinations during dismantling and transport
Each stage of the erection

erection,

table 6.1.

and dismantling

process

shall be

7.3.4

Elastic

displacements elastic displacements can render an ap-

considered, taking into account the appropriate loads and load combinations which shall be as specified in the parts of this International Standard covering each type of crane. Proof of competence calculations shall be carried out for each instance of significant loading of a member or component. In some cases it may also be necessary to take account occurring during transport. of load

In some

instances,

pliance unfit to perform its intended duties, can affect stability, or may interfere with the proper functioning of mechanisms. In such instances, calculated limits. consideration of displacements shall be part of with established the proof of competence displacements calculations and, where appropriate,

shall be compared

7.3.5

Proofs

of fatigue

strength

7.3
7.3.1

Application
General

of table

3

The effects of fatigue shall be considered. Where proofs of fatigue strength are found to be necessary they shall be carried out in accordance with the principles set down in 7.1. In general, load combinations Al, shall be taken into account. A2, A3 and A4 (regular loads)

The masses in column 2, lines 1 to 3, shall be multiplied by Igravitational -acceleration g, and masses in column 2, lines 4 and 5, by the appropriate loads-shall be multiplied accelerations. The resulting or given factors or by 1. by the corresponding shall be applied

In some applications it may be necessary to consider also occasional loads such as in-service wind, skewing and exceptional loads such as test loads and excitation of the lifting appliance foundation (for example wave effects).

Each combination with 7.1.

of loads

in accordance

7.3.6 7.3.2 Allowable stress method A, B and % shall of

High-risk

applicatiohs

In special cases where the human or economic consequences of failure are exceptionally severe (for example ladle cranes or cranes obtained which particular for nuclear applications), according increased reliability shall be of the specified strength by the use of a risk coefficient application. stress method, the allowable stresses shall the yn > 1 the value of

The allowable be determined

stresses for load combinations by dividing the appropriate

the material, element, the stress at yielding,
YfA. YfB Or YfC.

component or connection (for example buckling or limit of elastic stability) by

shall be selected

to the requirements

Using the allowable Values for coefficients yfA, yfa and yfc for this method B). are given in table B.1 (in annex

be divided by the coefficient. loads shall be multiplied_by

Using the limit state method, yn. See annex A.

12

IS/IS0

8686-i

: 1989

Annex A (normative) Application to the allowable stress method limit state method of design
(see clause 5)

and the

A.1

Introduction

design

stress

5,

should

be compared

with

an

appropriate

allowable

value of adm O.

The principles set out in this part of IS0 8685 for determining the loads and load combinations to be taken into account in
proof of competence calculations are applicable to both the allowable stress method and the limit state method of design. This annex describes their application in general terms.

A.2

Allowable

stress method

Admissible stresses are obtained by dividing the specified strengths R of the material, such as the stresses corresponding to the yield point, limit of elastic stability or fatigue strength, by a coefficient yr, specified in table 3 according to the basic load combination (see 7.1.11, and, where appropriate, by a risk coefficient yn (see 7.3.5). Special care is required to ensure a valid proof of competence when the allowable stress method is applied to cases where internal forces are not linearly proportional to the loads producing them Dr critical values of stress result from the combination of independently varying loads which give stresses of opposite signs.

Individual specified loads, f, , are calculated and amplified where necessary using the applicable factors Q. They are then combined according to the load combination under consideration from table 3. The combined load, ~j , is used to determine the resulting load effects, Sk, i.e. the inner forces and moments in members or the forces on supports. The stresses, C,, , due to the action of the load effects on a particular element or component are calculated and combined with any stresses, au, resulting from local effects. The resulting

A flow chart illustrating the allowable stress method of design is shown in figure A. 1.

fi 4 sk

is the load

i on the element or component

is the load combination j are the load effects in section k_of members or supporting parts, such as inner forces and moments resulting from load combination 5 are the stresses in the particular element / as result of load effects $ are the stresses in the particular element I arising from local effects is the resulting design stress in the particular element I is the specified strength or characteristic resistance of the material, particular element or connection, such as the stress corresponding to the yield point, limit of elastic-stability or fatigue strength (limit states)

adm o are the allowable stresses
Yf

are the coefficients applied to the specified strength according to the load combination under consideration is the risk coefficient. where applicable

Yn

Figure A.1 -

Typical flow chart of the allowable

stress method

13

IS/IS0 8886-l : 1989

A.3 Limit state method
Individual specified or characteristic loads, fi , are calculated and amplified where necessary using the factors @, multiplied by the appropriate partial load coefficients ye. They are then combined according to the load combination under consideration to give the combined load Fj . Factors @ and partial load coefficients yp for individual loads are given in table~B.1. Where appropriate, the risk coefficient y,, is applied to the combined load 5 (see 7.3.6) to give the design load, y,e . Design

load effects, $, , are determined from the design load. The stresses, cll, due to the action of the load effects on a particular element or component are calculated and combined with any stresses, CI~ , resulting from local effects which have also been calculated using the appropriate load coefficients. The resulting design stress 5, should be compared with an appropriate limit value, lim 5. A flow chart illustrating the limit state method of design is shown in figure A.2.

fi

is the load i on the element or component is the load combinationj from lOadS applicable

5
sk

fi , multiplied with partial load coefficients and risk coefficient, when

are the lcad effects in section k of members or supporting parts, such as inner forces and moments, resulting from load combination Fj are the stresses in the particular element I as a result of load effects Sk are the stresses in the particular element I arising from local effects is the resulting design stress in the particular element I is the specified strength or characteristic resistance of the material, particular element or connection, such as the stress corresponding to the yield point, limit of elastic stability or fatigue strength (limit states)

lima

is the limit design stress are the partial load coefficients applied to individual loads according to the load combination under consideration is the risk coefficient, where applicable is the resistance coefficient

YP
Yn
Ym

NOTES 1 Instead of a comparison of stresses, as mentioned above, a comparison of forces, moments, deflections, etc. may be made.
2 A general description of the limit state, method of design is given in IS0 23%: 1986, Generalprinciples on reliablity for structures.

Figure A.2 - Typical flow chart of the limit state method

14

Is/IS0

8686-l

: 1989

Annex ~B (normative) Values of coefficients yf, y,,, and yp

Table R.1 gives values of yt, y,,, and y,, to be used in proof of rDmpatence

calculations

for load combinations

A, B and C.

Table B-1 -

Values of coefficients'" Tf. Ymand Yp

1) 2)

The coefficients are calculated from the formula y = l.O!P, wf3ere 0 C Y < 12. These values apply to the mass of the payload.

For individual types of appliance, values of yp for each lo&d should be selected from those given in table B.1 and stated in the part of this International Standard covering the type of crane under consideration. Where the same load occurs in more than one load combination, the values of yp applying to that load shall be taken from the same column. The value of yp is selected which the relevant according to the accuracy There with be

special cases where the effect of a load is to reduce stress and values of yp < t may be appropriate. the other parts of thii international types of appliances. In proof of fatigue strength, These will be covered in Standard for indiiiduat

instead of y coefficients.

strength

load can be determined.

may

values shall be used that provide an appropriate probability of survival. Fatigue design will be covered in a future International Standard.

15

IS/IS0

8888-l

: 1989

Annex C (informative) General comment on the application of @ factors

C.l

Dynamic

effects
responses induced by different loads

In cases where

the load effect

and dynamic

response

are not exex-

In general,

the dynamic

covered by these factors, elasto-kinetic analyses or periments shall be carried out, unless it is known from perience that these effects are sufficiently

(see clause 6) are taken into account by the use of dynamic factors 4, by which gravitational forces due to the masses and inertia forces due to rigid body movements figure C.l). are multiplied (see

small to be ignored.

@ = static

Additional bending due to vibration

a)

Example of the load effects covered by dynamic factors @

b)

Example of the load effects~not by dynamic factors @

covered

Figure C.l -

Application

of dynamic factors @

16

Is/Is0

6666-l

: 1969

Annex D Iinformative) Example of a model for estimating the value of $14for a lifting travelling on rails
(see 6.1.3.2)

appliance

D.l

General m-

-

V

The dynamic loads caused by travelling or traversing on rails with steps or gaps may be estimated by using appropriate elasto-kinetic models. Unevenness functions may be used to represent the steps or gaps in the rails.

-

D.2

Elasto-kinetic

model

In this example, the dynamic loads on the appliance caused by excitation of the system are estimated using a simple model. A single mass m, in kilograms, moving horizontally at constant speed v, in metres per second, is supported by a linear elastic spring with a spring constant c, in newtonsper metre, and is guided by a rail (see figure D.l). With the unevenness function h(t), in metres, and the coordinate Z(I), in metres, describing the position of the springsupported mass, the dynamic force in the spring follows the expression F(t) = cIh(f) - &)I, in newtons. The maximum force F,,, is given by the maximum value of the expression F(t) during the period of response. This may occur during or after the period of excitation. Figure D.l
Model for determining dynamic factor Gs

D.2.1 Movement of the wheel centre when passing over a step or gap The movement of the wheel centre when passing over a step or gap and the corresponding formulae are shown in figure D.2.

a)

Passing over a step

b)

Passing over a gap

Figure D.2 -

Movement of wheel centie 17

iS/lSO 8888-1 : 1989

D.2.2

Approximate unevenness functions fer exciting the elasto-kinetic model

The approximate unevenness functions h(t) for exciting the elasto-kinetic model are shown in figure D.3 and in the corresponding formulae in 0.2.3.

fl

1 It)
h

h(t)

h(r)

=

T (1 -

cos Jz t)

where P 1s = n
a) Passing over a step

where a tG = 2H

.
Figure D.3 Unevenness functions h(t)

b)

Passing over a gap

D.2.3
D.2.3.1

Maximum vertical accelerations
Lower end of spring

in which w = & elasto-kinetic model.

is the natural circular frequency of the

D.2.3.3 The maximum vertical acceleration of the lower end of the spring, 8, when passing over a step or a gap at constant spaed v, is given by

Mass passing a gap

The maximum vertical acceleration 2 for a mass m passing a gap is given by ? = R r~(a~)
where

=

0
2

n 29 -

r

WG aG = 2nv

where hs, hG, Sa, v and rare as shown in figures D.2 and D.3. D.2.4 D.2.3.2

Factors rs and &

Mass passing a step

The maximum vertical acceleration 2 for a mass m passing a step is given by P = R [s(a.J where

In figure D.4, the curves for factors &Ja.$ and <o(oo) for a parabolic (par) unevenness function are compared with those for the approximate cosine (cos) unevenness function previously introduced. The numbers in brackets I(l) or (211 indicate the periods for which the factors r are valid. Period (1) covet?3times r, and to and period (2) is the response time thereafter. For both excitations (step or gap) the maximum values of rs or to for o = < 1.3 have been found to occur in period (21, i.e. after the time the wheel has passed the unevenness, land with the cosine unevenness function [cosQ)l. .18

IS/IS0 8886-l : 1989

In this case, the values of the factors may be determined analytically by o's 1 - a:

For the two cases and the assumptions made, including a < 1,3, using the formulae for cs, as and to, a& the factors G4 may be calculated as follows : for a step :
($4=1+

rs=---4 or

2 + 2 cos(nas)

0
4

2

--g

v*

Wad

rG=-d

a;
1 - a:

for a gap: 2 - 2 cos(27raG)

2
;

v*

tGlaG)

D.2.5

Dynamic factor. @4

e4 is defined as follows :
mg+ #4 = mg c? mz

D.2.6

Comments

c:

=l+

%

g

The use of this simple elasto-kinetic model is restricted tomappliances whose actual dynamic behaviour corresponds to that of the model and which are~excited in the manner shown by passing over steps or gaps in the rails. If more than one natural mode contributes a significant response and/or rotation occurs, the designer should estimate the dynamic loads using an appropriate model for the circumstances.

5

285
4 2

hlt)

t

f

cos (2)

3 I,5 t bs 1 I
tG

2

0:

1

0 0.4 0,6 0.8 ffs al For a step 1 1.2

0 0.2 0.4 0,6
aG -

0,8

1

I,2

bl

For a gap

Figure D.4 -

Curves of unevenness function

19.

IS/IS0 8888-l : 1989

Annex E (informative) Example
I.1

of determination

of loads caused (see 6.1.4)

by acceleration

Rigid body kinetic model

The example considered is that of a rigid lifting appliance (i.e. an overhead travelling crane) consisting of a double girder

crane bridge supported by four crane travel wheels and travelling at a constant speed. One wheel on each side is driven by a simplified independent drive. A traversing loaded trolley is supported by the crane bridge (see figure E.l).

sgnlil -

wmg

YJC`
X

I
7

ml
m3

-ail

isgn

ii) wmg f

El+

4

3 sgn (Xl wmg -?-

$

n :

x, x
C

..

I
M/k'?

-

h J :

-

Rail1

I

*

Y t

z+---T
Figure E.l -

I I-

1

+sgn(II

wmg+ C
travelling

lsgnbil wmg+

I

Loads acting on an overhead

crane (see table E.l)

20

IS/IS0

8888-l

: 1989

The drive forces developed by the motors and brakes are transferred through one-step gears to the crane travel wheels. The travel wheels are supported in the end carriages, those on one side being laterally fixed and those on the other side being laterally movable.

E.3
E.3.1

Forces
Drive forces and external forces

E.2

Symbols

The symbols used in this annex are given in table E.l.

The motion of the appliance [x(t)1 and load effects depend on drive forces which are in balance with the internal frictional forces, the inertia forces and the external forces. The external forces include the frictional forces due to mechanical resistance (losses) at the'wheels, wind load and, in the case of an inclined track, gravitational forces. The torques A4 = lvr,,j or A4 = Ma may be defined by the motor or brake characteristics and these are illustrated by the two examples given in figures E.2 and E.3.

Table E.l ymbol Geometric I Y a b c rt
`2 r

Symbols used in annex E
Description psrameters fin metres)

Span of the appliance Distance of centre of mass of loaded trolley from rail 1 Distance of centre of gravity KG) from rail 1 Distance of centre of gravity KG) from rail 2 Wheel base Radius of gear wheel 1 Radius of gear wheel 2 Radius of crane travel wheels Messes (in kilograms)

ml
m2 "3 m

Mass of crane bridge with travel drives Mass of crab Gross load Mass of the loaded lifting appliance
(m = ml + m2 + m3)

MM

is the steady-state output torque of the motor at a motor speed of li/ is the motor starting torque (I$ = 0)

Ml)

rjArJ is the synchronous rotational speed of the motor (MM = 0)

Mass moments squared) 4
e2

of inertia (in kilograms metre

Mass moment of inertia of motor, coupling, brake drum and gear wheel 1 Mass moment of inertia of gear wheel 2 and crane travel wheels (neglected in this example) Internal friction losses

Figure E.2 - Resistor-controlled slip-ring motor Simplified presentation of motor characteristics

tl

Ratio of output power of gearing to input power of gearing Speeds and accelerations (in radians or metres per second or second squared)

j/, @ P, Y

Rotational speed and acceleration, respectively, of motor, coupling, brake drum and gear wheel 1 Travel speed and acceleration, respectively, of the lifting appliance Torques (in newton metres) Drive torque acting on the first shaft of the crane travel gear

I& is the brake torque whose direction is opposite to that of @. For simplification purposes its magnitude, 1 ,GBI, is taken as constant. iii, I. Mathematically it is expressed as &fS = - sgn f@) 1

Torque due to the stationarycharacteristics of the motor Torque of the mechanicalbrake

Figure ~E.3-

Mechanical brake - Formal presentation of brake torque

21

Is/Is0

8888-l

: 1989

E.3.2

Frictional

losses at a wheel

Figure E.4 illustrates frictional losses at a wheel.

AM,

is the torque loss due to friction in the wheel bearing

Ah42 is the torque representing the losses due to rolling friction in the contact zone of the rolling wheel 4
W

is the wheel load is the equivalent friction coefficient (AMI + AM2 = wF,r)

Figure E.4 -

Frictional losses at a wheel

E.4

Drive

accelerations

The drive model shown in figure E.5 is used for estimating drive accelerations. This representation combines the two drives acting to balance forces and includes all significant effects.

sgn(xlwmg
Output side of gear element 2

/

Input side of gear element 1

Figure E.5 -

Crane drive model (sign convention) 22

IS/IS0

8688-1 : 1989

From rigid body kinetic analysis, neglecting the mass moments of inertia, 02, the~acceleration, X, of an appliance not affected by wind forces can be expressed as 2M

For the purposes of the example in this annex, events I and II are taken to be instantaneous changes in torque. The events are illustrated in figure E.6.

X=

r;'

r2

r-l q* - sgn(k) wmg

E.6

Accelerations

28,(r; ' r2 f -t12~rf1 + m where I = sgn(tiF); ti is the tangential speed of gear wheels; a) For event I X(i) = 0
2M$r;'
(f, =

Before the design load effects arising from changes in torque can be calculated, such as those of events I and II of clause E:5, it is necessan/ to estimate the initial acceleration Xtir and the final acceleration X bounding the event. These can be estimated as follows `:`I

F is the tangential force to be transferred by the gear wheels.

NOTE -

Sign convention

of speed and internal

forces

x

r2rm1 rj -

wmg

internal forces of a gear element are &sumed to be positive when acting at the input sidein the directionof the positivespeedand at the oufput side opposite to the direction of the positive speed. The speeds
of gear elements are chosen positive if acting in the positive direction of the movements of the lifting appliance considering the kinematic interactions of the mechanical parts.

201(rlS1 r2 r-`12 v + m

since A = + 1 (as P > 0 and b) For event II

F > 0)

x(i,

= 0

2MfJQj = 0)
ST

r;'

r2r-l

q rj + m

wm*

281(rld' f2 r-`j2

E.5

Loads and load effects

since 1 = + 1 (as ti > 0 and 211ijalr.7' X,f, = 2&(r;l

F > 0)
tl-' + wmg + m

The loads and load effects caused by appliance drives during regular use can be taken into account~considering the relevant events, for example : a) Event I

r2r-'

f2 r-`12 1-l

since 1 = - 1 (as ti > 0 and

F < 0)

Accelerating the appliance from rest (I& = 0) by-applying a starting torque Ml) to each travel drive. bj Event II

From these results it can be seen that if "8' = ( IC, (, the acceleration X rrrfor event I is less than the deceleration ji rf) for event II.

E.7 Design load effects components

in the mechanical

Decelerating the crane from steady-state motion C@ = X = 0) by mechanical braking whereby the torque on each travel drive is changed from a motor torque MM CQi= 0) to a braking torque of -1 M, (.

As an example, the tangential force to be transferred by the gears and to be considered in design, F,is estimated as follows
(see clause E.4 and figure E.5) :

I

EventII

Figure ES -

Illustration 23

of events I and II

S/IS0

8888-i

: 1989

F = (A4 - 8, Qii)r;'
where#? = ri_`r2rs1X F = F(i) + $sAF where AF = F(f) - F(i) a) For event I F(i) = 0 F(f) = M$' b) For event II - 81 r<' r2 r-l X&~'

E.8 Design load effects in the structural components As an example, the horizontal loads and reactions to be transferred by the crane girder, and to beconsidered in design, are estimated as follows. (See figure E.7.)
The horizontal loads and forces are caused by drive forces accelerating the crane and do not include skewing forces. During acceleration, the two acting drives balance the mass forces (mii = m,Jl + m2X + m3Z) and the forces due to the frictional losses at all wheels (wmg). It is assumed that the crane drive characteristics are identical as well as their control; therefore the drive forces are equally distributed to both of the drives (Fti = F,, = i ti 1 + 2 wmg). The resultant drive

force acts in the centreline of the span. Forces transverse to the

Fy3= m(ii+
fY3 fY4

wgl%

Fy4r-m I;+

wg) F

3 t 2

y-wmg

a

t 2-y-w

1

a

Fx3= i

iwg+i:)

7

wmg

CC-C

-I--Lb
2 I
wmg
1

Y t

I

14 21

wmg

2

a)

Distribution of horizontal loads during acceleration of the appliance

b)

Resultant loads - Acting drive forces F,g = F,l and reacting forces FVJ = -Fv3

Figure E.7 -

Horizontal

loads and reactions

24

~/IS0

8888-l

: 1989

runway, Fy4 = -Fe. e = f - o between
becOW@ =

usually occur due to the distance the acting and reacting forces, and

From the acting loads, the mass forces mX ii) and mY rr)as well
as the resultant friction forces, all relevant load effects F(i) [N(i),

Q(i), M(i)1 and Flf) [N,a, Q(r), Mu,1 respectively should be
estimated by an elastostatic calculation considering the crane girder as a plane (or space) frame kae figure E.8).

Fy4

Fe The de+ load effects may be evaluated, having reference to clauses E.4 and E.7, from F = F(i) + & AF where AF = Flf, - F(i)

= m (X + wg) Q
C

The design load effects pand the accelerations before LY(i)] and after ljrrf,l changing the torques for any considered event should be evaluated.

Fy3 If)
t t

Fym

A

T`ti) Nti)

Q(i)

Fx!li)=Fx3ti)

_I_!b 1
Y(i) = 0 a) Before changing the torques (i)

wmg

h(f) = Fr3w

+

wmg

In the specialcasesof events I and II :

b)

After

changing

the torques

(f)

Figure

E.8 -

Loading

state

25

IS/IS0 8888-l : 1989

Annex F (informative) Example of a method for analysing (see 6.2.2) loads due to skewing

F.l

Model of appliance

To enable an estimation to be made of the tangential forces between wheels and rails as well as of the forces between the acting guide means, caused by skewing of the lifting appliance, a simple travel-mechanic model is necessary. The lifting appliance is considered to be travelling at a constant speed without anti-skewing control. The model consists of n pairs of wheels in line, of which p pairs are coupled. An individual (i) pair of wheels can be defined, either as coupled (Cl mechanically or electrically, or mounted independently (I) of each other. The latter condition is also valid in the case of independent single drives. The wheels are arranged in ideal geometric positions in a rigid crane structure which~is travelling on a rigid track. Differences in wheel diameters are neglected in this model. They are either

fixed (F) or movable (M) in respect of lateral movement. The lateral degree of freedom can, for example, be provided by a hinged leg. The different combinations of transversally in-line wheel pairs that are possible are shown in figure F.l. In figure F.2, the positions of the wheel pairs relative to the position of the guide means in front of the travelling crane are defined by the distances di .
NOTE Where flanged wheels are used instead of an external guide

means, di = 0.

It is assumed that the gravitational forces due to the masses of the loaded appliance (mg) are acting at a distance ~1 from rail 1 and are distributed equally to the n wheels at each side of the crane runway.

I
Fixed/Fixed lFIF) +&

Coupled (C)

I

Independent

(I)

0

IFF

fl

Fixed/Movable (F/M) KI=z=++ 64 IFM Q

Figure

F.l

-

Different

combinations

of wheel

pairs

1 Guide means

Wheel pair 1 Wheel pair 2

.
Wheel pair i

.

Wheel pair n

Figure

F.2 -

Positions

6f wheel

pairs

26

IS/IS0

8888-l

: 1989

F.2 Relationship between and displacements

tangential

forces

In general, a relationship exists between the sliding distances (u,, u,), the free-rolling distance r~, the wheel load F, and the tangential forces (Fx, F,), as follows : F, = fJsw, f,, pc, surface conditions).F, F, = f,,(s,, sy, pc, surface conditions).F, The friction coefficients of the rolling wheel Cfx, fy) depend on the slip, i.e. the relation between slide and free-rolling distances (sx = uxlr~, sy = uy/rw), on the contact pressure between wheel and rail (p,) and the surface.conditions of the rail. To simplify the calculation, the following empirical relationships may be used :

It is first necessary to assume a relationship between the tangential forces and the corresponding displacements occurring between wheel and trail. Since the wheel has to transfer drive moments (MyI to the rail and its movement is restricted by the system (crane and runway) it slides in longitudinal and lateral directions MU,, u,)l; corresponding tangential forces (Fx, FYI react on the crane (see figure F.3).

Geometry

Sliding distance \

L

Tf4qsg
Rolling distance, rw

f, = 0,3 11 - exp( -250 s.Jl, for s, < 0,015
fy = 0,3 11 - exp( -250 s,)l, for sy < 0,015

F.3

Loads due to skewing

The crane model is assumed to be travelling in steady motion and to have skewed to an angle a, as shown in figure F.4. The appliance may be guided horizontally by external means or by wheel flanges. A guide force Fv is in balance with the tangential wheel forces Fxli, Fyli, FG, Fy2 which are caused by rotation of the appliance about the instantaneous slide pole. With the maximum lateral slip sY = a at the guide means and a linear distribution of the lateral slip Svi between guide means and instantaneous

Figure F.3 -

Tangential

forces and displacements a
Direction _I of motion

T
L $

Direction of rail Guide means

Fyli

FYZ,

P

xl

Rail 1 Rail 2

Figure F.4 -

Loads acting on crane in skewed 27

position

is/k30

8686-l : 1989

slide pole, the corresponding skewing forces can be calculated as follows : a) `Distance between instantaneous slide pole and guide means, -/I for systems F/F. h = (ppp'12 + Xdf)/Xdi For systems F/M, h = (p/d2 + Z:d~)l~.di where p is the number of pairs of coupled wheels;

NOTE - The skewing angle a, which should be equal to or less than 0,015, should be chosen taking into account the space between the guide means and the rail as well as reasonable dimensional variation and wear of the appliance wheels and the rails.

F.4

Tangential

forces, F, and F,

Fxli = tlifmg Fei = tvf~ Fyli= vlifmg Fy2i = Vvfmg
where

p is the distance of the instantaneous slide pole from rail 1; ~1' is the distance of the instantaneous slide pole from rail 2; I di b) is the span of the appliance; is the distance of wheel paicifrom the guide means.

f and mg are as given in F.3 b);
rti , r2i , Vii and vz are as given in table F.l.

Guide force, F, Fy = vfmg ' Table F.l -

Values of rli , r2i , Vii and

~2

where
v =

1 -

Zdilnh,

for systems F/F, for systems F/M;

= ~~`(1 -

~ilnh),

f = 0,3[1 - exp( - 250 all, where a < 0,015 red;
mg is the gravitational force due to the mass of the loaded appliance.
IFM

1

0

I

I

-

28

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under t!,e Burersu of Indian Stundar& Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the~copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary-details, such as symbols and sixes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating-to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed, if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of IndianStandards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards MonthlyAdditions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. HMD 14 ( 0337 ).

Amendments Amend No.

Issued Since Publication

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mag, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 3310131,33113 75 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to ~a11 offices) Telephone 3310131 { 33113 75 378499,378561 37 86 26,37 86 62 603843 602025 ( 23.5 02 16,235 04 42 1 235 15 19,235 23 15 632 92 95,632 78 58 632 78 91,632 78 92

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road,Maniktola CALCUTTA700054

{

Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH

160022

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093

Bran&es : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHC'PAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARiDABAD. GIIIIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAlPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA THIRUVANA.WHAPURAM.
Printed at Dee Kay Priatc;s, New Delhi-l 10015, tnii~a.

