NAT Alan IS 17008 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


ASH AeA h Tere ama-n- — 
fates 


Weigh-in-Motion System for Road 
Vehicles — Specification 


ICS 17.100; 43.040.01 


© BIS 2019 


weds Ae Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Wa, 9 Teg TH AMT, ay Reef- 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2019 Price Group 19 


Electronics Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee, LITD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Electronics 
Measuring Instruments, Systems and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and 
Information Technology Division Council. 


In line with the Government policy of introduction of modern and innovative technology to find solution for the 


highway sector, Ministry of road and highways (MoRTH) has taken initiative for nationwide traffic survey and 
overloaded control on Toll Plaza with Weigh-In-Motion (WIM) System. 


In this framework it was felt essential to have a WIM system which can be installed on highway and used for: 

a) Infrastructural and statistical purpose — Economic and technical study of freight transport, detailed 
analysis of traffic for design and maintenance of road and bridges, classification of vehicles, and collecting 
statistical data, 

b) Aiding enforcement — Screening of overloaded vehicles, and 

c) Enforcement — Weight, for both low and high speed vehicles. 

Accordingly this standard was formulated. In the formulation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
the following publications: 


a) International Organization of Legal Metrology, OIML R-134 : 2006 Automatic instruments for 
weighingroad vehicles in motion and measuring axle loads — Part 1: Metrological and technical 
requirements — Tests; 

b) COST 323 : 1999 Weigh — in — motion for road vehicles; and 

c) American Society for Testing and Materials, ASTM E-1318 : 2009 Standard specification for highway 
Weigh-in-Motion (WIM) Systems with user requirements and test methods. 

And also taking into account the Draft European Standards prepared under the Federation of European Highway 
Research Laboratories WIM initiative. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specifies value in this standard. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Contents 

Pages 
INTRODUCTION ee savieesteanrns V 
1 SOOPBE- — — — —-- xzgpee€C-Ceezc-Cezy rc el í í í í í í í í Gss 22 1 
2 REFERENCES (eee 1 
3 TERMINOLOGY —_ à, Kaea 1 
4 FUNCTIONAL TYPE CLASSIFICATION — —Ə- ee g. s.s... 9 
5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS Laanen 11 
6 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS ieee eee 24 
7 METROLOGICAL REQUIREMENTS ieee teeters 31 
8 REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRONIC INSTRUMENTS hee eee 38 
9 METROLOGICAL CONTROLS ÇK OaE 40 
10 TEST METHODS cee 44 
ANNEX A 54 
A-1 EXAMINATION FOR TYPE APPROVAL aE 54 
A-2 EXAMINATION FOR INITIAL VERIFICATION aeaea 54 
A-3 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS enters 54 
A-4 TEST PROGRAM cee 55 
A-5 PERFORMANCE TEST DURING TYPE EVALUTION ee a... a... 56 
A-6 ADITIONAL FUNCTIONALITY aaaeeeaa 57 
A-7 INFLUENCE FACTOR AND DISTURBANCE TESTS — “Ü eee .............. 58 
A-8 SPAN STABILITY TEST et eee cece 74 
A-9 PROCEDURE FOR IN-MOTION TESTS ee ttt 75 
A-10 PROCEDURE FOR IMPACT FORCE TESTS — “Ü > à b >Pə-9-—ə—`rcCcCsr ScLqN g D s ee... a... 85 
A-11 PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT OF ACCURACY CLASS — —- €r= s s,s?=cqcrcsezeZcCe.ae.Ü. ......... 85 
ANNEX Bo 90 
B-1 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION Kaanaan 90 
B-2 WEIGH-IN-MOTION SITE (WIM SITE) ee =... 90 


B-3 WIM SITE CHARACTERISTICS — AEE 90 


IS 17008 : 2019 


ANNEX C 


ANNEX F 


Fic. 1 
Fic. 2 


Table 1 
Table 2 
Table 3 
Table 4 
Table 5 
Table 6 
Table 7 
Table 8 


CHOICE OF SITE FOR PAVEMENT WIM (NOT FOR BBRIDGE WIM) 
PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS OF BRIDGE WIM SYSTEM 
PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS OF TYPE 1 WIM SYSTEM 


OPERRATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


GENERAL 


REFERENCE VALUES 


CALIBRATION CHECKS 


GENERAL 


METHODOLOGY BASEDON IRC:37-2012 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


LIST OF REFERRED OTHER NATIONAL /INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


List of Figures 


TOLERANCE OF ACCURCY CLASSES 


MINIMUM SPECIFIED LEVELS OF CONFIDENCE [10 WITH RESPECT TO 
THE TEST CONDITIONS 


List of Tables 


Application Types 
Vehicle Data Types 


Relationship Between Application Types and Vehicle Data Types 


Data Processing 
Vehicle Types 
Violation Code 


Invalidation Code 


ii 


Pages 


POERA 101 


RETEN 102 


ee 27 


parra 30 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Pages 

Table eset 26 
Table 10 26 
Table Pb 27 
Table Do 27 
Table 13 Minimum Levels of Confidence 20, of the Centered Tolerance Interval 

(In Percent) — Case of Test Under “Environmental Repeatability” (E1) ........... 29 
Table 14 Minimum Levels of Confidence 10, of the Centred Confidence Intervals 

(In Percent) — Case of Test Under “Limited Environmental 

Reproducibility’ (E2) 0 eee 29 
Table 15 Minimum Levels of Confidence 20, of the Centred Confidence Intervals 

(In percent) — Case of Test Under “Full Environmental 

Reproducibility’ (E3) 0 eee 30 
Table 160 31 
Table Vo serena 32 
Table VS centers’ 33 
Table 19 sve 33 
Table 20 0 g 'S-s-o-opnsCazLoLQT S,ÑQ RS  ”SAA Ë A NL, Š T L R. L eA Q. = 33 
Table 2]  — € eS SSsSs'ee.e.eL.lleeelelllelelelel.lelel espsegeeéélgl 1 wnsssss 34 
Tablëe22 — acne 34 
Table 23 Scale Interval for Vehicle Mass, D eee 35 
Table 24 Scale Interval for Axle/Wheel Loads, d eens 35 
Table 25 Minimum Capacity eee 35 
Table 26 Absolute Values of Relative Error for Weighing-in-Motion haere 36 
Table 27 Maximum Specified Error on Static Weighing eee 37 
Table 28 Minimum Required Level of Compliance, OO — ences 37 
Table29 eens nasty 47 
Table 300 48 
Table 3b 48 
Table32 0 0 cane 48 
Table33 0h aE 49 
Table 340 49 
Table 350 50 
Tabele 0:0 benny 50 
Tabë37 000 gene 51 
Table 38 OOO jOa 52 
Table 39 ees 52 
Table A-1] ——- - -fçgSsee-Cx?xecvcƏeeelelllloee e 8 nsnssssssss 59 
Table A-2 —— g?epn?-TseC-”--z-ze.eCC-cCGCLLGLCLxbDDYIKI n 60 
TableA-3  — - QISs'erre.e.. ezqlëlllëëeëeëeeëeéëglgegreéëéléëeéëgeégegeéëégeé£ge.. í 1 wnsssss 61 
Table A$ 62 
Table A-5 — png CC I c cI€ CLlll lI CICIlLLlLL.LL  ə.D.tc D ) OfeOUOI C e 1 wnssss 63 


Table A600 63 


ili 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Pages 
Table A-F — or )Ssg--.e c I ICICICCCCILLelleleeleeleeeleelelelelelelelllllllllelllellll i U 8 wssss 64 
Table A-8 —  — -re.e.e... ReelL.r-rD LLRDn u reDRa eeé£ëeéééélële 1 wnsssss 65 
TableA-9 — —— -nraqssexv-ec-sesccwc£elerCrrCIc LCI€IIGIICCCICICICG II I 1 wnsssss 65 
Table A-10 / —— Cr eeëéëélllllllëlelélJeer r í 1 wass 66 
TableA-I 3 - SSSS S sCsCz.oSeaeraReglélg3vhuve. leg í 1 wnsssss 67 
TableA-2 — Cgsgeeevc.ec I  LLCCleClIelLllelell.LllLgt.esLlLlL L lU CL a 1 wass 68 
Table A-13  — LS, NR RR AÑ NN NRQ S P A N N . L , U wn 68 
TableA-4 n 69 
Table A-15  — pəZTe  RRee.eeell.l.l.llëllëlllëlëëeëeëeëëëëëëëeëeë gg. 11 wanna 70 
Table A-16 e 71 
Table A-17 — -rewoeeezlereele.lleaellpy eléreg.egegeééeëeeegeégeeégeeée. 1 sss 71 
Table A-118 — — -—- eveoeDDe l.e.Releleleeeleelll LU a 1 1 wnasssss 72 
Table A-19 — — -xreCeëeëeëeëlëelzll.l.l.ëël.ëëléll.- 8 ge 1 wnsssssss 73 
TableA-0 —- n-q s SsSsePape.-a-en-C-cC-cCtcCcL.Crw-ctellleévzvl.l L cgmaəss s e f í 1 wnsssss 85 
TableA-1 —— C sssse.erRarRr..e Ic  ICCCCGCIC CCC  CGG lI L LL le l a a 1 wnssss 88 
Table Bebe 90 
Table Ben 91 
Table Ce, 93 
Table C720 93 


0 INTRODUCTION 


0.1 This Standard applies to WIM systems: 


a) Which uses WIM instrument of either fixed type 
or portable type, installed in controlled weighing 
area (see 3.2.1), either on a road pavement or on 
a road bridge, either at a place where the vehicle 
speed is controlled or on a stretch of the main 
highway where the vehicle speed is not controlled; 


b) Which are used for determining and indicating 
load related data items like vehicle mass', single- 
axle loads’, the axle-group loads’, axle load of 
axles-of-a-group*, the wheel loads*, when the 
vehicles are weighed in motion® and additionally, 
other vehicle characteristics like centre-to-centre 
distance between axles, vehicle class, wheelbase, 
vehicle speed, acceleration, etc.; and 


c) Which are to be used for enforcement purposes 
either under the supervision of personnel or in 
fully automatic mode. 


0.2 This Standard applies to WIM systems which are 
used in the following domain: 


0.2.1 Statistics 


Economical and technical studies of freight transport, 
general traffic evaluation on roads and bridges, 
collecting statistical traffic data, etc. 


0.2.2 Infrastructure 

Detailed analysis of traffic, design and maintenance of 
roads and bridges, count and classification of vehicles. 
0.2.3 Pre-selection/Screening 


Selection of vehicles from the traffic stream on the main 
highway or a diversion lane, for enforcement of legally 
specified limits on vehicle mass, and if applicable, 
on axle loads, vehicle speed, and/or in special cases 
acceleration. 


0.2.4 Legal 


Enforcement, including direct enforcement, of legally 
specified limits on vehicle mass, and if applicable on 


IS 17008 : 2019 


axle loads, wheel loads, vehicle speed and/or in special 
cases acceleration; consistent with legal provision. 


a) Total mass of the vehicle combination including 
all connected components (see 3.1.5). 


b) Fraction of the vehicle mass that is supported 
via the axle on the load receptor at the time of 
weighing (see 3.3.1.8). 


c) In determining the single-axle load, and if 
required the axle-group load, and if required the 
axle load of axle-of-a-group, conditions in 7.6 
and, if appropriate the requirements of national 
regulation should be taken into account. For the 
purposes of this specification, if no criteria for 
defining various axle-groups have been specified, 
axle load of axle of a group shall be considered as 
single-axle loads. 


d 


wa 


Axle load which is part of an axle-group load; 
sum of all wheel loads in an axle which is part of 
an axle-group. In case of conventional steel leaf 
spring suspension, the reliability of measurements 
should be considered before putting determination 
of axle load of axle-of-a-group as a system 
requirement. In this specification, accuracy criteria 
for wheel loads are reasonable expected values but 
not mandatory unless specifically mentioned to be 
so (see 6.4.4 and 9.1.3.2.2.2. 11D. 


Sum of the tyre loads on all tyres included 
in the wheel assembly on one end of an axle 
(see 3.3.1.18). A wheel assembly can have single or 
dual tyres. In this Specification, accuracy criteria 
for wheel loads are reasonable expected values but 
not mandatory unless specifically mentioned to be 
so ( see 6.4.5 and 9.1.3.2.2.2.IV) 


f) “Weighed-in-motion” means that the mass of 
the vehicle was determined while the vehicle 
was crossing over the load receptor of the WIM 
system. 


wm 


e 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


WEIGH-IN-MOTION SYSTEM 
FOR ROAD VEHICLES — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard covers all aspects of Weigh-in- 
Motion (WIM) system which includes functional type 
classification, technical requirements, metrological 
requirements, other performance requirements, test 
methods and tests procedures for type (model) approval, 
on site acceptance test, verification and accuracy 
assessment incorporating both statistical principles and 
metrological principles, and including simulation tests 
in laboratory, wherever possible. 


1.2 This Indian Standard is applicable to low speed 
vehicles of limited speed of < 10 or 15 km/h and high 
speed vehicles of speed < 130 Km/h. 


1.3 This specification does not apply to WIM systems 
that are installed on-board vehicles to measure axle 
load. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex F contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreement based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex F. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definition(s) shall apply. 


3.1 General Definitions 
3.1.1 Weighing Instrument 


3.1.1.1 Measuring instrument used to determine the 

mass of a body by using the action of gravity on the 

body. 
NOTE — In this specification “mass” (or “weight value”) 
is preferably used in the sense of “conventional mass” or 
“conventional value” of the result of weighing in air whereas, 
“weight” is preferably used for an embodiment (= material 
measure) of mass that is regulated in regard to its physical and 
metrological characteristics. 


3.1.1.2 The instrument may also be used to determine 
other mass-related quantities, magnitudes, parameters 
or characteristics ( for example, axle load, axle-group 
load, wheel load of a vehicle). 


3.1.1.3 The instrument may be scales which are able to 
weigh standard masses statically, or sensors which are 
able to measure loads not statically but dynamically. 


3.1.1.4 According to its method of operation, a 
weighing instrument is classified as an automatic or 
non-automatic instrument. 


3.1.2 Automatic Weighing Instrument — Instrument 
that weighs without the intervention of an operator and 
that follows a predetermined program of automatic 
processes characteristic of the instrument. 


3.1.3 Automatic Instrument for Weighing Road Vehicles 
in Motion (WIM Instrument) — Automatic weighing 
instrument, having a load receptor (see 3.2.3) and 
aprons, that determines, according to requirements any 
one or more of the following: 


a) Vehicle mass (see 3.3.1.8); 

b) Single-axle loads (see 3.3.1.12); 

c) Axle-group loads (see 3.3.1.14); 

d) Axle loads of axles of a group (see 3.3.1.15); and 


e) Wheel loads (see 3.3.1.18) of a road vehicle while 
the vehicle is crossing over the load receptor of the 
weighing instrument. 


3.1.4 Control Instrument — Weighing instrument used 
to determine the static reference vehicle mass of the 
reference vehicles and the static single-axle loads of a 
two-axle rigid reference vehicle. 


The control instruments used as a reference instrument 
during testing may be: 


a) Separate from the instrument being tested; or 


b) Integral, when a static weighing mode is provided 
by the instrument being tested. 


3.1.5 Conventional True Value (of a Quantity) — 
Value attributed to a particular quantity (for example, 
reference vehicle mass or single-axle load of a two-axle 
rigid reference vehicle) and accepted, by convention, as 
having an uncertainty appropriate for a given purpose. 


3.1.6 Metrological Authority — Legal entity (that is, 
the verification, and/or issuing authority) designated 
or formally notified by the Central Government or the 
State Governments under the Legal Metrology Act, 
2005 or Rules framed under the Act, for ascertaining 
that the weigh-in-motion system satisfies all or some 
specific requirements of this specification. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


3.1.7 User — Person (that is, individual or group of 
individual or organization) that is responsible for use 
of weigh-in-motion system in accordance with this 
specification. 


3.1.8 Vendor — Person (that is, individual or group of 
individual or organization) that is awarded a contract 
for supplying Weigh-in-Motion system or awarded 
a contract for operating Weigh-in-Motion system, or 
both, in accordance with this specification. 


3.1.9 Manufacturer — Person (that is, individual or 
group of individual or organization) that is responsible 
for manufacturing Weigh-in-Motion system in 
accordance with this specification. 


NOTE — A manufacturer can also be a vendor if it supplies the 
WIM system directly to the user. 


3.1.10 Applicant — Person, being a manufacturer 
or a vendor, who seeks approval of model from the 
Metrological Authority in accordance with Legal 
Metrology Act, 2005. 


3.2 Construction 


NOTE — In this Specification the term “device” is applied to 
any part which uses any means to perform one or more specific 
functions. 


3.2.1 Controlled Weighing Area — Place specified for 
the operation of instruments for weighing road vehicles 
in motion, which are installed in conformity with the 
requirements given in Annex B. 


3.2.1.1 Choke point — Controlled weighing area on 
the main highway with barriers to slow down and, if 
required, stop vehicles ( for example, toll plaza, check 


post). 


3.2.2 Weigh Zone — Zone of the road comprising the 
load receptor with aprons in advance of and beyond each 
end of the load receptor in the direction of travel of the 
vehicle being weighed. For multiple load receptors the 
weigh zone will comprise the individual weigh zones 
associated with the load receptors at the two extreme 
ends and the entire zone of the road in between. 


3.2.2.1 Apron — Part of the weigh zone that is not 
the load receptor but which is located on either end 
of the load receptor and that provides a straight, 
approximately level, smooth track of such length which 
is deemed adequate to fully support simultaneously all 
wheels of the longest vehicle type that will be weighed 
by the WIM instrument in the direction of travel of the 
vehicle being weighed. 

NOTE — International Organization of Legal Metrology 

(OIML) R-134 suggests a minimum apron length of 16 m on 

either side but leaves it to the individual countries to decide 


depending upon the length of the longest vehicle type that will 
be weighed by the WIM instrument. 


3.2.3 Load Receptor — Part of the weigh zone which 
receives the wheel loads of a vehicle and which realizes 


a change in the balance of the instrument when a wheel 
load is placed upon it. 


3.2.4 Electronic Instrument — Instrument equipped 
with electronic devices. 


3.2.4.1 Electronic device — Device comprised of 
electronic sub-assemblies and that performs a specific 
function. An electronic device is usually manufactured 
as a separate unit and may be capable of being 
independently tested. 


3.2.4.2 Electronic sub-assembly — Part of an electronic 
device comprised of electronic components and that 
has a recognizable function of its own. 


3.2.4.3 Electronic component — Smallest physical 
entity that uses electron or hole conduction in 
semiconductors, gases, or in a vacuum. 


3.2.5 Module — Identifiable part of an instrument or a 
system that performs a specific function or functions, 
and that can be separately evaluated according to the 
metrological and technical performance requirements 
in the relevant standard. The modules of a weighing 
instrument are subject to specified partial error limits 
with reference to metrological accuracy. 

NOTE — Typical modules of a weighing instrument are, 


sensor, indicator, data processing device, etc. A weighing 
instrument can be the module of a weighing system. 


3.2.5.1 Indicating device — Part of the instrument that 
displays the value of a weighing result in units of mass 
and other related values (for example, speed). 


3.2.5.2 Printing device — Means to produce hard 
copies of the weighing results. 


3.2.5.3 Load cell — Force transducer which, after taking 
into account the effects of the acceleration of gravity 
and air buoyancy at the location of its use, measures 
mass by converting the measured quantity (mass) into 
another measured quantity (output). 


3.2.6 Software 


3.2.6.1 Legally relevant software — Program(s), 
data and type-specific parameters that belong to the 
measuring instrument or device, and that define or 
fulfill functions which are subject to legal control. 


Examples of legally relevant software are: 


a) Final results of the measurement including the 
decimal sign and the unit; and 


b) Identification of the weighing range and the load 
receptor (if several load receptors have been used). 


The following types of legally relevant software can be 
distinguished: 

a) Type-specific; and 

b) Device-specific. 


3.2.6.2 Legally relevant parameter — Parameter 
of a measuring instrument or a module subject to 
legal control. The following types of legally relevant 
parameters can be distinguished: 


a) Type-specific parameters, and 
b) Device-specific parameters. 


3.2.6.3 Type-specific parameter — Legally relevant 
parameter with a value that depends on the type of 
instrument only. They are fixed at type approval of the 
instrument. 


Examples of type-specific parameters are: 
a) Parameters used for weight value calculation; 
b) Stability analysis 
rounding; and 
c) Software identification. 


3.2.6.4 Device-specific parameter — Legally 
relevant parameter with a value that depends on the 
individual instrument. Such parameters comprise 
calibration parameters (for example, span adjustments 
or corrections) and configuration parameters (for 
example, maximum capacity, minimum capacity, units 
of measurement, etc.). They are adjustable or selectable 
only in a special operational mode of the instrument. 
They may be classified as those that should be secured 
(unalterable) and those that may be accessed (settable 
parameters) by an authorized person. 


or price calculation and 


3.2.6.5 Software identification — Sequence of readable 
characters of software that is inextricably linked to the 
software ( for example, version number, checksum). 


3.2.6.6 Data storage — Storage used for keeping data 
ready after completion of the measurement for later 
legally relevant purposes. 


3.2.7 Communication Interface — Electronic, optical, 
radio or other hardware or software interface that 
enables information to be automatically passed between 
instruments and modules. 


3.2.8 User Interface — Interface that enables 
information to be passed between a human user and the 
instrument or its hardware or software components, for 
example, switch, keyboard, mouse, display, monitor, 
printer, touch screen, etc. 


3.2.9 Protective Interface — Interface that prevents the 
introduction of any data into the data processing device 
of the instrument which may: 


a) Display data that are not clearly defined and that 
could be taken as being a measurement result; 

b) Falsify displayed, processed or stored 
measurement results or primary indications; and 

c) Adjust the instrument or change any adjustment 
factor. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


3.2.10 Ancillary Devices 


3.2.10.1 Zero-setting device — Device for setting the 
indication to zero when there is no load on the load 
receptor. 


3.2.10.2 Non-automatic zero-setting device — Zero- 
setting device that must be operated manually. 


3.2.10.3 Semi-automatic zero-setting device — Zero- 
setting device that operates automatically following a 
manual command. 


3.2.10.4 Automatic zero-setting device — Zero-setting 
device that operates automatically and without the 
intervention of an operator. 


3.2.10.5 Zero-tracking device — Device for maintaining 
the zero indication within certain limits automatically. 


3.2.11 Measuring System — Set of measuring 
instruments and other devices or substances assembled 
and adapted to the measurement of quantities of 
specified kinds within specified intervals of values. 


3.2.12 Sensor — Element of a measuring system 
that is directly affected by the phenomenon, body, or 
substance carrying the quantity to be measured. 


3.2.12.1 Strip sensor — Sensor installed perpendicular 
to the direction of travel of a road, with a longitudinal 
extent (in the traffic direction) of a few centimeters, but 
smaller than a tyre imprint length. 


3.2.13 Detector — Device or substance that indicates 
the presence of a phenomenon, body, or substance 
when a threshold value of an associated quantity is 
exceeded. 


3.3 Metrological Characteristics 
3.3.1 Weighing 


3.3.1.1 Full-draught weighing — Determining the 
mass of a vehicle that is entirely supported on the load 
receptor. 


3.3.1.2 Partial weighing — Weighing a vehicle in two 
or more parts successively on the same load receptor. 


3.3.1.3 Weigh-in-motion (WIM) — Process of 
determining any one or more of the following 
parameters: 
a) The vehicle mass, 
b) The axle load, 
c) The axle-group load, and 
d) The wheel load of a moving vehicle (that is, a 
vehicle crossing over the load receptor of the 
weighing instrument) by measurement and 
analysis of the dynamic vehicle tyre forces. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


3.3.1.4 Weigh-in-motion system (station), WIM system — 
Set of sensor(s) mounted on road or bridge structure and 
instruments with software which measure the presence of 
a moving vehicle and related dynamic vehicle tyre forces 
at specified locations with respect to time; determines 
any or more of the following as per requirement: 


a) Vehicle mass, 

b) Axle load, 

c) Axle group load, and 
d) Wheel load. 


Other parameters concerning the vehicle as may be 
specified such as, speed, center-to-center distance 
between axles, wheelbase, acceleration, equivalent 
standard axle load (ESAL), vehicle class, vehicle 
count, vehicle ID etc. 


3.3.1.4.1 Pavement WIM (P-WIM) — Weigh-in-motion 
system where the WIM instrument(s) (see 3.1.3) is 
installed in a road pavement. 


3.3.1.4.2 Bridge WIM (B-WIM) — Weigh-in-motion 

system where the WIM instrument(s) (see 3.1.3) is 

installed in a bridge structure. 
NOTE — Bridge WIM system uses an instrumented bridge 
as an axle or vehicle scale. Detection of vehicles, axles and 
their velocity can be done with any type of axle detectors; the 
strains measured in some of the bridge elements are used to 
determine, through software, the vehicle mass and axle loads 
of a vehicle crossing the bridge. 


3.3.1.5 Low speed WIM (LS-WIM) — Weighing a 
(generally slowly) moving vehicle, on a specific area 
usually outside the traffic flow, on a horizontal, straight, 
and even pavement surface under controlled conditions, 
such as constant and limited speed ( for example, < 10 
or 15 km/h) in order to minimize dynamic effects. 


3.3.1.6 High speed WIM (HS-WIM) — Weighing a 
vehicle in motion in free flow traffic conditions, at 
highway speed (for example < 130 km/h). 


3.3.1.7 Static weighing — Weighing vehicles or test 
loads that are stationary. 


3.3.1.8 Vehicle mass — Total mass of the vehicle 
combination including all connected components. 


3.3.1.9 Axle — Axis comprising two or more wheel 
assemblies with centers of rotation lying approximately 
ona common axis extending the full width of the vehicle 
and oriented transversely to the nominal direction of 
travel of the vehicle. 


3.3.1.9.1 Single axle — Axle that is spaced more than 
2.5 m (or beyond such other range of distances as may be 
specified under the Central Motor Vehicle Act or, Rules) 
from its nearest neighboring axle of the same vehicle. 


3.3.1.9.2 Axle of a group — One axle of a vehicle that 
belongs to an axle-group (see 3.3.1.10) 


3.3.1.10 Axle-group — Two or more axles included in a 
defined group and their respective interspaces (or axle 
spacing). 
NOTE — The criteria for defining various axle-groups may be 
set by national regulations. 


3.3.1.10.1 Tandem axle — Axle group formed by 
a set of two consecutive axles spaced not more than 
2.5 m (or within such other range of distances as may 
be specified under the Central Motor Vehicle Act or 
Rules) 


3.3.1.10.2 Tridem axle (Triple axle) — Axle group 
formed by a set of three consecutive axles with the 
farthest axles spaced by not more than 3.5 m (or within 
such other range of distances as may be specified under 
the Central Motor Vehicle Act or Rules). 


3.3.1.11 Axle load — Fraction of the vehicle mass that 
is supported via the axle on the load receptor at the time 
of weighing. 


3.3.1.12 Single-axle load — Axle load which is not 
part of an axle-group load. For the purposes of this 
specification, if no criteria for defining various axle- 
groups have been specified (see 3.3.1.11), all recorded 
axle loads (see 10.12) shall be considered as single-axle 
loads. 


3.3.1.13 Static reference axle load — Conventional 
true value of single-axle load determined statically 
(see 3.6.1) for a two-axle rigid vehicle. Reference value 
(see 3.4.4.1.2) of the axle load determined statically for 
any other vehicle. 


3.3.1.14 Axle-group load — Sum of all axle loads in a 
defined group of axles; a fraction of the vehicle mass 
imposed on the axle group at the time of weighing. 


3.3.1.14.1 Zandem-axle load — Sum of all axle loads 
of a tandem axle (see 3.3.1.10.1); a fraction of the 
vehicle mass imposed on the tandem-axle at the time 
of weighing. 


3.3.1.14.2 Tridem-axle load (Triple-axle load) — Sum 
of all axle loads of a tridem axle (see 3.3.1.10.2) or a 
triple-axle; a fraction of the vehicle mass imposed on 
the tandem-axle (triple-axle) at the time of weighing. 


3.3.1.15 Axle load of axle of a group — Axle load 
which is part of an axle-group load; sum of all wheel 
loads in an axle which is part of an axle-group. For the 
purposes of this specification, if no criteria for defining 
various axle-groups have been specified (see 3.3.1.10), 
axle load of axle of a group shall be considered as 
single-axle loads. If no criteria for defining various 
axle-groups have been specified, all recorded axle loads 
(see 10.12) shall be considered as single-axle loads. 


3.3.1.16 Tyre load — Fraction of the vehicle mass that 
is imposed upon the load receptor via the tyre at the 
time of weighing. 


3.3.1.17 Dynamic vehicle tyre force — Component of 
the time-varying force applied perpendicularly to the 
road surface by the tyre(s) on a wheel of a moving 
vehicle. 

NOTE — In addition to the action of gravity, this force can 


also include dynamic effects of other influences on the moving 
vehicle. 


3.3.1.18 Wheel load — Sum of the tyre loads on all 
tyres included in the wheel assembly on one end of an 
axle; a wheel assembly may have a single tyre or dual 
tyres. 


3.3.1.19 Dynamic (impact) wheel/axle/group of axles/ 
vehicle force — Force applied to the load receptor by 
the moving tyre(s) of a wheel/axle/group of axles/ 
vehicle. 
NOTE — For the purposes of this standard, the WIM system 
shall be adjusted or calibrated to indicate the magnitude of 
the vertically downward, measured dynamic forces in units 
of mass. The indicated mass shall be converted to units of 
force by multiplying it by the local value of acceleration due 


to gravity (g). The conventional value of acceleration due to 
gravity is 9.80665 m/s2. 


3.3.2 Capacity 


3.3.2.1 Maximum capacity (Max) — Maximum 
weighing-in-motion capacity of the load receptor 
without totalizing. 


3.3.2.2 Minimum capacity (Min) — Value of the load 
below which the weighing-in-motion results before 
totalizing may be subject to an excessive relative error. 


3.3.2.3 Weighing range — Range between the minimum 
and maximum capacities. 


3.3.3 Scale Interval — Value expressed in units of mass 
for weighing-in-motion that is the difference between 
two consecutive indicated or printed values. 


3.3.3.1 Scale interval, d — Scale interval for axle load. 
Value expressed in units of mass for weighing-in- 
motion that is the difference between two consecutive 
indicated or printed values of axle load. 


3.3.3.2 Scale interval, D — Scale interval for vehicle 
mass. Value expressed in units of mass for weighing-in- 
motion that is the difference between two consecutive 
indicated or printed values of vehicle mass. 


3.3.3.3 Scale interval for stationary load — Value, 
expressed in units of mass, for stationary weighing 
vehicles or test weights that is the difference between 
two consecutive indicated or printed values. 


3.3.4 Speed 


3.3.4.1 Operating speed, v — Average velocity of 
the vehicle being weighed as it moves over the load 
receptor. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


3.3.4.2 Maximum operating speed, vMax — Greatest 
velocity of a vehicle that the instrument is designed to 
weigh-in-motion and above which the weighing results 
may be subject to an excessive relative error. 


3.3.4.3 Minimum operating speed, vMin — Lowest 
velocity of a vehicle that the instrument is designed to 
weigh-in-motion and below which the weighing results 
may be subject to an excessive relative error. 


3.3.4.4 Operating speed range — Set of values 
specified by the manufacturer between the minimum 
and maximum operating speeds at which a vehicle may 
be weighed-in-motion. 


3.3.4.5 Maximum transit speed — Maximum speed 
that a vehicle can travel on the weigh zone without 
producing a shift in the performance characteristics of 
a weighing instrument beyond those specified. 


3.3.5 Warm-Up Time — Time between the moment at 
which power is applied to an instrument and the moment 
at which the instrument is capable of complying with 
the requirements. 


3.3.6 Durability — Ability of an instrument to maintain 
its performance characteristics over a period of use. 


3.3.7 Final Weight Value — Weighing value that is 
achieved when an automatic operation is ended and the 
instrument is completely at rest. 


NOTE — This definition is only applicable to static weighing 
and not to weighing-in-motion. 


3.3.8 Stable Equilibrium — Condition of the instrument 
such that the recorded weighing values show no more 
than two adjacent values of each weighing cycle; with 
one of them being the final weight value. This condition 
is only valid for each separate weighing cycle and not 
for a group of cycles. 


3.3.9 Discrimination 


Ability of an instrument to react to small variations 
of load. The discrimination threshold, for a given 
load, is the value of the smallest additional load 
that, when gently deposited on or removed from the 
load receptor, causes a perceptible change in the 
indication. 


3.4 Indications and Errors 


3.4.1 Indications of an Instrument — Value of a quantity 
provided by a measuring instrument. 


NOTE — “Indication”, “indicate” or “indicating” include both 
displaying and/or printing. 


3.4.1.1 Primary indications — Indications, signals 
and symbols that are subject to requirements of this 
specification. 


3.4.1.2 Secondary indications — Indications, signals 
and symbols that are not primary indications. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


3.4.2 Methods of Indication 


3.4.2.1 Digital indication — Indication in which the 
scale marks are a sequence of aligned figures that do not 
permit interpolation to a fraction of the scale interval. 


3.4.2.2 Analog indication — Indication enabling the 
evaluation of the equilibrium position to a fraction of 
the scale interval. 


3.4.3 Reading 


3.4.3.1 Reading by simple juxtaposition — Reading 
of the weighing result by simple juxtaposition of 
consecutive figures giving the weighing result, without 
the need for calculation. 


3.4.3.2 Overall inaccuracy of reading — 
Overall inaccuracy of reading of an instrument 
with analog indication is equal to the standard 
deviation of the same indication, the reading of which 
is carried out under normal conditions of use by several 
observers. 


3.4.4 Errors 


3.4.4.1 Errors (of indication) — Indication of an 
instrument about a quantity minus the reference value 
of that quantity. 


3.4.4.1.1 Test value — Indication of an instrument 
during tests (see 3.6) 


3.4.4.1.2 Reference value — The conventional true 
value of a quantity, or if it is not possible to have a 
conventional true value, then the prescribed value of a 
quantity that is used for determination or error. 


3.4.4.1.3 Error (evaluated during test) — Test value of 
a quantity minus the reference value of that quantity. 


NOTE — For a data item represented by the suffix j, if is the 
test value of the data item, and is the 


Reference value of the data item, then the error shall be 
given by: = — ) 


3.4.4.1.4 Relative error — The quotient of error (see 
3.4.4.1.3) and the reference value of a quantity (see 
3.4.4.1.2). 


NOTE — For a data item represented by the suffix j, if is the 


test value of the data item, and is the reference value of the data 
I -R 
i 


item, then the relative error x shall be given by: x, = - 


J 
3.4.4.2 Intrinsic error — Error of an instrument 
determined under reference conditions. 


3.4.4.3 Initial intrinsic error — Intrinsic error of an 
instrument as determined prior to performance tests 
and durability evaluations. 


3.4.4.4 Maximum permissible error (MPE) — Extreme 
values of an error permitted by specifications or 


regulations between the indication of a weighing 
instrument and the corresponding known reference 
value. 


3.4.4.5 Maximum specified error (MSE) — Maximum 
permissible error for a specified proportion of 
measurements. 


NOTE — Equals maximum permissible error if the proportion 
is 100 percent. 


3.4.4.6 Fault — Difference between the error of 
indication and the intrinsic error of a weighing 
instrument. Principally, a fault is the result of an 
undesired change of data contained in or flowing 
through an electronic instrument. In this specification 
a “fault” is a numerical value. 


3.4.4.7 Significant fault — Fault greater than 1 D if 
vehicle mass is required to be determined; otherwise 
fault greater than 1 d. 


NOTE — Vehicle mass is not to be determined by WIM 
systems of Type f or Type f* (Table 2, clause 4.1.1). 


The following are not considered to be significant 
faults: 


a) Faults that result from simultaneous and mutually 
independent causes in the instrument or in its 
checking facility; 

b) Faults that make it impossible to perform any 
measurement; 


c) Transitory faults that are momentary variations 
in the indications which cannot be interpreted, 
memorized or transmitted as a measurement 
result; and 


d) Faults that are so serious that they will 
inevitably be noticed by those interested in the 
measurement. 


3.4.4.8 Span stability — Capability of an instrument 
to maintain the difference between the indication at 
maximum capacity and the indication at zero within 
specified limits over a period of use. 


3.4.4.9 Rounding error — Difference between a digital 
measurement result (indicated or printed) and the value 
of that measurement result with an analog indication. 


3.4.4.10 Repeatability error — Difference between the 
highest and lowest results of successive measurements 
of the same load carried out under the same conditions 
of measurement. 
NOTE — Repeatability conditions include: 
a) The same measurement procedure; 
b) The same operator; 


c) The same measuring instrument, used under the same 
conditions; 


d) The same location; and 


e) Repetition over a short period of time. 


3.4.4.11 Corrected result (mean axle/axle-group/axle- 
of-group/wheel load) — Result of a measurement after 
algebraic correction for systematic error. 


3.4.4.12 Bias (of a measuring system) — Systematic 
error of indication of a measuring system. 


3.5 Influences and Reference Conditions 


3.5.1 Influence Quantity — Quantity that is not the 
measured but that affects the result of the measurement. 


3.5.1.1 Influence factor — Influence quantity having a 
value within the specified rated operating conditions of 
the instrument. 


3.5.1.2 Disturbance — Influence quantity having 
a value that falls within the limits specified in this 
International Standard but that falls outside the rated 
operating conditions of the instrument. 


3.5.2 Rated Operating Conditions — Conditions of use 
which give the ranges of the influence quantities for 
which the metrological characteristics are intended to 
lie within the specified maximum permissible errors. 


3.5.3 Reference Conditions — Conditions of use 
prescribed for testing the performance of a measuring 
instrument or for inter comparison of results of 
measurements. 

NOTE — The reference conditions generally include reference 


values or reference ranges for influence quantities affecting the 
measuring instrument. 


3.6 Tests 


3.6.1 Static Test — Test with standard weights or 
load that remains stationary on the load receptor to 
determine an error. 


3.6.2 In-Motion Test — Test with reference vehicles 
that are in motion on the load receptor to determine an 
error. 


3.6.3 Simulation Test — Test carried out on a complete 
instrument or part of an instrument in which any part of 
the weighing operation is simulated. 


3.6.4 Performance Test — Test to verify that the 
equipment under test (EUT) is capable of accomplishing 
its specified functions. 


3.7 Vehicles 


3.7.1 Vehicle — Loaded or unloaded road vehicle that 
is recognized by the instrument as a vehicle to be 
weighed. 


3.7.2 Rigid Vehicle — Road vehicle with a single 
chassis that includes neither coupling nor trailer, and 
that has two or more axles located along the length 


IS 17008 : 2019 


of the chassis that are oriented perpendicularly to the 
normal direction of travel of the vehicle. 


3.7.3 Reference Vehicle — Vehicles having a known 
conventional true value (see 3.1.5) of: 


a) mass, and single-axle load of a two-axle rigid 
vehicle; and 


b) mass of other vehicles used for in-motion tests 
(see 6.5), determined on a control instrument 
(see 3.1.4). 


3.7.4 Wheelbase — The distance between the front-most 
and the rear-most axles on a vehicle or combination 
that has the tyres on these axles in contact with the road 
surface at the time of weighing. 


3.7.5 Vehicle Identification Number — A set of 
alphanumeric characters that is uniquely associated 
with each vehicle and can be used to uniquely identify 
a vehicle. 


3.8 Statistics 


3.8.1 Confidence Interval — Interval which contains the 
true value of a quantity value represented by a random 
variable, with a given probability, z, or a minimum 
required probability 20. 


3.8.2 Level of Confidence, Confidence Level — 
Probability II, that an interval contains the true value 
of a quantity value represented by a random variable. 


3.8.3 Tolerance, Tolerance Interval Width — Width 
of an interval (6) in which an error must lie with a 
minimum required probability. [-6;+ó] is called the 
tolerance interval. 


3.8.4 Level of Compliance, Compliance Level — The 
percentile of measured value of a quantity with error not 
exceeding the maximum specified error (see 3.4.4.5) 


3.8.5 Outliers(s) — Value(s) in a series of measurement 
results of a given quantity value which has (ve) a 
much lower probability of occurrence than expected 
according to the sample size and distribution. 


NOTE — An outlier is suspected of being an erroneous 
measurement, and may be eliminated under certain conditions. 


3.8.6 Accuracy Class — Class of measuring instruments 
that meet stated metrological requirements that are 
intended to keep errors or uncertainties of measurement 
within specified limits under specified operating 
conditions. 


3.8.6.1 Metrological accuracy class — Accuracy class 
intended to keep errors of measurement within specified 
limits; and determined on the basis of limits on error to 
be complied by a specified proportion of measurements 
independent of the sample size. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


3.8.6.2 Statistical accuracy class — Accuracy class 
intended to keep uncertainties of measurement within 
specified limits; and determined on the basis of limits 
applied on the distribution of errors using statistical 
methods. 


3.9 Data 


3.9.1 Data Item — Item of significance which is having 
some data of relevance associated with it. The data can 
be in alphanumeric form or in image form. 


3.9.2 Vehicle Data Item — Data item that pertains to a 
vehicle (see 3.7.1). 


3.10 Abbreviations and Symbols 


For the purpose of this standard, the following letter 
symbols have the meaning indicated against each, other 
symbols used in this standard have been explained at 
appropriate places’. 


Symbols Meaning 

AC Alternating current 

Ar Reference value of axle load (single- 
axle, axle-group, axle-of-a-group) 

d Actual scale interval for axle load 
Actual scale interval for vehicle mass 

e, E Error = I— R or I— L or P — L (digital 
Indication) 

E0 Error at zero load 

en nth value of error 

EUT Equipment under test 

I Indication 

In nth indication 

L Load 

Max Maximum capacity of the weighing 
instrument 

Min Minimum capacity of the weighing 
instrument 

MPE Maximum permissible error 

MSE Maximum specified error 

P I + 1/2 d — AL = Indication prior to 
rounding (digital indication) 

pi Fraction of the MPE applicable to a 
module of the instrument which is 
examined separately 

R Reference value 

Rn nth reference value 

sf Significant fault 

U. Highest value of a voltage range 


marked on the instrument 


Symbols 


min 


nom 


min 


v 


min” max 


Meaning 
Lowest value of a voltage range 
marked on the instrument 


Nominal voltage value marked on the 
instrument 


Vehicle mass 
Weigh-in-motion 
Reference value of vehicle mass 


Conventional true value of reference 
vehicle mass 


Relative error = (J — R) / R percent or 
(P—L)/L percent 


nth value of relative error 


Accuracy class tolerance or tolerance 
interval width 


Statistical accuracy class tolerance 
interval width for vehicle mass 


Metrological accuracy class tolerance 
interval width for axle-group load 


Additional load to next changeover 
point 


Metrological accuracy class tolerance 
interval width for vehicle mass 


Metrological accuracy class tolerance 
interval width for single-axle load 


Metrological accuracy class tolerance 
interval width for wheel load 


Operating speed 


Operating speed near centre of 
operating speed range DC Direct 
current 


Maximum operating speed 
Minimum operating speed 

Operating speed range 

Level of confidence, confidence level 


Lower bound of level of confidence or 
confidence level 


Level of confidence or confidence level 
calculated from proportion 


Minimum required level of confidence, 
minimum required confidence level 


Level of compliance or compliance 
level 


Minimum required level ofcompliance, 
minimum required compliance level 


4 FUNCTIONAL TYPE CLASSIFICATION 


WIM systems shall be classified into two broad 
functional types: 


a) General types to meet functional needs which are 
mostly common, and 


b) Special types to meet special requirements not 
covered under the general type. 


4.1 General Type 


4.1.1 WIM systems shall be specified to meet 
the intended functional needs in accordance with 
application type classification given in Table 1 and 
vehicle data type classification given in Table 2 and 
taking into account the relationship between the 


IS 17008 : 2019 


application type classification and the vehicle data type 
classification shown in Table 3. 


4.1.2 The full type classification shall be expressed as 
a combination of the alphanumeric characters of the 
partial type classifications namely, the application type 
classification and the vehicle data type classification, 
applicable to the WIM system. 


NOTE — For example, a WIM system specified as “Type 1” in 
respect of criteria given in Table 1 and specified as “Type a*” in 
respect of criteria given in Table 2 and in conformity with the 
relationship given in Table 3, shall be type specified as “Type 
la*”. Similarly, a WIM system specified as “Type 4” in respect 
of criteria given in Table | and specified as “Type e” in respect of 
criteria given in Table 2 and in conformity with the relationship 
given in Table 3, shall be type specified as “Type 4e”. 


Table 1 Application Types 
( Clause 4.1.1, 4.2 and 4.4 ) 


Criteria Domain of Use Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 5 

Category --- Pavement WIM Bridge WIM 
Statistics (+) (+) + o 
Infrastructure (+) (+) + + $ 

Purpose' Pre-selection or (+) + + = + 
Screening 
Legal? + + = = + 

= Off main highway lane(s) On or off On main On main On highway 
Location or at choke points* on main highway highway highway bridge 
main highway lane(s) lane(s) lane(s) lane(s) 

Maximum --- 15 Km/hr 130 Km/hr 130 Km/hr 130 Km/hr 

operating speed* 

Minimum --- 3 Km/hr 15 Km/hr 15 Km/hr 25 Km/hr 

operating speed’ 
Statistical (6.5) V V 

Accuracy Class‘ 
Metrological (7.3) v 
Single Axle (63) 
Axle of a Group 9) 

Static Weighing Axle Group (5) 9) 

Pepe 

capability Vehicle mass (Full- (x) (~*~) (*) vi 
draught weighing) 
Test Loads V Z 

Legend: 

a) ‘— Means insufficient, ‘+’ means sufficient, ‘(+)’ means sufficient but not necessary, 


b) Direct enforcement will come under this category, if permitted under law. 


c) The user should give careful consideration to the availability of type (model) approved systems with requisite accuracy, before 


specifying requirements for this application. 
d) For definition of choke point see 3.2.1.1. 


e) The values shown are indicative. User shall specify values based on user requirements. Manufacturer shall specify values based on 


design and performance. 


f) ‘v’ means mandatory, (x) means not required; [V ] means mandatory for applications in legal domain. 


g) Only for bridges with instrumented span length greater than the wheelbase of vehicles. 


NOTE — Currently static weighing is possible with sensors using strain gauge, load cell scales, piezoquartz crystal bars, capacitive 
strips or fibre optic sensors, but not piezoceramic or piezopolymer cables/strips/bars. Even for the strip sensors (piezoquartz, 
capacitive strips and fibre optic), the static weighing is not easy to perform because of the small area of the sensor (and thus the 
difficulty to apply a mass of several tonnes), and the loading condition differs from that under traffic flow, because the integration of 


the signal may not be performed during a static weighing test. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table 2 Vehicle Data Types 
( Clause 4.1.1, 4.2 and 4.4 ) 


SI Criteria (Data Item) Type a, Type b Type c Type d, Type e, Type f, Type g 
No. Type a* Type d* Type e* Type f* 

i) Wheel Load! * * * * 

ii) Number of tyres in axles (two/four) Vx v V 

iii) Axle Load (Single Axle) v V v V v 

iv) Axle-Group Load V v V V V 

v) Axle Load (Axle of Group} V v3 v v 

vi) Vehicle mass V v V V V V 
vii) Vehicle Speed v V V V V V 
viii) | Number of Axles V V V v v V 
ix) Centre-to-Centre Distance Between v V v V v 

Axles’ 
x) Vehicle Class (via axle arrangement) V V V 
xi) Vehicle Class (via electronic tag) V v3 V vs 
xii) | Wheelbase (front-most to rear-most V 
axle) 

xiii) Acceleration V v6 
xiv) Vehicle Identification Number Vx V V V v5 
xv) Vehicle Image V v5 vs 
xvi) Type of vehicle (commercial / v 


non-commercial) 


Legend: 


a) ‘*’ is used to indicate vehicle data type in which wheel load is considered. That is, wheel load is considered in Type a*, Type d*, Type 
e* or Type f*, and not considered in Type a, Type d, Type e or Type g. 


b) The data for Axle Load (Axle of a Group) shall be required to meet the accuracy criteria only if a Statistical Accuracy Class is 
specified for the WIM system. 


c) In the absence of criteria for identifying axle group, the Axle Load (Axle of a Group) shall be measured as Axle Load (Single Axle) 
but without any requirement for meeting the accuracy criteria for Axle Load (Single Axle). 


d) This information is necessary for identifying axle-groups defined on the basis of axle spacing. This information will also be necessary 
for computing the axle-group load for ‘bridge-formula grouping’ as and when such a formula is devised in India. 


e) Applicable only for applications in the legal domain. 
f) Applicable for off main highway installation. 


g) Only for classification of vehicles without electronic tag. 


Table 3 Relationship Between Application Types and Vehicle Data Types 
( Clause 4.1.1 ) 


Application Type 
Vehicle Data Type Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 5 
Type a, Type a* V v 
Type b V v 
Type c V v V v 
Type d, Type d* V v V 
Type e, Type e* V v V 
Type f, Type f* v V 
Type g V 


10 


4.2 Special Type 


If the scheme of type classification given in Clause 4.1 
does not cover the requirements of the intended 
application of a WIM system, a special type 
classification shall be specified by: 


a) formulating a new relationship (other than the 
ones given in Table 3) between the application 
type classification given in Table | and the vehicle 
data type classification given in Table 2, 


b) formulating a new application type classification 
(say, Type 6), or 

c) formulating a new vehicle data type classification 
(say, Type h* or Type h depending on whether 
wheel load is considered or not). 
NOTE — “Type Ic” or “Type 2e*” are examples of possible 
special type classifications. Similarly, “Type 6a” or “Type 2g” 


or “Type 4d*” are other examples of possible special type 
classifications. 


4.3 User Input 


The user may specify the compliance requirements 
for criteria which are mentioned but not specified in 
Table 1 ( for example, the maximum and/or minimum 
operating speeds for Type 5-Bridge WIM, or the static 
weighing capability of axle group for Type 1 WIM 
system). 


4.4 Manufacturer/Vendor Input 


The manufacturer or the vendor must provide all 
information in respect of the cells in Table 1 and Table 
2, for WIM system of a particular type. An entry of “not 
applicable” should be made in a cell if in the opinion 
of the manufacturer or the vendor that particular 
information is not relevant to the particular type WIM 
system considered. 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Suitability for Use 


WIM systems shall suit the application, vehicles, site, 
environment, method of operation, for which they are 
intended. 


5.2 Security of Operation 
5.2.1 Fraudulent Use 


WIM systems shall have no characteristics likely 
to facilitate its fraudulent use, and there must be a 
minimum of ways in which they can be unintentionally 
improperly used. Components that are not intended 
to be disassembled or adjusted by the user must be 
protected from such activity. 


5.2.2 Accidental Breakdown and Maladjustment 


WIM systems shall be so constructed and operated 
that accidental breakdown or maladjustment of 
control elements likely to disturb its correct 


11 


IS 17008 : 2019 


functioning cannot take place without its effect 
being evident. 


5.2.3 Interlocks 


5.2.3.1 WIM systems shall have interlocks to prevent or 
indicate operation of instruments outside the specified 
working conditions. Interlocks are called for: 


a) Minimum operating voltage (see 7.8.2); and 
b) Range of operating speed (see 5.6.8). 


5.2.3.2 If applicable, WIM system shall additionally 
have interlocks for: 


a) Vehicle recognition (see 5.5.1) 

b) Wheel position on the load receptor (see 5.5.2) 
c) Direction of travel (see 5.5.2) 

d) Threshold acceleration (see 5.6.9) 


5.2.4 Use as a Non-Automatic (Static) Weighing 
Instrument 


5.2.4.1 WIM systems that can operate ina non-automatic 
(static) mode shall be equipped with the means for 
enabling non-automatic operation that prevents both 
automatic operation and in-motion weighing. 


5.2.4.2 WIM systems that can operate in a non- 
automatic (static) mode shall comply with the 
specification for non-automatic weighing instruments 
published in Seventh Schedule-Heading-A of the Legal 
Metrology (General) Rules. 


5.2.5 Automatic Operation 


WIM systems shall be designed to provide level of 
confidence that their accuracy and operation comply 
with the requirements of this specification for a period 
of at least one year of normal use. Any malfunction shall 
be automatically and clearly indicated ( for example, 
by a fault indication or by automatic switch off). The 
documentation supplied with the instrument (A.1.1) 
shall include a description of how this requirement is 
met. 


The level of confidence shall take account of 
uncertainties of measurement, significant faults and 
failure of the instrument. 


5.3 Zero-Setting Devices 


This clause is applicable to WIM system for which 
static weighing of test loads is possible in accordance 
with functional type classification (see 4). When a 
particular WIM system uses weighing instrument is not 
amenable to zero-setting, this should be noted in the 
type approval certificate. 
NOTE — Type | and Type 5 WIM systems when used in 
applications that fall in the legal domain are some of the WIM 
systems to which this clause is applicable. WIM system based 
on piezoelectric sensor is an example to which this clause is 
not applicable. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


5.3.1 Accuracy of the Zero-Setting Devices 


WIM instruments shall be provided with a zero-setting 
device, which may be automatic or semiautomatic. 


A zero-setting device shall be capable of setting zero 
to within + 0.25 times the Scale Interval and shall have 
a range of adjustment not exceeding 4 percent of the 
maximum capacity. The range of adjustment of the 
initial zero-setting device shall not exceed 20 percent 
of the maximum capacity. 


A semi-automatic zero-setting device shall not be 
operable during automatic operation. An automatic 
and a semi-automatic zero-setting device shall function 
only when the instrument is in stable equilibrium. 


5.3.2 Zero-Tracking Device 
A zero-tracking device shall operate only when: 
a) The indication is at zero; 
b) The instrument is in stable equilibrium; 
c) Corrections are not more than 0.5 times the scale 
interval per second for Type 1 WIM systems, and 


not more than three scale intervals in three seconds 
for other WIM systems; and 


d) The corrections are within a range of 4 percent of 
Max around the actual zero. 


5.4 Use as an Integral Control Instrument 


WIM systems to be used as control instruments, for the 
purposes of determining the static reference vehicle 
mass or the static reference vehicle axle loads, shall 
meet the requirements of 


a) Clause 5.4.1 to Clause 5.4.4 inclusive; and 


b) the requirement for control instrument specified 
in 10.2.1. 
NOTE — Only Type 1 and Type 5 WIM systems can be 


used as integral control instruments provided they fulfil the 
requirements. 


5.4.1 Zero Setting 


WIM instruments shall be capable of setting zero to 
within + 0.25 times the scale interval for a stationary 
load (see7.9) 


5.4.2 Eccentric Loading 


The indications for different positions of the load on 
static weighing shall comply with the limits of errors 
in for initial verification for the given load specified 
in 6.5.7 (Table 16) and/or 7.5.2.2 (Table 27), as may 
be applicable in accordance with the functional 
classification (4). 


5.4.3 Discrimination 


An additional load that is equal to 1.4 times the scale 
interval for a stationary load, when gently placed on 
or withdrawn from each load receptor in turn when 
at equilibrium at any load, shall change the initial 


12 


indication. 


5.4.4 Repeatability 


The results of several weighing of the same load shall 
satisfy the limits of error specified for the WIM system 
for that load and for the specified test conditions. 


5.5 Vehicle Control Device 


5.5.1 Vehicle Recognition Device 


WIM systems which are required to operate without 
the intervention of an operator shall be provided with a 
vehicle recognition device. The device shall detect the 
presence of a vehicle in the weigh zone (see 3.2.2) and 
shall detect when the whole vehicle has been weighed. 
The device must accomplish classification of vehicles 
in accordance with the appropriate classification 
scheme (see 5.7.15.13), if applicable under functional 
type classification (see 4.1). 


5.5.2 Vehicle Guide Device 


5.5.2.1 WIM systems that are intended to be used for 
pre-selection or screening of overloaded vehicles or 
for applications in the legal domain shall be able to 
determine if the wheels of a vehicle did not pass fully 
over the load receptor, and categorize the event as an 
incorrect run. For WIM systems installed off the main 
highway or at choke points ( for example, check post, 
toll plaza) on the main highway, a lateral guide system 
may be used to ensure that all the wheels of the vehicle 
pass fully over the load receptor. 


5.5.2.2 WIM systems shall be able to determine the 
wrong direction of travel and categorize the event as an 
incorrect run, if only one direction of travel is specified 
for weighing-in-motion. Alternatively, barriers or other 
traffic control methods may be used to prevent vehicles 
travelling in the wrong direction. 


5.5.3 Vehicle Notification and Guidance Device 


The requirements in this subclause are applicable to 
WIM systems that are intended to be used for pre- 
selection or screening of overloaded vehicles or for 
applications in the legal domain. 
NOTE — This subclause is applicable to all Type 1 WIM 
systems and to those Type 5 or Type 2 WIM systems which 


are used in applications for pre-selection or screening or in the 
legal domain. 


5.5.3.1 Vehicle notification device 


WIM systems shall be equipped with device to notify 
a vehicle about the detection or suspicion of overload. 
In case of direct enforcement, the device should 
additionally notify the vehicle about the issue of legal 
notice containing details of violations and punitive 
measures proposed/imposed in accordance with 
applicable legislation 


5.5.3.2 Vehicle guidance device 


WIM systems intended to be used for pre-selection 
or screening shall be equipped with automatic traffic- 
control devices for directing each suspect vehicle to 
a reporting lane/area for further processing and for 
guiding all non-suspect vehicles to continue without 
stopping or diverting to the reporting lane/area for 
overloaded vehicles. 

NOTE — This sub clause is applicable to all Type 1 WIM 

systems and to those Type 5 or Type 2 WIM systems which 


are used in applications for pre-selection or screening or in the 
legal domain. 


5.5.4 Vehicle Identification Device 


WIM systems intended to be used for pre-selection 
or screening or applications in the legal domain shall 
be provided with automatic vehicle identification 
(AVI) device(s) to automatically and unambiguously 
identify each vehicle by a unique vehicle identification 
number. The user shall specify the type of vehicle 
identification number to be used for this purpose and 
the device containing the vehicle identification number. 
This identification must meet security, integrity and 
authenticity requirements. 


NOTES: 


1 The device could be license plate containing the vehicle 
registration number as the vehicle identification number. 
Alternatively, a RFID tag or any other electronic tag that every 
target vehicle is supposed to carry can be the device and the 
associated unique number that can be read by a remote unit, 
may be used as the vehicle identification number. 


2 This subclause is applicable to all Type 1 WIM systems 
and to those Type 5 or Type 2 WIM systems which are used 
in applications for pre-selection or screening or in the legal 
domain. 


5.5.5 Optical Vehicle Recognition Device 


The requirements in this subclause are applicable to 
WIM systems that are intended to be used for pre- 
selection or screening of overloaded vehicles or for 
applications in the legal domain. 


WIM systems shall be equipped with device(s) in 
accordance with 5.5.5.1 and/or 5.5.5.2, based on user 
requirement, provided that Clause 5.5.5.1 shall be 
mandatory for pre-selection or screening applications 
and 5.5.5.1 shall be mandatory for applications in 
the legal domain; for the unambiguous recognition 
of those vehicles that during weighing were found 
to exceed the maximum permissible limits of vehicle 
mass or axle loads or wheel loads, as may be applicable 
in accordance with the functional type classification 
(see 4.1). This recognition must meet security, integrity 
and authenticity requirements. 

NOTE — This clause is applicable to all Type 1 WIM systems 

and to those Type 5 or Type 2 WIM systems which are used 


in applications for pre-selection or screening or in the legal 
domain. 


13 


IS 17008 : 2019 


5.5.5.1 Imaging unit 


WIM systems shall be provided with an IP camera that 
captures the weighing situation with safe identification 
of the weighed vehicle, which is displayed on connected 
remote display(s) along with the values expressed in 
appropriate units for those of the following measured 
data items as may be applicable in accordance with the 
functional type classification (4.1): 


a) Wheel load; 
b) Single axle loads, axle-group load, axle load of 
axle-of-a-group; 
c) Vehicle mass; and 
d) Overload indication in simple graphical format ( 
for example, line/bar diagram). 
With option for display of the following additional 
information derived from vehicle class: 
a) Maximum permissible wheel load; 


b) Maximum permissible single axle loads, axle- 
group load, axle load of axle-of-a-group; and 


c) Maximum permissible vehicle mass. 


5.5.5.2 Network video recorder 


WIM systems shall be provided with an image 
recording unit that shall capture the situation during 
weighing, ensuring identification of the vehicle being 
weighed. 

An image-recording unit working in automatic mode 
should enable the setting of limit mass for image 
recording for each vehicle class. 

The situation on the load receptor shall be recorded 
by a digital camera, which outputs individual digital 
images or video sequences stored in digital memory. 
The user shall specify whether individual digital image 
or video sequence is required to be recorded. 
Following measured data items as may be applicable 
in accordance with the functional type classification 
(4.1) and the metrological verification class (see 7.2), 
shall be displayed on individual images or in video 
sequences in the data display field: 


a) Wheel load; 


b) Single axle loads, axle-group load, axle load of 
axle-of-a-group; 

c) Vehicle mass; and 

d) Vehicle speed. 


Additionally also the following information: 
a) Maximum permissible wheel load; 
b) Maximum permissible single axle loads; 
c) Maximum permissible axle-group load; 


d) Maximum permissible axle load of axle-of-a- 
group; 


IS 17008 : 2019 


e) Maximum permissible vehicle mass; 
f) Date and time stamp; 


g) Type of WIM 
classification); 


system (functional 


type 


h) Date of last verification; and 
J) Scheduled date of next verification. 


For digital images, image information and information 
regarding measured values of data items and other 
relevant information as specified above shall be 
inseparably joined into one data file and integrated 
into the pixel structure of the digital image. To ensure 
integrity, the digital image data file shall have a digital 
mark (signature). The origin (authenticity) of the entire 
digital image data file shall be uniquely identifiable 
via coding ( for example, the ID number of the WIM 
system). 

The integrity and authenticity of video sequences that 
are to be archived shall be ensured to prevent undue 
changes to the content of images and measured data, or 
improper assignation. 


5.5.6 Synchronization of Vehicle Control Devices 


WIM system shall have proper synchronization 
between vehicle control devices so that a vehicle that is 
detected in the weigh zone is correctly identified during 
weighing and imaging, correctly notified if found 
overloaded, and correctly guided for further processing 
if required. Synchronization is called for between 
following vehicle control devices as may be deployed: 


a) Vehicle recognition device (see 5.5.1); 

b) Vehicle identification device (see 5.5.4); 

c) Optical vehicle recognition device (see 5.5.5); 
d) Vehicle notification device (see5.5.3.1); and 
e) Vehicle guidance device (see 5.5.3.2). 


5.6 Indicating, Printing, Data Transmission and 
Data Storage Devices 


5.6.1 Quality Of Indication 


5.6.1.1 Reading of the primary indications (see 
3.4.1.1) shall be reliable, easy and unambiguous under 
conditions of normal use: 


a) The overall inaccuracy of reading of an analog 
indicating device shall not exceed 0.2 times the 
scale interval; and 


b) The figures, units and designations forming the 
primary indications shall be of a size, shape and 
clarity for reading to be easy. 


5.6.1.2 The indication shall be the self-indicating type 
and shall bear the name or symbol of the appropriate 
unit of mass (kg or ton). The scales, numbering and 
printing shall permit the figures which form the results 
to be read by simple juxtaposition (see 3.4.3.1). 


14 


5.6.2 Indication and Printout for Data 


5.6.2.1 The minimum indication or printout resulting 
from each normal weighing operation shall be in 
accordance with: 


a) the requirements given in 5.6, and 


b) additional requirements for verification class 
WIM systems as specified in 7.2.1 and 7.2.2. 


5.6.2.2 For normal operation the scale interval of 
indications or printouts for the vehicle mass shall be the 
scale interval D and for the single-axle load or the axle- 
group load shall be the scale interval, d, in accordance 
with 7.4.3. 


5.6.2.3 The results shall bear the name or symbol of the 
appropriate unit of mass in accordance with provisions 
specified in from 5.7.15.7 to 5.7.15.9. 


5.6.2.4 For abnormal run, WIM systems shall not 
indicate or print the vehicle mass or axle loads 
without marking the result with an invalidation code 
and a clear warning message that these results are not 
verified. 
NOTE — Abnormal run of a vehicle shall include but not be 
limited to an incorrect run, or a run with incomplete registration, 
or a run affected by accidental breakdown/malfunction of the 
WIM system, or a run beyond the operating range of speed or 
capacity of the WIM system. 


5.6.3 Limits of Indication 


WIM systems shall not indicate or print the single- 
axle loads, axle-group loads or the vehicle mass when 
the single-axle load (partial weighment) is less than 
minimum or greater than maximum + 9 d without 
giving a clear warning on the indication and/or the 
printout. 


5.6.4 Printing Device 


5.6.4.1 Printing shall be clear and permanent for the 
intended use. Printed figures shall be at least 2 mm 
high. 


5.6.4.2 If printing takes place, the name or the symbol 
of the unit of measurement shall be either to the right of 
the value or above a column of values. 


5.6.5 Data Storage 


5.6.5.1 Measurement data may be stored in a memory 
of the instrument (hard drive) or on external storage 
for subsequent indication, printing, data transfer, 
totalizing, etc. In this case, the stored data shall 
be adequately protected against intentional and 
unintentional changes during the transmission and/or 
storage process. 


5.6.5.2 For applications in the legal domain, the stored 
data shall contain all relevant information necessary to 
reconstruct an earlier measurement. 


NOTE — This clause is applicable to all Type 1 WIM systems 
and to those Type 5 or Type 2 WIM systems which are used 
in applications for pre-selection or screening or in the legal 
domain. 


5.6.5.3 For securing stored data, the following shall 
apply: 
a) The appropriate requirements for securing in 5.8 
and in 5.10; 


b) Software transmission and downloading 
process shall be secured in accordance with the 
requirements in 5.8; 

c) External storage device identification and 

security attributes shall ensure integrity and 

authenticity; 

d) Exchangeable storage media for storing 

measurement data need not be sealed provided that 

the stored data is secured by a specific checksum 


or key code; 


When storage capacity is exhausted, new data 
may replace oldest data provided that the owner 
of the old data has given authority to overwrite the 
old data. 


For data items identified for temporary storage, 
the authority to overwrite old data shall be deemed 
to have been given after the lapse of the period 
of temporary storage or 24 h whichever is later, 
unless the owner of the old data informs otherwise 
within the prescribed time period. 


5.6.6 Data Transmission 


5.6.6.1 The specification of data transmission by 
telephone line, data network or Hertzian wave shall 
comply with the relevant official documents on the 
telecommunication standards and technology. User 
may specify the standard to be used according to its 
needs and equipment. 


5.6.6.2 The transmission protocol must ensure that the 
data remains secure and no loss of data occurs. 


5.6.6.3 In the case of data transmission while the WIM 
system is in service, the transmission operation should 
not interrupt data collection. 


5.6.6.4 The Weighbridges at different locations may be 
interconnected through a data network. 


5.6.7 Totalizing Device 


WIM systems may be provided with a totalizing device 
which operates: 

a) automatically, in which case the instrument shall 
be provided with a vehicle recognition device (see 
5.5.1); or 

b) semi-automatically (that is, it operates 
automatically following a manual command). 


15 


IS 17008 : 2019 


5.6.8 Operating Speed (10.18) 


WIM systems shall be able to determine that the vehicle 
has travelled over the load receptor at a speed outside 
the specified range of operating speeds, and mark the 
vehicle record (see 5.7.7) with an invalidation code 
and a clear warning message that these results are not 
verified. 


5.6.9 Threshold Acceleration (10.19) 


WIM systems designated to estimate acceleration shall 
be able to determine that the vehicle has travelled 
over the load receptor at a speed outside the specified 
threshold value of average acceleration (see 5.7.15.17), 
and mark the vehicle record (see 5.7.7) with a violation 
code and an invalidation code with a clear warning 
message that these results are not verified. 


The procedure given in A-9.3.2.6 shall be used to test 
the threshold acceleration interlock. 


NOTE — Type la/ Type 1a*/Type 1d/Type 1d* WIM systems, 
and Type 2a/Type 2a*/Type 2d/Type 2d* WIM system 
installed off the main highway, are required to comply with the 
requirements of 5.6.9. 


5.7 Data Content, Structure and Format 


5.7.1 WIM system shall generate data files containing 
data recorded or computed by it. The data files shall 
contain, in accordance with requirements of the user, 
the following: 

a) Detailed data vehicle by vehicle; and 

b) Derived data and/or aggregated data. 
5.7.2 In order to avoid any confusion while reading 
the data files or using the data, explicit headings must 
appear at the top of each column (or line) of data file, 
table or graph. The units must also be given, and, as far 
as possible, the S.I. (System International) system used. 


5.7.3 Each type of data must be given with a number of 
digits in accordance with: 

a) The accuracy of the whole recording device, 

b) The applicable scale interval (see 7.4), 


c) The accuracy and number of digits of the entire 
processing software, and 


d) The accuracy requirement of the user. 
5.7.4 The data file itself or the accompanying document 


shall contain information about the site and the WIM 
system, such as: 


a) Road identification (name, number, etc.); 


b) Accurate location of the WIM system (milestone, 
traffic lane measured, etc.); 


c) Type of WIM system with accuracy class/classes 
and verification class; 


d) Type of sensor and electronics used; 


IS 17008 : 2019 


e) Date of manufacture and of installation of the 
WIM system; 

f) Date of the last calibration; 

g) Date of the last verification (if applicable); 

h) Period of measurement; 

j) Owner of the WIM system; 

k) Person in charge on behalf of the user of the WIM 


system; andm) Contact person in charge of the 
data collection. 


5.7.5 Additional information shall be reported if 
available, such as: 


a) Environmental conditions (weather, traffic, etc.) 
during the measurement period, 


b) Calibration coefficient periodically computed by 
the system in case of an automatic self calibration 
(Annex D), and 

c) Report on the eventual breakdown or failure, and 


any maintenance operation of the WIM system 
during the measurement period. 


5.7.6 In order to facilitate the data transfer and analysis, 
the data recorded for consecutive vehicles should be 
presented one per line of the file. Some lines at the top 
of the file may contain the general information listed 
in 5.7.4. 


5.7.7 The data for one vehicle presented on one line of 
the data file shall constitute one vehicle record. For a 
normal run, one vehicle record shall contain data for at 
least the following data items 


a) Sequential vehicle record number; 

b) Location, given by the site identification code; 
c) Traffic lane and direction code (if applicable); 
d) Date and time stamp; 


e) Vehicle data items that are applicable for the type 
classification (see 4.1) among following: 


1) 
2 


wheel load, 


x 


axle loads (single-axle and/or axle-group and/ 
or axle of a group), 


3 
4 
5 


wa 


number of tyres in axles (two-tyre/four-tyre), 


wa 


vehicle mass, 


wa 


vehicle speed or speeds (for multiple load 
receptors), 


6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11) 
12 


wn 


number of axles, 


x 


centre-to-centre distance between axles, 


x 


wheelbase, 


x 


vehicle class (via axle arrangement), 


= 


vehicle class (via electronic tag), 
acceleration, and 


vehicle identification number. 


wa 


16 


5.7.8 A vehicle registration is complete if all the data for 
a vehicle specified in 5.7.7, as applicable, are recorded 
irrespective of the accuracy of the data. 


5.7.9 Each vehicle record with completed registration 
shall be appended with the following derived data in 
accordance with the functional type classification and 
intended data application: 


a) For applications in areas of pre-selection/screening, 
legal domain, or any other area if so specified by 


the user: 

1) Maximum permissible value of vehicle mass; 
2) Maximum permissible value of single axle 
loads (if applicable); 

3) Maximum permissible value of axle-group 
load (if applicable); 

4) Maximum permissible value of axle-group 
load (axle of a group); 


5) Maximum permissible value of wheel load (if 
applicable); 

6) 

7) 

For applications in areas of statistics 

infrastructure ( for example, axle load surveys): 

1) ESAL (if applicable); and 


2) Any other derived value specified by the user. 


Violation code; and 
Any other derived value specified by the user. 
b) 


or 


5.7.10 The vehicle record for an abnormal run shall 
contain data for at least the following data items 


a) Invalidation code (Table 7), and. 


b) Data items out of those listed in 5.7.7 that are 
managed to be recorded 
NOTE — Abnormal run of a vehicle shall include but not 
be limited to an incorrect run, or a run with incomplete 
registration, or a run affected by accidental breakdown/ 
malfunction of the WIM system, or a run beyond the operating 
range of speed or capacity of the WIM system or the threshold 
value of acceleration, if applicable. 


5.7.11 The vehicle record for abnormal run shall be 
kept in the detailed data files, but marked with an 
invalidation code. These results shall be eliminated in 
the aggregated data files, but recorded in some statistics 
of errors. The criteria for detection of abnormal run 
shall be clearly indicated not only in the technical 
brochure of the WIM system, but also in any document 
presenting the data. 


5.7.12 A vehicle will be considered to be registered 
by the WIM system if the data for all the data items 
applicable in accordance with 4.1 and 5.7.7 are 
recorded. 


5.7.13 The data for a data item shall be in the column for 
that data item ( for example, date, time, speed, vehicle 
mass, axle loads for axles of the same rank, wheelbase, 
center-to-center distance between axles, etc.). It shall 


be permissible to club together ‘date’ and ‘time’ as one 

data item ‘date and time’ and present the data under 

one column. 
NOTE — Therefore, it is recommended to group on the left 
side of the file (the first columns) the data which is common 
to all vehicles: number, violation codes, date and time of 
passage, lane and direction, lateral position in the lane, speed, 
wheelbase, number of axles, class and vehicle mass; and on the 
right side (last columns) the data which only concerns some 
vehicles: axle loads and inter-axle distances (because of the 
variation in the number of axles per vehicle). 


In such a way, the size of the files may be reduced; 
avoiding having many partially empty columns for 
the smallest vehicles (only the carriage return symbol- 
end of line-will be mixed with other data in the same 
column). If this principle is not applied, the number of 
columns must be the largest to be used for the longest 
vehicles.) 


5.7.14 The aggregated data shall be compiled from 
vehicle record and presented as per the requirement of 
the user through software option. 
NOTE — Aggregated data can be of several types. For 
example, vehicle count and ESAL totalized over time (hour, 
day, month or year) or vehicle class or both. Percentage of 
overloaded vehicle according to vehicle class, and peak hourly 
traffic, are two more examples of aggregated data. 


5.7.15 Data Processing 


5.7.15.1 WIM systems shall process data for data 
items for each vehicle registered in accordance with 
Table 4 in which entries shown within brackets are to 
be considered only if the data item is applicable for the 
WIM system in accordance with its type classification 
(4). The user shall specify the processing requirements 
for any additional data item that may be of interest to 
the user. The meaning of numerals and symbols used in 
the table to denote the collection and processing of data 
for data items are explained below: 


a) Type 1 — Data item which will not be required 
for immediate review and will be calculated in a 
remote computer and made available according to 
an appropriate schedule and data format specified 
by the user. 

b) Type 2 — Data item which will be displayed for 

immediate review. 


c) Type 3 — Data item which will be available for 
temporary on-site storage for period not less than 
24 hours. 

d) Type 4 — Data item which will be available as 


permanent record. 
e) Type 5 — Data items which will be estimated. 
( ) — Data item shall be considered for processing only 


if it is applicable for the WIM system in accordance 
with 4. 


17 


IS 17008 : 2019 


# — Data item for which the user shall specify the 
processing requirements. 


5.7.15.2 Site identification code 


This will be a ten-character alphanumeric code to be 
used for site identification for each data-taking session 
and shall be a user input to WIM system which shall 
have provision for entering, displaying and recording 
the alphanumeric code. This code can be used to 
incorporate information about geographic location, 
road or bridge, etc. 


5.7.15.3 Traffic lane and direction code 


This will be a two-digit numeric code to be used for 
identifying the lane and direction-of-travel for each 
vehicle processed by WIM system shall consist of a 
number beginning with 01 for the left-hand northbound 
or eastbound traffic and continuing until all the lanes 
in that direction of travel have been numbered; the 
next sequential number shall be assigned to the lanes 
in the opposite direction of travel beginning with the 
right-hand lane and continuing until all lanes have been 
numbered. 


5.7.15.4 Date 


Date of passage shall be indicated numerically in 
each vehicle record processed by WIM system. The 
date format(s) used by the WIM system to produce 
the vehicle record shall be clearly documented 
and defaulted to the generally accepted format of 
“DD/MM/YYYY” where, DD is the day, MM is the 
month and YYYY is the year. 


5.7.15.5 Time stamp 


Time stamp of passage shall be indicated numerically 
for each vehicle processed by WIM systems in the 
format: hh:mm:ss:cc except for Type 3 and Type 4 
WIM systems for which the format will be hh:mm:ss; 
where, hh is the hour beginning with 00 at midnight 
and continuing through 23, mm is the minute, ss is the 
second, and cc is the centi-second or one hundredth of 
a second. 


5.7.15.6 Vehicle record number 


WIM systems shall provide sequential-numbering 
(user-adjustable) for each recorded vehicular data set. 


5.7.15.7 Vehicle mass 


WIM system shall determine and record vehicle mass 
using appropriate units of kilogram (kg) or tonne (t). 
The value shall be rounded off to the nearest integer 
if expressed in units of kilogram (units) or to the third 
place of decimal if expressed in units of tonne (t), 
before display or recording. The display and printout 
shall indicate the metrological verification status, if 
applicable, in accordance with 7.2. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table 4 Data Processing 
( Clause 5.7.15.1 ) 


SI No. Data Items Type 1 Type 2 Type 3, Type 4 Type 5 
1. Wheel Load (2, 4) (2, 4) (2, 3) 
2. Number of tyres in axles (two/four) (2, 4) (2, 4) (2, 3) 
3: Axle Load (Single Axle) 2,4 2,4 2; 3 
4. Axle-Group Load (2, 4) 2,4 2,3 
5. Axle Load (Axle of Group)’ (2, £F 2, 4! 253 
6. Vehicle mass 2,4 2,4 2,3 2,4 
oF Vehicle Speed 2,4 2,4 2,3 2,4 
8. Number of Axles 2,4 2,4 2,3 
9. Centre-to-Centre Spacing Between Axles (2, 4) 2,4 2:3 
10. Vehicle Class (via axle arrangement) (2, 4) 2,3 2,4 
11. Vehicle Class (via electronic tag) (2, 4) (2, 4) (2, 4) 
12; Vehicle Identification Number 2,4 (2, 4) (2, 3) (2, 4) 
13. Vehicle Image (2, 45) (2, 45) (2, 4*) 
14. Site Identification Code 2,4 2,4 2.3 2,4 
15. Lane and Direction of Travel 2,4 2,3 
16. Date and Time of Passage 2,4 2,4 2-3 2,4 
17. Sequential Vehicle Record Number 2,4 2,4 2; 3 2,4 
18. Wheelbase (front-most to rear-most axle) 2,3 
19. Equivalent Standard-Axle Loads (ESALs) 2,3 
20. Violation Code 2,4 2,4 2 2,4 
21. Invalidation Code 2,4 2,4 23 2,4 
22. Vehicle Count (Total flow) 2,3 
23. Acceleration (5, 4) 55,4 
24. Derived data or aggregated data as specified by 1 
user® 
25. Any other data item (s) # # # # 
Legend: 
1) For WIM systems other than Class II (verification class), the processing requirement can be scaled down from permanent storage (4) 


to temporary on-site storage (3). 


wheel load, as applicable. 


Applicable for off main highway installations. 


If there is no criteria for identifying axle group, axle load (axle of a group) will be measured as axle load (single-axle). 
Applicable only for WIM systems which are designated to indicate individual axle loads of axles of a group. 


Vehicles exceeding the maximum permissible values of vehicle mass or axle loads (single axle or axle-group or axle of a group) or 


Vehicle count over a period, cumulative ESAL over a period, percentage overload, etc. 


5.7.15.8 Axle loads 


WIM system shall determine and record axle loads 
for single axle, axle of a group (if applicable) and/ 
or axle-group load (if applicable), with proper 
identification and representation of axles and axle- 
group (if applicable). Ifthe criteria and mechanism for 
identifying axle-group is not provided, all axles shall 
be identified as single axles and all axle loads shall 
be recorded as single-axle loads. The identification 
of axles as two-tyre axle or four-tyre axle shall be 


mandatory for WIM systems that are meant to be used 
for computing the Equivalent Standard Axle Load 
(ESAL). The units for axle loads shall be kilogram 
(kg) or tonne (t), and the values shall be rounded off 
to the nearest integer if expressed in units of kilogram 
(units) or to the third place of decimal if expressed in 
units of tonne (t), before display or recording. The 
display and printout shall indicate the metrological 
verification status, if applicable, in accordance 
with 7.2. 


18 


5.7.15.9 Wheel loads 


WIM system shall determine and record wheel 
loads (if applicable) with proper identification and 
representation of wheels. Wheels shall be identified 
with respect to the axle on which they are mounted 
and also with respect to position on the axle that is, 
whether it is on the right or left of an axis (transverse 
to the axle) passing between the wheels and pointing 
to the normal direction of travel of the vehicle, and 
if applicable, with respect to the number of tyres in 
each wheel. The identification of wheels as single- 
tyre or dual-tyre shall be mandatory for WIM systems 
that determine wheel loads and are meant to be used 
for computing the Equivalent Standard Axle Load 
(ESAL). The units for wheel loads shall be kilogram 
(kg) or tonne (t), and the values shall be rounded off 
to the nearest integer if expressed in units of kilogram 
(units) or to the third place of decimal if expressed 
in units of tonne (t), before display or recording. The 
display and printout shall indicate the metrological 
verification status, if applicable, in accordance 
with 7.2. 


NOTE — It is mandatory for WIM system of data Type f or 
Type f* to have the capability to identify whether axles are 
two-tyre axles or four-tyre axles, that is whether an axle is 
having single tyre wheel or dual-tyre wheel on either side. 


5.7.15.10 Vehicle speed 


WIM system shall determine the speed with which 
the vehicle travels over a load receptor and round 
the value to the nearest 1 Km/h. For multiple sensor 
WIM systems, multiple values of vehicle speed shall 
be computed and the minimum and maximum values 
shall be represented in the vehicle record, unless the 
difference between the two is less than or equal to 1 
Km/h. If the difference is less than or equal to 1 Km/h 
then the higher of the two values shall be represented 
as vehicle speed. 


5.7.15.11 Centre-to-center distance between axles 


Centre-to-center distance between axles shall be 
determined by specified WIM systems as the distance 
between two consecutive axles on the vehicle that has 
the tyres on these axles in contact with the road surface 
at the time of weighing. This value shall be expressed 
in the unit of meter (m) rounded to the nearest 0.01m 
before display or recording. 


5.7.15.12 Wheelbase 


Wheelbase shall be computed by specified WIM 
systems as the distance between the front-most and the 
rear-most axles on the vehicle or combination that has 
the tyres on these axles in contact with the road surface 
at the time of weighing. This value shall be expressed 
in the unit of meter (m) rounded to the nearest 0.03 m 
before display or recording. 


19 


IS 17008 : 2019 


5.7.15.13 Vehicle class 


Vehicle classification, according to axle arrangement 
or according to data encrypted in on-board electronic 
tag, as applicable, shall be accomplished by specified 
WIM systems for determining the vehicle types. 
User shall specify the detailed classification scheme 
for different vehicle types, in the absence of which 
the vehicle types described briefly in Table 5 may be 
used. For vehicle classification via axle arrangement, 
the axle-spacing values used as input for this process 
shall be associated with each vehicle classified via the 
software, and the input values shall be made readily 
accessible to the user with means provided to the 
user to modify the input values easily. A user-defined 
Vehicle Type Code 16 shall be provided for application 
by the user. A Vehicle Type Code 17 shall be applied to 
any vehicle that the software fails to assign to one of 
the types described. 


Table 5 Vehicle Types 
( Clause 5.7.15.13 and Annex D ) 


2 Digit Brief Description IRC: 3-1983 
Code 

01 2-Wheelers, 3-Wheelers 

02 Passenger Cars, Jeeps, Mini Vans 

03 Buses 

04 Two-Axle, Four-Tyre, Rigid 2 
Vehicles 3 

05 Two-Axle, Six-Tyre, Rigid Vehicles 2 

06 Three-Axle, Rigid Vehicles 3 

07 Four-or-More Axle, Rigid Vehicles a” 

08 Four-or-Less Axle, Semi- 2-S1, 2-S2, 
Articulated Vehicles * 3-S1 

09 Five Axle, Semi-Articulated 2-S3, 3-S2 
Vehicles 

10 Six-or-More Axles, Semi- 3-SB° 
Articulated Vehicles 

11 Five-or-Less Axle Truck-Trailer 2-2, 2-3, 3-2 
Combination š 

12 Six-Axle Truck-Trailer 3-3 
Combination 

13 Seven-or-More Axle Truck-Trailer 3-B 
Combination 

14 Agricultural Tractor 

15 Agricultural Tractor-Trailer 

Legend: 


1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 


“a” is the number of axles (e.g. a=4 for a Four-Axle Truck) 
“p” is the number of axles on the trailer. 
Rigid Vehicle is categorized as Truck in IRC: 3-1983. 


Semi-Articulated Vehicle is categorized as Semi-Trailer in 
IRC: 3-1983. 


Truck-Trailer Combination is categorized as Trailer in 
IRC: 3- 1983. 


5) 


IS 17008 : 2019 


5.7.15.14 ESAL 


Equivalent Standard Axle Loads (ESALs) are the 
cumulative number of applications of the chosen 
standard axle load that will have an equivalent effect on 
pavement serviceability as all applications of various 
axle loads considered. WIM systems designated to 
calculate ESAL shall identify commercial vehicle with 
the help of license plate reader or on-board electronic 
tag, or by using data on the vehicle class and vehicle 
mass, and compute the Equivalent Standard-Axle 
Load. The system shall be able to identify whether 
axles are with single tyre-wheels or dual-tyre wheels, 
that is whether axles are two-tyre axles or four- 
tyre axles. The ESAL shall be computed for each 
vehicle which will form a part of each vehicle record. 
Cumulative or aggregated ESAL shall be computed as 
per requirement specified by the user. The ESAL shall 
be calculated using procedure to be specified by the 
user in Annex E. 

NOTE — It is mandatory for WIM system of data Type f or 

Type f* to have the capability to identify whether axles are 


two-tyre axles or four-tyre axles, that is whether an axle is 
having single tyre wheel or dual-tyre wheel on either side. 


5.7.15.15 Violations 


WIM systems shall determine violations of all user-set 
parameters and call attention to violations in the manner 
described in 5.7.21. A 2-character violation code, such 
as shown in Table 6, shall be used for each detected 
violation and shall be included in the displayed data. 
Provision shall be made for the user to define up to 15 
violation codes. 


Table 6 Violation Code 
( Clause 5.7.15.15 ) 


SI No. Violations Code 
(1) (2) 6) 
1. Wheel Load WL 
il. Axle Load AL 
iti) Axle-Group Load AG 
iv) Vehicle mass GV 
v) Over Speed OS 
vi) Under Speed US 
vii) Acceleration AC 
Vill) Deceleration DE 


5.7.15.16 Invalidation code 


WIM systems shall determine abnormal vehicle run 
and mark the vehicle record with a 2-digit invalidation 
code, such as shown in Table 7. Provision shall be made 
for the user to define up to 15 invalidation codes and 
for display of the invalidation code during abnormal 
run. 


20 


Table 7 Invalidation Code 
( Clause 5.7.10 and 5.7.15.16 ) 


SI. No. Invalid results Code 

(1) (2) (3) 
i) Incorrect Run 01 
ii) Incomplete Registration 02 
iii) Accidental Breakdown or Malfunction 03 
iv) Vehicle speed beyond operating speed limits 04 
v) Vehicle acceleration beyond threshold limits 05 
vi) Axle load beyond capacity limits 06 
vii) Vehicle mass beyond capacity limits 07 


5.7.15.17 Acceleration 


Vehicle acceleration, including negative acceleration 
or deceleration, shall be estimated by specified WIM 
systems in accordance with functionaltype classification. 
The threshold value of average acceleration during 
the time that the wheelbase (5.7.15.12) of the vehicle 
is passing over the load receptors beyond which it 
would be considered as a violation and the results of 
weighing-in-motion invalid, shall be user-adjustable, 
but the vendor shall program 0.6 m/s? as the default 
value in these WIM systems. 
NOTE — Severe acceleration while the vehicle is passing over 
the WIM system sensors can effect significant change in the 
distribution of the vehicle mass among the axles and wheels 
of the vehicle as compared to the distribution when the vehicle 
is static thereby inducing excessive error in measurement of 
wheel loads and axle loads by the WIM system. 


5.7.16 WIM systems shall provide the user with the 
facility to determine through software option whether 
or not a particular data item or a set of data items shall 
be prepared for display and recording, and to change 
options as and when required. 


5.7.17 WIM systems shall provide the user with the 
facility to determine through software option whether 
or not to have on-site presentation of printed hard copy 
of a particular data item or a set of data items, and to 
change options as and when required. 


5.7.18 WIM systems shall provide the user with the 
facility to determine through software option the 
method of producing aggregated data from vehicle 
record and presenting it in specified format. 


5.7.19 WIM systems shall provide the user with the 
facility to input through software option the threshold 
values for each data items so that only data falling 
within the range determined by the threshold values 
are displayed and if required stored. There shall be 
provision for display and permanent recording of 
threshold values. 


5.7.20 WIM systems shall provide the user with the 
facility to hold a selected record(s) on display without 
interference with continuous data taking by the system. 


5.7.21 WIM systems shall provide the user with 
the facility to call attention to violations of user-set 
parameters for selective data items through software 
options. Such call attention shall be through flashing 
display with audio tone to be used additionally at the 
option of the user. In the permanent record, data which 
are in violation of user-set parameters shall be properly 
highlighted using underlining or any other graphical 
scheme that will make such data stand out in the printed 
hardcopy. 


5.8 Software 


5.8.1 The legally relevant software used in WIM 
systems must be present in such a form that alteration 
of the software is not possible without breaking a 
seal, or any change in the software can be signaled 
automatically by means of an identification code. 


5.8.2 The software shall comply with the relevant 
official documents on the software security standards 
and technology. User may specify the requirements 
according to its needs. 


5.8.3 The software shall provide the user with the 
option to process and present data as per requirement: 
a) given from 5.7.15 to 5.7.21; and 


b) additional requirement specified by the user. 


5.8.4 The software documentation on the WIM system 
shall include: 


a) A description of the legally relevant software; 

b) A description of the accuracy of the measuring 
algorithms ( for example, programming modes); 

c) A description of the user interface, menus and 
dialogues; 

d) The unambiguous software identification; 

e) A description of the embedded software; 

f) An overview of the system hardware, for example, 
topology block diagram, type of Computer, source 
code for software functions, etc., if not described 
in the operating manual; 

g) Means of securing software; and 

h) The operating manual. 


5.8.5 Means of Securing Software 


The following means of securing legally relevant 
software shall be required for all WIM systems that 
are intended to be used for pre-selection or screening 
or applications in the legal domain. For other WIM 
systems, the means of securing software shall be 
mutually agreed between the applicant and the 
Metrological Authority or between the use and the 


21 


IS 17008 : 2019 


vendor, as applicable. 


NOTE — This clause is mandatory for all Type 1 WIM systems 
and optional for all Type 3 or Type 4 WIM systems. For Type 
2 or Type 5 WIM systems the applicability of this clause will 
depend on the domain of use. 


° 
— 


Access shall only be allowed to authorized people, 
for example, by means of a code (key-word) or of 
a special device (hard key, etc.); the code must be 
changeable; 


b 


we 


It shall be possible for the interventions to be 
memorized and it shall be possible to access and 
display this information; the records shall include 
the date and a means of identifying the authorized 
person making the intervention (see a) above); 
the traceability of the interventions shall be 
assured for at least the period of time in between 
periodical verifications as stipulated. Records may 
not be overwritten, and if the storage capacities 
for records are exhausted, no further intervention 
shall be possible without breaking a physical seal; 


c 


ma 


Downloading of legally relevant software shall 
only be possible through an appropriate protective 
interface (see 3.2.9) connected to the WIM system 
hardware; 

d) The software shall be assigned with appropriate 
software identification (see 3.2.6.5). This software 
identification shall be adapted in the case of every 
software change that may affect the functions and 
accuracy of the WIM system; and 


e 


— 


Functions that are performed or initiated via 
a software interface shall meet the relevant 
requirements and conditions of 8.3.5. 


5.9 Installation Environment 


5.9.1 General 


WIM system shall be designed, manufactured and 
installed so as to minimize any adverse effects of the 
installation environment. It should be possible to keep 
the load receptor free from all debris or other matter 
that could affect the accuracy of the WIM system. 
Where particular details of installation have an effect 
on the weighing operation ( for example, alignment 
and profile, length of weigh-zone, length of apron if 
applicable, surface smoothness or evenness, deflection 
and rutting if applicable, bridge details if applicable), 
these details shall be recorded in the test report. 


The load receptor must always remain fixed in place 
under heavy traffic flow, until their removal or the 
pavement replacement, for safety reasons. 


NOTE — This particularly concerns portable WIM sensors 
and sensors glued or bonded to the pavement surface. 


WIM systems intended to be used for pre-selection or 
screening or for applications in the legal domain, shall 
comply with the installation requirements specified in 
Annex B. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


NOTE — All Type 1 WIM systems and those of Type 2 
and Type 5 WIM systems which are used for pre- selection/ 
screening/direct enforcement shall have to be installed in 
controlled weighing. 


5.9.2 Drainage 


If any weighing mechanism being part of the WIM 
system is contained in a pit, there shall be provision 
for drainage to ensure that no portion of the instrument 
becomes submerged or partially submerged in water or 
any other liquid. 


5.9.3 Heating and Cooling 


If the weighing mechanism is installed in high 
temperature climate environments beyond the range 
specified by the user, there shall be provision for 
cooling to ensure that the devices operate within the 
operating conditions specified by the manufacturer. 


If the weighing mechanism is installed in low 
temperature climate environments beyond the range 
specified by the user, there shall be provision for 
heating to ensure that the devices operate within the 
operating conditions specified by the manufacturer. 


5.9.4 Climatic Environment (Weather Resistance) 


The manufacturer shall specify the maximum and the 
minimum temperature that a load receptor shall be able 
to withstand in its off-state without damage, and after 
returning to its operating temperature range, should 
function within the applicable limits of error. 


In order to ensure correct measurement in relation to 
ambient temperature and the operating temperature 
range, the WIM system shall have a temperature 
measurement device accurate up to + 2°C. The WIM 
system shall be capable of automatically recognizing 
a temperature outside the operating temperature range, 
and displaying a suitable warning. Any weighing taking 
place at that moment shall be terminated and the WIM 
system shall block further weighing or automatically 
switch off. 


The WIM system shall not be sensitive to the relative 
humidity of the surrounding air, and the WIM instrument 
shall maintain its metrological characteristics at the 
relative humidity and temperature severity condition, 
which shall be specified using any of the values as 
follows: 


a) Relative humidity: 93 percent, 85 percent 


b) Temperature : 30°C, 40°C 


5.9.5 Mechanical Environment (Physical Robustness) 


WIM system shall be designed and constructed to 
ensure sufficient rigidity, stability and resistance to 
mechanical vibrations and shocks. 


The manufacturer shall specify the physical conditions 
in which the WIM system should be used, provided that 
for Type 2 WIM intended to be used for applications 
in the legal domain, the load receptor must meet a 


22 


mechanical environment class equivalent to or more 
severe than M3 specified in OIML D 11 [4], and must 
comply with the vibration (random) and shock tests 
given in Annex A. 
NOTE — Mechanical environment class M3 applies to 
locations where the level of vibration and shock is high and 
very high, e.g. for instruments mounted directly on machines, 


conveyor belts, etc., and has been adopted in COST 323 (2.5) 
and CMI Regulation (2.7). 


5.9.6 Dust and Water Resistance 


WIM system parts that are subject to the effects of 
weather shall have at least IP 67 housing if installed 
below high flood level and at least IP 65 housing if 
installed above high flood level, to provide protection 
from dust, rain and temporary immersion in water; and 
other parts shall have at least IP 54 protection. 


5.9.7 Electromagnetic Environment (Electromagnetic 
Compatibility-EMC) 


WIM systems shall be designed, constructed and 
installed so as not be influenced by electrical or 
electromagnetic interference, or at least react to it in 
a defined manner (for example, reporting an error, 
blocking measurement, etc.). They must also not 
radiate any unwanted electromagnetic fields. 


WIM system or parts thereof shall exhibit normal 
function during laboratory EMC tests, and the results of 
simulated functional tests shall be within the applicable 
limits of error. 
NOTE — It is better not to install WIM systems under high 
voltage power line, or close to radio transmission towers 


and railways tracks to minimize the effect of electrical or 
electromagnetic interference. 


5.9.8 Lightning Protection 


WIM system and all its parts shall be protected against 
lightning as well as against any external electrical or 
magnetic field. 


5.10 Securing Of Components, Interfaces and Preset 
Controls 


5.10.1 General 


Components, interfaces, software devices and preset 
controls that are not intended to be adjusted or removed 
by the user shall be fitted with a securing means or shall 
be enclosed. When enclosed, it shall be possible to seal 
the enclosure. All parts of the measuring system that 
cannot be enclosed shall be equipped with sufficiently 
effective means of preventing operations that tend to 
influence measuring accuracy. 


Any device for changing the parameters of measurement 
results, particularly for correction and calibration, shall 
be sealed. 


The seals should, in all cases, be easily accessible. 
Securing should be provided on all parts of the 
measuring system which cannot be materially protected 


in any other way against operations liable to affect the 
measurement accuracy. 


5.10.2 Means of Securing 


Securing shall be provided by hardware, passwords or 
similar software means provided that: 

a) The requirements for securing software in 5.8 
apply; 

b) Transmission of legally relevant data via interfaces 
shall be secured against intentional, unintentional 
and accidental changes in accordance with the 
requirements of 5.6.6 and 8.3.5.2; 


c 


x 


The securing possibilities available in a WIM 
system shall be such that separate securing of the 
settings is possible; and 

d 


wm 


Stored data shall be secured against intentional, 
unintentional and accidental changes in accordance 
with the requirements of 5.6.5. 


5.11 Auxiliary Devices 


Any external devices connected to the WIM 
system via an appropriate interface must not have a 
negative influence on the metrological parameters or 
performance parameters. 


5.12 Descriptive Markings 
WIM systems shall bear the following basic markings, 


unless otherwise specified under the Legal Metrology 
Act or Rules. 


5.12.1 Markings Shown in Full 
a) Identification mark of the manufacturer; 
b) Type designation; 


c) Serial number (on each load if 


applicable); 


receptor, 


d) Not to be used to weigh liquid products (if 
applicable); 
e) Maximum transit speed, in km/hr; 
f) Direction of weighing (if applicable); 
g) Scale interval for stationary load (if applicable), 
in kg or t; 
h) Power supply voltage, in V; 
j) Power supply frequency, in Hz; 
k) Operating temperature range, in °C; 
m) Temperature range in off state, in °C; 
in 


n) Relative humidity-temperature severity, 


percent, °C; and 
p) Software identification (if applicable). 


5.12.2 Markings Shown In Code 


a) Statistical accuracy class (where applicable) A(5), 
B+(7), B(10), C(15), D+(20), D(25), E(30), E(35), 
E(40), E(45), E(50), etc. 


23 


IS 17008 : 2019 


b) Metrological accuracy class (where applicable) 
1) Particular accuracy class (where applicable) 
i. Accuracy class vehicle mass 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 


5 or 10 
H. Accuracy class single-axle (where 
applicable) A,B,C, D, E, F, G, H or I 


iii. Accuracy 
applicable) 


class axle-group (where 
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, or H 


2) General accuracy class 


(where applicable) a(5), b(5), c(10), 
d(15), é 
c) Verification class 0, I, I, MI, IV 
d) Maximum capacity Max =..... kg ort 
e) Minimum capacity Min =..... kg ort 
f) Scale interval (vehicle mass) D =..... kg ort 
g) Scale interval (axle loads) d=..... kg ort 
h) Maximum operating speed — vmax =..... km/hr 
j) Minimum operating speed vmin =..... km/hr 


k) Maximum number of axles 
per vehicle (where applicable) Amax 


m) Maximum traffic intensity (number of vehicles 
per hour, per day) 


n) Type approval sign in accordance with national 
requirements 


5.12.3 Supplementary Markings 


Depending upon the particular use of the WIM 
system, one or more supplementary markings may be 
required on type approval by the metrological authority 
issuing the type approval certificate. For example, the 
designation of the liquid(s) which the instrument is 
designed to weigh (if applicable), or where a particular 
WIM system is verified using a limited range of 
vehicles ( for example, air suspension systems only, 
two/three axle rigid vehicles only) then this should be 
marked on the WIM system. 


5.12.4 Presentation of Descriptive Markings 


5.12.4.1 Descriptive markings shall be indelible and 
of a size, shape and clarity that permit legibility under 
normal conditions of use of the WIM instrument. The 
markings shall remain indelible over the permissible 
environmental variations of the WIM instrument. 


5.12.4.2 Descriptive markings shall be in English 
language. 


5.12.4.3 Markings shall be grouped together in a 
clearly visible place on the WIM system, either on a 
descriptive plate or sticker fixed permanently near the 
indicating device, or on a non-removable part of the 
instrument itself. In case of a plate or sticker which is 
not destroyed when removed, a means of securing shall 
be provided, e.g. a non-removable control mark that 
can be applied. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


5.12.4.4 It shall be possible to seal the plate bearing the 
markings, unless it cannot be removed without being 
destroyed. 


5.12.4.5 As an alternative, all applicable markings 
above may be shown ona programmable display which 
is controlled by software provided that: 


a) At least Max, Min, D and d shall be displayed as 
long as the instrument is switched on; 

b) The other markings may be shown on manual 
command; and 


c) This shall be described in the type approval 
certificate. 


5.12.4.6 In this case, means shall be provided for 
any access to reprogramming of the markings to be 
automatically and non-erasably recorded and made 
evident by an audit trail, e.g. by traceable access 
software such as an event logger providing a record 
of the changes or an event counter providing a non- 
resettable counter of any changes. 


5.12.4.7 These programmable display markings need 
not be repeated on the data plate, if they are shown on 
or indicated near the display of the weighing result, 
with the exception of the following markings which 
shall be shown on the data plate: 


a) Type and class designations of the instrument; 

b) Name or identification mark of the manufacturer; 
c) Type approval number; 

d) Voltage supply; 

e) Voltage supply frequency; and 

f) Pneumatic/hydraulic pressure, (if applicable). 


5.13 Verification Marks 


The requirements of this clause shall not be applicable 
to WIM systems with verification class 0 or WIM 
system without any verification class, unless otherwise 
specified by the user in writing. 


5.13.1 Position 


WIM systems required to bear verification mark 
shall be provided with a place for the application of 
verification marks. This place shall: 

a) Be such that the part on which the marks are 
located cannot be removed from the WIM system 
without damaging the marks; 

b) Permit the easy application of the marks without 
changing the metrological qualities of the WIM 
system; and 


c) Be visible when the WIM system is in service. 


5.13.2 Mounting 


WIM systems required to bear verification marks shall 
have a verification mark support located as specified 


24 


above, which shall ensure the conservation of the 
marks as follows: 


a) When the mark is made with a stamp, the support 
may consist of a strip of lead or any other material 
with similar qualities inserted into a plate fixed to 
the part or a cavity bored into the part; and 


b) When the mark consists of an adhesive transfer, a 
space shall be provided for this purpose. 


6 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Applicability 


The performance criteria for all items, except for wheel 
loads, axle loads or vehicle mass given in 6.4, shall be 
applicable to WIM systems. 


6.2 Reference Values 


6.2.1 Vehicle Mass 


The reference value shall be as specified in 9.1.3.2.2.1 
when the static-reference value is of interest, or 
the summation of the dynamic (impact) axle force 
(see 3.3.1.19) of all axles of the vehicle when the 
dynamic (impact) vehicle force is the data item of 
interest. 


6.2.2 Axle Load (Single—Axle, Axle-Group, Axle of a 
Group) and Wheel Load 


6.2.2.1 Axle load (single-axle) 


The reference values shall be as specified in 9.1.3.2.2.2 
(I) when the static-reference value is of interest, or as 
specified in 9.1.3.2.2.3 when the dynamic (impact) axle 
force (see 3.3.1.19) is the data item of interest. 


6.2.2.2 Axle-group load 


The reference values shall be as specified in 
9.1.3.2.2.2(I]) when the static-reference value is of 
interest, or the summation of the dynamic (impact) axle 
force (see 3.3.1.19) of all axles of the axle- group when 
the dynamic (impact) axle-group force is the data item 
of interest. 


6.2.2.3 Axle load (axle of a group) 


The reference values shall be as specified in 9.1.3.2.2.2 
(III) when the static-reference value is of interest, or as 
specified in 9.1.3.2.2.3 when the dynamic (impact) axle 
force (see 3.3.1.19) is the data item of interest. 


6.2.2.4 Wheel load 


The reference values shall be as specified in 9.1.3.2.2.2 
(IV) when the static-reference value is of interest, 
or as specified in 9.1.3.2.2.3 when the dynamic 
(impact) wheel force (see 3.3.1.19) is the data item of 
interest. 


6.2.3 Vehicle Speed 


The reference value for vehicle speed shall be any one 
of the following: 


a) The speed determined in accordance with test 
procedures (see A-9.3.2.4.2), 


b) The speed determined with an approved radar 
gun, or 

c) The speed determined by any other scientifically 
acceptable method specified by the user. 


6.2.4 Centre-To-Centre Spacing Between Axles 


The reference value for centre-to-centre spacing 
between axles shall be any one of the following: 


a) The value specified in the Registration Certificate 
of the vehicle issued by the Government, or 


b) The value determined in accordance with test 
procedures (see A-9.3.2.9) 


6.2.5 Wheelbase 


The reference value for wheelbase shall be any one of 
the following: 


a) The value specified in the Registration Certificate 
of the vehicle issued by the Government, or 


b) The value determined in accordance with test 
procedures (see A-9.3.2.10) 


6.3 Performance Criteria for Items Other than 
Wheel/Axle Loads or Vehicle Mass 


6.3.1 The minimum rate of detection of vehicles in the 
traffic stream shall be 100 percent for Type 1 systems 
and 90 percent for Type 2 or Type 3 or Type 4 or 
Type 5 systems. 

NOTE — It does not mean that any detected vehicles can be 


eliminated from a sample, up to 10 percent of the sample size 
for Type 2 or Type 3 or Type 4 or Type 5 systems. 


6.3.2 The minimum rate of complete registration of 
detected vehicles shall be 90 percent for Type | systems 
and 80 percent for Type 2 or Type 3 or Type 4 or 
Type 5 systems. 


6.3.3 Wherever applicable under functional type 
classification, the minimum rate of right classified 
vehicles and the minimum rate of right identified 
vehicle shall be 99 percent for applications in the 
legal domain, 95 percent for pre-selection or screening 
applications, and 90 percent for other applications. The 
rates shall be worked out considering only vehicles that 
are detected by the system. 


6.3.4 The tolerance on the axle spacing shall be 
20 percent with a maximum of 0.3 m, and on the 
wheelbase shall be 10 percent with a maximum of | m, 
both for at least 95 percent of the measurements. 


6.3.5 Additional performance specifications given in 
Table 8 shall be applicable for WIM systems that are 


25 


IS 17008 : 2019 


required to be operated without the intervention of 
operator for pre-selection/screening or for applications 
in the legal domain. 


Table 8 
( Clause 6.3.5 ) 


Accuracy A(5), B+7/ B(10)-C(15)/  D+(20)-E/ 
class Item a(5) /2 b(5), c(10) / 5 d(15), e / 10 
Absolute time ls ls Is 
stamp (95 
percent)! 
Maximum 2 Km/hr 3 Km/hr 5 Km/hr 


absolute value 
of error in speed 
(95 preent) 
Legend: 

1) Figure in brackets indicate the minimum rate of 
measurements which has to comply which the given 
performance specification. 

2) Figure in brackets indicate the minimum rate of vehicle 


speed measurements during normal run which has to comply 
with the given performance specification. 


6.4 Accuracy Criteria For Wheel Loads, Axle Loads 
And Vehicle Mass 


6.4.1 The accuracy criteria for vehicle mass, wheel 
loads (if applicable), single-axle loads, if applicable 
axle loads (axle of a group), if applicable axle-group 
loads, shall be specified using accuracy classes, so that a 
WIM system may be checked following a well-defined 
procedure or test programme and then be classified into 
one of several accuracy classes specified in 6.5, or into 
one of several accuracy classes specified in 7.3, or into 
one of both, in accordance with the functional type 
classification (4) and test results. 


6.4.2 The accuracy classes defined in 6.5 shall be called 
Statistical Accuracy Classes. There shall be another 
set of accuracy classes called Metrological Accuracy 
Classes defined in 7.3. 


NOTE — The statistical sccuracy classes are defined on the 
basis of principles of accuracy classification adopted in COST 
323 recommendations (2.5). The statistical principles are based 
on the theoretical framework developed by Bernard Jacob 
2000 [8]. 


The metrological accuracy classes are defined on 
the basis of principles of accuracy classification 
adopted in OIML R-134 recommendations (2.2, 2.3), 
ASTM E-1318 standard (2.4), and Regulation No. 
0111-OOP-C010-10 of the Czech Metrology Institute 
which is the National Metrological Authority of the 
Czech Republic (2.9)) 


6.4.3 The statistical accuracy classes shall be applicable 
to WIM systems in accordance with: 


a) The type classification given in 4, and 
b) the domain of use (see 6.5.2) 


IS 17008 : 2019 


NOTE — Depending upon the type classification, there could 
be three different scenarios: 
a) When only statistical accuracy class is applicable and 
metrological accuracy class is not, 
b) When only metrological accuracy class is applicable and 
statistical accuracy class is not, and 


c) When both statistical accuracy and metrological accuracy 
classes are applicable.) 


6.4.4 The accuracy criteria for axle loads (axle of 
a group) given in given in Table 11 are reasonable 
expected values but not mandatory, unless specifically 
made so in writing by the user or it is so requested by the 
applicant during model (type) approval (see 9.1.3.2.2.2 
IH). Otherwise, the accuracy criteria for axle loads 
(axle of a group) given in statistical accuracy classes 
shall be considered as reasonable expected values, but 
not mandatory for compliance. 


6.4.5 The accuracy criteria for wheel load given in 
Table 11 shall be considered a mandatory requirement 
and used for determining statistical accuracy class only 
if it is so specified in writing by the user or it is so 
requested by the applicant during model (type) approval 
(see 9.1.3.2.2.2 IV). Otherwise, the accuracy criteria 
for wheel load given in statistical accuracy classes shall 
be considered are reasonable expected values, but not 
mandatory for compliance. 


6.4.6 Individual measurements are required to assess 
the accuracy of a system, and must be given by it. 
If a WIM system delivers only statistics during the 
operational period of use, detailed data should be 
provided for calibration and accuracy tests. 


6.5 Statistical Accuracy Classes 


6.5.1 General 


The principle adopted for this classification consists 
of assessing the tolerance 6, that is, the width of an 
interval (defined as tolerance interval) in which the 
relative error of any individual measurement lies, with 
a minimum specified probability (level of confidence) 
x0 chosen by the user depending on the domain of use 
and the test conditions (see 6.5.5). 


Note — A WIM system meets an accuracy class tolerance 6 
(see 6.5.4) if any individual measurement Wd (axle load of 
a single axle or axle of a group or group of axles, or vehicle 
mass, or wheel load) has a probability z higher than a minimum 
specified value 20 of being within the tolerance interval [Wr 
(1- ó); Wr (1+ 6)], where, Wr is the corresponding reference 
value. It also means that statistically a proportion z of a large 
sample of WIM data should be within this same tolerance 
interval. Reversely, it may be said that given an individual 
measurement Wd, the confidence interval [Wd / (1+ ô); 
Wd / (1- 5)] contains the reference (true) value Wr with a 
probability z higher than a minimum specified value 70. Hence 
the customer risk (that an individual measurement fails outside 
the previous interval) is lower than (1- 70). 


26 


6.5.2 Domain of Use 


The WIM system shall be specified to meet the 
requirements of statistical accuracy for at least the 
weighing interval limits for individual axle loads ( that 
is, axle loads of single-axle or axle of a group load) and 
vehicle mass, given in Table 9. 


Table 9 
( Clause 6.5.2 ) 


Weighing Interval Limits Minimum (Kg) Maximum (Kg) 
Axle Load 1000 20000 
Vehicle mass 3500 100000 


6.5.3 Scale Interval 


The relationship between accuracy classes and scale 
interval shall be in accordance with Table 10. 


Table 10 
( Clause 6.5.3 ) 


Accuracy Class A(5) Bd0) C5) D(25) E 
Axle load 20 50 100 200 200 
Vehicle mass 50 100 200 500 500 


Note — Table 10 is an excerpt of the general relationship given 
in Table 23 and Table 24. 


6.5.4 Accuracy Classes And Tolerances 


6.5.4.1 The standard accuracy classes are designated 
by numbers ðe = 5, 7, 10, 15, 20, 25, which are the 
tolerances for the vehicle mass. Accuracy classes with 
tolerances for the vehicle mass greater than 25 may 
be represented by a single accuracy class or may be 
represented by several accuracy classes depending 
upon requirement. 


6.5.4.2 The standard accuracy classes and corresponding 
tolerances 6 shall be as specified in Table 11. Table 12 
provides tolerances for further accuracy classes E (xx) 
if needed in some cases. 


6.5.4.3 Additional classes may be obtained, either by 
extrapolation or interpolation using the formulas of 
6.5.4.4.1 or 6.5.4.4.2, or the curves of Fig. 1. 


6.5.4.4 Tolerance extrapolation and interpolation 


6.5.4.4.1 If more classes with 6c > 50 are needed 


behind E(50), the tolerances for each data item for axle 
load may be extrapolated by: 


:ö = 1.047 6c+ 2.16 for óc >50 
Single Axle :6 = 1.133 öc + 2.67 for óc >50 
Axle ofa Group :6 = 1.133 ðc + 7.67 for óc > 50 


Group of Axles 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table 11 
( Clause 6.4.4, 6.4.5, 6.5.4.2, 6.5.4.6, 6.5.6, 6.5.6.3 ) 


Data Item Accuracy Classes : Tolerance Interval Width 6 (Percent) For Relative Error 

A(5) B+(7) B(10) C(15) D+(20) D(25) E 
Vehicle mass 5 7 10 15 20 25 >25 
Axle Group Load 7 10 13 18 23 28 > 28 
Axle Load (Single Axle) 8 11 15 20 25 30 >30 
Axle Load (Axle of a Group)' 10 14 20 25 30 35 >35 
Wheel Load? 11 15 21 28 35 42 >42 


Legend: 
1) Not mandatory unless specified as mandatory in accordance with 6.4.4. 


2) Not mandatory unless specified as mandatory in accordance with 6.4.5. 


Table 12 
( Clause 6.5.4.2, 6.5.6, 6.5.6.3 ) 


Data Item Accuracy Classes : Tolerance Interval width ó (Percent) 
E(30) E(35) E(40) E(45) E(50) etc. 
Vehicle mass 30 35 40 45 50 
Axle Group Load 33 39 44 49 55 
Axle Load (Single Axle) 36 42 48 54 60 
Axle Load (Axle of a Group)! 41 47 53 59 65 
Wheel Load? 43 51 59 67 75 


Legend: 

1) Not mandatory unless specified (see 6.4.4). 

2) Not mandatory unless specified (see 6.4.5). 
NOTE — Values of accuracy class tolerance ó has to be such that assuming normal distribution for relative error, for an unbiased 
WIM system (population mean of relative error = 0) and for a given vehicle sample condition, ó/o remains constant (with value 
depending upon the vehicle sample condition rl, r2, R1 or R2) for all data items, so that a single minimum confidence level z0 can 
be specified for all data items under the given vehicle sample condition. Here o is the population standard deviation of relative error. 
The values for accuracy class tolerance ó specified in Table 11 and Table 12 for data items other than wheel loads are based on 
research carried out under COST 323 program of the European Union. Research needs to be carried out in India for these values, 
including those specified for wheel load, should be periodically updated based on research carried out in India. 


Tolerances of Accuracy Classes 


8 (%) 


—— Gross weight 


30 L. Bt ---> — pe ee EENE EET —=— Group of axles 


—+— Single axle 


x— Axle of Group 


Accuracy Classes 


Fic. 1 TOLERANCE OF ACCURCY CLASSES 


27 


IS 17008 : 2019 


The extrapolated class shall be represented by E (6c). 
The values for óc shall be increased by steps of 5. The 
6 values obtained with the above formulae shall be 
rounded off to the nearest integer. 


6.5.4.4.2 If more classes with 0 < óc < 50 are required, 
tolerances for each data item for axle load may be 
interpolated by: 


Group of Axle =: 6 = dc /0.7 for ðc < 7, 6 = óc + 3 
for 7 < óc < 30, ó = 1.2 óc — 3 
for 30 < dc < 35, 6 = ðc + 4 for 35 
< dc < 50 

Single Axle : ó = dc (85 - 6c) / 50 for ðc < 10, 5 = 
dc + 5 for 10 < dc < 25, ó = 1.2 óc 
for 25 < dc < 50 

Axle of a Group :6 = 2 óc for óc < 10, 6 = óc + 10 


for 10 < óc < 25,6 = 1.2 ðc + 5 
for 25 < ðc < 50 


Only integer values shall be admissible for óc. The 
6 values obtained with the above formulae shall be 
rounded off to the nearest integer. The classes ahead of 
A (5) shall be represented by A(6c). The interpolated 
classes between A (5) and E(50) shall be designated 
using the letter of the closest standard class with a 
tolerance ðc > 6 ( for example, C(13) if óc =13). 


6.5.4.5 The accuracy class accepted for a WIM system 
is the best class for which the accuracy criteria for data 
items which are relevant in accordance with the type 
classification given in 4 and the exclusion criteria given 
in 6.4.4 and 6.4.5 are satisfied. 


6.5.4.6 For a specific user requirement, it is possible 
to classify a WIM system in different classes for each 
data item given in Table 11, but in this case the mention 
of the accuracy class must contain mention of the 
applicable data item. 


6.5.5 Test Conditions 


Depending on the environmental (climatic) conditions 
and the sample of reference vehicles to be used in 
accordance with specified test plans (10.7) for the 
type of test, the test repeatability or reproducibility 
conditions for assessing the statistical accuracy of 
WIM systems shall be as follows. 


6.5.5.1 Environmental conditions 


a) (El) Limited environmental variations 
(environmental repeatability): The test is 
carried out over a couple of hours, a day or a 
few consecutive days, such that the temperature, 
climatic and environmental conditions do not vary 
significantly during the measurements. 


b) (E2) Extended environmental variations 
(limited environmental reproducibility): The 


28 


test time period extends at least over a full week 
or several days spread over a month, such that 
the temperature, climatic and environmental 
conditions vary during the measurements, but no 
seasonal effect has to be considered; 


c) (E3) Full environmental variations (full 
environmental reproducibility): The test time 
period extends over a whole year or more, or at 
least over several days spread all over a year, such 
that the temperature, climatic and environmental 
conditions vary during the measurements and all 
the site seasonal conditions are encountered. 


6.5.5.2 Vehicle sample conditions 


a) (r1) Minimum or no reference vehicle variation 
(full repeatability conditions): Only one vehicle 
passes several times at the same speed, the same 
load and the same lateral position. 


b) (r2) One reference vehicle with variations 
(extended repeatability conditions): Only one 
vehicle but it passes several times at different 
speeds (according to the traffic lane conditions), 
different loads ( for example, fully loaded, half- 
loaded and empty), and with small lateral position 
variations (according to the real traffic paths). 


c) (RI) Small set of reference vehicles (limited 
reproducibility conditions): A small set of 
vehicles (typically 2 to 10), representative of the 
whole traffic composition expected on the site 
(axle spacings and vehicle mass), is used, each of 
them passing several times, at different speeds, 
different loads, and with small variations in lateral 
position. 

d) (R2) Large set of reference vehicles from the 

traffic flow (full reproducibility conditions): A 
large sample of vehicles ( that is, some tens to 
a few hundred) taken from the traffic flow and 
representative of it, pass on the WIM system and 
are statically weighed before or after it. 
NOTE — If the respective standard deviations of under each of 
these conditions are denoted oj(r1), oj(12), oj(R1) and oj(R2), 
then we shall have oj(rl)< oj(12)< oj(R1)< oj(R2) because, 
the higher the variability of the test conditions, the higher the 
scattering of the results. 


6.5.6 Level of Confidence (Confidence Level) 


The lower bound of the level of confidence a, or if 
applicable the level of confidence II, to get an individual 
error within the tolerance intervals specified in Table 11 
or Table 12 shall be estimated from the test results and 
statistics in accordance with the procedure specified in 
6.5.6.1 or with the agreement of the user in accordance 
with the procedure specified in 6.5.6.2. 


6.5.6.1 The lower bound of the level of confidence 
z shall be the lower bound of the probability for an 
individual value of a relative error, taken randomly 


from a normally distributed sample of size n, with a 
sample mean m and unbiased sample variance S* to be 
in the centred tolerance interval [-6, ó], and shall be 
given at risk of mean bias a (see note below) by: 


m= y (u,)— (u) 


Where, w is the cumulative distribution function 
of Student’s t distribution, and u, = (6 — m)/s — t, 
boron Nn and u,=(—d-—m)/s +t, t /Nn, where 


v vl-a/2 


t Nn / 2 is Student’s £ variable with v = n — 1 


y len 


degrees of freedom. 


1 


NOTE — For normally distributed individual error (x, 
X o Xa) if u is the population mean, m the sample mean 
and the unbiased sample variance (s ia an unbiased estimator 
of population standard deviation o ) for a sample size n, then 
follows Student’s t distribution with v = n - 1 degrees of 
freedom and lies within the centred confidence interval [-t 
t with a confidence level of (1-a) Le. P[-t u STS t a] 
= 1-a. This gives the confidence interval for population mean yu 
as[m~t, w2 s\n<u<m FE us sVn |with confidence level 
(1-a) or risk of mean bias a. 


v, 1-0/2, 


vil al 


For n > 60, the cumulative distribution function v of 
Student’s t distribution may be approximated by the 
cumulative distribution function of a standard normal 
variable.) 


IS 17008 : 2019 


6.5.6.2 If the sample size n is greater than 10/(1- 20), 
where 20 is the minimum required level of confidence 
(6.5.6.3) given in Table 13 to Table 15 (according to the 
test plan), the level of confidence II may be statistically 
estimated by the proportion II of the sample test data 
found within the tolerance interval [-ó, ó]. This principle 
of estimation by sample proportion can also be used 
when n is greater than 5/(1- 20), if agreed between 
the metrological authority or the technical authority/ 
agency with the consent of the user, as appropriate, and 
the applicant or vendor, as appropriate. 


6.5.6.3 Minimum required level of confidence (z0): 
Depending on the vehicle sample repeatability 
and reproducibility conditions (rl) to (R2) and the 
environmental repeatability and reproducibility 
conditions (E1) to (E3), the values of the minimum 
required level of confidence (n0) for the tolerance 
intervals (5) specified in Table 11, Table 12 shall be as 
specified in Table 13, Table 14 and Table 15, or Fig. 2. 


NOTE — The minimum confidence levels given in this clause 
have been worked out with the following assumptions: 

a) The individual errors are assumed to be random, 
independent of each other and normally distributed, 
b) The producer risk or supplier risk, linked to the statistical 
estimation of the mean bias a, is fixed at 5 percent.) 


Table 13 Minimum Levels of Confidence 70, of the Centered Tolerance Interval (In Percent) — 
Case of Test Under “Environmental Repeatability” (E1) 


( Clause 6.5.6.2, 6.5.6.3, 6.5.6.4 ) 


Sample Size (n) 


Test Conditions 1 a a so = i 

Full repeatability (r1) 95 97.2 97.9 98.4 98.7 99.2 
Extended repeatability (12) 90 94.1 95.3 96.4 97.1 98.2 
Limited reproducibility (R1) 85 90.8 92.5 94.2 95.2 97.0 
Full reproducibility (R2) 80 87.4 89.6 91.8 93.1 95.4 


NOTE — For sample size “n” not mentioned in this table, the figures may be interpolated using Fig. 2 or a linear interpolation. 


Table 14 Minimum Levels of Confidence x0, of the Centred Confidence Intervals (In Percent) — Case of 
Test Under “Limited Environmental Reproducibility” (E2) 


( Clause 6.5.6.3 and 6.5.6.4 ) 


Sample Size (n) 
10 20 30 60 120 00 
Test Conditions 
Full repeatability (r1) 93.3 96.2 97.0 97.8 98.2 98 
Extended repeatability (12) 87.5 92.5 93.9 95.3 96.1 97.5 
Limited reproducibility (R1) 81.9 88.7 90.7 92.7 93.9 96.0 
Full reproducibility (R2) 76.6 84.9 87.4 90.0 91.5 94.3 


NOTE — For sample size n not mentioned in this table, the figures may be interpolated using Fig. 2 or a linear interpolation. 


29 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table 15 Minimum Levels of Confidence 70, of the Centred Confidence Intervals (In percent) — 
Case of Test Under “Full Environmental Reproducibility” (E3) 


( Caluse 6.5.6.2, 6.5.6.3, 6.5.6.4 ) 


Sample Size (n) 
10 20 30 60 120 00 
Test Conditions 
Full repeatability (r1) 91.4 95.0 96.0 97.0 97.6 98.5 
Extended repeatability (12) 84.7 90.7 92.4 94.1 95.1 96.8 
Limited reproducibility (R1) 78.6 86.4 88.7 91.1 92.5 95.0 
Full reproducibility (R2) 73.0 82.3 85.1 88.1 89.8 93.1 


NOTE — For sample size n not mentioned in this table, the figures may be interpolated using Fig. 2 or a linear interpolation. 
NOTE — Table 13, Table 14 and Table 15 are based on COST 323 recommendations. 


© 
BR 
= 
= 
D 
> 
° 
® 
° 
= 
° 
ke 
= 
= 
° 
O 


SP $£ ° @ OSHS GH oO 


—= lll - r2 


—--Il - r2 
—= lli - r1 
—= III - R2 


—--ll -r1 
—--ll - R2 
—= lll - R1 


< 


9 
ON S 


Ss 


Number of data (n) 


Fic. 2 MINIMUM SPECIFIED LEVELS OF CONFIDENCE Ip WitH Respect To THE TEST CONDITIONS 


NOTE — This figure is taken from COST 323 document which uses the European convention of representing decimal with “,” instead 


of “.” as per Indian or international convention. 


6.5.6.4 For legal applications (like direct enforcement), 
higher confidence levels may be required, such as 99 
percent or 99.5 percent. Even if such values exceed the 
values given in Table 13, Table 14 and Table 15, they 
may be obtained on a large enough tolerance 6 on the 
considered criterion (that is, using a lower statistical 
accuracy class). 
NOTE — For a given system accuracy, higher the tolerance, 
higher the confidence level. So, if a WIM system having 
statistical accuracy class X(61) with 20 = z1 for a particular 
criterion is reclassified to a lower accuracy class Y(62) where 
62 > 61, it will produce corresponding 20 = 22 for the same 
criterion, such that 72 > 71 enabling use of higher confidence 
levels than those given in Table 13, Table 14 and Table 15. 


30 


6.5.6.5 For acceptance of a WIM system in a 
designated statistical accuracy class, the lower bound 
of the confidence level a determined in accordance 
with 6.5.6.1 or the confidence level HI 6.5.6.2, as 
may be applicable, shall be equal to or more than the 
minimum required level of confidence (70) specified in 
6.5.6.3 for each applicable data item. 
NOTE — Depending on the type of WIM system and user 
specification, there may be additional criterion for acceptance 
in a designated statistical accuracy class as shown in Table 16 
specifying the limits of error. 


6.5.7 Limits of Error (For Vehicle Mass, Axle Load, 
Wheel Load) 


The limits of error with reference to statistical accuracy 
shall be determined by the upper bound or lower bound 
or both upper and lower bounds, as applicable, on 
value of relative error (6.5.7.1) or statistical parameters 
(6.5.7.2) as appropriate, in accordance with Table 16 
where 6 is the tolerance interval width of the statistical 
accuracy Class for the relevant data item and the value 
of k shall be as specified in Table 16 unless a different 
value is agreed between the user and the vendor. 


6.5.7.1 Relative error — The upper bound on the 
absolute value of relative error for each and every 
individual measurement shall be k6. 


6.5.7.2 The limits on the value of relevant statistical 
parameters for the data item of relevance with statistical 
accuracy class tolerance interval width 6 shall be as 
follows: 


a) dmin: If 6 min is the minimum value of 6 that 
yields lower bound of level of confidence (m) 
using equation (1) given in 6.5.6.1 equalling the 
minimum required level of confidence (70), then 
the lower bound of ómin shall be kò. 

NOTE — Mathematically, 6min is the minimum value of ó 
that satisfies the equation 20 = w((6 — m)/s — t ,1—a/2 Nn) 

w((-6 — m)/s + t ,1—o/2 /Nn) where the values of m and s 
derived from errors A.11.3). 

b) zor II‘: The minimum required level of 
confidence 20 shall be the lower bound of the 
level of Confidence, computed using equation (1) 
given in clause 6.5.6.1 with kó in place of 6. 
NOTE — Mathematically, K6, and the values of m and s 


derived from errors should satisfy the equation w((K6 — m)/s — 
t, |-a2 Nn) — w((-8 — m)/s + t,l-a2 /Nn) > 10). 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Alternatively, if it is permissible to determine the level 
of confidence in accordance with the requirements 
specified in test procedures (A-11), then the minimum 
required level of confidence 70 shall be the lower bound 
of the proportion of relative errors falling within the 
centred interval [-kð, kó] for the data item considered. 


6.6 Performance Tests 


Performance tests in respect of 6.3 and 6.5 shall be 
carried out following the same test requirements as 
specified in 9 for different levels of metrological 
controls, provided that tests for model (type) approval 
shall be carried out only if called for under Legal 
Metrology Act or Rules. 


7 METROLOGICAL REQUIREMENTS 


7.1 Applicability 


Metrological requirements specified in this clause shall 
be applicable unless superseded by law by metrological 
requirements established under the Legal Metrology 
Act or Rules. 


7.2 Metrological Verification Class 


WIM systems shall be classified into verification class 
in accordance with the requirements of verification by 
the Metrological Authority as shown in Table 17. 


7.2.1 For any of the verification classes from I to IV, 
if wheel load is to be verified by the Metrological 
Authority as a mandatory metrological requirement 
in accordance with 7.3.4.1 then the symbol * will be 
appended and the verification class shall be represented 
by I*, II*, I* or IV* as applicable. 


7.2.2 The display and printout of data items specified 
in Table 17 shall clearly indicate whether they are 


Table 16 
( Clause 5.4.2, 6.5.6.5, 6.5.7, 7.5.2.2, 9.1.3.3.1, 9.3.2, A-11.3.4.1 and A-113.4.2 ) 


Type of Test Domain of Application Type of Test Load/ Error or Statistical Value of k 
Vehicle Farameters Initial Verification In-Service 
Inspection 
Static weighing WIM system with static Standard weights or As specified in 0.5 1.0 
weighing capability masses! clause 6.5.7.1 
Measurement of If specified by user Reference impact force 
impact force? (9.1.3.2.2.3) generator’ 
Weighing-in- All WIM systems Reference vehicles As specified in clause 0.8 1.0 


motion 
Legend: 
1) In accordance with 10.4.1. 


6.5.7.2 a) or 6.5.7.2 b) 


2) This test shall be applicable only if specified in accordance with 9.1.3.2.2.3. 


3) In accordance with 10.6. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table 17 
( Clause 7.2 and 7.2.2 ) 


Data Item Verification Class: Metrological Verification Requirement 
Class 0 Class I Class II Class MI Class IV 
Vehicle mass No Yes No No Yes 
Single-Axle Load No No Yes! Yes Yes 
Axle-Group Load No No No Yes Yes 
Wheel Load No Metrological verification requirement to be decided in accordance with 7.3.4.1. 
Legend: 


1) Individual axle of a group will be evaluated as a single-axle 


metrologically verified or in accordance with the 
following: 


7.2.2.1 Class 0 


This verification class will be used for WIM systems 
that are not required to meet verification requirements 
of Metrological Authority for any data items. 
Alternatively, for such WIM systems, the verification 
class may be omitted altogether. For WIM system with 
verification class 0 or without any verification class, 
the verification will be done by appropriate testing 
authority/agency mutually agreed between the user and 
the vendor. The data file (5.7) and reports generated 
from the data file shall contain an associated clear 
warning that presented data on vehicle mass and/or 
single-axle loads or axle-group loads or wheel load, as 
applicable, are not metrologically verified. 


7.2.2.2 Class I 


This verification class will be used for WIM systems 
that are concerned only with determining the vehicle 
mass is required to be metrologically verified. The 
display and printout of single-axle loads or axle- 
group loads, as applicable, shall have an associated 
clear warning that these results are not metrologically 
verified. If applicable, and unless verification of 
wheel load is determined as mandatory metrological 
requirement, the display and printout of wheel load 
shall have an associated clear warning that these results 
are not metrologically verified. 


In addition to the vehicle mass, if the wheel load is to 
be metrologically verified, the verification class used 
will be Class I*. 


7.2.2.3 Class II 


This verification class will be used for WIM systems 
where individual axle loads are required to be 
metrologically verified. Under this verification class, 
individual axle of a group will be treated as a single- 
axle. The display and printout of vehicle mass or axle- 
group loads shall have an associated clear warning 


32 


that these results are not metrologically verified. If 
applicable, and unless verification of wheel load is 
determined as mandatory metrological requirement, 
the display and printout of wheel load shall have an 
associated clear warning that these results are not 
metrologically verified. 


In addition to the individual axle loads, if the wheel 
load is to be metrologically verified, the verification 
class used will be Class II*. 


7.2.2.4 Class IT 


This verification class will be used for WIM systems 
where single-axle loads and axle-group loads are 
required to be metrologically verified. The criteria for 
defining axle-groups shall be specified. The display and 
printout of vehicle mass and axle loads for axle of a 
group shall have an associated clear warning that these 
results are not metrologically verified. If applicable, 
and unless verification of wheel load is determined 
as mandatory metrological requirement, the display 
and printout of wheel load shall have an associated 
clear warning that these results are not metrologically 
verified. 


In addition to the single-axle loads and axle-group 
loads, if the wheel load is to be metrologically verified, 
the verification class used will be Class III*. 


7.2.2.5 Class IV 


This verification class will be used for WIM systems 
where vehicle mass, individual axle loads and axle- 
group loads are required to be metrologically verified. 
The criteria for defining axle-groups shall be specified. 
The display and printout of axle loads for axle of a 
group shall have an associated clear warning that these 
results are not metrologically verified. If applicable, 
and unless verification of wheel load is specified as 
mandatory metrological requirement, the display and 
printout of wheel load shall have an associated clear 
warning that these results are not metrologically 
verified. 


In addition to the vehicle mass, individual axle 
loads and axle-group loads, if the wheel load is to be 
metrologically verified, the verification class used will 
be Class IV*. 


7.2.3 The requirement for verification of data items by 
the Metrological Authority is an additional requirement 
for WIM systems classified under verification class. 
The collection and processing requirements for these 
data items and other data items pertaining to the WIM 
system depending upon the type classification shall 
continue to apply in accordance with the provisions 
of 5.7. 


7.3 Metrological Accuracy Class 


7.3.1 Under this classification, metrological accuracy 
classes are defined and the metrological accuracy 
class tolerance 6 specified, as one of the factors which 
determine the limit on the relative error (percent) of 
individual WIM measurement for a given level of 
compliance Q. 
NOTE — In the metrological approach to WIM system 
accuracy, under specified test conditions any individual 
measurement of a variable must have at least 2 proportion of 
test results within the interval [Wr(1- 6), Wr(1+ 6)] centred on 
the reference value Wr of the variable. Here, Q will depend on 
the WIM type (whether, it is an integral control instrument or 
otherwise), and on the weighing conditions (whether weighing 
is controlled or not). For static weighing and for weighing-in- 
motion under controlled conditions, this level of compliance 
must be 100 percent. 


7.3.2 Metrological accuracy classes of WIM systems 
are defined under two distinct families called: 

a) Particular accuracy classes, and 

b) general accuracy classes. 


The suitability of accuracy class family to be considered 
will depend on the application area, accuracy 
requirements and the availability of WIM system under 
that particular accuracy classification. 


7.3.3 Particular Accuracy Classes 


Particularaccuracy classes aredefinedinaccordancewith 
the procedure followed in the OIML recommendations. 
The accuracy classes and corresponding accuracy class 
tolerance 6 are given below. 


7.3.3.1 Vehicle mass: 


For determining the vehicle mass, WIM systems are 
divided into particular accuracy classes with accuracy 
class tolerance as shown in Table 18. 


Table 18 
( Clause 7.3.3.1 ) 


Accuracy Class for 


Vehicle mass 02. y 0.5 Í 2 > 10 
Accuracy Class 
Tolerance ë (percent) I| 95 l 2 a 19 


33 


IS 17008 : 2019 


7.3.3.2 Single-Axle load and if applicable axle-group 
load 


For determining single-axle loads and if applicable 
Axle-group loads, WIM systems are divided into 
particular accuracy classes with accuracy class 
tolerance as shown in Table 19. 


Table 19 
( Clause 7.3.3.2 ) 


Accuracy 
Class for 
Single-Axle 
Load / 
Axle-Group 
Load 


Accuracy 
Class 
Tolerance 
6 (percent) 


0.50 | 1.00 | 1.50 | 2.00 | 4.00 | 8.00 | 11.00} 15.00 | 20.00 


Legend: 


e-axle 
owest 


1) The accuracy class I is the class with lowest accuracy for sing 
load, whereas for axle-group load, the accuracy class with 
accuracy is H. 


7.3.3.3 Relationship between particular accuracy 
classes 


7.3.3.3.1 The relationship between the particular 
accuracy classes for single-axle load and the particular 
accuracy classes for vehicle mass shall be specified by 
the manufacturer. The relationship given in Table 20 
shall be used for informative purpose (not mandatory). 


Table 20 
( Clause 7.3.3.3.1, 7.4.5 and 7.5.2.3 ) 


Accuracy Class 
for Single- Axle 


Accuracy Class for Vehicle Mass 


Load 0.2 0.5 1 2 5 10 
A vL YL 
B VL VL yL 
C YL VL VL 
D VL vy VL 
E V vL 
F V YL 
G v V 
H v 
I V 


NOTE — VL is used to indicate that the relationship is 
valid for low-speed WIM systems only under current 
technological scenario. 


7.3.3.3.2 The relationship between the particular 
accuracy Classes for single-axle load and the particular 
accuracy classes for axle-group load shall be specified 
by the manufacturer. The relationship given in 
Table 21 shall be used for informative purpose (not 
mandatory). 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table 21 
( Clause 7.3.3.3.2, 7.4.5 and 7.5.2.3 ) 


Accuracy Class 
for Single-Axle 


Accuracy Class for Axle-Group Load 


Load A B C D E F G H 
A v 

B V 

C V 

D Vx 

E v 

F “¿h v 

G “h v 

H “¿h y 
I vh 


NOTE — vh is used to indicate that the relationship is 
valid for High-speed WIM systems only under current 
technological scenario. 


General accuracy classes are defined and corresponding 
accuracy class tolerance 6 are given in Table 22. 


NOTE — The particular accuracy classes make it possible to 
work out many different configurations of WIM systems. But 
the requirements of most applications can be covered by three 
particular accuracy classes and two more accuracy classes 
defined for lower accuracy requirements than those afforded 
by particular accuracy classes. These five accuracy classes are 
termed general accuracy classes. 


Table 22 
( Clause 7.3.4 and 7.3.4.1 ) 


Data Item General Accuracy Class: Accuracy 
Class Tolerance 6 (Percent) 
a(5) b(5) c(10) d(15) e 
Vehicle mass 5 5 10 15 >15 
Axle Group Load 5 8 15 20 > 20 
Single axle load 5 11 20 30 >30 
Wheel load 5 15 25 35 > 35 


NOTE — Currently only low speed weigh-in motion 
(LSWIM) systems are capable of complying with general 
accuracy class a(5). High speed weigh-in motion (HSWIM) 
systems are capable of complying with general accuracy 
class c (10) and in some cases b (5), but this situation may 
change in future with advancement in HSWIM technology. 


7.3.4.1 The tolerance criteria given in Table 22 on wheel 
load shall be considered a mandatory metrological 
requirement and used for determining metrological 
accuracy class only if it is so specified by the user in 
writing or it is so requested by the applicant during 
model (type) approval (9.1.3.2.2.2 IV). 


Otherwise, the given tolerance criteria for wheel load 
shall be treated as reasonable acceptable values for WIM 
systems but shall not be mandatory for compliance. 


34 


7.4 Scale Interval 


7.4.1 For a particular WIM System, one unique scale 
interval (D) shall be used for indicating or printing of 
vehicle mass and another unique scale interval (d) shall 
be used for indicating or printing of axle loads and if 
applicable wheel loads. 


7.4.2 The scale intervals of the indicating or printing 
devices shall be in the form 110s, 2x10s or 5x10s, s 
being a positive or negative whole number or zero. 


7.4.3 The relationship among the accuracy classes, the 
value of the scale intervals and the maximum capacity 
expressed in scale intervals shall be as specified in 
Table 23 for indicating or printing of vehicle mass, and 
Table 24 for indicating or printing of axle loads and if 
applicable wheel loads. 


7.4.4 The minimum capacity shall not be less than the 
load, expressed in scale intervals, specified in Table 
25 for indicating or printing of vehicle mass and for 
indicating or printing of axle loads. 


7.4.5 The relationship between particular accuracy 
classes for axle loads and the minimum capacity can 
be obtained from Table 25, using Table 20 and/or 
Table 21 (to correlate the particular accuracy class for 
single-axle loads and, if required, axle-group load with 
the particular accuracy class for vehicle mass). 


7.4.6 For a WIM system which is classified under a 
Statistical Accuracy Class and a Metrological Accuracy 
Class having different upper bounds for scale intervals, 
the lower of the two upper bounds will be chosen as 
the scale interval and the corresponding maximum 
capacity and minimum capacity values shall be decided 
in accordance with the requirements specified in Table 
24 and Table 25, respectively. 
NOTE — Table 23, Table 24 and Table 25 give the relationship 
between the accuracy classes, the scale intervals and the 
maximum or minimum capacity. It does not seek to indicate 
the relationship between the metrological accuracy classes and 
the statistical accuracy classes or the relationship between the 
particular accuracy classes and the general accuracy classes, 
and should not be used to infer any such relationship. 


7.5 Limits of Error (For Vehicle Mass, Axle Load, 
Wheel Load) 


7.5.1 The limits of error for vehicle mass, axle loads 
(single-axle, axle-group) and/or wheel-load, as may 
be applicable in accordance with functional type 
classification (4), shall be: 


a) The limits of error with respect to statistical 
accuracy class specified in 6.5.7, 

b) The limits of error with respect to metrological 

accuracy class specified in 7.5, that is, the 

maximum specified error (€) (7.5.2) for the 

metrological accuracy class for a level of 

compliance (Q) (7.5.3) equalling or exceeding a 


Table 23 Scale Interval for Vehicle Mass, D 


( Clause 7.4.3 and 7.4.6 ) 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Metrological Accuracy Class 


Statistical Scale Inte 


rval for Vehicle 


Maximum Capacity 


Accuracy Class Mass, D, (Kg) in Sscale Intervals 
Particular Accuracy General Accuracy Minimum Maximum 
Class Class 
0.2 <5 
0.5 <10 500 5 000 
1 <20 
2 a(5 A(5), B+(7) <50 
69) 50 2 000 
5 b(5) B(10) < 100 
10 c(10) C(15), D+(20) < 200 
20 1 000 
d(15), e D(25) or lower < 500 


Table 24 Scale Interval for Axle/Wheel Loads, d 


Metrological Accuracy Class 


( Clause 7.4.3 and 7.4.6 ) 


Statistical Scale In 


Accuracy Class 


terval for Axle/ 


Wheel Load, 


Maximum Capacity 
in Scale Intervals 


Particular Accuracy General Accuracy d, (Kg) Minimum Maximum 
Class Class 
A,B <2 
C <5 500 5 000 
D <10 
E a(5 A(5), B+(7 <20 
(5) (5), B+(7) sO z000 
F, G b(5) B(10) <50 
H, I c(10), d(15 C(15), D+(20 < 100 
(10), d(15) (15), D+(20) ij ooi 
< 200 


e 


D(25) or lower 


Table 25 Minimum Capacity 
( Clause 7.4.4, 7.4.5 and 7.4.6 ) 


Metrological Accuracy Class Statistical Accuracy Scale Interval Minimum Capacity 
Class in Scale Intervals 
Particular Accuracy General Accuracy Vehicle Mass, Axle/ Wheel 
Class for GVW Class D, (Kg) Load, d, (Kg) 
0.2 <5 
0.5 < 10 50 
1 < 20 <10 
2 a(5) A(5), B+(7) <50 <20 
5 b(5) B(10) <100 <50 16 
10 c(10), d(15) C(15), D+(20) <200 < 100 
e D(25) or lower < 500 <200 


35 


IS 17008 : 2019 


specified minimum required level of compliance 
(QO) (7.5.4), or 


c) The limits of error specified in 6.5.7 and 7.5. 
7.5.2 Maximum Specified Error, € 


NOTE — The criteria for determining the maximum specified 
error for weighing-in-motion and on static weighing are not 
the same. In case of the former it is based on relative error and 
expressed as a percentage whereas in case of the latter it is 
based on error and expressed as a number with unit (Kg). This 
means, different values of z will have to be used for weighing- 
in-motion and for static weighing. 


Maximum permissible error is the same as maximum 
specified error with 100 percent level of compliance.) 


7.5.2.1 Weighing-in-Motion 


The maximum specified error for weighing-in-motion 
will be the greatest of the absolute values of relative 
error specified in Table 26. 


Maximum permissible is the same as maximum 
specified error used in this specification with minimum 
level of compliance specified as 100 percent.) 


7.5.2.2 Static weighing 


WIM system for which static weighing of test 
loads is possible in accordance with functional type 
classification (4), the maximum specified error on static 
weighing for increasing or decreasing load shall be 
the appropriate value of error given in Table 16 or 
Table 27, whichever is more, as appropriate for the 
accuracy class of the WIM system. 


If it is not possible to test a sensor with static loads 
due to the difficulty of placing the load, static weighing 
tests may be carried out with simulated loads. 


If e is the error, the absolute value of error is given by 
e for e > 0, whereas for e < 0 it is given by -e. By using 
the modulus function, if e is the error, the absolute 
value of error can be expressed as |e].) 


7.5.2.3 The relationship between particular accuracy 
classes for axle loads and the maximum specified error 
on static weighing can be obtained from Table 27, using 
Table 20 and/or Table 21 (to correlate the particular 
accuracy class for single-axle loads and, if required, 


Table 26 Absolute Values of Relative Error for Weighing-in-Motion 
( Clause 9.1.3.3.2 and 9.3.2 ) 


Data Item Type of Test Vehicle Absolute Values of Relative Error (Percent) 
Initial Verification In-Service Inspection 
Vehicle mass All types of vehicles a) 0.5 x Accuracy Class Tolerance a) Accuracy Class Tolerance (6m), 


(6m), rounded to the nearest scale 


interval 


b) (D/Wr) x 100 x the number of axles 


rounded to the nearest scale interval 


b) (2D/Wr) x 100 x the number of 
axles in the totalization! 


in the totalization! 


Axle Load (Single- 
Axle Load or Axle- 


Two-Axle Rigid Vehicle? 


c) 


0.5 x Accuracy Class Tolerance (6s c) 


or g), rounded to the nearest scale 


Accuracy Class Tolerance (6s or 6g), 
rounded to the nearest scale interval 


(D/Ar) x 100 x the number of axles 


(2d/Ar) x 100 x the number of axles 


0.5 x Accuracy Class Tolerance 
(ów), rounded to the nearest scale 


Group Load) interval 
d) (D/4r) x 100 
e) (2d/Ar) x 100 
All types of vehicles f) 
except Two-Axle Rigid 
i 2 
Vehicle g) 
in the group? 
h) 
in the group? 
Wheel Load All types of vehicles i) 
interval 
Legend: 


g) 


h) 


Accuracy Class Tolerance (ós or 
6g), rounded to the nearest scale 
interval 

(2D/Ar) x 100 


(4d/4r) x 100 


2 x Accuracy Class Tolerance (6s 
or 6g), rounded to the nearest scale 
interval 

(2D/Ar) x 100 x the number of 
axles in the group? 

(4d/Ar) x 100 x the number of 
axles in the group? 


Accuracy Class Tolerance (ðw), 
rounded to the nearest scale interval 


1) Number of axles in totalization for each reference vehicle will be the sum of the single axles and the axles of groups for the reference 


vehicle. 


2) Two-Axle Rigid Vehicle can be with four tyres or six tyres. 


3) For single-axle the number of axles in group will be taken as 1. 


NOTE — If r is the relative error, the absolute value of relative error is given by r for r > 0, whereas for r < 0 it is given by -r. By 
using the modulus function, if r is the relative error, the absolute value of relative error can be expressed as |r]. 


36 


axle-group load with the particular accuracy class for 
vehicle mass). 


7.5.3 Level of Compliance, Q 


7.5.3.1 The level of compliance (Q) will be the 
proportion of data observed and recorded during weigh- 
in-motion test for which the absolute value of relative 
error is less than or equal to the maximum specified 
error for weighing-in-motion specified in 7.5.2.1. 
NOTE — The level of compliance Q is the same as the level of 


confidence II obtained in accordance with 6.5.6.2 with [-s, €] 
replacing [-6, ó]. 


7.5.3.2 The level of compliance shall be determined in 
accordance with the procedure specified in A-11. 


7.5.4 Minimum Required Level of Compliance, QO 


The minimum required level of compliance (Q0) will 
depend on the type of WIM system, the data item 
(weighing-in-motion) or test item (static weighing), 
the type of test, and shall be the appropriate value as 
specified in Table 28. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


7.6 Installation and Testing of WIM Systems 


7.6.1 For WIM systems to be used in applications where 
the individual axle or axle-group loads are required, 
the installation and testing requirements specified in 
Annex B and 11 respectively, shall be applicable. 


7.6.2 The following effects on the weighing results 
should be taken into account: 


a) Lateral forces due to interactions of the control 
instrument with the vehicle; 


b) Forces on part of the vehicle by different transient 
behaviour and friction within the axle suspensions; 
and 


c) Forces on part of the ramps if there are different 
levels between the control instrument and ramp 
that could lead to varying distribution of the axle 
load. 


7.6.3 Further practical guidance on the installation and 
operation of WIM systems is provided in Annex C. 


Table 27 Maximum Specified Error on Static Weighing 
( Clause 5.4.2, 7.5.2.3, 10.4.1, 7.5.2.2, A.7.2.1, A.7.2.3, A.7.2.5, A.7.2.6, A.7.2.7 and A.7.2.8 ) 


Metrological Accuracy Class Statistical Accuracy Load, m, Expressed Absolute Values of Error (Kg) 
Particular Accuracy General Accuracy Class ini Scale Tütervals Initial In-Service 
Class for Vehicle Mass Class Verification Inspection 

0.2 0 <m < 500 0.5 D 1.0 D 

0.5 500 < m < 2000 10D 2.0D 

1 2000 <m < 5000 1.5D 3.0 D 

2 a(5) 0 <m < 200 1.0 D 2.0D 

5 b(5) A(5), B+(7) 200 < m < 2000 1.5D 3.0 D 

10 c(10), d(15) B(10) 0<m<20 1.0 D 2.0D 

e C(15), D+(20) 20<m< 500 15D 3.0D 


NOTE — This clause can be applied to large scales or large-bas' 


ed sensors ( that is, longer than the tyre footprint in the direction of 


the traffic flow sensors), which are able to measure static loads. In particular cases it may be applied to some strip sensors, and may 
be extended with caution to sensors calibrated with shock devices. Type 1 WIM systems and Type 5 WIM systems when used for 
applications in the legal domain, are some of the WIM systems to which this clause is applicable. 


Table 28 Minimum Required Level of Compliance, Q0 


( Clause 7.5.4 ) 
Type of Test Data Item / Test Item Minimum Level of Compliance (Percent) for Different Types! of WIM Systems 
Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4 Type 5 

Static Weighing? Test Loads? 100 100(2) — — 100 

Vehicle mass 

Axle-group Load 
Weighing-in- motion 100 95 

Single axle load 

Wheel load 


Legend: 


1) Types of WIM systems are given in Table 1. 
2) Applicable only for integral control instruments. 
3) Test loads can be standard weights or standard masses. 


37 


IS 17008 : 2019 


7.7 Agreement Between Indicating and Printing 
Devices 


For the same load, there shall be no difference between 
the weighing results provided by any two devices 
having the same scale interval. 


7.8 Influence Quantities 


For WIM systems to be used in applications in the legal 
domain, influence factor and disturbance tests shall be 
applicable. Refer to 11 for test conditions. 


7.8.1 Temperature 


7.8.1.1 Temperature limits 


WIM systems shall comply with the appropriate 
metrological and technical requirements for ambient 
air temperatures at sites. The ambient air temperature 
limits shall be specified using any of the lower and 
upper values as follows: 


a) Upper temperature limits: 
70°C 

b) Lower temperature limits: +5°C, -10°C, -25°C, 
-40°C 


30°C, 40°C, 55°C, 


Unless otherwise specified by the user, the ambient 
temperature limit shall be considered from -25 °C to 
+55 °C. 


The limits of temperature shall be specified in the 
descriptive markings of the WIM instrument. 


7.8.1.2 Temperature effect on no-load indication 


The indication at zero or near zero shall not vary by 
more than one scale interval for a difference in ambient 
temperature of 5°C. 


7.8.2 Power Supply 


WIM systems shall be designed to operate with the 
local electrical power of the country (that is, nominal 
voltage (Unom) of 230 V, a.c., 50 Hz power in India) 
under normal conditions, and with battery power (d.c.) 
when electrical power is not available or is not used. 


WIM instruments operating in electrical/electronic 
mode shall comply with the appropriate metrological 
and technical requirements, if the voltage supply varies 
from the nominal voltage, Unom (if only one voltage is 
marked on the instrument), or from the upper and lower 
limits of the voltage range, Umin — Umax, marked on 
the instrument at: 


a) AC mains power: 

Lower limit is 0.85 x Unom or 0.85 x Umin, upper 
limit is 1.10 x Unom or 1.10 x Umax. 

b) DC mains power, including rechargeable 
battery voltage supply if the battery can be 
fully (re)charged during the operation of the 
instrument: 


38 


Lower limit is the minimum operating voltage, 
upper limit is 1.20 x Unom or 1.20 x Umax (for a 
rechargeable battery, Umax is the voltage of a new 
or fully charged battery of the type specified by 
the manufacturer). 


c 


— 


Battery power (DC), non-rechargeable 
batteries, and also including rechargeable 
batteries if (re)charging of batteries during the 
operation of the instrument is not possible: 


Lower limit is the minimum operating voltage; 
upper limit is Unom or Umax. 


d 


wm 


12 V or 24 V motor vehicle battery power: 


Lower limit is 9 V (for a 12 V battery) or 16 V (for 
a 24 V battery), upper limit is 16 V (for a 12 V 
battery) or 32 V (for a 24 V battery). 

NOTE — The minimum operating voltage is defined as the 
lowest possible operating voltage below which the electrical 
powered WIM instrument is automatically switched off. 


Battery-operated and DC mains powered WIM 
instruments shall either continue to function correctly 
or not indicate any mass or load values if the voltage 
is below the manufacturer’s specified value, the latter 
being larger than or equal to the minimum operating 
voltage. 


7.9 Scale Interval for Stationery Load 


For WIM systems having static weighing capability, if 
the scale interval for stationary loads is not equal to 
the scale interval, D (for tests on full-draught weighing) 
or d (for tests other than on full- draught weighing), 
it shall not be readily accessible when the instrument 
is in use for weighing-in- motion. In addition, if the 
instrument is not verified for use as a non-automatic 
weighing instrument (5.2.4), the scale interval for 
stationary loads shall not be readily accessible and shall 
only be used for static testing. 


7.10 Operating Speed 
WIM systems shall comply with the appropriate 
metrological and technical requirements at vehicle 
speeds within the operating speed range: 

a) given by the operating speed interlock; or 

b) determined during the weighing test 


Operating speed shall be indicated and/or printed only 
after the entire vehicle has been weighed in motion. 


8 REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRONIC 
INSTRUMENTS 


Electronic instruments forming a part of the WIM 
system shall comply with the following requirements, 
in addition to the applicable requirements of all other 
clauses. 


8.1 General Requirements 


8.1.1. Rated Operating Conditions 


Electronic weighing instruments used in WIM systems 
shall be designed and manufactured so that they do not 
cause the WIM system to exceed, under rated operating 
conditions, the limits of error specified in 6.5.7 and/or 
7.5, as may be applicable in accordance with functional 
type classification (4). 


8.1.2. Disturbances 


Electronic weighing instruments shall be designed 
and manufactured so that when they are exposed to 
disturbances either: 


a) significant faults do not occur; or 


b) significant faults are detected and acted upon as 
specified in 8.3.1. 


NOTE — A fault equal to or less than 1 D or 1 d, as applicable, 
is allowed irrespective of the value of the error of indication. 


8.1.3. Durability 


The requirements in 8.1.1 and 8.1.2 shall be met durably 
in accordance with the intended use of the instruments. 


8.1.4. Evaluation For Compliance 


A type of an electronic weighing instruments is 
presumed to comply with the requirements in 8.1.1, 
8.1.2 and 8.1.3 if it passes the examination and tests 
specified in Annex A. 


8.2 Application 

The requirements in 8.1.2 may be applied separately to: 
a) each individual cause of significant fault; and/or 
b) each part of the electronic instruments. 


The choice of whether 8.1.2 a) or b) is applied is left to 
the manufacturer. 


8.3 Functional Requirements 


8.3.1 Acting upon a Significant Fault 


When a significant fault has been detected, the 
instruments shall either be made _ in-operative 
automatically, or a visual or audible indication shall be 
provided and shall continue until the user takes action 
or the fault disappears. 


8.3.2 Switch-On Procedure 


Upon switch-on, a special procedure such as a display 
test facility which is automatically initiated at switch- 
on of indication (in the case of electronic instruments 
permanently connected to the mains at switch-on of 
indication) shall be performed that shows all relevant 
signs of the indicator in their active and non-active 
states sufficiently long to be checked by the operator. 
This is not applicable for non-segmented displays, on 
which failures become evident, for example screen- 
displays, matrix-displays, etc. 


39 


IS 17008 : 2019 


8.3.3 Influence Factors 


An electronic weighing instrument shall comply 
with the requirements of 7.8, and in addition it shall 
maintain its metrological and technical characteristics 
under specified climatic environment (5.9.4). 


8.3.4 Warm-Up Time 


During the warm-up time of an electronic weighing 
instrument, there shall be no indication or transmission 
of the weighing result and automatic operation shall be 
inhibited. 

8.3.5 Interface 


An instrument may be equipped with communication 
interfaces (see 3.2.7) enabling the coupling of the 
instrument to external equipment and user interfaces 
(see 3.2.8) permitting the exchange of information 
between a human user and the instrument. When 
an interface is used, the instrument shall continue to 
function correctly and its accuracy and metrological 
functions (including all metrologically relevant 
parameters and software) shall not be influenced. 


8.3.5.1 Interface documentation 


The documentation on the instrument interfaces shall 
include: 


a) A list of all commands (for example, menu 
items); 


b) Description of the software interface; 
c) A list of all commands together; and 


d) A brief description of their meaning and their 
effect on the functions and data of the instrument. 


8.3.5.2 Securing of interfaces 


Communication and user interfaces shall not allow 
the legally relevant software and functions of the 
instrument and its measurement data to be inadmissibly 
influenced by other interconnected instruments, or by 
disturbances acting on the interface. 


An interface through which the functions mentioned 
above cannot be performed or initiated, need not be 
secured. Other interfaces shall be secured as follows: 


a) Data shall be protected ( for example, with a 
protective interface as defined in 3.2.9) against 
accidental or deliberate interference during the 
transfer; 


All functions in the software interface shall be 
subject to the requirements for securing software 
in 5.10.2; 


All functions in the hardware interface shall be 
subject to the requirements for securing hardware 
in 5.10; 


It shall be easily possible to verify the authenticity 
and integrity of data transmitted to and from the 
instrument; and 


b) 


c) 


d) 


IS 17008 : 2019 


e) Functions performed or initiated by other connected 
instruments through the interfaces shall meet the 
appropriate requirements of this specification. 


Other instruments or devices required by national 
regulations to be connected to the interfaces of an 
instrument in the WIM system shall be secured to 
automatically inhibit the operation of the WIM system 
for reasons of the non-presence or improper functioning 
of the required instrument or device. 


9 METROLOGICAL CONTROLS 


Consistent with the Legal Metrological Act or Rules, 
metrological controls of WIM system shall consist of 
the following: 


a) Model (type) approval; 

b) Initial verification; 

c) Subsequent verification; and 
d) In-service inspection 


Model (type) approval shall be done by the Metrological 
Authority. Other metrological controls shall be 
exercised by the Metrological Authority wherever 
required by law, and elsewhere by any testing authority 
or agency agreed between the user and the vendor. 


9.1 Model (Type) Approval 


9.1.1 Documentation 


The application for model (type) approval of WIM 
system shall include documentation which provides the 
following information: 


a) Functional type classification (4) with complete 
information (4.4); 


b) Metrological characteristics of the WIM system; 


c) A standard set of specifications for the WIM 
system; 


d) A functional description of the instruments, 
components and devices; 


e) Drawings, diagrams and general software 
information, explaining the design, construction 
and operation; 


f) Any document or other evidence demonstrating 
that the design and construction of the WIM 
system complies with the requirements of this 
document; and 


g) Any other document required under Legal 
Metrology Act and Rules. 


9.1.2 General Requirements 


Model (type) evaluation shall be carried out on at least 
one, and normally not more than three, WIM system 
that represent the definitive model. At least one WIM 
system shall be completely installed at a typical site and 
if so required by the Metrological Authority, at least 
one WIM system shall be submitted, and if that is not 


40 


possible then the major instruments shall be submitted, 
and if that too is not possible then at least the major 
components of the instruments shall be submitted; in a 
form suitable for simulation testing in a laboratory. The 
evaluation shall consist of the tests specified in 9.1.3. 


9.1.3 Model (Type) Evaluation 


The submitted documents shall be examined and tests 
carried out to verify that the WIM system complies 
with the: 


a) Functional type classification specified by the 
applicant consistent with clause 4; 


b) Technical requirements in clause 5; 


c) Metrological requirements in clause 7, particularly 
with reference to the appropriate limits of error 
when using the range of reference vehicles 
(10.5) and operating conditions specified by the 
manufacturer; 


d) Accuracy requirement in clause 6.5, particularly 
with reference to the appropriate limits of error 
(6.5.7) when using the range of reference vehicles 
(10.5), and operating conditions specified by 
the manufacturer, if statistical accuracy class is 
specified under 9.1.1 consistent with the functional 
type classification; 


e) Requirements for electronic instruments in 8. 


The appropriate metrological authority shall: 


a) Conduct the tests in a manner which prevents 
unnecessary commitment of resources; 


b) Permit the results of these tests to be assessed for 
initial verification when the same instrument is 
involved; 


Ensure that an instrument used in non-automatic 
(static) operation in accordance with 5.2.4, meets 
the weighing performance test requirements for 
non-automatic weighing instruments published 
in Seventh Schedule-Heading-A of the Legal 
Metrology (General) Rules. 

NOTE — OIML advises the Metrological Authority to accept, 


with the consent of the applicant, test data obtained from other 
metrological authorities without repeating the tests. 


c 


ma 


9.1.3.1 In-motion tests 


A complete WIM system, and if applicable complete 
WIM instrument(s) shall be tested: 


a) In accordance with functional type classification 
using statistical principles in 6 or metrological 
principles in 7 or both; 


b) In accordance with the test methods in 10, using 
the range of reference vehicles specified in 10.5 
and applicable test plans and test conditions 
specified in 10.7; 


c) under the rated operating conditions in accordance 
with the model (type) specification. 


9.1.3.2 Determination of errors for automatic weighing 


9.1.3.2.1 For data item(s) of relevance, the error and the 
relative error shall be determined for normal automatic 
weighing operation using test value and reference 
values for reference vehicles, as applicable. 


NOTE — For a data item represented by the suffix j, if 1 is the 
test value of the data item, and R is the reference value of the 
data item, then the error e; and the relative error x; shall be e = 
I-R 
J J 


R 


J 


I =x; and x, = 
9.1.3.2.2 Test value and reference value 
9.1.3.2.2.1 Vehicle mass 


Test value: The test value for vehicle mass shall be 
the indicated reference vehicle mass observed and 
recorded (10.11) as appropriate. 


Reference value: The reference value for vehicle mass 
shall be the conventional true value of the reference 
vehicle mass as defined (10.9) as appropriate. 


9.1.3.2.2.2 Axle load (single—axle, axle-group, axle of a 
group) and wheel load 


Subject to the provisions of 9.1.3.2.2.3, the test value 
and reference value of wheel load and/or axle load for 
singe-axle, axle-group, and/or axle of a group, as may 
be applicable, shall be as follows: 


a) Axle load (single-axle) 


The requirements in this subclause are only applicable 
to WIM systems which are designated to determine 
single-axle loads. 


1) Test value: The test value of single-axle load 
shall be the indicated single-axle load of the 
reference vehicle observed and recorded 
(10.12) as appropriate. 


2) Reference value: The reference value of 
single-axle load shall be one of the following in 
accordance with the axle type of the reference 


vehicle: 


— 


i) For two-axle rigid reference vehicle, the 
conventional true value of static reference 
single-axle load (10.10) as appropriate 
determined through static weighing test. 


ii) For all other reference vehicle axle types, 
the corrected mean single-axle load 
(10.16) as appropriate determined through 
in motion test. 


For applications where vehicle mass is not 
required to be determined or for applications other 
than those in the legal domain, and if so agreed 
between the user or the metrological authority 
or testing authority/agency as appropriate and 
the applicant or vendor as appropriate, it shall 
be permissible to use the mean single-axle load 
(10.14.1) as appropriate in place of corrected 
mean single-axle load in 9.1.3.2.2.2 a) 2 (ii). 


41 


b 


— 


IS 17008 : 2019 


NOTE — Examples of applications where vehicle mass is not 
required are axle load surveys or any other application where 
WIM systems with Type f or Type f* vehicle data type are to 
be used. 


Axle-group load 


The requirements in this subclause are only 
applicable to WIM systems which are designated 
to determine axle-group loads. 


1) Test value: The test value of axle-group load 
shall be one of the following: 


i) For WIM systems which determine and 
indicate the loads independent of single- 
axles or axle- group, by summation of 
individual axle loads for the axle-group 
of the reference vehicle, observed and 
recorded as single-axle loads (10.12) as 
appropriate, in accordance with national 
regulations for axle-group load. 

ii) For WIM instruments which automatically 
determine and indicate single-axle loads 
and axle- group loads separately, by the 
indicated axle-group load of the reference 
vehicle observed and recorded (10.12) as 
appropriate. 

2) Reference value: The reference value of axle- 
group load shall be one of the following: 


For WIM systems which determine and 
indicate the axle loads independent of 
single-axles or axle-group, the summation of 
corrected mean individual axle load (10.16) 
as appropriate for the axle-group of the 
reference vehicle, determined in accordance 
with national regulations for axle- group load 
through in motion test. 

ii) For WIM instruments which automatically 
determine and indicate single-axle loads and 
axle- group loads separately, by the corrected 
mean axle-group load (10.16) as appropriate 
of the reference vehicle, determined through 
in motion test. 


For applications where vehicle mass is not 
required to be determined or for applications other 
than those in the legal domain, and if so agreed 
between the user or the metrological authority 
or testing authority/agency as appropriate and 
the applicant or vendor as appropriate, it shall be 
permissible to use the mean individual axle load 
(10.14.4) as appropriate in place of corrected 
mean individual axle load in 9.1.3.2.2.2 II 2 (a), if 
applicable. 


For applications where vehicle mass is not 
required to be determined or for applications other 
than those in the legal domain, and if so agreed 
between the user or the metrological authority 
or testing authority/agency as appropriate and 
the applicant or vendor as appropriate, it shall 
be permissible to use the mean axle-group 


IS 17008 : 2019 


c) 


d) 


load (10.14.2) as appropriate in place of corrected 
mean axle-group load in 9.1.3.2.2.2b) 2 (ii), if 
applicable. 

NOTE — Examples of applications where vehicle mass is not 
required are axle load surveys or any other application where 
WIM systems with Type f or Type f* vehicle data type are to 
be used. 


Axle load (axle of a group) 


The requirements in this subclause are only 
applicable to WIM systems which are designated 
to determine axle load for axle of a group in 
compliance with specified statistical accuracy 
requirements, and so mentioned in the application 
for model (type) approval, subject to any exception 
or exclusion that may be mentioned in the said 
application. 


1) Test value: The test value of axle load for 
axle of a group shall be the indicated axle load 
for axle of a group of the reference vehicle 
observed and recorded (10.12) as appropriate. 


2) Reference value: The reference value of 
axle load for axle of a group shall be the 
corrected mean axle load for axle of a group 
(10.16) as appropriate of the reference vehicle, 
determined through in motion test. 


For applications where vehicle mass is not 
required to be determined or for applications other 
than those in the legal domain, and if so agreed 
between the user or the metrological authority 
or testing authority/agency as appropriate and 
the applicant or vendor as appropriate, it shall 
be permissible to use the mean axle load for axle 
of a group (10.14.3) as appropriate in place of 
corrected mean axle load for axle of a group in 
clause 9.1.3.2.2.2 c) 2. 

NOTE — Examples of applications where vehicle mass is not 
required are axle load surveys or any other application where 
WIM systems with Type f or Type f* vehicle data type are to 
be used. 


Wheel load 


The requirements in this subclause are only 
applicable to WIM systems which are designated 
to determine wheel load with mandatory 
compliance to metrological accuracy requirements 
or performance requirements, and so mentioned in 
the application for model (type) approval. 


1) Test value: The test value of wheel load for 
automatic weighing shall be the indicated 
wheel load of the reference vehicle observed 
and recorded (10.13) as appropriate. 


2) Reference value: The reference value of wheel 
load shall be the corrected mean wheel load 
(10.17) as appropriate determined through in 
motion test. 


For applications where vehicle mass is not required 
to be determined or for applications other than in 


42 


the legal domain, and if so agreed between the user 
or the metrological authority or testing authority/ 
agency as appropriate and the applicant or vendor 
as appropriate, it shall be permissible to use the 
mean wheel load (10.15) appropriate in place of 
corrected mean wheel load in 9.1.3.2.2.2d) 2. 
NOTE — Examples of applications where vehicle mass is not 
required are axle load surveys or any other application where 
WIM systems with Type f or Type f* vehicle data type are to 
be used. 


9.1.3.2.2.3 Axle load and/or wheel load as impact force 


If proposed by the applicant and agreed by the 
Metrological Authority, the test value and reference 
value of wheel load and/or axle load for single—axle, 
axle-group, or axle of a group as may be applicable, 
shall be as follows: 


a) The test value shall be the indicated value of 
the impact force, consistent with the data item, 
imparted by the reference impact force generator 
(10.6), and observed and recorded (10.20) as 
appropriate; and 

b) The reference value shall be the known value 

of impact force, consistent with the data item, 
imparted by the reference impact force generator 
(10.6). 
NOTE — For WIM systems whose primary objective is the 
measurement of true value of dynamic axle loads or the true 
value of dynamic wheel loads with high accuracy, it may be 
more appropriate to use test values and reference values given 
in 9.1.3.2.2.3 as compared to those given in 9.1.3.2.2.2. 


9.1.3.3 Limits of error 


The limits of error shall be determined with reference 
to statistical accuracy class or metrological accuracy 
class or both in accordance with the functional type 
classification of the WIM system. 


9.1.3.3.1 Limits of error with reference to statistical 
accuracy class 


The limits of error with reference to the statistical 
accuracy class of a WIM system shall be determined 
in accordance with the procedure specified in A-9 and 
if applicable A-10 and A-11 as applicable for model 
(type) approval and using the value of k as specified 
in Table 16 for initial verification, as appropriate, and 
with the minimum required level of confidence (70) as 
specified in 6.5.6.3 with reference to test plans (10.7) as 
applicable for model (type) approval. 


9.1.3.3.2 Limits of error with reference to metrological 
accuracy Class 


The limits of error with reference to the statistical 
accuracy class of a WIM system shall be determined 
in accordance with the procedure specified in A-9 and 
if applicable A-10 and A-11 as applicable for model 
(type) approval with the maximum specified error 
shall be as specified in Table 26 for initial verification, 


as appropriate, and the minimum required level of 
compliance be as specified in Table 26 as applicable. 


9.1.3.4 Simulation tests 


Influence factors shall be applied during simulation 
tests in a manner that will reveal an alteration of the 
weighing result for any weighing process to which the 
WIM system could be applied, in accordance with 7.8 
and 8. 


Simulated tests shall be performed on complete WIM 
system unless the size and/or configuration of the 
instruments make it impossible to test them in their 
complete form. In such cases, testing is allowed with 
a load signal generator taking the place of load 
receptors. 


The Metrological Authority can accept a manufacturer’s 
proposal to modify the method and manner in which 
simulated tests are performed, if suitable with regards 
to the specifics of the technology and design of the 
WIM systems’ measurement chain 


Simulation tests for determination of limits of error of 
module(s) with reference to statistical accuracy class 
shall not be mandatory for model (type) approval and 
shall be carried out only if specifically agreed between 
the applicant and the Metrological Authority and in 
accordance with mutually agreed procedure. 


9.1.3.4.1 Apportioning of errors 


Where modules of a WIM system or a WIM instrument, 
as the case may be, are tested separately the following 
requirements shall apply: 


9.1.3.4.1.1 For tests with reference to statistical 
accuracy class, if applicable, the error limits shall be 
determined in accordance with the procedure proposed 
by the applicant and agreed by the Metrological 
Authority. 


9.1.3.4.1.2 For tests with reference to metrological 
accuracy class, the error limits shall be equal to a 
fraction, pi, of the maximum specified errors or the 
allowed variations of the indication of the complete 
instrument or system, with accuracy class and level of 
compliance level taken to be the same as that of the 
complete WIM system or WIM instrument, as the case 
may be, f which the module is a part. 


The fractions pi shall satisfy the equation 


The fraction, pi, shall be chosen by the manufacturer of 
the module and shall be verified by an appropriate test, 
taking into account the following conditions: 


a) For purely digital devices, pi may be equal to 0; 
b) For weighing modules, pi may be equal to 1; and 


c) For all other modules (including digital load 
cells), p, shall not exceed 0.8 and shall not be less 
than 0.3, when more than one module contributes 
to the effect in question. 


43 


IS 17008 : 2019 


9.1.3.4.1.3 For mechanical structures including 
weighbridges evidently designed and manufactured 
according to sound engineering practice, an overall 
fraction pi = 0.5 may be applied without any test, vfor 
example, when levers are made of the same material and 
when the chain of levers has two planes of symmetry 


Ifthe metrological characteristics of the load cell or other 
major component have been evaluated in accordance 
with the requirements of non-automatic weighing 
instruments published in Seventh Schedule-Heading-A 
of the Legal Metrology (General) Rules or the Indian 
Standard Specification for Electronic Weighing System 
(IS 9281) or any other applicable Indian Standard or 
any applicable OIML Recommendation (R 60, etc.), 
that evaluation shall be used to aid model (type) 
evaluation if so requested by the applicant. 


9.1.4 Provision of Means for Testing 


For the purposes of testing, the applicant may be 
required to furnish the Metrological Authority with the 
test vehicles, material, qualified personnel and a control 
instrument. The WIM system under test may be used as 
the control instrument provided that it complies with 
the requirements in 10.2.1. 


9.1.5 Place of Testing 


WIM system submitted for type approval may be tested 
at anyone of the following places: 


a) On a site at which all necessary tests can 
be conducted and agreed upon between the 
Metrological Authority and the applicant; 


b) At a laboratory considered appropriate by the 
Metrological Authority; and 


c) At any other suitable place mutually agreed 
upon between the Metrological Authority and the 
applicant. 


9.2 Initial Verification 


9.2.1 Tests 


WIM systems shall be tested to verify that they comply 
with the requirements in 5, 6 and 7 (except 7.8) for any 
vehicle(s) and product(s) loaded on a vehicle for which 
they are intended and when operated under normal 
conditions of use. 


Tests shall be carried out in-situ, in anormal installation: 


a) Inrespect of compliance with 5, 6 (except 6.3) and 
7, by the Metrological Authority for WIM systems 
with verification class I, IL III or IV; and by an 
appropriate testing authority or agency agreed 
between the user and the vendor for WIM systems 
with verification class 0 or without any specified 
verification class; 


b 


x 


inrespect of compliance with 6.3 by an appropriate 
testing authority or agency agreed between the 
user and the vendor. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


The WIM system shall be installed so that an automatic 
weighing operation will be the same for testing as it is 
for a normal operation. 


The Metrological Authority or the appropriate testing 
authority/agency agreed between the user and the 
vendor, as the case may be, shall conduct the tests in 
a manner that prevents an unnecessary commitment 
of resources. In appropriate situations and to avoid 
duplicating tests previously performed on the WIM 
system for model (type) evaluation under 9.1.3, the 
authority/agency may use the results of observed tests 
for initial verification. 


9.2.1.1 In-motion tests 
In-motion tests shall be conducted: 


a) In accordance with the descriptive markings 
(5.12); 

b) Under the rated conditions for which the system is 
intended; 


c) In accordance with the test methods in 10, with 
the reference vehicles in accordance with test 
plans and test conditions (if applicable) for initial 
verification (10.7.2). However, for systems to be 
used in applications in the legal domain where the 
axle load is required, the test utilizing the two-axle 
rigid reference vehicle must be conducted. 


d 


wn 


In accordance with test conditions applicable for 
initial verification in 10.7.2, if statistical accuracy 
is to be determined. 


9.2.1.2 In-motion test error evaluation 


9.2.1.2.1 Determination of error 


Error and relative error shall be determined for data 
item of relevance in accordance with 9.1.3.2, provided 
that for determination of wheel load and/or axle loads 
the use of impact force measurements in accordance 
with 9.1.3.2.2.3 shall be permissible if agreed between 
the vendor and the Metrological Authority or other 
appropriate testing authority/agency, as applicable. 


9.2.1.2.2 Limits of error 


The limits of error shall be determined in accordance 
with 9.1.3.3 with reference to statistical accuracy class 
or metrological accuracy class or both as applicable 
under the functional type classification of the WIM 
system with the limits of error with reference to 
statistical accuracy class in accordance with the same 
provisions as in clause 9.1.3.3.1 with the exception that 
the test plans and test conditions (10.7.2) shall be as 
applicable for initial verification. 


9.2.2 Provision of Means for Testing 


For the purposes of testing, the applicant may be 
required to furnish the Metrological Authority or other 
appropriate testing authority/agency, as applicable, 
with the test vehicles, material, qualified personnel 


44 


and a control instrument. The WIM system under test 
may be used as the control instrument provided that it 
complies with the requirements in 10.2.1. 


9.2.3 Place of Testing 


Initial verification tests shall be conducted entirely at 
the place of installation, and during testing the WIM 
system shall include all components and parts which 
form the system as intended for normal use. 


9.3 Subsequent Metrological Control 


9.3.1 Subsequent Verification 


Subsequent verification shall be carried out in 
accordance with the same provisions as in 9.2 for initial 
verification. 


9.3.2 In-Service Inspection 


In-service inspection shall be carried out in accordance 
with the same provisions as in 9.2 for initial verification, 
with the following exceptions: 


a) For determining the limits of error with reference 
to statistical accuracy class: 


1) The test plan and test conditions (10.7.2) shall 
be as applicable for in-service inspection, 
for determining the minimum sample size in 
accordance with the provisions of 9.1.3.3.1 
and for determining the minimum required 
level of confidence (70) in accordance with the 
provisions of 9.1.3.3.2; and 

2) The value of k to be considered in accordance 

with 9.1.3.3.1 shall be as specified in Table 16 

for in-service inspection. 


b) In evaluating the limits of error with respect 
to metrological accuracy class, the maximum 
specified error shall be as specified in Table 26 for 
in-service inspection. 


10 TEST METHODS 


10.1 Test Procedures 


10.1.1 Vehicle Mass 


For the vehicle mass a complete WIM system shall be 
tested for compliance with the requirements specified 
in a) or b) or both, as may be applicable under the 
functional type classification (4): 


a) Clause 6.5.4, using the range of vehicles specified 
in 10.5 and under test conditions specified in test 
plans (10.7) as appropriate, and if applicable also 
the integral control instrument (10.2.1) shall be 
tested; and 


Clause 7.3.3.1 or clause 7.3.4, as applicable, 
using the range of vehicles specified in 10.5, and 
if applicable also the integral control instrument 
(10.2.1) shall be tested. 


b 


wm 


10.1.2 Axle Loads and Wheel Load 


10.1.2.1 Single—axle load and axle-group load 


For single-axle loads, and if required axle-group loads, 
a complete WIM system shall be tested for compliance 
with the requirements specified in a) or b) or both a) 
and b), as may be applicable under the functional type 
classification (4): 


a) Clause 6.5.4, using the range of vehicles specified 
in 10.5 and under test conditions specified in test 
plans (10.7) as appropriate: and 


b) Clause 7.3.3.2 or clause 7.3.4, as applicable, using 
the range of vehicles specified in 10.5. 


10.1.2.2 Axle load (axle of a group) 


If required under the functional type classification 
(4), and provided the user or applicant for model 
(type) approval, as the case may be, has specified it 
as a mandatory criteria for determination of statistical 
accuracy (6.4.5 and/or 9.1.3.2.2.2.IID, for axle loads 
of axles of a group, a complete WIM system shall be 
tested for compliance with the requirements specified 
in 6.5.4, using the range of vehicles specified in 10.5 
and under test conditions specified in test plans (10.7) 
as appropriate. 


If required under the functional type classification 
(4) but not specified as a mandatory criteria for 
determination of statistical accuracy by the user, the 
test procedure shall be as agreed between the user and 
the vendor. 


10.1.2.3 Wheel load 


If required under the functional type classification 
(4), and provided the user or applicant for model 
(type) approval, as the case may be, has specified 
it as either a mandatory criteria for determination of 
statistical accuracy (6.5.4 and/or 9.1.3.2.2.2.1V) and/ 
or a mandatory metrological requirement (7.3.4.1 
and/or 9.1.3.2.2.2.IV), for wheel loads a complete 
WIM system shall be tested for compliance with the 
requirements specified in a) or b) or both a) and b), as 
may be applicable: 


a) Clause 6.5.4, using the range of vehicles specified 
in 10.5 and under test conditions specified in test 
plans (10.7) as appropriate. 


b) Clause 7.3.4, using the range of vehicles specified 
in 10.5. 


If required under the functional type classification 
(4) but not specified as a mandatory criteria for 
determination of statistical accuracy or metrological 
accuracy by the user, the test procedure shall be as 
agreed between the user and the vendor. 


10.2 Control Instrument 


A control instrument for determining the conventional 
true value of each reference vehicle mass shall be 


45 


IS 17008 : 2019 


available for testing. The control instrument may either 
be separate or integral. 


10.2.1 Integral Control Instrument 


The WIM system under test may be used as the control 
instrument provided that it: 


a) has an appropriate scale interval or scale interval 
for stationary load (7.9); and 


b) complies with the requirements in 5.4. 
10.2.2 Separate Control Instrument 


10.2.2.1 Control instrument for full-draught vehicle 
weighing 

A separate control instrument, capable of being used to 
determine the conventional true value of each reference 
vehicle mass by full-draught weighing when stationary, 
shall ensure the determination of the conventional true 
value of each reference vehicle’s mass to an error not 
greater than: 


a) one-third of the value of kó, where the value of k is 
for in-motion tests in 6.5.7 as appropriate, and 6 is 
the statistical accuracy class tolerance for vehicle 
mass in 6.5.4, when statistical accuracy class is 
applicable in accordance with functional type 
classification, or 

b) one third of whichever is smaller of the 

metrological accuracy class tolerance(s) specified 

in accordance with 7.3, when metrological 
accuracy class is applicable in accordance with 
functional type classification. 


The smaller of the two values obtained from a) and b), 
when both a) and b) are applicable in accordance with 
functional type classification. 


10.2.3 Control Instrument for Static Reference Single- 
Axle Load of the Two-Axle Rigid Vehicle 


As appropriate, a separate or integral control instrument, 
capable of being used to determine the conventional 
true value of the static reference single-axle loads by 
individual axle measurement when stationary, shall be 
used for tests with the two-axle rigid reference vehicle. 


The control instrument used for determining the static 
reference axle loads shall: 


a) be able to support the entire contact area of all the 
tyres on the individual axle being weighed; 


b) ensure the determination of the conventional true 
value of the static reference axle loads of the two- 
axle rigid reference vehicle to an error not greater 
than: 


1) one-third of the value of kô, where the value of 
k is for in-motion tests in 6.5.7 as appropriate, 
and 6 is the statistical accuracy class tolerance 
for single-axle load in 6.5.4, when statistical 
accuracy Class is applicable in accordance with 


IS 17008 : 2019 


functional type classification, or 


2) one third of the value of the metrological 
accuracy class tolerance for single-axle load 
(ds) specified in accordance with 7.3, when 
metrological accuracy class is applicable in 
accordance with functional type classification. 


The smaller of the two values obtained from (b)(1) and 
(b)(2), when both (b)(1) and (b)(2) are applicable in 
accordance with functional type classification. 


10.2.3.1 When scales built into the ground are to be 
used as control instrument, they shall be provided with 
approach and exit aprons in the same plane as the load 
receptor which shall extend to a length sufficient to 
fully support the two-axle rigid vehicle being weighed. 
The aprons shall have no longitudinal slope and not 
more than 1 percent of transverse slope. Where this 
specification cannot be achieved, alternative means 
may be provided to ensure that all of the wheels of the 
reference vehicle are within + 3 mm of a horizontal 
or transversely-sloped plane passing through the load 
receptors during the weighing operations. 


10.2.3.2 When portable scales laid on flat and horizontal 
ground are to be used as control instrument, preferably 
four numbers wheel scales or two numbers axle scales 
shall be used. If less than four numbers of wheel scales 
or less than two numbers of axle scales are used then 
steps or similar devices should be used to level all the 
wheels/axles so that the level difference between any 
two wheels is within + 2 mm or the slope is not more 
than 0.5 percent. 


NOTE — Multi-platform weighbridges or vehicle scales, axle 
scales, wheel scales, etc. can be used as control instrument for 
static reference axle load of two-axle rigid vehicle. 


10.3 Static Weighing Test for Integral Control 
Instruments 
This test is applicable if the WIM system being verified 
is to be used as the control instrument for measuring the 
static reference axle loads of the two-axle rigid vehicle. 
10.3.1 Test Loads 
Errors shall be determined for test loads of: 

a) Minimum capacity (7.4.4); 

b) Maximum capacity (7.4.3); and 

c) At least two load between a) and b). 


10.3.2 Distribution of Test Loads 

Except for eccentricity tests, standard weights or 
masses shall be evenly distributed on the load receptor. 
10.3.3 Eccentricity Tests 


Tests shall be carried out without excessive stacking or 
overlapping of the load on the load receptor provided 
that the conditions are practical and safe. 


10.3.4 Repeatability Tests 


The repeatability error has to be determined with a load 
of about 50 percent of Max which is placed 3 times on 
the load receptor. 


10.4 Verification Standards 


10.4.1 Weights 


The standard weights or standard masses used for the 
type examination or verification of an instrument shall 
principally meet the specifications laid down in the 
Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011: 


a) In Part I of Fifth Schedule of the for weights up to 
50 kg, and 


b) In Part III of Fifth Schedule of the for weights 
equal to or greater than 50 kg. 


10.4.2 The Error of The Standard Weights or Masses 
Used Shall not be Greater Than One-Third of the 
Maximum Permissible Error For the Load, As Specified 
In Table 27 For Initial Verification 


10.4.3 Substitution of Standard Weights 


The test shall be carried out only during verification 
and at the place of use taking A-5.2.2.2 into account. 


When testing WIM system at the place of use 
(application), instead of standard weights any other 
constant load may be used, provided that standard 
weights of at least 50 percent of Max are used. Instead 
of 50 percent of Max, the portion of standard weights 
may be reduced to: 


a) Thirty percent of Max if the repeatability error is < 
0.3 D; or 


b) Twenty percent of Max if the repeatability error is 
<0.2 D. 


The repeatability error (10.3.4) shall be checked at 
a load of about the value at which the substitution 
is made, by placing this load three times on the load 
receptor. The results of the repeatability test (A-5.2.5) 
may be used if the test loads have a comparable mass. 


If the WIM system is provided with automatic zero- 
setting or zero-tracking device, it may be in operation 
during the tests, except for the temperature test. The 
error at zero point is then determined according to 
A-5.1.2. 


10.5 Reference Vehicles 


10.5.1 The type and number of reference vehicles to 
be used for testing shall represent the range of vehicles 
appropriate for the application for which the WIM 
system is intended to be used and representative of the 
traffic stream commonly encountered at the WIM site. 
The minimum number of reference vehicles of different 
types to be used for testing with reference to test plans 
shall be in accordance with Table 29. 


Table 29 
( Clause 10.5.1, 10.7.1.1 to 10.7.1.8 ) 


Vehicle Type Minimum Number of Vehicles Under 
Test Plans 
N°1, N°2 |N°3, N°4| N°5 | N°6, N°7| N°8 
Two-Axle, Four-Tyre, 24 
Rigid Vehicles j i u 
Two-Axle, Six-Tyre, 60 
Rigid Vehicles i 
Three-Axle, Rigid 105 
Vehicles 
A 1 — 
Four-or-More Axle, 15 
Rigid Vehicles 
Four-or-Less Axle, 
Semi-Articulated 9 
Vehicles 
Five Axle, Semi- l B 1 9 
Articulated Vehicles 
Six-or-More Axles, 
Semi-Articulated 30 
Vehicles i 
Five-or-Less Axle 
Truck-Trailer 30 
Combination 
Six-Axle Truck- c I 9 
Trailer Combination 
Seven-or-More 
Axle Truck-Trailer 9 
Combination 
Total number of 1 2 3 4 300 
reference vehicles 


For test plan N°5, two vehicle types shall be chosen out 
of the three vehicle types corresponding to A, B and 
C, by assigning the numerical value 0 to A or B or C 
whichever corresponds to the one among the three that 
is least commonly encountered in the traffic stream at 
the WIM site, and assigning the numerical value of 1 
each to the other two. 


For any test plan, if the minimum numbers of vehicles 
for one or more types is not available in the traffic 
stream for a reasonable time during test, the shortfall 
shall be made up by increasing the numbers of vehicles 
from other types that are available in the traffic stream, 
maintaining closeness with the substituted vehicle 
types as far as possible. 


10.5.2 Wherever one two-axle rigid vehicle is selected 
under the test plan, it shall be used both as the reference 
vehicle for determining the conventional true value 
of static reference single-axle loads and as one of the 
reference vehicles for in-motion tests. 


10.5.3 The other reference vehicles shall be selected 
to cover, as far as practicable, the weighing range for 
which the instrument is approved. 


47 


IS 17008 : 2019 


10.5.4 When a particular WIM system is tested 
using a limited range of vehicle types (for example, 
conventional steel leaf spring suspension systems only), 
this should be noted in the type approval certificate. 


10.5.5 Vehicles carrying liquid loads or other products 
that that may be subjected to fluctuations in their centre 
of gravity when the vehicle moves, shall be used as 
reference vehicles only if the WIM system will be 
applied subsequently for determining the mass, or 
the loads of single-axles and/or axle-group of such 
vehicles. If the WIM system is not intended for this 
use, it shall bear the marking “not to be used to weigh 
vehicles carrying liquids or other products that may be 
subjected to fluctuations in their centre of gravity by 
vehicle movement”. 


10.6 Reference Impact Force Generator 


One or more equipment to be used as reference impact 
force generator(s), if so required under 9.1.3.2.2.3, 
shall be fully repeatable calibrated shock device(s) or 
pressure device(s) or instrumented truck or any other 
suitable device, as may be agreed between the parties 
involved in testing. 


10.7 Test Plans 


WIM systems shall be tested for accuracy under normal 
operation in accordance with standard test plans (10.7.1) 
as applicable (10.7.2). If appropriate, a higher order test 
plan (see note below) shall be used in accordance with 
government regulations. In case a higher order standard 
test plan is used, it should be noted in the type approval 
certificate or in the test reports of initial/subsequent 
verification or in-service inspection, as the case may be. 


It shall be permissible to test a WIM system with a lower 
order test plan provided the same is agreed between the 
user or the testing authority/agency, as appropriate, 
and the vendor in writing prior to the test. In case a 
lower order standard is used, it should be noted in the 
type approval certificate or in the test reports of initial/ 
subsequent verification or in-service inspection, as the 
case may be. 
NOTE — With the exception of N°5, a test plan will be of 
higher order if it is a higher plan indicated by greater plan 
number or has a higher environmental condition indicated by 
a higher environmental condition number. A plan will be same 
or higher order than N°5 if it includes all the reference vehicles 
of N°5 and one or none more vehicles, each vehicle is tested 
in both loaded and unloaded condition, the number of runs at 
different speeds for each loading condition is equal to or more 
than those in N°5 for each reference vehicle and each speed, 
and the environmental condition higher than equal to or more 
than El. 


10.7.1 Standard Test Plans 
10.7.1.1 Test plan N°1 


One reference vehicle shall be chosen from the target 
group in accordance with Table 29, generally the one 


IS 17008 : 2019 


with the most common class on the WIM site or as 
specified by the user or the testing authority/agency, as 
appropriate, for making repeated runs. The reference 
vehicle shall be loaded either to the mean vehicle mass 
of the same type of vehicles in the traffic stream, or 
to 80 percent of the maximum vehicle mass legally 
permissible with a  non-shifting, approximately 
symmetric (side to side) load. The test shall be carried 
out within a single day so that there is variation in 
temperature, climatic or environmental conditions. 
The number of runs at different speeds shall be in 
accordance with Table 30. 


10.7.1.2 Test plan N°2 


One reference vehicle shall be chosen from the target 
group in accordance with Table 29, generally the 
one with the most common class on the WIM site, 
or as specified by the user or the testing authority/ 
agency, as appropriate, for making repeated runs. The 
reference vehicle shall be tested in loaded and unloaded 


condition. The test shall be carried out within one to 
three consecutive days (E1) or over a week (E2) or over 
a few days in a month (E2), as appropriate. The number 
of runs at different speeds and loading conditions shall 
be in accordance with Table 31. 


10.7.1.3 Test plan N°3 


Two reference vehicles shall be chosen from the 
target group in accordance with Table 29, generally 
the ones with the most common class on the WIM 
site, or as specified by the user or the testing authority/ 
agency, as appropriate, for making repeated runs. 
Each reference vehicle shall be loaded to 80 percent 
of the maximum vehicle mass legally permissible 
with a non-shifting, approximately symmetric (side 
to side) load. The test shall be carried out within one 
to three consecutive days (E1) or over a week (E2) 
or over a few days in a month (E2), as appropriate. 
The number of runs at different speeds shall be in 
accordance with Table 32. 


Table 30 


( Clause 10.7.1.1, 10.7.1.2, 10.7.1.3, 10.7.1.4, 10.7.1.5, 10.7.1.6, 10.7.1.7 and 10.7.1.8 ) 


Reference Vehicle Vehicle Number of Runs at Different Speeds! Total Test Conditions (6.5.5) 
Loading Near Near Near Number Vehicle Sample Environmental 
of Runs eve ae 
Mag Via Vin Condition Condition 
One representative vehicle Loaded 2 6 2 10 rl El 


Legend: 


1) Here vmin is the minimum operating speed; v, 
speed range (see A-9.3.2). 


ax 


„İs the maximum operating speed; and vm is the speed at the centre of the operating 


Table 31 
Reference Vehicle Vehicle Number of Runs at Different Speeds! Total Test Conditions (6.5.5) 
Loading Number 
Near Near Near oh Rains Vehicle Sample Environmental 
Wis Va Viiz Condition Condition 
Loaded 3 9 3 
One representative vehicle 30 r2 El or E2 

Unloaded 3 9 3 


Legend: 
1) Same as legend below Table 30. 


Table 32 
Reference Vehicle Vehicle Number of Runs at Different Speeds! Total Test Conditions (6.5.5) 
Loading Near Near Near Number Vehicle Sample Environmental 
of Runs e PP 
Via Va Mus Condition Condition 

Rigid vehicle Loaded > 5 5 15 — El or E2 
Semi- articulated Vehicle or Loaded 5 5 5 15 (see note below)” 

Truck-Trailer combination 

TOTAL 10 10 10 30 


Legend: 
1) Same as legend below Table 30. 


2) The vehicle sample condition is somewhat between r2 and R1. 


48 


10.7.1.4 Test plan N°4 


Two reference vehicles shall be chosen from the target 
group in accordance with Table 29, generally the ones 
with the most common class on the WIM site, or as 
specified by the user or the testing authority/agency, 
as appropriate, for making repeated runs. The two 
reference vehicles shall be tested in fully loaded and 
unloaded condition. The test shall be carried out within 
one to three consecutive days (E1) or over a week (E2) 
or over a few days in a month (E2), as appropriate. 
The number of runs at different speeds and loading 
conditions shall be in accordance with Table 33. 


10.7.1.5 Test plan N°5 


One two-axle rigid vehicle and two other reference 
vehicles shall be chosen from the target group in 
accordance with Table 29, generally the ones with the 
most common class on the WIM site, or as specified by 
the user or the testing authority/agency, as appropriate, 
for making repeated runs. The three reference vehicles 
shall be tested in fully loaded and unloaded condition. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


The test shall be carried out within one to three 
consecutive days (El) or over a week (E2) or over a 
few days in a month (E2), as appropriate. The number 
of runs at different speeds and loading conditions shall 
be in accordance with Table 34. 


10.7.1.6 Test plan N°6 


One two-axle rigid vehicle and three other reference 
vehicles shall be chosen from the target group in 
accordance with Table 29, generally the ones with the 
most common class on the WIM site, or as specified by 
the user or the testing authority/agency, as appropriate, 
for making repeated runs. The four reference vehicles 
shall be tested in fully loaded and unloaded condition. 
The test shall be carried out over a few consecutive 
days (El) or over a full week (E2) or several days 
spread over a month (E2), such that the temperature, 
climatic and environmental conditions vary during the 
measurements, but no seasonal effect is encountered. 
The number of runs at different speeds and loading 
conditions shall be in accordance with Table 35. 


Table 33 
( Clause 10.7.1.4 ) 


Reference Vehicle Vehicle Number of Runs at Different Speeds! Total Test Conditions (6.5.5) 
Loading Near Near Near Number Vehicle Sample Environmental 
of Runs Sy oe 
Vain Va bua Condition Condition 
Rigid vehicle Loaded 3 9 3 15 
Unloaded 3 9 3 15 
Rl El or E2 
Semi- articulated Vehicle or Loaded 3 9 3 15 
Truck-Trailer combination Unloaded 3 9 3 15 
TOTAL 12 36 12 60 
Legend: 
1) Same as legend below Table 30. 
Table 34 
( Clause 10.7.1.5 ) 
Reference Vehicle Vehicle Loading Number of Runs at Different Speeds' Total Test Conditions (6.5.5) 
Near Near Near pe ber Vehicle Sample Environmental 
Mos y bos ee Condition Condition 
Two-axle Rigid Loaded 5 5 5 15 
Unloaded 5 5 5 15 
First type? Loaded 5 Š 5 15 
RI El or E2 
Unloaded 5 5 5 15 
Second type? Loaded 5 > 5 15 
Unloaded 5 5 5 15 
TOTAL 30 30 30 90 
Legend: 


1) Same as legend below Table 30. 


2) The two vehicles indicated as first type and second type are the two types of vehicles chosen in accordance with Table 29. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


10.7.1.7 Test plan N°7 


One two-axle rigid vehicle and three other reference 
vehicles shall be chosen from the target group in 
accordance with Table 29, generally the ones with the 
most common class on the WIM site, or as specified by 
the user or the testing authority/agency, as appropriate. 
The four reference vehicles shall be tested in fully 
loaded and unloaded condition. The test shall be carried 
out in three phases within a month, with each phase 
completed in consecutive weeks (E2); or the three 
phases shall be spread out to cover coldest, hottest 
and medium season with each phase lasting for a full 
week or several days spread over a month, so that the 
system is subject to variations in temperature, climate, 
environment and seasons (E3). The number of runs 
at different speeds and loading conditions shall be in 
accordance with Table 36. 


10.7.1.8 Test plan N°8 


Reference vehicles shall be chosen from the traffic stream 
in accordance with Table 29 for each vehicle making one 
single run, and shall be weighed before or after the run 
using a control instrument. The reference vehicles shall 
cover, as far as practicable, the weighing range and the 
operating speed range of the WIM system. The test shall 
be carried out in three phases, with each phase lasting for 
about a week and the three phases spread over a month 
(E2); or with each phase lasting for several days spread 
over a month and the three phases spread out to cover 
coldest, hottest and medium season (E3). The number of 
runs shall be in accordance with Table 37. 


If vehicle with any loading condition given in Table 37 
is not available in the traffic stream within a reasonable 
time during the test, the other loading condition may be 
substituted for that vehicle. 


Table 35 
( Clause 10.7.1.6 ) 


Reference Vehicle Vehicle Number of Runs at Different Speeds' Total Test Conditions (6.5.5) 
Loading Near Near Near pa ber Vehicle Sample Environmental 
Veo, Va Ve ohne Condition Condition 
Two-axle Rigid Loaded 3 6 3 12 
Unloaded 2 4 2 8 
Three-or more axle rigid Loaded 8 14 8 30 
Unloaded 5 10 5 20 
RI El or E2 
Semi-articulated Loaded 5 8 5 18 
Unloaded 3 6 3 12 
Truck-Trailer combination Loaded 3 6 3 12 
Unloaded 2 4 2 8 
TOTAL 31 58 31 120 
Legend: 
1) Same as legend below Table 30. 
Table 36 
( Clause 10.7.1.7 ) 
Reference Vehicle Vehicle Number of Runs at Different Total Total Test Conditions (6.5.5) 
Loading Speeds! in Each phase Number Number 
Near Near Near of Runs u Vehicle Sample Environmental 
Each Phase aa ie 
Vii. Va Vinax Condition Condition 
Two-axle Rigid Loaded 3 6 3 12 36 
Unloaded 2 4 2 8 24 
Three-or more axle rigid Loaded 3 6 3 12 36 
Unloaded 2 4 2 8 24 
o Rl El or E2 
Semi-articulated Loaded 3 6 3 12 36 
Unloaded 2 4 2 8 24 
Truck-Trailer combination Loaded 3 6 3 12 36 
Unloaded 2 4 2 8 24 
TOTAL 20 40 20 80 240 


Legend: 
1) Same as legend below Table 30. 


50 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table 37 
( Clause 10.7.1.8 ) 


Reference Vehicle Vehicle Number of Different Total Total Test Conditions (6.5.5) 
Loading Vehicles Making Single Number Number 
Runs at Different Speeds'in of Vehicle of 
Each Phase Runs in Vehicle 
Near Near Near Each Phase. -Runs Vehicle Sample Environmental 
Via Va V nax Condition Condition 

Two-Axle, Four-Tyre, Loaded 1 3 1 5 15 
Rigid Unloaded 1 I 1 3 9 
Two-Axle, Six-Tyre, Rigid Loaded 3 6 3 12 36 
Unloaded 2 4 2 8 24 

Three-Axle, Rigid Vehicles Loaded 5 13 5 23 69 i ee 

Unloaded 3 6 3 12 36 
Four-or-More Axle, Rigid Loaded 1 1 1 3 9 
Unloaded — 1 1 2 6 
Four-or-Less Axle, Semi- Loaded 1 1 — 2 6 
Articulated Unloaded — 1 — 1 3 
Five Axle, Semi- Loaded 1 1 _ 2 6 
Articulated Unloaded — 1 — 1 3 
Six-or-More Axles, Semi- Loaded 1 4 1 6 18 
Artigulared Unloaded 1 2 I 4 12 
Five-or-Less Axle Truck- Loaded 1 4 1 6 18 
Trailer Combination Unleaded I 2 I 4 12 
Six-Axle Truck-Trailer Loaded 1 1 k 2 6 
Combination Unloaded — 1 a. 1 3 
Seven-or-More Axle Loaded 1 1 — 2 6 
Truck-Trailer Combination Unloaded _ I o l 3 

TOTAL 24 55 21 100 300 


Legend: 
1) Same as legend below Table 30. 


10.7.2 Selection of Test Plans 


WIM systems shall be tested for accuracy under normal 
operation in accordance with: 


a) The standard test plans specified in Table 38, for 
systems designated to comply with only statistical 
accuracy in accordance with functional type 
classification; 


The standard test plans specified in Table 39, 
for systems designated to comply with only 
metrological accuracy in accordance with 
functional type classification; or 


b) 


A common test plan constructed by merging or 
amalgamating the tests plans applicable under 
Table 38 for statistical accuracy and Table 39 
for metrological accuracy, for WIM systems 
designated to comply with both statistical accuracy 
and metrological accuracy in accordance with 
functional type classification, so that the new test 
plan will be the same or a higher order plan than 
the corresponding standard plans of Table 38 and 


51 


Table 39 with reference to the specified statistical 
accuracy and metrological accuracy, respectively, 
of the WIM system. 

NOTE — The test conditions that is, vehicle sample condition 


and environmental condition are given within brackets in 
Table 38 and Table 39. 


10.8 Number of In-Motion Tests For Weighing 
Performance 


Thenumber of in-motion tests for weighing performance 
shall be equal to or more than those specified in the test 
plan applicable (10.7) for each reference vehicle type, 
loading condition and speed as detailed in A-9.3.2. 


10.9 Corrected Mean of the Wheel Load 


The corrected mean of the wheel loads for each wheel 
on a reference vehicle shall be the mean (10.15) of the 
recorded values (10.13) for the wheels on the reference 
vehicle during a series of weighing operations, 
corrected proportionally (A-9.3.2.3) in relation to the 
systematic error of the instrument used for determining 
the recorded values. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table 38 
( Clause 10.7.2 and A-11.1 ) 


Accuracy Class 


Standard Test Plans (Test Conditions) : Accuracy Class 


A Bt B C D+or D E or lower 
Model (type) approval N°7 (R1, E3) N°7 (R1, E2) N°6 (R1, E2) N°6 (R1, E2) N°4 (R1, E2) N°2 (12, E2) 
Initial verification N°6(R1,E2)  N°4(R1,E2) N°4(R1,El) — N°4(RI,El) N°2 (r2, E1) N°1 (rl, El) 
Subsequent verification 
In-service inspection N°4 (R1, E2) N°4 (R1, El) N°3 (r*, El)! N°3 (r*, El)! N°2 (12, El) N°1 (1, El) 
Legend: 
r* denotes vehicle sample condition which is somewhat between r2 and R1 as defined in 6.5.5. 
Table 39 
( Clause 10.7.2 and A.11.1 ) 
WIM System Application Type (4.1.1) Standard Test Plans: Metrological Accuracy Class 
0.2, 5, 1,2 5 10 — — 
a(5) b(5) c(10) d(15) e 

Type 1 N°5 

Type 2 N°5 N°4 

Type 3 N°4 

Type 4 N°3 

Type 5 N°6, N°5! N°5!, N°3? 
Legend: 

1) To be used for WIM system application in the legal domain. 
2) To be used for WIM system application in statistics, infrastructure, pre-selection or screening. 
10.10 Indicated Operating Speed 10.13 Examination and Tests of Electronic 


The WIM system shall indicate and record the 
operating speed following an in-motion test (5.6.8). 
The procedure given in A-9.3.2.4.2 shall be used to 
determine the operating speed and the error. 


10.11 Indicated Acceleration 


WIM system designated to estimate acceleration shall 
indicate and record the acceleration following an in- 
motion test (5.6.9). The procedure given in A-9.3.2.6 
shall be used to determine the capability of the WIM 
system to detect operation beyond the threshold limit 
(5.7.15.17). 
NOTE — Type la/ Type 1a*/Type 1d/Type 1d* WIM systems, 
and Type 2a/Type 2a*/Type 2d/Type 2d* WIM system when 
installed off the main highway, are required to comply with the 
requirements of 10.19. 


10.12 Indicated Impact Load 


WIM system designated to measure impact load in 
accordance with 9.1.3.2.2.3 shall indicate and record 
the impact force imparted as individual axle load. 


52 


Instruments 


The examination and testing of an electronic weighing 
instrument is intended to verify compliance with 
the applicable requirements of this specification and 
especially the requirements for electronic instruments 
in 8. 

The appropriate metrological authority, or if applicable 
and with the consent of the user, the appropriate testing 
authority/agency, may accept test data or certificate 
of compliance with the applicable requirements of 
this specification and especially the requirements 
for electronic instruments in 8, obtained from other 
metrological authorities or testing authorities/agencies 
without repeating the examination and/or tests specified 
in this clause. 


10.13.1 Examination 


An electronic weighing instrument shall be examined 
to obtain a general appraisal of its design and 
construction. 


10.13.2 Performance Tests 


An electronic weighing instrument or electronic 
device, as appropriate, shall be tested as specified in 11 
to determine its correct operation. 


Tests are to be conducted on the whole instrument except 
when the size and/or configuration of the instrument 
does not lend itself to testing as a unit. In such cases, 
the separate electronic devices shall be subjected to 
testing. It is not intended that electronic devices be 
further dismantled for separate testing of components. 
In addition, an examination shall be carried out on the 
fully operational weighing instrument or, if necessary, 
on the electronic devices in a simulated setup that 
sufficiently represents the weighing instrument. The 
equipment shall continue to function correctly as 
specified in Annex A. 


10.13.3 Span Stability Tests 


This clause is applicable to WIM system for which 
testing with static load or simulated load is possible. 


53 


IS 17008 : 2019 


When a particular WIM system uses weighing 
instrument that is not subjected to span stability test 
using static load or simulated load, this should be noted 
in the type (model) approval certificate. 


If applicable, the weighing instrument shall be subjected 
to span stability tests at various intervals before, during 
and after being subjected to performance tests. 


When an instrument is subjected to the span stability 
test specified in A-8: 


a) The maximum allowable variation in the errors 
of indication shall not exceed half the absolute 
value of the maximum specified error in 7.5.2.2 
for initial verification for the test load applied on 
any of the n measurements. 

b) Where the differences of the results indicate a trend 

more than half the allowable variation specified 

above, the test shall be continued until the trend 
comes to rest or reverses itself, or until the error 
exceeds the maximum allowable variation. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


ANNEX A 


( Normative ) 


TEST PROCEDURES FOR WEIGH-IN-MOTION SYSTEMS 
FOR ROAD VEHICLES 


A-1 EXAMINATION FOR TYPE APPROVAL 


A-1.1 Documentation (9.1.1) 


Review the documentation that is submitted, including 
necessary photographs, drawings, diagrams, general 
software information, relevant technical and functional 
description of main components, devices, etc. to 
determine if it is adequate and correct. Consider the 
operational manual. 


A-1.2 Compare Construction with Documentation 
(9.1.1) 


Examine the various components of the weigh-in- 
motion (WIM) system to ensure compliance with 
the documentation. If required, examine the various 
devices of the WIM instrument(s) to ensure compliance 
with the documentation. 


A-1.3 Functional Type Classification (4) 

Examine the system for conformity with the functional 
type classification. 

A-1.4 Technical Requirements (5) 


Examine the system for conformity with the technical 
requirements according to a checklist (see note below 
A-1.3). 


A-1.5 Functional Requirements (8.3) 


Examine the system for conformity with the functional 
requirements according to a checklist (see note 
below A-1.3). 


A-2 EXAMINATION 
VERIFICATION 


FOR INITIAL 


A-2.1 Compare Construction with Documentation 
(9.1.1) 


Examine the system for conformity with 
requirements in 5.12 for the approved model (type). 


the 


A-2.2 Descriptive Markings (5.12) 


Check the descriptive markings according to a checklist 
(see note below A-1.3). 


A-2.3 Verification Marks (5.13) and Securing 
Devices (5.10) 


Check the arrangement for verification marks and 
securing according to a checklist (see note below 
A-1.3). 


54 


A-3 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 


A-3.1 Voltage Supply 


Power up the equipment under test (EUT) for a time 
period equal to or greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer and maintain the EUT 
energized for the duration of each test. 


A-3.2 Zero-Setting 


This clause is applicable to WIM system for which 
static weighing of test loads is possible in accordance 
with functional type classification (4). When the 
EUT is not amenable to zero-setting (for example, a 
piezoelectric sensor), this should be noted in the model 
(type) approval certificate and the test report. 


Adjust the EUT as closely as practicable to zero prior to 
each test, and do not readjust it at any time during the 
test, except to reset it if a significant fault has occurred. 


Certain tests require the automatic zero-setting and 
zero-tracking devices to be in operation (or not in 
operation). Where there is no specific requirement to 
this effect, the automatic zero-setting and zero- tracking 
devices shall be switched off. When this is done it shall 
be mentioned in the test report. 


A-3.3 Temperature 


The tests shall be performed at a steady ambient 
temperature, usually normal room temperature unless 
otherwise specified. The temperature is deemed to 
be steady when the difference between the extreme 
temperatures noted during the test does not exceed one- 
fifth of the temperature range of the instrument(s) or 
5°C whichever is less, and the rate of change does not 
exceed 5°C per hour. Note that this requirement does 
not apply to in-motion tests. 


The handling of the instrument(s) shall be such that no 
condensation of water occurs on the instrument. 


A-3.4 Recovery 


After each test, allow the instrument(s) to recover 
sufficiently before the following test. 


NOTE — A recovery time of 2 h is recommended for influence 
factor tests 


A-3.5 Indication with a Scale Interval not Greater 
than 0.2 d 


If an instrument has a device for displaying the 
indication with a scale interval of 0.2 d or less, this 
device may be used to calculate the error. If such a 
device is used, it should be noted in the test report 


A-3.6 Control Instruments and Test Standards 


A-3.6.1 Control Instrument (10.2) 


Control instruments meeting the requirements of 10.2 
shall be used for weighing the vehicles. Where necessary, 
standard test weights meeting the requirements 
of 10.4.1 may be used to assess the rounding error. 


A-3.6.2 Use of Standard Weights to Assess Rounding 
Error 


This clause is applicable to WIM system for which 
static weighing of test loads is possible in accordance 
with functional type classification (4). 
NOTE — Type 1 WIM systems and Type 5 WIM systems 
when used in applications that fall in the legal domain are some 
of the WIM systems to which this clause is applicable. 


A-3.6.2.1 General method to assess error prior to 
rounding 


For systems with digital indication having a scale 
interval for vehicle mass D, changeover points may 
be used to interpolate between scale intervals, that 
is to determine the indication of the system, prior to 
rounding, as follows: 


At a certain load, L, the indicated value, J, is noted. 
Additional weights, of say 0.1 D, are successively 
added until the indication of the instrument is increased 
unambiguously by one scale interval (J + D). The 
additional load, AL, added to the load receptor gives the 
indication, P, prior to rounding by using the following 
formula: 


P=1+0.5D-—AL 


The error prior to rounding is: 
E=P-L=I+0.5 D-AL-L 


For systems with digital indication having a scale 
interval for axle load d, the same procedure as given 
above for vehicle mass is followed for determining the 
indication of the system, prior to rounding, by using 
additional weights, of say 0.1 d, successively, totalling 
AL until the indication of the instrument is increased 
unambiguously by one scale interval from 7 to (J + d) 
when the load is increased from L to (L + AL). 


The error prior to rounding is: 
B=1+05d-AL-L 


Example: 


An instrument with a scale interval, D, of 10 kg is 
loaded with 1 000 kg and thereby indicates 1 000 kg. 
After adding successive weights of | kg, the indication 
changes from 1 000 kg to 1 010 kg at an additional 
load of 3 kg. Inserted in the above formula, these 
observations give: 


P=(1000+5-—3)kg=1 002 kg 


55 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Thus, the true indication prior to rounding is 1 002 kg, 
and the error is: 


E= (1 002 — 1 000) kg = 2 kg 


A-3.6.2.2 Correction for error at zero 


Evaluate the error at zero load, E0, by the method of 
A.3.6.2.1. Evaluate the error at load L, E, by the method 
of A-3.6.2.1. 


The corrected error prior to rounding, Ec, is: 
Ec=E-E, 
Example: 


If, for the example in A.3.6.2.1, the error calculated at 
zero load was: 


E,=+ 1kg 
Then the corrected error is: 
Ec=+2-(+1)=+1 kg 


A-4 TEST PROGRAM 


A-4.1 Model (Type) Approval (9.1) 


Clause A-1 and, A-5 to A-9 shall normally be applied 
for model (type) approval. A-5.2 may be omitted if the 
WIM system under test is not to be used as an integral 
control instrument. 


The tests in A-6 to A-8 may be performed with static 
load, with a vehicle movement simulator (switches) 
used if necessary for the calculation of the weighing 
results. Ifthe size and/or configuration of the instrument 
make it impossible to apply static load, testing may be 
done with simulated load using a load signal generator. 


The Metrological Authority can accept a manufacturer’s 
proposal to modify the method and manner in which 
simulated functional tests are performed, if suitable 
with regards to the specifics of the technology and 
design of the weighing instruments measurement 
chain. 


A-4.2 Initial Verification (9-2) 


A-2 and A-9 shall be applied for initial verification 
tests. 


If the WIM system under test is to be used as an integral 
control instrument, the tests in A-5.2 shall also be 
applied. 


The test in A-9 shall include all dynamic in-motion 
effects corresponding to normal operation of the WIM 
system. 


A-4.3 Subsequent Verification (9.3.1) 


The tests shall be in accordance with the same 
provisions as in A-4.2 for initial verification with the 
exception that A-2 shall be applied only if there is a 
relocation or major modification of the WIM system. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


A-4.4 In-Service Inspection (9.3.2) 


This shall be applied for in-service inspection and 
tests shall include all dynamic in-motion effects 
corresponding to normal operation of the WIM system. 


If the WIM system under test is to be used as an integral 
control instrument, the tests in A-5.2 shall also be 
applied. 


A-5 PERFORMANCE TEST DURING TYPE 
EVALUTION 


This clause is applicable to only those WIM system 
for which static weighing of test loads is possible in 
accordance with functional type classification (4). 


For WIM systems not amenable to static weighing 
of test loads, performance test shall be carried out in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation 
if so agreed between the metrological authority and 
the applicant for model (type) approval as appropriate. 
If that is not possible, it should be noted in the model 
(type) approval certificate of the WIM system that 
performance test was not carried out. 

NOTE — Type 1 WIM systems and Type 5 WIM systems 


when used in applications that fall in the legal domain are some 
of the WIM systems to which this clause is applicable. 


A-5.1 Zero-Setting (5.3.1) 
A-5.1.1 Range of Zero-setting 


A-5.1.1.1 Initial zero-setting 


The initial zero-setting range shall comprise of the 
positive and negative portions of the initial zero- setting 
range. If the load receptor (platform and/or topcoat) 
cannot readily be removed, only the positive part of the 
initial zero-setting range need be considered. 


a) Positive range: 


With the load receptor empty (no external load), 
set the WIM instrument to zero. Place a test load 
on the load receptor or sensor and switch the 
instrument off and then back on. Continue this 
process until, after placing a load on the load 
receptor and switching the instrument off and 
on, it does not reset to zero. The maximum load 
that can be re-zeroed is the positive portion of the 
initial zero-setting range. 

b) Negative range: 

1) Remove any load from the load receptor or 
sensor and set the instrument to zero. Then, if 
possible, remove the load receptor (platform 
and/or topcoat) from the instrument. If, at 
this point, the instrument can be reset to zero 
by switching it off and back on, the mass of 
the non-essential components is used as the 
negative portion of the initial zero-setting 
range. 


56 


2) If the instrument cannot be reset to zero with 
the load receptor (platform and/or topcoat) 
removed, add weights to any live part of the 
scale until the instrument indicates zero again. 

3) Then remove the weights and, after each 
weight is removed, switch the instrument off 
and back on. The maximum load that can be 
removed while the instrument can still be reset 
to zero by switching it off and on is the negative 
portion of the initial zero-setting range. 
4) The initial zero-setting range is the sum of the 
positive and negative portions. 
5) Alternatively, if it is not possible to test 
the negative range of initial zero-setting by 
removing the load receptor (platform and/ 
or topcoat) of the instrument, then before 
proceeding to step 3) above, apply a test load 
greater than the permissible negative portion 
of the initial zero-setting range which can be 
calculated from the result of the positive range 
test. 

6) Ifitis not possible to test the negative portion of 

the initial zero-setting range by these methods 

then only the positive part of the initial zero- 
setting range need be considered. 

7) Reassemble or adjust the instrument for normal 

use after the above tests. 


A-5.1.1.2 Semi-automatic zero-setting 


This test shall not be carried out during the span 
stability test. 


This test is performed in the same manner as described 
in A-5.1.1.1, except that the zero-setting device is used 
rather than switching the instrument on and off. 


A-5.1.1.3 Automatic zero-setting 


This test shall not be carried out during the span 
stability test. 


Remove the non-essential parts of the load receptor 
or re-adjust the instrument as described in A-5.1.1.1 
and place weights on the live part of the scale until it 
indicates zero. 


Remove weights in small amounts and after each weight 
is removed allow the instrument to operate through the 
appropriate part of the automatic cycle so as to see if 
the instrument is reset to zero automatically. 


The maximum load that can be removed so that the 
instrument can still be reset to zero is the zero-setting 
range. 


A-5.1.2 Accuracy of Zero-Setting 


A-5.1.2.1 Semi-automatic zero-setting 


The accuracy of the zero-setting device is tested by 
setting the instrument to zero and then determining 


the additional load at which the indication changes 
from zero to one scale interval above zero. The error 
at zero is calculated according to the description 
in A-3.6.2.1. 


A-5.1.2.2 Automatic zero-setting or zero-tracking 


The indication is brought outside of the automatic 
range. Then the additional load at which the indication 
changes from one scale interval to the next above is 
determined and the error is calculated according to the 
description in A-3.6.2.1. It is assumed that the error 
at zero load would be equal to the error at the load in 
question. 


A-5.2 Non-Automatic Tests of the Integral Control 
Instrument (5.4) 
NOTE — The tests in this sub-clause are to be performed on 


the integral control instrument in-situ at the time of model 
(type) approval or verification. 


A-5.2.1 Zero-Setting 
A-5.2.1.1 Accuracy of zero-setting (5.4.1) 


Determination of the accuracy of zero-setting is 
carried out as described in A-5.1.2.1 or A-5.1.2.2, as 
appropriate. 


A-5.2.2 Determination of Weighing Performance 


A-5.2.2.1 Preloading 


Before the first weighing test, the WIM instrument(s) 
shall be preloaded once to near Max as appropriate. 


A-5.2.2.2 Static weighing test (10.3) 


Apply loads from zero up to and including Max as 
appropriate, and then remove the loads back to zero. 
When determining the initial intrinsic error, at least 
ten different load values are selected, and for other 
weighing tests at least five are selected. The values 
of the loads selected shall include Max and Min, as 
appropriate, and values at or near those at which the 
maximum specified error (MSE) changes. 


It should be noted that when loading or unloading 
weights the load must be respectively increased or 
decreased in a uniform progression. 


The maximum permissible errors shall be the 
appropriate values from 7.5.2.2 for initial verification. 


A-5.2.3 Eccentricity Test (5.4.2 and 10.3.3) 


Apply a load equal to 1/3 Max as appropriate on each 
half of the load receptor. On an instrument with a load 
receptor having n points of support with n > 4 the 
fraction 1 / (n — 1) of Max shall applied to each point 
of support. 


The errors shall not exceed the appropriate maximum 
permissible errors from 7.5.2.2 for initial verification. 


57 


IS 17008 : 2019 


A-5.2.4 Discrimination Test (5.4.3) 


The following tests are performed with three different 
loads, for example, Min as appropriate, Max as 
appropriate and 0.5 x Max. A load plus sufficient 
substitution material (for example, 10 times 0.1 x 
scale interval) is placed on the load receptor. The 
additional material is then successively removed until 
the indication, /, is decreased unambiguously by one 
scale interval (to /—d or I— D as appropriate). Replace 
substitution material equivalent to 0.1 x scale interval 
and then a load equal to 1.4 x scale interval shall be 
gently placed on the load receptor and the result shall 
be increased by one scale interval above the initial 
indication (to Í + d or I + D as appropriate). 


A-5.2.5 Repeatability Test (5.4.4 and 10.3.4) 


Two series of weighing shall be performed, one with 
a load of about 50 percent and one with a load close 
to 100 percent of Max. Each series shall consist of at 
least three weighing. Readings shall be taken when the 
instrument is loaded, and when the unloaded instrument 
has come to rest between weighing. In the case of a 
zero deviation between the weighing, the instrument 
shall be reset to zero, without determining the error 
at zero. The true zero position need not be determined 
between the weighing. 


If the instrument is provided with automatic zero- 
setting or zero-tracking, it shall be in operation during 
the test. 


For initial verification, one test with about 50 
percent of Max is sufficient with no more than three 
weighing. 


A-6 ADITIONAL FUNCTIONALITY 


A-6.1 Warm-up Time Test (8.3.4) 


This test is to verify that metrological performance 
of WIM instrument is maintained in the period 
immediately after switch on. 


The method is to check that automatic operation is 
inhibited until a stable indication is obtained and 
to verify that zero and span errors comply with the 
requirements during the first 30 min of operation and is 
applicable to only those WIM system for which static 
weighing of test loads is possible in accordance with 
functional type classification (4). 


a) Disconnect the instrument from the power supply 
for a period of at least 8 h prior to the test. 


b) Reconnect the instrument and switch on while 
observing the indicating device. 


c) Verify that it is not possible to initiate automatic 
weighing or printout until the indication has 
stabilized or until completion of the warm-up time 
if it is specified by the manufacturer (8.3.4). 


IS 17008 : 2019 


d) As soon as the indication of the indicating device 
has stabilized, set the instrument to zero if this is 
not done automatically. 


e) Determine the error of zero-setting by the method 
of A-3.6.2.1 and record this error as EOI (error 
of initial zero-setting) at first and as EO when 
repeating this step. 

f) Apply a load close to Max. Determine the error by 
the method of A-3.6.2.1 and A_3.6.2.2. 


g) Verify that: 


1) The zero indication error, EOI, is not greater 
than 0.25 x scale interval as appropriate 
(5.3.1); 


2) The span error is not greater than the maximum 
specified error specified in 7.5.2.2 for initial 
verification. 


h) Repeat stages e) and f) after 5, 15 and 30 min. 
j) After each time interval verify that: 


1) The zero variation error (EO — EOI) is not 
greater than 0.25 d x pi; and 


2) The span error is not greater than the maximum 
specified error specified in 7.5.2.2 for initial 
verification. 


For WIM systems which uses instrument(s) not 
amenable to static weighing of test loads, other test 
methods which verify that metrological performance 
is maintained during the first 30 min of operation 
may be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
recommendation if so agreed between the metrological 
authority or with the consent of the user the testing 
authority/agency as appropriate and the applicant for 
model (type) approval or the vendor as appropriate. 
If that is not possible, it should be noted in the model 
(type) approval certificate and the test certificate that 
metrological performance during the first 30 min of 
operation is not verified. 


A-6.2 Agreement Between Indicating and Printing 
Devices (7.7) 


If the WIM system has more than one indicating device, 
the indications of the various devices (both indicating 
and printing) are compared during the test. 


A-6.3 Operating Speed (5.6.8) 


Verify that the automatic indication and printing of the 
operating speed contain a clear warning message if the 
speed is outside the specified range. 


A-6.4 Acceleration (5.6.9) 


If the WIM system is designated to estimate 
acceleration, verify that the automatic indication and 
printing of the acceleration contain a clear warning 
message if the acceleration is outside the threshold 
limit. 


58 


A-7 INFLUENCE 
DISTURBANCE TESTS 


FACTOR AND 


This clause is applicable to WIM system for which 
testing with static load or simulated load is possible. 
When a particular WIM system uses weighing 
instrument that is not subjected to influence factor 
and disturbance tests using static load or simulated 
load, this should be noted in the type (model) approval 
certificate. 


A-7.1 Test Conditions 


The influence factor and disturbance tests are based 
on OIML R-134-1 (see 2.2) recommendations, CMI 
metrology regulation no. 0111-OOP-C010-10 (see 2.7) 
and Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) specifications. 


Further guidance on the metrological performance 
testing requirements for influence quantities and 
disturbances is provided in the appropriate reference 
standards as indicated for each test and in OIML 
D 11 [4]. 


A-7.1.1 General Requirements 


WIM instruments used for determining the vehicle mass, 
axle loads (single-axle and/or axle-group load and/or 
axle load of axle-of-a-group) as applicable, wheel load 
if applicable, shall comply with the influence factor and 
disturbance tests conditions and requirements specified 
in this Annex. 


Influence factor and disturbance tests are intended to 
verify that instruments can perform and function as 
intended in the environment and under the conditions 
specified. Each test indicates, where appropriate, the 
reference condition under which the intrinsic error is 
determined. 


It is not possible to apply these tests to an instrument that 
is performing an automatic operation. The instrument 
shall therefore be subjected to the influence factors 
or disturbances under static conditions or simulated 
operation as defined herein. The permissible effects 
of the influence factors or disturbances, under these 
conditions, are specified for each case. 


When the effect of one influence factor is being 
evaluated, all other factors are to be held relatively 
constant, at a value close to normal. After each test 
the instrument shall be allowed to recover sufficiently 
before the following test. 


Where parts of the instrument are examined separately, 
errors shall be apportioned in accordance with 9.1.3.4.1. 


The operational status of the instrument or simulator 
shall be recorded for each test. 


When an instrument is connected in other than a normal 
configuration, the procedure shall be mutually agreed 
on by the approving authority/user and the applicant/ 
vendor. 


A-7.1.2 Simulator Requirements 


A7.1.2.1 General 


If a simulator is used to test a module, the repeatability 
and stability of the simulator should make it possible to 
determine the performance of the module with at least 
the same accuracy as when a complete instrument is 
tested with weights, the limits of error to be considered 
being those applicable to the module. If a simulator is 
used, this shall be noted in the test report format and its 
traceability referenced. 


A-7.1.2.2 Interfaces (8.3.5) 


Susceptibility that would result from the use of 
electronic interfaces to other equipment shall be 
simulated in the tests. For this purpose, it is sufficient 
to connect 3 m of interface cable terminated to simulate 
the interface impedance of the other equipment. 


A-7.1.2.3 Documentation 


Simulators shall be defined in terms of hardware and 
functionality by reference to the instrument under test, 
and by any other documentation necessary to ensure 
reproducible test conditions. This information shall be 
attached to, or shall be traceable from, the test report. 


A-7.2 Influence Factor Tests (7.8) 


Summary of Tests 


Test Conditions § 
Applied 

Static temperatures MSE* A-7.2.1 
Temperature effect on no- MSE A-7.2.2 
load indication 
Damp heat, steady-state MSE A-7.2.3 
Resistance to specified MSE A-7.2.4.1 
high limit temperatures in 
off state 
Resistance to specified MSE A-7.2.4.2 
low limit temperatures in 
off state 
AC mains voltage variations MSE A-7.2.5 
DC mains voltage MSE A-7.2.6 
variations, including 
rechargeable battery if 
the battery can be fully 
(re)charged during the 
operation of the instrument 
Battery voltage variations MSE A-7.2.7 
(DC), including non- 
rechargeable, and 


rechargeable battery if (re) 
charging of the battery 
during the operation of the 
instrument is not possible 


59 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Summary of Tests 


Test Conditions § 
Applied 

Voltage variations in 12 MSE A-7.2.8 
V or 24 V road vehicle 

batteries 

Resistance to vibration A-7.2.9 
Resistance to shock MSE A-7.2.10 
Resistance to dust and MSE A-7.2.11 


water 


* maximum specified error (see 3.4.4.5) 


A-7.2.1 Static Temperatures (7.8.1.1) 


Static temperature tests are carried out according to 
IS 9000 (Part 2) [10] and IS 9000 (Part 3)(11) and 
according to Table A-1. 


Table A-1 
( Clause A-7.2.1 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Reference of 20 °C 
Specified high for 2 h IS 9000 (Part 3) 
Specified low for 2 h IS 9000 (Part 2) 
Temperature Temperature of 5 °C, if the 
specified low temperature IS 9000 (Part 2) 
is < 0 °C 
Reference of 20 °C 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards test procedures: 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with the 
provisions in 8.1.1 under conditions 
of dry heat (non-condensing) and 
cold. The test in A-7.2.2 may be 
conducted during this test. 


Preconditioning: 16h 


Condition of the EUT: EUT is connected to the 
voltage supply and “on” for 
a time period equal to or 
greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 
Voltage supply is to be “on” 
for the duration of the test. The 
zero-setting and zero-tracking 
facilities shall be enabled as 
for normal operation. If the 
test is performed together 
with A-7.2.2, automatic zero- 
setting and zero-tracking shall 
not be in operation. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Stabilization: 


Temperature: 


Temperature sequence: 


Barometric pressure: 


Number of test cycles: 


Test information: 


Maximum 
allowable variations: 


2 h at each temperature under 
“free air” conditions. “Free air” 
conditions mean a minimum 
air circulation to keep the 
temperature at a stable level. 


As specified in 7.8.1.1 


a) At the reference 
temperature of 20 °C; 

b) At the specified high 
temperature; 

c) At the specified low 
temperature; 


d) At a temperature of 5 °C, 
if the specified low 
temperature is below 10°C; 
and 


e) At the 
temperature. 


reference 


Changes in barometric pressure 
shall be taken into account. 


At least one cycle. 


Adjust the EUT as close to 
zero indication as practicable 
prior to the test Gf an 
automatic zero-tracking device 
is connected, adjust it to a 
value near zero). The EUT 
shall not be readjusted at any 
time during the test. After 
stabilization at the reference 
temperature and again at each 
specified temperature, apply at 
least five different test loads or 
simulated loads and record: 


a) Date and time; 


b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Test load; 

e) Indications (as applicable); 
f) Errors; and 

g) Functional performance. 


All functions shall operate as 
designed. All errors shall be 
within the maximum specified 
errors specified in Table 27 of 
7.5.2.2 for initial verification. 


60 


A-7.2.2 Temperature Effect on the No-Load Indication 
(7.8.1.2) 


Currently, there are no applicable standards. This test 
shall be conducted as described below: 


a) The instrument shall be set to zero and then 
changed to the prescribed highest and lowest 
temperatures as well as to 5°C if applicable. After 
stabilization the error of the zero indication shall 
be determined. 

b) The change in zero indication per 5 °C shall be 

calculated. The changes in these errors per 5 °C are 

calculated for any two consecutive temperatures 
of this test. 


This test may be performed together with the 
temperature test in A-7.2.1. The errors at zero 
shall then be additionally determined immediately 
before changing to the next temperature and after 
the 2 h period after the instrument has reached 
stability at this temperature. 


c 


— 


NOTE — Preloading is not allowed before these measurements. 


If the instrument is provided with automatic zero- 

setting or zero-tracking, it shall not be in operation. 

Condition of the EUT : EUT connected to the voltage 
supply and “on” for a time 
period equal to or greater than 
the warm-up time specified 
by the manufacturer. Voltage 
supply is to be “on” for the 
duration of the test. 


Maximum allowable 
variation 


: The change in zero indication 
per 5 °C shall not exceed 
the smaller of the applicable 
scale intervals 1d (see.3.3.3.1) 
and/or 1D (see 3.3.3.2). 


A-7.2.3 Damp Heat, Steady State (8.3.3) 


Damp heat, steady state tests are carried out according 
to IS 9000 (Part 4), and according to Table A-2. 


Table A-2 
( Clause A-7.2.3 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Damp heat, Relative humidity and IS 9000 (Part 4) 
steady state temperature of specified 
severity for 48 h 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards test procedures: 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.1 under 
conditions of high humidity 
and constant temperature. 

Preconditioning: None required. 


Condition of the EUT: 


Stabilization: 


Temperature: 


Temperature-humidity 


48 h sequence: 


Barometric pressure: 


Number of test cycles: 


Test information: 


EUT is connected to the voltage 
supply and “on” for a time 
period equal to or greater than 
the warm-up time specified 
by the manufacturer. The 
zero-setting and zero-tracking 
facilities shall be enabled as 
for normal operation. 


The handling of the EUT shall 
be such that no condensation 
of water occurs on the EUT. 


3 hat reference temperature 


and 50 percent humidity. 

2 days at the specified 
temperature for relative 
humidity (8.3.3) 


Reference temperature (20°C 
or the mean value of the 
temperature range whenever 
20°C is outside this range) 
and at the temperature severity 
value specified in accordance 
with 8.3.3. 


a) Reference temperature at 50 
percent humidity; 


b) Specified temperature 
severity value (30°C or 
40°C) and 


Specified relative humidity 
severity value (93 percent or 
85 percent); 


c) Reference temperature at 50 
percent humidity. 


Changes in barometric pressure 
shall be taken into account. 


At least one cycle. 


After stabilization of the EUT 
at reference temperature and 
50 percent humidity, apply at 
least five different test loads or 
simulated loads and record: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 
d) Test load; 


e) Other indications 
applicable); 


f) Errors; 


(as 


61 


Maximum allowable 
within variations: 


IS 17008 : 2019 


g) Functional performance. 


Increase the temperature in 
the chamber to the specified 
severity value (30°C or 40°C) 
and increase the relative 
humidity to the specified 
severity value (93 percent or 
85 percent). Maintain the EUT 
at no load for a period of 48 h. 
Following the 48 h, apply the 
same test loads or simulated 
loads and record the data as 
indicated above. 


Decrease the relative humidity 
to 50 percent and decrease the 
temperature in the chamber 
to the reference temperature. 
After stabilization of the EUT, 
apply the same test loads or 
simulated loads and record the 
data as indicated above. 


Allow full recovery of the 
EUT before any other tests are 
performed. 


All functions shall operate as 
designed. All errors shall be 
the maximum specified errors 
specified in Table 27 of clause 
7.5.2.2 for initial verification. 


A-7.2.4 Resistance to Limit Temperatures, in off State 


(5.9.4) 


A-7.2.4.1 Resistance to specified high limit temperature 


in off state 


If the specified high limit temperature for the EUT 
in off-state is the same as its maximum operating 
temperature, the test A-7.2.1 will be sufficient and no 
further test will be required in off state. 


Ifthe specified high limit temperature for the EUT in off- 
state is more than its maximum operating temperature, 
tests for resistance to specified high temperature in off 
state are carried out according to IS 9000 (Part 3) and 


according to Table A-3 


Table A-3 
( Clause A-7.2.4.1 ) 
Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Dry heat Reference of 20 °C IS 9000 (Part 3) 
ar Limit Specified high limit 
Temperature . 
in off stat temperature (in off state) 
(in off state) for 2 h. 
Reference of 20 °C 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards test procedures: 

Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 5.9.4 under 
conditions dry heat (non- 
condensing). 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


None required 


EUT is disconnected from the 
voltage supply, in “off” state, 
and without any loading. 


Stabilization: 2 h at each temperature under 
“free air” conditions. “Free air” 
conditions mean a minimum 
air circulation to keep the 


temperature at a stable level. 


Temperature: Specified high in accordance 


with 5.9.4 


a) At the reference 
temperature of 20 °C; 

b) At the specified high 
temperature; and 


c) At the 
temperature. 


Temperature sequence: 


reference 


Barometric pressure: | Changes in barometric pressure 


shall be taken into account. 


Number of test cycles: At least one cycle. 


Maintain EUT in “off” 
state and without any 
loading throughout the three 
temperature stabilization 
sequence. At the end of the 
stabilization sequence, inspect 
EUT for damage and record 
findings. 


EUT shall not exhibit any 
damage and during the 
following functional test under 
static condition or simulated 
operation, all errors shall be 
within the maximum specified 
errors specified for initial 
verification, in 7.5.2.2 or 
7.5.2.1, as applicable. 


Test information: 


Maximum allowable 
variations: 


A-7.2.4.2 Resistance to specified low limit temperature 
in off state 

Ifthe specified low limit temperature for the EUT in off- 
state is the same as its minimum operating temperature, 
the test A-7.2.1 will be sufficient and no further test 
will be required in off state. 


62 


If the specified low limit temperature for the EUT in off- 
state is less than its minimum operating temperature, 
tests for resistance to specified high temperature in off 
state are carried out according to IS 9000 (Part 2) [10] 
and according to Table A-4. 


Table A-4 
( Clause A-7.2.4 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Reference of 20 °C 
Cold at Limit Specified low limit 
Temperature (in temperature (in off state) IS 9000 (Part 2) 
off state) for 2 hours 
Reference of 20 °C 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards test procedures: 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with 


the provisions in 5.9.4 under 
conditions of cold. 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


None required 


EUT is disconnected from the 
voltage supply, in “off” state, 
and without any loading. 


Stabilization: 2 h at each temperature under 
“free air” conditions. “Free air” 
conditions mean a minimum 
air circulation to keep the 


temperature at a stable level. 


Temperature: Specified low in accordance 


with 5.9.4 


a) At the reference 
temperature of 20°C; 


b) At the specified 
temperature; 


c) At the 
temperature. 


Temperature sequence: 


low 


reference 


Barometric pressure: Changes in barometric pressure 


shall be taken into account. 


Number of test cycles: At least one cycle. 


Maintain EUT in “off” 
state and without any 
loading throughout the three 
temperature stabilization 
sequence. At the end of the 
stabilization sequence, inspect 
EUT for damage and record 
findings. 


Test information: 


Maximum allowable EUT shall not exhibit any 


variations: damage and during the 
following functional test 
under static condition or 


simulated operation, all errors 
shall be within the maximum 
specified errors specified for 
initial verification, in 7.5.2.2 or 
7.5.2.1, as applicable. 


A-7.2.5 A.C. Mains Voltage Variations (7.8.2) 


A.C. mains voltage supply variation tests are carried 
out according to Basic Standard IEC 61000-2-1 [34] 
and IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 11) [20] and according to 
Table A-5. 


Table A-5 
( Clause A-7.2.5 ) 


Environmental Test Test Setup 
Phenomena Specification 
Unom 
A.C. mains Upper 1.10 x Unomor IEC 61000-2-1, 
voltage limit: 1.10 x Umax 
variation Lower 0.85 x Unom or IS 14700 
limit: 0.85 x Umin (Part 4/Sec 11) 
Unom 


NOTE — Where an instrument is powered by a three phase 
supply, the voltage variations shall apply for each phase 
successively. 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards / IEC test procedures: 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.1 under 
conditions of A.C. mains 
voltage variations. 

Preconditioning: None required. 

Condition of the EUT: The EUT is connected to the 


A.C. mains supply and “on” 
for a time period equal to or 
greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 
Adjust the EUT as close to zero 
indication as practicable prior 
to the test and do not readjust 
at any time during the test 
except to reset if a significant 
fault has been detected. 


Number of test cycles: At least one cycle. 


The EUT shall be tested with 
a test or simulated load at 
or near Min and with one 
test load or simulated load 


Test information: 


63 


IS 17008 : 2019 


between 50 percent and the 
maximum capacity of the EUT. 


Stabilize the EUT at the 
nominal voltage and record the 
following data: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) AC voltage supply; 

e) Test loads; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; 

h) Functional performance. 


Repeat the test for each 
of the voltages defined in 
IEC 61000-4-11 in section 5 
(noting the need in certain 
cases for the test weighing to 
be repeated at both ends of the 
voltage range) and record the 
indications. 


Maximum allowable 
variations: 


All functions shall operate as 
designed. All errors shall be 
within the maximum specified 
errors specified in Table 27 
of clause 7.5.2.2 for initial 
verification. 


A-7.2.6 D.C. Mains Voltage Variations (7.8.2) 


Instruments operating from D.C. mains voltage 
supply, including rechargeable battery if recharging 
of the battery during the operation of the instrument 
is possible, shall fulfil the tests in A-7.2, with the 
exception of A-7.2.5 which is to be replaced by the 
test according to Basic Standard IEC 60654-2 [35] and 
according to Table A-6. 


Table A-6 
( Clause A-7.2.6 ) 


Environmental Test Sspecification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Unom 
Upper 1.20 x Unom or 
D.C. mains limit: 1.20 x Umax 
voltage minimum IEC 60654-2 
iati Lower Š 
variations limit: operating voltage 
` (see 7.8.2) 
Unom 


NOTE — If a voltage-range is marked, use the average 
value as nominal Unom. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Supplementary information to the IEC test procedures 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.1 under 
conditions of D.C. mains 
voltage variations. 


Pre-condition None: None 


Condition of the EUT: The EUT is connected to the 
D.C. mains voltage supply 
and “on” for a time period 
equal to or greater than the 
warm-up time specified by the 
manufacturer. Adjust the EUT 
as close to zero indication as 
practicable, prior to the test 
and do not readjust at any time 
during the test except to reset 
if a significant fault has been 
indicated. 


Number of test cycles: At least one cycle. 


Test information: Stabilize the EUT at the 
nominal voltage and record 
the following data at no load 
and with one load or simulated 
load: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) DC voltage supply; 

e) Test loads; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 

h) Functional performance. 


Repeat the test for each of the 
voltages defined in IEC 60654- 
2 and record the indications. 


Maximum allowable All functions shall operate as 

variations: designed. All errors shall be 
within the maximum specified 
error specified in Table 27 of 
7.5.2.2 for initial verification. 


A-7.2.7 Battery voltage supply (D.C.), not mains 
connected, including non-rechargeable battery voltage 
supply and also including rechargeable battery supply 
if (re)charging of battery voltage supply during the 
operation of the instrument is not possible (7.8.2) 
Battery-powered instruments shall fulfil the tests 
in A-7.2, with the exception of A-7.2.5 and A-7.2.6 
and A-7.2.7 which are to be replaced by the test in 
Table A-7. 


64 


Table A-7 
( Clause A-7.2.7 ) 
Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Battery voltage Unom No reference to 
variations ad : standards for 
Minimum operating (is test 
voltage (see 7.8.2) 
Unom 


NOTE — Ifa voltage range is marked, use the average value 


as nominal Unom. 


Supplementary test information: 


Object of the test: 


Pre-condition: 


Condition of the EUT: 


Number of test cycles: 


Test information: 


To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.1 under 
conditions of voltage variations 
of a fully charged battery. 


None 


The EUT is connected to the 
battery voltage supply and 
“on” for a time period equal 
to or greater than the warm- 
up time specified by the 
manufacturer. Adjust the EUT 
as close to zero indication as 
practicable, prior to the test 
and do not readjust at any time 
during the test except to reset 
if a significant fault has been 
indicated. 


At least one cycle. 


Stabilize the EUT at the 
nominal voltage and record 
the following data at no load 
and with one load or simulated 
load: 


a ) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c ) Relative humidity; 

d ) Battery voltage supply; 
e) Test loads; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g ) Errors; and 

h ) Functional performance. 


Reduce the voltage supply to 
the EUT until the instrument 
ceases to function properly 
according to the specifications 
and metrological requirements 
and record the indications. 


All functions shall operate as 
designed. All errors shall be 
within the maximum specified 
errors specified in Table 27 
of clause 7.5.2.2 for initial 
verification. 


Maximum allowable 
variations: 


A-7.2.8 Voltage Variations from 12 V or 24 V Road 
Vehicle Batteries (7.8.2) 


Road vehicle battery operated instruments shall fulfil 
the tests in A-7.2, with the exception of A-7.2.5 which 
is to be replaced by the following test conducted in 
accordance with ISO 16750-2 [42] and according to 
Table A-8. 


Table A-8 
( Clause A-7.2.8 ) 


Environmental ç ' 
Phenomena Test specification Test setup 
Unom Upper Lower 
limit limit 
12 V or 24V 12V 16V 9V 
road vehicle 
ISO 16750-2 
battery voltage 24 V 32V 16 V 
variation 


NOTE — The nominal voltage, Unom, of the electrical 
system in road vehicles is usually 12 V or 24 V, but the 
practical voltage at the battery connection points can vary 
considerably. 


Supplementary information to the ISO test procedures: 
Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.1 under 
conditions of road vehicle 
battery voltage variations. 


None 


The EUT is connected to 
the voltage supply and “on” 
for a time period equal to or 
greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 
Adjust the EUT as close to zero 
indication as practicable, prior 
to the test and do not readjust 
at any time during the test 
except to reset if a significant 
fault has been indicated. 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


At least one cycle for each 
functional mode. 


Stabilize the EUT at the 
nominal voltage and record 
the following data at no load 
and with one load or simulated 
load: 


Number of test cycles: 


Test information: 


65 


IS 17008 : 2019 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Voltage supply; 

e) Test loads; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 

h ) Functional performance. 


Reduce the voltage supply to 
the EUT until the instrument 
clearly ceases to function 
properly according to the 
specifications and metrological 
requirements, and record the 
indications. 


Maximum allowable 
variations: 


All functions shall operate as 
designed. All errors shall be 
within the maximum specified 
errors specified in Table 27 
of clause 7.5.2.2 for initial 
verification. 


A-7.2.9 Resistance to Random Vibrations (5.9.5) 


Resistance to random vibration tests are carried out 
according to basic standard IEC publication, IEC 60068- 
2-47 [26], IEC 60068-2-64 [27], with documentation 
support and guidance from IEC 60068-3-8 [28], and 
according to Table A-9. 


Table A-9 
( Clause A-7.2.9 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Vibration Exposure to random TEC 60068-2-47 
(random) vibration for 2 min per TEC 60068-2-64 


axis, in all three, mutually 


perpendicular axes TEC 60068-3-8 


Supplementary test information: 


Object of the test Verification of compliance 
under conditions of random 
vibration 

Preconditioning None required 

Condition of the EUT The EUT shall be mounted 


in such a way that the gravity 
vector points in the same 
direction as it would in normal 
use. After mounting EUT shall 
be connected to the voltage 
supply and “on” for a time 


IS 17008 : 2019 


period equal to or greater than 
the warm-up time specified 
by the manufacturer. Voltage 
supply is to be “on” for the 
duration of the test. Adjust the 
EUT as close to zero indication 
as practicable prior to the test 
and do not readjust at any 
time during the test. 


Test duration 2 min per axis 


Apply random vibrations on 
the EUT for 2 min in each of 
the three mutual perpendicular 
directions with following test 
severities: 


Test information 


Total frequency range: 10 — 
150 Hz 


Total RMS level: 7 m/s? 
ASD level (10-20 Hz): 1 m° /s° 


ASD level (20-150 Hz): -3 dB/ 
octave 


and record the functionality 


During the course of this 
test the EUT shall remain 
functional, and during the 
following functional test in 
static condition or simulated 
operation, all errors shall be 
within the maximum specified 
errors specified for initial 
verification, in 7.5.2.2 or 
7.5.2.1, as applicable. 


Maximum allowable 
variations: 


A-7.2.10 Resistance to Shock (5.9.5) 

Resistance to shock tests are carried out according to 
IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 2)[13] and according to Table A-10. 
Table A-10 
( Clause A-7.2.10 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Shock/Impact Exposure to repeated IS 9000 (Part 7/ 
(bump) shock/prolonged bumping Sec 2) 


Supplementary test information: 

Object of the test Verification of compliance under 
conditions of repeated shock / 
prolonged bumping and/or to 
assess structural integrity. 


Preconditioning None required 
Condition of the The EUT shall be mounted in such 
EUT a way that it can be subjected to 


bumps in all possible directions 


and attitudes as in normal use. 
After mounting EUT shall be 
connected to the voltage supply 
and “on” for a time period equal to 
or greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 
Voltage supply is to be “on” for 
the duration of the test. Adjust the 
EUT as close to zero indication 
as practicable prior to the test and 
do not readjust at any time during 
the test. 


Number of If the attitude of the EUT when 
directions for mounted is known, and since 
conditioning bumps arc generally of greatest 


significance in one direction 
(usually vertical), the specified 
number of bumps should be 
applied in that direction and 
attitude only. Where the attitude 
is unknown, the specified number 
of bumps should be applied 
in each of the three mutually 
perpendicular directions. 


Test information Apply bump on EUT in each 
direction with following test 


severities: 


peak acceleration: 100 m/s? 


nominal impulse duration: 
16 min, 

corresponding velocity 
change: | m/s, 


number of bumps in each 
direction: 1 000 + 10 


and record the functionality 


Maximum During the course of this test the 
allowable EUT shall remain functional, and 
variations: during the following functional 


test in static condition or 
simulated operation, all errors 
shall be within the maximum 
specified errors specified for 
initial verification, in 7.5.2.2 or 
7.5.2.1, as applicable. 


NOTE — Use IS 8456-1977 [9] for guidance on mounting 
methods 


A-7.2.11 Dust and Water Resistance (5.9.6) 


Dust and water resistance according to 5.9.6 shall be 
tested in the off state on those parts of the EUT that are 
exposed to the effects of weather in accordance with IS 
9000 (Part 12) and IS 9000 (Part 16) [15], respectively. 
Alternatively, the tests may be conducted in accordance 
with IEC 60512-11-8 [29], IEC 60721-2-5 [30] for 
dust and IEC 60068-2-18 [32], IEC 60512-14-7 [33] 


for water; using IS/IEC 60529 : 2001 for degrees of 
protection provided by enclosures (IP Codes). 


Following this test, the EUT must not exhibit any 
damage. During the following functional test in static 
condition or simulated operation, all errors shall be 
within the maximum specified errors specified for 
initial verification in 7.5.2.1 or 7.5.2.2 as applicable. 


A-7.3 Disturbance Tests (8.1.2) 


Summary of Tests 


Test Condition § 
Applied 

AC mains voltage short time sf* A-7.3.1 
power reduction 
Electrical fast transients/burst sf A-7.3.2 
immunity on mains supply 
lines and on I/O circuits and 
communication lines 
Electrical surges on mains sf A-7.3.3 
supply lines and on IO 
circuits and communication 
lines 
Electrostatic discharge sf A-7.3.4 
Immunity to electromagnetic sf A-7.3.5 
fields 
Electrical transient sf A-7.3.6 
conduction for instruments 


powered by 12 V or 24 V 
road vehicle batteries 


* Value of the significant fault (see 3.4.4.7) 


A-7.3.1 Short Time Power Reduction 


A.C. mains short time power reduction (voltage dips 
and short interruptions) tests are carried out according 
to IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 11) [20] and according to 
Table A-11. 


Table A-11 
( Clause A-7.3.1 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test 
Phenomena Setup 
Test Reduction Duration / 
of Number of 
Amplitude Cycles 
to 
Test a 0 percent 0.5 
Voltage dips 1814700 
and short testib Ypsrcent | (Part 4/ 
interruptions Test c 40 percent 10 Sec 11) 
Test d 70 percent 25/30 
Test e 80 percent 250/300* 
Short 0 percent 250 
interruption 


* These values are for 50 Hz /60 Hz, respectively 


67 


IS 17008 : 2019 


NOTE — A test generator suitable to reduce for a defined 
period of time the amplitude of one or more half cycles (at 
zero crossings) of the A.C. mains voltage shall be used. The 
test generator shall be adjusted before connecting the EUT. The 
mains voltage reductions shall be repeated 10 times with an 
interval of at least 10 s. 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards test procedures: 

Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.2 under 
conditions of short time mains 
voltage interruptions and 
reductions while observing the 
weight indication of a single 
static load 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


None required. 


The EUT is connected to 
the voltage supply and “on” 
for a time period equal to 
or greater than the warm- 
up time specified by the 
manufacturer. Adjust the EUT 
as close to zero indication as 
practicable, prior to the test. 
Zero-setting functions shall 
not be in operation and are 
not to be adjusted at any time 
during the test except to reset 
if a significant fault has been 
indicated. 


Number of test cycles: At least one cycle. 


The EUT shall be tested with 
one small static test load 


Test information: 


Stabilize all factors at nominal 
reference conditions. Apply 
one load or simulated load and 
record: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 
d) Voltage supply; 

e) Test load; 


5 


f) Indications (as applicable) 
g) Errors; and 


h) Functional performance. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


In accordance with the test 
specification in Table A-7, 
interrupt the voltages to the 
corresponding durations/ 
number of cycles and conduct 
the test as detailed in IS14700 
(Part 4/Sec 11) 8.2.1 During 
interruption observe the effect 
on the EUT and record as 


appropriate. 
Maximum  allowableThe difference between 
Variations : the indication due to the 


disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the threshold 
value for significant fault (see 
3.4.4.7) or the EUT shall detect 
and react to a significant fault. 


A-7.3.2 Electrical Fast Transients/Burst Immunity on 
the Mains Supply Lines and on the I/O Circuits and 
Communication Lines 


Electrical fast transients/burst immunity tests are 
carried out at the positive and the negative polarities 
for at least 1 min at each polarity in accordance with 
1S14700 (Part 4/Sec 4) [18] or technically equivalent 
Basic Standard IEC 61000-4-4 [37] and according to 
Tables A-12 and A-13. 


Table A-12 
( Clause A-7.3.2 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
0.5 kV (Peak) 
Fast transient 1814700 (Part 4/Sec 4) 
common mode 35068 Tt, / IEC 61000-4-4 


5 kHz rep. frequency 


NOTE — Applicable only to ports or interfacing with 
cables whose total length may exceed 3 m according to the 
manufacturer’s functional specification. 


Table A-13 
( Clause A-7.3.2 ) 


Environmental Test Setup Standard 


Phenomena 


Test Specification 


1 kV (peak) 
5/50 ns T1 /Th 
5 kHz rep. frequency 


1814700 (Part 4/Sec 4) / 
IEC 61000-4-4 


Fast transient 
common mode 


NOTE — D.C. supply lines, not applicable to battery- 
operated appliance that cannot be connected to the mains 
while in use. 


A coupling/decoupling network shall be applied for 
testing A.C. supply ports. 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standard /IEC test procedures: 


68 


Object of the test: 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


Number of test cycles: 


Test information: 


To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.2 under 
conditions where fast transients 
are superimposed separately on 
the mains voltage, and on the 
T/O circuits and communication 
lines (if any), while observing 
the indications for one static 
test load. 


None required. 


The performance of the test 
generator shall be verified 
before connecting the EUT. 


The EUT is connected to 
the voltage supply and “on” 
for a time period equal to 
or greater than the warm- 
up time specified by the 
manufacturer. Adjust the EUT 
as close to zero indication as 
practicable, prior to the test. 
Zero-setting functions shall 
not be in operation and are 
not to be adjusted at any time 
during the test except to reset 
if a significant fault has been 
indicated. 


At least one cycle. 


Both positive and negative 
polarity of the bursts shall be 
applied. The duration of the 
test shall not be less than one 
min for each amplitude and 
polarity. The injection network 
on the mains shall contain 
blocking filters to prevent the 
burst energy being dissipated in 
the mains. For the coupling of 
the bursts into the input/output 
and communication lines, a 
capacitive coupling clamp 
as defined in the reference 
standard shall be used. 


Before any test stabilize 
the EUT under constant 
environmental conditions. 


Apply one small static test load 
or simulated load and record: 


a) Date and time; 
b) Temperature; 
c) Relative humidity; 


d) Voltage supply; 


e) Test load; 
f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 


h) Functional performance. 


Maximum ` allowableThe difference between 


variations: 


the indication due to the 
disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the threshold 
value for significant fault (see 
3.4.4.7) or the EUT shall detect 
and react to a significant fault. 


A-7.3.3 Electrical Surges on Mains Supply Lines and 
on I/O Circuits and Communication (Signal) Lines 


Electrical surge tests are carried out according to 
IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 5) [19] or technically equivalent 
Basic Standard IEC Publication IEC 61000-4-5 [38] 
and according to Table A-14. 


Table A-14 


( Clause A-7.3.3 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 

Surges on 0.5 kV (peak) line to line IS 14700 

mains supply 1 kV line to earth (Part 4/Sec 5) / 

lines and on a IEC 61000-4-5 

T/O circuits and a) 3 positive and : 3 

communication negative surges applied 


lines 


b) 


synchronously with 
A.C. supply voltage in 
angles 0°, 90°, 180° 
and 270°. 


3 positive and 3 
negative surges applied 
on D.C. supply lines 
and on T/O circuits and 
communication lines. 


NOTE — This test is only applicable in those cases where the 
risk of a significant influence of surges can be expected such as 
outdoor installations and/or indoor installations connected to 
long communication and signal lines (lines longer than 30 m 
or those lines partially or fully installed outside the buildings 
regardless of their length). It is also applicable to D.C. powered 
instruments if the voltage supply comes from a D.C. network. 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards /IEC test procedures: 


Object of the test: 


To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.2 under 
conditions where electrical 
surges are applied separately 
to the mains supply lines, 
and to the I/O circuits and 
communication lines (if any), 
while observing the indications 
for one static test/simulated 
load or dynamic simulated load. 


69 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


Number of test cycles: 


Test information: 


IS 17008 : 2019 


None required. 


The characteristics of the test 
generator shall be verified 
before connecting the EUT. 


The EUT is connected to 
the voltage supply and “on” 
for a time period equal to 
or greater than the warm- 
up time specified by the 
manufacturer. Adjust the EUT 
as close to zero indication as 
practicable, prior to the test. 
Zero-setting functions shall 
not be in operation and are 
not to be adjusted at any time 
during the test except to reset 
if a significant fault has been 
indicated. 


At least one cycle. 


The test consists of exposure 
to surges for which the rise 
time, pulse width, peak values 
of the output voltage/current 
on high/low impendence load 
and minimum time interval 
between two successive pulses 
are defined in IS14700 (Part 4/ 
Sec 5) or IEC 61000-4-5. 


The injection network depends 
on the lines the surge is 
coupled to and is defined in 
1S14700 (Part 4/Sec 5) or 
IEC 61000-4-5. 


The EUT shall be tested with 
one small static test load or 
simulated load. 


Before any test stabilize 
the EUT under constant 
environmental conditions. 
Apply one load or simulated 
load and record: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Voltage supply; 

e) Test load; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 


h) Functional performance. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Maximum allowable 
variations: 


The difference between 
the indication due to the 
disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the threshold 
value for significant fault 
(see 3.4.4.7) or the EUT shall 
detect and react to a significant. 


A-7.3.4 Electrostatic Discharge 


Electrostatic discharge tests are carried out according to 
IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 2) [16] or technically equivalent 
basic standard IEC 61000-4-2 [39] and according to 


Table A-15. 
Table A-15 
( Clause A-7.3.4 ) 
Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
f Test voltage Levels(1) 1814700 
Electrostatic ; contact ; 6 kV (Part 4/Sec 2) / 
discharge discharge air IEC 61000-4-2 
discharge 8kV 
NOTES: 


1 Tests shall be performed at the specified lower levels, 
starting with 2 kV and proceeding with 2 kV steps up to 
and including the level specified above in accordance with 
1814700 (Part 4/Sec 2) or IEC 61000-4-2. 

2 The 6 kV contact discharge shall be applied to conductive 
accessible parts. Metallic contacts, for example, in battery 
compartments or in socket outlets are excluded from this 


requirement. 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards / IEC test procedures: 


Object of the test: 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.2 under 
conditions where electrostatic 
discharges are applied while 
observing the weight indication 
for one small static test load 


None required. 


The performance of the test 
generator shall be verified 
before connecting the EUT. 


The EUT is connected to the 
voltage supply and “on” for a 
time period equal to or greater 
than the warm-up time specified 
by the manufacturer. Adjust the 
EUT as close to zero indication 
as practicable, prior to the test. 
Zero-setting functions shall not 
be in operation and are not to be 
adjusted at any time during the 
test except to reset ifa significant 
fault has been indicated. 


70 


Number of test cycles: 
At least one cycle. 


Test information: 


Maximum allowable 
variations : 


Contact discharge is the 
preferred test method. 20 
discharges (10 with positive 
and 10 with negative polarity) 
shall be applied on each 
accessible metal part of the 
enclosure. The time interval 
between successive discharges 
shall be at least 10 s. In 
the case of a nonconductive 
enclosure, discharges shall 
be applied on the horizontal 
or vertical coupling planes 
as specified in the reference 
standard. Air discharges 
shall be used where contact 
discharges cannot be applied. 


Before any test stabilize 
the EUT under constant 
environmental conditions. 


Apply one small static test load 
or simulated load and record: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Voltage supply; 

e) Test load; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 

h) Functional performance. 


The difference between 
the indication due to the 
disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the threshold 
value for significant fault 
(see 3.4.4.7) or the EUT shall 
Detect and react to a significant 
fault. 


A-7.3.5 Immunity to Electromagnetic Fields 


A-7.3.5.1 Immunity to radiated electromagnetic fields 


Radiated, radio-frequency, electromagnetic (EM) field 
immunity tests (radio-frequency EM fields higher 
than 80 MHz) are carried out in accordance to basic 


standard IEC publicatio 
or technically equivalen 
according to Table A-16 


n IS14700 (Part 4/Sec 3) [17] 
t with IEC 61000-4-3 [40] and 


Table A-16 
( Clause A-7.3.5.1 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 

Phenomena 

Radiated Frequency Field 1S:14700 
electromagnetic ranges strength (Part 4/Sec 3)/ 
80 to 2 000 10 
26 to 80° 
Modulation 80 percent AM, | kHz sine wave 
NOTES: 


1 1S14700 (Part 4/Sec 3) or IEC 61000-4-3 only specifies 
test levels above 80 MHz. For frequencies in the lower range 
the test methods for conducted radio frequency disturbances 
according to A-7.3.4.2 are recommended. 

2 For EUTs having no mains or other I/O ports available so 
that the test according to A-7.3.4.2 cannot be applied, the 
lower limit of the radiation test is 26 MHz. 


Supplementary information to the Bureau of Indian 
Standards / IEC test procedures: 

Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.2 under 
conditions of specified radiated 
electromagnetic fields applied 
while observing the weight 
indication for one small static 


test load. 
Preconditioning: None required. 
Condition of the EUT: The performance of the test 


generator shall be verified 
before connecting the EUT. 


The EUT is connected to the 
voltage supply and “on” for a 
time period equal to or greater 
thanthe warm-up time specified 
by the manufacturer. Adjust the 
EUT as close to zero indication 
as practicable, prior to the test. 
Zero-setting functions shall 
not be in operation and are 
not to be adjusted at any time 
during the test except to reset 
if a significant fault has been 
indicated. 


Number of test cycles: At least one cycle. 


Test information: The EUT shall be exposed to 
EM field strength as specified 
in Table A-16. The frequency 
ranges to be considered are 
swept with the modulated 
carrier. The performance of the 


EUT shall be verified. 


71 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Before any test stabilize 
the EUT under constant 
environmental conditions. 


Apply one small static test load 
or simulated load and record: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Voltage supply; 

e) Test load; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 

h) Functional performance. 


The difference between 
the indication due to the 
disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the threshold 
value significant fault (see 
3.4.4.7) or the EUT shall detect 
and react to a significant fault. 


Maximum allowable 
variations: 


A-7.3.5.2 Immunity to conducted electromagnetic field 
tests 


Conducted, radio-frequency, electromagnetic field (EM) 
immunity tests (radio-frequency EM fields lower than 
80 MHz) are carried out in accordance to basic standard 
IEC 61000-4-6 [41] and according to Table A-17. 


Table A-17 
( Clause A-7.3.5.2 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test Setup 
Phenomena 
Frequency RE 
Conducted range amplitude 
electromagnetic MHz (50 ohms) IEC 61000-4-6 
field V (e.m.f) 
0.15 to 80 10V 
Modulation 80 percent AM, 1 kHz sine wave 


NOTE — This test is not applicable when the EUT has no 
mains or other input port. 


Supplementary information to the IEC test procedures 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.2 under 
conditions of specified 
conducted electromagnetic 
fields applied while observing 
the weight indication for one 


small static test load. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


None required. 


The performance of the test 
generator shall be verified 
before connecting the EUT. 


The EUT is connected to 
the voltage supply and “on” 
for a time period equal to 
or greater than the warm- 
up time specified by the 
manufacturer. Adjust the EUT 
as close to zero indication as 
practicable, prior to the test. 
Zero-setting functions shall 
not be in operation and are 
not to be adjusted at any time 
during the test except to reset 
if a significant fault has been 
indicated. 


Number of test cycles: At least one cycle. 


Test information: Before any test stabilize 
the EUT under constant 
environmental conditions. 


Apply one small static test load 
or simulated load and record: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Voltage supply; 

e) Test load 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 

h) Functional performance. 


The difference between 
the indication due to the 
disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the threshold 
value for significant fault 
(see.3.4.4.7) or the EUT shall 
detect and react to a significant 
fault. 


Maximum allowable 
variations : 


A-7.3.6 Electrical Ttransient Conduction 
Instruments Ppowered by a Road Vehicle Bbattery 


for 


A-7.3.6.1 Electrical transient conduction along supply 
lines of 12 V or 24 V batteries 


Transient immunity tests along supply lines of 12 V and 
24 V vehicle batteries are carried out in accordance to 
ISO 7637-2 [43] and according to Table A-18. 


72 


Table A-18 
( Clause A-7.3.6.1 ) 


Environmental Test Specification Test 
Phenomena Setup 
Test Pulse Voltage, U, 
Pulse y „=12V  U,„=24V 
Conduction 2a +50 V +50 V 
ae A D N FAON i 
lines 3a -150 V -200 V 
3b +100 V +200 V 
4 -7V -16 V 


NOTE — Test pulse 2b is only applicable if the instrument 
is connected to the battery via the main (ignition) switch of 
the car, that is if the manufacturer has not specified that the 
instrument is to be connected directly (or by its own main 
switch) to the battery. 


Supplementary information to the ISO test procedures: 


ISO 7637-2 § 5.6.2: Test pulse 2a + b, 
§ 5.6.3: Test pulse 3a + 3b, 


§ 5.6.4: Test pulse 4. 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.2 under 
the following conditions 
while observing the weight 
indication for one small static 


test load: 


a) Transients due to a sudden 
interruption of currents in a 
device connected in parallel 
with the device under test 
due to the inductance of the 
wiring harness (pulse 2a); 


b) Transients from DC motors 
acting as generators after 
the ignition is switched off 
(pulse 2b); 


c) Transients on the supply 
lines, which occur as a result 
of the switching processes 
(pulses 3a and 3b); 


d) Voltage reductions caused 
by energizing the starter- 
motor circuits of internal 
combustion engines (pulse 4). 


Preconditioning: None 


Condition of the EUT: The EUT is connected to 
the voltage supply and “on” 
for a time period equal to or 
greater than the warm-up time 


specified by the manufacturer. 


Stabilization: 


Test information: 


Maximum allowable 
variations: 


Adjust the EUT as close to 
zero indication as practicable 
prior to the test. Zero-setting 
functions shall not be in 
operation and are not be 
adjusted at any time during 
the test except to reset if a 
significant fault has been 
indicated. 


Before any test stabilize 
the EUT under constant 
environmental conditions. 


The EUT is exposed to 
conducted disturbances (on the 
supply voltage by direct brief 
coupling on supply lines) of 
the strength and character as 
specified in Table A-18. With 
the static load or simulated 
load in place record: 


a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Voltage supply; 

e) Test load; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 

h) Functional performance. 


Repeat the test weighing for 
the defined voltages and record 
the indications. 


The difference between 
the indication due to the 
disturbance and the indication 
without the disturbance either 
shall not exceed the threshold 
value for significant fault 
(see 3.4.4.7) or the EUT shall 
detect and react to a significant 
fault. 


A-7.3.6.2 Transient conduction by capacitive and in- 
ductive coupling via lines other than supply lines 


Transient immunity tests via lines other than supply 
lines for 12 V or 24 V road vehicle batteries are carried 
out in accordance with ISO 7637-3 [44] and according 


to Table A-19. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Environmental 
Phenomena 
Electrical Test 
transient pulse 


conduction via 


lines other than a 


Table A-19 
( Clause A-7.3.6.2 ) 

Test Specification Test 

Setup 
Pulse voltage, Us 

Uar RY Uae JSO 

-60 V -80V 7637-3 
+40 V +80 V 


supply lines b 


Supplementary information to the ISO test procedures: 


Applicable standards: 


Object of the test: 


Preconditioning: 


Condition of the EUT: 


Stabilization: 


73 


ISO 7637-3, § 4.5: Test 
pulses a and b. 


To verify compliance with 
the provisions in 8.1.2 under 
conditions of transients 
which occur on other lines 
as a result of the switching 
processes (pulses a and 
b), under the following 
conditions while observing 
the weight indication for 
one small static test load. 


None 


The EUT is connected to 
the voltage supply and 
“on” for a time period 
equal to or greater than the 
warm-up time specified by 
the manufacturer. Adjust 
the EUT as close to zero 
indication as practicable 
prior to the test. Zero- 
setting functions shall not 
be in operation and are not 
to be adjusted at any time 
during the test except to 
reset if a significant fault 
has been indicated. 


Before any test stabilize 
the EUT under constant 
environmental conditions. 
Weighing test: The EUT 
is exposed to conducted 
disturbances (bursts of 
voltage spikes 


By capacitive and inductive 
coupling via lines other than 
supply lines) of the strength 
and character as specified 
in Table A-19. With the 
static load or simulated 
load in place record: 


a) Date and time; 


IS 17008 : 2019 


b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Voltage supply; 

e) Test load; 

f) Indications (as applicable); 
g) Errors; and 

h) Functional performance. 


Repeat the test weighing 
for the defined voltages and 
record the indications. 


allowableThe difference between 
the indication due to 
the disturbance and the 
indication without the 
disturbance either shall 
not exceed the value 
for significant fault (see 
3.4.4.7) or the EUT shall 
detect and react to a 
significant fault. 


Maximum 
variations : 


A-8 SPAN STABILITY TEST 


This clause is applicable to WIM system for which 
testing with static load or simulated load is possible. 
When a particular WIM system uses weighing 
instrument that is not subjected to span stability test 
using static load or simulated load, this should be noted 
in the type (model) approval certificate. 


Summary of test 
Test Condition applied § 
Span stability 1, MSE* A.8 


* Maximum specified error on initial verification given in 7.5.2.2. 


NOTE — The maximum permissible error for the zero point 
shall also be taken into consideration. 


Test method: Span stability 


Object of the test: To verify compliance with the 
provisions in 10.21.3 after the 
EUT has been subjected to the 


performance tests. 


No reference to international 
standards can be given at the 
present time. 


Reference to standard: 


Test procedure in brief: The test consists of observing 
the variations of the error of 
the EUT or simulator under 
sufficiently constant ambient 
conditions (reasonably constant 


74 


Test severity: 


Time, t, between tests 
(days): 
Test load: 


Maximum allowable 
Variations: 


Number of tests, n: 


conditions in a normal 
laboratory environment) at 
various intervals: before, 


during and after the EUT has 
been subjected to performance 
tests. 


The performance tests shall 
include the temperature test 
and, if applicable, \the damp 
heat test. Other performance 
tests listed in this Annex may 
be performed. 


The EUT shall be disconnected 
twice from the mains power 
supply (or battery supply 
where fitted) for at least 8 h 
during the period of the test. 
The number of disconnections 
may be increased if so specified 
by the manufacturer or at the 
discretion of the approval 
authority in the absence of any 
specification. 


In the conduct of this test, 
the operating instructions for 
the instrument as supplied 
by the manufacturer shall be 
considered. 


Test duration: 28 days or 
the time period necessary to 
conduct the performance tests, 
whichever is less. 


0.5<t< 10. 


Near maximum capacity, Max; 
the same test weights shall be 
used throughout the test. 


The variation in the errors of 
indication shall not exceed 
half the absolute value of the 
maximum permissible error in 
7.5.2.2 for initial verification 
for the test load applied on any 
of the n measurements. 


At least eight, except where 
the differences of the results 
indicate a trend more than 
half the allowable variation 
specified, the measurements 
shall be continued until the 
trend comes to rest or reverses 
itself, or until the error exceeds 
the maximum allowable 
variation. 


Precondition: 


Test equipment: 


Condition of the EUT: 


Test sequence: 


None required. 


Verified mass standards or 
simulated loads. 


The EUT is connected to 
the voltage supply and “on” 
for a time period equal to or 
greater than the warm-up time 
specified by the manufacturer. 


The EUT shall be stabilized at 
sufficiently constant ambient 
conditions after switch-on 
for at least 16 h after the 
temperature and damp heat 
tests have been performed. 


Stabilize all factors at 
sufficiently constant ambient 
conditions. 


Adjust the EUT as close to 
zero as possible. 


Automatic zero-tracking 
shall be made inoperative and 
any automatic built-in span 
adjustment device shall be 
made inoperative. 


Apply the test load (or 
simulated load) and determine 
the error. 


After the first measurement 
immediately repeat zeroing 
and loading four times to 
determine the average value of 
the error. For the subsequent 
measurements perform only 
one, unless either the result is 
outside the specified tolerance 
or the range of the five readings 
of the initial measurement is 
more than 0.1d. 


Record the following data: 

a) Date and time; 

b) Temperature; 

c) Relative humidity; 

d) Test load; 

e) Indications (as applicable); 
f) Errors; and 


g) Changes in test location, 


75 


IS 17008 : 2019 


all necessary 
corrections resulting from 
variations in temperature, 
etc. between the various 
measurements. 


and apply 


Allow full recovery of the 
EUT before any other tests are 
performed. 


A-9 PROCEDURE FOR IN-MOTION TESTS 


A-9.1 General 


Note the functional type classification of the WIM 
system and the data items required. 


Note the statistical accuracy classes required for the 
vehicle mass (W) and, if required, for axle load, axle- 
group load, axle load of axle of a group and wheel load. 


Note the metrological accuracy classes required for the 
vehicle mass (W) and, if required, for axle load, axle- 
group load, and wheel load. 


Note the verification class required for vehicle mass 
(W) and, if required, for axle load, axle-group load, axle 
load for axle of a group and wheel load. 


Ensure that the desired scale interval and the maximum 
capacity comply with 7.4. Check that the minimum 
capacity complies with 7.5. 


Obtain approval from the public authority having 
jurisdiction over the site for the traffic control 
procedures, including permission to exceed the legal 
speed limit if applicable (10.7) that will be used during 
testing. 


For model (type) approval, tests shall be carried out in 
accordance with the requirements of this specification, 
and especially the requirements in 9.1 and A-1. 


For initial verification, tests shall be carried out in 
accordance with the requirements of this specification, 
and especially the requirements in 9.2 and A-2. 


For subsequent and in-service verification, tests shall 
be carried out in accordance with the requirements 
of this specification, and especially the requirements 
in 9.3. 


In determining the vehicle mass (VM) and, if required, 
for axle load, axle-group load, axle load of axle of a 
group and wheel load, the conditions specified in 5.9 
and, if appropriate the requirements of government 
regulations should be taken into account. 


A-9.2 Control Instrument 


Establish whether or not the WIM system is to be used 
as an integral control instrument. If it is an integral 
control instrument then it shall comply with 10.2.1 and 
be tested, using the static weighing test method in 10.3, 
in accordance with A-5.2. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


If vehicles have to be moved over some distance 
from a separate control instrument to the EUT, the 
conditions must be closely controlled. Differences in 
weather conditions may cause errors which will not 
be determinable and so this should be avoided where 
possible. Consideration shall also be given to the 
amount of fuel used and any possible effects that this 
could have on the reference values. 


A-9.3 Weighing 


A-9.3.1 Static Weighing 


If the WIM system is provided with a static weighing 
mode, the static weighing test detailed in 


A-9.3.1.1 shall be applied. When the system has been 
tested according to the test in A-9.2 then those results 
may be used. 


A-9.3.1.1 Static weighing test 


Establish whether Max with reference to the load 
receptor relates to axle load or vehicle mass. 


Apply test loads from zero up to and including Max, 
then remove the test loads back to zero. Where the size 
of the load receptor prevents loading to Max for vehicle 
mass, then the reduced load should be noted. However, 
where a reduced load is used, it shall be at least 50 
percent of Max. At least ten different load values shall 
be selected. The values of the loads selected shall 
include Max and Min, and values at or near those at 
which the maximum specified error changes. 


It should be noted that when loading or unloading 
weights, the load must be respectively increased or 
decreased in a uniform progression. 


Ensure that the error is recorded at each change in load 
and calculate the errors according to A-3.6.2. Record 
the errors and compare them to the limits in 6.5.7 or 
7.5.2.2 as appropriate for initial verification or in- 
service inspection. 


A-9.3.1.2 Full-draught weighing of reference vehicles 


For testing systems to be used for determining the 
vehicle mass (W), select the required number of 
reference vehicles as specified in test plans in 10.7, and 
conduct the following tests: 


a) The conventional true value (see.3.1.5) of 
the unloaded reference vehicle mass shall be 
determined by full-draught weighing of the 
unloaded reference vehicle(s), if required, on the 
control instrument. 

b) The conventional true value (see 3.1.5) of the 

loaded reference vehicle mass shall be determined 

by: 

1) Loading the unloaded reference vehicles in a) 
above with standard test loads; or 


2) Full-draught weighing of the loaded reference 
vehicles on the control instrument. 


76 


A-9.3.1.3 Determining static reference single-axle 
loads for the two-axle rigid reference vehicle 


For testing WIM systems in applications where the 
single-axle loads are required, the conventional true 
value of the static reference single-axle loads shall be 
determined for the two-axle rigid reference vehicle by 
including, one axle load for test plans N°1, N°3 and 
N°8, and a minimum of two different axle loads for all 
other test plans using the following method: 


a) Weigh each axle of the static two-axle rigid 
reference vehicle in turn on the control instrument 
specified in 10.2 and record the indicated single- 
axle load. After both axles have been weighed, 
calculate the vehicle mass by the summation of 
the recorded values for the two axle loads and 
record the vehicle mass (Wk for the k* weighing 
operation). This operation shall be conducted 
N number of times with half the times with the 
vehicle facing in the same direction, and half 
the times with the vehicle facing in the opposite 
direction. The total number of times (N) the 
weighing operation shall be performed shall be 


1) 10 for applications in the legal domain, with 
five times with the vehicle facing in the same 
direction, and a further five times with the 
vehicle facing in the opposite direction; 


2 


— 


At least 4 for applications in domain other 
than legal, with two times with the vehicle 
facing in the same direction, and a further two 
times with the vehicle facing in the opposite 
direction. 


b 


we 


For each of the above weighing operations, ensure 
that the vehicle is stationary, with the wheels on 
the axle being weighed fully supported by the 
load receptor, the engine switched off, the gear in 
neutral and the brakes released. Use wheel chocks, 
if necessary, to prevent vehicle motion. 


1) Calculate the mean static reference single-axle 
load for each axle on the two-axle rigid vehicle 
according to the following: 


== N 
y =1 Asi 
As; = AKaik 


(4) 
where, 


Single-axle rank (sequence number of 
i® single-axle in the sequence of single 
axles starting from front of the vehicle. If 
criteria for identifying axle- group is not 
specified, all axles will be considered as 
single axles); 

Static reference axle load of i® single- 
axle indicated and recorded during the k" 
weighing operation; and 

Number of weighing operations of the axle. 
N = 10 for applications in the legal domain 
and N > 4 for applications in other areas. 


2) As; = Mean static reference single —axle load 
of the i“ single — axle. Add the two mean 
single-axle loads to determine the mean of the 
static vehicle mass: 


w ks Xia As; 
Alternatively, use the recorded values for the vehicle 


mass calculated after each vehicle 


Weighment as described above and calculate the mean 
of the static two-axle rigid reference vehicle mass 
according to the following: 


— E-1Wk 
N 


Ww 
where, 


W. is the vehicle mass calculated after the k* weighing 
operation ( W, = X2 , As; ). The mean of the static two- 
axle rigid reference vehicle mass can also be calculated 
directly from 


the indicated and recorded values according to the 
following: 


W = 


SN 52, Asik 
N 


3) Calculate the corrected mean single-axle loads 
as follows: 


where, 


is the conventional true value of each reference 
vehicle mass determined by full draught 
weighing in 10.9. 

The corrected mean single axle load of the 
static two-axle rigid reference vehicle can be 
calculated from the indicated and recorded 
values using the following: 


= As; 
As. =W. x —— 
TE” FE Ane 


4) a) For the purposes of this specification, and with 
the exception noted in 4b), the conventional 
true value of the static reference single-axle 
loads (see 3.3.1.12) for the two-axle rigid 
reference vehicle shall be the respective 
corrected mean single-axle load as calculated 
in 3) above. 


b) For applications where the vehicle mass is not 
required to be determined or for applications 
in domains other than legal, and if so agreed 
between the metrological authority or with the 
consent of the user the testing authority/agency 
as appropriate and the applicant or the vendor 
as appropriate, it shall be permissible to use 
the mean static reference single-axle load as 
calculated in 1) above as the conventional true 


77 


IS 17008 : 2019 


value of the static reference single-axle loads 
(see 3.3.1.12) for the two-axle rigid reference 
vehicle provided that the standard deviation 
of static reference single-axle load, computed 
from the indicated and recorded values, does 
not exceed the greater of the values of 4 
percent or one-third of the applicable accuracy 
class tolerance(s). 


NOTES : 


1 ASTM E-1318-09 recommends that all indicated values 
of static reference single- axle load should be are within + 4 
percent of the mean static reference single-axle load. 


2 Examples of applications where vehicle mass is not required 
are axle load surveys or any other application where WIM 
systems with Type f or Type f* vehicle data type are to be used. 


5) 


6) 


Traceability of the conventional true value of 
the single-axle loads on the static reference 
two- axle rigid vehicle is provided by the 
fact that the sum of the two corrected mean 
static reference single-axle loads equals the 
conventional true value of the reference vehicle 
mass determined by full-draught weighing 
(10.9) on a suitable control instrument (10.2). 


Wier = 


Wherever required under the test plan (10.7), 
the static reference single-axle loads shall be 
determined with the vehicle unloaded and 
loaded appropriately such that the axle loads 
cover, as far as practicable, the weighing range 
of the instrument. A minimum of two different 
axle loads, for example, one near Min and 
one near Max (respectively at the maximum 
permissible axle load of the two-axle rigid 
reference vehicle) shall be tested. 


For applications where the vehicle mass is not 
required to be determined or for applications 
in domains other than legal, and if so agreed 
between the metrological authority or with the 
consent of the user the testing authority/agency 
as appropriate and the applicant or the vendor 
as appropriate, it shall be permissible to use 
the mean single-axle load and, if required, the 
mean axle-group load, and if required, the mean 
axle load of axle of a group as calculated in 1) 
above, in place the corresponding corrected 
mean values, for calculation of relative error in 5) 
above, provided that the standard deviations of: 


i) The standard deviation single-axle load 
does not exceed the greater of the values 
of 4 percent or one-third of the applicable 
accuracy class tolerance(s); and 


ii) If required, the standard deviation of axle- 
group load does not exceed the greater of 
the values of 3 percent or one-third of the 
applicable accuracy class tolerance(s); 
and/or 


IS 17008 : 2019 


iii) if required, the standard deviation of axle 
load of axle of a group does not exceed 
the greater of the values of 5 percent or 
one-third of the applicable statistical 
accuracy class tolerance or one-third of 
the metrological accuracy class tolerance 
for single-axle load. 

7) The limits of error applicable in accordance 
with 6.5.7 for the specified statistical accuracy 
class, and/or the limits of error applicable 
in accordance with 7.5 for the specified 
metrological accuracy class, should not be 
exceeded. 

8) For future reference only (to quantify any 
difference in the fraction of the vehicle mass 
carried on each of the two-axle rigid reference 
vehicle’s single axles when determined by static 
(A-9.3.1.3 4) and by in-motion (A-9.3.2.2 3) 
weighing), also perform the calculations 
above (1- 6) for all test runs of the two-axle 
rigid reference vehicle, unloaded and loaded. 
Include these results in the test report so that 
this data will not be lost. These results shall 
not be used in lieu of those from A-9.3.2.1 for 
evaluating the WIM system being tested. 


A-9.3.2 In-Motion Tests 


Prior to any test, adjust the WIM system under test 
in-situ and in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
specifications. 


All weighing operations shall be started with the 
reference vehicle positioned in advance of the weigh 
zone at a distance- sufficient for the vehicle to be 
travelling at a steady speed before arriving at the weigh 
zone. 


Test runs shall be conducted using reference vehicles, 
loading conditions and if applicable, test conditions in 
accordance with selected test plan (10.7). 


The speed of the vehicle shall be kept as constant as 
feasible during each in-motion test run. 


For each vehicle and loading condition, out of the total 
runs performed during the entire test period, covering 
all test phases (if applicable), 60 percent subject to a 
minimum of one shall be made over the centre of the 
load receptor, 20 percent subject to a minimum of one 
shall be made to the left side of the load receptor, and 
20 percent subject to a minimum of one shall be made 
to the right side of the load receptor. 


The test runs shall be conducted at the following 
speeds that are within the range of speeds for which the 
instrument is to be evaluated: 


a) Near maximum operating speed, vmax (see 
3.3.4.2); 


b) Near minimum operating 
3.3.4.3); 


speed, vmin (see 


78 


c) Near the centre of the range of operating speeds 
vm (see 3.3.4.4). 


Provided that the speed near vmax or the speed near 
vm Shall be limited to the maximum safe speed for the 
reference vehicle that may be stipulated by the public 
authority having jurisdiction over road safety. 


A-9,3.2.1 Vehicle mass measurement 


Record the vehicle masses as they are displayed or 
printed (10.11) by the WIM system under test, and using 
conventional true value of vehicle mass determined in 
A-9.3.1.2 calculate the relative errors in accordance 
with 9.1.3.2.1 and 9.1.3.2.2.1. 


The limits of error applicable in accordance with 6.5.7 
for the specified statistical accuracy class, and/or the 
limits of error applicable in accordance with 7.5 for the 
specified metrological accuracy class, should not be 
exceeded. 


A-9.3.2.2 Axle load measurement 


The procedures in this subclause are only applicable 
to WIM systems to be used in applications where the 
single-axle load or the axle-group load or the axle load 
of axle of a group is required. 


A-9.3.2.2.1 In-motion test with the two-axle rigid 
reference vehicle 


a) In accordance with 10.7, 10.8 and 10.12 record 
the two single-axle loads of the two-axle rigid 
reference vehicle as they are indicated or printed 
by the system under test. Using each recorded 
single-axle load of the two-axle rigid reference 
vehicle and its respective static reference single- 
axle load (A-9.3.1.3), calculate the relative errors 
in accordance with 9.1.3.2.1 and 9.1.3.2.2.2.1. 


The limits of error applicable in accordance with 
6.5.7 for the specified statistical accuracy class, 
and/or the limits of error applicable in accordance 
with 7.5 for the specified metrological accuracy 
class, should not be exceeded. 


b 


eS 


A-9.3.2.2.2 In-motion tests with all other reference 
vehicle types 


a) As specified in 10.8 and 10.12 and A-9.3.2, 
conduct the in-motion tests, record the single- 
axle loads and, if required, the axle-group loads, 
and if required the axle load of axle of group 
of the vehicle as they are indicated or printed 
by the WIM system under test. If no criteria 
for identifying various axle-groups have been 
specified (see 3.3.1.10), all recorded axle loads 
shall be considered as single-axle loads (see 
3.3.1.12). For each reference vehicle (except the 
two-axle rigid) and its loading condition, calculate 
the mean single-axle loads and, if required, the 
mean axle-group loads, and if required the mean 
axle load of axle of group for all such axles and all 


such groups, of the test runs specified in A-9.3.2 
according to the following equations: 


— _ rR A 

A, = = ee (11) 
5 — _ Das Agix 

SJ] ON w (12) 
= DR=1 Gok 

g Net (13.1) 

Or, if applicable 

— 
Gg ZÈ, Ag) eeen (13.2) 


for WIM systems which determine and indicate the 
axle loads independent of single-axles or axle-group, 
equation 13.2 shall be used instead of equation 13.1. 


where, 


Single-axle rank (sequence number of i" 
single-axle in the sequence of single axles 
starting from front of the vehicle. If criteria 
for identifying axle-group is not specified, all 
axles will be considered as single axles); 


i= 


= axle group-rank (sequence number of g* axle- 
group in the sequence of axle-groups staring 
from front of the vehicle, g = 0 if criteria for 
defining axle-group is not specified or if there 
is no axle-group in the vehicle considered); 


= rank of axle of a group (sequence number 
of j axle in the sequence of axles in the g® 
axle-group. The sequence numbering will re- 
start with each new axle-group. If criteria for 
identifying axle-group is not specified then 
individual axle of a group will be considered 
and evaluated as single-axle); 


number of test runs; 

number of single axles, highest single-axle 
rank; 

number of axle-groups, highest axle-group 
rank; 

number of axles in the g axle-group, highest 
rank of axle of a group in the g™ axle-group; 


Axle load of i" single-axle indicated and 
recorded during the k" weighing operation; 


Axle load of j" individual axle of the g" 
axle-group indicated and recorded during k® 
weighing operation; 

Axle-group load of the g* axle-group (For 
WIM system which determine and indicates 
single axle loads and axle -group loads 
separately, the axle — group load shall be as 
indicated and recorded during k* weighing 
operation. For WIM systems which determine 
and indicate the axle loads independent of 


79 


IS 17008 : 2019 


single-axles or axle-group, the axle group load 
shall be obtained from Gy.= Yj, Agix ); 


A; = Mean single-axle load of the i single-axle; 
Ag; = Mean axle load of the j" axle in the g" axle- 
group; 
G, = Mean axle-group load of the g" axle-group; 
W, = Vehicle mass indicated and recorded during 
the k" weighing operation 


b) Use the values indicated or printed by the 
instrument under test according to A-9.3.2 and 
recorded as specified in 10.11 for the vehicle mass 
and calculate the mean of the reference vehicle 
mass according to the following: 


N 
+ W) 
W = Zk= WK = 
N 


Alternatively, add the mean single-axle loads and 
axle-group loads or the mean axle loads of axles 
of groups as appropriate, to determine the mean of 
the vehicle mass: 


Wa A PEG: css (15.1) 
Or, if applicable 
W Ak tas ssc (15.2) 


where, for WIM systems which determine and 
indicate the axle loads independent of single-axles 
or axle-group, equation 15.2 shall be used instead 
of equation 15.1. 


c 


wm 


Calculate the corrected mean single-axle loads 
and, if required, the corrected mean axle-group 
load(s), and if required corrected mean axle load 
of axle of a group as follows: 


A=AxXx— aen. .......... (16) 
L a f 

G; = Gç X = Pt: (17) 

a . a Wref 
A,, = Ag, x T; ae. (18) 

where, 
ep = Conventional true value of the reference 
' vehicle mass determined by full-draught 
weighing in 10.9. 

A, = Corrected mean single-axle load of the i 


single-axle 
= Corrected mean axle load of the j" axle in 
the g" axle-group 
Corrected mean axle-group load of the g" 
axle-group 
d) To provide traceability, the sum of the corrected 
mean single-axle loads and axle-group loads 
for the reference vehicle should be equal to the 


IS 17008 : 2019 


e 


wm 


conventional true value of the reference vehicle 
mass: 


Wap= YA A ener (19.1) 
Or, if applicable 
Wag DA + Deke psl (19.2) 


Calculate the relative error of each single-axle 
load and, if required, the relative error of each 
axle-group load and, if required the relative 
error of each axle load of axle of a group and 
for all groups, in accordance with 9.1.3.2.1 and 
9.1.3.2.2.2I to 9.1.3.2.2.2II1, as applicable: 


1) Relative error for single-axle of rank 
seis _ AÂ 
L: single axle-i — 4, 


2) Relative error for axle- group of rank 
g Gg-Gg 
axle group—g — É 


gir 


3) Relative error for axle of a group of rank 


Agj—Agy 


i © Teed at = 
8J : Taxle of group—gj Agi 


f) 1) For determining the reference values of axle 


load, instead of in motion tests as specified 
in A-9.3.2.2.2 a), single-axle loads and, 
if required, the axle-group loads, and if 
required the axle load of axle of group may be 
recorded on the basis of static weighing tests 
to be conducted separately from in motion 
tests, if agreed between the applicant and the 
Metrological Authority or between the use and 
the vendor, as the case may be depending upon 
the type of test. For such static weighing tests, 
control instruments shall be as specified in 
10.2 and the following procedure of weighing 
specified in a) and b) shall be used: 


i) Weigh each single axle and each individual 
axle of axle-groups of the reference vehicle 
in turn on the control instrument and record 
the indicated single axle loads and indicated 
individual axle load of axles of a group. 
If axle-group loads are required, record 
the summation of the recorded individual 
axle loads of a group as the axle-group 
load, and repeat the procedure for all axle 
groups. After all axles have been weighed, 
individually and/or as part of axle group, 
calculate the vehicle mass by the summation 
of the recorded values of single-axle loads 
and axle- group loads (if applicable) or by 
the summation of all individual axle loads, 
as appropriate, and record the vehicle mass 
(Wk for the k* weighing operation). This 
will complete one weighing operation. The 
weighing operation shall be conducted NV 
number of times with half the times with 
the vehicle facing in the same direction, 


80 


and half the times with the vehicle facing 
in the opposite direction. The total number 
of times (N) the weighing operation shall 
be performed shall be the same as specified 
in A-9.3.1.3 a. 


For each of the above weighing operations, 
ensure that the vehicle is stationary, with 
the wheels on the axle being weighed fully 
supported by the load receptor, the engine 
switched off, the gear in neutral and the 
brakes released. Use wheel chocks, if 
necessary, to prevent vehicle motion. 


ii 


x 


The mean axle load and corrected mean axle 
load for single-axle(s), and if required for 
axles of axle-group, and if required for axle- 
group(s) shall be calculated by using equations 
specified in A9.3.2.2.2, considering one 
weighing operation as one test run. 
NOTE — The recorded values of axle loads determined 
using static weighing test shall be used only for calculating 
the reference values for axle loads and shall not be used as 
test values. 

2) For applications where the vehicle mass is not 
required to be determined or for applications 
in domains other than legal, and if so agreed 
between the metrological authority or with the 
consent of the user the testing authority/agency 
as appropriate and the applicant or the vendor 
as appropriate, it shall be permissible to use 
the mean single-axle load and, if required, the 
mean axle-group load, and if required, the mean 
axle load of axle of a group as calculated in a) 
above, in place the corresponding corrected 
mean values, for calculation of relative error in 
f) above, provided that the standard deviations 
of 

i) The standard deviation single-axle load 
does not exceed the greater of the values 
of 4 percent or one- third of the applicable 
accuracy class tolerance(s); and 


ii 


wn 


If required, the standard deviation of axle- 
group load does not exceed the greater of 
the values of 3 percent or one-third of the 
applicable accuracy class tolerance(s); 
and/or 


iii) If required, the standard deviation of axle 
load of axle of a group does not exceed 
the greater of the values of 5 percent or 
one-third of the applicable statistical 
accuracy class tolerance or one- third of 
the metrological accuracy class tolerance 
for single-axle load. 


g) The limits of error applicable in accordance with 


6.5.7 for the specified statistical accuracy class, 
and/or the limits of error applicable in accordance 
with 7.5 for the specified metrological accuracy 
class, should not be exceeded. 


h) For future reference only (to quantify any difference 
in the fraction of the vehicle mass carried on each of 
the two-axle rigid reference vehicle’s single axles 
when determined by static (A-9.3.1.3 4) and by 
in-motion (A-9.3.2.2 3) weighing), also perform 
the calculations above (1-6) for all test runs of the 
two-axle rigid reference vehicle, unloaded and 
loaded. Include these results in the test report so 
that this data will not be lost. These results shall 
not be used in lieu of those from A-9.3.2.1 for 
evaluating the WIM system being tested. 


A-9,3.2.3 Wheel load measurement 


The procedures in this subclause are only applicable 
to WIM systems to be used in applications where the 
wheel load is required. 


a) As specified in 10.8 and 10.13 and A-9.3.2, 
conduct the in-motion tests, record the left wheel 
loads and the right wheel loads for each individual 
axle (5.7.15.9) as they are indicated or printed by 
the WIM system under test. For each reference 
vehicle and its loading condition, calculate the 
mean left wheel load and the mean right wheel 
load of the test runs specified in A-9.3.2, for all 
single-axles and axles of a group according to the 
following equations: 


i 2 YE=iLik 
L, = wees (20.1) 
N 
— = R; 
Rate (20.2) 
N 
w a > .Lgjk 
Lgj T a az wes (21.1) 
_ Tra Rgjk 
Ng a 5 — “Guss (21.2) 
L, = Mean left wheel load of the 7" single — 
axle. 
R, = Mean Right wheel load of the i single — 
axle. 
Lj = Mean left wheel load of the j® axle in the 
g“ axle group. 
R,, = Mean Right wheel load of the j* axle in the 


gth axle group. 


all other symbols have the same meaning 
as in A-9.3.2.2.2. 
b) Calculate the corrected mean left wheel load and 
the corrected mean right wheel load for single 
axles and axles of a group as follows: 


Wref 


L, s N. N NG ong Èk-1 Lik 
(Ek=1 Diz; (Lik+Rik)+ YR=1i Lg So L jaa LgjktRgjk)) 
sasa (22.1) 
= w, 
1 = Dk- Rik 


ie rs (Lint Rix)+ IRL, y, Tray jk+Rgjk)) 


81 


IS 17008 : 2019 


a (22.2) 
y _ Wref rN. L " 
aI (yE YES (tR) + DN gC L agt) — U S 
ee (23.1) 
w Wref N 
Rea A a E R 
"a Ca ar HIME la a a gjk 
ee (23.2) 
where, 
ep = Conventional true value of the reference 
= vehicle mass determined by full-draught 
weighing in 10.9. 
L, = corrected mean left wheel load of the i! 
single-axle. 
R, = corrected mean right wheel load of the it 
single-axle. 
Lj = corrected mean left wheel load of the j" 
axle in the g" axle group 
Ro = corrected mean right wheel load of the j" 


axle in the g" axle group. 


c) If the criteria for identifying axle group are not 
specified, the wheel loads of axles belonging to 
axle group shall be identified and evaluated as 
wheel loads of single axles. Equations 21.1, 21.2, 
23.1 and 23.2 will be ignored and only equations 
20.1, 20.2, 22.1 and 22.2 will be used with Lex = 
OR. = 0. 

Traceability is provided because the sum of the 
corrected mean wheels loads for single-axles and 


d 


wa 


axles of groups equal the conventional true value of the 
reference vehicle mass 


N< == = 


Wref Lial + R.) + Doe 


üz ==. a 
g=0 È jllg + Rg) 


e) Calculate the relative error for each wheel, both 
right and left, on each axle in accordance with 
9.1.3.2.1 and 9.1.3.2.2.2IV. 


For determining the reference values of wheel 
loads, instead of in motion tests as specified in 
A-9.3.2.3 a) Wheel loads of single-axles and, if 
required axles of a group, and if required axle- 
group, may be recorded on the basis of static 
weighing tests to be conducted separately from in 
motion tests, if agreed between the applicant and 
the Metrological Authority or between the use and 
the vendor, as the case may be depending upon the 
type of test. 


For such static weighing tests, control instruments 
shall be as specified in 10.2.3, provided that if portable 
wheel scales are used then either as many wheel scales 
shall be used as there are number of wheels, or if less 
number of wheel scales are used then steps or similar 


IS 17008 : 2019 


devices should be used to level all the wheels/axles so 
that the level difference between any two wheels is 
within +2 mm or the slope is not more than 0.5 percent. 
The procedure of weighing and recording wheel load 
shall be as specified in a) and b): 


a) Weigh the left wheel and the right wheel of each 
single axle and individual axles of axle- groups of 
the reference vehicle, on the control instrument, 


1) Simultaneously for all wheels using portable 
wheel scales and record indicated wheel loads, 
or 


2 


wna 


In turn axle by axle with both the left wheel 
and the right wheel of an axle weighed 
simultaneously (for example, when two wheel 
scales are used on the same axis transverse to 
the nominal direction of travel of the vehicle) 
and record indicated wheel loads, or 


In turn wheel by wheel with the left wheel and 
the right wheel weighed at different points in 
time (for example, when wheel scales are used 
in a staggered manner so that they do not lie 
on the same axis transverse to the nominal 
direction of travel of the vehicle) and record 
indicated wheel loads. If static reference value 
of axle load is available or can be determined 
following the procedure specified in A-9.3.1.3 
or A-9.3.2.2.2, then the indicated and recorded 
values of wheel load shall be used to apportion 
the axle load (for example, if W, and W, are 
the indicated wheel- loads of the left wheel and 
the right wheel, respectively, for an axle having 


3) 


static reference axle load a the apportioned 


wheel loads shall be —A, for the left 
WL 


WLtWR 
WL 


wheel and ‘A, for the right wheel ) and 


+WR 
the apportioned values of wheel loads shall 
be recorded for single axles and, if required 
for individual axles of axle-groups. After all 
wheels have been weighed, weights recorded 
and, if required apportioned, calculate the 
vehicle mass by the summation of the recorded 
values of wheel loads, indicated or apportioned 
as applicable, and record the vehicle mass 
(W, for the kh weighing operation). This 
will complete one weighing operation. The 
weighing operation shall be conducted N 
number of times with half the times with 
the vehicle facing in the same direction, and 
half the times with the vehicle facing in the 
opposite direction. The total number of times 
(N) the weighing operation shall be performed 
shall be the same as specified in A-9.3.1.3.a 


b) For each of the above weighing operations, ensure 
that the vehicle is stationary, with the wheels on 
the axle being weighed fully supported by the 


82 


load receptor, the engine switched off, the gear in 
neutral and the brakes released. Use wheel chocks, 
if necessary, to prevent vehicle motion. 


The mean wheel load and corrected mean wheel 
load, for the left wheel and the right wheel, for 
single-axle(s) and if required for individual axles 
of axle-groups, shall be calculated by using 
equations specified in A-9.3.2.3 considering one 
weighing operation as one test run. 
NOTE — The recorded values of wheel loads determined 
using static weighing test shall be used only for calculating the 
reference values for wheel loads and shall not be used as the 
test values 
2) For applications where vehicle mass is not 
required to be determined or for applications 
other than in the legal domain, and if so agreed 
between the metrological authority or with the 
consent of the user the testing authority/agency 
as appropriate and the applicant or the vendor as 
appropriate, it shall be permissible to use the mean 
wheel loads as calculated in a) above, in place 
the corresponding corrected mean values, for 
calculation of relative error in e) above, provided 
that the standard deviation of the left wheel or the 
standard deviation of the right wheel load does 
not exceed the greater of the values of 6 percent 
or one-third of the applicable accuracy class 
tolerance(s). 


A-9.3.2.4 Operating speed measurement (7.10) 


A-9.3.2.4.1 Test of operating speed interlock (A-6.3) 


To test the functioning of the operating speed interlock, 
test runs with one of the reference vehicles shall be 
made at speeds outside the range of operating speeds: 


a) At a speed of at least 5 percent in excess of the 
maximum operating speed, v 


b) Ata speed of at least 5 percent below the minimum 
operating speed, v_ (if applicable). 


min 


The WIM system shall detect the above conditions 
and mark the indication and/or the printout (5.6.8) of 
mass and load values with invalidation code 04 and 05, 
respectively, and with a clear warning that results are 
not verified. If the speed in a) above is more than the 
threshold value set for legal speed, the system shall also 
indicate the violation code OS. 


A-9.3.2.4.2 Test of operating speed (5.6.8) 


To determine and test the operating speed during an 
in-motion test, conduct six test runs of the unloaded 
two-axle rigid reference vehicle over the lateral centre 
of the load receptor at constant speed. Three runs shall 
be near maximum operating speed, v... and three 
additional runs shall be just above minimum operating 
speed, v_.. The indicated speeds (5.7.15.10) shall be 
observed and recorded. 


The reference value (conventional true value) for speed 
to be used in calculating the error in the indicated 
operating speed for each test run shall be determined 
by either 


a) The quotient of the wheelbase (measured on the 
static reference vehicle to the nearest 30 mm) 
divided by the measured time interval (to the 
nearest millisecond) between the arrival at a 
defined location (for example, the leading edge on 
the load receptor) by the front-most axle and the 
rear-most axle of the moving reference vehicle, or 


b 


wm 


The quotient of the wheelbase (measured on the 
static reference vehicle to the nearest 30 mm) 
divided by the measured time interval (to the 
nearest millisecond) between when the tyres on 
the front-most axle and when those on the rear- 
most axle of the moving reference vehicle actuated 
a designated tyre-force sensor, or 


c 


x 


Calculating an adjusted speed for the vehicle 
that made the test run by multiplying the speed 
measured by the WIM system by the ratio of 
reference-value wheelbase and the WIM system 
measured wheelbase. Any other method of 
determining the reference value may be adopted 
if agreed between the metrological authorities, or 
with the consent of the user the testing authority/ 
agency, as appropriate, and the applicant or vendor 
as appropriate, and the method documented in the 
test report. 


The reference value for vehicle speed shall be rounded 
off to the nearest 1 kmph. 


The error shall be evaluated as the absolute value of the 
difference between the indicated speed observed and 
recorded and the reference speed. 


Regarding the limits of error, the provisions in 6.3 shall 
apply. 


A-9.3.2.5 Test of vehicle recognition device interlock 
(5.5.1) 


The correct function of the device shall be tested by the 
following test procedure if: 


a) The WIM system is designated to automatically 
determine axle-group loads in accordance with 
functional type classification; or 


b) A maximum number of axles per vehicle is given 
on the plate; or 


c) The length of the weigh zone is given on the plate. 


Select two reference vehicles so that the combined total 
number of axles is more than the maximum specified 
for the WIM system. Connect two of the reference 
vehicles together with a suitable towing device (strap 
or chain) to form a combination vehicle that has an 
overall length greater than the weigh zone, apron length 
or bridge length (for Type 5 system). Have the front 
vehicle tow the connected rear vehicle (with driver 


83 


IS 17008 : 2019 


onboard) over the full length of the weigh zone at a 
speed near the maximum operating speed, vmax, with 
the system operating in automatic mode. 


The system shall: 


a) Determine the correct axle-group loads or detect a 
failure; 


b) Detect the exceeding of the maximum number of 
axles; 


c) Detect the fact that all of the wheels of the vehicle 
being weighed were not within the weigh zone 
throughout the weighing operation and indicate or 
print any mass or load values only with a clear 
warning message on the indication and/or the 
printout. 


Any other method of testing may be adopted if agreed 
between the metrological authorities, or with the 
consent of the user the testing authority/agency, as 
appropriate, and the applicant or vendor as appropriate, 
and the method documented in the test report. 


A-9.3.2.6 Test of threshold acceleration interlock 
(5.6.9) 


This subclause applies only to WIM systems installed 
off the main highway and designated to estimate 
acceleration and identify operation beyond threshold 
limits. 

To test the functioning of the threshold acceleration 
interlock test runs with one of the reference vehicles 
shall be made at acceleration outside the threshold limit 
by having the driver of the vehicle approach the WIM 
system load receptor 


a) At a speed near 75 percent of the maximum 
operation speed v „ subject to a limit of 60 km/h 
and apply heavy braking for approximately 1 s 
while the vehicle is passing over the load receptor 
or bridge (for Type 5 system); 


b 


wm 


At a speed near the maximum operation speed 
V,a» and when the vehicle is about 50 m ahead 
of the load receptor, apply full accelerator till the 
vehicle passes over the load receptor or bridge (for 


Type 5 system); 
c 


ma 


At a speed near the minimum operation speed v,» 
and when the vehicle is about 10 m ahead of the 
load receptor, apply full accelerator till the vehicle 
passes over the load receptor or bridge (for Type 5 
system). 


In the first case of a), the WIM system shall detect 
excessive negative acceleration (deceleration) and 
indicate it by “Violation Code DE”. In the second and 
third case of b) and c), the WIM system shall detect 
excessive positive acceleration and indicate them by 
“Violation Code A.C”. In all three cases, the indication 
or print of mass or load values should have a clear 
associated warning message (5.6.9). 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Any other method of testing may be adopted if agreed 
between the metrological authority, or with the consent 
of the user the testing authority/agency, as appropriate, 
and the applicant or vendor as appropriate, and the 
method documented in the test report. 


A-9.3.2.7 Test of wheel position interlock (5.5.2) 


To test the functioning of the wheel position interlock, 
one (for test plan N°1 or N°2) or two (for all other test 
plans) of the reference vehicles, reference vehicle #1 
and/or reference vehicle #2, as available under the 
applicable test plan, shall make abnormal runs, in 
order to check the ability of the system to detect such 
situations, and to mark the results with an invalidation 
code as follows: 


a) For WIM systems other than Type 5: 


1) Reference vehicle #1 : The single reference 
vehicle (when only one is used) or the rigid 
reference vehicle (when more than one 
reference vehicle are used) shall make two 
runs, one with half of the vehicle (left or 
right half) outside the load receptor(s), and 
one run with the first axle passing on the load 
receptor(s) and the second axle passing outside 
or partially outside the load receptor(s); and 


2) Reference vehicle #2 : When a semi articulated 
vehicle or a truck-trailer combination is 
available as a second reference vehicle, the 
vehicle shall make two runs half of the vehicle 
(left or right half) outside the load receptor(s), 
and one run with the tractor passing on the load 
receptor(s) and the semitrailer/trailer passing 
half outside the load receptor(s). 


b) For Type 5 WIM systems, 


1) Reference vehicle #1 : the single reference 
vehicle (when only one is used) or the rigid 
reference vehicle (when more than one 
reference vehicle are used) shall make two 
runs with the vehicle straddling two lanes or, 
where this is infeasible for safety reasons, with 
the vehicle driving at the edge of the lane (one 
side of lane for each run); 


wa 


2) Reference vehicle #2 : when a Semi articulated 
vehicle or a Truck-Trailer Combination is 
available as a second reference vehicle, it 
(Reference vehicle #2) shall make three runs, 
to test the accuracy of its weighing, when all or 
part of the Reference vehicle #1 is also on the 


bridge; and 


wa 


3 


wa 


Additional test runs with vehicle configuration 
and run condition in accordance with 
manufacturer’s recommendation or as may be 
decided between the user and the vendor. 

The WIM system shall detect the above conditions and 
any indication and/or printout of mass and load values 
should be marked with invalidation code 01 and a clear 


84 


warning message. 


Any other method of testing may be adopted if agreed 
between the metrological authority, or with the consent 
of the user the testing authority/agency, as appropriate, 
and the applicant or vendor as appropriate, and the 
method documented in the test report. 


A-9.3.2.8 Test of direction of travel interlock (5.5.2) 


To test the functioning of the direction of travel 
interlock, test runs with one of the reference vehicles 
shall be made as follows: 


a) With the vehicle approaching the load receptor(s) 
from the wrong direction; and 


b) With the vehicle approaching the load receptor(s) 
from the right direction and when the front wheels 
have passed over the load receptor(s). 


The WIM system shall detect the above conditions 
as incorrect run and mark the indication and/or the 
printout of mass and load values with invalidation 
code 01 and a clear warning. 


Any other method of testing may be adopted if agreed 
between the metrological authority, or with the consent 
of the user the testing authority/agency, as appropriate, 
and the applicant or vendor as appropriate, and the 
method documented in the test report. 


A-9.3.2.9 Test of centre-to-centre distance between 
axles measurements (5.7.15.11) 


For testing the capability of the WIM system to 
determine centre-to-centre distance between axles if the 
WIM system is designated to do so, the indicated value 
of centre-to-centre distance between axles (5.7.15.11) 
shall be observed and recorded for one test run for each 
reference vehicle during in motion tests conducted in 
accordance with test plans (A-9.3.2) at speed near the 
centre of the operating speed range, v, 


The reference value of centre-to-centre distance 
between axles shall be either 


a) The distance between adjacent axles measured 


using a standard measuring tape to the nearest 
10 mm when the reference vehicle is stationery, or 


b 


eS 


the value specified in the Registration Certificate 
of the vehicle issued by the Government. The 
reference value of centre-to-centre distance 
between axles shall be determined prior to the test. 
Any other method of determining the reference 
value may be adopted if agreed between the 
metrological authority, or with the consent of the 
user the testing authority/agency, as appropriate, 
and the applicant or vendor as appropriate, and the 
method documented in the test report. 


The error shall be evaluated as the absolute value of 
the difference between the indicated value of centre-to- 
centre distance between axles observed and recorded, 
and the reference value of centre-to- centre distance 
between axles determined prior to the test. 


Regarding the limits of error, the provisions in 6.3 shall 
apply. 


A-9.3.2.10 Test of wheel base measurements (5.7.15.12) 


For testing the capability of the WIM system to 
determine wheelbase if the WIM system is designated 
to do so, the indicated value of wheelbase (5.7.15.12) 
shall be observed and recorded for one test run for each 
reference vehicle during in motion tests conducted in 
accordance with test plans (A-9.3.2) at speed near the 
centre of the operating speed range, v 


The reference value of wheelbase shall be either: 

a) The distance between the front-most and the rear- 
most axles on the reference vehicle measured 
using a standard measuring tape to the nearest 30 
mm when the reference vehicle is stationery, or 


b 


s 


the value specified in the Registration Certificate 
of the vehicle issued by the Government. The 
reference value of wheelbase shall be determined 
prior to the test. Any other method of determining 
the reference value may be adopted if agreed 
between the metrological authority, or with the 
consent of the user the testing authority/agency, 
as appropriate, and the applicant or vendor as 
appropriate, and the method documented in the 
test report. 


The error shall be evaluated as the absolute value of the 
difference between the indicated value of wheelbase 
observed and recorded, and the reference value of 
wheelbase determined prior to the test. 


Regarding the limits of error, the provisions in 6.3 shall 
apply. 


A-10 PROCEDURE FOR IMPACT FORCE 
TESTS 


The tests for determining the capability of the WIM 
system to accurately measure impact forces imparted 
by reference impact force generator (10.6) shall be 
carried out in accordance with the recommendation of 
the manufacturer with the consent of the metrological 
authority for model (type) approval and with the 
consent of the user and the testing authority/agency in 
other cases. The test method shall be documented and 
appended to the test report. 


A-11 PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT OF 
ACCURACY CLASS 


A-11.1 General 


a) Note the functional type classification with 
reference to the descriptive markings and/or the 
user specification. 


b) Note the requirements of the WIM system for 
compliance with defined accuracy classes with 
reference to the descriptive markings and/or the 
user specification. 


85 


IS 17008 : 2019 


c) If there is a requirement for compliance with 
statistical accuracy class, note the data items of 
relevance in accordance with functional type 
classification (4) and determine the test plan 
applicable in accordance with Table 38 (10.7.2). 


If there is a requirement for compliance with 
metrological accuracy class, note the data items 
of relevance in accordance with functional type 
classification (4) and determine the test plan 
applicable in accordance with Table 39 (10.7.2). 


If there is a requirement for compliance with 
both statistical accuracy class and metrological 
accuracy class, prepare common test plan in 
accordance with 10.7.2. 


d) 


e 


wa 


Prepare a master list for all data items that are to 
be considered for assessment of either in statistical 
accuracy or metrological accuracy with accuracy 
class details in accordance with Table A-20. 


Table A-20 
( Clause A-11.1 ) 


Data item Statistical Accuracy Metrological Accuracy 
Class Class 
Applicable Accuracy Applicable Accuracy 
(Yes/No) Class (Yes/No) Class 
Required Required 


Vehicle mass 
Axle load 
(single axle) 
Axle-group 
load 


Axle load 
(axle of 
group) 


Wheel load 


f) Ifrequired, determine the minimum required level 
of compliance p0 (7.5.4) applicable to the type of 
WIM system and for the data item of relevance for 
metrological accuracy. 


A-11.2 Calculation of Relative Error 


Conduct the tests in accordance with test procedures 
(A-9) and determine the relative errors for all test runs 
and for all data items of relevance (A-1.11.1(6)) in 
accordance with A-9.3.2. 


A-11.3 Determination of Statistical Accuracy Class 


A-11.3.1 Selection of Relative Error Data for Analysis 


If the number of vehicle runs under common test plan 
is more than the number of vehicle runs required under 
test plan in A-11.1(c), select minimum vehicle runs to 
comply with test plan A-11.1(c). Otherwise select all 
vehicle runs. 


Determine the number of data (sample size n) for each 
data item in the selected vehicle run data. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


NOTE — This number could be different for different data 
items depending on reference vehicle types. For example, if 
only one reference vehicle is chosen with two single axles and 
one tandem axle, the sample size for single-axle load shall be 
double that of axle-group load.) 
Consider relative error data for the selected vehicle run 
for further analysis. 


A-11.3.2 Calculation of Sample Mean 


a) Using the relative error data considered for 
analysis (A-11.3.1), calculate the mean relative 
error for a data item of relevance as follows: 

Di xi 


m = 


where, 
m= mean relative error, of data item; 
x = relative error, of data item; and 


n= number of relative error data (sample size) 
of data item considered in accordance with 
A-11.3.1. 
b) Repeat 1) for all data items of relevance (A-11.1.3) 
and obtain mean relative error for all data items 
relevance. 


A-11.3.3 Calculation 
Standard Deviation, s 


ofUnbiased Estimator for 


a) Using the relative error data for analysis (A- 
11.3.1), calculate the unbiased estimator for 
standard deviation, s, for a data item of relevance 
as follows as follows: 


S = Ei (xi-m)? 
J n-1 


b) Repeat a) for all data items of relevance 
(A-11.1 (c)) and obtain the unbiased estimator for 
standard deviation, s, for all data items relevance 
(A-11.1 (c)). 


A-11.3.4 Evaluation of Statistical Accuracy Class 


The statistical accuracy class can be evaluated based on 
any one of the following two methods: 


a) Method based on confidence level, described in 
A-11.3.4.1; and 


b) Method based on minimum tolerance interval 
width, described in A-11.3.4.2. 
A-11.3.4.1 Method based on confidence 
(A-11.3.4 a) 


a) Select the value of k from Table 16 (clause 6.5.7) 
in accordance with the requirements. 


level 


b) Select 0.5 or any other value for the risk of mean 
bias a. 


c) Calculate £, 2 / Vn using a from 2) above and 
value of n from A-11.3.2, where ¢ is Student’s 
t distribution variable with degree of freedom 
v=n-l. 


86 


d) Consider the standard accuracy class or classes (if 
class is data item specific). 


e) Consider a data item, its accuracy class and class 
tolerance interval width 6 (6.5.4). 


f) Determine the minimum required level of 
confidence 20 (clause 6.5.6.3) using the number 
of relative error data (sample size) in A-11.3.2 
and the environmental condition from test plan 
(A-11.3.1) 


g) Calculate confidence level a using methods 
specified in 1) or 2) as appropriate: 
1) For the data item considered, calculate the 
value of u, and u, from equations 27 and 28: 


u =(k5—m)/s—t, a! Vn 


u,=(k5—m)/s—t, 2! Vn 


1 
using the value of k from a) above, ó from e) 
above, m from A-11.3.2, s from A-11.3.3 and 
Laser Vn from ) above 


Using values of u, and u, calculate lower 
bound of confidence level z as follows: 


n= (u) — wu) 


Where, w is the cumulative distribution 
function of Student’s t distribution as in c) 
above. 


Check that the minimum required level of 
confidence 20 in f) above does not exceed the 
lower bound of the level of confidence in 7(1) 
above. If it does, consider a lower accuracy 
class in d) above and repeat the steps from e) 
to g) for all data items. If it does not, go to 
step e) and repeat the steps up to g) for another 
data item. Continue till the lower bound of the 
level of confidence is evaluated for all data 
items and is found to be greater than or equal 
to the minimum required level of confidence 
x0. Then go to step h. 


2 


— 


If the sample size n is greater than 10/(1- z0), 
where z0 is the minimum required level of 
confidence (A-11.1(7)), or if the sample size 
n is greater than 5/(1- 20) but the method is 
agreed between the metrological authority 
or the technical authority/agency with the 
consent of the user, as appropriate, and the 
applicant or vendor, as appropriate; calculate 
the proportion II‘ of the relative error data 
that lies within the closed tolerance interval 
[-kó, ko]. 

The level of confidence HI is equal to this 
proportion II“. 


Check that the minimum required level of 
confidence 70 in f) above does not exceed the 
level of confidence in g2) above. If it does, 
consider a lower accuracy class in d) above and 
repeat the steps from e) to g) for all data items. 
If it does not, go to step e) and repeat the steps 
up to g) for another data item. Continue till the 
level of confidence is evaluated for all data 
items and is found to be greater than or equal 
to the minimum required level of confidence 
70. Then go to step h. 


h) Using the accuracy class or classes (if class is data 
item specific) obtained, determine the accuracy 
class tolerance interval width or widths (if 
tolerance interval width is data item specific) for 
vehicle mass 6c for all data items. 


wa 


The statistical accuracy class or classes (if class is 
data item specific) of the WIM system shall be one 
of the followings: 


j 


1) If different accuracy classes are possible for 
different data items, the standard accuracy 
classes determined in step h shall be the 
statistical accuracy classes for data items. 


2 


wa 


If a single accuracy class is to be used for all 
data items, the lowest of the standard accuracy 
classes (one with the largest dc value) 
determined in step 8 shall be the statistical 
accuracy class. 


k 


x 


The accuracy class or classes (if class is data item 
specific) defined by dc is the statistical accuracy 
class or classes (if class is data item specific) of 
the WIM system. 


A-11.3.4.2 Method based on minimum 
interval width min (A-11.3.4 b) 


a) Select the value of k from Table 16 (6.5.7) in 
accordance with the requirements. 


tolerance 


b) Select 0.5 or any other value for the risk of mean 
bias a. 


c) Calculate £, |, / Vn using a from b) above and 
value of n from A-11.3.2, where ¢ is Student’s 
t distribution variable with degree of freedom 
v=n-1 

d) Consider a data item. 


e) Determine the minimum required level of 
confidence 20 (6.5.6.3) using the number of 
relative error data (sample size) in A-11.3.2 
and the environmental condition from test plan 
(A-11.3.1) 


f) Calculate the tolerance interval width dmin using 
methods specified in 1) or 2) as appropriate: 


1) Using the value of k from a) above, m from 
A-11.3.2, s from A-11.3.3 and / / Xn from 


v, 1—6/2 
c) above, and z0 from e) above, and by setting 


87 


IS 17008 : 2019 


z = n0, calculate the minimum value of 6 that 
satisfies equation 29 as the minimum tolerance 
interval width ómin. 


Find the closest standard accuracy class 
tolerance ó > ómin for that data item (6.5.4) 
and identify the accuracy class or that data 
item. Alternatively, using ó and the relations 
given in 6.5.4.4, calculate the tolerance interval 
width for vehicle mass óc. 


Go to step d) and repeat steps up to f) for all 
data items of relevance (A-11.1(c)). 


After the standard accuracy classes have 
been determined considering all data items 
of relevance (A.11.1(c)), or alternatively the 
tolerance interval widths for vehicle mass have 
been determined with reference to all data 
items of relevance (A-11.1(c)), go to step g. 


2 


— 


If the sample size n is greater than 10/(1- z0), 
where z0 is the minimum required level of 
confidence (A.11.1(g)), or if the sample size 
n is greater than 5/(1- 20) but the method is 
agreed between the metrological authority or 
the technical authority/agency with the consent 
of the user, as appropriate, and the applicant or 
vendor, as appropriate; calculate the absolute 
value (modulus) of relative errors for the 
data item and form a frequency distribution 
table with the absolute value of relative errors 
arranged in ascending order of value, as shown 
in Table A-21. 


Identify the two consecutive percentiles so that 
the lower percentile is less than or equal to the 
minimum required level of confidence 720, and 
the higher percentile is greater than the minimum 
required level of confidence 70 (for example, if P. 
and P _ are two such consecutive values, then P. 
<zx0<P ) 
Consider the absolute error value with lower 
percentile rank (P ) as determined above and 
calculate the minimum tolerance interval width 
dmin as follows: 
- . [xr+1| 

=. k CEETETETIT 
Find the closest standard accuracy class tolerance 
ó > dmin for that data item ( 6.5.4) and identify the 
accuracy class, X, with reference to that data item. 
Alternatively, using 6 and the relations given in 
6.5.4.4, calculate the tolerance interval width for 
vehicle mass, dc and identify the accuracy class X 
for that data item. 


Go to step d) and repeat steps up to f) for all data 
items of relevance (A-11.1(c)). 

After the standard accuracy classes {X} have been 
determined considering all data items of relevance 
go to step g). 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table A-21 
SI. No. Absolute Value of Relative Frequency Cumulative Frequency Percentile 
Error 

0) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) [x1| fi fi 100fi/n 

ii) [x2] fo fith 100 (f+ fan 

iii) s 

iv) [xrl fr fit fa +..thr á 

P,=100() _ f)/n 
i=1 
v) lxr+1l fr+1 fit fo ++frtfr+l nea 
Pr =100(Ò f) /n 
i=1 

vi) ax 

vii) |xal £ fit p+... f. =n 100 
viii) TOTAL a 

Lam 
i=1 
NOTE — If there are no two absolute value of relative error which are equal, = n, and all the frequency values will be 1. Otherwise, 
a<n.) 


g) The statistical accuracy class or classes (if class is 
data item specific) of the WIM system shall be one 
of the followings: 


1) If different accuracy classes are possible for 
different data items, the standard accuracy 
classes {X} determined in step f) shall be the 
statistical accuracy classes. 

2) If a single accuracy class is to be used for all 
data items, the lowest of the standard accuracy 
classes determined in step 6 shall be the 
statistical accuracy class. (If the alternative 
method in 6(2) above is used, the lowest 
accuracy class shall be the one with the largest 
dc value). 


A-11.4 Determination of Metrological Accuracy Class 


A11.4.1 Selection of Relative Error Data for Analysis 


If the number of vehicle runs under common test plan 
is more than the number of vehicle runs required under 
test plan in A-11.1(4), select minimum vehicle runs to 
comply with test plan A11.1(4). Otherwise select all 
vehicle runs. 


Determine the number of data (sample size n) for each 
data item in the selected vehicle run data. Consider 
relative error data for the selected vehicle run for 
further analysis. 


Group the relative error data for selected vehicle 
runs under reference vehicle categories so that for a 
particular reference the relative error data of selected 
vehicle runs of that vehicle are grouped together. 
NOTE — This grouping helps in comparing with the maximum 
specified error which remains unchanged for a group, but it is 
possible to proceed without grouping. 


88 


Consider relative error data for the selected vehicle run 
for further analysis. 


A11.4.2 Evaluation of Metrological Accuracy Class 


The metrological accuracy class shall be evaluated as 
follows: 


a) Consider the scale interval for axle load d and 
vehicle mass D. 

b) Consider the standard accuracy class or classes (if 

class is data item specific). 


c) 


Consider a data item, its accuracy class tolerance 
6 (7.3) and sample size n (A-11.4.1) 


Determine the minimum required level of 
compliance Q0 (clause 7.5.4) for the data item 
considering the type of WIM system and the type 
of test. 


Determine the maximum specified error (7.5.2) 
for the data item and for each reference vehicle in 
accordance with requirement. 


d) 


Consider the relative error data for the data item 
in a group (A-11.4.1) and determine the number 
of data for the data item in that group for which 
the absolute value of relative error exceeds the 
maximum specified error determined in e) above 
for that group. Repeat this for all groups and add 
the numbers to arrive at the total number of data 
for which in which the relative error for the data 
item exceeds their maximum specified error. Let 
this number be represented by n . This calculation 
can be carried out without considering groups, but 
in that case the maximum specified error will have 
to be calculated or checked every time it is to be 
compared with the relative error. 


g 


x 


Calculate the level of compliance for the data item 
as: 


Q=100(1— >) 


If the level of compliance determined for the 
data item in f) above, is equal to or more than the 
minimum required level of compliance QO in d) 
above, the standard accuracy class considered in 
b) above is the assessed accuracy class for the data 
item. Otherwise, consider a lower accuracy class 
in b) above and repeat the steps from c) to f) till 
compliance with the minimum required level of 
compliance Q0 is achieved. 


h) Repeat the steps from b) to g) for all data items 


89 


J 


Swa 


IS 17008 : 2019 


and determine the standard accuracy class for all 
data items. 


The metrological accuracy class or classes (if class 
Is data item specific) for the WIM system shall be 
one of the followings: 


1) If different accuracy classes are possible for 
different data items, the standard accuracy 
classes determined in step h) shall be the 
metrological accuracy classes. 


2 


— 


If a single accuracy class is to be used for all 
data items, the lowest of the standard accuracy 
classes determined in step h) shall be the 
metrological accuracy class. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


ANNEX B 


( Normative ) 


( Mandatory for application in legal domain, informative in other applications ) 


PRACTICAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE INSTALLATION OF 
WEIGH-IN-MOTION SYTEMS FOR ROAD VEHICLES 


B-1 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION 


The installation requirements are subject to change, in 
recognition of future technical developments. 


B-2 WEIGH-IN-MOTION SITE (WIM SITE) 


The weigh-in-motion site shall comprise of WIM 
system and road or bridge sections as follows: 


B-2.1 WIM System of Application Type 1 


For WIM system categorized as application Type 1 
in accordance with functional type classification, 
the WIM site shall comprise of load receptor(s) with 
aprons ahead and behind of load receptor(s) and any 
intermediate road pavement portion between aprons. 


B-2.2 WIM System of Application Type 2 


For WIM system categorized as application Type 2 
in accordance with functional type classification, the 
WIM site shall comprise of length of road pavement 
staring from 60 m ahead of load receptor at one end 
and extending to 30 m beyond the last load receptor at 
the other end. 


B-2.3 WIM System of Application Type 3 and 
Type 4 


For WIM systems categorized as application Type 3 or 
Type 4 in accordance with functional type classification, 
the WIM site shall comprise of length of road pavement 
staring from 50 m ahead of load receptor at one end and 
extending to 25 m beyond the last load receptor at the 
other end. 


B-2.4 WIM System of Application Type 5 


For WIM systems categorized as application 
Type 5, the WIM site shall comprise of structures 
such as culverts, bridges, or any other structure which 
behaves in a similar way. 


NOTE — For Type 5 WIM system (Bridge WIM), particular 
requirements (not mandatory) are given in C-2 in Annex C. 


B-3 WIM SITE CHARACTERISTICS 


B-3.1 Site Characteristics for Pavement WIM 


This subclause is not applicable for Type 5 systems. 


B-3.1.1 Road Geometry 


The road geometry for WIM systems for different 
site classes (B-3.1.2.2) shall be in accordance with 
Table B-1. 


B-3.1.1.1 Surface smoothness/evenness 


The pavement in the WIM site shall be smooth and 
maintained in a condition that complies with either a) 
or b) as follows: 


a) a 150-mm diameter circular plate 3 mm thick 
cannot be passed beneath a 5-m long straightedge 
when the straightedge is positioned and 
manoeuvred in the manner prescribed in ASTM 
E-1318- 09 (see 2.4); 


the International Roughness Index is in accordance 
with Table B-2. 


B-3.1.1.2 Lane width and markings 


The lane width shall be sufficient to fully support the 
widest vehicle that will be weighed by the WIM system. 


Normally the WIM system lane width shall be between 
3.5 m to 4.3 m. The width of WIM system lane for 
oversized vehicle shall have at least 1m additional 
width on each side of the lane. 


b 


wm 


For Type | systems lane markings shall be as specified 
in B-3.1.3.2. For Type 2 systems installed off the main 
highway, solid white longitudinal pavement marking 
lines 100 to 150 mm wide shall be used to mark the 
edges of the lane throughout the WIM site. 


B-3.1.2 Pavement Characteristics 


This subclause is not applicable for Type 1 WIM system 
for which B-3.1.3 shall apply. 


Table B-1 
( Clause B-3.1.1 ) 


Installation Longitudinal Slope Transverse Radius of Curvature Surface 
Location Slope Roughness 
> 2 500 m for model e) approval 
at < 1 percent for Class I site = P 
On main highway . <3percent > 1 700 m for Class I site Asper B-3.1.1.1 
< 2 percent for other sites ‘ 
> 1 000 m for other sites 
0 percent for Type 1 systems, 
Off the main highway 4 ha 4 < l percent >2 500m an as 


< 1 percent for other systems 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Table B-2 
( Clause B-3.1.1.1 ) 


WIM site classes 


I lH HI 
Excellent Good Acceptable 
Deflection!' Semi-rigid Mean deflection (10? mm) <15 <20 <30 
(quasi-static) Pavements Left/Right difference (10? mm) + + +10 
All bitumen Mean deflection (10? mm) <20 <35 <50 
(121) Pavements Left/Right difference (10mm) + + +12 
Flexible Mean deflection (10? mm) <30 <50 <75 
Pavements Left/Right difference (10? mm) +7 +10 +15 
Deflection! Semi-rigid Deflection (10? mm) <10 <15 < 20 
(dynamic) Pavements Left/Right difference (10° mm) +2 +4 + 
All bitumen Mean deflection (10? mm) sis <25 <35 
G t—load) Pavements Left/Right difference (10? mm) +3 +6 + 
Flexible Mean deflection (102 mm) <20 <35 <55 
Pavements Left/Right difference (10° mm) +5 +7 +10 
Rutting! Rut dept max. (mm) <4 <7 < 10 
(3 m — beam) 
Evenness IRF index Index (m/km) 0-1.3 1.3 -2.6 2.6-4 
Legend: 


1) The rutting and deflection values are given for a temperature below or equal to 20°C and suitable drainage conditions. 


2) International Roughness Index. 


NOTE — Except for Bridge WIM, it is not recommended to install a WIM system on a site which does not meet at least class IH 
specification. The recommended site class/WIM system accuracy pairings, according to the current technology and knowledge, are 


given in Table C-I of Annex C 


B-3.1.2.1 Rigid pavement 


Rigid pavement that is properly designed, of sound 
construction and without any surface defect, shall be 
considered as WIM site of excellent class (Class I). 
The rigid pavement shall be continuously reinforced 
concrete pavement (CRCP) or a jointed concrete 
pavement (JCP), with transverse joints spaced 5 m 
or less apart. If required, the surface of every such 
rigid pavement shall be ground smooth after curing 
and before the load receptor(s) are installed. The skid 
resistance of the surface after grinding shall be made at 
least as good as that of the adjacent surfaces. At a site 
with flexible pavement, a 15 m long section comprising 
full-depth-asphalt, or black-base, design; or any other 
alternative pavement structure to affect a stiffness 
transition between the two pavement structural types, 
should be considered for installation at each end of the 
Portland cement concrete pavement structure. 
NOTE — No deflection criterion is available for rigid 
pavement. Draft European Specification and COST 323 
classifies concrete slab pavement into classes I, II and III based 
on slab banging motion should be limited to 0.05 mm for sites 
in class I and to 0.10mm for sites in classes II and III. 


B-3.1.2.2 Other than rigid pavement 


For Semi-rigid, all-bitumen and flexible pavement, 
there shall be three classes of WIM sites based on 


91 


criteria for rutting, deflection and evenness as specified 
in Table B-2. 


The pavement 
requirements: 


shall also meet the following 


a) There shall be no hard spots in the underlying 
courses or under the wearing course (toll slabs, 
service tunnels, etc.); 

b) Thickness of bonded layers shall be greater than 

100 mm; 


There shall be good mechanical bonding between 
courses, in particular of bituminous concrete on 
granular materials stabilised by hydraulic binders; 


c) 


d) Wearing cores shall be defect-free in the area of 


installation of load receptor; 


Pavement shall be homogeneous across each 
traffic lane without longitudinal joints of coated 
materials within the length of a load receptor. 


B-3.1.2.3 Apron characteristics 


For WIM systems of Type 2, Type 3 and Type 4, the 
apron shall be a part of the road pavement having same 
geometry (B-3.1.1) and construction (B-3.1.2) as the 
road pavement. For Type 5 WIM system, the apron 
shall be a part of the bridge span and have the same 
geometry and construction. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


For Type 1 WIM system, the apron shall have 
construction as specified in B-3.1.3.1 and geometry as 
specified in B-3.1.3.2. Additional apron characteristics 
are given in C-3 in Annex C. 


B-3.1.2.4 Apron construction 


The aprons (see.3.2.2.1) in advance of and beyond the 
load receptor shall consist of a stable, load bearing 
structure made of concrete or an equally durable 
material resting on a suitable foundation to provide a 
straight, smooth, approximately-level plane surface 
to support all tyres of a vehicle simultaneously as the 
vehicle approaches and passes over the load receptor. 
NOTE — Annex C gives an example of an apron specification 
which may be used to construct aprons which have been shown 
to respect the conditions in this Annex B. This example can be 
considered when specifying aprons. 


B-3.1.1.1 Apron geometry 


Each of these aprons shall have a minimum length of 
16m. However, the user may specify a different apron 
length (shorter or longer) which is deemed adequate to 
fully support simultaneously all wheels of the longest 
vehicle type that will be weighed by the WIM system 
(see 5.5.1) as it approaches and passes over the load 
receptor or sensor. A reasonably smooth and level road 
surface shall be provided in advance of the approach 
apron of sufficient length and width for the reference 
vehicle to reach a steady test speed before arriving at 
the apron. 


92 


The aprons shall be permitted to have a transverse 
slope, not exceeding 1 percent, for drainage purposes. 
To minimize load transfer between axles of the vehicle, 
the aprons shall have no longitudinal slope. The load 
receptor shall be mounted in the same plane as the 
aprons. 


If no lateral guide system is used (5.5.2), the aprons 
shall have sufficient width throughout their length to 
extend transversely a minimum of 300 mm beyond 
each lateral edge of the load receptor and the width 
of the load receptor shall be clearly marked over the 
whole length of the aprons with solid white longitudinal 
pavement marking lines 100 to 150 mm wide. 


The apron (and load receptor) shall have sufficient 
width to fully support the widest vehicle that will be 
weighed by the WIM system. 


B-3.2 Site Characteristics for Bridge WIM 


For purpose of model (type) approval, the site 
characteristics for Bridge WIM shall be specified by the 
manufacturer. For purpose of procurement or service 
contract for WIM system, the site characteristics for 
Bridge WIM shall be mutually decided between the 
vendor and the user. Recommendations given in C.2 in 
Annex C are of indicative value (not mandatory) and 
are for general guidance only. 

NOTE — Currently, there are no mandatory standards for site 

characteristics for Bridge WIM 


IS 17008 : 2019 


ANNEX C 
(Informative ) 


GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR THE INSTALLATION ANDOPERATION 
OF WEIGH-IN-MOTION SYATEMS 


C-1 CHOICE OF SITE FOR PAVEMENT WIM 
(NOT FOR BBRIDGE WIM) 


The information in this section does not apply to Type 1 
WIM system (for which apron is provided), Type 5 
WIM systems (Bridge WIM), and multiple sensor WIM 
systems (MS-WIM). 


According to the current experience of WIM systems 
using load receptor(s) on road pavement, except 
those mentioned above, the expected accuracy class 
according to the 6.5.4 and/or 7.3 require a minimum 
quality of the WIM site, as shown in Table C-1. 


C-2 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS OF 
BRIDGE WIM SYSTEM 


The basic bridge criteria recommended are summarized 
in Table C-2. 


A bridge-WIM system may be installed on: 


a) Culverts — any length if accurate axle and 
velocity detections are available; 


b) Bridges designed as simply-supported or integral 
(frame-type) structures, or any variation of these two; 

c) Single or multiple-span bridges; 

d) Structures made of reinforced concrete, pre- 
stressed concrete, steel or combination of these 
materials and any other materials (for example, 
fibre-reinforced plastics) that ensure linear 
behaviour under the expected traffic loading; 


nN 


e) Bridges designed as slabs or beam/deck structures; 


f) Any other type of bridges (for example, with an 
orthotropic deck as the superstructure) which 
provides requested information (about velocity 
and axle spacing of individual vehicles linear 
dependence between the measured structural 
response and passing vehicles) 


Table C-1 
( Clause C-1 ) 


Metrological Accuracy Class Statistical Accuracy WIM site Classes 
Class 
Particular Accuracy Class General Accuracy Class I II HI 
Excellent Good Acceptable 
A(5) + _ _ 
2 or higher a(5) 
B+(7) + = = 
5 b(5) B(10) + + = 
10 c(10) C(15) (+) + + 
--- d(15) D+(20) (+) (+) + 
--- e D(25) or lower (+) (+) + 
Legend: ‘~’ means insufficient, ‘+’ means sufficient, ‘(+)’ means sufficient but not necessary. 
Table C-2 
( Clause C-2 ) 
SI. No. Criteria Optimal Acceptable 
a) 2 (3) (4) 
i) steel girders, pre-stressed concrete girders, 
Bridge type reinforced concrete girders, culvert, steel Concrete slab 
orthotropic decks‘ 
11) Span length 2) (m) 10-20 8-35 
ili) Traffic density free traffic - no congestion (traffic jam) 
iv) Evenness of the pavement before and on class I or II (Table C-1) class III (Table C-1) 
the bridge 
v) skew angle (°) Nil <25 or < 45 


Legend: (1) expected to be optimal, (2) this criterion applies for the length of the bridge part which influence the instrumentation, (3) except culverts, 


(*) after inspection of calibration data 


93 


IS 17008 : 2019 


C-3 PARTICULAR REQUIREMENTS OF 
TYPE 1 WIM SYSTEM 


C-3.1 Apron Characteristics 


To achieve the necessary levels of accuracy (with 
the exception of WIM instruments for full-draught 
weighing) the minimum requirements for the apron 
smoothness should include the following: 


a) For 8 min advance ofand beyond the load receptor, 

the apron surface should be within a tolerance of 
+3 mm from the level or transversely-sloped plane 
that includes the load receptor. 


b 


wn 


The surface of the apron outside the 8 m length of 
apron beyond the load receptor should be within a 
tolerance of +6 mm from the level or transversely- 
sloped plane that includes the load receptor. 


C-3.2 Apron Compliance Checks 


Compliance with the apron geometry and characteristics 
specified above and in Annex B should be determined 
by a suitably qualified person at a specified period 
(for example, if concrete is used, 30 days after apron 
construction is complete, to allow for the adverse 
effects of shrinkage in the concrete during curing) and 
before the site is first used. 


A level datum should be taken at a suitable point within 
the apron minimum area (that is the “16 m area”) and 
its position marked on the drawing in the test report 
format. Its position should be determined by taking 
elevations using a precise level and staff, and choosing 
the point which minimizes the extent of any remedial 
work having regard to the requirements specified above. 


A 400 mm x 400 mm (normal) grid of level control 
points should be marked out durably on the aprons for 
8 m either side of the load receptors(s). A 1 m x 1 m 
(nominal) grid of level control points should be marked 
out on the remainder of the aprons. Setting out lines for 
the control points should be shown on the drawing in 
the test report format. Elevations should be taken on all 
those points using the precise level and staff. 


If concrete is used, a simple stability check should be 
undertaken to monitor any changes in apron elevation 
under an axle load. A loaded two-axle vehicle, with 
a rear axle loading as near to the maximum capacity 


94 


of the WIM instrument as feasible, should pass at 
a low speed along the approximate lateral centre of 
the concrete aprons. Elevations should be taken at 
the corners of each stab making up the apron at each 
transverse joint to ensure that as the vehicle crosses 
the joint, no movement in elevation is outside the 
tolerances specified in see 3.1. 


C-4 OPERRATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


C-4.1 Routine Durability Checks 


Surface level compliance checks should be repeated 
using the same level control points at time intervals 
specified by national legislation. 
NOTE — There are a number of factors (for example, level 
of usage, construction of aprons, etc.) which should be taken 
into consideration when specifying the time interval between 
compliance checks.) 


C-4.2 Split Material 


Care should be taken in the design and operation of the 
installation to ensure that, as far as possible, a build-up 
of spilt material on the weigh zone of the system either 
does not occur or is removed regularly. 


C-4.3 Overhead Structures 


Load receptors should not be installed beneath a 
loading or conveying mechanism from which loose 
material might fall. 


C-4.4 Tare Weighing 


The time between tare weighing and gross weighing 
operations associated with a particular load should be 
minimal. 


C-4.5 Notice of Speed Restrictions 


There should be means to ensure that all drivers of 
vehicles that cross the load receptor(s) are aware of 
the minimum and maximum operating speeds at which 
they can proceed. 


C-4.6 Lightning Arrestors 


Lightning arrestors shall be checked regularly at 
intervals not more than six months to ensure continued 
operations. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


ANNEX D 


( Informative ) 


GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR THE CALIBRATION OF 
WEIGH-IN-MOTION SSYTEMS 


D-1 GENERAL 


The manufacturer or the vendor shall specify the detailed 
procedure and methods for calibration to ensure to 
ensure that the WIM system performs properly during 
the site design life. The guidelines given herein may be 
used to supplement that information only. 


After installation/re-installation and general checking, 
an initial calibration shall be performed for acceptance 
testing. Recalibration (fine tuning) shall be carried 
out throughout the design life of a WIM site to adjust 
parameters when problems are identified during 
the Quality Assurance Procedure for WIM data. 
Recalibration is called for following any relocation, 
significant modification of the WIM system, or 
significant change in site conditions. 


Unless otherwise agreed between the user and the 
vendor, calibration prior to acceptance of the system 
shall be the responsibility of the vendor and calibration 
after acceptance of the system shall be the responsibility 
of the user. 


The purpose of the WIM system and its application 
should guide the selection of a calibration procedure 
and method. The reference values used for calibration 
must be chosen accordingly. 


D-2 REFERENCE VALUES 


If the WIM data are used to estimate vehicle mass and 
static reference axle-loads for two-axle rigid vehicles, 
it is required to minimize the differences (bias) between 
indicated value of data item and reference value of 
data item. Therefore, the reference values should be 
vehicle mass or static reference axle loads for two-axle 
rigid vehicles (or both) or corrected mean axle loads 
or corrected mean wheel loads to provide traceability. 
The accuracy of these reference values should be 
appropriate for the expected accuracy of the WIM 
system to be calibrated. 


If the WIM data are used to provide instantaneous 
impact forces, the reference values should be the “true” 
impact forces applied by the wheels or axles when they 
hit the WIM sensors. 


D-3 CALIBRATION CHECKS 


The accuracy of an operational WIM system shall 
be checked regularly, for example, once or twice a 
year (in- service inspection, 9.3.2, or accuracy check, 
clause A-11). For a newly installed WIM system, some 
check(s) ( A-11) shall be carried out during the first 
three months period of use. Calibration checks may 


95 


be carried out using the same methods as for an initial 
calibration (9.2), but with fewer reference values or test 
vehicles and runs. 


D-4 CALIBRATION METHODS 


The calibration methods briefly described herein 
are based on COST 323 (see 2.5) recommendations 
which are retained in the Draft European Specification 
(see 2.6), and are most commonly used, from the 
simplest to the most sophisticated. Other calibration 
methods may also be considered including those given 
in ASTM E-1318. 


In applications where vehicle mass is required, the 
reference values for wheel load and/or axle load to 
be used for calibration shall be the mean value or the 
corrected mean value as applicable (9.1.3.2.2.2). The 
reference value of vehicle mass shall be its conventional 
true value (10.9). 


In applications where the dynamic (impact) forces are 
required, the reference values for wheel load and/or 
axle load to be used for calibration shall be the values 
of the dynamic (impact) force for the respective data 
items produced by the reference impact force generator 
(10.6). The reference value of vehicle mass shall be the 
dynamic (impact) vehicle force (3.3.1.19). 


The variables used are: 


Wd, = dynamic (impact) force of the individual 
wheel (left/right) or axle of the axle /, 
measured in motion of the test vehicle i, 
and the run k, 


dynamic (impact) vehicle force of the test 
vehicle 7, calculated by: È for axle loads; 


for wheel loads (the inner summation is 
over the two wheels on right and left) 


reference value of the individual wheel 
(left/right) or axle of the axle j, of the test 
vehicle i, 


reference value of vehicle mass of the test 
vehicle i, 


NOTE — W is the same as W „when WIM 
system is to be used for determination of 
vehicle mass. 


n,= number of runs of the test vehicle i, 

N= 
In the conditions (r2), it is recommended to consider 
the different configurations (loads and speeds) of 
the same vehicle as different vehicles for the data 
analysis. 


number of test vehicles 


IS 17008 : 2019 


a) Calibration Coefficient 


A calibration coefficient is defined as a 
multiplicative factor C to be applied to a raw 
recorded dynamic (impact) force Wd to get the 
final estimation of the reference value of the 
wheel load or axle load or vehicle mass W (or the 
calibrated result W ) by: W = C. Wd. 


A calibration coefficient is intended to eliminate 
as far as possible any systematic bias in the WIM 
system, which may partially be induced by the 
pavement profile (spatial repeatability effect). 


If the WIM system uses more than one sensor, at 
least one calibration coefficient must be computed 
for each of them. 


In some WIM systems, particularly the 
sophisticated ones, several calibration coefficients 
may be computed for each sensor, depending on 
the type of vehicle or on the axle rank (see b). and 
c). below). 


For bridge-WIM (Type 5) systems, the calibration 
coefficient is replaced by a calibration curve, an 
influence line or surface. 

NOTE — Among the methods outlined below, COST 323 and 
the Draft European Specification cites the first two (1) and 
2)) as the most commonly used, and the third one 3) as often 
recommended. All three methods provide only one calibration 
coefficient per sensor.) 


1) Calibration on the Mean Bias 


This method consists of calculating the 
calibration coefficient C such that for the mean 
bias of the relative errors for the vehicle mass 
of all the test vehicles measured in motion (one 
measurement for each run) is removed, each of 
them being accounted as many times as the test 
vehicle passed: 

a fi (32) 


7 M Wdik 

Zik Cu ) 
This method provides an unbiased estimator 
of the vehicle mass appropriate for vehicle 


sample Condition (r1). 
Calibration on the Total Vehicle Mass 


This method consists of calculating the 
calibration coefficient C as the ratio of the 
total reference value of vehicle mass of all the 
test vehicles (each of them being accounted 
for as many times as the test vehicle) to the 
total vehicle mass of these vehicles measured 
in motion (one measurement for each run): 


_ 2 in;Wi 
Y ik Wd;k 


2 


— 


This method provides an unbiased estimator of 
the total weight of all the vehicles. It is only 
Appropriate if the purpose of the WIM system 
is the estimation of the whole traffic tonnage, 


96 


such as in economical surveys of goods 
transportation like in the case of Type 4 WIM 
systems. 


3 


— 


Calibration on the Mean Square Error (1) 


This method consists of calculating the slope 
of a regression line which passes through the 
origin in an orthonormal diagram plotting 
the individual dynamic (impact) vehicle 
force versus the individual reference value 
of vehicle mass of the test vehicles for each 
passage. It is based on the fact that a WIM 
system should provide dynamic (impact) loads 
which are proportional to the reference loads. 
The calibration coefficient C is given by: 


c= YiniW? 
Lik WiWdik 


This method may be applied for conditions 
(r2) to (R2), with more than 3 test vehicles 
(or loading cases); it minimises the mean 
square error of the individual vehicle mass 
measurements with respect to the reference 
value of vehicle mass for all the vehicles 
passed, with the constraint that the dynamic 
(impact) vehicle force are proportional to 
the reference value of vehicle mass. It is 
appropriate for most applications, when the 
purpose is the estimation of the individual 
vehicle masses, because the estimator has a 
lower variance than the two previous ones and 
a very small bias. 


4 


— 


Calibration on the Mean Square Error (2) 


This method consists of calculating the slope 
and the ordinate at the origin of the regression 
line in an orthonormal diagram plotting the 
individual dynamic (impact) vehicle force 
versus the individual reference value of vehicle 
mass of the test vehicles for each passage. The 
mean square error should be smaller than with 
the previous method, but the proportionality 
between the dynamic (impact) loads and the 
reference loads is no longer ensured, which is 
not in accordance with theory. The calibration 
procedure becomes: W = C.(Wd - b), with C 
and b given by : 


_ (ini )(iniW?)— (Xi niWwi)2 
~ (in) (Liz WiWdir)- ind (Lie Wiz) 


bh (LiniW7 ) (Diz Wdir)- Lin) (Viz WiWdix) 


ind (Xiniw?)-iniw;)? 


This method is not considered appropriate 
in most cases because of the theoretical 


b) 


c) 


inconsistency explained above. It may be 
applied, if the b value is rather small and 
independent of the calibration vehicle sample 
considered. 

NOTE — In both methods 3) and 4), the vehicle mass 
may be replaced by the axle loads and the formulas 
adapted. The calibration coefficients shall then be slightly 
different. The reliability of results will be less, because 
the individual axle loads are more significantly affected 
by the dynamic motion of the vehicles than the vehicle 
mass, and because the static reference axle loads are 
not well defined for vehicles other than two-axle rigid 
vehicle. 


Calibration by Vehicle Type or Vehicle Class 


This method provides one calibration coefficient 
for each type of vehicle (Table 5) from the test 
sample, or for each class of vehicle (based on axle 
arrangement). It is only applicable for conditions 
(R1) and (R2), and of interest if the WIM station 
software is able to manage such a set of calibration 
coefficients according to each vehicle type. The 
same formulas as in 1) to 4) may be applied, 
as many times as the number of vehicle classes 
considered. The same remarks apply to each 
formula and procedure. 


Calibration by Axle Rank and Type 


This method provides one calibration coefficient 
for each rank (and/or type) of axle within a 
vehicle, taking into account the fact that the axle 
dynamic behaviour depends on their rank and 
type in the vehicle. Axle-group shall be calibrated 
by considering axle- group load. In the absence 
of criteria for identifying axle-group, individual 
axles of axle-group will be calibrated as single 
axle. 


It is only of interest if the WIM station software 
is able to manage such a set of calibration 
coefficients according to each axle rank and 
type. The following sub-populations may be 


97 


IS 17008 : 2019 


considered, some of which may be merged for 
simplification: 

1) For the 2-axle rigid vehicle: the front axles and 

the rear axles, 

2) For the 3-axle rigid vehicle: the front axles 
and the rear tandem axle (sum of the two rear 
axles). 

3) For semi-articulated vehicles: the front axles, 
the drive axles and the tandem or tridem axles 
of the semi-trailer (sum of the two or three rear 
axles) 

4) For truck-trailer combination: the front axles, 
the rear axles (or tandem or tridem) of the 


truck, the axles of the trailers 


The formulas given above are again applied to each 
sub-population by replacing the vehicle mass by the 
axle loads. The same remarks apply to each formula 
and procedure. 


d) 


NOTE — Except for bridge WIM (Type 5), all of these 
calibration methods are more efficient in cases (R1) and (R2) 
with a test vehicle sample being representative of the expected 
traffic flow. In the case of (r1) or (r2) it is appropriate to choose 
loads (vehicle mass and axle loads) which are representative of 
the load distribution encountered for the same type of vehicles 
as the test vehicle in the traffic flow. 


Automatic Self-Calibration 


This is a software based method which involves 
fitting some statistics recorded and computed by 
the WIM system to some target values depending 
on the site-specific traffic. The procedure requires 
a good prior knowledge of the site specific traffic 
composition and statistics of the axle and vehicle 
loads. 


The automatic calibration system is specific to its 
lane. So, in case of more than one instrumented lane, 
the traffic on each lane should be taken into account 
separately. 


IS 17008 : 2019 


ANNEX E 
(Informative ) 


PROCEDURE FOR CALCULATION EQUVALENT STANDARD AXCLE LOAD 


E-1 GENERAL 


The methodology for computation of the equivalent 
standard axle load (ESAL) for a vehicle shall be 
specified by the user. 

NOTE — As per IRC:37-2012, standard axle is a single axle 


with dual wheels or four tyres with axle load of 80 kN or 8.16 
tonne) 


E-2 METHODOLOGY BASEDON IRC:37-2012 


A methodology based on IRC:37-2012 is given below 
for guidance for computation of ESAL for a vehicle 
based on axle loads (1) or wheel load (2) as applicable 
and appropriate: 


a) ESAL based on axle loads: 


g \4 Ns ane G ane 
ESAL = (a) 2% (=) r200) (=) 


Nr 
+26 
j=1 


NR 4 


(Z) + w (25) 


K=1 


local value of the acceleration due to 
gravity (conventional value adopted by ISO is 
9.80665 m/s’) 


= single-axle rank (sequence number of i" 
single-axle in the sequence of single axles 
starting from front of the vehicle. If criteria 
for identifying axle- group is not specified, all 
axles will be considered as single axles) 

= tandem axle-group rank (sequence number 
of j* tandem axle-group in the sequence of 
tandem axle-groups staring from front of the 
vehicle, j = 0 if criteria for defining tandem 
axle-group is not specified or if there is no 
tandem axle-group in the vehicle considered) 


tridem axle-group rank (sequence number of 
j" tridem axle-group in the sequence of tridem 
axle-groups staring from front of the vehicle, 
j = 0 if criteria for defining tridem axle-group 
is not specified or if there is no tridem axle- 
group in the vehicle considered) 

= number of single axles; 

= number of tandem axle groups; 

= number of tridem axle groups; 


Axle load of i" single-axle indicated and 
recorded; 


98 


Axle-group load of j tandem axle-group 
indicated and recorded; 
Axle-group load of k" tridem axle-group 
indicated and recorded; 
Measurement unit factor for axle-load, axle- 
group load and wheel-load (a =1 if the unit is 
kilogram, a =0 if the unit is tonne); 
Tyre factor for single axle (0, = 1 for two-tyre 
single axles, 0. =0 for four-tyre single axles); 
Tyre factor for tandem axle-group (B, = 0 for 
tandem axle-groups with two-tyre axles, B, =1 
for tandem axle-groups with four-tyre axles); 
and 
Tyre factor for tridem axle-group (y, = 0 for 
tridem axle-groups with two-tyre axles, y, =1 
for tridem axle-groups with four-tyre axles.) 
b) ESAL based on wheel loads: 

ESAL based on wheel loads can be computed by 

using any of the two methods specified below: 

1) ESAL based on wheel loads can be computed 
by using the following formula — 


Ns 
g ) Ye = 
1024 i 65 
i=1 

Ns 
(Li + Ry y 
ii x 9) ( 80 ) 

= 


Nr 
>: Lojr + Y7= i Rojr 
Y Bios Rae 
j=l 


Y 


ESAL = 


= 
148 ) 
] 
Left hand side wheel load of 1: single-axle 
indicated and recorded; 


Nr 
s: >, Ji Lkr + p Rokr 
Yk 224 
k=1 


where, 


Right hand side wheel load of i" single-axle 
indicated and recorded; 

Left hand side wheel load of r' individual axle 
of the j" tandem axle-group, indicated and 
recorded; 

Right hand side wheel load of r* individual 
axle of the jih tandem axle-group, indicated and 
recorded; 

Left hand side wheel load of r* individual 
axle of the j” tridem axle-group, indicated and 
recorded; and 


R,,,= Right hand side wheel load of r* individual 
axle of the j" tridem axle-group, indicated and 
recorded. 


All other symbols have the same meaning as 
stated in equation | (ESAL based on axle loads) 


2) ESAL based on wheel loads can be also be 
computed by using the following formula — 


ESAL = (%) > (= ML y (> mary 


N: 
" x = Lay + —] 
148 
j=0 
NR 4 
+ > (z Lskr + Dr=1 a | 
224 
k=0 
where, 

L,,= Left hand side wheel load (single-tyre) on 
the i single axle with two tyres (single tyre 
wheel on either side) indicated and recorded, 
otherwise zero; 

R,,= Right hand side single wheel load (single-tyre) 
on the i” single axle with two tyres (single tyre 
wheel on either side) indicated and recorded, 
otherwise “zero”; 

L,,= Left hand side wheel load (dual-tyre) on the i" 


single axle with four tyres (dual tyre wheel on 


99 


IS 17008 : 2019 


either side) indicated and recorded, otherwise 
“zero”; 


Right hand side wheel load (dual-tyre) on 
the i single axle with four tyres (dual tyre 
wheel on either side) indicated and recorded, 
otherwise “zero”; 


= Left hand side wheel load (dual-tyre) of rt" 
individual axle with four tyres (dual tyre wheel 
on either side) of the j" tandem axle-group, 
indicated and recorded, otherwise “zero”; 


Right hand side wheel load (dual-tyre) of ri 
individual axle with four tyres (dual tyre wheel 
on either side) of the j" tandem axle-group, 
indicated and recorded, otherwise “zero”; 


Left hand side wheel load (dual-tyre) of r" 
individual axle with four tyres (dual tyre wheel 
on either side) of the k" tridem axle-group, 
indicated and recorded, otherwise “zero” 


Right hand side wheel load (dual-tyre) of r® 
individual axle with four tyres (dual tyre wheel 
on either side) of the k* tridem axle-group, 
indicated and recorded, otherwise “zero”; 


All other symbols have the same meaning as 
stated in equation 1 (ESAL based on axle loads). 
NOTE — If the formula shown in 2.2 is to be used, all 
possible wheel load values shall have to be initialized to 
“zero” before start of data collection session for each identified 
vehicle 


IS 17008 : 2019 


ANNEX F 
( Normative ) 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. 


9281 (Part | to 4) 


9000 (Part 2 /Sec 1 to 4) : 1977 


9000 (Part 3 /Sec 1 to 5) : 1977 


9000 (Part 4) : 2008 


9000 (Part 7/ Sec 2) : 1979 


9000 (Part 12) : 1981 


9000 (Part 16) : 1983 


14700 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2018 


14700 (Part 4/Sec 3) : 2008 


14700 (Part 4/Sec 4) : 2018 


14700 (Part 4/Sec 5) : 2012 


14700 (Part 4/Sec 11) : 2008 


Title 


Indian standard specification for electronic weighing systems, published 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical 
items: Part 2 Cold test 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical 
items: Part 3 Dry heat test 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical 
items: Part 4 Damp heat (steady state) (first revision) 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical 
items: Part 7 Impact test, Section 2 Bump 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical 
items: Part 12 Dust test 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical 
items: Part 16 Driving rain test 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing and measurement 
techniques, Section 2 Electrostatic discharge immunity test 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) : Part 4 Testing and measurement 
techniques, Section 3 Radiated, radio- frequency, electromagnetic field 
immunity test 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing and measurement 
techniques, Section 4 Electrical fast transient/burst immunity test 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing and measurement 
techniques, Section 5 Surge immunity tests 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing and measurement 
techniques, Section 11 Voltage dips, short interruptions and voltage 
variations immunity tests 


100 


IS 17008 : 2019 
LIST OF REFERRED OTHER NATIONAL /INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS 


Legal Metrology (General) Rules, 2011, Seventh Schedule-Heading-A: Specifications for Non- 
automatic weighing instruments. 


OIML R 134-1: 2006 International recommendation for automatic instruments for weighing road 
vehicles in motion and measuring axle loads — Part-1: Metrological and technical requirements — 
Tests 


OIML R 134-2 : 2009 International recommendation for automatic instruments for weighing road 
vehicles in motion and measuring axle loads — Part-2: Test report format 


ASTM E 1318-09 Standard specification for highway weigh-in-motion (WIM) systems with user 
requirements and test methods; published by American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM 
International). 


COST 323 “Weigh-in-Motion of Road Vehicles” final report (1993-1998) Appendix-1: European 
WIM Specification. 


Draft European Standard pr EN (NN nnnnn) Version 2010/1: Weigh-in-Motion of Road Vehicles 
developed by the Federation of European Highway Research Laboratories WIM initiative (FiW1) and 
available as draft standard DIN 8113. 


Measure of a General Nature No. 0111-OOP-C010-10 (reference no. 0313/003/10/Pos., publication 
date: 21 May 2010) issued by the Czech Metrology Institute: Stipulating metrological and technical 
requirements for specified measuring devices, including test methods for verifying specified measuring 
devices: “high-speed weigh-in-motion road vehicle scales”. 


IRC:3-1983: Dimensions and Weights of Road Design Vehicles, published by the Indian Roads 
Congress 


IRC:37-2012: Tentative Guidelines for the Design of Flexible Pavements, published by the Indian 
Roads Congress 


101 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Ref. 


[1] 


[2] 


[3] 


[4] 


[5] 


[6] 


[7] 


[8] 


[9] 


[10] 


[11] 


[12] 


[13] 


[14] 


[15] 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Standards and reference documents 


International Vocabulary of Basic and 
General Terms in Metrology (VIM) (1993) 


International Vocabulary of Terms in 
Legal Metrology, OIML, Paris (2000) 


OIML B 3 (2003) 


OIML Certificate System for Measuring 
Instruments (formerly OIML P 1) 


OIML D 11 (2004) 


General requirements for 
measuring instruments 


OIML R 111 (2004) 


Weights of classes El, E2, Fl, F2, M1, 
M1-2, M2, M2-3 and M3 


electronic 


OIML D 28 (2004) 


Conventional value of the result of 
weighing in air 


OIML R 60 (2000) 


Metrological regulation for load cells 


Jacob, B. (2000) : Assessment of the 
Accuracy and Classification of Weigh- 
in-Motion Systems: Part 1 Statistical 
Background 

IS 9001 : Part 12 

IS 9000 (Part 2) : 1977 

IS 9000 (Part 3) : 1977 


IS 9000 (Part 4) : 2008 


IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 2) : 1979 
IS 9000 (Part 12) :1981 


IS 9000 (Part 16) :1983 


Description 


Vocabulary, prepared by a joint working group consisting 
of experts appointed by BIPM, IEC, IFCC, ISO, IUPAC, 
IUPAP and OIML. 


Vocabulary including only the concepts used in the field 
of legal metrology. These concepts concern the activities 
of the legal metrology service, the relevant documents 
as well as other problems linked with this activity. Also 
included in this vocabulary are certain concepts of a 
general character which have been drawn from the VIM. 


Provides rules for issuing, registering and using OIML 
Certificates of conformity. 


Contains general requirements for electronic measuring 
instruments. 


Provides the principal physical characteristics and 
metrological requirements for weights used with and for 
the verification of weighing instruments and weights of 
a lower class. 


Provides the definition of the quantity “conventional 
mass” (conventional value of the result of weighing in 
air) as it is used for the characterization of weights and 
its relation to the physical quantities mass and density 
and the evaluation of its uncertainty. 


Provides the principal static characteristics and static 
evaluation procedures for load cells used in the 
evaluation of mass. 


International Journal of Vehicle Design — Heavy 
Vehicle Systems, Vol. 7, Nos. 2/3, 2000 


Guidance on method of mounting of electronic and 
electrical items for dynamic tests 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic 
and electrical items: Part 2 Cold test 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic 
and electrical items: Part 3 Dry heat test 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic 
and electrical items: Part 4 Damp heat (steady state) 
(first revision) 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic 
and electrical items: Part 7 Impact test, Section 2 Bump 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic 
and electrical items: Part 12 Dust test 


Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic 
and electrical items: Part 16 Driving rain test 


102 


Ref. 


[16] 


[17] 


[18] 


[19] 


[20] 


[21] 


[22] 


[23] 


[24] 


Standards and reference documents 


IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 2) : 2018 


IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 3) : 2008 


IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 4) : 2018 


IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 5) : 2012 


IS 14700 (Part 4/Sec 11) : 2008 


IEC 60068-2-1 : 2007 


Environmental testing — Part 2-1: 
Tests — Test A: Cold 

IEC 60068-2-2 : 2007 

Environmental testing — Part 2-2: 
Tests — Test B: Dry heat 

IEC 60068-3-1 : 2011 

Environmental testing — Part 3-1 
Supporting documentation and 


guidance — Cold and dry heat tests 


IEC 60068-2-78 : 2012 


Environmental testing — Part 2-78 
Tests — Test Cab: Damp heat + steady 
state 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Description 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing 
and measurement techniques, Section 2 Electrostatic 
discharge immunity test 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing 
and measurement techniques, Section 3 Radiated, radio- 
frequency, electromagnetic field immunity test 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing 
and measurement techniques, Section 4 Electrical fast 
transient/burst immunity Test 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing 
and measurement techniques, Section 5 Surge immunity 
test 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC): Part 4 Testing 
and measurement techniques, Section 11 Voltage dips, 
short interruptions and voltage variations immunity tests 


Concerns cold tests on both non heat dissipating and 
heat dissipating equipment under test (EUT) 


Contains test Ba: dry heat for non-heat dissipating 
specimen with sudden change of temperature; test Bb: 
dry heat for non-heat dissipating specimen with gradual 
change of temperature; tests Bc: dry heat for heat 
dissipating specimen with sudden change of temperature; 
test Bd dry heat for heat dissipating specimen with 
gradual change of temperature 


Gives background information for Tests A: Cold (IEC 
68-2-1), and Tests B: Dry heat (IEC 68-2-2). Includes 
appendices on the effect of: chamber size on the surface 
temperature of a specimen when no forced air circulation 
is used; airflow on chamber conditions and on surface 
temperatures of test specimens; wire termination 
dimensions and material on surface temperature of a 
component; measurements of temperature, air velocity 
and emission coefficient. Supplement A gives additional 
information for cases where temperature stability is not 
achieved during the test 


Provides a test method for determining the suitability 
of electro-technical products, components or equipment 
for transportation, storage and use under conditions of 
high humidity. The test is primarily intended to permit 
the observation of the effect of high humidity at constant 
temperature without condensation on the specimen over 
a prescribed period. 


This test provides a number of preferred severities of 
high temperature, high humidity and test duration. The 
test can be applied to both heat-dissipating and non-heat 
dissipating specimens. The test is applicable to small 
equipment or components as well as large equipment 
having complex interconnections with test equipment 
external to the chamber, requiring a setup time which 
prevents the use of preheating and the maintenance of 
specified conditions during the installation period 


103 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Ref. 


25] 


[26] 


[27] 


[28] 


Standards and reference documents 


IEC 60068-3-4 : 2001 


Environmental testing — Part 3-4 
Supporting documentation and guidance - 
Damp heat tests 


IEC 60068-2-47 : 2005 


Environmental testing — Part 2-47 
Test — Mounting of specimens for 
vibration + impact and similar dynamic 
tests 


IEC 60068-2-64 : 2008 
Environmental testing — Part 2-64 


Tests — Test Fh: Vibration + broadband 
random and guidance 


IEC 60068-3-8 : 2003 


Environmental testing — Part 3-8 
Supporting documentation and guidance — 
Selecting amongst vibration tests 


Description 


Provides the necessary information to assist in preparing 
relevant specifications, such as standards for components 
or equipment, in order to select appropriate tests and 
test severities for specific products and, in some cases, 
specific types of application. The object of damp heat 
tests is to determine the ability of products to withstand 
the stresses occurring in a high relative humidity 
environment, with or without condensation, and with 
special regard to variations of electrical and mechanical 
characteristics. Damp heat tests may also be utilized to 
check the resistance of a specimen to some forms of 
corrosion attack. 


Provides methods of mounting components, and 
mounting requirements for equipment and other articles, 
for the families of dynamic tests in IEC 60068-2, that 
is impact (Test E), vibration (Test F) and acceleration, 
steady-state (Test G) 


Determines the adequacy of specimens to resist 
dynamic loads without unacceptable degradation of its 
functional and/or structural integrity when subjected 
to the specified random vibration test requirements. 
Broadband random vibration may be used to identify 
accumulated stress effects and the resulting mechanical 
weakness and degradation in the specified performance. 
This standard is applicable to specimens which may be 
subjected to vibration of a stochastic nature resulting 
from transportation or operational environments, for 
example in aircraft, space vehicles and land vehicles. 
It is primarily intended for unpackaged specimens and 
for items in their transportation container when the latter 
may be considered as part of the specimen itself. 


Provides guidance for selecting amongst the IEC 60068-2 
stationary vibration test methods Fc sinusoidal, Fh 
random and F(x) Mixed mode vibration. The different 
steady-state test methods and their aims are briefly 
described in Clause 4. Transient test methods are not 
included. For vibration testing, the environmental 
conditions, especially the dynamic conditions for the 
specimen, should be known. This standard helps to 
collect information about the environmental conditions 
(Clause 5), to estimate or measure the dynamic conditions 
(Clause 6) and gives examples to enable decisions to be 
made on the most applicable environmental vibration 
test method. Starting from the condition, the method 
of selecting the appropriate test is given. Since real life 
vibration conditions are dominated by vibration of a 
random nature, random testing should be the commonly 
used method, see Table 1, Clause 7. The methods 
included hereafter may be used to examine the vibration 
response of a specimen under test before, during and 
after vibration testing. The selection for the appropriate 
excitation method is described in Clause 8 and tabulated 
in Table 2. In this standard specification, writers will 
find information concerning vibration test methods and 
guidance for their selection. 


104 


Ref. 


[29] 


[30] 


[31] 


[32] 


[33] 


[34] 


[35] 


Standards and reference documents 


IEC 60512-11-8 : 1995 


Electromechanical components for 
electronic equipment — Basic testing 
procedures and measuring methods — 
Part 11 : Climatic tests — Section 8 : 
Test 11h — Sand and dust 


IEC 60721-2-5 : 1991 


Classification of environmental 
conditions — Part 2 : Environmental 
conditions appearing in nature — 


Section 5: Dust + sand + salt mist 


IEC 60529 : 1989+AMDI1 : 1999+AMD2 
: 2013 CSV 


Degrees of protection provided by 
enclosures (IP Code) 


IEC 60068-2-18 : 2017 


Environmental testing — Part 2-18 
Tests — Test R and guidance: Water 


IEC 60512-14-7 : 1997 


Electromechanical components for 
electronic equipment — Basic testing 
procedures and measuring methods — 
Part 14: Sealing tests — Section 7: 
Test 14g: Impacting water 


IEC 61000-2-1 : 1990 
Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) 
Part 2: Environment Section 1 


IEC 60654-2 : 1979 with amendment 1 : 
1992 


Operating conditions for 
process measurement and 
equipment — Part 2: Power 


industrial- 
control 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Description 


Defines a standard test method to assess the ability of a 
connector to withstand driving fine sand and dust. 


Presents characteristics of dust, sand and salt mist 
appearing in nature, and describes the influences from 
these environmental factors to which products are liable 
to be exposed during storage, transportation and use. 


Applies to the classification of degrees of protection 
provided by enclosures for electrical equipment with a 
rated voltage not exceeding 72.5 kV. 


Provides methods of test applicable to products which, 
during transportation, storage or in service, may be 
subjected to falling drops, impacting water or immersion. 
The primary purpose of water tests is to verify the ability 
of enclosure covers and seals to maintain components 
and equipment in good working order after and, when 
necessary, under a standardized drop field or immersion 
in water. These tests are not corrosion tests and should 
not be considered or used as such. The effects of a 
large temperature difference between the water and 
the specimen, such as increased water ingress resulting 
from pressure changes, as well as thermal shock, are not 
simulated. Established water tests in other standards are 
not intended to simulate natural rainfall and their quoted 
intensities are too high to be adopted for that purpose. 
Therefore, in addition to the high-intensity severities, 
Test R includes an artificial rain test based on natural 
conditions but not taking into account high wind speeds 
generally associated with natural rain. Guidance is given 
on the applicability of the tests and the severities to be 
selected. 


Defines a standard test method to assess the effects 
of impacting water or specified fluid on electrical 
connecting devices. 


Description of the environment — Electromagnetic 
environment for low-frequency conducted disturbances 
and signalling in public power supply systems. 


Gives the limiting values for power received by land- 
based and offshore industrial process measurement and 
control systems or parts of systems during operation. 


105 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Ref. 


[36] 


[37] 


[38] 


[39] 


Standards and reference documents 


IEC 61000-4-11 
CSV 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) — 
Part 4-11: Testing and measurement 
techniques — Voltage dips + short 
interruptions and voltage variations 
immunity tests 


: 2004+AMD1 : 2017 


IEC 61000-4-4 : 2012 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) — 
Part 4-4: Testing and measurement 
techniques — Electrical fast transient/ 
burst immunity test 


IEC 61000-4-5 :2014+AMD1 : 2017 CSV 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) — 
Part 4-5: Testing and measurement 
techniques - Surge immunity test 


IEC 61000-4-2 : 2008 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) — 
Part 4-2: Testing and measurement 
techniques — Electrostatic discharge 
immunity test 


Description 


Defines the immunity test methods and range of 
preferred test levels for electrical and electronic 
equipment connected to low-voltage power supply 
networks for voltage dips, short interruptions, and 
voltage variations. This standard applies to electrical 
and electronic equipment having a rated input current 
not exceeding 16 A per phase, for connection to 50 Hz 
or 60 Hz AC networks. It does not apply to electrical 
and electronic equipment for connection to 400 Hz 
AC networks. Tests for these networks will be covered 
by future IEC standards. The object of this standard 
is to establish a common reference for evaluating the 
immunity of electrical and electronic equipment when 
subjected to voltage dips, short interruptions and voltage 
variations. It has the status of a Basic EMC Publication 
in accordance with IEC Guide 107. 


Establishes a common and reproducible reference for 
evaluating the immunity of electrical and electronic 
equipment when subjected to electrical fast transient/ 
burst on supply, signal, control and earth ports. The 
test method documented in this part of IEC 61000-4 
describes a consistent method to assess the immunity of 
an equipment or system against a defined phenomenon. 


a) The standard defines: 

b) test voltage waveform; 

c) range of test levels; 

d) test equipment 

e) verification procedures of test equipment, 
f) test setup; and 

g) test procedure 


The standard gives specification for laboratory and post- 
installation tests. 


Relates to the immunity requirements, test methods, 
and range of recommended test levels for equipment 
to unidirectional surges caused by over-voltages from 
switching and lightning transients. Several test levels 
are defined which relate to different environment 
and installation conditions. These requirements are 
developed for and are applicable to electrical and 
electronic equipment. Establishes a common reference 
for evaluating the performance of equipment when 
subjected to high-energy disturbances on the power and 
inter-connection lines. 


106 


Ref. 


[40] 


[41] 


[42] 


[43] 


[44] 


Standards and reference documents 


IEC  61000-4-3 2006+AMD1 
2007+AMD?2 : 2010 CSV 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) — 
Part 4-3: Testing and measurement 
techniques — Radiated + radio-frequency 
+ electromagnetic field immunity test 


IEC 61000-4-6 : 2013 


Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) — 
Part 4-6: Testing and measurement 
techniques — Immunity to conducted 
disturbances + induced by radio-frequency 
fields 


ISO 16750-2 : 2012 


Road vehicles — Environmental 
conditions and testing for electrical and 
electronic equipment — Part 2: Electrical 
loads 


ISO 7637-2 : 2011 


Road vehicles — Electrical disturbances 
from conduction and coupling — Part 2: 
Electrical transient conduction along 
supply lines only 


ISO 7637-3 : 2016 


Road vehicles — Electrical disturbances 
from conduction and coupling — Part 3: 
Electrical transient transmission by 
capacitive and inductive coupling via 
lines other than supply lines 


IS 17008 : 2019 


Description 


Relates to the conducted immunity requirements of 
electrical and electronic equipment to electromagnetic 
disturbances coming from intended radio-frequency 
(RF) transmitters in the frequency range 9 kHz-80 MHz 
Equipment not having at least one conducting cable (such 
as mains supply, signal line or earth connection),which 
can couple the equipment to the disturbing RF fields is 
excluded. This standard does not intend to specify the 
tests to be applied to particular apparatus or systems. 
Its main aim is to give a general basic reference to all 
concerned product committees of the IEC. The product 
committees (or users and manufacturers of equipment) 
remain responsible for the appropriate choice of the test 
and the severity level to be applied to their equipment. 


107 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 08 (10740). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern :1/14C.LT.Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


