RAT Alte IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Frater vaa sete — Am- 


AN 11 Adda YATIA 


Construction Project Management — 
Guidelines 


Part 11 Sustainability Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2021 Price Group 6 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 11) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 

A construction project is an endeavor undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 
b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 


procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 


c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off; 


d) Tender action — Open competitive biddine/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation, if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the built 
facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time overruns, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal 
is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial and 
other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and technical 
processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top management 
commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of the public 
domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 ‘Guidelines for construction project management’. Part | General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This standard has been followed by publication of other parts as follows: 


Part2 : 2013 on Time management 

Part3 : 2015 on Cost management 

Part4 : 2015 on Quality management 

Part5 : 2013 on Health and safety management 
Part6 : 2015 on Scope management 

Part7 : 2020 on Procurement Management 
Part8 : 2015 on Risk management 

Part9 : 2018 on Communication management 
Part 10 : 2020 on Human resource management 
Part12 : 2016 on Integration management 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGEMENT — 
GUIDELINES 


PART 11 SUSTAINABILITY MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 11) covers guidelines for 
sustainability management aspects of construction 
project management. 


1.2 The sustainability project management aspects 
considered in this standard include the stages 
subsequent to the stages of approval (when a decision 
to implement the project including its financing is 
taken) till commissioning and handing over the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard shall be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Part 1) and SP 7 (Part 11). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

7337 : 2010 Glossary of terms in project 
management (second revision) 

10400: 2013 Glossary of terms in inventory 
management (second revision) 

15198: 2014 Glossary of terms in human resource 
development (first revision) 

15883 Construction project management — 
Guidelines 

(Part 1): 2009 General 


(Part 10) : Human resource management 
2021 
SP 7 (Part 11): National building code of India 
2016 2016: Part 11 Approach to 
sustainability 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 7337, IS 10400, IS 15198 and the following shall 


apply. 


3.1 Embodied Energy — Total of all the energy 
consumed in the processes associated with the 
production of materials and products. 


3.2 Environmental Impact — Impact to the 
environment, wholly or partially resulting from 
environmental aspects. 


3.3 Non-renewable Resource — Resource that exists 
in a fixed amount that cannot be naturally replenished 
or cleansed on a human time scale. 


3.4 Renewable Resource — Resource that is grown, 
naturally replenished or cleansed on a human time 
scale. 


3.5 Reuse — Operation by which products or 
components are used again for the same purpose for 
which they were conceived. 


3.6 Recycling — Recovery operation by which waste 
materials are reprocessed into products, materials or 
substances whether for the original or other purposes. 


3.7 Sustainability — State of the global system, 
including environmental, social and economic aspects 
in which the needs of the present are met without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet 
their own needs. 


3.8 Sustainable Development — Development that 
meets the environmental, social and economic needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs. 


3.9 Waste — Substances or objects which the holder 
intends or is required to dispose of. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Context 


Sustainable development is key to tackling the linked 
challenges of climate change, resource use, economic 
prosperity and social well-being, and cannot be achieved 
without sustainable construction. 


Sustainable construction bears upon developing the 
design proposal, which is efficient in terms of functional 
performance as well as detailed out to ensure that the 
material resources and construction technologies are used 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


efficiently during construction stage. Frequent changes to 
the design during construction stage often lead to wastage 
and other resources, rework, and redundant handling and 
construction processes. Construction practices to execute 
design proposals, which inherently cause higher wastages 
and do not facilitate efficient planning should be avoided. 


4.2 Principal Objectives 


Following are the principal objectives of sustainability 
management: 


a) Minimizing adverse environmental impact of 
construction activities, products and services. 


b) Limiting any adverse impact within the laws/ 
prescribed norms and their monitoring. 

c) Protection of environment while working with 
hazardous material. 


d) Reduction and management of disposal of waste 
from construction sites. 


e) Considering positive environmental contribution. 


f) Developing system and procedures for achieving 
sustainability objectives. 


g) Putting in place systems to minimize damage at site 
due to natural and man-made disasters. 


4.3 Steps to Achieve Objectives 


The objectives given in 4.2 define the scope of the 
environmental management of the project site, and a 
framework for the project manager to determine the 
environmental aspects of the activities, products and 


services. To achieve these objectives, it is required 
to identify the following aspects of sustainable 
development on project site by adopting a structured 
methodology at different stages of the construction 
process: 


a) Identification of issues at project planning and 
designing stages; 

b) Identification of issues at pre-construction stage; 

c) Identification of issues during construction stage; 


d) Preparation of sustainability construction 


management plan; and 


e) Implementation and monitoring of sustainability 
construction management plan. 


The social and environmental impact assessment of 
the project need to be undertaken depending on the type 
and size of the project and as per the statutory guidelines. 


4.4 Organizational Structure 


Establishing site organization structure, considering 
management systems and involvement of other agencies 
in construction, is very critical. Interfaces across 
various agencies involved in construction need clarity 
for effective coordinated decisions which can lead to 
prevention of wastage of resources, reworks, rejections, 
delays and such other non-conformities detrimental 
to quality of work and delay in execution. As an 
example, a typical organizational chart for sustainability 
management in a design-bid-build model is given in 
Fig 1. 


OWNER / CLIENT OR 
HIS REPRESENTATIVE 


PROJECT MANAGER 


CONSULTANTS 


CONSTRUCTION 
AGENCIES 


| | | | 
SUSTAINABILITY | | PLANNING DESIGN ee SERVICES CIVIL WORKS 


ELECTRICAL / 
MECHANICAL 


WORKS 


OTHER 
SERVICES 


NOTE — ‘CONSULTANTS’ MAY COVER IN-HOUSE TEAMS OR OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS 
Fic. 1 TYPICAL ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE FOR SUSTAINABILITY MANAGEMENT IN DESIGN-BiD-BuUILD MODEL 


5 SUSTAINABILITY MANAGEMENT IN 
CONSTRUCTION 


5.1 Identification of Issues at Project Planning and 
Designing Stages 


5.1.1 Planning and Design 


The project planning should be detailed out so that 
use of materials and technologies may be planned in 
advance. Design detailing should facilitate planning of 
procurement of materials in sizes, volumes and lots, 
such that the wastage during construction is least. It is 
desirable that the design is consistent with the available 
material sizes, shapes, volumes and local or regionally 
sourced material. Design should, therefore coordinate 
to incorporate quality and quantity aspects from the 
point of view of construction. 


5.1.2 Inclusion of Sustainable Construction Needs 


5.1.2.1 Elements of sustainability 


The generalized design process towards sustainability 
should creatively address the following considerations: 


a) Set the design parameters to be equal to or higher 
than benchmarking standards as prescribed in 
SP 7 (Part 11). 


b) Make the basic performance requirements and set 
standards, applicable/selectively adaptable to the 
climatic zone and geological conditions in which 
the construction is proposed. 


c) Address requirements of performance and human 
comfort, considering development type and use, 
quality of building and plumbing services desired, 
etc, in a building and its surroundings. 


d) Question the need, identify their optimum levels 
in long term scenario, and take the design and 
construction provisions to that level only. 


e) Ensure what is sustainable today, remains that 
way in decades to come during the service life of 
the structure and ensure the required performance 
levels of systems designed. 

f) Ensure that sustainability is perceived as a holistic 
effort. 

g) Make efforts to maximize the use of traditional 
wisdom in design, and construction. 

h) While having an open approach, assess new 
materials and technologies for their long-term 
impact in the context of the location of the project. 


j) Take decision making processes to measurable 
levels in order to make judicious choices. 


k) Take the savings’ benchmark targets closer to 
the minimum consumption standards; undertake 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


value engineering exercises for deciding among 
the options. 


This process emphasizes the requirement of bottom up 

approach which invariably considers microclimatic, 

social and cultural conditions around. 
NOTE — The ‘bottom up approach’ concentrates more on how 
little is consumed, pursue deep understanding of sustainability, 
uses low technology innovations, materials and practices, 
recognizes performance to be more important than intent; and 
necessitates the use of common knowledge and common sense 
in design decisions. On the contrast, the ‘top down approach’ 
concentrates more on how much energy is saved, accepts 
the understanding of sustainability may not be developed 
indigenously more readily, uses high technology innovations, 
materials and practices, is driven by green brand and 
accompanying recognitions based on intent; and necessitates 


expert inputs and simulations. 


5.1.2.2 Life cycle sustenance 


The process flow from concept, design, construction, 
commissioning, operation and maintenance, and also 
decommissioning and disposal at the end of useful life 
of structure, should be planned and important steps 
chalked out for sustainable development. This should 
also take care of possible reuse/recycle of materials/ 
components/structure or parts thereof. Ideally close 
the loop (cradle to grave) with regards to resources 
originally used. 


5.1.2.3 Technology options 


Technology options shall be a combination of natural 
and manmade materials with least embodied energy and 
use of rapidly renewable resources to be implemented. 
The trade-off between choice of the materials and 
technologies and their effect on environment has to be 
balanced with the aim of a closed-loop system. As a 
holistic approach, all efforts should be made towards: 


a) Encouraging and harnessing building materials 
out of agricultural, industrial and bio-wastes. 


b) Encouraging indigenous environment-friendly 
and acceptable cost-effective technologies and 
practices in identifying and pursuing sustainable 
developments amenable to local, cultural and 
resource diversity. 


c) Making building construction more indigenous, 
more adaptable to local climatic zone and 
executionable to achieve the basic provisions 
for sustainable development to ensure sustained 
availability of building resources through 
regeneration and/or reuse/recycle. 

d) Encouraging use of traditional materials, 


technologies, local vernacular design and 
construction practices. 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


5.1.2.4 Reduced embodied and operational energy 


All designs, materials and technologies, construction 
practices should be selected and employed aimed 
at reducing the overall embodied and operational 
energy involved in construction and operation of the 
built facility. The construction should promote local 
sustainability through adoption of local resources 
(natural and man-made) and local skills. 


5.1.2.5 Stakeholder commitment and involvement 


All stakeholders shall be involved in the training and 
awareness to pursue and achieve needs for, sustainable 
development at all stages of building lifecycle (from 
design to end of life). The environmental impact 
assessment should be carried out and remedial measures 
based on the findings should be taken during the life 
cycle of the buildings. 


5.2 Identification of 
Pre-Construction Stage 


Issues during 


5.2.1 Preparation of Sustainability Construction 
Management Plan 


Having identified sustainable issues specific to 
the project, a comprehensive planning needs to be 
documented in a management plan. The management 
plan documents the approach to site management, 
project management processes, systems for 
management, site organization, data inputs to determine 
effectiveness of management systems and site planning. 


5.2.2 Site Planning 


Improper site planning is often reason for redundant 
material handling, processes involving unnecessarily 
long lead, wastage during multiple handling, inefficient 
deployment of equipment, etc. Circulation and 
movement of workers and visitors can be reason for 
unsafe working conditions. Following issues, therefore, 
need specific attention while undertaking site planning: 
a) Layout of roads and services; 
b) Movement and deployment of plants, equipment 
and machineries; 
c) Location of temporary structures, fabrication area 
and storage areas; 
d) Work area demarcation and safe surrounding; 
e) Emergency plan and medical facility; 
f) Control of derelict site or land; 


NOTE — ‘Derelict site or land’ is a land that has become 
damaged by industrial or other development and beyond 
beneficial use without treatment. 


g) Protection and management of top soil; 
h) Storage of chemicals, fuels and explosives; and 


j) Construction and demolition waste management. 


5.2.3 Location of Facilities for Hazardous Materials 


The facilities for storage of hazardous materials may 
be provided after considering all aspects. There may 


be a case for locating such facilities offsite. Specific 
statutory guidelines in respect of such requirements 
shall be referred to. The facilities and the handling 
procedures shall be well established. 


5.3 Mitigation of Impact Due to Material and 
Technologies Deployed 


Construction materials and technologies used at site 
may impact the environment, especially during 
processing of materials, such as cutting, mixing, 
fabrication, etc causing noise, dust and sometimes 
release of fumes. Such materials and technologies need 
to be identified and procedures planned to mitigate 
impacts. 


5.4 Movement and Deployments of Plant and 
Equipment 


Selection of efficient plants and equipment and their 
proper scheduling of operation are key considerations 
for sustainable deployment. While selection, it is 
essential to ensure that plants and equipment have their 
performance ensured not in isolation but also when 
considered in relation to the supporting plants and 
equipment. For example, the selection of excavator 
of a certain capacity is linked to the availability to 
earth transportation out of site and the clear working 
space available for the excavator and the transportation 
vehicles. Having selected an optimum set of plants 
and equipment, it is essential that their operation is 
scheduled such that their combined performance is 
maximized. Failure to deploy plants and equipment 
in an efficient and effective manner may result in 
undesirable loss of fuel, and noise and air pollution. 


5.5 Contractual Obligation towards Sustainable 
Construction 


Contracts determine obligations of individuals and 
organizations. In this respect, the contracts shall make 
it obligatory on the part of the supplier (materials, 
equipment or services) to follow sustainable practices 
and processes. Contractually binding obligations 
ensure system-wide responsibilities so that necessary 
mitigation of resources may be budgeted within the 
project scope. 


5.6 The procedure to identify sustainability issues 
during construction, should include the areas of 
analysis given in 5.6.1 to 5.6.3 and other applicable 
concerns in respect of project scope and context of site 
and environment. 


5.6.1 Construction Methods Review and Impact on 
Sustainability 


Design details determine the construction procedures. It 
is desirable to prepare a construction methodology and 
review the same from the point of view of its impact on 
the suitability to achieve quality, control of wastages, 
safety, resource optimization, energy conservation, 
water use, site contamination and pollution. 


5.6.2 Consideration to Environmental Impact 
Assessment 
Environmental impact assessment (EIA) report 


systematically identifies the risks and impacts and 
recommends mitigation measures. Framework of EIA 
is defined in accordance with the statutory reguirements 
and, hence, it is essential to consider the impacts so 
identified. Construction methodology and processes 
shall take cognizance of EIA report and environmental 
management plan (EMP). The EIA reguirements are 
specific to the project undertaken. 


5.6.3 Identification of Training Needs and Workforce 
Development 


Sustainable construction practices reguire specific 
processes to be followed in respect of planning, 
monitoring and control. Involvement of workforce 
at all levels need training to deal with sustainability 
issues during construction. Project management 
functional responsibilities shall include identification 
of processes, competencies of persons involved in 
discharge of such duties, assessment of performance 
and conduct of training programme. The effectiveness 
of training programme shall be assessed through 
performance appraisal system and corrections made as 
needed. Training need assessment frequency should be 
determined based on the type of work and the human 
resource competencies. Reference should be made to 
IS 15883 (Part 10) for detailing out training schedules 
and requirements. 


5.7 Establishment 
Management Processes 


of Construction Project 


Objectives of sustainable construction can only 
be realized through effective project management 
processes. Time, cost, quality, scope, risk, 
procurement, human resource, health and safety are 
some of the basic project management processes that 
shall be elaborated. Reference should be made to 
IS 15883 (Part 1) for detailing out construction project 
management processes. 


5.8 Establishment of Energy Consumption 


Monitoring of performance of management systems 
and processes of execution need establishment 
of indicators so that specific improvements may 
be achieved. In this respect, energy consumption 
monitoring is fundamental. At construction sites, 
electricity and diesel are primary sources of energy and 
their consumption shall be monitored so as to improve 
methods and to ensure that the operation of equipment 
Is energy efficient. Data collected should be analyzed 
with respect to processes of significance in terms of 
consumption and pollution. Database so generated 
can also be used for establishing project specific, 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


organization specific or process specific benchmarks 
for future reference. Appropriate documentation of 
fuel consumption logs, energy metering and execution 
processes shall be planned and assigned organizational 
responsibility. Site management decisions shall take 
cognizance of energy consumption data. 


5.9 Work Education Procedures 


Work execution procedures should be described in 
a manner so that there is least wastage, rework and 
repair and acceptable performance is achieved. In this 
respect, the reference to relevant Indian Standards 
for materials; quality assurance verification; material 
handling, storage, and protection; work procedures 
including working on materials/fabrication, placing/ 
installation; inspection and testing procedures of 
completed works; and protection after completion of 
work, need to be specifically addressed. In addition 
to these considerations, the relevant works should be 
given specific attention as given below: 


a) Excavation and sub-structure works — Issues 
related to noise and vibrations during excavation, 
piling, rock cutting, etc; control of damages to 
surroundings; prevention of collapse; and, control 
of excessive dewatering and sustainable use 
of dewatered water need to be analyzed, risks 
identified and methodologies detailed out prior to 
undertaking such works. 


b) Concrete work procedures —  Soundness 
and stability of formwork and other enabling 
structures; suitability of concrete mix to the 
prevailing environmental conditions; avoidance 
to undesirable cutting, etc, for laying services and 
embedded items; providing requisite cover to the 
reinforcements; proper curing; and, allowance of 
setting time are essential for meeting the expected 
performance of concrete works. In general, for 
concrete works, good practices standards shall be 
followed. 


c) Steel, aluminium and other metal works — Noise 
control during cutting, welding, hammering and 
fabrication operations; prevention of waste; reuse 
of cut sections (for example cut reinforcement 
bars reused in other locations depending on 
requirement); collection and disposal of scrap; fire 
and injury prevention during working; prevention 
of collapse due to unstable installation operations; 
and safety of workmen are critical aspects that 
need special mention in procedures. 


d) Masonry works — Wastage during on-site 
handling of materials; execution in proper plumb, 
plane and alignment to avoid wastage of finishing 
material for making up for the defects; and, filling 
up of joints to attain requisite material thermal 
characteristics, impermeability and strength. 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


e) Surface finishing and furnishing — Preparation 
of finishing base; environmental conditions 
during and after finishing/furnishing works; 
and, application procedure for surface finishes 
are essential considerations to realize desirable 
surface characteristics as well as service life of 
finishes and furnishings. 


f) Handling and use of chemicals — Working 
conforming to the prescribed procedures; 
protection against spillage and human body 
contact; supply and use of log describing 
quantities and authorized person(s); and, 
prevention of reaction which are explosive, 
exothermic causing fire or release of toxic fumes 
or creating corrosive reactions to the surrounding 
works, should be specifically identified and 
planned. 


g) Handling and use of oils and gases — Avoidance 
of fire by preventing conditions leading to ignition; 
spillage polluting the works and sites; use of 
appropriate containers for storage and handling; 
and contingency procedures for limiting damage 
due to spillage and neutralizing the effects should 
be specifically highlighted in procedures. 


5.10 Construction Waste Management 


5.10.1 Construction and Demolition 


Construction and demolition activities generate large 
quantities of solid waste. Diversion to landfill sites 
is one of the major issues in handling of construction 
waste. Increase in waste generation and improper land 
filling with construction wastes have major impacts, 
and like waste of land resources, affecting water bodies, 
ground water pollution. Construction organizations 
shall systematically pre-empt and identify wastes that 
may be generated and plan to reuse, recycle and handle 
wastes in an appropriate manner. Monitoring of waste 
and its disposal through an established procedure also 
create opportunities to prevent wastages in construction 
processes and lead to conservation of resources. 


By proper disposal, waste materials which are likely 
to be dumped in landfills can be converted into value 
added products. Some construction waste materials can 
be diverted for re-use, whereas others can be recycled 
into another usable material. Many construction waste 
materials can either be used onsite or sent to other 
sites/industries for reuse/recycle/reconversion into 
useful products. 


One of the important approaches to reduce waste and 
effect waste utilization is to evolve design details 
such as optimizing use of materials and employing 
technologies aiding in the same. Durable materials 
and high performance technologies need lesser 
maintenance and deliver better service life. Proper 
construction waste planning is, therefore, recommended 
before starting the construction or demolition which 
involves identification, segregation, proper storage, 


reuse/recycling and finally the proper disposal of 
remnant waste materials. 


5.10.2 Identification, 
of Waste 


It is very difficult and costly to reuse or recycle the 
waste materials which are in mixed form and not 
segregated at right time during the construction. 
Storing of segregated waste in labelled containers/bins, 
and monitoring of stored waste bins periodically by the 
trained/skilled personnel may prevent wastage. Waste 
should be stored within the site and such area should be 
chosen, where further shifting is not required. 


Segregation and Storage 


5.10.3 Reuse and Recycle 


Reuse and recycling not only reduces the land filling 
load but is also economical and an eco-friendly step 
in construction. Reuse increases the life of building 
materials. It is desirable to locate nearby recycling units 
for construction waste recycling to reduce the cost as 
well as adverse environmental impact. 


Brick bats and concrete wastes have a potential to be 
used as sub-grade works for paving, etc. Excavated 
earth and boulders may often be reused at site or 
used elsewhere. However, topsoil should be isolated, 
preserved and reused at the same site or at another 
location where there is a demand for fertile topsoil 
for landscaping. Wastes, such as metal and plastics, 
should be disposed off for recycling. Other wastes, 
such as cellulosic materials and timber, which are 
biodegradable, should be disposed of at authorized 
designated locations. 


5.10.4 Handling and Disposal of Waste 


All construction wastes shall be stored or handled 
in such a way so as to avoid unnecessary decay 
or deterioration. Bio-degradable waste during 
construction shall be collected separately and treated 
with bio-methanation, organic waste compactors, etc or 
subjected to composting. 


5.11 Planning, Monitoring and Control of 


Environmental Descriptors 


Environmental impact assessment (EIA) undertakes 
characterization of the existing status of the land, water, 
air, biological and socio-economic environment in the 
project area and its surroundings. It seeks to identify 
potential environmental impacts of the project, and 
formulation of an effective environmental management 
plan (EMP) to prevent, control and mitigate the adverse 
environmental impacts, and ensuring the compliance 
with the environmental legislations. Thus, the scope 
for planning, monitoring and control of environmental 
descriptors during construction phase is identified and 
described in the EIA and EMP. Construction agencies 
shall develop further and detail out their respective 
compliance requirements accordingly. Depending on 
the nature of project, construction agencies shall be 


required to establish infrastructure and procedures for 
soil monitoring, water quality monitoring, ambient air 
quality monitoring, noise monitoring, tree counting and 
traffic survey, with a view to having required controls 
thereon. 


5.11.1 Soil Monitoring 


Soil samples from representative locations in the site 
and study area shall be collected and analyzed for 
important relevant physical and chemical parameters. 
Soil monitoring should be carried out at appropriate 
locations of the sites. 


5.11.2 Water Quality Monitoring 


Water quality monitoring shall be conducted at 
representative locations in the study area for surface 
and ground water. Samples shall be collected and 
analyzed for important relevant physical, chemical and 
bacteriological parameters. Water quality monitoring 
locations should include the appropriate surface water 
(if existing in the study area) and groundwater locations. 


5.11.3 Ambient Air Quality Monitoring 


Depending upon the project size, location and the type 
of activities involved, ambient air quality in respect 
of suspended particulate matter (SPM), respirable 
particulate matter (RPM), SO,, NOx, and CO, shall 
be monitored at representative locations in the site 
and study area at a frequency defined by the statutory 
authority at each location. The monitoring locations 
shall be located on the basis of predominant wind 
directions, land use pattern and height of the proposed 
stacks. At least one station shall be located at the 
maximum pollution deposition area due to the proposed 
stacks of generators. The number of air quality 
monitoring locations should be as per the statutory 
guidelines. 


5.11.4 Noise Monitoring 


Ambient noise level monitoring shall be carried out at 
representative locations in the site and study area over 
a period of 24 h to obtain hourly equivalent continuous 
noise (L) levels as well as day and night time L_ to 
compare with the standards. Noise monitoring should 
be carried out at appropriate locations including one at 
the project site, one at the boundary of the project site 
and one at the nearest residential/sensitive area. 


5.11.5 Landscape, Biodiversity and Site Dereliction 


Survey shall be conducted to assess existing shrubs, 
trees, water sources, etc, and the variety of animal and 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


vegetable species in the project site shall be recorded. 


5.11.6 Traffic Studies 


Traffic survey for continuous 24 h shall be carried out 
to measure number and type of vehicles passing on the 
existing main roads giving access to the project. 


6 PREPARATION OF 
MANAGEMENT PLAN 


SUSTAINABILITY 


A sustainability management plan shall be prepared 
to meet the objective of sustainability, covering 
various aspects reflected in this standard. The plan 
of shall also describe the processes, procedures and 
initiatives that the project will implement to meet 
the sustainability goals of the project. The plan shall 
require implementation of appropriate sustainability 
management techniques. 


7 CONTROL OF 
MANAGEMENT PLAN 


SUSTAINABILITY 


The project team shall monitor, measure, analyze, 
and evaluate its performance on site based upon the 
sustainable management plan developed above. The 
evaluation should include following aspects from 
the sustainable management plan: 


a) Frequency of the assessment should be every 
6 months, though, the frequency may vary based 
upon the complexity and size of the project. 


b 


we 


Based on the assessment report, plan of action 
should be determined and circulated to the 
entire team to ensure that the process remains 
integrated. 


c 


— 


Action items should have timelines, and a tracking 
mechanism shall be in place to comply with any 
non-compliance of the actions mentioned through 
the assessment reports. 


Self-declaration matrix is provided at Annex A which 
will capture the sustainable management plan and help 
create a tracking mechanism for the project team. 


8 LESSONS LEARNT 


Lessons learnt is a summary of sustainable project 
management experience and process improvement 
recommendations. It includes information on 
environmental compliances, approaches, sustainable 
construction methodologies, energy performances and 
shall be documented for the improvement of the future 
projects. 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


(al 
(ul 
(u 
( 
(11) (01) (6) (8) (2) (9) (c) | () (£) (2) (1) 
aed YIM PIYA Judo 
uoy sjuəuttuoƏ Pogy sydvisojoyg sudeiSojouq | JaəunrtutuoƏ uel JuəursSguue]A] | D99902 3q 
IeIpəum2 | /uopeAd9sqO | /sjuəuiməodq Jo əəuə4.əJə% | /sJuəuinoəoq Jo ayeq Suipuəq | ON | ON/SƏA əlquzure)sns 0) spodsy | ‘ON IS 


(AALLVOIGND XRLLVIN NV'Id LNANADVNVI ATAVNIVLSAS 


( 9 ƏsnpjO ) 


VXHNNV 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (102, Sraddha Temple Tree, 
Rustom Bagh, Old Airport Road, Bengaluru) 


AECOM India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 
Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, 
New Delhi 


Construction Skill Development Council of India, 
New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants & Engineers Private 
Limited, Ghaziabad 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, 
Roorkee 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


GMR Infra and Airport, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, 
New Delhi 


Kaleidoscope, Noida 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


M. N. Dastur & Company Private Limited, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 
Sur! P. KRISHNAN (Chairman) 


SHRI PAWAN JAIPURIAR 
SHRI ARVIND AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI G. D. GUPTA 
Suri M. N. N. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI H. S. PASRICHA 
SHRI SANJAY SONI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. K. SHARMA 
SHRI SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI P. R. SWARUP 
SHRI O. P. GUPTA (Alternate) 


SHRI ANAND KUMAR SINGH 
Ms JANCY MATHEW (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Dr AcHuAL K. MITTAL 
DR AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


ENGINEER MEMBER 
CHIEF ENGINEER (DEsIGN) (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMIT KUMAR GARG 
Suri Ravi Kapoor (Alternate) 


SHRIA. K. TRIPATHI 


SHRI AMITAVA PAL 
SHRI RAVINDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRI AVINASH HARDE (Alternate I) 
Ms Pooja DEsHMUKH (Alternate ID) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Suri S. K. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK NARAYAN 


Dr K. C. Iver 
Dr J. UMA MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMOR KOOL 


Suri M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SOUMIK SEN 
SHRI ALAKES BHATTACHARYYA (Alternate I) 
SHRI AGNI GUPTA (Alternate II) 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


Organization 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics & Programme 
Implementation, New Delhi 


NBCC (India) Ltd, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and 
Research, Mumbai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
NITI Ayog, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Private Ltd, Mumbai 
School of Planning & Architecture, New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 
STUP Consultants, Mumbai 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (B-31, Manas Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar -1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur 
Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, 
PPD Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, 
Thiruvananthapuram) 


In personal capacity (411, Technology Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (P 1/2, Block 2, Silver Estate 
Sector 50, Noida) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Bric M. J. KUMAR 
Cot Y. S. Dhaka (Alternate) 


Deputy DIRECTOR GENERAL (PI) 
Director (IPMD) (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK RASTOGI 
SHRI P. S. RAO (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 
DR ARUN CHANDRAMOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 


SHRI SHATRUGHAN LAL 
SHRI SANJAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUVARNA NAIKDESAI 
SHRI SESHA SAI (Alternate) 


Dr V. K. PAUL 
Suri ABHIJIT RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR MITTAL 
REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI BIPIN CHAND 


SHRI V. K. SHARMA 
DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 
SHRI KRISHNA KANT 
DR VANITA AHUJA 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 


SHRI R. P. LAHIRI 


Bric ViNop NAKRA (RETD) 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI ABHISHEK PAL 
SCIENTIST ‘C? (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


10 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (102, Sraddha Temple Tree, 
Rustom Bagh, Old Airport Road, Bengaluru) 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, 
Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development 
Corporation, New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


RICS School of Built Environment, Amity University, 
Noida 


School of Planning £ Architecture, New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant 
Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (£-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay 
Khand-II, Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 


In personal capacity (C-2/2324, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Sector A, Pocket-C, 
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, 
LP. Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (B-31, Manas Apartments, 
Mayur Vihar-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, 
Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (7A, Autumn Hue, Seasons, 
PPD Apartments, Kuravankonam, Kowdiar, 
Thiruvananthapuram) 


In personal capacity (P 1⁄2, Block 2, 
Silver Estate Sector 50, Noida) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI P. KRISHNAN (Convener) 


CHIEF ENGINEER-CSQ 
SHRI SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI SHISHIR BANSAL 
Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


SHRI A. K. MISHRA 
Suet D. JANA (Alternate) 


Dr K. C. Iver 


Suri M. P. NAIDU 
SHRI R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 


PROF JOSEPH V. THANIKAL 
Pror V. K. PAUL 
SHRI ABHIJIT RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ KUMAR MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 

SHRI IFTIKHAR A. DRABU 
SHRI CHANDRA PAL 

SHRI KRISHNA KANT 

Dr S. N. MANDAL 

SHRI V. K. SHARMA 

DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 


Bric ViNop NAKRA (RETD) 


IS 15883 (Part 11) : 2021 


Working Group on Sustainability Management, CED 29/P1/WG 11 


Organization Representative(s) 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi Dr V. K. PauL (Convener) 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida SHRI MANOJ Kumar MrIrTTAL (Co-Convener) 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI P. BHAGAT SINGH 
Construction Industry Development Corporation, REPRESENTATIVE 

New Delhi 
Kaleidoscope, New Delhi SHRI AMOR KooL 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 
PMI Organization Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Suri TEJAS SURA 
RICS School of Built Environment, Amity University, Pror JosEPH V. THANIKAL 

Noida 


12 


(Continued from second cover) 


This standard (Part 11) on sustainability management has been formulated with the purpose to provide guidelines 
on sustainability parameters. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The provisions of this standard are without prejudice to the concerned statutory provisions contained in various 
Acts and Rules and Regulations framed there under, including Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1794; Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act; 1981; The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986; The Public 
Liability (Insurance) Act, 1991, and EIA Notification 2006 as amended from time to time. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (15034). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


