Waa HAF IS 14483 (Part 3) : 2018 
Indian Standard 


SaTH Ud aA stat: AR 
gë 


am 3 Sate eat — faferite 


Fertilizer and Chemical Injector 
System 


Part 3 Fertilizer Tank — Specification 


ICS 65.060.35 


© BIS 2018 


KARIA AA ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM WH, 9 uu AHL HM, Ae fercit-110002 
Veale” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2018 Price Group 3 


Farm Irrigation and Drainage Systems Sectional Committee, FAD 17 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Farm Irrigation 
and Drainage Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


As the fertigation technique that is application of fertilizers through irrigation water in drip irrigation systems is 
fast becoming popular in the country with the increased use of drip/sprinkler irrigation systems, need was felt to 
formulate this new standard to standardize and improve the quality of fertilizer tanks in use and to rationalize the 
specifications. 


The main objectives of this standard are: 
1) To specify the nominal sizes and classify different types of fertilizer tanks according to the techniques 
used. 
il) To specify technical requirements for the effective and efficient use of the equipment. 
ii) To specify health and safety aspects related to the equipment 
iv) To specify maintenance requirements to sustain the corrosive action of fertilizers 
v) To specify suitable test methods for evaluating the performance parameters of the equipment. 


The figures given in the standard are only for illustrations showing typical installation of fertilizer tanks in the main 
line. 


The standard on fertilizer and chemical injector system have already been formulated in two earlier parts. The other 
parts of this standard are as follows: 


IS 14483 (Part 1):1997 Indian Standard fertilizer and chemical injection system Part 1 Venturi injector 
IS 14483 (Part2) : 2002 Indian Standard fertilizer and chemical injection system Part 2 Water-driven chemical 
injector pump 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 14483 (Part 3) : 2018 


Indian Standard 


FERTILIZER AND CHEMICAL INJECTOR SYSTEM 
PART 3 FERTILIZER TANK — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the mechanical and functional 
requirements for fertilizer tanks used in irrigation 
systems, test methods and the data to be supplied by 
the manufacturer to permit correct installation and 
operation in the field. 
NOTE — This standard applies to fertilizer tanks working 
on the principle of differential pressure used in irrigation 


systems. This standard also applies to the fittings used for 
connecting fertilizer tanks with the irrigation systems. 


2 REFERENCES 


For the purpose of this standard the following Indian 
standards are necessary adjuncts to this standard. The 
following Indian Standards also contain provisions, 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based on 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

513 : 2008 Cold reduced low carbon steel 
sheets and strips 

Pipe threads where pressure — 
Tight joints are made on the 
threads — Dimensions, 
tolerances and designation (fourth 
revision) 

Steel tubes, tubular and other 
wrought steel fittings — Part 1: 
Steel tubes 

Specification for electroplated 
coating of zinc on iron and steel. 
Pipe threads where pressure — 
Tight joints are not made on the 
threads — Dimensions, 
tolerances and designation (third 
revision) 

Specification for hot dip zinc 
coating on mild steel tubes 
Random sampling and 
randomization procedures (first 
revision) 

Rubber sealing rings for gas 
mains, water mains and sewers. 
Powder coating specifications 


554 : 1999 


1239 (Part 1) : 2004 


1573 : 1986 


2643 : 2005 


4736 : 1986 


4905 :2015 


5382 : 1985 


13871 : 1993 


3 DEFINITION 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply: 


3.1 Fertilizer Tank — A metal or plastic or composite 
material pressure tank generally cylindrical in shape, 
used to inject fertilizer/chemical solution for injection 
into an irrigation system, using differential pressure. 


3.2 Fertilizer Tank Assembly — A fertilizer tank with 
inlet-outlet pipes with connecting adaptor, inlet and 
outlet valve, drain valve, pressure check assembly, 
outlet filter. 


3.3 Fertilizer Tank Inlet — Port through which water 
enters the fertilizer tank body. 


3.4 Fertilizer Tank Outlet — Port through which 
water with dissolved fertilizers/chemicals or other 
additives flows out. 


3.5 Differential Pressure Device — A device which 
operates manually or automatically to create a pressure 
difference between the inlet and the outlet. It can be a 
pressure reducing valve or manual throttle valve or 
any other device specified by the manufacturer. 


3.6 Rubber or Plastic Bladder — A non-adhering 
bladder physically attached to the tank and constructed 
of rubber or plastic material to provide physical 
separation of liquid product from the tank side walls. 
Rubber or plastic bladder is constructed of material 
that are compatible with the contact material. 


3.7 Fertilizer Tank Quantitative Model— A fertilizer 
tank fitted with two pipes, one for water inlet and the 
other for fertilizer solution outlet, to be connected to 
main water line with a differential pressure device 
between them which is used for creating a sufficient 
pressure difference to cause part of the flow to be 
diverted through the tank. The water entry point 
reaches to the bottom of the tank, thus mixing the 
solution and expelling it into the water line. 


3.8 Fertilizer Tank Proportional Model with Rubber 
or Plastic Bladder — A fertilizer tank fitted with two 
pipes, one for water inlet and the other for fertilizer 
solution outlet, to be connected to main water line 
with a differential pressure device connected between 
them which is used for creating sufficient pressure 
difference to cause part of the flow to be diverted 
through the tank. Inside the tank there is a rubber/ 


IS 14483 (Part 3) : 2018 


plastic bladder which fills the tank. The fertilizer/ 
chemical solution is filled into the rubber/plastic bladder 
thereby insulating the metal tank from corrosion. Water 
from the main line enters between the tank and the 
bladder and compresses the contents. Since the 
pressure on the inlet side is greater than the outlet 
side, fertilizer/chemical solution is uniformly expelled 
into the water line. 


3.9 Maximum Working Pressure (Pmax) — Highest 
water pressure declared by the manufacturer, at the 
inlet of a fertilizer tank not less than 800 kPa, to ensure 
proper fertilizer injection. 


3.10 Nominal Test Pressure (Pn) — A reference 
pressure of 100 kPa at the inlet of fertilizer tank or any 
other pressure described in the publication of the 
manufacturer as ‘nominal test pressure’. 


3.11 Nominal Differential Pressure (Pd) — A 
reference differential pressure of 20 kPa or any other 
differential pressure declared by the manufacturer. 


3.12 Nominal Injection Rate (Qn) — The injection 
rate of a fertilizer tank is expressed in liters per hour. It 
is the rate at which fertilizer/chemical solution is expelled 
out of the fertilizer tank operating at nominal test 
pressure (Pn) and nominal differential pressure (Pd) of 
20 kPa with water temperature of 27+ 3°C or as specified 
by the manufacturer. 


> Se dh ep T 


Bl 
PF | + 
| il 
| ILE 
OD 
Gi 
y tT 


3.13 Tank Volume — The approximate inside volume 
of the fertilizer tank or bladder of the fertilizer tank used 
to store fertilizer/chemical solution before injection, 
expressed in litres. 


4 CLASSIFICATION 


4.1 Based on the Type of the Fertilizer Tanks are 
Classified as follows : 


4.1.1 Quantitative model 


A fertilizer tank fitted with two pipes, one for water inlet 
and the other for fertilizer solution outlet, to be 
connected to main water line with a differential pressure 
device between them which is used for creating a 
sufficient pressure difference to cause part of the flow 
to be diverted through the tank. The water entry point 
reaches the bottom of the tank, thus mixing the solution 
and expelling it into the water line. 


The solution in the tank is increasingly diluted. 
(see fig. 1) 


4.1.2 Proportionate model with rubber/plastic 
bladder 


A fertilizer tank fitted with two pipes, one for water 
inlet and the other for fertilizer solution outlet, to be 
connected to main water line with a differential 
pressure device connected between them which is 


H <== INLE 
ve ` 
= | 
IET | 
PPE | 
| 
LI 
z 
ULI 
PS 
, 
| 
mg o 
vd 
n — 


Fic. 1 QUANTITATIVE MODEL 


2 


used for creating sufficient pressure difference to 
cause part of the flow to be diverted through the 
tank. Inside the tank there is a rubber/plastic bladder 
which fills the tank. The fertilizer/chemical solution 
is filled into the rubber/plastic bladder thereby 
insulating the metal tank from corrosion. Water from 
the main line enters between the tank and the bladder 
and compresses the contents. Since the pressure on 
the inlet side is greater than the outlet side, fertilizer/ 
chemical solution is uniformly expelled into the water 
line. (see fig. 2) 


The water inlet flow on the inlet side is generally 
metered and also adjusted by means of a regulating 


IS 14483 (Part 3) : 2018 


valve. The fertilizer concentration remains the same 
throughout and under stable condition is fairly 
accurately proportional to the irrigation discharge. 


4.2 Based on the Volume of the Tank 


Based on the volume of the tank or bladder it can be 
classified as 30, 60, 90, 120, 160, 180, 220 liters etc. or 
any other volume declared by the manufacturer. 


5 MATERIAL 


The material used in the manufacture of fertilizer tanks 
and their fittings shall be resistant to fertilizers and 
chemicals commonly employed in irrigation, and shall 


Liquid Fertilizer 


Rotameter (optional) 


flexible bladder 


outlet 


Fic. 2 PROPORTIONATE MODEL 


IS 14483 (Part 3) : 2018 


be suitable for use with water at temperatures up to 
60 °C and at nominal test pressure. 


5.1.1 The materials shall not support the growth of 
algae. The plastic parts of the fertilizer tanks that are 
exposed to light, shall be protected against UV 
degradation. 


5.1.2 The corrosive metals used in the manufacture of 
fertilizer tanks shall be duly protected with non- 
corrosive coating such as epoxy paint, rubberized or 
tar based powder coating paint or any other suitable 
coat. For metal fertilizer tank powder coating thickness 
should be minimum 70 microns. 


6 CONSTRUCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Dimensions 


In-side and outside diameter, height and wall 
thickness: 


The inside diameters, outside diameter and height of 
the fertilizer tank, wall thickness and dimensions of the 
connecting fitting shall be as declared by the 
manufacturer. 


The wall thickness shall be measured in accordance 
with a dial vernier/ball or micrometer. The resulting 
dimensions shall be expressed to the nearest 0.05 mm. 
The dimensions of the connecting fittings shall match 
the dimensions of the fertilizer tank, to ensure easy and 
reliable installation and operation. The assembly made 
with or without the use of clamping bands, shall be 
sufficiently strong to withstand the maximum working 
pressure. 

NOTE — Clamping means, such as bands and screws, shall 


be non-corrosive materials or of materials protected against 
corrosion. 


6.2 General 


The fertilizer tanks, its parts and fittings, shall have no 
manufacturing defects that may impair their 
performance. The construction of the fertilizer tank and 
its fittings shall permit their easy connection, with or 
without clamping bands, whether the connection is 
made manually or by means of suitable tools supplied 
by the manufacturers. 


7 TESTSPECIMENS AND TESTING CONDITIONS 


7.1 Test Specimens 


Test specimens shall be selected at random by the 
representative of the testing laboratory from a lot of at 
least 5 units. 


7.2 Testing Conditions 


Unless otherwise specified in the relevant clause, all 


tests shall be performed at ambient temperature and at 
water temperature of 27 +3°C. 


7.3 Accuracy of Measuring Devices 


7.3.1 The error, if any, in the measurement of water 
pressure shall not exceed 2 percent of the actual value. 


7.3.2 During the test, the pressure shall not vary by 
more than 2 percent. 


8 REQUIREMENTS 


8.1 Resistance of Fertilizer Tanks to Hydrostatic 
Pressure at Ambient Temperature. 


8.1.1 When tested in accordance with the test method 
given at A-1, the fertilizer tank assembly shall withstand 
the test pressure without showing signs of damage to 
the fertilizer tank or the connecting fittings. No leakage 
shall occur from body or fitting. 


8.2 Resistance to Hydrostatic Pressure at Elevated 
Temperature 


8.2.1 When tested in accordance with the test method 
given at A-2, the fertilizer tank assembly shall withstand 
the test pressure without showing signs of damage to 
the fertilizer tank or the connecting fittings. No leakage 
shall occur from body to fitting. 


8.3 Injection Rate Calibration 


8.3.1 Injection rate calibration for fertilizer tank — 
quantitative model 


8.3.2 Calibration of rate of injection 
8.3.2.1 When tested in accordance with the test method 
given at A-3 of Annexure A, test results of injection 


rate obtained, shall be within 10 percent of the injection 
rate declared by the manufacturer. 


8.3.3 Calibration of injection time 


8.3.3.1 When tested in accordance with the test method 
given at A-4 of Annexure A, test results of injection 
rate obtained, shall be within 10 percent of the injection 
rate declared by the manufacturer. 


8.3.4 Injection rate calibration for fertilizer tank — 
proportional model with rubber/plastic bladder 


8.3.5 Calibration of rate of injection 


8.3.5.1 When tested in accordance with the test method 
given at A-5 of Annexure A, Test results of injection 
rate obtained, shall be within 10 percent of the injection 
rate declared by the manufacturer. 


8.3.6 Calibration of injection time 


8.3.6.1 When tested in accordance with the test 
method given at A-6 of Annexure A, residual solution 
shall not be more than 10 percent of the capacity of 


bladder, within the time declared by the manufacturer. 
9 DESIGNATION 


9.1 Fertilizer Tank — Quantitative Model 


Fertilizer tanks shall be designated by the words 
‘Quantative Model’, reference to this Indian standard, 
nominal volume, inlet outlet connection size, maximum 
operating pressure (Pmax), nominal operating pressure 
(Pn), injection time at nominal operating pressure (Pn) 
and nominal differential pressure (Pd) etc. 


9.2 Fertilizer Tank — Proportional Model with 
rubber/plastic bladder 


Fertilizer tanks shall be designated by the words 
‘Proportional Model’, reference to this Indian Standard, 
inlet outlet connection size, volume of bladder, 
maximum operating pressure (Pmax), nominal operating 
pressure (Pn), injection time at nominal operating 
pressure (Pn) and nominal differential pressure (Pd) 
etc. 


10 MAINTENANCE AND PERIODIC CLEANING 


10.1 Manufacturer shall supply guidelines for proper 
operation and maintenance of fertilizer tank along with 
safety instructions. 


11 MARKING AND PACKING 


11.1 Each fertilizer tank shall bear clear and permanent 
markings, indicating the following particulars: 


a) Name of the manufacturer or his registered 
trade mark; 

b) Nominal volume of the fertilizer tank; 

c) Batch or Code No; 

d) Designation in accordance with 9; 


e) Each fertilizer tank shall have clear marking 
preferably pictorial “Not for drinking”; and 


f) Arrow indicating direction of flow. 


IS 14483 (Part 3) : 2018 


11.2 BIS Certification Marking 


Each product may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


11.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. 
The details of conditions under which the licence for 
the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to 
manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the 
Bureau of Indian Standards. 


11.3 Packing of Fertilizer Tank 


11.3.1 Fertilizer tanks shall be duly packed in protective 
packing to avoid handling and transit damages. 


12 DATA TO BE SUPPLIED BY THE 
MANUFACTURER WHEN EVERASKED FOR 


12.1 The manufacturer shall make available to the user, 
together with the fertilizer tank and fittings, catalogues 
or information sheets that include the following data: 


a) Catalogue number of fertilizer tank and fitting; 


b) Type of fittings for connecting fertilizer tank 
to supply network or appliances; 


c) Instruction sheet for proper operation of 
fertilizer tank (the instruction sheets shall be 
dated); 


d) Installation instructions for the fertilizer tank 
and fittings; 

e) Range of working pressure of the fertilizer 
tank; 

f) Classification of fertilizer tank; 

g) Operating Characteristics of fertilizer tank (8.3); 


h) Limitations of fertilizer tank use (fertilizers, 
chemicals, etc); 


j) Maintenance and storage requirements; 
k) Nominal test pressure; 
m) Safety Instructions. 


IS 14483 (Part 3) : 2018 


ANNEXA 


A-1 RESISTANCE OF FERTILIZER TANKS TO 
HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE AT AMBIENT 
TEMPERATURE 


A-1.1 Perform the test on fertilizer tank complete with 
assembly. 


A-1.2 Connect the fertilizer tank assembly to a source of 
water, by means ofan inlet fitting, and close its outlet end. 
Fill the fertilizer tank assembly with water and check that 
no air remains trapped in the pipe. Increase the water 
pressure gradually (10 s minimum) to the maximum working 
pressure (Pmax) and maintain the test pressure for 5 min. 


A-1.3 Observe for any leakage from body or fitting and 
any signs of damage to the fertilizer tank or the 
connecting fittings. 


A-2 RESISTANCE TO HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE 
ATELEVATED TEMPERATURE 


A-2.1 Perform the test on fertilizer tank at a temperature 
of 60+2°C. 


A-2.2 Perform the test on fertilizer tank complete with 
assembly. 


A-2.3 Connect the fertilizer tank assembly to a source 
of water, by means of an inlet fittings, and close its outlet 
end. Fill the fertilizer tank assembly with water and check 
that no air remains trapped in the pipe. Increase the water 
pressure gradually (10 s minimum) to the nominal working 
pressure and maintain the test pressure for 15 min. 


A-2.4 Observe for any leakage from body or fitting and 
any signs of damage to the fertilizer tank or the 
connecting fittings. 


A-3 INJECTION RATE CALIBRATION FOR 
FERTILIZER TANK-—QUANTITATIVE MODEL 


A-3.1 Calibration of Rate of Injection 


A-3.2 Perform the test on fertilizer tank at a temperature 
of 27+3°C. 


A-3.3 Install the fertilizer tank on a bypass line 
connecting main system flow pipeline and set nominal 
operating pressure (Pn). 


A-3.4 Create pressure difference between the inlet and 
the outlet with the help of pressure reducing device or 
throttle valve. Set the differential pressure. 


A-3.5 Measure the injection rate using Rotameter or 
other flow measuring device. Perform the test for atleast 
three values of differential pressures as declared by 
the manufacturer out of which one value shall always 
be nominal differential pressure (Pd). (for example, 
20 kPa, 30 kPa and 50 kPa). 


A-4 CALIBRATION OF INJECTION TIME 


A-4.1 Perform this test on fertilizer tank at a temperature 
of 27 + 3°C. 


A-4.2 Install the fertilizer tank as stated in 8.2.1 or use 
easily identifiable and completely water soluble media 
as a solution to be used in fertilizer tank. (For example, 
acidic solution with pH up to 4). 


A-4.3 Create pressure difference between the inlet and 
the outlet with the help of pressure reducing device or 
throttle valve equal to nominal differential pressure (Pd). 
Run the system for the time declared by the manufacturer. 
Employ suitable means to check and all the fertilizer from 
the tank is expelled in to the main pipe line. This may 
include litmus paper test, pH paper test, EC test, pH 
check or as per manufacturer’s recommendations. 


A-4.4 Observe for residual solution within the time + 10 
percent of the time declared by themanufacturer. 


A-5 INJECTION RATE CALIBRATION FOR 
FERTILIZER TANK PROPORTIONAL 
MODEL WITH RUBBER/PLASTIC BLADDER 


A-5.1 Calibration of Rate of Injection 


A-5.2 Perform the test on fertilizer tank at temp 
of 27+3°C. 


A-5.3 Install the fertilizer tank on bypass line 
connecting main systems flow pipeline. Set nominal 
operating pressure and flow. Create pressure difference 
between the inlet and outlet. 


A-5.4 Perform the test for at least three values of 
differential pressures as declared by the manufacturer out 
of which one value shall always be nominal differential 
pressure (Pd). (for example, 20 kPa, 30 kPa and 50 kPa). 


A-5.5 Measure the injection rate using Rotameter or 
other flow measuring device. 


A-6 CALIBRATION OF INJECTION TIME 


A-6.1 Perform this test on fertilizer tank at a temperature 
of 27+3°C. 


A-6.2 Install the fertilizer tank as stated in 8.2.1 or use 
easily identifiable and completely water soluble media 
as a solution to be used in fertilizer tank. (For example, 
acidic solution with pH up to 4). 


A-6.3 Create pressure difference between the inlet and 
the outlet with the help of pressure reducing device or 
throttle valve equal to nominal differential pressure (Pd). 
Run the system for the time declared by the manufacturer. 


A-6.4 Take out the bladder assembly and check for 
residual solution. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enguiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 17 (2583). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : CUT Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


