( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 12182- 1987

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES .FOR DETERMINATION OF EFFECTS OF SEDIMENTATION IN PLANNING AND PERFORMANCE OF RESERVOIRS
Reservoirs
Chairman SHRIN.K.SARMA Members Damodar Valley Corporation, Dhanbad Irrigation and Power Department, Government of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad SUPERINTENDING EHGINXER ( Alternate ) Irrigation Department, Government of Punjab, CHIEF ENGINEER Chandigarh DIRECTOR,TUNNEL& SPILLWAY ( Alternate) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta DIRECTOR SHI~I K. N. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Madhya DIRECTOR Pradesh, Bhopal SUPERINTENDINQ ENGINISFII ( DFZHGNS ) ( Ahmate) Irrigation and Waterways Department, Government Drnwxore of West Bengal. Calcutta Public Works Department, Government of Karnataka, Bangalore CHIEF RESIMRCH OFFICEI~ ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR (HYDIIOLOGY-SOCTII ) Central Watrr Commission. Xew Delhi DEPUTY DIREC~OR(HY~ROLOGY-S� UTR ) ( Alternate ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( RESF,IIV 01n SEDIMENTATION) DEPUTY D~RIXTOR (RESBRSEDIMENTATION vOlR DIRECTORATE ) ( Altunafc ) ( SOIL Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ( Department COMMISSIONER JOIN,~ of Agriculture ): New Delhi CONSERVATION) SHRI B.K. BANERJ~E CHIEF ENGINEER ( Continued on page 2 ) Central

Sectional

Committee,

BDC 48
New Delhi

Representing Water Commission,

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

of 1957 ) and This publication is protected under the Indian Copyight Act ( XIV reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the nublishcr shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 12182- 1987
( Continued frompage1 ) Members
SHRI SUREGHCHANDER

Representing GUPTA

Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow SHRI S~RINDER KUMAR GUPTA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. R. MERNDII~ATTA In personal capacity ( N-13. Tara Apartments, Govindpuri E&n, Kalkaji, New Delhi ) SECRETARY Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi DIRECTOR ( C ) ( Alternate ) Bhakra Beas Management Board, Chandigarh SUPERINTXNDINGENGINEER EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( Alternate ) Irrigation Departmrnt, Government of Maharashtra, SUPERIXTENIXNG ENGINEER Bombay EXECUTIVE;: ENGINEER ( Alternntc ) Irrigation Department, Government of Gujarat, SHRI C. D. THATTE Gandhinagar SHRI M. K. PUROHIT ( Alfernate ) Irrigation & Power Department, Government of SHRI B. N. TRIPATRY Orissa, Bhubaneshwar India Meteorological Department, New Delhi SHRI D. S. UPADBYAY SHRI K. MUKREI~~EE ( Altcrnafe ) DR G. N. YOGANARASIMHAN Water Resources Development Training Gentre, Roorkee DR V. C. CHAUPE ( Alleraale ) Director General, BIS ( Ex-o#cio Member ) SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) SHRI HYMANT KUMAR Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS

-IS : 12182 - 1987

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR DETERMINATION OF EFFECTS OF SEDIMENTATION IN PLANNING AND PERFORMANCE OF RESERVOIRS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 29 September 1987, after the draft finalized by the Reservoirs Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 The storage reservoirs built across rivers or streams lose their capacity on account of deposition of sediment. This deposition of sediment which takes place progressively in time reduces the active capacity of the reservoir which in turn affects the regulating capability of the reservoir to provide the outputs of water through passage of time. Accumulation of sediment at or near the dam may interfere with the future functioning of water intakes and hence affects decisions regarding location and height of various outlets. It may also result in greater inflow of sediment into the canals/water conveyance systems provided at the reservoir. Problems of rise in flood levels in the head reaches and unsightly deposition of sediment from recreation point of view may also crop up in course of time. 0.2.1 Water resources systems operate over a long period of time and are subject to ever increasing demand for water for various purposes. long term changes in terms of technology and production Besides, functions are also encountered. Man-made changes taking place in the river basin and consequent changes in hydrologic regime controlling the water inputsover long term periods are also encountered and have to be provided for ( All these factors are to be considered and taken into account while assessing performance of any reservoir project ). In this context, sedimentation of reservoirs is to be viewed as an additional factor which has to be considered and its effects studied and evaluated on the reservoir performance. 0.3 In the formulationof the practices prevailing by deriving assistance Report number 19. this standard, due weightage has been given to in the field in this country,. , T,his.has.bee.n met from Chapter II and,111 of CR1 & P Technical

IS:121821. SCOPE

1987

1.1 This standard lays down guidelines for determining the various effects of sedimentation on the performance of reservoir projects in order to make suitable allowances in the design of such projects at the time of initial planning. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions ( Part 6 )-1983* and the following shall apply. 2.1 Dead Storage - Storage of reservoir means of the in-built sluices/outlets. given in I'S : 44 `0 to release by

not susceptible

2.2 Economic Life - If at any point of time, the benefits likely to accrue in further operation of the reservoir compare unfavourably under the relevant economic criteria with the future costs involved in operating and maintaining the-system, but excluding any element to cover the past costs incurred, the reservoir shall be said to have reached the end of the economic life. 2.3 Feasible Service Time - For a specified purpose, the period or notional period for which the reservoir provided or is/was expected to provide a part of planned benefit in respect of storage in the reservoir being impaired by sedimentation. Customarily, it is estimated as the time after which the new zero elevation of the reservoir would equal the sill of the outlet relevant for the purpose. 2.4 Full Service Time For a specified purpose, the period notional period for which the reservoir provided or is/was expected provide, a part of the full planned benefit inspite of sedimentation. or to

2.5 New Zero Elevation - Thelevel up to which all the available capacity of the reservoir was or is expected to be lost due to progressive sedimentation of the reservoir up to the specified time.
NOTE-New zero elevation is a time related concept and as sedimentation progresses, the new zero elevation may rise. Thus specified time should be any

length of time such as full service time, feasible service time, etc.

3. PROBLEMS RESERVOIR 3.1 Following

ASSOCIATED are the main effects

WITH

SEDIMENTATION

OF

of sedimentation

on the reservoir:

a) The reduction of the active storage capacity which may reduce the capability of the reservoir to deliver the benefits which could The have been delivered by the reservoir but for sedimentation. *Glossary of term? relating to river valley projects: Part 6 Reservoirs (Jirst w&ion ). 4

IS : 12182- 1987
progressive recluction of the active storage capacity on the outputs f:,orn the reservoir in folloiving ways: may reflect

1) It

may reduce the dump or secondary output. However, where detnanc's have not grown as expected, this effect may not be felt. In years of exceptional good run or secondary off, there may be no reduction of dump output<. It may reduce availability of firm water in marginal years by Howincrease in both the number and quantum of failures. ever, in very bad years where no spills would have occurred even otherwise, the number and quantum of failures may remain unaffected by reduction in active storage capacity. Some reduction of benefits from the existing reservoir projects as a result of sedimentation of active storage capacities is inevitable. However, efforts may be made to make the best use of remaining storage capacity as described, in 5.

2)

b) Sedimentation

at or near the dam face may tend to block the outlet causing difficulties in operation of the gates. Sedimentation up to intake of the outlet may induce more sediment to be carried through the conservation outlets, thus causing problems of sedimentation of canals, machinery parts, etc. Elevation to which sediment will accumulate at the dam in a given period of time affects the design elevation of outlets for water withdrawals, sill level of canal's taking off from namely, the Location of these outlets is, reservoir and power penstock sills. however, also dependent on other considerations like command areas to be covered and minimum head required for functioning of turbines. In cases where outlet elevations are controlled by above considerations, the effect of sediment accumulation may pose no prob!em. Sedimentation may cause operational difficulties by tending to jam the intake gates of the outlet when The problem is new zero elevation reaches above the gate sill. more serious for gates which are not frequently operated, and for situations where early floods occur when reservoir is low in frequently deposit sediment near the intake. However, operated gates, a local deep approach channel may develop and However, in such cases, difficulties allow withdrawal of water. caused by passage of sediment in irrigation canals, power houses, etc, may become serious. Sediment accumulation on the masonryiconcrete provided for. at the dam-face may increase the loading dam structure beyond what has been

4 4

Sedimentation in upper portion of the reservoir may change the back water profile from what it would have been put for sedimentation. The increase in flood levels upstrram of the

IS : 12182 - 1987 reservoir may cause marshy lands, etc. additional submergence, formation of

e) The river regime at the entry to the reservoir may get affected due to sediment deposits. Delta formation and braided river pattern may result and this may be unsightly. Tree growth in the delta lends increase evapotranspiration. constraints for a reservoir may necessitate certain f 1 The operation minimum reservoir level and filling generally starts at around same level or range of levels. Over a period of years, large deposits of sediment may be built up in the reservoir. The depth of sediment upstream and downstream of this location is small, resulting in a sort of hump in the reservoir bed. This hump acts as a natural barrier to the flow of sediment closer to The deleterious effect of this hump formation is the the dam. early reduction of live storage capacity. g) The process of sedimentation in reservoirs may also increase the turbidity of water resulting in the environment problems like deterioration of water quality and reduction of visibility in the reservoir water for fish survival. 4. STUDY OF EFFECTS OF RESERVOIR SEDIMENTATION

4.1 The study normally a) Performance b) Likely

comprises

of the following: rate of sedimentation, and at dam face.

assessment

with varying

effects of sedimentation

In special cases where effects of sedimentation on backwater levels are likely to be significant, backwater studies would be useful. Similarly, special studies to bring out delta formation regime changes may be of interest. 4.2 Performance
Varying 4.2.1 Assessment Rate of Sedimentation ( Simulation ) Studies with

The following

steps are involved

for simulation

studies:

a) Selection of annual sediment yields into the reservoir or the average annual sediment yield, and of trap efficiency expected; b) Distribution of sediment within the reservoir to obtain a sediment elevation and capacity curve at any appropriate time; c) Simulation d) Assessment stutlies with varying rate of sedimentation; and

of effect of sec:imentation,

IS : 12182- 1987 4.2.2 Sediment Yield Assessment 4.2.2.1 Estimation of sediment yield from the catchment area above the reservoir is usually made using river sediment observation data or more commonly from the experience of sedimentation cf existing reservoirs with similar characteristics. On adopting the first procedure, it is usually necessary ( though often not complied within practice ) to evolve proper sediment water discharge rating curve and combine it with flow duration ( or stage duration curve ) based on uniformly spaced daily or shorter time units in case of smaller river basins. Where observed stage/flow data is available for only shorter periods, these have to be suitably extended w~ith the help of longer data on rainfall to eliminate, as far as possible, the sampling errors due to shortness of records. The sediment discharge rating curves may also be prepared from hydraulic considerations using sediment load formulae, that is, modified Einstein's procedure but this has not yet become popular. It is also necessary to account for the bed load which may not have been measured. While bed load measurement is preferable; when it is not possible, it is often estimated as a percentage generally ranging from 5 to 20 percent of the However, practical means of measuring bed load of suspended load. sediment needs to be undertaken particularly in cases where high bed loads are anticipated. To assess the volume of sediment that would deposit in the reservoir, it is further necessary to make estimates of average trap efficiency for the reservoir in question and the likely unit weight of sediment deposits, time averaged over the period selected. The trap efficiency would depend mainly on the capacity inflow ratio but would also vary with location of controlling outlets and reservoir operating procedures. Computation of reservoir trap efficiency may be made using the trap efficiency curves such as those developed by Rune An illustration of these computations and curves is and by Churchill. given in Appendix A.
4.2.2.2 The density of deposited sediment would vary with the composition of the deposits, the location of the deposit within the reservoir, the flocculation characteristics of clay and water, and the age of the deposit. For coarse material ( 0'062 5 mm and above ), variation of density with location and age may be unimportant. For silt and clay, this may be significant. Normally, a time and space average density of these fractions, applicable for the period under study is required for finding the overall volume of deposits. For this purpose, the trapped sediment for the period under study would have to be classified in fractions by corrections in inflow estimates of the fractions by trap efficiency. Most of the sediment removed from the reservoir should be from the silt and clay fraction. In some special cases, local estimates of densities at a point in the reservoir may be required instead of average density over the reservoir. 7

IS:12182

-1987

4.2.2.3 The reservoir surveys give valuable additional information This information may regarding the rate of sediment accumulation. be of guidance in deciding the annual sediment inflow `Bnd deposition for the problem of catchment. However, as given in 4.2.2.4, information obtained through capacity re-survey of reservoirs would have little use unless it is accurate enough. While transferring the rates observed in adjacent reservoir( s ), considerations for differences in the sediment production or trapping characteristics of the cases involved have to be kept in view. 4.2.2.4 Estimates of annual sediment yield/sedimentation rate assessed from past data are further required to be suitably interpreted and where necessary, the unit rates which would apply to the future period are computed by analysing data for trends or by making subjective adjustments for the likely future changes. Where the contributing drainage area is likely to be reduced by upstream future storages, only such of the projects as are under construction or which have the same priority of being taken up and completed as the project in question are considered for assessing the total sediment yield. Sediment observation data ( see IS : 18QO-1968* ) is necessary if the yield is being assessed from hydrometric data. If observational methods are inadequate, the possibility of large errors should be considered. For drawing conclusions from reservoir re-surveys, it is important that reduction of al least 10 percent or more has been observed in the capacities of the two successive surveys; if this is not done, inaccuracies in the successive surveys will distort the estimation of the capacity reduction between the surveys. If the loss of capacity is small, useful conclusions may not be forthcoming, and in such cases, river sediment measurements with its large observational errors may still provide a better estimate. It is essential to make a proper assessment of sediment yield for reservoir under study taking relevant factors into account. Any adhoc adoption of a sediment yield rate, from experience not fully analysed, may lead to large errors. The range recommended in 3.2.3 of IS : 6518-19727 may at best be used for rough reconnaissance level studies [ see IS : 5477 ( Part 2 )-1969t 1. 4.2.3 Distribution of Sediment Volume - Once an assessment of expected volume of total sediment deposition for the required time period has been made, the revised elevation area capacity curves of the reservoir are prepared by using empirical area reduction methods. 4.2.4 Simulation Studies with Varying Rate of Sediment - The following are the two ways in which the effect of sedimentation may be considered in the simulation: a) The first method considers every year or for blocks the progressive of a few years, reduction of capacity and as the simulation

*Methods for measurement of suspended sediment in open channels. tCode of practice for control of sediment in reservoirs. SMethods for fixing the capacities of reservoirs: Part 2 Dead storage. 8

IS: 12182 - 1987 uses the newly progresses, be more appropriate in the reservoir; however, it out for a long period up required to be monitored updated curve. This method would bringing out the progressive effects on requires that the simulation be carried to which the benefits of the project are through the simulation.

The second method lumps the progressive effect of sedimentation up to an appropriate time horizon up to which no reduction in firm target benefits is contemplated ( full service time ) and considers situation as at the end of that period throughout the simulation. Thus, though the performance as given by this method is the one that considers the effect of sedimentation up to that period ( full service time ), the progressive reduction of the dump or secondary benefits within that period should not be brought out in this method. The main advantages of this method are: 1) It is relatively simple, and 2) It does not. require that the period correspond to the full service time. of simulation should

4.2.5 Assessment of Efict of Sedimentation on Outputs - The comparison of the sedimentation studies would bring out the effect of sedimentation, as a vector of the differential performance, as time progresses if method given in 4.2.4(a) is followed. If the method given in 4.2.4(b) is followed, it would bring out the change in the range and distribution of the performances over the time period considered. If the stndies are for planning purposes, changes in the project features, and necessary progressive adjustment in targetted outputs beyond the full service time would become apparent and the studies may be repeated after modifying the planning decisions. 5, PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT FOR STORAGE RESERVOIR

5.1 General - The performance of reservoir project under varying hydrologic inputs to meet varying demands is required to be assessed. Although analytical probability based methods are available to some extent,~simulation of the reservoir system is the standard method. The method is also known as the working tables, sequential rouling, performance assessment studies, etc. In this method, the water balance of the reservoirs and of other specific locations of water use and constraints in the systems are considered. All inflows to and outflows from the reservoirs are worked out to decide the changed storage during the period. In simulation studies, the inflows to be used may be either historical inflow series, adjusted for future upstream water use changes or a synthetically generated series so adjusted. Whichever approach is 9

IS : 12182 - 1987 used, it shall be used uniformly for assessment of alternate regard to sedimentation [ see IS : 5477 ( Part 3 )-1969* 1. scenarios in

NOW - A synthetic generation of hydrologic series is a technique which involves mathematical modelling of the statistical properties of historical series and the activation of the model to generate alternate equally likely sequences. 5.1.1 h set of practicable and pre-determined operation policies is essential, to such studies; so is the idea of a firm demand which the within the policy and physical reservoir shall meet, as long as possible, For this purpose, firm irrigation and power and other limitations. demands which the reservoir should meet are to be pre-determined. Demands over and above firm demands are considered as secondary or dump demands, meeting of which, although beneficial is not obligatory. 5.1.2 The acceptability of performance as seen in the simulation is decided by checking if the firm demands have been met with the desired reliability: that is, whether these meet the acceptability criteria. In case, these are not met or the performance is better than required, it is customary to change the assumptions and conduct simulation study again in the planning phase of the project. In general for irrigation and hvdro power projects, it is customary to adopt the following acceptability criteria: are not met a) Any year or water year in which the firm demands fully in each time period separately is labelled as a failure year. is b) The ratio of f`iilure years to the total years of simulation determined. For irrigation and hydra-power, the ratio shall not exceed 0.25 and 0'1 respectively. The evaluation of performance may also be made through economic analysis considering the series of benefits from year to year during the period~of simulation. 5.2 Time Units and Period of Simulation

5.2.1 In general, for within the year projects, a monthly simulation is sufficient for assessing conservational benefits. Shorter period simulation is required for assessing benefits of flood control and secondary power. Units longer than one month may be used for carry over projects. The period of simulation has to be long enough to containdifferent hydrologic situations which are experienced ( set also 5.1 ). 5.3 Inflows and Demands - The water inflows in the desired time units may be based on the historical data as observed, historical as estimated from hydrologic observations of related phenomenon, or synthetic hydrologic data. The last method has the advantage that it does not make any assumption about the actual flows repeating -I
`Methods for fixing the capacities of reservoirs: l'art 9 Live storage.

10

IS : 12182 4987

themselves. In all cases, observed trends in hydrologic data may be projected in the future operational period. Similarly, the effect of the manmade future upstream development may be incorporated, either in the form of time dependent changes, or in the form of scenario studies, with a pseudo stationary approach with different levkls of development. Pattern of firm demand is decided on the basis of assessment of future energy requirement. Seasonal requirements may or may not be built in the demands. The growth of demands after construction may also be considered. 6. STANDARD PROCEDURES FOR PLANNING

6.1 Procedures for New Storages A rough assessment of seriousness of the problem is necessary to classify the reservoir sedimentation problem as insignificant, significant or serious. Assessment of reservoir sedimentation problem, in a particular case, may be made by comparing the expected average annual volume of sediment deposition with the gross capacity of the reservoir. If ratio is more than 0.5 percent per year, the prob!em is usually said to be serious and special care is required in estimating the sediment yields from the catchment. If it is less than 0.1 percent per year, the problem of siltation may be insignificant and changes in r-escrvoir capacity ran be neglected for studies of reservoir performance. For cases falling between these two limits, the sedimentation problem i? considered significant and requires further studies. 6.1.1 The following studies studies are required with sediment if the problem condition is insignificant:

a) No simulation

is necessary.

b) The feasible service time for the project may be decided. Sediment distribution studies to ensure that the new zero-elevation does not exceed the dead storage level may be made. 6.1.2 The following but not serious: studies are required and if the problem feasible service is significant time for the

a) Both the full service time reservoir may be decided.

b) Simulation studies for conditions expected at the end of full service time may be made by procedure explained in 4.2.4(a) to ensure that firm outputs with required dependability are obtained. The studies used also assess non-dependable secondary outputs, if relevant, available at the end of this period. Studies without sedimentation, with the same firm outputs should bring out the additional potential secondary outputs which may be available in the beginning, and this informatian may be used, if in the economic analysis, using a linear decrease of required, these additional benefits over thp fuH service time.

IS : 12W2 - 1987

cl 4
serious:

No simulation Studies

studies studies

beyond

full service for feasible

time are essential. service time are essential. problem is

as described

in 6.1.1

6.1.3 The following

are required

if sedimentation

a) / All studies as described in 6.1.2 would be required. benefits available in the initial years should be b) The secondary more in such cases. If these are being utilised, for a proper assessment of the charge of these, a simulation at half of full service time should be required. c) In these cases, the drop of benefits after the full service time may be sharper. To bring out these effects, a simulation of the project at the end of the feasible service time is required to be done. (a), (b), and (c) together, it may be worthwhile to d) Considering resort to the more realistic method, given in 4.2.4(a) in simulation for cases where the problem is serious. For this purpose, it should be sufficient to consider sediment trapped in every loyear block, and to use the expected sedimental elevation area capacity curve at the end of each IO-years block, for simulation of that block.

7. PROCEDURE

FOR EXISTING

PROJECTS

4 b) cl

Assess the present elevation area curve either by reservoir re-surveys or by projecting from the earlier survey data, using the estimates of sediment yield and its distribution. Decide the target firm level may be based on the earlier of the outputs. To start with, this planning or on existing situation.

Simulate the reservoir by the method described in 4.2.4(a). It should suffice if lo-yearly block is considered and expected sedimented elevation area capacity curve at the end of each IOyears block is considered for smlulation of that block. Screen the performance to see if the frequency of failures, after proper smoothening tends to cross from an acceptable frequency to an unacceptable frequency ( .ree 3.1 ). If this is happening, estimate the time of switchover from an acceptable frequency of failures to an unacceptable frequency. This represents the end of the full service time, thus giving an estimate of the residual full service time. If the total full service time ( lapsed period plus remaining period ) is more or less equal to the prescribed full service time in the criteria, this would show that the actual sedimentation has no effect on the project.

d)

I

12

IS : 12182- 1987 e) For period beyond the full service time, it should to determine the policy changes in operation which measures discussed in 7.1 and 7.2. be necessary may include

7.1 In hydro-electric projects, the slow reduction in the total energy generation as a result of partialloss o-f active capacity may be adjusted in the system by reducing the load factor without losing the peaking benefits. It is also important to note here that even if the reservoirs for such projects were to be silted up completely, the head available in the reservoir would give a permanent benefit. 7.2 In the case of irrigation projects, the reduction in availability of water may be adjusted to some extent by changing the crop pattern and/ or the dependability criteria. 7.3 The simulation shall have to be repeated with these changes. If it is necessary to bring out the overall effect of sedimentation, or the effect 0f sedimentation due to change in the estimate of sediment load from the,earlier planning, it should be necessary to recompute steps given in 7 (a) to (e) for either the no sedimentation case or for the earlier assumption of sediment rate. The time series of the differences in performance should bring out the differential effect. 7.4 If at any time, the new zero elevation is crossing the sill levels of an outlet of a primary purpose, this should signify the end of the feasible service period unless with new engineering measures ( see 7.2 ) or due to natural development of an approach channel this may be extended. 8. LIFE OF RESERVOIR AND DESIGN CRITERIA

8.1 General - The reservoir exists for a long time and the period of its operation should normally check large technological and socioeconomic changes. The planning assumptions about the exact socioeconomic output are, therefore, likely to be changed during operation, and similarly, the exact implication of socio-economic differences in the output due to sedimentation are difficult to assess. The ever increasing demands due to both increase of population and increases in per capita needs are of a larger magnitude than the reductions in outputs, if any, of existing reservoirs. Thus effects of sedimentation, obsolensence, structural deterioration, etc, of reservoirs may require adjustments in future developmental plans and not simply replacement projects to bring back the lost potential. On a regional or national scale, it is the sufficiency of the total economic outputs, and not outputs of a particular project which is relevant. However, from local considerations, the reduction of outputs of reservoir like irrigation and flood control may cause a much greater degree of distress to the population which has got used to better socio-economic conditions because of the reservoir. 13

IS : 12182 - 1987 8.2 Life of Reservoir - Life strictly is a term which may be used for Systems showing system having two functional states `ON' and `OFF'. gradual degradation of performance and mot showing any sudden nonReservoirs fall in the later functional stage have no specific life period. category. 8.2.1 The term `life of reservoir' as loosely used denotes the period $ri;g which who+ or a specified fraction Of its total or active capacity this life, the progressive changes in trap efficiency . In calculatmg towards the end of the period were commonly not considered. In ~some of the projects, it was assumed that all sedimentation would occur only in the dead storage pocket and the number of years in which the pocket should be filled under this assumption was also sometimes termed as the life of reservoir. This concept was in fact used to decide the minimum size of the pocket. Under this concept, no effect of sedimentation should be felt in the live storage of the reservoir. It has subsequently been established that the silt occupies the space in the live storage of reservoir as well as the dead storage. 8.2.2 It shall not be possible to express the life of the reservoir specific period. The concerned life related terms such as economic feasible service time and full service time are defined in 2.2 to 2.4. as a life,

8.2.3 If the operation of the reservoir becomes impossible due to any structural defects, foundation defects, accidental damages, etc, this situation should also signify the end of the feasible service time. Before the expiry of this feasible service time, it may be possible to make large changes in the reservoir ( for example, cew higher level outlets, structural strengthening, etc ) or other measures, if it is economically feasible to do so. If these studies are done, the feasible service time may be extended. 8.2.3.1 Economic life - By definition, the economic life cannot be more than the feasible service time. In general, for reservoir projects with gravity irrigation, operation and maintenance costs are so small compared to benefits even from much reduced capacity that economic life should be determined by the feasible sedimentation problem; no check should bc required. 9. DESIGN CRITERIA FOR NEW PROJECTS The design criteria given in 9.1.1

9.1 General Design Criteria to 9.1.3 are recommended.

9.1.1 Ir+ztion Projects - Full service time shall not bk less than 50 years after the start of operation. Feasible service time shall not be less For reservoirs with serious than 100 years after the start of operation. sedimentation problem where extension of feasible service time to overcome social distress is perhaps feasible, the period may be suitably 14

IS : 12182- 1987 reduced, provided detailed studies as detailed therein are done, and also provided that rigorous economic analysis up to the feasible service time and with changing stream of benefits is made. 9.1.2 Far hydro-power community, in isolation same as for the irrigation projects the feasible projects. expected and full to supply service time power to a shall be the

9.1.3 For hydro-power projects supplying power to a grid, full service Feasible service time shall not be time shall not be less than 25 years. less than 70 years. For reservoirs with serious sedimentation problem where extension of feasible service time to overcome social distress is perhaps feasible_, the periods may be suitably reduced, provided detailed studies as detatled therein are done, and also provided that rigorous economic analysis up to the feasible service time and with changing stream of benefits is made. f0. CONSIDERATION PROGRAMME OF EFFECTS OF SOIL CONSERVATIOlY

lead to reduction of sediment. 10.1 Soil conservation may This apart from benefiting downstream reservoir, could have programme, large beneficial effects on production of the protected area. However, because of the different areas benefitted, socio-economic implication, etc, these programmes normally are not included in the economic analysis of the reservoir project. Therefore, any change in trend of sediment yield, attributable to such programmes, may not be considered in assessment of performance of the reservoir. If economic feasibility of the soil conservation programme is to be established, any properly established reduction of yield, and its effect on the reservoir benefits may be considered in that analysis. 10.2 Normally at the project planning stage, the sediment load calculations used in the sedimentation studies are as per the land use existing then. If adverse human actions come into operation in the catchment, it may result into a higher sediment load than the one assumed in the project planning. This should be reflected in the project.

15

IS : 12182

- 1987

APPENDI-X A ( Chusc 4.2.2.1 )
TYPICAL A-l. EXAMPLE TO CALCULATE TRAP EFFICIENCY GENERAL

A-l.1 Trap efficiency of a reservoir, over a period is the ratio of the total deposited sediment to the total sediment inflow. Gunnar Brune analysed data from 44 reservoirs with catchment areas varying from small to very large and presented a median curve together with lower and upper envelope curves which is shown in Fig. 1. Using data from Tennisse Valley Authority, M.A. Churchil developed a relationship between the percentage of incoming sediment and the sedimentation index of the reservoir and presented a curve which is shown in Fig. `2. ENVELOPE PONDED CURVE FOR RESERVOIRS MEDIAN PONDED NORMAL CURVE FOR RESERVOIRS NORMAL

CAPACITY

INFLOW

RAT!0

(YEARS)

FIG. 1 BRUNE'S CURVE A-1.2 Description
a) Capacity b) Injow
-

of Terms Reservoir Average annual

in Bane's capacity inflow 16

Curve units.

at FRL in volumetric

IS:12182 A-1.3

- 1987 of Terms in Churchill's Curve

Description

a) Cajxzcity b) Znj7ow c) Period of
Retention

-

Reservoir capacity at the mean operating elevation for the period considered. Average inflow rate during the study period. Capacity Reservoir divided by inflow rate. length at mean operation pool level.

pool

d) Length e) Velocity

f) Sedimentation Index A-2. A-2.1 EXAMPLE Reservoir

-

Mean velocity obtained by dividing the-inflow by The average crossaverage cross-sectional area. sectional area is computed by dividing capacity by length. Periods of retention divided by the velocity.

Data

a) Full reservoir level = 400 m (FRL) b) Mean operating pool elevation = 399 m c) Capacity d) Capacity at FRL, Cl = 55.1 x 106 m3 at mean operating pool elevation, C, = 51.5 X 106 m3

e) Average inflow, Z, over the study period of 10 years, in volumetric Units = 1 380.06 x 106 ma/year f) Length of reservoir, L, at the mean~operating = 19 312.13 m A-2.2
Brune's Method

level

Capacity

inflow ratio

Cl/Z=

-i-~~~oG= 0'039

9 year.

Trap efficiency corresponding to above ratio C/I as read from median curve of Fig. 1 for normally ponded reservoir = 75 percent
A-2.3 Churchil's Method

Average inflow ratio = 1 380'06 ms/year 43.76 ms/sec 18

IS:12182-1987 51.5 x 106m3 43.76 m3,sec

Retention

period

F

=

= 1.176 9 x 106 set A ( Average = Velocity = cross-sectional area G ) = r

51'5 x 10Sm3 = 2 666.7 m2 1 9312.13 m-i 43'76 ma/set 2 666.7 rn2 index = == 0,016 41 m/set period of retention velocity

= Sedimentation

1.1769 x 106 set 0.016 41 m/set
x 107 secsjm

= 7.1718

Percentage of incoming sediment passing through as read Fig. 2 corresponding to above sedimentation index = 15 percent. Trap efficiency = 100 15 = 85 percent.

from

INTERNATIONAL
Bue

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

units
QUANTITY
UNIT

SYMROL m kg s

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

A K cd mol

Supplementary
QUANTITY

UNIT radian

SYMBOL rad sr

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
QUANTITY

UNIT

SYMBOL

DEFIRITION 1 N = 1 kg.m/s*

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance force Electromotive Pressure, stress

newton
joule watt

N

J
W Wb T HZ s V Pa

1

J-

lN.m 1 J/s

1 W = 1 1 1 T

weber tesla hertz siemens volt pascal

1 Wb = 1 V.s = 1 Wb/m* 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1) S = 1 A/V V = lW/A

I Pa = 1 N/m'

