IRAT HTT IS 5229 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


ated Urs & MT Add Aare 
act nAra waa — tha fga 
( {aT FART ) 


Continuous Movement Monocable 
Ropeways with Automatic Grip — 
Code of Practice 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 93.100 
© BIS 2017 
ads Aah Set 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF WH, 9 E WEL HM, ae feeet-110002 
daeadenn MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2017 Price Group 6 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment 
Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Divisional Council. 


This standard was first published in 1969 and first revision was done in 1998. This revision has been undertaken 
to incorporate modifications based on the technology being followed in the country. 


An aerial ropeway is a special form of transportation system where passengers/materials are carried on a 
tensioned wire rope supported above the ground. Aerial ropeways are particularly useful in regions where 
the facility in surmounting natural barriers gives them a great advantage over railways or roads, both of 
which may need the heavy civil engineering work to secure easy gradient. They are inexpensive to maintain; 
their power demand is modest and they are not seriously affected by adverse climatic conditions. 


Nothing in this standard is intended to contravene any provisions of the statutory regulations wherever they 
are in force. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5229 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


CONTINUOUS MOVEMENT MONOCABLE ROPEWAYS 
WITH AUTOMATIC GRIP — CODE OF PRACTICE 
( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the design and construction 
of continuous movement monocable aerial ropeways 
with automatic grip meant for the transportation of 
passengers and goodsin separate cabins. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which, through reference in the text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication,the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions in addition to those given in IS 7649 shall 


apply. 


3.1 Ropeway with Automatic Grip — Continuous 
movement monocableaerial ropeways with automatic 
grip in which the vehicles are automatically coupled 
to the rope on leaving the station and automatically 
detached on arrival at the station. 


3.2 Line — Route alignment of the ropeway between 
two terminals. 


3.3 Inspecting Authority — Competent authority 
recognized by the statutory regulations to inspect 
the aerial ropeways installation and determine its 
acceptability or otherwise, on the basis of this 
standard and compliance to prevailing statutory rules 
and regulations. 


4 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Guidelines for Design and Construction 


4.1.1 Each part of the ropeway equipment shall be 
designed and constructed in conformity with this 
standard. The quality of the materials to be used for 
its construction shall be as per the design. 


4.1.2 On the request of the supervising authorities 
or the purchaser, a certificate of a recognized (NABL/ 
Statutory accredited) testing laboratory shall be 
supplied by the constructor as regards to the 


characteristics of material used and essential to the 
safety of the installation. 


4.2 Route and Profile of the Ropeway 


4.2.1 As arule, the axis of the line in its plan position 
shall be straight. However, horizontal deflections of 
the path of the travel may be permitted as regards 
supporting trestles provided that the minimum load 
on the roller train satisfies the requirements of 4.5.1, 
but with a minimum load of 2 kN, and that the angle 
of deflection does not exceed 0.5° (0.9 percent) per 
trestle. This effect shall not be cumulative. 


4.2.2 The profile of the terrain chosen for 
constructing the installation and that of the line shall 
allow, in the event of rescue of passengers, their safe 
descent by approved rescue system to ground as 
well as easy access to the nearest station. 


4.2.3 The maximum slope of the loaded rope (that is 
the total load is uniformly distributed along the rope 
itself) shall not exceed 100 percent. 


4.2.4 The vehicles must be capable of passing over 
the trestles even in presence of inward and outward 
oscillation of 12°with minimum 0.5 m clearance 
without contact with tower structure. 


4.2.5 In order to ensure the free movement of 
passengers and personnel in the station, the side 
clearance between the space occupied by the vehicle 
and fixed obstacles belonging to the installation 
shall be not less than 0.40 m measured towards the 
interior of the line and | m measured towards the 
outside. If the vehicles are not guided, these values 
shall be maintained even when the vehicle is inclined 
transversely at 12°. 


4.2.6 Along the line, the distance between the two 
paths of travel of the carrying-hauling rope, shall be 
such as to ensure a clearance of at least 1 m between 
vehicles swung by 12° towards one another. Such 
clearance is required for spans having a length of 
not more than 200 m. As for longer spans, the 
clearance shall be increased by 0.20 m for each 
additional 100 m or fraction thereof. 


4.2.7 A minimum clearance of 30 cm between the 
space occupied by a loaded vehicle, swung 
longitudinally by 15° and obstacles lying on the 
vertical longitudinal plane, shall be ensured either 
along the line or in the stations. 


IS 5229 : 2017 


4.2.8 In closed/semi enclosed vehicle installations, 
the height above ground shall not be greater than 
25 m. However, this limit may be increased in small 
stretches not exceeding 10 percent of actual or slope 
length of the ropeway provided that the passenger 
safety is not compromised, but in no case shall the 
height above ground be greater than 40 m and in the 
case of accidental stoppage of the system, the rescue 
personnel shall be able to reach the vehicles and get 
the passengers to safety without being helped by 
the passengers (see Fig. 1). 


4.2.8.1 In open vehicle installations (chair lifts, 
cabin lifts etc), the maximum height of the lowest 
portion of the vehicle from the ground, measured in 
the most unfavourable conditions, shall not be more 
than 8 m. However, if the height above ground is 
more than 25 m and such length is less than 
20 percent of total ropeway, such installation will be 
allowed if a suitable designed and approved rescue 
cable pathway is provided below the vehicle where 
the vertical distance from cable path to underside of 
the chair is kept within 25 m. 


4.2.8.2 In a closed vehicle installation, the height 
above ground may be more than 40 m if such length 
does not exceed 20 percent of the total system length 
provided a suitably designed and aproved rescue 
cable pathway below the closed vehicle is provided. 
This 20 percent would be in addition to the relaxation 
given in 4.2.8 for height above ground being between 
25 m and 40 m in small stretches. For guidance see 
Fig. 1 and 4.6.3. 


4.2.8.3 When the vertical clearance between the 
ground and the bottom of the loaded vehicle exceeds 
40 m and a cable pathway below the vehicle is not 
provided in accordance with 4.2.8.2, a suitable 


TRESTLE 


TRESTLE 


rescue system with a rescue cabin shall be provided 
to bring the passengers to a safer place by 
transporting to a nearby trestle or station. 


4.2.9 The minimum vertical clearance between the 
space occupied by a vehicle and the terrain lying 
below with obstacles existing over it, such as trees, 
rocks, snow drifts etc., referred to the lowest outline 
of the vehicle shape and determined taking into 
account the most unfavourable conditions or 
assuming a conventional increase of 20 percent of 
the amount of static sag due to possible swing on 
account of braking and starting shall be not less than 
2.50 m. Such limit however may be reduced to 1.50 m 
in case of places inaccessible or forbidden to public. 
The minimum clearances are normally not available 
at entry and exit points of the vehicles from the 
stations. Such places shall be cordoned off by 
fencing. 


4.2.9.1 As regards crossings with other communication 
paths or with aerial conductors, a minimum clearance 
shall exist in order to take into account requirements 
of 4.7. 


4.3 Maximum Speed and Minimum Spacing Between 
Vehicles 


4.3.1 The maximum speed adopted for the system 
shall be consistent with safe working of all mechanical 
elements and shall not induce abnormal loads in the 
carrying-hauling rope or any other part of the system. 
In no case shall the maximum speed exceed the values 
given below: 


a) System with closed / semi-enclosed vehicle 
having locked doors — 6 m/s; and 
b) Chairlift with semi-enclosed vehicle having 


adequate protection — 5 m/s 


TRESTLE 


ZLS 20% OF ROPEWAY LENGTH 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF RESCUE CABLE PATHWAY 


2 


4.3.2 The nominal average accelerationshall not 
exceed 0.5 m/s’. 


4.3.3 In case the stations are not provided with 
mechanism for regulating the release of vehicles on 
the line as per designed interval, it shall be ensured 
that under no circumstances, the distance separating 
two successive vehicles shall be less than 1 m, 
considering 15° longitudinal swing of two vehicles 
towards each other under the conditions of 
emergency stopping. 


4.4 Capacity of Vehicles 


4.4.1 The calculation of the various components 
shall be done, taking into account the weight of 80 
kg per passenger. 


4.4.2 The vehicles may be of the following types: 


a) Chairs with maximum eight seats; and 


b) Closed/semi-closed cabins with maximum 
ten seats. 


4.4.2.1 The area at disposal of each standing 
passenger shall be at least 0.22 m?. For standing 
passenger, minimum height inside the cabin shall be 
2 m. Semi-enclosed cabins shall be protected upto 
1.1 m above the floor of the cabin. 


4.4.3 Vehicles with a capacity of more than two 
passengers shall be fixed to the supportinghauling 
rope by means of a double grip when the greatest 
slope of the loaded cable is greater than 40 percent 
and each of the grips shall be capable of transmitting 
100 percent of the load. 


4.5 Rope Guiding 


4.5.1 The load exerted by the carrying-hauling rope 
on each supporting roller shall be not less than 350 N. 
However, the total load on each supporting roller 
train shall not be less than the value in kgf equal to 
the length in metres of the spans adjoining the trestle 
under consideration. This minimum load shall be 
respected under even the most unfavourable load 
conditions of the line and considering also effects 
due to starting and braking. 


4.5.1.1 When a trestle of the supporting type has 
its top under the straight line which links the top of 
the adjoining trestles, the load exerted by the rope 
shall satisfy not only the minimum values for each 
roller and roller train mentioned in 4.5.1, but shall be 
of such amount to ensure that in the most 
unfavourable load conditions and considering also 
the effects due to starting and braking, the rope does 
not come off the rollers even when there is an 
increase of tension equal to 30 percent. 


4.5.2 The roller train shall be provided with rope 
catching devices which enable the operator to put 


IS 5229 : 2017 


back the rope to recover its normal position should 
it come off the rollers. 


4.5.2.1 The roller train shall also be provided with 
guiding devices which can prevent the rope from 
coming off towards the interior of the line. Such 
devices shall be preferably installed near the rollers 
at the end of the roller train. 


4.5.3The maximum load exerted by the carrying- 
hauling rope on the rollers shall not be more than 
2 KN per roller having the groove without soft material 
lining. When the groove has lining, the allowable 
load may be higher (for instance, as regards rubber 
of good quality, such load may reach the value of 
4 x d x D, expressed in N, when d is the diameter of 
the rope and D the diameter of the roller, both are 
expressed in cm). The angle of deflection of the rope 
on each roller shall be not more than 2°30' for rollers 
without lining and 4°30' for rollers having soft material 
lining such as rubber or neoprene rubber. 


4.5.3.1 All rollers shall preferably be mounted on 
rolling bearings sealed for life. Alternatively suitable 
arrangements shall be made for lubricating the 
bearings. 


4.5.4 The stability of the carrying-hauling rope on 
the roller train shall be ensured even when the 
vehicles are disconnected from the wire rope. 


4.6 Rescue of Passengers along the Line 


4.6.1 When designing an installation, suitable means 
for rescue shall be provided to facilitate the rescue 
of passengers who might remain trapped along the 
line on account of unforeseen stopping of the 
installation in a reasonably short time and in the 
easiest and safest manner. 


4.6.2 The chosen rescue equipment shall be such 
that the rescue operation can be carried out in a 
perfect manner even at the most critical points of the 
route over water spread, rugged terrain, high 
elevation above ground, etc. 


4.7 Crossings 


4.7.1 The crossing of routes, railways, waterways 
or other ropeways shall be avoided as far as possible. 
When it is not possible, the clearances shall be 
determined in such a manner that there is no danger 
for any vehicle using the various ways enumerated. 


4.7.2 The crossings and paralleling with railways, 
highways, ropeways or overhead electrical lines shall 
be so done that no mutual discomfort results either 
in course of normal operation or rescue operation or 
during installation operations. Wherever the local 
conditions are favourable and the characteristics of 
the electrical line permit it, the overhead electrical 
lines shall be replaced by underground cables in 
consistency with prevalent statutory regulations. 


IS 5229 : 2017 


4.7.3 Long paralleling with electrical overhead lines 
or contact lines shall be avoided as far as possible. 
The distance of separation shall be determined in 
such a way that the safety of both the installations 
is assured. Any phenomenon of induction shall not 
in any way affect the continuity or integrity of the 
telephonic or safety systems on either of the 
installations. 


4.8 Dangerous Areas 


4.8.1 In the proximity of airports or in areas where 
aeroplanes fly at low altitude or land frequently, the 
route of the ropeway shall be adequately marked, 
taking into account any restriction imposed by the 
authority having jurisdiction over the airports. 


4.8.2 The areas exposed to the dangers of natural 
forces (avalanches, landslides, rock falls, storms, 
earthquakes, etc) shall be avoided as far as possible. 


4.8.3 When the dangers indicated in 4.8.2 exist, 
suitable protection devices shall be provided. 


4.9 Wind Action 


4.9.1 The wind forces and their effects (static and 
dynamic) should be taken into account when 
designing ropeways. The provisions mentioned in 
IS 875 (Part 3) and in IS 802 (Part 1) shall be followed. 


4.9.2 Inthe calculation of wind action on the cables, 
the surface area to be considered shall be the 
diameteral surface of the cable multiplied by the 
factor (C: 


a) C, =1.1 for snow bound areas; and 
b) C, = 0.7 for areas not affected by snow. 


4.9.3 The uplift caused by breeze/wind on wire rope 
and carrier considered alongwith the conditions 
specified in 4.5.1 shall be fully met. 


5 WIRE ROPES 
5.1 General 


5.1.1 All wire ropes shall be in single piece and of 
non-rotating construction. Welded joints in the rope 
shall be spaced at least 6 times the pitch of the wire 
and the number of welded joints in 500 m length shall 
not exceed the number of wires in the wire rope. 


5.1.2 In order to facilitate periodic in service checks 
the carrying hauling rope should preferably be 
checked by a suitable non-destructive means, like 
magneto inductive test, to ensure that the 
requirement in 5.8 is fully met. 


5.1.3 Lubricants incorporated in the wire rope during 
manufacture or use shall not exert any corrosive 
action on material of the rope. Lubrication of the wire 
rope shall be done in conformity with a good 


established practice and according to specific 
requirements. 


5.1.4 Care shall be taken to avoid any twisting or 
kinking of the rope while unreeling the rope in service. 


5.2 Carrying-Hauling (Transport) Wire Rope 


5.2.1 The wire rope conforming to IS 10891 (Part 1) 
shall be of stranded construction with a fiber core. 
The fiber core shall conform to IS 1804. Solid plastic 
core may also be used. 


5.2.2 The minimum breaking load of the wire rope at 
the time of putting into service shall be not less than 
five times the maximum axial tension met with in 
service, calculated for the most unfavourable 
conditions which may occur by the combination of 
the following factors: 


a) Counterweight; 


b) Components of the ropeway and that of the 
loaded vehicles considered conventionally 
as uniformly distributed along the rope; 


c) The frictional resistance in the tensioning 
device; 


d) Resistance to motion exerted by the line 
rollers (in the case of rollers having their 
grooves lined with soft materialsuch as 
rubber orneoprene rubber. This value can be 
assumed to be 2.5 percent of the load on the 
rolls); and 


e) Adequate amount of tension to limit the sag 
in the wire rope caused by its self-weight 
and load supported by it. 


5.3 Tensioning or Regulating Ropes 


5.3.1 The tensioning or regulating ropes shall be of 
round strand, ordinary lay type. Ropes of the Lang’s 
lay type may be used only when the rotation of either 
the counterweights or the coupling to the carrying- 
hauling rope is prevented. 


5.3.2 The minimum breaking load of the tensioning 
or regulating ropes shall be at least 5.5 times the 
maximum axial load in the rope during operation. 


5.4 Telephonic and Signal Cables 


5.4.1 The telephonic and signal cables shall be of 
the stranded type and protected against corrosion. 


5.4.2 The minimum breaking load of the cables shall 
not be less than 3.3 times the maximum axial load met 
with in service. 


5.4.3 Care shall be taken to ensure that the 
telephonic and signal cables do not come into contact 
either with the vehicles or with the carrying-hauling 
rope even under the worst conditions of weather. 


Therefore, when these cables are connected with line 
trestles, the height of the support shall be so chosen 
as to avoid any interference between the cables and 
vehicles or carrying-hauling ropes which can affect 
the safety and regularity of operation. 


5.5 Loads and Pulley Diameter 
5.5.1 Transverse Loads 


In case of the vehicle with only one grip for attaching 
to the carrying-hauling rope, the weight supported 
by the grip shall not exceed one-twentieth of the 
minimum tension of the rope calculated for the most 
unfavourable conditions of load but with the 
installation under normal conditions of operation. 
When there are two grips for each vehicle, it shall be 
ensured that the total weight of the vehicle carrying 
its full complement of passengers shall not exceed 
one-tenth of the minimum tension of the carrying- 
hauling ropes. 


5.5.1.1 As regards transverse loads transmitted by 
the line rollers on the carrying-hauling rope, the 
requirement of 4.5.3 shall also be satisfied. 


5.5.2 Sheaves 


5.5.2.1 The diameter of the driving or return sheaves 
shall be not less than 80 times that of the wire rope 
and 800 times that of the outer wires of the wire rope. 


5.5.2.2 The deflection sheaves of the tensioning or 
regulating ropes of the stranded type shall have a 
diameter of not less than 40 times that of the 
tensioning rope and 600 times that of the diameter of 
the outer wires. Such sheaves shall be lined either 
with leather, wood or any other soft material. Such 
sheaves shall, preferably, be lined either with leather, 
wood or any other soft material such as rubber or 
neoprene rubber. 


5.5.2.3 The sheaves on which the tensioning or 
regulating ropes are normally stationary during the 
operation and the drums, on which the regulating 
ropes are wound, shall have a diameter of not less 
than 20 times that of the rope. 


5.6 Splices and Rope Termination 


5.6.1 All splices shall be made by experienced 
personnel. The length of a splice shall be not less 
than 1200 times that of the rope diameter. The 
distance between two splices shall be not less than 
3 000 times the diameter of the rope. 


5.6.1.1 Only one spliced joint along a closed loop 
formed by the carrying-hauling rope is desirable. 
However if the length of the ropeway exceeds | km, 
two splice joints may be permitted but even after 
repair of the rope after an accident, the total number 
of splice joints in the closed loop of the rope shall 
not exceed four splice joints. 


IS 5229 : 2017 


5.6.2 Rope socketing shall be done with the utmost 
care. Only organizations who have experience of 
making of rope sockets shall be entrusted with this 
operation. 


5.7 Testing and Acceptance of Ropes 


Ropes used shall conform to the relevant Indian 
Standards. 


5.8 Replacement of Ropes 


Generally a rope should be withdrawn from service 
when it is considered that: 


a) the loss of strength in the rope due to wear 
or corrosion or both is approaching one- 
sixth of the original strength. 


b) the loss of strength in the rope due to 
fatigue, surface embrittlement or cracked and 
broken wires of any kind is approaching one- 
tenth of the original strength. 


c) the outer wires have lost about one-third of 
their depth as a result of any kind of 
deterioration. 

d) the outer wires are becoming loose and 
displaced for any reason. 

e) the rope has become kinked, distorted or 
damaged and the damaged piece cannot be 
removed. 

f) examination of the rope leaves any doubt 
as to its safety for any reason what-so-ever. 

g) the number of wires rupture in the rope 
exceed the limit specified in 8.1.6 of 


IS 3973. 
6 STATIONS 
6.1 General 


6.1.1 According to the climate of the area where the 
ropeways are situated, suitable shelters for 
passengers and personnel shall be provided, as 
agreed by the buyer and the manufacturer. Such 
shelters shall conform to the local statutory 
regulations. 


6.1.2 The station machinery, such as mechanical 
parts of the driving gear, electrical equipment, ropes 
and vehicles shall not be a source of danger to the 
passengers and ropeway personnel. The passenger 
entrance shall not cross the path of the travel of the 
vehicles without ensuring proper safety to avoid any 
possible accident to the passengers. 


6.1.3 The whole of the driving gear and of the return 
or deflection devices shall be protected against bad 
weather. Moreover, care shall be taken to prevent 
the entrance to the machine room of unauthorized 
persons to avoid any possible accident to them. 


IS 5229 : 2017 


6.1.4 Ropeway operator shall be located where 
operator shall have best possible view of the route. 
Controls and communicating devices shall be within 
their reach without them having to leave their 
position. 


6.1.4.1 The control panel shall be provided with the 
following: 


a) Speed indicator; and 
b) Fault indicator. 


6.1.5 Fire hazard shall be reduced as far as possible. 
Fire extinguishers as per local area regulations 
guaranteed to function effectively shall be kept ready 
in case of need and installed in places which are 
readily accessible. 


6.2 Driving and Braking 


6.2.1 The driving gear shall be provided with an 
emergency motor fed by auxiliary power or Internal 
Combustion engine which can ensure a rescue 
operation as needed even when there is something 
wrong with the main motor or even in case of power 
failure. However, installations having length less 
than 200 m, winching device may be provided. 


6.2.2 The speed of travel shall be maintained 
constant irrespective of any load conditions. In 
practice, the variation of the speed in the most 
unfavourable conditions shall not exceed 5 percent. 


6.2.2.1 In case the main motor is of electrical type 
and the installation is self-acting, dissipating device 
shall be provided to absorb the excess energy. 


6.2.2.2 Starting under the most unfavourable 
conditions of load shall be guaranteed whatever the 
type of drive used. 


6.2.2.3 When the main prime mover is not in action, 
the normal transportation of passengers is forbidden. 


6.2.2.4 In case the installation is of the self-acting 
type, the continuous braking shall be ensured, the 
driver himself shall exert the braking action. 


6.2.2.5 For the purpose of inspection of the 
installation, a uniform inspection speed not 
exceeding | m/s shall be maintained. 


6.2.3 Working of the main motor shall be stopped 
automatically when any brake is on or when any 
safety device operates. 


6.2.4 Rope Adhesion on the Driving Sheave 


6.2.4.1 The friction coefficient between the rope and 
the surface of the groove of the driving sheave is as 
follows: 


a) Grooves with leather lining u=0.15 


b) Grooves with rubber lining or pw =0.25 
with similar material having a 
high friction coefficient 

c) Groove with aluminum lining u=0.20. 


6.2.4.2 Grooves with a special material lining of a 
higher friction coefficient may be permitted according 
to experience. 


6.2.4.3 The contact angle of the rope on the driving 
sheave shall be such as to ensure that even under 
the most unfavourable combination of 
circumstances, the required power is transmitted to 
the rope. 


6.2.5 As far as possible, belts shall not be used for 
power transmission. However, in the case of small 
powers (less than 10 HP) use of V-belts shall be 
permitted provided at least four belts are used 
simultaneously for transmitting the power. 


6.2.6 Two different friction brakes shall be used to 
cause the normal and emergency braking. One of 
these brakes is called ‘service brake’ and the other 
‘emergency brake’. Each of such brakes shall be able 
to ensure the safe stopping of the system’s motion 
under most unfavourable conditions of loading. In 
any case, the nominal average deceleration shall not 
exceed 0.5 m/s?. 


6.2.6.1 In order to avoid any sudden braking with 
consequent violent swinging of the vehicles, the 
average nominal declaration during emergency 
braking shall not exceed 0.5 m/s?. It is recommended 
that the braking effort shall be automatically 
proportional to the load conditions of the line or 
applied gradually. 


6.2.6.2 The ‘emergency brake’ shall act directly on 
the driving sheave; springs shall induce its braking 
effort and its operation shall be carried out in a manner 
that its regular working can be automatically and 
constantly checked. This brake shall act automatically 
if the speed of the carrying-hauling rope exceeds the 
permitted value by 15 percent. It shall also be capable 
of being released manually. Emergency brake for 
ropeways on plain terrain may be deleted, if, the 
ropeways stops on its own without the application 
of an external brake. 


6.2.6.3 The ‘service brake’ besides ensuring the 
holding of the driving gear when the installation is 
stopped shall work when the feeding power fails or 
when the value of the absorbed current is too high. 
Moreover, it shall also work automatically when the 
remote controls installed in the station are in action 
or when any safety device is operated (see 6.2). 


6.2.6.4 The factor of safety of all parts forming the 
brakes shall not be less than 5. 


6.2.7 A suitable automatic device which prevents 
the reverse motion of the system in normal service 
shall be installed. The reversal in, the direction of 
the movement shall not be possible except by 
intentional manipulation. This device as well as 
emergencybrake is not obligatory when the 
installation is not self-acting even in case of a 
breakage of any element of transmission as also when 
one part of the rope is completely loaded and the 
other has no vehicle attached to it. 


6.3 Rope Tensioning and Anchorage Devices 


6.3.1 The Carrying-hauling rope should be kept 
under tension at one end, as constant as possible, 
using any of the following means 


a) Hydraulic tensioning devices. 
b) Counter weight 


In the case of hydraulic device, low elongation 
carrying- hauling rope shall preferably be used. 


6.3.2 The spaces in which the counterweights travel 
(in pit or construction above the ground) shall be 
protected from water, snow, ice and from any other 
material. It shall be ensured that the above elements 
do not accumulate inside these spaces. These spaces 
shall beprovided with guardrails in order to prevent 
the entrance of unauthorized persons. 


6.3.3 The mobility of the tensioning devices shall 
be ensured at all times. 


6.3.4 The travel of the tensioning devices shall be 
determined taking into account the maximum variation 
which may be due to the sag of each span, the 
surrounding temperature of the zone where the 
installation lies (minimum variation to be considered 
is 60°) and the elastic stretch of the rope. 


6.3.5 All foundations shall be in accordance with 
IS 4091. For the structural safety against sliding, 
overturning and for the footings at different levels 
provisions laid down in IS1904 shall apply. The depth 
of footings and other provisions shall conform to 
the provisions laid down in the relevant Indian 
Standards depending on the type of foundation [see 
IS 1904, IS 1080, IS 2950, IS 11089, IS 9456, IS 2911 
(Part 1/Sec 1), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 2), IS 2911 (Part 1/ 
Sec 3), IS 2911 (Part 1/Sec 4), IS 2911 (Part 3)]. 


6.3.6 Where several tensioning ropes are laid in 
parallel, all the necessary precautions shall be carried 
out in order to ensure uniform distribution of the 
tension among such ropes. 


6.3.7 In place of tension ropes, chains can be used 
provided they are proved to be sufficiently safe. The 
safety factor shall be at least 7 in this case. Other 
systems are permissible subject to agreement 


IS 5229 : 2017 


between the ropeway promoter and the inspecting 
authority. 


6.3.8 The foundations of either tensioning devices 
in these of the anchorage shall have a factor of safety 
of 1.5 in respect of shifting and over turning. Such 
factor of safety is to be calculated on the basis of a 
conventional assumption that these foundations are 
free, that is, there is no lateral movement of the earth. 


6.4 Other Requirements 


6.4.1 As regards the free travel of the vehicles in 
stations, the provisions of 4.2.5 shall be applied. 


6.4.2 In stations, the correct coupling of each 
vehicle to the carrying-hauling rope shall be ensured 
by a device combining two distinct systems of 
control. For example, one will control geometrically 
the correct positions of the group and the other will 
check that the coupling obtained has sufficient 
resistance to sliding. When these controls ensure 
the stoppage of the system without retaining the 
vehicles, the line shall have at the exit of the station, 
a route in counter slope, or at least horizontal, and 
length greater than the distance of braking in the 
most unfavourable load conditions. The device shall 
ensure that the resistance to sliding is not less than 
1.2 times that of the component of the vehicle’s 
weight measured along the wire rope axis on the 
maximum slope. 


6.4.3 When the grip is gripped on to the carrying- 
hauling rope, the speed of the vehicle shall not differ 
by more than 20 percent that of the wire rope. 


6.4.4 A suitable device should be provided at the 
station which at the entrance of the vehicle in the 
station automatically stops the movement of the 
system if the portion of decoupling is not functioning 
properly. Care shall be taken to ensure that the wire 
rope is not subjected to dangerous loads because of 
these devices. 


6.4.5 Care shall be taken to ensure that there is no 
reversal of the vehicle after decoupling. The minimum 
required spacing between the vehicles shall always 
be ensured. Vehicles containing passengers shall not 
be allowed to pass on points whose position is not 
maintained by a mechanical block, such as a bolt. 


6.4.6 The drive and return sheaves on which the 
ropes are wound shall be either cast or fabricated 
construction. They shall be mounted on rolling 
bearings. 


6.4.7 Provision shall be incorporated in the terminal 
design to retain the terminal sheaves in their 
approximate normal operating position in the event 
of failure of the bearings, shaft, or hub. 


IS 5229 : 2017 


6.4.8 The sheave assembly shall be designed to 
retain the haul rope in the event of a de-ropement 
from the sheave. A flange extension of 1 to 1.5 times 
the rope diameter (measured radially from the bottom 
of the rope groove) shall be deemed adequate for 
retention. 


6.4.9 The stations shall be provided with a place for 
garaging the reserve vehicles ready for putting on 
line. In addition, suitable devices shall be provided 
as a part of the station structure itself for maintaining 
the tackle for easy maneuvering of wire ropes and 
other mechanical and electrical elements of the 
station. 


6.4.10 All suitable equipment for the inspection of 
the power elements shall be provided, at least in one 
of the stations. 


7 TRESTLES 
7.1 Loads 


In designing trestles, the following loads shall be 
considered: 


a) The weight of the trestle and the pressure 
exerted by the ropes; 


b) The whole of the stresses due to friction 
which occur during the motion of the 
carrying-hauling rope. These stresses can 
be determined with a sufficient margin of 
safety as 2.5 percent of the load on the 
rollers; 


c) Weight of vehicles travelling with maximum 
load (considered conventionally static); 


d) Load due to wind and load of snow or ice 
(for wind action on the ropes, see 4.9.3); 
and 


e) Load imposed by communication cable, if 
provided. 


7.1.1 The wind forces and their effects (static and 
dynamic) should be taken into account when 
designing ropeways. The provisions mentioned in 
IS 875 (Part 3) and IS 802 (Part 1) shall be followed. 
Further, loads due to snow in accordance with IS 875 
(Part 4) shall also be considered while designing 
ropeways. The ropeway design shall also consider 
seismic loads in accordance with IS 1893. In addition, 
other special loads in accordance with IS 875 (Part 5) 
shall also be considered while designing ropeway. 


7.2 Safety 


7.2.1 The metal parts of the trestle shall have a 
safety factor defined as the ratio of the ultimate 
strength of the metal to stress in the metal under the 
most unfavourable conditions of not less than 3.0 
when the installation is in service. 


7.2.2 The trestle shall be analyzed and designed for 
various load combinations as per IS 802. The trestle 
foundation shall be either a shallow foundation or 
deep foundation or founded on rock anchors. These 
foundations shall be in accordance with 6.3.5. 


7.2.3 The elastic deformation of the trestles, in 
particular those due to torsion which happens during 
normal conditions of operation, shall not be such as 
to endanger the safety of the guides and the stability 
of the ropes. The maximum angle of deformation due 
to torsion shall be limited in such a manner that the 
ends of the shoes for supporting the carrying-hauling 
rope are not displaced by more than 20 percent of 
the wire rope diameter. 


7.3 Construction 


7.3.1 The number of trestles, their position, their 
height and their construction are determined by the 
requirements of the route and the layout. Wooden 
trestles or trestles which are guyed shall not be used. 


7.3.2 In case the trestles have metallic framework, 
the thickness of the open profile shall not be less 
than 5 mm, while in the case of closed profile, it shall 
not be less than 2.5 mm. The interior of the latter 
shall be adequately protected against corrosion. 


7.3.3 The anchorage of the trestles on the concrete 
foundations or on the rock shall be carefully made. 
The anchor bolts of concrete foundations shall just 
be above the ground. 


8 VEHICLES 
8.1 Factor of Safety 


For all the components constituting the vehicle, the 
safety factor (ratio of the ultimate strength and stress 
in metal) shall be at least 5 under the static 
conditions. This factor of safety may be increased 
suitably to take into account the dynamic conditions 
to assure the desired degree of safety. 


8.2 Construction 


8.2.1 The vehicles shall be provided with devices 
which prevent the falling overboard of passengers. 
The chairs especially, shall be provided with closing 
bars and footrests. In the case of cabins provided 
with windows, they shall be suitably protected. 


8.2.2 The hangers shall be of sufficient length as to 
guarantee conformity to the requirements of 4.2.4 
to 4.2.6 and also ensure that roller guides, etc, are 
always outside the reach of the hand of the 
passengers. 


8.2.3 The tubes used in the hangers shall have no 
longitudinal welds and preferably seamless. Their 
interior shall be protected against corrosion. 


8.3 Couplings/Grips 


8.3.1 The form of the grip and the profile of the 
grooves of the roller shall be adapted to one another, 
taking into account specially the maximum lateral 
swing permitted for the vehicles. 


8.3.2 If only one grip is used for attaching the vehicle 
to the carrying-hauling rope, it shall be capable of 
offering resistance to sliding at least equal to twice 
the component of the loaded vehicle weighed along 
the axis of the wire rope and the maximum slope and 
in no case,thisresistance to sliding be less than that 
of the loaded vehicle. In case of vehicle with double 
grip, it shall be ensured that when the action of the 
one grip accidentally becomes deficient, the other 
ensures the safety factor of at least 1.5 times that of 
the slide. The required resistance to sliding shall be 
maintained even under the supposition that the 
diameter of the rope is conventionally reduced by 
one-tenth of the nominal diameter. 


8.4 Numbering 


In order to distinguish the vehicles on the line, they 
shall be successively numbered. 


8.5 Ata prominent position in the cabin, a nameplate 
indicating maximum number of passengers and load 
allowable shall be displayed. 


9 COMMUNICATIONS, SAFETY CIRCUIT AND 
EARTHING OF METALLIC PARTS 


9.1 Communications 


9.1.1 The stations shall be linked to each other by 
telephone. At least one of the stations shall be linked 
up with the public network, wherever the latter exists. 


9.2 Safety Circuit 


9.2.1 All the safety devices along the length of line 
and in the stations shall be incorporated in the 
continuous circuit energized permanently so that 
when any one device fails or the signal line fails, the 
system automatically comes to a halt. 


9.3 All the metallic portions of the installation, with 
the exception of signal cables, shall be directly 
earthed. 


IS 5229 : 2017 


9.4 All the elements of the installation shall be 
suitably protected against lightening. 


10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 


a) The cabins must be provided with door lock, 
which cannot be opened by the passengers. 


b) Two separate brakes shall be provided in 
the drive of ropeway system. One brake is 
provided on drive sheave. This will act as 
emergency brake. A second brake is 
provided on high speed shaft which will act 
as service brake. The brakes must come in 
to operation automatically when: 


1) Normal Stop/Emergency Stop push 
button is pressed; 


2) The ropeway speed exceeds by 
5 percent of the set speed; 


3) The tripping of Drive motor due to 
actuation of line and station security 
devices; and 


4) Incase of power failure. 


c) Emergency brake is not required when the 
installation is not of the self-acting type 
even in the case of a breakage of any element 
of the transmission. 


d) Arrangement should be made so that the 
brakes can be released during emergency 
running of the system. 


e) Standby prime mover is required to run 
ropeway at slow speed, to rescue 
passengers from line in case of failure of 
main motor or power failure or DG set failure. 


f) Line safety devices must be installed on each 
trestle and must immediately stop the 
ropeway in the unlikely event of rope 
derailment. 


g) Rope catcher must be provided with the fully 
articulated sheave mount beam at incoming 
and outgoing side on line trestles and 
stations to arrest/support the hauling rope 
in case of de-ropement. 


h) Emergency push buttons must be provided 
at all stations to stop the ropeway. 


IS 5229 : 2017 


IS No. 


802 (Part 1): 
2015 


(Sec 1): 1995 
(Sec 2) : 1992 
875 


(Part 3) : 1987 
(Part 4) : 1987 
(Part 5) : 1987 


1030: 1998 


1080: 1985 


1089 (Part 2) : 
1986 


1804 : 2004 
1893 : 1984 


1904 : 1986 


2062: 2011 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Code of practice for use of 
structural steel in overhead 
transmission line towers : Part 1 
Materials,loads and permissible 
stresses, 


Materials and loads 
Permissible stress 


Code of practice for design loads 
(other than earthquake) for 
buildings and structures: 


Wind loads 
Snow loads 


Special loads and load 


combinations 


Carbon steel castings for general 
engineering purposes 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of shallow 
foundations in soils (other than 
raft, ring and shell) 

Steel wire ropes for aerial ropeways 
— Specification 

Track ropes 

Steel wire ropes — Fiber main cores 
— Specification 

Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundations in soils 
—General requirements 


Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel 


IS No. 
2911 (Part 1) 


(Sec 1): 
(Sec 2): 
(Sec 3) : 1979 
(Sec 4) : 1984 


2911 (Part 3): 
1980 


1979 
1979 


2950 (Part 1): 
1981 


3973 : 1984 


4091 : 1979 


7649 : 1975 


9456 : 1980 


10891 
(Part 1): 2001 
(Part 2) : 1986 


11089 : 1984 


14329 : 1995 


Title 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 1 Concrete piles, 


Driven cast in-situ concrete piles 
Bored cast in-situ piles 

Driven precast concrete piles 
Bored precast concrete piles 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of pile foundations: 
Part 3 Under-reamed piles 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of raft foundations: 
Part 1 Design 


Code of practice for the selection, 
installation and maintenance of 
wire ropes 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of foundation for 
transmission towers and poles 


Glossary of terms used in 
connection with aerial ropeways 
and cableways 


Code of practice for design and 
construction of conical and 
hyperbolic paraboloidal types of 
shell foundations 


Steel wire ropes for aerial ropeways: 
Haulage ropes 

Track ropes 

Code of practice for design and 
construction of ring foundation 


Malleable iron castings 


IS 5229 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Forward) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment 
Sectional Committee, MED 06 


Organization 


RITES Limited, Gurgaon 
Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research (CIMFR), Dhanbad 


Conveyor Ropeway Services Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Damodar Ropeways and Infra Ltd, Kolkata 
Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour Institute, 
(DGFASLI), Mumbai 

Elecon Engineering Co Ltd.; Vallabh Vidyanagar 

Indian Association of Amusement Parks & Industry, New Delhi 

Mcna_ty Bharat Engineering Co Ltd, Kolkata 

MECON Limited, Ranchi 

Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 

National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd; Hyderabad 

National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd. New Delhi 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India (P) Ltd., New Delhi 


Polo amusement Park Ltd., Gurgaon 
Projects and Development India Ltd; Dhanbad 
Rail India Technical and Economic Services Ltd; (RITES), Gurgaon 


Ropeway and Resorts Pvt. Ltd, Kolkata 
Steel Authority of India Ltd (IPSS SECT), New Delhi 


USHA BRECO Limited, Ghaziabad 


In Personal Capacity, Kolkata 
In Personal Capacity, New Delhi 
BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
Sarı Rasiv MILIND (Chairman) 


Suri DesBasis BASAK 
Suri GIRENDRA M. Prasan (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHAKRAVARTY 
Suri KAMAL Kumar Boss (Alternate) 


Suri RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


Suri D. B. Naik 
Suri Vuay Kumar K. (Alternate) 


SHRI U. K. Das 
Suri H. Cuatrorapuyay (Alternate) 


SuriC. S. SHAH 
SHRI K.S. KODIA (Alternate) 


Suri PRADEEP SHARMA 
Sarı BALWANT CHAWLA (Alternate) 


SHRI SHYAMAL Kumar Das 
SHRI ASHOKE Kumar Boss (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. Guosu 
Suri JAIPAL SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri B. PorvAAMOZHI 
Suri D. J. Basu (Alternate) 


Suri B. CHANDRA 
Suri R. M. R. Kramnatu (Alternate) 


Suri O. P. KALIA 
SHRI B. K. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE Kumar Guosi (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH CHAWLA 
SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


Suri A. BHADRA 
Sarı N. C. Srivastava (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. Kinra 


Suri S. K. Bose 
Suri R. K. ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL 
Suri Manos Panwar (Alternate) 


SHRI C. K. KARMAKAR 
Suri S. C. GANDHI 


Suri A. RENGA Rasan, Scientist ‘E’ and Head (MED) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri A. K. MOHINDROO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Panel | on Aerial Ropeways 


RITES Limited, Gurgaon 

CIMFR, Dhanbad 

Conveyor & Ropeway Services Pvt. Ltd. Kolkata 
DGMS, Kolkata 

Damodar Ropeways and Infra Ltd., Kolkata 


11 


Suri A. BHADRA (Convener) 
Dr. D. Basak 

Suri K. K. Bose 

Suri D. B. Naik 


Suri RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (1463). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14,C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 23379120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


