( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS:9561-1985

Indian Standard,
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FELLING AND CONVERSION OF TREES INTO LOGS

( First Revision
Timber Sectional Committee,
Chairman

)

BDC 9

Representing
OB

IHSPECTOR GENERAL
Members

FORESTS Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi

ADDITIONAL CHIEFCONSERVATOR Fore;ucy;r;tment, Government of Uttar Pradesh, OF FORESTS ADDITIONAL INSPECTOR GENERAL Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi OBFORESTS Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SHRI R. C. BEDI SHRI J. P. BHARDWAJ( Alternate) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. BAN~RJEE SHRI D. K. MANUNQO( AZternatc ) CHIEF CONSERVATOR OF FORESTS Himachal Pradesh Forest Department, Simla CONSERVATOR OF FORESTS( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, SHRI V. N. DESHPANDE New Delhi SARI D. S. SAXENA ( Alternate ) Forest Department, Government of Karnataka, DIRECTOR Bangalore Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, DIRECTOR Bangalore Railways Board ( Ministry of Railways ) DIRECTOR ( TRACKS) JOINT DIRECTOR ( CE ) ( TM ) ( Alternate ) Forest Rssearch Institute & Colleges ( Wood DR RAMESIIDAYAL Anatomy Branch ), Dehra Dun National Buildings Organization. New Delhi EDITOR Directorate General of Technical Development, INDUSTRIAL ADVISER New Delhi SERI P. V. M~HTA ( Alternate ) R&DDey;ganiaation ( Ministry of Defence ), New SHRI U. B. KANCHAX
SHRI B. B. MERTA ( Alternate ) Federation of Indian Plyoood and Panel Industry, SHRI K. L. LAULY New Delhi EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR ( Alternate ) ( Conhued on page 2 )

@ Copyright 1985
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the In&n CopVrightAct ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9561 - 1985
( Confinued from page 1 ) Members DR A. N. NAYAR SHRI R. C. PRASAD In Representing ( C-59, Inderpuri, JVew personal capacity Delhi ) Bihar State Forest Development Corporation Limited, Patna

SHRI B. M. PRASAD ( Alternate ) Indian Academy of Wood Science, Dehra Dun PRESIDENT DR SATISH K~XAR ( Alternate ) Indian Plywood Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bombay DR A. PURUSHOTHAM Naval Headquarters, New Delhi CAPT MORAN RAGMAN CDR MANMOHAN Sr~arr ( Alternate ) Forest Research Institute and Colleges ( Timber SHRI S. S. RAJPUT Mechanics Branch ), Dehra Dun In personal capacity ( 28-C. Jv. Block, Malviya .Nagar DR V. RAN~ANATHAN Extension, Saket, .New Delhi ) ( 17-l-391/54, Subramanyan In personal capacity SHRI A. C. SERHAR Colony, Saidabad, Hyderabad ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi SHRI F. C. SHARMA Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SHRI SHARAN SINGH New Delhi Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Forest DR M. C. TEWARI Products Department ), Dehra Dun DR A. CHANDRA ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI G. RANAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) Secretury Assistant Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI
SHRI P. SATYANARAYANA

Timber

Conversion

and

Grading Convener

Subcommittee,

BDC

9 : 10

SHRI A. C. SEKHAR 17-I-391 /54, Subramanyan Colony, Saidabad, Hyderabad Members CONSER- Forest Department, ADDITIONAL CHIEF VATOR OF FORESTS CONSERVATOROF FORESTS ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence SHRI R. C. BEDI SHRI J. P. BHARDWA~ ( Alternate ) CHIEF CONSERVATOROF FORESTS Agriculture Forests Government of ADDITIONAL CHIEF CONSERVATOR OB FORESTS (Alternate ) Govt of Uttar Pradesh, Nainital ( DGI ) and Co-operation Gujarat, Vadodara Department,

( Continued on page 10 )

IS : 9561- 1985

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FELLING AND CONVERSION OF TREES INTO LOGS

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 February 1985, after the draft finalized by the Timber Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. There0.2 Felling and conversion of trees into logs is a specialized job. fore, with a view to get the maximum yield from a tree it is desirable to follow certain well established methods of felling and observe necessary precautions before and during the felling. 0.3 This standard was first published in 1980 to give guidance for felling With the recent and conversion of trees into logs for general purposes. developments in the field of felling trees and their conversion into logs, need was felt to revise the provisions of this standard. As such, this revision has been prepared, wherein, while reviewing the recommendations, in general, major changes have been made in the provisions relating to methods of felling and the sequence of felling procedure. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether standard is complied with, the final expressing the result of a test or analysis, The number of ance with IS : 2-1960". rounded off value should be the same as standard. a particular requirement of this value, observed or calculated, shall be rounded off in accordsignificant places retained in the that of specified value in this

1. SCOPE 1.1 This
standard gives guidance logs for general purposes. for felling and conversion of trees into

*Rules for rounding.off numerical values ( rektd). .3

IS:9561-1985 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.9 For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in IS : 707-1976* and the following shall apply. 2.1 Break-Off felling sink. 2.2 Bucking of the log. 2.3 Butt-End is given. The uncut wood fibres left between the felling cut and of the felled tree perpendicular to the axis

Cross-cutting

The bottom end of the felled tree where the felling cut

2.4 Cable Puller - Device consisting of a system of lever pulley blocks and wire ropes employed to fell a tree in a given direction. 2.5 Delimbing the stem. Cutting off the side branches of a felled tree flush to

2.6 Felling Cut - The cut given at the base of the tree for felling the tree which is on the side opposite the desired direction of fall of the tree and little above the felling sink. 2.7 Felling Sink - A notch cut at the base of the tree in the direction It governs the direction of fall and also in which the tree is to be felled. avoids splitting at butt-end ( syn. under cut ). 2.8 Kerf The gap made by cutting the wood fibres. Cutting off small branches, twigs and rarely top of a 2.9 Lopping standing tree.

- Rounding back of the whole of the front end edges of 2.10 Snouting a log to ease skidding ( syn. snipping ). - A device consisting of a wire rope and lever 2.11 Stem Tightner It is fixed just above the felling mechanism for tensioning the wire rope. cut to avoid splitting of butt-end particularly in leaning trees and coniferous woods. 3. GENERAL RULES FOR FELLING 3.1 Tree shall be felled as near the ground level as possible leaving tree number and hammer mark intact on the stump portion. 3.2 Tree shall be felled in a manner and in the direction, which will eliminate or minimize the damage to itself and the surrounding vegetation. *Glossary of terms applicable to timber technology and utilization ( second revision ). 4

IS : 95619 1985 3.3 Tree shall be felled such that it will fall in a place where operations of bucking, conversion and further movement will be convenient and efficient. 3.4 Trees shall not be felled during a strong wind. 3.5 On slopes, felling of trees shall usually be started from proceeded in the downward direction of the slope. 3.6 Trees shall slopes. 4. METHODS generally be felled on the uphill the top and on steep

direction

OF FELLING felled

4.1 Depending upon tools employed in felling, a tree is normally by any one of the following three methods: a) With the axe alone, b) With the saw and axe combined, c) With saw alone. 4.1.1 Felling with axe alone is not only wasteful and is, therefore, not recommended. but and

also dangerous lower and saw such to this saw felling cut

4.1.2 In case of felling with saw and axe combined, the horizontal cut of the felling sink shall be made first and by the that the chosen direction of fall of the tree is at right angle The cut. The upper and slanting cut may be made by axe. from the back side of the tree bole is given by saw only.

4.1.3 In case of felling with saw alone, the upper and slanting cut is also made by saw. The upper cut is made first such that the length of the saw blade is at right angle to the chosen direction of the fall of the tree. When sufficient depth of slant cut is made, the lower horizontal cut of the sink shall be made also by saw such that the two cuts meet and a notch is made by removal of a wood stub. Then the felling cut shall be given as usual by saw. 4.2 The technique such as: a) Normal, b) Leaning, c) Unbalanced crown, d) Buttressed, ' e) Rotten or hollow at the base, and f) Forked. 5 of felling shall depend upon the condition of the tree,

IS : 9561-

1985

4.2.1 The break-off, that is, a'portion of uncut wood fibres, also called the holding wood, shall be so manipulated in shape and size that the, chosen direction of fall can be maintained in trees of unbalanced crown and leaning trees. 4.2.2 Wider width of the holding wood on the side opposite to the lean of the tree or heavier crown and branch can help in maintaining the chosen direction of fall determined by the direction right angle to the line of the lower cut of the sink. 5. PREPARATION BEFORE FELLING before

5.1 The direction in which a tree is to be felled shall be decided starting the operation. 5.2 The working site shall be cleared for handling 5.3 The felling tools shall easily approachable. the tools freely.

be kept at a place where they are safe and

5.4 The workers shall decide a safe escape route to be followed when the tree is felling. 5.5 The tree shall be looped if its branches damage the surrounding crop. are likely to affect its fall or

5.6 The leaning trees and the trees on slopes shall be felled in the desired direction with the help of cable puller. 5.7 To avoid splitting of the butt-end of leaning tree, a stem tightner shall be fixed just above the felling cut line. 6. SEQUENCE OF FELLING PROCEDURE

6.1 General - After following the steps mentioned under 5, the procedure mentioned under 6.1.1 to 6.1.7 shall be followed for felling a normal tree. However, if the condition of tree is different, namely, leaning, buttressed, rotten and forked, felling techniques shall be modified as given under 6.2 to 6.5. 6.1.1 The direction in which a tree is to be felled having been decided before starting the operation, the position of lower and upper cuts of the following sink shall be marked in the decided direction, such that the cutting saw blade length is at right angle to the desired direction of fall of the tree. 6.1.2 Felling sink shall then be cut, the depth of the lower horizontal cut shall not be more than one-third of the diameter of the tree at that place. In case of tree up to 50 cm dia the depth of sink shall be one-fourth of the This depth will, however, depend on the shape of the tree diameter. trunk and its lean and crown. ,6

IS : 9561.1985 6.1.3 The horizontal cut of the sink shall be given by a saw to the decided depth. The slanting cut, above the horizontal cut, shall be given so that the two cuts meet to form a straight line. The sink cuts may be given by a saw or an axe ( see 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 ). A wedge shaped wooden piece, thus cut-off, shall be removed forming a sink at the bottom of the tree.

6.1.4 A mark for felling cut shall then be given on the other side of the sink. The felling cut shall be a little higher ( 2-3 cm ) than the horizontal plane of the felling sink, depending upon the size of the tree. 6.1.5 Felling cut shall be given by a saw which shall run parallel to the inner line of the sink, that is, at right angle to the direction of faII and on the horizontal plane. Care shall be taken to ensure that the cutting plane of the felling cut never goes below the horizontal plane of the sink on the stump. 6.1.6 Sufficient and suitable type of break-off shall be left ( see 7.3 ). of sink 6.1.7 Wedges which help in felling the tree, in the direction shall be inserted and hammered in accordance with 8.

6.2 Leaning Tree - While felling a side lean tree, the width of the break-off should be less towards the leaning side and more towards the other side. More holding wood shall be maintained on the side opposite to the lean. Trees leaning more than 5" from the vertical axis, shall not be tried to be felled on opposite direction than lean without cable puller or other tensioning device. If the tree is to be felled on the direction of lean, the felling sink shall be deeper than normal or double sink shall be made to avoid sudden fall and damage to tree. 6.3 Buttressed Tree - If the tree is buttressed, the buttress should be removed with the help of axe first and the bole should be made cylindrical then only felling sink shall be made and felling cut given. 6.4 Rotten or Hollow Tree - When a tree is rotten or hollow at the base, and the defect is known before making sink, a cable puller shall be fixed to control the direction of fall. But if, while giving felling cut, the defect comes out, then it shall be cut cautiously thinking that the breakoff is only at the sides and that there is no holding wood and fibres in the rotton portion. 6.5 Forked Tree - While felling a forked tree which forks at a height Firstly, one fork of less than 2 m, the tree shall be felled in two steps. shall be felled as a tree by giving felling sink and felling cut little above the fork. Then, the remaining part shal1 be taken from the bottom. For trees which fork at a height of more than 2 m from the ground, separate suitable provision shall be made to fell one fork first depending upon the height and orientation. 7

IS : 9561-

1985 DURING FELLING

7. PRECAUTIONS

7.1 Two wood cutters may be allowed to work at the same time on one tree with separate axes provided they are well separated and work with good understanding. 7.2 There shall always be sufficient `break-off' or uncut fibres left between the felling sink and felling cut so that the tree may not come down suddenly but slowly in chosen direction. These uncut fibres act as hinges. 7.3 The width of the `break-off' or uncut fibres shall depend also upon the species. The stronger the species the lesser would be the break-off. Width of the break-off also depend on lean, crown and forked situation of the tree. 7.4 Where two or more trees are cut at a time, the distance between crews shall be more than double the height of trees in question. the

7.5 When the tree starts falling crew should take the escape route and a signal shall be given to other wood cutters working nearby. 8. WEDGING 8.1 Wedges help to increase the tendency of the tree to fall towards the direction of the sink and help remove saw jamming on the felling cut. These shall, therefore, be inserted in the kerf of felling cut for smooth running of the saw. Wedges should be put as soon as felling cut is deep enough to allow putting the wedge. 8.2 The number of wedges inserted in the kerf of felling cut should normally be odd in number, that is, 1, 3 and 5, so that one wedge will thrust on opposite sides. 8.3 Wedges shall be of iron preferably 9. CONVERSION OF THE FELLED with wooden head. TREE INTO LOGS

9.1 After felling, the butt-end of the hole shall be dressed properly. 9.2 The branches shall be delimbed or removed flush to the stem of the Small branches may be removed by axe or bow-saw, large felled trees. branches shall be cut by cross-cut saw. 9.3 The stem shall be marked for log lengths in best assortments as per requirements. While marking the lengths, defects like knots, bends, etc, shall be considered along with the transport facilities. 9.4 The stem shall be cut or bucked at the given marks by saw. 9.5 The saw cut shall be perpendicular to the axis of the log to avoid any oblique cut and end wastage of wood. 8

IS :9561- 1985

9.6 Cross-cutting ( bucking ) on undulating ground may cause damage Cutting to saw or splitting in the log end, which should be avoided. from above and cutting from below shall be adopted when tree trunk may be under'tension or compression at the place of cutting.
9.7 Wedges are inserted for cross-cutting of the saw in the kerf. to facilitate smooth movement

9.8 The debarking or removal of the bark, if required, shall be done by scraping the bark with debarking spade or the bark may be removed by hand after beating it with axe head if it is thick such as in sal.

10.SNOUTING

OR SNIPPING

10.1Snouting or rounding off the ends of the logs shall be done by axe to prevent the front end of the log, stubbing into the ground, during its `movements on ground.

IS : 9561 - 1985
( Cwhwed from page 2 ) Mcm6ClS Repwlting
CHIEF CONSERVATOR OB FORESTS Forest Department, Government of Himachal Pradesh, Simla CONSEBVATOBOF FORESTS ( Aknatc ) CHIEF CO~+~SERVATOR OF FORESTS Forest Department, Government of West Bengal, Calcutta CON~~YATOR OF FOBESTS( AIterrratc) DIRECTOR ( TR ACXS ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) JOII~T DII~ECTOR( Alternate ) DB R. GIIANAII~IIAN Rsrala Forest Research Institute,_Peechi A D v I 8 E R Direc;e~t&lheneral of Techmcal Development, 1rpDUSTItIAL ( CbIEMICALS ) SHRI P. V. MEHTA ( Alternate ) MAN~QING DIBECTOB U.P. Forest Corporation, Lucknow REQIONAL MANAQIFR ( Alternate ) Hirn;c2: Pradesh State Forest Corporation Ltd, MAI~A~INQ DIBECTOB OvvIOIsn-IN-CHAIK3E SIIIII P. C. SHARMA SWI R. T. SOMAIYA SHRI Jrawrn WADIA ( Alternate) Forest Research Institute & Colleges ( Logging Branch), Dehra Dun Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Bombay Timber Merchants Association Limited, Bombay

1

10

