**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 5901 (1970): Thermograph, Bimetallic [PGD 21: 
Meteorological Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 5901- 1970 

Indian Standard Reaffirmed 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
THERMOGRAPH, BIMETALLIC 

( First Reprint MAY 1979 ) 



UDC 551.508.26 




© Copyright 1971 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHAOUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW MlMI U0002 

tpnl 1971 



IS. 5901 -1970 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
THERMOGRAPH, BIMETALLIC 

Meteorological Instruments Sectional Committee, EDG 69 

Chairman Representing 

Miss A. Mani India Meteorological Department, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri N. R. Chakraborty The National Instruments Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri N. R. Das Gupta ( Alternate ) 

Deputy Director ( Meteoro- Indian Navy 
looy) 
Stapp Officer ( Meteoro- 
logy ) ( Alternate ) 

Joint Director, Research (B&F) Research, Designs & Standards Organization 

(Ministry of Railways), Lucknow 
Deputy Director, Research 

(B&F) (Alternate) 

Dr R. N. Mathur Central Scientific Instruments Organization ( CSIR ), 

Chandigarh 
Shri D. D. Puri ( Alternate ) 

Shri R. H. Mbndonsa Lawrence & Mayo ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutta 

Shri S. Varadarajan ( Alternate ) 

Shri Prem Praxash National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi 

Shri Om Praeash ( Alternate ) 

Shri K. K, Rohatoi Government Precision Instruments Factory, Calcutta 

Gp Gapt S. Das Sarma Indian Air Force 

Wo Cdr P. 4*tNi vasan ( Alternate ) 

Shri M. V. Patanear, Director General, ISI ( E#+fficio Member ) 

Director (Mech Engg ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. M. Razvi 
Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS 1 5901 -1970 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
THERMOGRAPH, BIMETALLIC 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Insti- 
tution on 4 September 1970, after the draft finalized by the Meteorological 
Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 Liquid-in-glass thermometers exposed in louvred screens are generally 
used for the measurement of air temperature but permanent records of air 
temperature at meteorological and other observing stations arc made with 
thermographs. The instrument is exposed at meteorological stations in 
special louvred screens to obtain temperature data representative of the 
area. 

0.3 Specifications for thermographs in use at meteorological stations in 
the country have been prepared by the India Meteorological Department, 
but no Indian Standard specifications for these exist. With the increasing 
manufacture of these instruments in the country, the formulation of an 
Indian Standard for thermographs and their certification by ISI has 
become necessary. 

0.4 This standard has been prepared in the interest of standardization 
of thermographs in use in the country and of accuracy in the measure- 
ment of temperature.^ The testing of all thermographs made in the 
country and their initial certification after manufacture will in future be 
the sole responsibility of ISI. 

0*5 In the formulation of this standard, due consideration has been given 
to the requirements laid down by the World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, in addition to the special circumstances obtaining in this 
country. 

0.6 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS : 2-1360* . The number of significant places. retained in Ac roun ded qff 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rmstd ). 



IS: 5901- 1970 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for bimetallic thermograph. 
The scale value of the instrument is such that temperatures to an accuracy 
of 0*2°C may be read on a suitable chart. 

2. DESCRIPTION 

2*1 The instrument consists of a temperature sensitive bimetallic element, 
in the form of a flat strip or helix, connected by a system of magnifying 
linkage to a recording pen moving on a chart which is fixed on a drum 
driven by clockwork. The movement of the recording pen is controlled 
by changes in the bimetallic element, one end of which is rigidly fixed 
to the "frame of the instrument. Provision is there for setting the zero of 
the instrument and for changing the scale value of the instrument by 
adjusting either the length of the bimetallic element which is used 'to 
operate the pen or the relative lengths of the levers of the linkage system. 
The complete recording mechanism is mounted on a base and has a 
hinged cover provided with a viewing window. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The material used for the fabrication of the base and cover shall be 
either a light and durable metal or any other material having the follow- 
ing properties: 

a) Rigidity and strength with no distortion or other deterioration 
when exposed to widely varying climatic conditions, while at the 
same time being light in weight; 

b) Freedom from attack by animal, insect or fungoid life; 

c) Smooth and permanent surface finish; and 

d) Low coefficient of thermal expansion so as to minimize alterations 
of the frame due to temperature changes. 

3.1.1 White any material . satisfying the above requirements may be 
used, aluminium or glass reinforced polyester is considered as a suitable 
material for moulding the base and cover. 

3.2 The material used for the remaining components of the instrument shall 
be brass, aluminium or similar material. The material used shall be such 
that it is capable of being finished to the specified dimensions and is not 
affected by exposure to widely varying climatic conditions especially at 
coastal stations. 

4. DIMENSIONS 

4.1 The general arrangement and main dimensions of the thermograph 
shall be as indicated in Fig. 1, 



IS 1 5901 -1970 



4.1.1 Though a bimetallic helix is indicated in Fig. 1, it is not obligatory 
to have the sensor in this form. Any shape or form is acceptable 
provided the performance of the instrument conforms to all the require- 
ments of this specification. 



ZERO SETTING SCREW 




SPMCXE 



^NAME PLATE ^-PEN LIFTER 

TOP VIEW (COVER REMOVED) 



GATE SUSPENSION 



COVER 




-— 3W 



All dimens font in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 General Arrangement and Dimensions of Bimetallic 

Thermograph 



IS 1 5901 -1970 

4.1*2 The design of the arrangement for zero adjustment and scale 
value alteration is left to the manufacturer who may also suitably alter the 
system of linkages to suit his design. 

5. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

5.1 Bimetallic Element Assembly 

5.1.1 The bimetallic element shall be in the form of a strip or helix of 
suitable length and thickness so that the full range on the chart is covered. 
The bimetallic strips used shall be well aged ( repeated heating and 
cooling of the strips over the entire measuring ranflfe is recommended ) 
to counteract any tendency for a decrease in its sensitivity with time. 

5.1.2 The spindles shall be made of stainless steel or similar non-rusting 
material and shall be perfectly straight and well polished. They shall be 
held in suitable bearings so that they rotate smoothly and freely with 
minimum friction. 

5.1.3 The sensing element shall either be mounted within the instru- 
ment or be outside it; in the latter case, it shall be suitably protected by 
a guard or other similar device. 

5.1.4 A fine adjustment screw shall be incorporated in the instrument 
to enable the zero position of the pen to be adjusted with a precision of 
(H°C on the chart. 

5.2 Pen Arm Assembly 

5.2*1 The pen arm shall be made of hard-drawn German silver sheet 
or similar material. If necessary, it may be ribbed in the centre for 
rigidity and strength. 

5.2.2 The length of the pen arm with the pen shall be exactly 185 mm 
so that the pen follows the time grid arcs on the chart. 

5.2.3 The pen arm shall be mounted in such a way that there is no 
play of the arm in the suspension. Provision shall be made for adjusting 
the angle of contact as well as the pressure of the pen on the chart. 

5.2.4 The movement of the pen up and down the chart shall be parallel 
to the time grid marked on the chart. 

5.2.5 When finally assembled the movement of the pen on the chart 
shall have minimum friction so that the pen returns to its original position 
when disturbed manually up or down through a distance equal to one 
small division on the chart. The instrument shall pass this test at all 
positions of the pen on the chart. 



IS: 5901 -1970 

5.3 Cover and Base 

5.3.1 The cover shall be provided with a cut-away window to enable 
the record on the chart to be seen without opening the cover. The win- 
dow shall be covered with a transparent sheet of glass or acrylic plastic 
which may be slid in grooves framing the window and fixed in position. 
Alternatively, the cover shall be such as to provide a panoramic view of 
the inside. In either case the cover shall be attached to the base with a 
strong rustproof hinge. 

5.3.2 A suitable rustproof locking device shall be provided to enable 
the cover to be locked to the base. 

5*3.3 A suitable handle shall be fixed securely on the top of the cover. 

5.4 Recording Mechanism 

5.4.1 The recording mechanism shall be such that the movement of the 
pen on the chart is linear in the temperature range of—- 20°C to + 60°C. 
The pen shall travel a vertical distance of 110 mm for a difference of 
temperature of 40° C in the temperature range of— 20°G to + 60°C. 

5.4.2 The recording mechanism shall be free enough to denote clearly 
on the chart a change in temperature of the order of , 2°C. 

5.4.3 The friction in the instrument shall be kept to the minimum so 
that the record obtained on the chart is continuous without steps, that is, 
when there is a gradual change in temperature, the record docs not show 
abrupt changes of temperature with traces showing periods of constant 
temperature interposed in between. 

5.4.4 The recording pen shall have the dimensions as given in Fig. 2 and 
shall yield a clear trace on the chart at all times. 

5.4.5 The instrument shall be provided with a clock mechanism and 
drum conforming to IS: 5924-1970*. 

5.4.6 The chart ( see IS : 5947-19701 ) shall be « daily ' or < weekly » for 
use with either daily or weekly clock mechanism and drum. 

6. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

6*1 The external surfaces of the thermograph shall have a smooth and 
permanent finish. 

6.2 The instrument shall be painted in any light colour, but light blue is 
preferred. 



•Specification for clock mechanisms and drums for meteorological instruments. 
fSpecification for charts for recording meteorological instruments. 



IS .5901- 1970 



2-5- 



Hi 



r-2* 



1 



H-2'S 



T& 



— j|— o*: 



319 



J. 



-as 



IT 



u 



All dimension* in millimetre!. 
Fio. 2 Dimensions for Recording Pen 

6.3 The bimetallic element shall be suitably protected from rusting and 
other deterioration in all types of climate, particularly at coastal stations. 
It shall not be painted. 

6.4 All metal parts shall be suitably treated so as to protect them from 
rusting and other deterioration, particularly at coastal stations. 

7. TEST AND CALIBRATION 

7.1 The thermograph, when tested in a properly designed and operated 
thermostatic chamber, shall indicate the change in temperature^ correct to 
within ±1°C throughout its working temperature range of^-20°C to 
+ 60°C. This test shall be carried out with the aid of a suitable labora- 
tory reference thermometer. 

7*2 The stale error of the instrument is generally determined by immersing 
the sensing element successively in comparison baths kept well stirred and 
maintained at three or more different temperatures, the difference between 
lowest and highest temperature being about 40°C. The true temperatures 
of the water hplhs are obtained from a laboratory reference thermometer 
kept close to the bimetallic senser. The range of temperature shown by the 
thermometer and the instrument shall agree within the limits stipulated 
in 7.1. 

8. MARKING 

8.1 Each thermograph shall have the following information engraved 
legibly And neatly on a name plate which shall be cemented firmly on the 



IS j 5901- 1970 

base of the instrument: 

a) Name of the instrument — « Bimetallic thermograph '; 

b) Word c Daily* or 'Weekly* corresponding to the clock 
mechanism; 

c) Designation of the chart to be used with the instrument; 

d) Manufacturer's name or recognized trade-mark; and 

e) Serial number and year of manufacture, for example. 
No. 123/1970. 

8.1.1 The thermograph may also be marked with the ISI Certification 
Mark. 

None — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of 
the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the 
producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

9. PACKING 

9*1 Each thermograph, without the clock mechanism and drum, shall be 
wrapped in dust-proof paper and placed in a corrugated cardboard 
carton with suitable cushioning, after lightly tying the pen arm to the pen 
lifter to prevent movement of the pen arm during transit. The clock 
mechanism and drum shall be carefully packed separately in another card- 
board carton to avoid any risk of damage or deformation during transit. * 
Both the cartons shall then be packed in a strong wooden box using 
suitable packing, material. Alternatively, the instrument shall be packed 
as agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. 

10. TESTING AND INSPECTION 

10*1 Each thermograph shall be tested individually for conformity to all 
the requirements of this specification. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OP UNITS (SI UNITS) 



Bm Units 










QmniHr 


CMI 


tm*ot 






length 


metre 


m 






hbqbbw 


kilogram 


kfl 






Tim* 


eecond 


• 






Electric current 


ampere 


A 






Thermodynamic 


fcefvln 


K 






temperate!* 










Urrfnotie Intensity 


eaadele 


cd 






Amount of eubetance 


mole 


mol 






Supplementary Unite 










Quantity 


UnH 


Symbol 






Plant angle 


radian 


rad 






Solid angle 


eteradfen 


or 






Derived Unite 










QtfsnlrtT 


(faff 


4>meof 




Conrcrcfon 


Force 


nawton 


N 


% 


N- 0-101 972KQ* 


Energy 


louto 


d 


1 


J~1N.m 


Power 


...ail 

wan 


W 


t 


W - 1 J/a 


Flux 


weber 


Wb 


1 


Wb-lV3 


Flux density 


leala 


T 


t 


T~1Wb/m« 


Frequency 


Haiti 


Hi 


f 


Ht~le/e(a-») 


Electric conductance 


etemeoe 


S 


1 


S-1A/V 


Preeeure, etreee 


peace! 


9* 


1 


Ps-IN/m* 



Telegri 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Mane* Shaven, f Bahadur Shall Zafar Merg, NEW DELHI 110001 

Telephone 1 27 ti 31 ( K lloce) 

ftegfttiaf Oghut 

Wettem i Novelty Chambers, Grant Road 

Eastern : 8 Chowrtnghee Approach 

Soiitham t CXT. Campue, Adyar 

eVancft Often t 

•ftiebpa**, Nurmohamed Shaft* Marg, Khenpw AHMADASAO WQ01 t 0891 



BOMBAY 4NWI 


»W» 


CALCUTTA »0W1 


M4t0t 


MAORASMMtO 


4t*«t 



•P Block. Unity BMo, N«wlmh«r»}« Squart 

R-*fc Sure T«a Bahadur ComplM 

ttIKtl|um«Ar«« 

AMmMBI^o, BC08MS, SMtar 1TC 

«-8-M/97C,N.«upt«M»rfl 

0417 Totf*rm«l Mai* Banlpat* 

11*011 8 SaraocsyaHaaar v 

B.CL Bld 8 (Srtf Roat), GtmJht M*i<J« la* 

HMt^BUtg (*n*«w»r), MySlaMQfftftoatf 



BANOALOftC MOOM t»4» 

BMOPAl 4«0St • «?» 
BHU8ANESHWARWW14 • **» 

CHAMOIBARH 1W017 . t«*N 

HYDERABAD 800001 »*«* 

JAIPUR *«$*' •«» 

KANPUJttttt* IttW 

PATMAWOOW »M8S 

TRftAJtBftUM IMMt If » 



tt»W<»«a fe/fcwoykW U B ri f if); k:» 6>ft, t 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 1994 
TO 
IS 5901:1970 SPECIFICATION FOR 
THERMOGRAPH BIMETALLIC 

( Page 3, clause 3.1, line 2 ) — Add 'aluminium alloy* between the words 
'metal' and 'or'. 

( Page 3, clause 3.1.1, line 2 ) — Substitute 'aluminium alloy' for 
'aluminium*. 

( Page 3, clause 32) — Substitute the following for the existing : 

'The material used for the remaining components of the instrument shall be 
non-magnetic, non-corrosive and non-rusting material like stainless steel, brass 
or similar material with suitable anticorrosive paint. The material used shall be 
such that it is capable of being finished to the specified dimensions and is not 
affected by exposure to widely varying climatic conditions both at inland and 
coastal stations.' 

( Page 6, clause SAA ) — Add the following at the end of the clause: 

'Suitable fibre tipped disposable pen can also be used.' 

(Page 6, clause 5 A.S) — Substitute 'IS 5924:1988 (first revision)' /or 
'15 5924:1970'. 



(LM21) 



Reprography Unit, BIS. New Delhi, India 



