IS 14516:1996

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

CUREDFISHANDFISHERYPRODUCTSPROCESSINGANDSTORAGECODEOFPRACTICE

ICS

67.120.30

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI I10002

February

1998

Price Group

5

Fish and Fisheries Products Sectional Committee,

FAD 12

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Fish and Fisheries Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. Salting fish and drying in the sun is one of the oldest, easiest and cheapest methods of preservation techniques developed by human being. For several years, salting fish remained unchanged as the major preservation method. With the development of modern methods of food preservation, such as freezing and canning, and with the greater facilities for transportation of fresh fish in refrigerated vehicles, the salting and drying processes have lost their previous importance. Still these traditional techniques continue to enjoy popular appeal since they are low cost technologies easily adoptable in rural conditions. However, thousands of tons of salted fish are lost every year all around the world, and the major portion of these products are poor both in quality and nutritive value. This Code is intended for those engaged in the fish curing industry. It contains technological and essential hygiene requirements for the preparation and storage of sun-dried, salted-and-dried fish and fishery products and is based on long established traditional commercial practices duly revised in the light of scientific research. In the preparation of this standard, due consideration has been given to the provision of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, and the Rules framed thereunder. However, this standard is subject to the restrictions imposed under these, wherever applicable. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14516:

1998

Indian Standard

CUREDFISHANDFISHERYPRODUCTSPROCESSINGANDSTORAGECODEOFPRACTICE
1 SCOPE This code provides the technological guidelines and essential requirements of hygiene for processing, handling and storage of cured fish and fishery products.
NOTE - This code applies to sun-dried, salted and dried fish and fishery products.

3.6 Contamination Direct or indirect transmission of objectionable or microorganisms to the fish or salt. 3.7 Disinfection Reduction, without adversely affecting the fish, by means of hygienically satisfactory chemical agents and/or physical methods, of the number of microorganisms, to a level that will not lead to harmful contamination of fish. 3.8 Dry-Salting or Kench Curing matter

2 REFERENCE The following standard contains provision which through reference in this text, constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: IS No.
594 : 1981 Title

Process of mixing fish with dry food grade common salt (sodium chloride) in such a manner that the resulting brine drains away. 3.9 Equipment All processing machines, tables, sinks, utensils, tanks, racks, etc, used in a fishery products plant. 3.10 Fatty Fish Fish that when alive contains more than 2 percent fat or oil in the flesh. 3.11 Fillet A slice of fish of irregular size and shape removed from the carcass by cuts made parallel to the back bone. 3.12 Fiih Any of the cold-blooded aquatic vertebrate animals such as Pisces, Elasmobranchs and Cyclostomes. The term also includes, unless specifically excluded, molluscs and crustaceans. Aquatic mammals, amphibians and reptiles are not included. 3.13 Fbh Handling Any operation in the preparation, packaging and other related work. processing,

Common

salt for (second revision)

fish

curing

3 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this standard following definitions shall apply. 3.1 Brine A solution of edible common salt (Sodium chloride) in potable water. 3.2 Clean Water Water which meets the same microbiological standards as potable water and is free from objectionable substances. 3.3 Cleaning The process of removai of objectionable fish surface. 3.4 Chilling Process of cooling fish to a temperature that of melting ice. 3.5 Chlorinated Water appropriate amounts of approaching matter from

3.14 Food Additive/Preservative Any substances not normally used as a typical ingredient of the food, the intentional addition of which alters advantageously the characteristics of the food.

Potable water containing available chlorine.

IS 14516 : 1998 3.15 Fresh Fiih Freshly caught fish which has received no preservative treatment or which has been preserved only by chilling. 3.16 Lean Fish Fish that when alive contains 2 percent or less of fat or oil in the flesh. 3.17 Pickling or Pickle Curing Process whereby fish is mixed with food grade common salt (sodium chloride) and is stored in the resultant brine which is formed by dissolution of salt in the fish tissue water. 3.18 Plant Building(s) processed. or area(s) in which fish is handled and 4 RAW MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS

4.1 No fish or ingredients which have deteriorated or decomposed, or are contaminated to an extent which renders them unfit for human consumption, shall be used for the processing of fish by drying or salting. Fish in a diseased or damaged condition shall be discarded. 4.2 Raw material shall be rejected if it contains harmful, decomposed or extraneous substances which will not be removed to acceptable levels by the normal procedures of sorting or preparation. 5 CURING YARD FACILITIES ING REQUIREMENTS 5.1 Plant Construction AND OPERAT-

and Layout

5.1.1 General Considerations 5.1.1.1 Fish curing yards should be so designed that all handling and processing operations can be carried out efficiently, and all materials and products can pass from one stage of processing to the next in an orderly manner with minimum delay (see Fig. 1). 5.1.1.2 In order to prevent cross-contamination between different processing activities and to safeguard the wholesomeness and quality of cured fish, the following operation shall be conducted in well defined areas of adequate size: a) Receiving and storage of raw materials; salting, cleaning, b) Processing (dressing, drying); c) Treating with preservatives; d) Sorting and packaging; e) Storage of final product; and f) Disposal of processing wastes. 5.1.1.3 strictly a) b) c) d) e) The fish handling and storage areas shall be kept separate and away from the following: Dumping of waste materials; Storage of packaging materials; Storage of cleaning and disinfecting compounds; Living quarters of personnel; and Toilets.

3.19 Potable Water Fresh water fit for human consumption. 3.20 Salt Sodium chloride of an appropriate quality suitable for the purpose. 3.21 Salted Fish Fish which have been salted by brining, dry-salting, pickle curing or a combination of these treatments. 3.22 Scaling Process of removing scales from the fish body using suitable instruments without cutting the flesh or disfiguring the body. 3.23 Scoring Opening the thick parts of muscle by cuts to allow better salt penetration. 3.24 Splitting Process of cutting open the belly all the way along the back bone to the tail. 3.25 Suitable Corrosion Resistant Material Impervious material free from pits, crevices and scales, is non-toxic and unaffected by sea-water, ice, fish slime or any other corrosive substances with which it is likely to come in contact. Its surface must be smooth and it must be capable of withstanding exposure to repeated cleaning, including the use of detergents and disinfectants. 3.26 Thawing Process by which heat is introduced into the frozen product to raise its temperature above freezing point.

5.1.2 Construction 5.1.2.1 The plant maintained in such from objectionable contaminants. The size with adequate and built to protect of insects, birds adequate cleaning. and surrounding area shall be a way that they are reasonably free odours, flies, dust or other processing hall shall be of sufficient moving space. It shall be designed against the entrance and harbouring or rodents and permit easy and

The location of the curing yard, its design, layout and construction should he planned with proper emphasis on the hygiene aspects.

IS 14516: 1998
RAW MATERIAL I STORAGE

1 DRYING ] I DRIED PRODUCTS ( PRESERVATlVE TREATMENT) 1 FINAL

1

------[WAS
DRESSING (SCALING SPLITTING SCORING 1

PACKAGING

PRODUCT

1 STORAGE

ROOM TEMPERATURE 1 PACKAGING 1

1FINAL PRODUCT

STORAGE

1

FIG. 1 FLOW DIAGRAM FORFISH CURING OPERATION 5.1.2.2 Floors shall be hard surfaced, non-absorbent and adequately drained. Floors shall be constructed of durable, water-proof, non-toxic, non-absorbent material and shall be easy to clean and disinfect. They shall be non-slippery, without crevices and shall slope evenly and sufficiently for liquids to drain off to trapped outlets fitted with removable grills of suitable mesh size. 5.1.2.3 Drains shall be adequate, fitted with traps and with removable gratings to facilitate maximum flow of effluents without any overflowing. Drainage lines should have a minimum internal diameter of 10 cm. 5.1.2.4 Internal walls shall be smooth, waterproof, readily cleanable and without any crevices or projections. Pipes or cables shall be concealed within the wall surface or neatly boxed without giving chances for insect harbourage. 5.1.2.5 Windows shall be of adequate site, fitted with removable fly-proof nets made of corrosion-free material. Window sills shall be at least 1 m above the floor. 3 5.1.2.6 Separate doors, fitted with door closers. shall be provided for movement of fish or products and for staff access. 5.1.2.7 Ceilings should be so designed and constructed as to prevent accumulation of dirt, dust and mould, and flaking. The roof-wall joint shall be tight to avoid entry of rodents, etc. Ceilings shall be minimum 3 m in height. In buildings with thatched roof, a false ceiling without crevices or joints, and which can be easily cleaned, shall be provided. 5.1.2.8 Since good ventilation is important to prevent condensation and growth of moulds in overhead structures, the processing hall shall be well ventilated to prevent heat, dust, vapour, etc. The air tlow shall be from the more hygienic areas to the less hygienic areas. 5.1.2.9 The working areas shall be sufficiently illuminated. Light bulbs shall not he fitted ahovc work tables so as to avoid contamination with glass pieces in case of accidental breakage. It is desirable to have

IS 14516 : 1998 the light fixtures fitted close to the ceilings to prevent accumulation of dust on them. 5.1.2.10 Separate and adequate storage shall be provided for utensils, cutting knives, drying racks, etc. used for processing work. 5.1.3 Hygiene 5.1.3.1 Areas where raw materials are received, stored or handled shall be separated from the areas in which product preparation, processing and packaging are conducted. Receiving and storage areas shall be well ventilated, clean and shall provide protection to the fish from deterioration and contamination. 5.1.3.2 A separate refuse area or suitable facilities shall be provided outside the premises with easy access for vehicles loading and unloading. Jf processing waste, brine, etc, are to be collected and stored before disposal, adequate precautions shall be taken to keep it out of reach of rodents, flies, insects, etc. These areas shall be cleaned and disinfected regularly. 5.1.3.3 The processing of by-products shall be done in separate enclosed premises so that there is no possibility for contamination with the cured products. 5.1.3.4 Supply of potable running. water under adequate pressure shall be available at various points during working hours. The water supply used for cleaning purposes shall be fitted with an in-line chlorination system. 5.1.3.5 Ice shall be made from potable water and shall be manufactured, handled and stored free of contamination. Suitable storage facilities shall be provided to protect the ice from excessive melting and to prevent contamination from dust, bits of wood or saw dust, straw, rust, microorganisms and other contaminants. 5.1.3.6 Salt and other ingredients used shall be of food grade and stored dry. 5.1.3.7 Storage facilities shall be available for the proper dry storage of packaging materials free from contamination. compounds, disinfectants, 5.1.3.8 Cleaning detergents, etc, shall be kept in separate rooms designed and marked specifically for the purpose. All such materials shall be prominently labelled. 5.2 Equipments, Utensils and Working Surfaces withstanding repeated cleaning and disinfection. They shall be smooth and free from pits and crevices. 5.21.2 Boards and other surfaces on which fish are cut should be made of impervious materials which meet the physical requirements for cutting surfaces. Wooden surfaces soon become water logged and hard to clean and hence shall not be used. 5.21.3 Brining/salting vats shall be made of suitable corrosion-resistant material and so constructed as to permit easy cleaning and complete drainage. The vats/tanks shall be of proper size with drain holes near the bottom to make cleaning and draining easy and effective. They shall be provided with lids of non-corrosive materials. Utensils with rollers/wheels, which can be rolled out of the premises for cleaning and drying in the sun are to be preferred.' 5.2.1.4 Fish shall not be carried in open vehicles or trolleys. The vehicles should provide adequate refrigeration and shall have adequately insulated walls, roof and floor to protect fish from warming up during transportation and shall be of such material and construction as to permit easy and thorough cleaning. 5.22 Drying Equipments

5.221 The fish drying racks shall be made of materials which can be cleaned and disinfected easily. The size of the racks should be adequate for easy operations. The height of racks from the floor shah be sufficient enough to keep the fish away from sand particles blown by wind.The drying area shall have breezy surroundings with proper access for sunlight. When a number of racks are provided in an area, care should be taken not to overcrowd. The racks shall be covered with nylon nets to ward off birds, rodents, etc. The floor on which the racks are fixed, shall be of clean surface, properly cemented without crevices or pits and so designed as to make cleaning easy and effective. 5.3 Hygienic Operating Requirements 5.3.1 Fish intended for curing shall always be treated in-a hygienic manner. Precautions shall be taken at all times to protect the fish from contamination by objectionable substances. Preparatory operations and the packaging operations shall be so timed as to prevent deterioration or spoilage. 5.3.2 Strict hygienic procedures shall be observed during handling, processing, packaging and storage of products to prevent contamination and proliferation of Clostridium botulinum, Salmonella, V. cholerae or other pathogens that can cause food-borne intoxication. In fish, lightly salted (with less than 5 percent common salt), the outgrowth of these organisms may not be 4

5.2.1 General Considerations 5.2.1.1 All contact-surfaces and equipments that arc likely to come into contact with fish shall be made of material which does not transmit toxic substances, odours or tastes to the product. Such surfaces shall be non-absorbent, resistant to corrosion and capable of

IS 14516 : 1998 preventable. In such cases the effective method of avoiding microbial contamination is the strict observance of hygienic and good manufacturing practice during handling and processing fish. 5.3.3 The building, equipment, utensils and other physical facilities of the plant should be kept in an orderly and hygienic condition. 53.4 The following cleaning schedule shall be followed before and after each shift of work: 4 Wash the utensils in running potable water to remove solid fish particles slime, etc. b) Spray a suitable non-corrosive detergent at a concentration of 0.5 percent followed by scrubbing with hand- brush to remove slime. Flush with potable water. cl Immerse the utensils in water chlorinated to a residual level of 100 tug/kg for 15 minutes. For cleaning the floor, water chlorinated to a residual level of 500 mg/kg shall be used. d) Finally, wash with potable water (chlorinated to 10 mg/kg level). The same cleaning schedule is applicable equipments;fish carrier vans, etc. to be on a continuous basis using water and/or appropriate equipment so that these areas are kept clean and the chances .for product contamination are excluded. 53.12 Containers, conveyors, bins or storage bays used for removal, collection or storage of fish offal and other waste shall be frequently subjected to the cleaning schedule. Arrangements for removal and disposal of fish wastes shall be approved by the appropriate official agency having jurisdiction. 53.13 An effective and continuous programme for the control of animals, insects, birds, rodents, etc, within the premises shall be maintained. All rodenticides, fumigants. insecticides or other harmful substances used shall be those which are permissible
under the Insecticide Act and shall be stored in separate locked rooms, handled only by trained personnel.

53.14 All persons working in the plant shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and should take all necessary precautions to prevent contamination of fish or fish products. employees shall wear clean protective clothing, head covering and footwear which are washable or disposable. The use of water proof aprons, where appropriate, is recommended. Light colours are required to assess visually the cleanliness of the garment.
light-coloured

53.14.1 All

5.3.5 Splitting and cutting board shall be frequently and thoroughly scrubbed and treated with disinfectant and flushed with running potable water. 5.3.6 The degree of microbial contamination found on fish and fish products is related to the microbial contamination of the working surfaces on which they are processed. All such surfaces shall, therefore, be cleaned, scrubbed and disinfected frequently. 5.3.7 Cutting knives, salting tanks, drying racks, and other food contact surfaces shall be protected from contamination. 5.3.8 Cleaned and disinfected portable equipments and utensils shall be stored above the floor in a clean, dry location. Knives, utensils, etc, shall be air-dried before being stored in a self-draining position on hooks or racks made of corrosion resistant material. 5.3.9 Special care shall be taken to clean salting tanks as frequently as necessary to prevent accumulation of fatty scum and deposition of sludge and of solid salt, fish residues and other foreign materials. 5.3.10 There are always impurities left in the tahk after the salted fish has been removed for drying. These consist of crystals of salt, particles of dirt, fish scales, slime, fish oil, blood, etc. Such impurities shall be removed by flushing with water, scrubbing and emptying the tanks through the drain hole and then disinfecting. 5.3.11 Removal of solid, semi-solid or liquid wastes from fish unloading, holding or processing areas shall
5

53.14.2 Gloves used shall be in a sound, clean and hygienic condition and shall be made of impermeable material. I&mds shall be washed with soap from elbow down and disinfected with a suitable sanitizer before commencing work, after visiting the toilet, before resuming work and whenever otherwise necessary. 5.3.15 No person who is known or suspected to be suffering from, or who is a carrier of a disease likely to be transmitted through food, or has an infected wound or open lesion, shall be engaged in processing work. 5.4 Processing Practices 5.4.1 General Considerations Spoiled or damaged fish shall not be employed for curing. Salting and/or drying cannot correct faults that are due to the poor physiological conditions of the fish,
improper handling 54.2 or prolonged storage, Handling of Raw Material

5.4.2.1 The time lag between catching of fish and its processing should be limited to 6 to 8 hours at ambient temperature. Fish which are suspected to contain harmful pollutants or other substances, which after dressing and cleaning are unlikely to get reduced to an acceptable level, shall not be used.

IS 14516 : 1938 5.4.2.2 Fresh fish which cannot be processed immediately on arrival shall be chilled in clean containers and stored in specially provided areas within the plant, protected from heat, weather conditions and contaminants. Wherever possible, iced fish shall be stored in a chill room maintained at l�C to 5Oc. Containers when filled with iced fish shall not be stacked in a'manner which permits contamination from other containers. Intimate contact of ice and fish by proper layering is essential to obtain rapid cooling to around O'C. Flake ice is to be preferred for rapid cooling and to prevent damage to fish. 54.23 All fish shall be carefully inspected and sorted to discard contaminated or damaged fish. 54.24 Fish shall be thoroughly washed before processing and immediately after operations like scaling, gutting, etc. Washing removes a large part of microorganisms from the surface of fish and from intestine. During dressing, eviscerating (gutting) or trimming operations, each fish shah be washed with a flow or spray of potable water applied in such a manner as to clean the fish thoroughly. Water used for washing, rinsing or conveying shah not be recirculated. 5.4.2.5 Thawing of frozen fish prior to processing shall be done at temperature not higher than what is necessary to carry out the operation reasonable quickly. Water used for thawing shall be potable running water of temperature not higher than 25'C. All thawing operations shall be carried out under strict hygienic conditions. 5.4.3 Dressing Fish for Salting/Drying 5.4.3.1 Small fishes intended for drying, such as white baits, anchovies, etc. need no splitting and gutting. They can be washed free of slime and extraneous matter prior to drying. 5.4.3.2 Fishes like jew fish, mackerel, etc, can be split open and gutted mechanically or by hand. The fish could be prepared for salting according to the so-called "butterfly" cut. The knife is first introduced through the opercle. The bones other than head bones shall remain (in order to give rigidity during salting/drying operations). The fish shall be split open at the ventral side starting from the head portion. Wash thoroughly to remove all the viscera parts, blood, etc. 5.4.3.3 Preparation of fish for salting head on 5.4.3.4 Preparation of large fishes Large fishes such as sharks, could be split open as described above or they could be cut to large pieces (usually longitudinally) and cut again into smaller pieces (1.5 cm - 2 cm thick, 10 cm width and 20 cm length). Sharks usually have certain ammonical odours (owing to the presence of body urea) which can be fillets eliminated by placing the dressed fish or the in a mild brine (10 percent) and crushed ice for 6- 10 hours. This may be followed by salting. Before preparation, it is advisable to bleed sharks by cutting their caudal fin or by cutting through the gill opening. Bleeding improves quality and colour of flesh. The best way to salt fish is always by splitting it, even the small ones like sardines, etc. The splitting is usually made during gutting. As a rule, the maximum thickness of the piece/fillet/fish to be salted shall not exceed 1.5 cm - 2 cm. 5.4.3.5 Splitting shall be done by skilled workers, avoiding ragged edges, uneven separation of sides and losses in recovery. Fish shall be split by a cut parallel to the back bone straight down from the nape to the tail. 5.4.3.6 Immediately after splitting, fishes shall be washed with potable water. If intended for a speciality trade, the black membrane should be taken from the nape while the fish are being washed. Fish shall be thoroughly washed before salting to remove all blood, slime, pieces of gut and other extraneous matter. Fish blood coagulates rapidly, and washing will facilitate more complete bleeding, which, in turn, will improve the appearance of the product. A continuous flow of clean cold water shall be used for washing to prevent the accumulation of contamination materials. After washing, fish shall be drip-dried to remove excess of water. 5.4.3.7 If frozen fish is used as raw material, thawing shall be done prior to salting in such a manner that temperature does not rise above 5'C. However, in `the case of soft textured fish, partial thawing before splitting might be desirable in preventing tearing of flesh. The thawing operations shall be carried out in a hygienic and clean manner, care being taken to avoid contamination as far as possible. Access to animals, birds, etc, shall be strictly prevented. 5.4.4 Dry-Salting 5.4.4.1 Salting time depends on the species of fish (amount of fat), size and thickness. Proper salting methodology shall above all, reflect the requirement of the final product, such as taste, salt content, texture, appearance and the products shelf life. 6

The fish can be prepared with head on (which usually contains edible flesh) provided the head is fist opened. The splitting could then be continued to the tail. If the head of the fish is very large, additional cuts or scoring shall be done in order to facilitate salt penetration.

IS 14516 : 1998 5.4.4.2 The maximum thickness of the piece/fillet/fish to be salted shah not exceed 1.5 cm to 2.0 cm. Small fish (such as anchovy, sardines) assimilate salt quicker than large fish. Very large fishes spoil if salted whole; and, therefore, large fish shall be salted in pieces and the intermediate (such as sea breams, croakers, etc) shall be opened and salted in halves or "butterfly" fillet. 5.5 Fish Salting Prucxss According to Fish Type 5.5.1 7'he Dry Method (Ke,wh Cure) 5.5.1.1 Alternate layers of fish and salt shall be stacked until the pile reaches about 1 m: The salt penetrates inside the fish tissue and dissolves in the tissue fluid and drains out as self brine. 5.5.1.2 Dry process is employed for fish which have a total lipid content not over 2 percent. Best appearance and stability are obtained in fish with total lipids less than 1 percent. Salt of proper crystal size and purity shall be taken in appropriate proportion of the fish mass. A thin layer of salt is first spread at the bottom of thecontainer. Each fish is smeared with salt, care being taken to cover the split surface and gills (if fish used is head on). The salted fish are stacked in the container with sprinkling of a small amount of salt in between the layers. The top layer shall be completely covered by salt. The salted fish is then covered with a lid to prevent contamination. 5.5.1.3 After 24-48 hours (depending upon the species of fish, thickness of flesh and fat content), the container is opened at the bottom (drain hole) and the self brine formed is drained out. The salted fish is taken in plastic or bamboo mesh baskets and quick-washed in running water to remove any adhering salt crystals or other extraneous matter. The fish is then taken for drying. 5.5.2 Wet Method 5.5.2.1 The wet process is recommended for fish with a high lipid content (over 2 percent). In fatty fish, the fat content can be reduced during wet salting by pressing the fish. The fish which accumulates fat in its liver can be dry salted since the fat is removed during dressing. 5.5.2.2 In the wet method the salting is done as described above. The self brine formed is not drained out, but is allowed to cover the fish. As and when need arises, the fish is taken out, rinsed in water and dried. 5.6 Quality and Proportion of Salt for Salting Fish 5.6.1 Salt 5.6.1.1 Salt used shall conform to IS 594. The appropriate size of the crystals for dry salting shall be around 3 mm-5 mm (Regular Size) although it is advisable to use a mixture of 213of this size and l/3 of
7

tine size. Smaller salt crystals will provide a self brine very quickly and the regular ones will maintain the strength of the brine during processing. 5.6.1.2 Salt used for salting shall be free of copper and iron contents as copper and iron accelerate rancidity in fatty fish. 5.6.13 Salt shall be free from halophilic microorganisms, the most common of them being the red halophilic bacteria. The contamination from halophiles can be eliminated by: 4 Avoiding the use of visibly contaminated salt, which will be reddish in colour. b) Dissolving the suspected salt in clean water until it is saturated, put the brine in a solar dryer and let it crystallize. Eliminate the foam. Crystallization can also be performed by boiling the
brine.

5.6.2 Proportion 5.6.2.1 In dry salting fish the proportion of salt shall be 3 kg/l0 kg (30 petcent) of dressed fish. For many practical purposes a greater quantity of salt may be used, but it is not advisable to exceed beyond 35 to 40 percent as there is no additional advantage. 5.6.2.2 For wet salting, the ratio of brine to tish shall 1 by mass when using i! saturated brine. A certain amount of solid salt shall be present at the bottom of the salting cisterns. In effect this corresponds to 30 to 40 percent salt (on a dry basis) with regard to the mass of dressed fish.
be 1. :

5.6.3 Salting Time 5.63.1 The time for salting may vary according to the following variables : a) Thickness of fish, fillets, etc; b) Brine concentration outside the fish; c) Fat layers; and d) Resence of scales. Fat layers tend to reduce the rate of salt diffusion inside the fish. Presence of scales and thickness of skin usually present a high resistance to salt diffusion. 5.6.3.2 Small pelagic fishes shall be salted for 24 to 40 hours by wet salting/dry salting methods. Intermediate sized fish need salting for 40 to 48 hours whereas fishes like shark shall be salted for 48 hours. 5.63.3 The salted fish in the container may be subjected to pressing from the top layer for ease of salt penetration. Applying pressure (by putting some weights uniformly over the top layer) has the following advantages : a) The rate of salting is increased; thus there is reduction in the risk of spoilage during salting stage.

I!314516: 1998

b) Oil can be partially eliminated by pressing. It
reduces the lipid content of the salted fish, thus lowering the chances for development of rancidity during storage. Application of pressure facilitates the removal of soluble undesirable compounds. Pressure reduces the total volume of the salted fish. The reduction of moisture leads to less time for drying. In the case of wet cured products, the volume reduction could help in lowering transportation costs; and also it will be easier to pack the salted pressed fish than the unpressed fish. Pressing also gives the opportunity to skim off the supernatant layer of fish oil, organic substances, foam, etc, and to maintain fresh brine over the pile.

cl 4

5.7.4 At the close of the day, or as and when the weather conditions do not permit proper drying, the fish shall be carefully collected in clean vessels and transferred to a cold room and kept in hygienic condition out of contact with insects, rodents or animals till next day or till the weather conditions improve. The fish shall not be left overnight in the open area since infestation of insects OF the growth of spoilage organisms will occur. The partly dried fish shall preferably be kept at chilled condition (2'C to 5'C) as long as drying is not possible.

d

5.7 Drying 5.7.1 Immediately after salting, fish shall be removed to the drying area in closed containers. Drying could

5.7.5 The drying shall be continued until the products reach the intermediate moisture level and attain marketable quality. Drying time may vary according to species, preparation of fish, salt content, fat level and the weather conditions. Generally a moisture content of 35 to 40 percent is sufficient for most of the species, but for fishes like sole, white baits, etc, a lower level of water content could be followed. 5.8 Requirements
5.81 When the drying process is over and after the product is allowed to attain moisture equilibration, the dried fish shall appear pleasing and wholesome, firm and soft with a fresh cured flavour. Detailed requirements of specific type of fish products are given in relevent Indian Standards. However, for guidance, the requirements for some dried fish products are given in Annex A for guidance.

be carried out in the sun in an open area or in a mechanical dryer under controlled conditions. The fish shall be suspended on rods, hooks or laid out on trays according to ease and efficiency of operations. Care should be taken to ensure that the suspended fish do not touch each other. 5.7.2 Drying operations shall be carried out on elevated platforms made of non-corrosive, smooth surfaces or on single or multideck racks made of wood, plastic, steel, aluminium or neatly painted metals which shall not in any way affect the quality of the final
product. The drying area and the racks shall be made clean before and after each operation. 5.7.3 The fish kept for drying shall be kept out of contact from insects, birds, rodents, or other animals by way of proper netting or other protective measures which shall not adversely affect the drying process.

5.8.2 Food additives shall not be used indiscriminately. The types and concentration of the preservatives and other food additives used shall be as permissible under the Prevention of F&d Adulteration Rules, 1955. For guidance, methods for preservative treatment of cured fish are given in Annex B.

I!3 14516 : 1990

ANNEX A
(Clause 5.8.1)
REQUIREMENTS
SI No.

FOR DRIED FISH PRODUCTS (For GuidanceOnly) Requirement
L /

Product Moiotum
Percent(Max) (3 1 20 18 15 15 40 ; 35

`\

(2) (1) 1. Driedprawns/shrimps
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Dried white baits Dried Bombay duck LaminatedBombay duck Dry salted threadfin(DAPA) Dry saltedjew fish (GHOL) Dry salted cat fish Dry salted leather jrrkct Dry salted horse mackerel Dry salted mackerel Dry salted seer fish Dry salted shark Dried sharkfins

Chloride" (4) 5Ma.x 2.5 Max 7.5 Mar 6Max 25 Mar 25 Max 25 Max 25-30

Acid Insoluble Ash, (Mar) (5)

I
1.5 2 1 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5

35
30 35 35 10 8 35 35

25-30 25-30 25-30 25-30 20-25
IO-15

10. 11. 12. 13. 14. Fish maws 15. Dry salted surai

1.5
1.5 1.5 1.5

1.5
2

(TUNA) 16. Dry salted dhoma, %&es are on moisture-fne basis.

ANNEX B
(Clause 5.8.2)
PRESERVATIVE TREATMENT METHODS FOR CURED FISH B-l DIRECT DUSTING METHOD propionate

The cured samples are uniformly dusted with calcium powder (0.3 g for IO0 g cured fish). The powder taken in a coarse mesh cloth bag is gently and uniformly dusted over the entire Surface of the product. Mechanical sprayers could be used for bulk treatment. This method is found to be the most effective against fungus, `red', discoloration or off smell. The product retains an attractive bright cream colour. B-2 DIP TREATMENT PROPIONATE B-E IN CALCIUM

the product are not as good as in procedure 1, but there is no fungus, `red', etc. throughout the storage period. B-3 CALCIUM TREATMENT PROPIONATE MIXTURE

This is as effective as the other methods but the appearance is not very good because of the presence of excessive salt particles on the surface of fish. The cured samples are sprinkled with a mixture containing 3 percent calcium propionate in refined salt and intimately mixed. The proportion of the mixture to cured fish is 1 : 10. Tb ese methods extend the shelf life of dry cured products from the normal 4 to 8 weeks to 52 weeks. In the case of wet cured products the normal shelf life of 2 weeks could be extended to 16 weeks. The method can be further improved to control rancidity by incorporating up to 0.5 percent BHA.

The cured samples, just after the salting Stage, are kept immersed for 2 minutes to 3 minutes in saturated brine containing 3 percent calcium propionate (fish:dip solution is 1 : 1). The fish is drained and dried as usual. The method is second in efficieicy to the above method. In this method the colour and appearance of

Bure!au of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of fndiurr Standard Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.

B&Shas the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and s&s, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. FAD
12(433 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9.Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern
:

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323,38 41
{

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054

:

337 84 86 99,337 85 9120 61 26,337 { 60 38 20 43 25

Northern : SC0 335336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, C!IENNAI 600113 { 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15 Western
:

Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI400093

{ 832 92 78 95,832 91,832 78 58 92

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALGRE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

