**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 1885-68 (1989): Electrotechnical Vocabulary, Part 68: 
Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW) Filters [LITD 7: Audio, Video 
and Multimedia Systems and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 1885 ( Part 68 ): 1989 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

*tt 68 m$ tariff ?rc«i ( «t ) fa&x 

Indian Standard 

ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY 

PART 68 SURFACE ACOUSTIC WAVE ( SAW ) FILTERS 



UDC 621-372-54 : 001-4 



© BIS 1990 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

October 1990 Price Groap 1 



Piezoelectric Devices for Frequency Control and Selection Sectional Committee, LTD 12 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard ( Part 68 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 14 December 
1989, after the draft finalized by the Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional 
Committee in consultation with the Piezoelectric Devices for Frequency Control and Selection 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunication Division 
Council. 

The surface acoustic wave ( SAW ) filters are used in telecommunications, measuring equipment, radar 
systems and consumer products. 

This standard ( Part 68 ) covers the general terms and definitions relating to surface acoustic wave 
( SAW ) filters. 

This standard follows IEC Pub 862-1-1 ( First Edition ) - 1985, 'Surface acoustic wave ( SAW ) filters 
Part 1 : General information, test conditions and methods, Chapter 1 : standard values — Section 
One — General and Section Two — Terms and definitions; issued by International Electroteohnical 
Commission ( IEC ). 

This standard is one of the series of Indian Standards on electrotechnical vocabulary. 



IS 1885 (Part 68): 1989 



Indian Standard 
ELECTROTECHNICAL VOCABULARY 

PART 68 SURFACE ACOUSTIC WAVE ( SAW ) FILTERS 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 68 ) covers general terms 
and definitions relating to surface acoustic wave 
( SAW ) filters. 

2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 

2.1 Surface Acoustic Wave ( SAW ) 

An acoustic wave, propagating along a surface 
of an elastic substrate, whose amplitude decays 
exponentially with substrate depth. 

2.2 Surface Acoustic Wave Filter ( SAW Filter ) 

A filter characterized by a surface acoustic wave 
which is usually generated by an interdigital 
transducer and propagates along a substrate 
surface to a receiving transducer. 

2.3 Power Flow Vector 

A vector, analogous to a poynting vector, 
characterizing energy propagation caused by a 
surface acoustic wave. 

2.4 Propagation Vector 

A vector characterizing the phase progression of 
a wave. 

2.5 Power Flow Angle 

The angle between the direction of power flow 
vector and the direction of propagation vector. 

2.6 SAW Beam Steering 

SAW propagation phenomenon in anisotropic 
materials described by an angle of power flow, 
which is not zero. 

2.7 SAW Diffraction 

A phenomenon ( analogous to diffraction of light 
from a source of finite aperture ) which causes 
SAW beam spreading and wave front distortion. 

2.8 SAW Coupling Coefficient ( k B ) 

SAW electromechanical coupling coefficiency is 
defined as follows: 



fc 2 s-2 



Av 



where 

Av is the relative velocity change produced 
~~7~ by short-circuiting the surface potential 
from the open-circuit condition. 

2.9 Interdigital Transducer ( IDT) 

A SAW transducer made of a comb-like conductive 
structure deposited on a piezoelectric substrate 
transforming electrical energy into acoustic energy 
or vice versa. 

2.10 Unidirectional Interdigital Transducer (UDT) 

A transducer capable of radiating and receiving 
surface acoustic waves in or from a single 
direction. 

2.11 Multiphase Transducer 

An interdigital transducer having more than two 
inputs which are driven in different phases. 
Usually used as unidirectional transducer. 

2.12 Finger 

An element of the IDT comb electrode. 

2.13 Dummy Finger 

A passive finger which may be included in order 
to suppress wave-front distortion. 

2.14 Bus Bar 

A common electrode which connects individual 
fingers together and also connects the filter to an 
external circuit. 

2.15 Weighted-Response Transducer 

A transducer intended to produce a specified 
impulse response by design of the structure. See, 
for example, 2.16 to 2.21. 

2.16 Finger Overlap or Source Strength 

The length of a finger pair between which only 
electromechanical interaction is generated. 

2.17 Apodisation 

Weighting produced by the change of finger 
overlap over the length of the IDT. 

2.18 Withdrawal Weighting 

Weighting by removal of fingers or sources. 



1 



»1885lP*fll$)£lW9 



2.19 Capacitance Weighting 

Weighting by change of capacitance between 
electrodes. 

2.20 Series Weighting 

Weighting by separation of a finger into individual 
elements having capacitive coupling between them. 
The elements may be separated from the bus 
bar. 

2.21 Phase Weighting 

Weighting by change in period of finger arrange- 
ment inside the IDT. 

2.22 Aperture 

Normalized beamwidth of the SAW generated at 
centre frequency and normalized to the 
corresponding wavelength. 

2.3 Multistrip Coupler ( MSC ) 

An array of additional metal strips deposited on 
a piezoelectric substrate in a direction transverse 
to the propagation direction which transfers 
acoustic power from one acoustic track to an 
adjacant track. 

2.24 Reflector 

A SAW reflecting component which non&ally 
makes use of the periodic discontinuity provided 
by a metal strip array or a grooved array. 



2.25 Spurious Reflections 

Unwanted signals caused by reflection of SAW or 
bulk waves from substrate edges or electrodes. 

2.26 Triple Transit Echo ( TTE ) 

Unwanted signals in a SAW filter which have 
traversed three times the propagation path 
between input and output IDTs, caused by 
reflections from output and input transducers. 

2.27 Bulk Wave Signals 

Unwanted signals caused by bulk wave excitation 
detected at the filter output. 

2.28 Feed Through Signals ( Signals of Electro- 
magnetic Interference ) 

Unwanted signals from the input appearing at the 
filter output due to stray capacitances and other 
electromagnetic couplings. 

2.29 Suppression Corrugation 

Grooves in the non-active side of a substrate for 
suppressing bulk wave signals. 

2.30 Acoustic Absorber 

Material with high acoustic loss placed on any 
part of the substrate for acoustic absorption 
purposes. 

231 Shielding Electrode 

An electrode intended for the reduction of 
electromagnetic interference signals. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the 
producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity 
to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the 
use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained 
from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the 
course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of 
the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference: 

Doc: No. LTD 12 ( 1167) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 33 1 1 3 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Eastern : 1/14 C, I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C. L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 



f 331 01 31 


$331 13 75 


37 86 62 


2 18 43 


41 29 16 


6 32 92 95 



Printed at Printwell Printers, Delhi, India 



