IS1448[

P:

59]:1991

( Reaffirmed 2003 )

Indian Standard

METHODS OF TEST FOR PETROLEUM AND ITS PRODUCTS
[P:59] DETERMINATION f OF MINERAL OIL CONTENT IN GREASES

Second Revision/

UDC

621-892-2 : 543 : 547.913

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

December

1991

Price Group 2

Methods of Test for Petroleum,

Petroleum

Products

and Lubricants

Sectional Committee,

PCD 1

FOREWORD This Indian standard [ P : 59 ] ( Second Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Methods of Test for Petroleum, Petroleum Products and Lubricants Sectional Committee had been approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 1448 .[ P : 59 ] `r 1991 '

Indian Standard

,

METHODSOFTESTFOR PETROLEUMANDITSPRdDUCTS
[P:59] .,-

*"
.

.

DETERMINATION OF MINERAL OIL CQNTENT IN GREASES (
1 SCOPE 1.1 The methods prescribed are intended for the determination of mineral oil content in conventional greases which consists essentially of mineral oil and soap.
Method A shall be followed for all greases except those containing residuum, asphaltic oils, asphalt, tars, etc, as these ingredients usually cause stubborn emulsions if a vigorous agitation is applied at the start. Method B will be applicable in the latter cases. 1.2 A supplementary method is provided in the Annex A. This method is intended primarily for application to greases containing thickeners which are essentially insoluble in n-hexane and to greases which may not be analysed by conventional methods because of the presence of such constituents as non-petroleum fluids or non-soap type thickeners or both. In some cases, these constituents may react with strong acid or alkaline solutions. 1.3 This standard may involve hazardous materiand equipment. This standard als, operations, does not purport lo address all of the safety problems associated with its use. It is the responsibility of whoever uses this standard to consult and establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use ( see Annex B ). 2 REFERENCES

Second Revision)
The petroleum hydrocarbon solvent layer is washed and the solvent distilled off. The mineral oil is obtained as the residue after distillation. 3.2

Reagents

3.2.1 n-Hexane
See IS 3470 : 1976. 3.2.2 Dilute Hydrochloric acid 10.0 percent by mass of hydro-

Approximately chloric acid. 3.2.3

Phenolphthalein Indicator in 50 ml or KOH. of

Dissolve 1.0 g of phenolphthalein water and neutralising with NaOH 3.2.4

Alcoholic Potassium Hydroxide Solution 10 percent ( m/v ).

Approximately 3.2.5

Ethyl Alcohol water, neutralising phenolphthalein as

50 percent by volume in exactly with NaOH or KOH an indicator. 3.3

Procedure

3.3.1 Weigh into a 500 ml conical

2.1 The following Indian
adjuncts to this standard: IS "No. 323 : 1959 3470 : 1966 3 METHOD-A

Standards Title

are necessary

flask a suitable quantity ( 8 to 30 g ) of the material, accurately to the nearest 0.1 g depending on the percentage of mineral oil present in the grease. Add 50 ml of n-hexane and disperse the grease in the solvent. Add 50 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid ( 10 percent ) and several boiling chips. 3.3.2 Digest by boiling under. reflux condenser until all soap has been decomposed and the upper solvent layer is clear. Generally three hours time is sufficient. However, sometimes more vigorous use of stronger hydrochloric acid or boiling, additional quantity of solvent will be found helpful for greases difficult to decompose. 3.3.3 Allow the contents of the flask to cool to room temperature. Remove the condenser and transfer the contents of the flask to a separating funnel, using n-hexane and distilled water as washing liquids ( in the presence of fillers, filter

Rectified Hexane,

spirit food-grade

3.1 Outline

of the Method

The sample is dissolved in petroleum hydrocarbon solvent and heated under reflux with dilute hydrochloric acid under prescribed conditions.

the undissolved matter through a Gooch crucible provided with a suitable mat, wash with h-hexane and then transfer the combined filtrate and washing to a separating funnel ). 3.3.4 Allow the solution in the separating funnel to clear and draw the aqueous layer (A) into another separating funnel. Wash the n-hexane layer (B) three times with 25 ml of water to remove hydrochloric acid, adding the washings to (A). Wash the aqueous solution (A) twice with 20 ml of n-hexane (C). Run the solution (C) into a third separating funnel and wash this solution (C) once with 10 ml water and then add (C) to the solution (B). Discard solution (A) 3.3.5 Transfer solution (B) to a 500 ml conical flask, add a few `drops of phenolphthalein indicator and excess of alcoholic potassium hydroxide solution to make the alcoholic layer sufficiently alkaline after vigorous shaking. Boil solution (B) under reflux condenser for half an hour and transfer solution (B) to a separating funnel. Wash the 500 ml conical flask with small portion of ethyl alcohol and n-hexane and add the washings to solution (B). Add also a few millilitres of water to solution (B) to facilitate separation of alcohol layer. Draw off the lower alcohol layer (D) into another separating funnel. 3.3.6 Wash the alcohol layer (D) three or four times with 25 ml n-hexane and add the washing to solution (B). Wash solution (B) carefully and repeatedly with aqueous ethyl alcohol ( 50 percent by volume ) till free from alkali and soap and finally wash once with 50 ml of water. Discard the ethyl alcohol and water washings. During washings of solution (B), care should be taken that there is no loss of' mineral oil due to emulsification. 3.3.7 Filter solution (B) through a filter paper into a clean and dry tared conical flask or beaker and evaporate off n-hexane on water bath. Ensure tl at the separating funnel as well as the filter paper are thoroughly washed with small quantities of n-hexane and washings are also transferred for evaporation to minimise loss of oil. 3.3.8 Remove last traces of n-hexane by heating in an oven at 105'C and by agitation/passing air over the hot oil. Cool and weigh. Repeat operation of heating, cooling and weighing till constant mass is obtained. From the mass of the residue, calculate the percentage by mass of mineral oil. 3.3.9 If the grease contains rosin oils, beeswax, montan wax, spermatin, degras, spermaceti,

candle pitoh and other materials containing a larger amount of unsaponifiable substances, the mineral oil isolated from solution (B) will contain unsaponifiable matter and the constant found will differ from those of the petroleum products used in making the grease. In most cases, no further separation is possible except in the hands of skilful and experienced operators who can devise special methods to suit the individal conditions. 4 METHOD-B 4:1 @dine
of'the Method

-

The sample is heated with potassium hydrogen sulphate and ignited sand and then extracted with petroleum hydrocarbon solvent in sohxlet apparatus. The extract is saponified, washed and then distilled when the mineral oil is obtained as the residue. 4.2 Reagents lated.
Potasstum Hydrogen Su&hate ( KHSO,

) -

granu-

Igntted sand Phenolpthalein n-Hexane Alcoholtc

clean and dry.
indicator -

as in 3.2.3.

( see IS 3470 : 1966 ). Potassium Hydroxide solution -

mately 10 percent ( m/v ). as in 3.2.5.

approxi-

Ethyl Alcohol -

4.3 Procedure
4.3.1 Weigh 8 to 30 g of the material, accurately to 0.1 g in a 75 mm porcelain dish and add IO g of potassium hydrogen sulphate and 18 g of clean dry ignited sand and 5 ml of water.

4.3.2 Heat the dish and contents on a steam bath while stirring frequently until all water is driven off ( 2 hours being usually sufficient ) cool and break the lumps with a small pestle and transfer the mixture quantitatively to an extraction thimble, which has been previously placed in a soxhlet apparatus, using a little n-hexane to wash the last traces into the thimble. 4.3.3 Extract the mixture in the thimble thoroughly with n-hexane. Add a few drops of phenolphthalein indicator to the n-hexane extract, saponify it with excess of alcoholic potassium hydroxide solution and continue the process given thereafter in 3.3.3 of Method A to determine the mineral ,oil content.

2

IS 1448 [ y : 59 ] I 1991

ANNEX
SUPPLEMENTARY .A-1 SCOPE A-l.1 This method includes procedures for the determination of the total fluid constituent and the total n-hexane insoluble material. It is primarily intended for application to greases of the types discussed in 1.2. A-2 DEFINITIONS A-2.1 Total fluid constituent the mineral oil or no petroleum fluid and n-hexane soluble fats or all three. A-2.2 Total n-hexane insoluble material - soap, nonsoap thickeners, fillers, inorganic salts from free alkali, asphaltenes or any combination of these, essentially insoluble in n-hexane. A-3 APPARATUS A-3.1 Extraction Apparatus A 1 OOO-ml flask shall be used. A double thickness filter paper extraction thimble, 33 by 94 mm, shall be suspended by corrosion resistant wire or by a corrosion resistant basket below the condenser in such a position that the condensed solvent will enter the thimble. A-4 PROCEDURE A-4.1 Weigh to the nearest 1 mg 10 & O-2 g of a representative sample into the n-hexane washed, dried, tared extraction thimble and place the thimble in the extraction apparatus to which 125 ml of n-hexane has previously been added, Place the assembly on steam plate and extract for 12 hrs. A-4.2 Remove the thimble from the apparatus, dry the insoluble material for 30 minutes in a convection oven at 1OO'C and record the weight. METHOD

A
OF LUBRICATING GREASES

FOR THE ANALYSIS

To ensure complete removal of fluid constituent, re-extract the insoluble material for 1 hr. A-4.3 Dry and reweigh. If the weight loss is greater than 20 mg, reextract for 4 hrs more, Repeat the drying operation. A-4.4 Transer the n-hexane filtrate to a tared beaker. Evaporate the solvent on steam plate, with a jet of air or inert gas impinging on the surface for 3 hrs, and place in a convection oven for 1 hr at 100%. Heat to constant weight. A-5 CALCULATIONS A-5.1 Calculate the percentage constituent as follows: Total fluid constituents, percent 100 x A _B
W >

of

total

fluid

-(
where,
B =

A = gms of n-hexane soluble residue ( 4-4 ); W = gms of sample used; and percentage of free fatty acids as oleic. of total n-hexane percent A-5.2 Calculate the percentage insoluble mater ial as follows: Total n-hexane _ looxc_D

insoluble material,

c
D=

X

w=

W ( ) gms of residue from n-hexane extraction ( 4-3 ); gms of sample used; and percentage of free alkali as the hydroxide of the predominating base.

ANNEX
PRECAUTIONARY B-l n-HEXANE Extremely flammable.

B
STATEMENTS

Danger -

Avoid skin and eye contact, gloves and aprons as required. B-2 ETHYL ALCOHOL

use impermeable

Harmful if inhaled. May produce nerve cell damage. Vapours may cause flash fire. Keep away from heat, sparks and open flame. Keep container closed. Use with adequate ventilation. Avoid build up of vapours and eliminate all sources of ignition especially all non explosion proof electrical apparatus and heaters. Avoid breathing of vapour or spray mist, use respiratory protection devices as required.

Warning - Flammable, made nontoxic.

Denatured,

Cannot

be

Keep away from heat, sparks and open fire flame. Keep container close. Use with adequate ventilation. Avoid prolong breathing of vapour or spray mist. Avoid contact with eyes and skin. Do not take internally.

3

IS 1448 [ P : 59 ] : 1991 B-3 PHENOLPHTHALEIN
Warning -

Avoid skin contact

or ingestion. SULPHATE

Causes severe eye irritation mist may be harmful. B-5 POTASSIUM
Danger -

or injury.

Dust or

B-4 POTASSIUM ( RHSO4 1
Danger -

HYDROGEN Harmful

HYDROXIDE

Poison.

or fatal if swallowed.

damage.

Poison. Corrosive. Causes eye and skin. Harmful if swallowed or inhaled.

4'

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, tosting and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use oft he Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Ihdian Standards.
_____

Bnreao of Indian St8edarde BlS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certtfication of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Cop&$1 No part of these publications may be reproduced in any BIS has the copyright of all its publications. form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. PCD 1 ( 1084)

Amendment8 Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters
:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 01 Bahadur 13 75Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 31, 331Shah Regional OffIces I Central I Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern I 1 14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola d ALCUTTA 700054 Northern i SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH Southern c C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 160036 600113

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Office8 ) Telephone 331 01 31 1 331 13 75 87 86 62

53 38 43 235 02 16 632 92 95

Western f Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

