атт Ah IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ert urn sema — ПЧТ 
ттт 2 Caer атт чуїїяї gRT ааа extet 
faterat 


Tunnelling in Rock Masses — 
Guidelines 
Part 2 Mechanized Tunnelling Methods by 
Tunnel Boring Machines 


ICS 93.060 


© BIS 2023 


т AA э] 
^8 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
uuu тч чач, 9 TRS зїє srt AMT, 45 Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in | www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 12 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Rock 
Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


Usage of tunnel boring machines (TBM) for tunnel excavation has increased across infrastructure sectors like 
hydropower, transportation and others. Compared to conventional tunnelling, tunnel boring machines limit 
disturbance to surrounding ground making it suitable for heavily urbanized areas as well as cost effective for 
longer tunnels which will require more time to complete using normal drill and blast techniques. 


Tunnel boring machines perform full face excavation and mostly excavate circular cross-section of tunnels with 
diameters varying from | m to almost 15 m in variety of ground conditions and for various purposes. Excavation 
process produces a smooth tunnel wall after installation of precast segments. Cost of constructing a tunnel with 
tunnel boring machines is generally more than conventionally drilled tunnel in terms of cost per metre. However, 
tunnel boring machines give huge savings in terms of construction time through faster production rates. 


Different types of tunnel boring machines suit different ground types. Hence, to ensure a reliable progress, it is 
of paramount importance to select and design tunnel boring machines suiting to ground, characterized through 
site investigations, topographical and hydrogeological surveys. Long and deep tunnels face different hazards and 
risks compared to tunnelling in shallow overburden. 


The standard on tunnelling in rock masses IS 15026 was first published in 2002. In this revision, the tunnelling 
method in rock masses has been grouped into two parts. This standard (Part 2) covers guidelines for mechanized 
tunnelling methods. The other part being: 


Part 1 Conventional tunnelling methods 
This standard covers following important aspects: 


a) Selection of tunnel boring machines; 

b) Geological and geotechnical modelling; 

c) Production aspects of segment lining; 

d) Geotechnical risk management; and 

e) Developments in TBM design to reduce squeezing ground risks. 


This standard does not cover process management for design and manufacturing of TBM segments at this stage. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this 
country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: 


“Recommendation for Gasket Frames in Segmental Tunnel Linings” published by STUVA, Germany. 


ITA COSUF N° 03 “Current Practice on Cross-Passage Design to Support Safety in Rail and Metro Tunnels” 
published by International Tunnelling Association (ITA), Switzerland. 


ITA Report N° 22 “Guidelines for the Design of Segmental Tunnel Linings” published by 
International Tunnelling Association (ITA), Switzerland. 


“Recommendation for the Selection of the Tunnel Boring Machine” published by German 
Tunnelling Committee (ITA-AITES), Germany. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


This standard contributes to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 9 'Industry, innovation and 
infrastructure' towards building resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and 
foster innovation; and Goal 11 ‘Sustainable cities and communities! towards making cities and human settlements 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Indian Standard 
TUNNELLING IN ROCK MASSES — GUIDELINES 


PART 2 MECHANIZED TUNNELLING METHODS BY 
TUNNEL BORING MACHINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 2) provides guidelines for 
construction of tunnels using mechanized tunnelling 
methods through tunnel boring machines (TBM) in 
soil and rock. The scope of this standard is to lay out 
the guidelines and provisions related to design and 
construction of TBM tunnels. This standard also 
defines guidelines for selection of type of TBM for 
tunnelling, geotechnical investigation, interpretation, 
characterization, properties and how they affect TBM 
tunnelling; manufacturing, durability and curing 
criteria for segmental lining, grouting in TBM lining; 
risk and mitigation measures related to TBM tunnels 
and construction of cross-passages in TBM tunnels. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards. 


3 GENERAL 


Tunnelling by tunnel boring machine is a vast 
subject, with overlapping expertise from 
geotechnical, geological, civil, mechanical and urban 


planning. TBM tunnelling is a major form of 
mechanized tunnelling used across the globe and in 
India as well. The standard brings out various 
provisions and guidelines from past experiences and 
current practices for use of practising professional in 
the field of TBM tunnelling. 


4 TYPES OF TBM AND THEIR SUITABILITY 


Tunnel boring machines perform full face 
excavation. TBMs can be manufactured suiting to 
different diameters, ranging from micro TBM less 
than 1 m to TBM for large tunnels greater than 15 m. 
TBMs are available for different geological 
conditions ranging from hard rock to soft ground. 


One of the requirements for use of a TBM is to have 
a detailed assessment of geology along the route of 
the tunnel. A universal machine suiting all types of 
rock and soil conditions does not exist (although 
TBMs with multiple modes of operation are being 
developed). 


TBMs are classified based on mode of operation that 
is, open or closed (see Table 1). In closed mode, the 
excavation chamber of a tunnel boring machine is 
held under a measured and monitored positive 
pressure. The pressure is applied through slurry, 
remoulded earth or compressed air. Based on 
geological conditions, TBMs are operated in open or 
closed modes. 


Table 1 Classification of Tunnel Boring Machines 


(Clause 4) 
SI No. TBM Type Abbreviation Operation Mode 
n~ 
Open Closed 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Competent rock 
a) Gripper GRT ү - 
b) Single shield/open shield OPS ү - 
с) Double shield DOS ү = 


ii) Soft ground/mixed geology/weak 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


51 No. TBM Type Abbreviation Operation Mode 
Open Closed 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
a) Slurry shield SLS ү ү 
b) Earth pressure balance shield EPB ү ү 


Guidelines for areas of application апа selection 
criteria for different TBM types are in Annex B. 


Further advancement has been made into TBMs in 
terms of boring shape for projects with unique 
challenges. Since conventional circular TBMs 
cannot completely meet the requirements of 
underground space exploitation regarding the 
cross-section and space-utilization ratio, 
non-circular TBMs, which are the tunnelling 
equipment for an ideal cross-section, have become 
the new market growth point. List of non-circular 
TBMs available is provided below: 


a) Double-O-tube, multi-circular face, and 
quasi-rectangular shield machines; 


b) The rectangular TBM; and 
c) The horseshoe shaped TBM. 


5 GEOLOGICAL AND GEOTECHNICAL 
MODELLING 


5.1 Characterization of Rock Mass 


5.1.1 A key step is analysis of investigation results 
and geological interpretation followed Ьу 
engineering characterization of rock mass and 
selection of suitable TBM. 


5.1.2 Information collected through a series of 
surface geological mapping, drilling, test tunnelling 
or drifting, soil and rock mechanic testing must be 
interpreted and characterized so that the same could 
be used by the designers and for risk assessment. 
Additional drilling investigations may be planned at 
cross passage locations to have better assessment at 
these locations. 


5.1.3 The standards IS 11315 (Parts 1 to 12), 
describe techniques and formats for collection of 
information on various parameters which are 
subsequently used in rock mass classifications. 


5.1.4 Geophysical methods like electrical resistivity 
test and seismic refraction tests can be performed for 
both shallow and deep tunnels. 


5.1.5 Rock mass classification systems RMR and Q, 
their broad impacts on underground openings are 
described in IS 13365 (Parts 1 and 2). These 
classifications are a part of engineering 
characterization of rock masses. Several empirical 
relationships are available for working out the 
properties such as modulus of deformation and shear 


strength through these systems. However, these 
empirical relationships are to be used with caution. 


5.1.6 Hard ground and soft ground have a high 
impact on TBM design and progress. Particularly the 
strength and abrasivity of rock and their jointing 
pattern affect boring. Therefore, correct assignment 
of engineering properties to various geologic 
domains is of prime importance. 


5.2 Testing for Rock Properties 
5.2.1 Uniaxial Compressive Strength (UCS) 


Uniaxial compressive strength test determined as per 
IS 9143 1s the most basic property that describes the 
intact rock strength; and is measured by 
compression testing machine on rock cylinder 
samples. During TBM tunnelling, samples must be 
extracted from tunnel face and walls by portable 
drilling machines at a regular interval or when there 
is a change in lithology. With the variable advance 
rates in different geology, it is difficult to give an 
interval for regular testing, but it is suggested to test 
at every 500 m, minimum and when there is a change 
in rock type. 


5.2.2 Other methods of strength determination may 
also be used such as point load test as per IS 8764, 
Schmidt’s hammer test as per IS 12608 or geological 
hammer test from specialist literature. 

NOTE — Special literature may include guidelines from 


International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) or any 
other guidelines as per the agreements. 


5.2.3 Other rock mechanic tests on laboratory rock 
samples for each rock type should be conducted. 
These tests are as given below: 


a) Physical properties — Density, porosity, 
water absorption, hardness, slake durability; 
and 

b) Mechanical properties — UCS Schmidt 
hammer test and point load index as above, 
modulus ofelasticity, Poisson's ratio, tensile 
strength, shear strength. 


5.2.4 For TBM tunnels certain specialized tests as 
per specialized literatures are recommended for each 
rock type as encountered in tunnel: 


a) Mohs hardness and Vickers hardness; 
b) Sievers J value; 

c) Brittleness J value S20; and 

d) Cerchar abrasivity index. 


NOTE — Special literatures may include guidelines 
from International Society for Rock Mechanics 
(ISRM), (NTNU/SINTEF), (CAI) or any other 
guidelines as per the agreements. 


5.2.5 Some of the analysis does require rock joint 
characteristics such as Joint stiffness which may be 
determined from rock cores from core drilling 
campaign or visible rock exposures in the 
surroundings. 


5.2.6 Ideally 10 samples should be tested for each 
rock type for the various rock mechanic properties 
but minimum of 05 samples shall be required for 
each rock type. 


5.3 Collection of Geological and Geotechnical 
Data during Construction 


The geological model for a TBM tunnel is developed 
through a series of investigations during feasibility 
and investigation stages. By the time the project 1s 
put through bidding process, the base line 
geotechnical reports should be prepared. However, 
for detailed design if some additional testing is 
required, the same must be conducted prior to 
commencement of construction. It should be clearly 
understood that detailed investigations should be 
carried out during design stage and well before 
commencement of construction. Only confirmatory 
tests for detailed design as mentioned above may be 
conducted prior to construction. 


On the other hand, there may be situations where 
supplementary tests are required even during the 
construction if there are substantial variations. Such 
cases need to be dealt carefully with the impact on 
project safety and timelines. 


However, collection of geological data and rock 
classification is a part of tunnelling cycle and must 
be conducted for characterization of rock mass and 
efficacy or suitability of tunnel supports for various 
situations. Collection of data is different in case of 
open TBMs when compared to double shield TBMs 
where neither the face nor walls are visible. It has 
been experienced that the difficult ground conditions 
and extra ordinary geological conditions cause 
considerable hold-ups and extra cost particularly if 
conditions are not as predicted. 


5.3.1 It should be noted that, for generation of 
geological data and preparation of maps, rock 
classification should be carried out prudently and 
accurately as number of activities such as 
installation of rock supports particularly in open 
TBMs is dependent on the same. In all types of 
TBM tunnels, geological records are to be preserved 
for reference when problems occur in the operation 
and maintenance stage. Such record shall be handy 
for undertaking repairs in future. On the other hand, 
these geological conditions often become a matter of 
dispute and therefore reliable and time-tested 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


systems should be developed and implemented for 
generation and record of geological data. 


5.3.2 Several types of TBMs are in use and every 
type of machine has different facilities for recording 
of data. In open type or main beam or shaft 
machines there is a gap between the cutter head and 
backup support systems. This opening is used for 
recording of geological data and preparation of 3D 
geological maps of the excavated surfaces. In the 
TBMs, it may be noted that it is not possible to 
record the face data continuously as the cutter head 
is in operation at the face. When the situation 
demands, cutter head may be retracted back for 
repairs or maintenance purposes during which face 
inspection is possible by entering through the cutter 
head window. However, such occasions neither are 
at regular intervals nor frequent to generate the 
geological information continuously. Rarely, cutter 
head may also be retracted solely for the purpose of 
geological inspection. 


5.3.3 For documentation of rock conditions at the 
face, cutter head embedded with cameras could be 
used. Existing machines could also be upgraded 
with cameras for geological mapping. Qualified 
personnel study the pictures and develop the records 
therefrom. Such state-of-the-art devices be used to 
generate data in invisible areas which cannot be 
accessed for physical inspection. 


5.3.4 For mapping of the walls, conventional 3D 
geological mapping with details of discontinuities 
together with recording of other parameters used for 
rock mass classification systems is required. 

NOTE — In view of the severity of the site conditions, 


Engineer-in-charge may take a decision to perform other 
methods for collection of data required in 5.3.4. 


5.3.5 Duration of time consumed for geological 
mapping after each tunnelling cycle, may be decided 
as agreed to between the interested parties. 


5.4 Post Construction phase 


Wherever possible, relevant geophysical tests 
should be carried out post construction to capture 
impact of TBM tunnelling to mitigate risk of post 
construction damage to surrounding ground and 
built environment. 


6 SEGMENTAL LINING 


6.1 Types 
Segmental lining can be of following types: 


a) Re-bar reinforced cement concrete; 

b) Steel fibre reinforced concrete; 

c) Hybrid system (combination of 
reinforcement bars and steel fibers); 

d) Any of the above with addition of synthetic 
fibres to cater for fire loads; and 


e) Hollow steel segments for special locations 
along the tunnel. 


Selection of lining types depend on project 
requirements and suitability. 


6.2 Joints 


TBM segment lining consists of circumferential and 
radial joints. Circumferential joints are formed at 
junction of two successive lining rings and radial 
joints are formed between various segments of same 
segment ring. 


Depending upon segment shape, circumferential 
joints can be straight, tapered trapezoidal and 
tapered universal. Tapered universal ring 18 
recommended for cases where there are horizontal 
and vertical curves along tunnel alignment as it gives 
flexibility for correction in tunnel alignment through 
ring sequencing. Other segment shapes shall be 
usedfor special design, construction, or project 
requirement. 


Radial joints are flat or curved. They shall be chosen 
based on stresses permissible at the segment joints 
and thickness of segmental lining. Curved joints 
have advantage of avoiding damages due to 
ovalization but have higher steel requirements due 
to concentrated bursting stresses. The curved joints 
shall be followed in a project unless there is a special 
design, construction, or project requirement for flat 
joints. 

6.3 Connections 

The connections are made with assemblies 
associated with TBM segments. They shall be 
properly designed for structural and functional 


requirements as per IS 800. The assemblies are 
mentioned as below: 


a) Gaskets or sealings; 


EXTRODOS 


ПЧ 


4 
^ SEGMENT 


E 


b) Erector holes; 

c) Lifting holes; 

d) Segment connecting bolts/connectors and 
sleeves; 

e) Thrust pressure distribution pads; 

f) Dowels and guiding rods; and 

g) Bolt and fastening system. 


6.4 Sealings 


To seal circumferential joints, elastomeric gaskets 
are placed around the segments like a frame near the 
lining extrados. It is important to select the right 
gasket material, profile geometry and groove 
geometry for a durable sealing over the service life 
of structure. Overall performance of sealings also 
depend upon complex interaction between 
dimensional tolerances of sealing material 
properties, segment production and ring installation 
(see Fig. 1). 


6.4.1 Types of Gaskets based on Fixity to Segment 


Glue-in gaskets are glued into gasket groove with a 
special adhesive after casting of segments. However, 
these gaskets can loosen or leave the groove during 
handling and installation of segments. 


Anchored gaskets are placed inside the segment 
mould before casting of segments. Anchored gaskets 
provide higher bonding force through gasket legs 
embedded in concrete during segment production. 
These gaskets also provide an extended seepage path 
for water leakage during service life. Improper 
segment handling from production to installation 
stages may result in permanent unbinding of gasket 
from and may render the segments useless 
(see Fig. 2). Gaskets shall be re-inspected and 
repaired before segment installation 


" WATER FLOW 


CONTACT ~ 
PRESSURE 


| SEALING 
GASKETS 


FIG. 1 SEALING MECHANISM OF GASKETED JOINTS IN SEGMENTAL LINING 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


FiG. 2 REPRESENTATIVE ILLUSTRATION OF GLUE-IN AND ANCHORED 
GASKETS BASED ON FIXITY TO SEGMENT 


6.4.2 Types of Gaskets based on Affinity to Water 


Compressible gaskets are made of EPDM (ethylene 
propylene diene monomer) which achieves water 
tightness by compression of two gaskets of adjacent 
segments during ring assembly. 


Hydrophilic gaskets are composite seals made of 
EPDM and a hydrophilic material which swells in 
the presence of water to ensure the designed water 
tightness. These can be either slotted hydrophilic or 
co-extruded hydrophilic type. Such gaskets require 


г GLUE IN 


careful handling and storage as the hydrophilic 
material can swell before installation upon exposure 
to water/moisture and loose its effectiveness to swell 
post ring installation (see Fig. 3). 


6.4.3 Requirements and Testing 


Requirements for elastomeric material of gasket 
profiles and frames is recommended in Table 2 and 
Table 3. Compliance with these requirements shall 
be checked for initial acceptance and suitability 
testing. 


LOTTE! 
IYDROPHILLIC 


г CO-EXTRUDED 
| HYDROPHILIC 


FIG. 3 REPRESENTATIVE ILLUSTRATION FOR DIFFERENT GASKETS BASED ON AFFINITY TO WATER 


Table 2 Test Requirements for Elastomeric Material of Gasket Profiles and Frames 


(Clause 6.4.3) 
51 Type of Test Requirement Testing as per Indian 
No. Standard 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
i) | Profile tolerances Class E2, Min IS 16752 
ii) | Material properties 
a) Hardness Stated value + 5 IRHD IS 3400 (Part 2) 
b) Tensile strength > 9 MPa IS 3400 (Part 1) 
c) Elongation at break Hardness Elongation at Break IS 3400 (Part 1) 
56 — 65 > 300 percent 
IRHD 
66 — 75 > 200 percent 
IRHD 
76-85 > 175 percent 
IRHD 
ш) | Compression set < 20 percent IS 3400 (Part 10/Sec 1) 
iv) | Ozone resistance No crack IS 3400 (Part 20) 
v) | Artificial ageing 
a) Change of hardness, — 5 percent to + 8 percent IS 3400 (Part 2) 
percent 
b) Change of tensile strength, — 20 percent to + 10 percent IS 3400 (Part 1) 
percent 
c) Change of elongation at — 30 percent to + 10 percent IS 3400 (Part 1) 
break, percent 
vi) | Stress relaxation, percent < 45 percent IS 3400 (Part 28) 
vii) | Restorative capacity > 90 percent Refer specialist literature 
for test procedure 
viii) | Deflection force for gasket frame | Refer specialist literature for test procedure and requirement 
and gasket corner 
ix) | Water tightness Refer specialist literature for test procedure and requirement 
NOTE — Special literatures may include ISO 5893 : 2019 and STUVA recommendation or any other guidelines as per agreement 
between the parties. 


In above Table 2, test for deflection force and water 
tightness are performed for suitability testing to 
groove geometry and water pressure. 
tightness test, water pressure shall be kept at least 
two times the design water pressure to cater for 


long-term relaxation. 


Gasket manufacturing tolerances on profile height 
and width are normally for the tolerance class E2 as 


In water 


ring. 


per IS 16752. However, tight tolerance class E1 may 
be specified for better performance (see Table 3). 
Profile width should be at least 1.6 times the profile 
height to prevent tilting of profile while erecting the 


For ozone resistance test as per IS 3400 (Part 20), 
recommended test conditions are given at Table 4. 


Table 3 Allowed Tolerances for Profile Height and Width According to IS 16752 


(Clause 6.4.3) 
SI No. Profile Height and Width, in mm 
a) (2) 
1) С1а$5 2]0tol6 216to25 >251040 240(063 263100 
ii) El + 0.5 mm + 0.7 mm + 0.8 mm + 1.0 mm + 1.3 mm 
iii) E2 + 0.8 mm + 1.0 mm + 1.3 mm + 1.6 mm + 2.0 mm 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 4 Test Conditions for Ozone Resistance Testing 
(Clause 6.4.3) 


SI No. Parameter Value 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Ozone concentration 50+5 pphm 

ii) Temperature 40+2°С 
ш) Prestress (conditioning) 72+0/-2h 
iv) Action time 48+0/-2h 
v) Strain at IRHD hardness 36 to 75 IRHD 20 90-42 96 
Strain at IRHD hardness 76 to 85 IRHD 15%+2% 
vi) Relative air humidity 55 + 5 % 


6.4.4 Gaps and Offsets 


Gap is the distance between concrete surface of 
adjacent segments after erecting a ring. Offset is 
mutual displacement of opposing gasket frames 
perpendicular to the gasket axis (see Fig. 4). Higher 
than designed gap or offset for a particular profile 
height and groove base distance reduces the 
compression force on the gasket, required to achieve 
specified water tightness. 


Gaps and offsets result due to cumulative effect of 
tolerances on segment manufacturing and ring 
installation and the connection system used between 
adjacent segments. Gaskets should be tested for 
water tightness with extreme combination of gaps 
and offsets permitted during construction. 5 mm gap 
and 10 mm offset is generally defined as an upper 
limit at which segments should be installed. 


6.5 Design Methods 


Design of TBM segmental linings can be done 
through various methods. It is recommended to 


GROOVE BASE 
DISTANCE 


follow at least one method for preliminary design 
and at least two methods (with validation of results) 
for detailed design of the tunnel lining. Additional 
design methods (as given below) can be used to 
verify or optimize the design during construction 
and site-specific behaviour observed from 
instrumentation and monitoring data. 


a) Analytical approach 


Curtis-Muir Wood method shall be used to 
carry out design. 


b) Numerical approach 


Numerical modelling can be done on a 
numerical geotechnical model in 2D or 3D 
and/or a beam-spring model in structural 
model. 


Continuum models are generally preferred for 
simplicity; although, discontinuum model can also 
be done for detailed analysis on case-to-case basis. 


I-— OFFSET 


—-| OFFSET - 


FIG. 4 ILLUSTRATION OF GAPS AND OFFSETS AT SEALINGS IN SEGMENTAL LINING 


During the design process following parameters, in 
addition to general structural and geotechnical 
design criteria, shall be considered: 


a) Allowable surface settlements and effects of 
liquefaction (short term, due to deflection of 
tunnel linings and long term). 

b) Allowable volume loss — Recommended 
maximum allowable value for soft ground is 
1 percent, however may vary as per 
geological conditions and impact on third 
party assets in the tunnel influence zone. 

c) Building/utility damage assessment shall be 
carried out as per specialist literature. 

d) Design shall Бе validated from 
instrumentation and monitoring results 
obtained during construction апа 
optimization shall be done if required. 

e) Design shall include the checks for 
estimated stresses due to fabrication, 
demolding, handling, —storage/stacking, 
transportation, ring — assembly/erection, 
floatation, and seismicity. 

f) Design shall include splitting tensile checks 
due to thrust force from TBM jacks. 

g) Design shall include checks for primary and 
secondary grouting. 

h) Design shall include checks for stress 
concentration due to compression of 
waterproofing gaskets. 

j) Design shall include checks of the 
bolts/inserts and their impact on TBM 
segment. 

k) Load cases and load factors shall be as per 
relevant Indian standards ог other 
international guidelines. 

m) Design shall reduce the capacity of lining at 
joints due to discontinuity. 


6.6 Manufacture of Precast Segments 
6.6.1 Concrete Mix Design 


Precast concrete segments remain in contact with 
ground during their entire service life and hence 
should be of required durability. Depending on 
exposure conditions, all concrete ingredients and 
concrete manufacturing shall be quality controlled in 
accordance with IS 456 and IS 10262. Development 
of mix design should be conducted well in advance 
considering exposure conditions during production 
and designed service life. 


6.6.2 Reinforcements 


Precast concrete segments are reinforced with steel 
reinforcement bars or fibres (steel or polypropylene) 
or a combination of both. When reinforced with 
only steel reinforcement bars, categorization is done 
as transverse (to resist main tunnel forces), 
longitudinal (to resist temperature and shrinkage) or 
joint/special reinforcement (to resist forces from 


TBM Jacks or at vicinity of joints). Reinforcement 
spacing shall allow fixing of built-in-parts in the 
segment mould before casting. Segment design shall 
specify permitted rebar/reinforcement bar cage 
placement tolerances. 


For an improved post-cracking flexure strength, 
crack control and overall economy, fibre 
reinforcements should be used for design and 
manufacture of precast concrete segments, in 
accordance with specialist literature supported with 
field testing. Adoption of design with reinforcement 
bars, fibres or hybrid solution should be confirmed 
against specified performance requirements through 
full scale bending test of casted precast segment. 
Production and testing shall continue throughout 
segment casting to demonstrate that the specified 
performance is being achieved. Testing of concrete 
shall demonstrate that the fibres are uniformly 
distributed throughout the concrete mix. 


6.6.3 Fire Resistance 


During tunnel fire, thermal gradients develop in 
concrete lining which result in spalling due to 
thermal expansion of concrete due to restraint and 
buildup of water vapour pressure. One method to 
provide fire resistance 18 addition of 
micro-polypropylene (PP) fibers with dosage 
1 kg/m? to 2 kg/m? of concrete which significantly 
reduces risk of spalling. Micro PP fibers melt before 
reaching temperature of 160 ?C providing channels 
for escape of water vapour. Full scale fire testing 
may be performed on precast concrete segments to 
determine dosage for ensuring performance under 
complex scenarios. For more details, guidance from 
IS/ISO 834 (Parts 1 to 9) may be taken. Minimum 
nominal cover of 40 mm shall be provided for 4 h 
fire resistance as per IS 456. 


6.6.4 Curing of Segments 


Depending on project requirements for faster 
production, steam curing shall be considered. 
Precast segments are steam cured in static or 
carousel-based segment production method, to 
achieve required demoulding strength (depending 
on design check for segment) within 8 h of casting. 
Steam curing shall be done at 100 percent relative 
humidity and maximum steam temperature limited 
to 70 °C. During application/discontinuing of the 
steam curing, the ambient air temperature shall 
change at a rate not exceeding 22 °C per hour. 
Generally, duration of steam curing at peak 
temperature is kept between 6 h to 8 h. Trials shall 
be done to ascertain correct duration of steam 
curing, to achieve desired concrete strength. 


Generally, 2 h to 4 h after placing concrete and after 
the concrete has undergone initial set, the first 
application. of steam should be made, unless 
retarders are used, in which case the waiting period 


before application of the steam should be increased 
to4hto6h. Water curing methods to be used from 
the time concrete is placed until steam is first 
applied. Adding hot water in cold weather facilitates 
curing as well as reduces thermal gradient inside 
concrete segment during steam curing. Temperature 
monitoring may be documented for checking 
adverse effects of high curing temperature. 


Post demoulding, curing compound shall be applied 
as an alternate to further water curing of concrete 
ensuring complete personal protection equipment. 
The segment surface temperature during application 
of curing compound should not be more than 
atmospheric temperature by 20 °C. 


6.6.5 Durability of Precast Segments 


Durability of concrete precast segments should be 
ensured to meet requirements of load bearing 
capacity of the ring and its individual components, 
water tightness under designed ground water 
pressures, avoiding spalling and excessive 
degradation due to corrosion of reinforcements or 
aging of concrete by carbonation over the designed 
life period. 


6.6.5.1 Design life and crack width 


Precast segments are not easily repairable or 
serviceable and hence designed for minimum 
100 year service life. Crack widths should be 
limited to less than 0.2 mm during design and 
subsequently during service stage. Precautions shall 
be taken to avoid thermal cracking of concrete 
during casting. 


6.6.5.2 Carbonation of concrete and chloride/ 
sulphate attack 


Mostly durability is affected due to carbonation of 
concrete and severe exposure towards sulphate 
attack from ground water on reinforcements, 
amongst others. Maximum acid soluble chloride 
content shall be limited to 0.4 kg/m? and water 
soluble sulphate content expressed as SO; shall be 
limited to 4 percent by mass of cement as per IS 456. 
However, provision of minimum concrete cover of 
40 mm on intrados and extrados of precast concrete 
segments for steel reinforcement bars shall be 
followed. 


6.6.5.3 Concrete permeability of concrete 


Maximum depth of water penetration shall be 
restricted to 10 mm for a sample prepared and tested 
at design ground water pressure as per IS 3085 for 
72 h. 


6.6.5.4 Chloride ion penetration 


Chloride attack poses a significant threat to 
reinforced concrete especially for structures that are 
likely to be exposed to high concentrations of salts. 
Chloride attack results in corrosion of steel 
reinforcement, leading to cracking and spalling of 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


concrete. Resistance to chloride ion permeability is 
important to prevent attack on steel reinforcements. 
Maximum chloride permeability rating shall be 
specified depending upon project exposure 
conditions; however, no individual test result shall 
exceed 1 000 coulombs at concrete age of 28 days. 
For test methods and frequency of chloride ion 
penetration testing, special literature may be 
referred. 

NOTE — Special literature тау include 

ISO 1920 (Part 11) : 2013 ‘Testing of concrete: Part 11 

Determination of the chloride resistance of concrete, 


unidirectional diffusion’ or any other guidelines as per the 
agreements. 


6.6.5.5 Alkali silica reaction (ASR) 


ASR is a heterogeneous chemical reaction which 
takes place in aggregate particles between the 
alkaline pore solution of the cement paste and silica 
in the aggregate particles. All aggregates shall be 
tested for alkali silica reaction as рег 
IS 2386 (Part 7) and deleterious content as per 
IS 2386 (Part 2). The aggregates should be 
innocuous for alkali reactivity and shall have 
deleterious content limited to 2 percent by mass. 
See also IS 383. 


6.6.5.6 Delayed ettringite formation (DEF) 


DEF is expansion and cracking of concrete 
associated with the delayed formation of the mineral 
ettringite which is a normal product of early cement 
hydration. DEF should be prevented by limiting the 
internal concrete temperature to 70 °C during its 
early life. 


6.6.5.7 Numerical assessment of design life 


Various softwares are available to assess design life 
of structures using inputs of concrete quality and 
properties of surrounding environment and provide 
the design life of structure as output. These 
techniques shall be adopted to ensure the desired 
design life of structure. 


6.7 Quality Control in Precast Concrete Segment 
Production 


Quality control is required to establish reasonable 
confidence in the performance of the concrete mix 
and its constituents to deliver the required 
performance throughout the design life of the 
structure. Projects may define their own frequency 
and specific requirements; however, testing is 
conducted for initial suitability and confidence in 
control over continuous production process. 


A quality control plan shall list out all factors 
responsible for influencing quality of concrete as 
well as Initial suitability and production process. 


Testing for concrete shall be carried for checking 
concrete compressive strength, splitting tensile 
strength, flexure strength, permeability and other 


tests related with durability as per IS 456 and 
requirements stated in 6.6.5 of this standard to the 
extent applicable. 


6.7.1 Dimensional Control for Segment Moulds 


Tolerance to mould dimensions shall be agreed with 
manufacturer during design of each mould catering 
to temperature variations and number of casting 
cycles expected at segment casting yard. After 
fabrication, dimensional accuracy (angles, 
distances, and torsion) shall be ascertained before 
using them for factory production. After being 
reused, say for 30 times post commissioning of 
casting factory, each mould shall be rechecked for 
dimensional accuracy. Subsequently, during 
continuous production, each mould shall be 
rechecked for dimensional accuracy at every 
200 reuses and readjusted if necessary. Allowable 
tolerances to mould dimensions during any stage of 


check are recommended in Table 5. 


6.7.2 Fabrication Control апа | Installation 
Tolerance for Precast Segments 
These are allowable deviations from design 


dimensions in casted segments or from designed 
installation geometry, which do not result in damage 
to the segmental lining or rendering it unusable for 
the intended function. Segment design should 
always be checked for tolerances comprising of 
fabrication and installation tolerances separately for 
both individual segments and complete ring. 


6.7.2.1 Fabrication tolerance 


Fabrication tolerances for every segment for first 
10 castings from a new mould should be measured 
and subsequently, say for every 50% casting. 
Recommended fabrication tolerances for precast 
segments are provided in Table 6. 


Table5 Allowable Tolerances to Mould Dimensions 
(Clause 6.7.1) 


SI No. Description of Mould Dimension Tolerance 
(1) Q) (3) 
i) Width + 0.5 mm 
il) Developed length between lateral surfaces + 1.0 mm 
iii) Thickness + 1.0 mm 
iv) Maximum distortion + 1.0 mm 
v) Distance between radial face and supports of angle template + 0.2 mm 
vi) Roundness of mould bottom + 1.0 mm 
vii) Position of inserts and block-outs between rings and segments + 1.0 mm 


Table 6 Fabrication Tolerances for Precast Segments 
(Clause 6.7.2.1) 


SI Description Tolerances based on Inner 
No. Ring Diameter 
\ 
<8.0m > 11.0 т 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Longitudinal joints tolerances (based on the load transfer surface) 
a) Longitudinal joint deformation + 0.3 mm +0.5 mm 
b) Angular deviation of the longitudinal joint + 0.5 mm + 0.7 mm 
с) Addition rule of 1.1 and 1.2 + 0.6 mm +0.9 mm 
i) Overall segment deviations (based on the median plane) 
a) Segment width + 0.5 mm + 0.7 mm 
b) Segment thickness +3.0 mm + 4.0 mm 
с) Segment arch length + 0.6 mm +0.7 mm 
d) Inner radius of each segment +1.5 mm + 2.5 mm 
е) Difference of the diagonal length of a segment to the target + 1.0 mm + 2.0 mm 
length 
f) Vertical spacing of the fourth segment corner from the +5.0 mm +8.0 mm 


plane formed by the other three corners 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 6 (Concluded) 


51 Description Tolerances based on Inner 
No. Ring Diameter 
1 
<8.0m >11.0m 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
ii) Sealing groove 
a) Sealing groove width + 0.2 mm +0.2 mm 
b) Sealing groove depth + 0.2 mm +0.2 mm 
c) Position of sealing groove axis +1.0 mm +1.0mm 
iv) .Flatness of the contact zones 
a) Longitudinal and ring joint + 0.3 mm +0.5 mm 
v) Tolerances on the entire segment ring 
a) Outside diameter +10mm +15mm 
b) Inside diameter +10mm +15mm 
c) Outer circumference (measured at three heights) +30 mm + 45 mm 
vi) Position of the fixing components 
a) Erector cones +2.0 mm +2.0 mm 
b) Spiral pockets and bushings + 1.0mm +1.0mm 


NOTES 


1 Interpolate the values for inner ring diameter between 8 m and 11 m. 

2 Individual maximum tolerances are not allowed to add up and go beyond tolerances on entire segment ring. 

3 In the case of inconsistency between two dependent tolerances, the more stringent shall be adopted. 

4 Relaxation in tolerances for gasket groove shall be in accordance with the requirements of the gasket supplier/gasket type after 


ensuring performance for specified conditions. 


5 Tolerances on the entire segment ring relate to the tolerances of the master ring only. For these any two rings shall be erected on 
a flat and level base with the top ring rotated one bolt pitch from the bottom ring with the bolts inserted. The base ring shall be 
retained as the master ring. Checks shall be made against the master ring at intervals not exceeding 1 in every 200 produced rings. 


6.7.2.2 Dimensional control measurement records of 
individual segments and ring sets preferably after 
segment striping should be maintained as per project 
requirement. Laser based measurement of moulds 
and segment which deliver a complete 3D geometry 
check to detect deviations in the sub-millimetre 
range may also be employed. Tolerances on 
complete ring can be measured by physically 
placing one ring on top of another ring or comparing 
digitized models of ring geometry generated by a 


laser interferometer with the theoretical ring 
geometry. 


6.7.2.3 Installation tolerances 


Deviations from design ring geometry can be 
observed due to inaccurate ring installation. 
Excessive deviation from installation tolerances lead 
to reduced advance rates, joint misalignments, 
reduced sealing performance and overall functional 
performance of the segment (see Table 7). 


Table 7 Recommended Installation Tolerances for Segment Rings 
(Clause 6.7.2.3) 


51 Description of Inaccuracy Recommended Range 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Maximum shape ovalization on diameter 
a) For inner diameter up to 8 m + 0.25 percent of ID 
b) For inner diameter more than 8 m + 0.50 percent of ID 
i) Maximum ring roll (absolute) + 100 mm 
iii) Maximum ring roll (relative) +10mm 


iv) Joint offset/steps or lips 


v) Maximum gap between joint contact faces 


vi) Tolerance on absolute vertical position of 


segment invert 
vii) Planarity of faces of the ring 


11 


+5mmto+ 10mm 


+5mm 


+ 75 mm 


+ 0.75 mm from theoretical plane 


Table 8 Recommended Remedial Measures for Damage Repair during Segment Production 


(Clause 6.8) 
51 Damage Type Description Remedial Measure 
No. 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 

i) Voids Small voids visible on surface Closure of voids by stopping with 
cement-bound mortar and final surface 
smoothing. 

i) Cracks Cracks with more than 0.2 mm opening Penetration can be done with epoxy resin. 


ш) — Spalling 


segment edges 


iv) Breakage 


Separation of concrete layer from 
segment normally near the groove or 


Within groove, contact areas, near 


erector cones or bolting gaps 


v) Pockets 
reinforcement 


Locally limited and do not reach 


Cracks less than 0.2 mm can be penetrated 
with glue. 


Post forming with cement mortar and final 
forming for spalling of less than 5 mm 
depth and/or less than 20 m length. Spalling 
greater than 30 mm will need epoxy resin 
for reconstructing original geometry. 


Upto 8 mm depth and 50 mm length 
breakage can be repaired with closure of 
voids Бу stopping with non-shrink 
cement-bound mortar and final surface 
smoothing. 


Reach intact concrete zone and fill with 
non-shrink cement-bound mortar. 


6.8 Damages of Concrete TBM Segmental 
Linings 

Damages to concrete TBM segment lining can occur 
during production, transportation, ring building and 
TBM advancing. Some of the production defects and 
their recommended remedial measures are provided 
in Table 8. 


7 ANNULUS GROUTING 


Annulus grouting is the construction method to fill 
up the annular gap between tunnel excavation and 
installed segmental lining. Backfill grout ensures 
homogenous contact of installed segment lining with 
the ground, controls further ground movement and 
surface settlement due to volume loss at shield, 
stabilizes segmental lining in the ground and 
improve its water tightness. Grout should be 
pumpable to the point of injection without 
segregation or bleeding, for the required distances 
and time. Grout should attain adequate strength to 
not de-bond from surrounding ground. 


7.1 Grout Mixes 


7.1.1 Based on reactivity, mortar-based grout mix 
can be divided into three categories: 


a) Active — Full hydration of binder 
component occurs. Portland cement 
content is normally more than 200 kg/m? in 
active mixes. 

b) Semi-inert — Minor hydration of binder 
takes place. Portland cement content varies 
between 50 kg/m? to 200 kg/m’. 


с) Inert — No binder content is present. 


Selection of type of grout depends on project 
requirements like risk of settlement, future 
deformation allowance, machine downtime during 
no operation and ground conditions. 


7.1.2 Based on number of components, grout mix 
can be divided into following categories. 


7.1.2.1 Single component 


Mixture of sand, binder like cement or lime, water 
and plasticizer which should be sufficiently 
workable from time of mixing to injection to ensure 
pumpability of mix. All components are transported 
to back system of TBM through vehicles which 
requires detailed logistics planning. 


7.1.2.2 Two component 


Achieves better filling of annular void compared to 
single component but requires more sophisticated 
equipment and maintenance to prevent clogging of 
injection nozzles. Two components are referred to as 
A/B grouts where component A is a stable mortar 
filler comprising of cement, Bentonite, water, etc; 
and component B 1s hydration accelerating liquid 
like sodium silicate, etc mixed to component A at 
point of injection. Both components are transported 
through pipes and have easy logistics. Site trials 
should be conducted to demonstrate complete 
penetration of grout behind installed segment lining 
for the selected mix proportions (see Table 9). 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 9 Benefits of Single and Two Component Grout Mix 
(Clause 7.1.2.2) 


51 Consideration Single Component Two Component 

No. 

(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Strength Ч = 
i) Соз Y — 
iii) Transportation = Y 
iv) Dilution due to groundwater - ү 
v) Early set time — ү 
vi) Early support = ү 

vii) Fluidity = ү 

viii) Batching = ү 
ix) | Maintenance - ү 


7.1.2.3 Pea gravel 


In case of hard rock geology, annular gap can also 
be backfilled with pea gravel (washed gravel with 
diameter 8 mm to 12 mm mostly round and without 
any fines) for immediate stabilization of segment 
lining. Pea gravel is pneumatically pumped through 
segment holes or blow pipes which fills annulus at 
angle of repose. Subsequently, voids in pea gravel 
are filled with cement grout through secondary grout 
operation. 


7.2 Grouting 


7.2.1 Primary annulus grouting can be conducted 
through channels provided in the tail shield 
(see Fig. 5) and/or through holes in the segment 
lining. 


a) When grouting through tail shield, multiple 
rows of tail seal brushes, preferably made of 
steel, are filled with grease to close the gap 
between the shield tail and segment lining 


extrados and protect against entry of ground 
water, grout, etc. The pressure of grease is 
always maintained above the pressure of 
annulus grout. 

b) When grouting through holes provided in 
segment lining, there is higher risk of 
settlement as annular gap remains unfilled 
for a longer time. 


7.2.2 Secondary grouting is performed through holes 
in segment lining and required to fill voids left after 
primary annulus grout. Void detection behind 
segment lining can be performed randomly at crown 
portion with geophysical tests like ground 
penetrating radar, etc. The secondary grout pressures 
shall be assessed with respect to the capacity of 
segmental lining against stresses generated due to 
localized pressures and resulting  ovalization. 
Monitoring of lining deformation resulting from 
secondary grouting shall be done during and post 
activity. 


LULA 
(| (C). CHECK varves 


! HIGH PRESSURE 
WATER FLUSH 


LONGITUDINAL AXIS OF TUNNEL 


BUILDING GROUND 


ees LLLA 


TAIL SEAL BRUSHES -/ 


PILASTERS Д 


COMPONENT A 
(GROUT) 
! І 
СОМРОМЕМТ В E 
(ACCELERATOR) 
€ —— — c^ | 22 
| DIRECTION OF TBM ADVANCE PEASIERA PILASTER 3 i 
| 
CENTRAL AXIS OF TUNNEL 


CMS SSA 


10 TO 20 cm ! 


TWO COMPONENT GROUT 


É GREASE 


USUAL ARRANGEMENT OF PILASTERS | 


PILASTER 6 


à PILASTER2 


FIG. 5 ANNULUS GROUTING THROUGH TAIL SHIELD 


13 


8 PRINCIPLES FOR DESIGN AND cross-passages to protect the safe area in the 
CONSTRUCTION OF CROSS PASSAGES non-incident tube. During normal operation, the 
cross-passages shall house and protect technical 
equipment of various technical systems 
(for example, low voltage power supply, 
data/communication installations, etc). During 
maintenance, the cross-passages shall support a safe 
working environment for staff. 


8.1 Cross-passages are essential elements of twin-tube 
railway and road transit tunnels. During construction 
and operation, cross-passages serve multiple 
functions. For the operation phase of a tunnel, 
major requirements result from the unique needs of 
normal, maintenance and emergency mode of 
tunnel operation. 8.3 Selection of Cross-passage Shape as Per 


: : Ground Condition 
8.2 During an emergency, cross-passages contribute 


significantly to the safety of tunnels by providing an 8.3.1 The geometry of the cross-section of 
escape route for the tunnel users from the incident to cross-passage are important to identify as per 
the non-incident tube, that is, to a safe area, and by geological and loading condition for safety and 
providing an access route for emergency forces from economical design. The shape of the cr oss-section 
the safe area to the incident tube. Cross-passages depends on the external and internal forces acting on 
need to be designed such that smoke or hazardous the perimeter of the excavated profile as detailed in 
gases may not propagate into or through the Fig. 6. 


USED WHEN THE EXTERNAL FORCES DO NOT LEAD 
TO ANY DAMAGING MOVEMENT OF THE ROCK MASS 
INTO THE TUNNEL.THIS KIND OF TUNNEL IS 
SELF-STABLE. THIS KIND OF SECTION IS VERY 
SUITABLE FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSE. 


га х 
/ 


RECTANGULAR / D-SHAPE 


USED WHEN ONLY VERTICAL FORCES ACT AND 
THERE IS MOVEMENT INTO THE TUNNEL AT CROWN 


SEMI-ELLIPTICAL PARABOLLIC, 
OR SEMI-CIRCULAR 


USED WHEN VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL BOTH THE 
-- — FORCES ACT SIMULTANEOUSLY. THIS KIND OF 
SECTION IS GIVEN ADVANTAGE FOR ACCOMODATION 
OF UTILITY SERVICES AND BETTER HEAD ROOM. 


HORSESHOE, VAULTED 


USED WHEN FORCES ACT FROM ALL THE SIDES. 
THIS KIND OF SHAPE ARE COMMONLY USED FOR 
- SOFT-GROUND CONDITION AND UNDER-WATER 
TUNNELS 
CIRCULAR 


FIG. 6 BASIC CROSS-SECTION SHAPES OF CROSS PASSAGES 


14 


8.4 Location and Dimension 


8.4.1 Where tunnels are provided in twin tube 
configuration, cross passages to the adjacent tube 
can be considered a safe refuge. The cross passage 
should be of at least 2 h fire resistance rated 
construction, and should be equipped with 
self-closing fire rated doors that open in both 
directions. Distance between апу (мо 
cross-passageways and other design requirement 
should be as per SP 7 (Part 4). Special literature may 
also be referred depending upon the project 
requirement. The system shall incorporate a 
walking surface or other approved means for 
passengers to evacuate a train at any point along the 
train way so that they can proceed to the nearest 
station or other point of safety. Cross-passageways 
shall be a minimum of 1 200 mm in clear width and 
2 100 mm in height, if intended of only pedestrians. 
Larger cross passages may be required for 
movement of emergency vehicles as per project 
requirements. 

NOTE — Special literatures may include guidelines from 

NFPA 130 or any other guidelines as per the agreement(s). 
8.5 Design Considerations 


8.5.1 Cross-passages аге used to be designed in 
railway and road infrastructure for both soil and rock 
condition. In exceptional cases, cross-passages are 
used to be designed by the Box-Pushing Method in 
soil condition. For detailed design of cross-passage 
and support arrangements IS 15026 (Part 1), IS 456 
or special literature can be followed. Load 
combinations for design shall be adopted as per 
SP 7 (Part 6), and project requirements. 


NOTE — Special literatures may include guidelines from 
Indian Road Congress, (IRC) SP-91, FHWA-NHI-09-010 
and ITA-COSUF N° 03 "International Tunnelling 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Association" or any other guidelines as per the 
agreement(s). 


8.5.2 During the design of opening for cross passage 
in railway or road transit system where TBM 
segment have been used, the load in tunnel lining 
from which the segments are removed, is transferred 
to the adjacent fully enclosed rings, as illustrated in 
Fig. 7. 


8.5.3 Permanent disruption to the structural response 
of nearby segmental lining and re-distribution of soil 
effective stresses will happen at the opening area 
where cross-passages will be constructed. This 
creates additional stresses on the nearby segments at 
opening area which should be safely distributed to 
other structural elements. The segments located at 
opening of cross-passage must be designed to 
withstand all load cases and combinations which 
they will be subjected during their design life. In 
deciding upon the type of the temporary opening 
support systems, it is important to review the 
geological and geotechnical parameters through 
additional investigations as per site feasibility for 
safe and economical design. The ovalization 
acceptance criteria of the segments at the opening 
location shall be decided as per the project 
requirement considering the Schedule of Dimension 
(SOD) The approach for junction design of 
cross-passage can be analysed using analytical and 
numerical methods of design. 


8.5.4 Different temporary support systems are 
available to create an opening on the precast 
concrete segments. Temporary steel bracing can be 
installed inside of tunnel at opening space to provide 
support and mitigate ring ovalization resulting from 
opening and cross passage excavation. Commonly 
used systems are mentioned in Fig. 8 to Fig. 11. 


TUNNEL SEGMENT 


FIG. 7 STRESS DISTRIBUTION AROUND OPENING IN SEGMENTAL LINING 


FIG. 8 STEEL LINTEL AND SILL BEAMS IN CONJUNCTION WITH STEEL PROPS 


FIG. 9 HALF-MOON SUPPORT FRAME 


FIG. 10 FULL-MOON SUPPORT FRAME 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Fic. 11 PREFABRICATED STEEL SEGMENTS 


8.6 Precautions for Cross Passage Construction 


Problems encountered during сгоѕѕ-раѕѕаре 
construction and precautions required are given as 
below. 


8.6.1 Ingress of Water and Proper Assessment of the 
Ground Condition 


Water can inflow through rock-joints during 
construction of opening for cross-passage if water 
level is high, which can cause difficulty in 
cross-passage construction. Adequate preparedness 
for fillings of the joints with grouting arrangement 
shall be readily available. The ground condition 
shall be accurately assessed to minimize the risk of 
failure. These issues may cause chimney formation 
and an unsafe working environment. Probe-drilling 
shall be done before opening for cross-passage from 
safety aspect. 


8.6.2 Inadequate Design and Construction Scheme 


Inappropriate support arrangement and construction 
scheme can trigger the risk for failure of 
cross-passage. It is to be ensured before construction 
that the support systems are in order as per the 
ground and loading condition. 


8.6.3 Material and Equipment Issue 


Use of construction material and equipment with 
inadequate properties may lead to failure of 
cross-passage. Suitable quality material and 
equipment as per project specifications shall be 
used. 


8.6.4 Delay in the Installation of Support System 


The delay in the installation of support system may 
lead to failure in critical ground condition. Skilled 
person shall be deployed at site to take decision 
instantly upon observing the criticality of the ground 
condition to minimize the risk of failure. The 
materials and equipment shall be in place to carry 


out the task as per drawings, construction 


methodology and specifications. 
9 FACE PRESSURES 


If the ground is unstable, weak enough with high 
deformations than desired or groundwater exist at 
the tunnel face with undesirable water inflow, then 
it should be kept under pressure. The pressure in the 
work chamber should be kept at a level that allows 
stable working conditions. If it is too low an 
uncontrolled collapse into the chamber could occur 
and if it is high, it may cause a ‘blow ош” or 
deformation of the ground surface. 


10 URBAN TUNNELLING AND ITS 
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR 
TUNNEL DESIGN 


10.1 Ground and Sub-Surface Displacements 


Ground and subsurface displacements shall be 
considered as an important criterion in design and 
construction of tunnel. The settlement shall be 
calculated with empirical approach. The estimation 
of displacement shall be verified with analytical and 
numerical approaches. 


During construction, ground movement records and 
controls shall be put in place. Various limits on 
ground movement shall be defined as per design, 
and demarked with colors such as green, amber and 
red as per the severity of ground movement. The 
data collected on ground movements during 
construction shall be used to correlate with design 
values and validation/review of design shall be 
carried out, if required. 


10.2 Tunnelling Induced Vibrations 


All tunnel induced vibrations shall be within limits 
to have minimum impact on the state of structural 
health of third-party structures/buildings in the 
influence zone of construction. 


10.2 Tunnelling Induced Vibrations 


The limits of maximum ground vibration allowed on buildings are mentioned below: 


Building Type of Structure Frequency Vibration 
Class Limits 
Hz mm/s 
I Industrial reinforced concrete and steel 10 — 60 30 
buildings and structures 60 — 90 30 — 40 
II Buildings with concrete foundations and 10-60 18 
floors; Underground structures 60—90 18—25 
ш Buildings with concrete foundations and 10 — 60 12 
basement floor, wooden floors and 60 — 90 12—18 
brickwork walls 
IV Buildings sensitive to vibrations or 10 — 60 8 
requiring protection 60—90 8—12 


Additional limits of vibration for special cases аге as below: 


Case Maximum Allowed Limit 
mm/s 
For water supply, gas supply and fuel supply pile 5 
lines 
Inside the residential/office buildings 5 


Detailed study on vibration impact for sensitive 
cases not listed above, shall be done in accordance 
with IS/ISO 4866. 


10.3 Groundwater Contamination 


Groundwater contamination during construction 
shall be within the limits as specified in the project 
specifications, local guidelines and laws. 


11 INSTRUMENTATION AND MONITORING 


Main objective of instrumentation and monitoring 
are to: 


a) obtain information on ground response due 
to tunnelling; 

b) provide construction control; 

c) verify design parameters and analysis; 

d) measure performance of support system 
during and after construction; 

e) assessment of groundwater impact due to 
tunnelling from environmental aspect; and 

f) indicate a warning of critical ground 
condition due to tunnelling. 


The quantity and frequency of instruments and 
monitoring shall be based on ground response and 
same shall be adopted as per project requirement. 


IS 17446 provides the details of instrumentation and 
monitoring of tunnels, special literature may be 
referred for the details. 


NOTE — Special literatures may include guidelines from 
ITA tech report N° 03 “International Tunnelling 


Association” 
agreement(s). 


or any other guidelines as per the 


12 GEOTECHNICAL RISK MANAGEMENT 


Geotechnical risks are always part of tunnelling, 
however for successful TBM tunnelling, it is 
important to undertake detailed ground 
investigations to identify all hazards and then 
consequently selection and design of an appropriate 
TBM. Long and deep tunnels face different hazards 
compared to tunnelling in shallow overburden. Few 
identified geological hazards for different TBM 
types along with identification of consequences on 
the selected TBM and location of the hazard are 
given in Annex B. Recommendations for mitigation 
measures for various hazards depending on selected 
TBM are given in Annex D. List of hazards and 
mitigation measures presented in Annex C and 
Annex D are just for guidance purpose and need to 
be updated to the project requirements. These 
mitigation measures shall not be construed to reduce 
importance of detailed investigations during initial 
project stages. 


12.1 Geotechnical Risk Mitigation Measures 
12.1.1 Advance Probing 


Advance probing is used in difficult ground 
conditions to predict indication of water ingress, gas 
potential, fault, and transition zones. Both direct and 
indirect methods are used for this purpose. Direct 
methods require to drill an investigation hole ahead 
of tunnel face whereas indirect methods use 


geophysics to provide data regarding strata ahead of 
face. 


12.1.1.1 List of direct methods for advance probing 
are presented in Table 10. Direct investigations are 
conducted by drilling ahead of TBM head with or 
without core recovery. Systematic probing with an 
overlap of 5 m to 10 m is mandatory to correctly 
predict the strata likely to be encountered for TBM 
boring through difficult ground conditions. 


12.1.1.2 List of indirect methods for advance 
probing are presented in Table 11. Indirect 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


investigations are non-destructive methods, 
conducted by using geophysical methods. These 
methods require less time for probing; however, they 
cannot replace application of direct methods 
completely. Commonly used geophysical methods 
are based seismic wave velocity and electrical 
resistivity of the ground ahead of cutter head. 
Depending on ground properties, appropriate 
Geophysical methods can be used to predict ground 
conditions. However, selective confirmation of 
interpretation by core drilling is recommended. 


Table 10 Direct Methods for Advance Probing Ahead of TBM Face 
(Clause 12.1.1.1) 


Investigation Type 
(1) (2) 


Description 


(3) 


i) Boreholes with core 
recovery 


Horizontal boreholes are made through cutter head with a rig positioned 
behind the TBM cutter head. Preventer valves are utilized to prevent 


ingress of water during drilling. This method is not commonly used due 
to low speed, interruption to TBM boring and higher associated costs. 
Length of probing is restricted to under 10 m due to huge time for 
investigations. Geotechnical tests on rock samples can be performed on 
extracted cores of NX size. 


1) Boreholes without 
core recovery 


Both horizontal and inclined boreholes can be done through the ports 
provided in the cutter head and behind it through the shield respectively 


through a drilling hammer and extension rods. Diameter of hole is 
restricted to 75 mm, however greater lengths of 40 m or more are 
possible within short span of time. Measure while drilling parameters 
like penetration rate, percussion pressure, rotation pressure, etc are 
captured to interpret the strata to be encountered. In large diameter 
tunnels, usually up to 2 to 3 probe drills are required depending upon 


variability of the ground. 


Measurement while drilling (MWD) 


parameters from probe drills can be corelated with TBM boring 
parameters to have good interpretation of Geology. 


Table 11 Indirect Methods for Advance Probing Ahead of TBM Face 
(Clause 12.1.1.2) 


51 Type of Test 
No. 


(1) (2) 


Description 


(3) 


i) Seismic methods 


This technique is one of the main methods for non-destructive, long-sighted 


prediction ahead of tunnel face, usually up to 5 to 10 times tunnel diameter. Short 
holes are drilled on the tunnel walls and the small blasts are taken in them to 
Part of wave signal is picked up by high precision 
equipment receiver mounted on the walls. Excavation is stopped while 


generate seismic waves. 


performing this test. 
i) Geo-electric 
methods 


This technique relies on the induced polarization method. The system is attached 
on head of TBM, and it continuously generates two sets of data for resistivity 


and percent frequency effect that have correlations with water content in rock 
mass and fractures/ TBM advance rates, usually 2 to 4 times tunnel diameter. This 
technique is more successful in detecting water bodies ahead of face. Excavation 
is not stopped while performing this test. 


12.1.2 Ground Conditioning 


The following describes several techniques that can 
be used to improve the stability of the ground to aid 
construction of the tunnel, reduce/control ground 
displacements and hence mitigate the effects of the 
tunnelling operation on adjacent structures. 


12.1.2.1 Lowering groundwater table 


In permeable strata where the permeability, К, 
exceeds about 10? cm/s, or where an aquifer can be 
dewatered below less permeable strata, the level of 
the water table over a wide area can be drawn down 
by pumping from boreholes and deep wells. 


There are two principle methods of groundwater 
lowering: well points and deep filter wells. Well 
points, although one of the most versatile methods 
of dewatering, are limited to dewatering to a depth 
of about 6 m (limited by the effective vacuum lift of 
a pump), although staged well points can be used to 
go deeper, but a greater excavated plan area is 
required. Well points are installed at between 1 m 
to 3 m intervals by wash boring, that 1s, using high 
pressure water jetting to form the borehole, but the 
spacing depends on the permeability of the ground. 
Well points can also be used from inside the tunnel, 
in this case they should be directed upwards. 


Drawdown of the groundwater level can cause 
consolidation settlements in the surrounding ground 
and hence affect adjacent structures, and therefore it 
shall be closely monitored. The extent of the 
drawdown zone depends on the depth ofthe well and 
the type of ground. 


Further assessment on groundwater lowering and 
dewatering shall be done as per specialized 
literature. Further complicated cases shall be 
modelled in  numerical/analytical models for 
detailed study. 


12.1.2.2 Pre-grouting 


Major types of grouting used in tunnelling are as 
follows: 


a) Permeation grouting (chemical grouting), 
b) Jet grouting, and 
c) Compaction grouting. 


The design of grout shall be followed by a test at 
field before implementation during construction. 
The desired properties of the strata shall be worked 
out during design and various design mix of grouts 
shall be tried during field test. The samples from 
field shall be properly tested (minimum 3 samples) 
and at least 2 samples must achieve the desired 
properties. 


Further, post grouting, the test shall be repeated 
across the grouted area to validate the assumptions 
made in design. 


20 


12.1.2.3 Pressurized tunnelling (compressed air) 


The disadvantage of constructing a tunnel under air 
pressure is that, in order to maintain the air pressure 
at the face, all the materials and spoil, as well as the 
workforce, have to be passed through an airlock 
system. The maximum working pressure and the 
time that workforce can spend working in 
compressed air shall be strictly controlled. 


Project shall consider health and safety requirements 
related to exposure of workers to conditions where 
the pressure is higher than atmospheric. Effects of 
both compression and decompression shall be 
included. Work plan shall clearly specify the 
procedures to follow safe working. 


The design shall consider the risk and mitigations for 
blowouts. The provisions shall also be incorporated 
in the design. 


12.1.2.4 Ground freezing 


The freezing method is only applicable when the 
ground contains water, ideally still, fresh water. A 
ground with a moisture content greater than 
5 percent shall be considered for this technique. 


Water can be added using a fire hose, a sprinkler 
system, a borehole or injection device to raise the 
moisture content in the ground. 


Frozen areas shall overlap to provide ап 
impermeable barrier. Cooling fluid shall be brine 
(salt solution) with a temperature of — 50 °C to 
— 20 °C or liquid nitrogen which evaporates at 
— 196°C. 


Ground heave can occur and shall be included as a 
criterion for design and the impact of heaving on the 
nearby structures shall be assessed. Heaving shall 
be limited under acceptable limits by controlling the 
speed of the freezing process and/or the sequence of 
freezing. 


There are two methods of ground freezing: 


a) Two phase method (closed) — In this 
method, a primary refrigerant (ammonia or 
freon) is used to cool a secondary fluid 
(usually brine); and 

b) Direct process (open) — In the direct 
process liquid nitrogen is used to freeze the 
ground. The nitrogen is passed down the 
freeze pipes and then allowed to evaporate 
into the atmosphere. This direct process is 
good for short-term or emergency projects. 
Liquid nitrogen is likely to be the only 
effective method for freezing pore water in 
fine grained soils. 


When designing the freezing system, the thermal 
characteristics of the ground to be frozen and the 


freezing point of the groundwater shall be 
determined. Тһе process shall be carefully 
monitored during construction. | Thermocouple 
strings shall be used to monitor the ground 
temperatures between the freezing elements and to 
monitor the refrigerant temperature. 


Ground freezing shall be carried out as per specialist 
literature. 


12.1.3 Developments in TBM Design to Reduce 
Squeezing Ground Risks 


Squeezing ground conditions risk TBM operations, 
when deformations occur which close gap between 
shield and surrounding excavated rock. Converging 
tunnel face puts additional load on the cutter head 
requiring a higher torque for rotation. In TBMs with 
low thrust/torque capability, this leads to jamming 
of shield or cutter head due to friction. TBM 
jamming usually occurs in shielded rock TBMs with 
high in-situ stresses and soft ground conditions. 
Following measures may be adopted based on 
project requirements to mitigate TBM squeezing 
risks. 


12.1.3.1 Enlargement of boring diameter by 
increasing radial overcut 


In squeezing ground conditions, additional space 
around TBM shield should be provided to allow 
ground relaxation by deforming without squeezing 
the shield. Increased radial overcut can be achieved 
by shimming the periphery cutters, increasing 
diameter of periphery cutters and installing 
additional cutters at guage positions. Typically, a 
uniform radial overcut of up to 100 mm can be 
provisioned in TBM during design stage. 


12.1.3.2 Cutter head offsetting 


By design, diameter of cutter head is kept slightly 
bigger than diameter of connecting end of front 
shield by 50 mm to 100 mm. Typically, in squeezing 
ground conditions, deformations are observed 
mostly in tunnel crown, hence TBM cutter head 
should have provision to move cutter head vertically 
up. Vertical cutter head offsetting is used together 
with boring diameter enlargement to increase radial 
overcut at crown. 


12.1.3.3 Conical shield 


During TBM excavation, deformation in tunnel wall 
occurs behind TBM shield as TBM advances ahead. 
Based on most frequent ground properties and 
condition of in-situ stresses, deformation values can 
be easily estimated. A conical shield having larger 
front shield diameter and lesser tail shield diameter 
can be provisioned during TBM design to cater for 
deformation which is bound to happen most of 
times. The rate of conicity from front to tail shield 
may be kept in range of 5 mm to 10 mm (calculated 


21 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


on the diameter) per meter of shield. If not estimated 
properly, conicity can unnecessarily increase TBM 
cutting diameter and consumption of annulus grout 
behind segmental lining leading to overall increase 
in construction cost. 


12.1.3.4 Lubrication of TBM shield extrados 


To reduce skin friction at points of contact between 
rock and shield, provision to lubricate shield 
extrados with bentonite or similar material should be 
made during design stage. This lowers skin friction 
coefficient and reduces the torque and thrust 
requirement of TBM during advancement. 


12.1.3.5 Sufficient torque and thrust 


Squeezing zones should be excavated by adopting 
all measures as stated above, however when 
jamming of TBM shield or cutter head occurs due to 
circumstances beyond control at site, then additional 
thrust and torque can help to rescue and release the 
shield from converging ground. 


12.1.3.6 Convergence monitoring devices on TBM 
shield 


Convergence monitoring device comprises of steel 
cylinders fixed inside front shield which can be 
pushed outwards towards excavated rock when 
TBM is not advancing. When these cylinders are 
provided at ring width spacing, they can measure 
deformation at same location 3 times or more. This 
helps in knowing the deformation trends during each 
ring building cycle and helps in strategizing 
additional measures to prevent shield jamming due 
to squeezing ground. 


13 E AND M (ELECTRICAL AND MECHNICAL) 
AND VENTILATION 


Ventilation systems shall be design by both 
empirical and analytical approaches. 


13.1 Empirical approach may be based on: 


a) Emergency ventilation smoke control in 
roadways tunnels; and 

b) Vehicle emission and air demand for 
ventilation in road tunnels. 


For railway tunnels the emissions expected during 
operation shall be converted to equivalent truck 
numbers and above guidelines shall be used. For 
empirical approach special literatures may be used. 
NOTE — Special literatures may include guidelines from 


AASHTO, PIARC or any other guidelines as per the 
agreements. 


13.2 Analytical approach may be based on CFD 
(computational fluid dynamics) analysis and SP 7. 
Special literatures may also be referred. 


NOTE — Special literatures may include guidelines from 
UIC 779-9R, TSI-SRT, and NFPA 130 or any other 
guidelines as per the agreements. 


14 USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI) 
AND MACHINE LEARNING (ML) IN TBM 
TUNNELLING 


14.1 Artificial Intelligence and machine learning are 
ongoing developments in many industries including 
tunnelling. These technologies shall be carefully 
included in the projects with inclusion of processes 
and provisions in the project requirements. The 
local guidelines/laws for use of these technologies 
shall be adhered to. 


14.2 Data-driven automation in project may result in 
issues related to data security. Each project is unique 
and has its own challenges related to who can collect 
the data, how to store it, how to ensure its security, 
who owns the data during project and after 
completion of project, who has access to data and 
during which stage of the project. This control over 
data shall be defined by client and controls must be 
defined in detail. Therefore, it shall be integral for 
projects to embrace the best and right data 
management environment for implementation of AI. 
Such a data management environment will offer 


22 


greater security to sensitive data and make it simple 
for projects to access siloed data for AI and ML 
projects. 


14.3 Since AI and ML use in a project has 
challenges, it is important to understand specific and 
clear conditions for following: 


a) Specific provisions on collection, storage 
and processing the data; 

b) Specifying the restricted access to relevant 
data to concerned users at various stages of 
project that is, setting up a system to 
provide users with access to relevant data 
only at a particular stage of project; 

c) Specifying the control on data and defining 
controls with respect to the project stages; 

d) Specifying the security standards for data 
security; 

e) Clearly specifying the requirement for 
processing the data and related use of 
systems required for the same; 

f) Specifying the outputs from programs; 

g) Defining the allowed error in output 
expectations from the programs; 

h) Specifying the ownership of data and/or 
AI/ML program; and 

j) Specifying training requirements for use of 
data and program. 


IS No. 
IS 383 : 2016 


IS 456 : 2000 


IS 800 : 2007 


IS/ISO 834 


(Part 1) : 1999 
(Part 4) : 2000 


(Part 5) : 2000 


(Part 6) : 2000 


(Part 7) : 2000 


(Part 8) : 2002 


(Part 9) : 2002 


IS 2386 


(Part 2) : 1963 


(Part 7) : 1963 


IS 3085 : 1965 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 


LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 
Coarse and fine 
aggregate for concrete — 
Specification (third 


revision) 


Plain and reinforced 
concrete — Code of 
practice (fourth revision) 


General construction in 
steel — Code of practice 
(third revision) 


Fire-resistance tests 
elements of building 
construction: 


General requirements 


Specific requirements for 
load bearing vertical 
separating elements 


Elements of building 
construction 


Specific requirements for 
beams 


Specific requirements for 
columns 


Specific requirements for 
non-load bearing vertical 
separating elements 


Specific requirements for 
non-load bearing ceiling 
elements 


Methods of test for 
aggregates for concrete: 


Estimation of deleterious 
materials and organic 
impurities 


Alkali aggregate 


reactivity 


Method of test for 
permeability of cement 
mortar and concrete 


IS No. 


IS 3400 (Part 1) 
2021/ISO 37 : 2017 


15 3400 (Part 2) : 
2014/ISO 48 : 2010 


IS 3400 (Part 10/Sec 2) : 


2020/ISO 815-1 
2014 


IS 3400 (Part 20) : 2018/ 
ISO 1431-1 : 2012 


IS 3400 (Pat 28) : 
2022/ISO 3384-1 : 
2019 


IS/ISO 4866 : 2010 


IS 8764 : 1998 


IS 9143 : 1979 


23 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Title 


Methods of test for 
vulcanized rubber: Part 1 


Tensile stress-strain 
properties (fourth 
revision) 


Methods of test for 
vulcanized rubber: Part 2 
Determination of 
hardness (Hardness 
between 10 IRHD and 
100  IRHD) (fourth 


revision) 


Methods of test for 
vulcanized rubber: Part 
10 Compression set, 
Section 2 At ambient 
temperatures (second 
revision) 


Methods of test for 
vulcanized rubbers: Part 
20 Resistance to ozone 
cracking — Static strain 
test (second revision) 


Methods of test for 
rubber, vulcanized ог 
thermoplastic: Part 28 
Determination of stress 
relaxation in compression 
— Testing at constant 
temperature 


Mechanical vibration and 
shock - vibration of fixed 
structures — Guidelines 
for the measurement of 
vibrations and evaluation 
of their effects оп 
structures 


Method of determination 
of point load strength 
index of rocks (first 
revision) 


Method for the 

determination of unconfined 
compressive strength of 

rock materials 


IS No. 


IS 10262 


IS 11315 


(Part 1) : 


(Part 2) : 


(Part 3) 


(Part 4) : 


(Part 5) : 


(Part 6) : 


(Part 7) 


(Part 8) : 
(Part 9) : 


(Part 10) : 1987 


(Part 11) : 1985 


(Part 12) : 1992 


: 2019 


1987 


1987 
: 1987 


1987 


1987 


1987 
: 1987 
1987 
1987 


Title 
Concrete mix 
proportioning = 
Guidelines (second 


revision) 


Method for the 
quantitative description 
of discontinuities in rock 
masses: 


Orientation 
revision) 


(under 


Spacing (under revision) 


Persistence (under 
revision) 
Roughness (under 
revision) 


Wall strength (under 
revision) 


Aperture (under revision) 
Filling (under revision) 
Seepage (under revision) 


Number of sets (under 
revision) 


Block size 
revision) 


(under 


Core recovery and rock 
quality designation 
(under revision) 


Drill core study (under 
revision) 


IS No. 


IS 12608 : 1989 


IS 13365 


(Part 1) : 1998 


(Part 2) : 2019 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


IS 16752 : 2018 
ISO 3302-1 : 2014 


IS 17446 : 2020 


SP 7 : 2016 


24 


Title 


Method for determination 
of determination hardness 
of rock 


Quantitative classification 
system of rock mass — 
Guidelines: 


Rock mass rating (RMR) 
for predicting engineering 
properties 


Rock mass quality for 
prediction of support 
pressure, support system 
and engineering properties 
in underground openings 
(first revision) 


Tunnelling methods in rock 
masses -- Guidelines: 
Part 1 Conventional 
tunnelling methods (first 
revision) 


Rubber — Tolerances for 
products — Dimensional 
tolerances 


Observational method for 
tunnelling in rock masses 
— Guidelines 


National building code of 
India, 2016 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 4 and 12) 


AREAS OF APPLICATION AND SELECTION CRITERIA FOR DIFFERENT TBM TYPES 


B-1 RECOMMENDED AREA Table 13 and Table 14. These tables are provided 
The recommended area of application for various only for common guidance and actual selection 
TBMs is provided in Table 12. criteria of TBM type may depend on project specific 


requirements. In the table, (V) denotes main 
application area, (0) denotes limited application area 
and (x) denotes application not recommended. 


B-1.1 Recommended selection criteria for different 
TBM types for application in soil and rock on basis 
of relevant geotechnical parameters is provided in 


Table 12 Areas of Application for various TBM Types 
(Clause B-1) 


51 Туре оГТВМ Abbreviation Areas of Application 
No. Soil Rock 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 

i) Gripper GRT Not recommended See Table 13 
ii) Double shield DOS Not recommended See Table 13 
iii) Single shield OPS See Table 14 See Table 14 
iv) Slurry shield SLS See Table 14 See Table 14 
v) Earth pressure Balance shield EPB See Table 14 See Table 14 


Table 13 Areas of Application for Gripper (GRT) and Double Shield (DOS) TBM 
(Clause B-1.1) 


SI Parameter Application on Rock 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 

i) Unconfined 0-5 5—25 25—50 50—100 100 — 250 > 250 
compressive GRT X 0 Ч Ч Ч Ч 
strength (MPa) DOS © б al ДІ J Ч 

ii) | Rock quality 0 —25 25 – 50 50—75 75—90 90—100 
designation GRT X 0 Ч Ч Ч 
(OD) DOS o Y Y Y Y 

ii) | Rock mass ratio « 20 21—40 41—60 61—80 81-100 
(ЕМЕ) СЕТ x о Y Y ү 
DOS о Y Y Y Y 
iv) | Water inflow per 0 0-10 10-25 25-125 > 125 
10 m tunnel | GRT RI RI RI " X 
(l/min) DOS Y Y Y о x 
v) | Abrasivity (CAT) 0.1 — 0.5 0.5 -1 1-2 2-4 4-6 
GRT Ч Ч Ч о о 
DOS Y Y Y о о 
vi) | Swelling None Poor Fair High 
potential GRT Ч Ч 0 0 
DOS Y Y о о 
vii) Confinement 0 1-4 4—7 7—15 
pressure [bar] GRT A X 
DOS Y х 


25 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 14 Areas of Application for Single Shield Open (OPS), Slurry Shield (SLS) and Earth Pressure 
Balanced Shield (EPB) TBM 


(Clause B-1.1) 


SI No. Parameter Application on Soil 
(1) Q) (3) 
1) Fines content «5 5—15 15—40 > 40 
(< 0.06 mm) percent percent percent percent 
OPS х X х о 
515 ү ү ү о 
ЕРВ x о ШЕК ү 
ii) Permeability > 10? 107-104 107-1075 « 109 
(m/s) OPS x х х о 
SLS х о ү о 
ЕРВ x x о ү 
ili) Consistency Very soft Soft Stiff Very stiff Hard 
0 — 0.5 0.5 — 0.75 0.75 — 1.0 1.0 — 1.25 1.25 - 1.5 
OPS X X х о 
SLS X о о о о о 
ЕРВ о ү ү о о 
iv) Relative Dense Medium Dense Loose 
density OPS ү x x 
SLS ү ү о 
ЕРВ ү ү ү 
v) Confinement 0 1-4 4—7 7—15 
pressure (Bar) | Ops " " X X 
SLS о ү ү ү 
ЕРВ ү ү о x 
vi) Swelling None Little Fair High 
potential OPS Ч Ч 0 Е 
SLS ү ү о х 
ЕРВ ү ү о x 
vii) Abrasivity 0-5 5-15 15—35 35—75 75—100 
(equivalent OPS Y Y Y о о 
quartz content) | SIS d J 4 d 8 
percent EPB Y Ч о о X 
Application on Rock 
viii) Unconfined 0-5 | 5-25 25-50 50-100 100-250 » 250 
compressive OPS о о 4 A 4 4 
strength (MPa) [SLS о О m " " 
EPB о O X X х 
ix) Rock quality 0—25 25—50 50—75 75—90 90—100 
designation OPS 0 МІ N МІ `| 
(КОР) SLS о О о о о 
ЕРВ Y O о x x 
x) Rock mass < 20 21-40 41-60 61-80 81-100 
ratio(RMR) | OPS о ү ү ү Y 
SLS о о о о о 
ЕРВ Y о о x X 


26 


Table 14 (Concluded) 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


51 No. Parameter Application on Soil 
(1) (2) (3) 
х1) Water inflow 0 0-10 10-25 25-125 » 125 
per 10 m tunnel | OPS Y Y y o x 
(l/min) SLS o о о o o 
EPB о о о о о 
xil) Abrasivity 0.1 — 0.5 0.5-1 1-2 2-4 4-6 
(CAI) OPS y y y о о 
51.5 Y Y о о o 
EPB Y Y о о X 
xiii) Swelling None Poor Fair High 
potential OPS A A " " 
SLS y y о x 
EPB ү y о x 
xiv) Confinement 0 1-4 4—7 7—15 
pressure [bar] | Ops RI X X X 
SLS о y y y 
EPB о ү о x 


27 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 12) 


COMMON GEOLOGICAL HAZARDS IN TBM USAGE 


C-1 GEOLOGICAL HAZARDS 
The common geological hazards along with consequence level and identification of consequences on the selected 
TBM is given in Table 15. 


Table 15 Hazard and Consequences for the Selected TBM Type 
(Clause C-1) 


51 Hazards Consequence | Identification of Consequences on TBM Location 
No. Level 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
0 |Not concerned 
1 [Negligible — No further consideration 
of the hazard is needed 
<= = : БҰЛТ? o с 
T © | 2 [Unwanted — Risk mitigation measures 2 b 2 
з 5 = shall be identified. The measures shall Бе| “= 5 вэ 
5 2 2 implemented if the costs of the теаѕшеѕ 8 = т 
ob мш : 2 В : = 2 -4 
Ё Б are not disproportionate with the risk E Е 2 
n а reduction obtained m 
3 [Unacceptable — The risk shall be 
reduced at least to unwanted, regardless 
of the costs of risk mitigation 
0 0 2 Blocking of the telescopic part of the shield - ү - 
2 0 2 |Спррег bracing difficulties - ү - 
i) |Spalling 0 1 ] |Cracks in the segmental lining - - ү 
1 0 0 |Damage of the support - - ү 
2 0 0 High cleaning effort in invert (time| - ү ү 
consuming) 
3 | 3 3 |Damage of TBM ү - - 
2 2 2 Damage of the cutter head and/or the cutting] V - - 
tools 
3 3 3 Injuries of the workers during face| vV - ү 
inspections 
ii) |Rock-burst 0 2 2 |Damage of the segmental lining - - ү 
2 0 0 |Damage of the support - Y 
3 0 0 Injuries to workers - ү 
3 0 0 Damage of the back-up; Damage of the belt) - ү ү 
сопуеуог 
2 2 2 |Jamming of the cutter head ү - - 
1 2 3 |Jamming and damage of the shield - ү - 
iii) Squeezing and 2 0 0 |Jamming and damage of the back-up - - ү 
buckling EL 
0 3 3 |Overstress of the segmental lining - - ү 
2 0 0 |Оуегѕігеѕѕ of the support - - ү 
3 0 0 |Inadmissible high tunnel convergences - - Y 


28 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Table 15 (Concluded) 


51 Hazards Consequence | Identification of Consequences on TBM Location 
No. Level 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
0 |Not concerned 
1 [Negligible — No further consideration 
of the hazard is needed 
<= = : Tm o S 
ua © |2 [Unwanted — Risk mitigation measures 2 g 2 
g = | 3 shall be identified. The measures shall Беј 2 = 2 
&| 212 implemented if the costs of the measures 8 > o 
27) 2 : : : 1 Е E ж 
Е в аге not disproportionate with the risk} 5 = 2 
n а reduction obtained E m 
3 [Unacceptable — The risk shall be 
reduced at least to unwanted, regardless 
of the costs of risk mitigation 
2 2 2 [Reduction of advance rate up to stop - 
Complete stop of the TBM due to site| - - - 
3 3 3 : 
: : flooding 
iv) |Extremely high- 
water inflow 2 2 2 |Mucking-out difficulties - ү ү 
Du 2 2 [Difficulty in bedding the segment - Y ү 
3 3 3 |Hazardous working conditions ү ү ү 
v) {High water 2 2 2 |Damage of the support or segmental lining - - Y 
pressure 2 2 2 Damage of the drilling equipment - - ү 
Complete stop of the TBM due to site| vV ү 
3 3 3 . 
flooding 
vi) |Mud inrush 3 3 3 Hazardous working conditions V V V 
2 2 2 |Mucking-out difficulties ү ү Y 
2 2 2 |Cleaning problem ү Y Y 
2 2 2 |Block of the cutter head Y - - 
2 2 2 Damage of the cutter head and/or the cutting] V - - 
tools 
1 3 3 Injury of workers during inspection and| V - - 
maintenance 
vii) Face instability Overstress of the support or the segmental 
2 2 2 |lining (due to stress redistribution) - й Ч 
Damage of belt conveyor due to large or 
2 2 2 sharp-edged blocks destroying the belt and/or Ni \ 4 
the transfer chutes 
3 3 з |Difficult to unacceptable working conditions ү ү ү 
iii) |High temperature 
ын B р Where mortar & shotcrete must be installed,| — V y - 
1 2 2 З Я 
quick grout hardening could happen 


29 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 12) 


EXAMPLES OF MITIGATION MEASURES FOR GEOLOGICAL HAZARDS 
D-1 MITIGATION MEASURES 


The examples of mitigation measures for various geological hazards and difficulty in implementation based on 
the selected TBM shall be as given in Table 16. 


Table 16 Mitigation Measures Regarding the Consequences of the Hazards duringTBM Operation 
According to the Selected TBM Type 


(Clause D-1) 


51 Hazards Difficulty Level Example of Mitigation Measures 
No. to Implement 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
3 S 0 [Not concerned 
"D o 
= E 2 1 [Easy to implement on site, to be previously considered in the design 
Ф | WH 
5 = = 2 Medium difficulty of implementation 
Е = 
22 д 3 |Exceedingly difficult to implement 
0 1 Selection of the appropriate type of the telescope to limit the material 
accumulation and prevent blockage 
0 0 2 |Орегайоп of the double shield TBM as a single shield TBM 
i) Spalling 0 2 2 Improvement of the annular void filling method to stabilize the ring as 
early as possible 
Installation of radial bolting (friction anchors) in combination with wire 
1 0 0 
mesh and Shotcrete 
1 1 1 |Appropriate torque reserve (high torque low speed gear) 
1 1 1 Execution of sub-horizontal destructive drilling combined with blasting 
around the perimeter of the TBM 
Drilling of large diameter holes (approximately 100 mm), as close as 
1 2 0 : 
possible to the cutter head 
n 1 1 1 Avoid front loading cutter head; change cutter tools from inside (back- 
ii) |Rock-burst loading cutter head) 
1 1 1 |Avoid face inspections or work in front of the cutter head in risk zone 
1 1 1 Install face inspection cameras and wear cutters tools 
1 0 0 Presence of workers in the machine zone (0—2 diameters) should be 
avoided 
1 1 1 Advance exploration with sub-horizontal probe drilling with registration 
of parameters and geophysics 
1 1 1 [Non-stop operations (requiring modification of the shift system) 
Increase the radial over-cutting (and consequently the annular gap around 
1 2 2 : 
the shield) 
0 1 1 Appropriate shield geometry (conical shape, reduction of the 
shield length)/Avoid use of double shield TBM 
1 1 1 |Lubrication of the shield extrados 
iii) [Squeezing 1 1 1 Qum 3 a high thrust force — with sufficiently high factor of safety 
and buckling 8 
1 1 1 |Appropriate torque reserve (high torque low speed gear) 
Increase of steel ratio in the pre-cast concrete, use high strength concrete, 
0 2 De | ғала : 
identify different type of rings 
2 0 0 Installation of a yielding support (for example, sliding ribs, openings in 
the shotcrete, closed or not closed with compressive elements) 
0 2 2 Improvement of the annular void filling method to stabilize the ring as 
early as possible. 
0 3 3 Deformable annular filling in extreme squeezing conditions (the low 
stiffness) 


30 


Table 16 (Continued) IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


51 Hazards Difficulty Level Example of Mitigation Measures 
No. to Implement 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
з | 0 Not concerned 
Е) Q 
= E = ] [Easy to implement on site, to be previously considered in the design 
vo 
& E 2 2 Medium difficulty of implementation 
22 5 3 |Exceedingly difficult to implement 
1 1 1 Advance exploration with sub-horizontal probe drilling with registration 
of parameters and geophysics 
iv) |Extremely 2 2, 2 |Reduction of the permeability by grouting ahead of the machine 
high water 0 2 0 Closed mode operation in the case of using a Single Shield Multimode 
inflow TBM, and water pressure up to 15 bar 
1 1 1 |Installation of a muck chute closure gate 
3 3 3 [Reduction of the permeability by freezing (in advance) 
2 3 3 Advance exploration with sub-horizontal probe drilling with registration 
of parameters and geophysics 
2 3 3 Long advance drainage of length, at least 2 times tunnel diameter long, 
in the periphery and/or front ssface of the machine 
1 2 3 3 Improve the ground characteristic by grouting ahead of/and around the 
v) High machine 
мэн : 0 2 0 Closed mode operation in the case of using a Single Shield Multimode 
pese TBM, and water pressure up to 15 bar 
3 3 3 Reduction of the permeability by freezing (in advance) 
0 3 3 Improve the ground characteristic by grouting around the segmental 
lining 
2 3 3 Drainage boreholes around the lining 
Treatment of the extracted ground by foams (to manage mucking-out 
А 1 1 T. : 
vi) [Mud difficulties) 
inrush 2 2 2 Clean TBM area with pumps, excavator etc. in the front zone of the 
machine. 
1 1 1 Advance exploration with sub-horizontal probe drilling with registration 
of parameters and geophysics 
2 2 2 Improve the ground characteristic by grouting ahead of/and around the 
machine 
Closed mode operation in the case of using a Single Shield Multimode 
, 0 2 0 
vii) |Face TBM, and water pressure up to 15 bar 
instability 2 2 2 |Advance drainage boreholes to release the water pressure 
1 1 |Moderate driving — Reduction of rotation speed and penetration 
Appropriate design of cutter head — Wedges to protect discs; high- 
1 1 1 |resistance wear plates; high-resistance disc cutters (450-550 mm); many 
small bucket openings; closable manholes 
1 1 1 |Appropriate torque reserve (high torque low speed gear) 
1 1 1 |Appropriate design of ventilation (increase of airflow) 
2 2 2 Foresee systematic equipment of chilled water pipe system in the tunnel 
ҚТ and the TBM 
уш) {High І : Е : 
Catch water as soon as possible with advance drainage boreholes to avoid 
temperature 2 2 2 : 
heat transfer to the air. 
1 1 1 [Reduce shift time for workers 
1 1 1 |Use of additive/formula to delay the grout hardening 


31 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Amberg Technologies, Gurugram 


Border Roads Organisation, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi 


Central Soil & Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


CSIR - Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 


CSIR - Central Institute of Mining & Fuel Research, 


Dhanbad 


CSIR - Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology-ISM, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 
Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


32 


Representative(s) 
DRN. K. SAMADHIYA (Chairperson) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


LT COL ANIL RAJ 


DR G. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


SHRIHARI DEV 
SHRI MAHABIR DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
DR S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


SHRI DARPAN TALWAR 
M. S. HARSHITHA (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


DR J. K. MOHNOT 
DR R. D. DWIVEDI (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRI R. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 
SHRI D. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 


PROF R. AYOTHIRAMAN 
PROF PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
DR PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate I) 
PROF SUMIT SEN (Alternate П) 


PROF A. K. MISHRA 
DR К. К. SINHA (Alternate) 


DR C. S. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRISHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


Organization 


National Disaster Management Authority,New Delhi 

National Highways & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 

National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 

National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited, 
Faridabad 

National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 

NTPC Limited, New Delhi 

Rail Vikas Nigam Limited, New Delhi 

Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, 


ACE Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida) 

In Personal Capacity (Naimex House, A-8, Mohan 
Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 
New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21-C, 
Faridabad) 


In Personal Capacity (A-125. | Prodhyagiki 
Apartment, Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity (C-1004, Park View City-2, 
Sector-49, Gurugram) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15026 (Part 2) : 2023 


Representative(s) 


JS (MITIGATION) 
DR RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV MALIK 
SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate I) 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYAK (Alternate II) 


DR A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRIN. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH RAWAT (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI VIJAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 
SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate I) 


SHRI AHMED SHAZ (Alternate ЇЇ) 


SHRI T. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. GOEL 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


DR MANOJ VERMAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S. SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR AND 


HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio) | 


Member Secretary 
DR MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’/JOINT DIRECTOR 
(CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


33 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (20381). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 23670012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


