IS 12746 ! Part 4 ) : 1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990 1

( Reaffirmed 2006 )

Indian TELECONTROL
PART 4

Standard AND SYSTEMS

EQUIPMENT
PERFORMANCE

REQUIREMENTS

UDC

621'398

: 620'16

@I BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 NEW BAHADUR DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MARG 110002 Price Group IO

September

1993

Power

Line

Carrier

Systems

and Associated

Telecontrol

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 25

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990 ) `Telecontrol equipment and systems - Part 4 : Performance requirements' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Power Line Carrie: Systems and Associated Telecontrol Equipment Sectional Committee (LTD 25 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The text of the IEC Pub has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma practice CROSS Standard' appear referring in Indian Standard in Indian they

to this standard, Standards,

( , ) has been used'as a decimal marker while is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker.

the current

REFERENCES

In the adopted standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Technically equivalent Identical

!EC Pub 371 ( 1984 ) International electrotechnical vocabulary, Chapter 371 : Telecontrol IEC Pub 870-1-I ( 1988 ) Telecontrol equipment and systems, Part 1 General considerations. Section One General principles IEC Pub 870-5-I ( 1990 ) Telecontrol equipment and systems, Part 5 Transmission protocols, Section One Transmission frame formats

IS 1885 ( Part 50 ) : 1935 Electrotechnical vocabulary : Part 50 Telecontrol Dot LTD 25 ( 965 ) Telecontrol equipment and systems: Part 1 General considerations, Section 1 General principles ( under prini ) Dot LTD 25 ( 1583 ) Telecontrol equipmsnt and svstems: Part 5 Transmission protocols, Transmission Section 1 frame formats ( under print )

Identical

The concerned Technical Committee responsible for preparation of this standard the provisions of the following international publicatrons and has decided acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. IEC Pub 51 : Direct accessories IEC Pub 271 ( 1974) IEC Pub 271A IEC Pub 300 ( 1978 ( 1934 acting indicating analogue terms, electrical measuring

has that

reviewed they are and their

instruments

List of basic ) First ) Reliability measuring quantities text of the

definitions

and related management far converting has been

mathematics

for reliability

supplement and maintainability transdu cers a.c. elactrical retained while quantities
adJ>ting

IEC Pub 688 : Electrical into d.c. electrical Only the English language it in this Indian Standard.

International

Standard

1s12746 ( Part 4 ) :1gg3
fEC Pub 870~4(1ggO)

Indian Standard
TELECONTROL Part 4:

EQUIPMENT Performance

AND

SYSTEMS

requirements

INTRODUCTION Reliable and secure remote monitoring and control of a geographically widespread process is the ultimate goal of a telecontrol system. This standard covers those aspects which contribute to achieving a level of system performance consistent with that goal. The approach adopted performance requirements control systems. has in this standard on the basis of the been to inherent treat the properties subject of of tele-

are those intangibles, The inherent properties of a system such as in many ways affect the overall availability, time parameters, etc., which During normal system operation, these properties and system performance. their effect on the system performance go largely unnoticed. Their real value is only noticed in exceptional circumstances, such as on detection of a fault, or when it is necessary to extend the system. The system perespecially under these conditions, reflects the consideration formance, design and manufacture of the given to these properties in the planning, equipment.

In determining the performance requirements for a particular telecontrol care should be taken to stipulate standards which are adequate for system, without being tempted to place excessive demands. the specific application, A balance should be found between the ideal requirements on the one hand, and the technical and financial consequences on the other hand.

1.

Scope This series of standards applies to telecontrol equipment and systems with coded bit serial data transmission for monitoring and control of The scope of this standard widespread processes. geographically embraces telecontrol systems in the restricted sense, as shown in IEC Publication 870-l-1, figure 2.

2.

Object This part deals with those characteristics and relates ante of telecontrol systems application and processing functions. The object of this part used to assess and specify systems. is to establish the performance a which affect the the characteristics performto the

set of rules requirements

which can be of telecontrol

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990) It is intended that this part serves as a common platform for the system planner and the supplier or manufacturer of telecontrol systems. will find the contents helpful in The system planner determining the requirements for a particular telecontrol system. In addition, these rules provide a mean: of comparing the products of The supplier or manufacturer will find guidelines different suppliers. for the system design and a base for classification of system performance.

This part comprises a main standard, together with two information and recommendations.

body, which contains the appendices, contain which

actual further

The main body is devoted chiefly to a treatment of the various characteristics as operational parameters. A short description of each operational parameter is followed by a list of the necessary performance requirements and, where feasible, a classification of the operational parameters in performance classes.

The performance classes for a particular application different telecontrol systems.

serve to specify and to evaluate

the system requirements the system performance of

The performance classes application and agreed upon

used between

are the

to user

be and

optimized for the supplier.

each

3.

`Classification

of operational

parameters

This clause covers those properties which influence the performance Appropriate requirements and, where feasible, of telecontrol systems. have been specified for each of the properties performance classes covered. The classification ratings given apply in general to the performance The performance of the overall of the units of the overall system. system shall be derived from the performance of all components of a telecontrol system (in the restricted sense), excludi;~w~~~rpro;;;; and properties, as Certain equipment. the operator's I can be applied as performance criteria to reliability and availability, The components of an overall system individual items of equipment. are, for instance: - substations; - nodes; - transmission lines; - central processor; - man/machine interface. The requirements for a on the specific application between supplier and user. particular and are telecontrol invariably system subject are to dependent agreement

2

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 8794 ( 1990)
3.1 Reliability

Reliability is defined as a measure of an equipment or system to perform its intended function under specified conditions for a specified It is a period of time (see IEC Publications 271, 271A and 300). based on failure data and length of operating time. probability figure,

The reliability of a telecontrol system is expressed by the "mean time in hours (MTBF), and can be calculated from the between failures" of the individual reliability figures system components (see the standards of Technical Committee No. 56). The the the reliability reliability configuration of a system of the depends on the following factors:

system

equipment

and the

software;

of the

system. the reliability are listed in appendix A,

Measures which clause A. 1. 3.1 .I
Reliability

may enhance

requirements

The overall system reliability and partial reliabilities of certain specified sections of the telecontrol system are to be calculated by the supplier from the reliability figures of the individual components, and proved against the actual performance in the field over a given trial period. The start and duration of the trial period should be agreed upon between the supplier and the user and should exclude the early failure period.

The equipment supplier should provide on request failure distriassemblies and units which, on failure, bution data for all components, could cause loss of a function or malfunction of the system.

and the effects of failures The failure modes performance shall be analysed by the supplier and available on request. 3.1 .2
Reliability classes

on the system the results made

In the reliability classes provided in table 1, the to the reliability of the units of th'e overall system.

values

given

refer

Table

1 - Rel'iability

classes

Reliability class Rl R2 R3 -_____

MTBF MTBF 2 2 000 h MTBF Z 4 000 h MTBF 2 8 760 h

3

IS12746(Part4):1993

IEC Pub
3.2

870-4

( 1990)

Availability

The perform

availability of a unit its required function

of a system at any given

characterizes moment. concerns concerns

its

ability

to

The availability in given instant, a given period. The availability may be calculated

is a probability figure contrast to reliability

which which

operation operation

at a over

of a using

unit the

of the overall equation:

system,

expressed

in

"A",

uptime A= (uptime In applications where outages system' operation, the downtime the corrective maintenance and + downtime) 100%

(1,

due to preventive maintenance degrade in equation (1) should be the sum of the preventive maintenance.

For hardware design analysis and for system subassemblies and units, equation MTBF and MTTR as defined in subclauses

prediction of availability of (2) shall be used, utilizing 3.1 and 3.3 respectively:

AP where Ap is the predicted

q

MTBF __---~~~ __~~~ (MTBF + MTTR)

*loo%

(2)

availability. the these relationship values may between not be the values given combined arbitrarily. in

This tables

equation governs 1 to 4. Therefore

Measures aimed appendix A, clause 2.1
Requirements

at improving A. 2.

the

system

availability

are

given

in

The system between

class or classes of availability applicable consideration are and subsystems under supplier and user.

to the subject to

telecontrol agreement

in equipment already of telecontrol systems 01 The availability shall be calculated using equation (I), nn the basis of operation, statistics provided by operating and maintenance records. The records should cover a time period of not less than 6 months for systems and 12 months for equipment, starting after elapse of the early failure period.

4

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990 )

equation (2) should be used to For equipment not yet installed, calculate the predicted availability of the overall system as well as the such as master station equipment, outstation major system components, and computer peripheral devices. The calculated etc., equipment, results should be checked against the performance in the field once the equipment has been operating for the time required to exclude the early failures.

The consequence of outages of individual system elements or functions on the overall system availability and of planned preventive maintenance should be mutually agreed upon between the user and the supplier. 3.2.2 Availability classes in table availability 2, of the values the units given, of the

In the availability classes provided refer to the unless otherwise stated, overall system.

Table

2 -

Availability

classes _.__

Availability

class

Availability A ~_______~___~

Al A2 A3

A 2 99.00% A L 99.75% A 2 99.95%

3.3

Maintainability Maintainability conditions of working order is use, and the ability of after detection to be maintained a system or equipment under given of a fault, to be restored to full during normal working operation.

The maintainability, maintenance organization, thus on the layout of facilities provided. Maintainability hours (MTTR), components : administration and notification

whilst being influenced is mainly dependent on together the equipment,

by the respective the serviceability and with the diagnostic

is expressed which is

by given

the "mean by the

time sum

to of

restoration" in the following

time: the time interval between of the maintenance service;

detection

of

a fault

transport time: the time interval maintenance service and the arrival personnel together with the necessary

between notification of the of the maintenance on site equipment; trained parts rectify

mean repair time (MRT): the mean time required by Pquipped with replacement maintenance personnel on site, to diagnose ar!d to and the recommended test equipment, the fault, including retesting the equipment.

5

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4 (1990)

The MTTR, as defined above, is without the administration time significant only for telecontrol systems and equipment which are mainFor installations maintained by the user, the tained by the supplier. supplier only has influence over the repair time, the administration being dependent on the user's maintenance and transport times organization.

The serviceability considered during is important that the release of the

of equipment, as a design feature, shall the initial design and development phase and thus serviceability requirements be established prior equipment specifications.

be it to

Measures which maintainability of Normally, only the

the serviceability may enhance equipment are listed in appendix producer can give the MRT figure.

and thus A, clause

the A.3.

3.3.1

Requirements Equipment complying to trained personnel at service this standard facilities and shall be in the field. maintainable by

The class or classes of maintainability system and subsystems under consideration between supplier and user. The MTTR maintenance values statistics. quoted by the supplier

applicable to are subject

the to

telecontrol agreement

shall

be

based

on

available

provide a list of test equipment The supplier shall, upon request, replacement and quantities of parts deemed necessary for the maintainability class(es) agreed upon. The extent of the spare parts shall take into consideration the time required to repair a faulty component (field and/or factory repair) and return it to a serviceable condition. 3.3 2 Main tainabilit y( classes

In order (MTTR) and been provided

to differentiate between the mean time to restoration separate classifications have the mean repair time (MRT), for both properties, as shown in tables 3 and 4.

j

Table

3 - Maintainability

classes

Maintainability class ~-

MTTR

I

__ - ._
MTTR MTTR MTTR MTTR

~--.~-I 5 I 5 36 24 12 6 h

h
h h --

8

IS 12746 (Patt4)

:1993

IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990)

Table I

4 -

Repair I

time

classes

Repair time class

MRT

The avoid unstable out of errors

security of a telecontrol system can be defined as its ability to placing the controlled system in a potentially dangerous or situation. It deals with the consequences of failures, arising malfunctions of the telecontrol equipment, undetected information as well as information losses.

The consequence of a failure may depend on the state of the power system at the instant of failure. A dangerous situation can arise out of a combination of a failure of the telecontrol system with a particular situation of the power system. In such cases, the probability of occurrence of a dangerous situation is the product of the probability of occurrence of the failure and the probability of occurrence of the particular situation in the power system, provided that the two occurrences are independent of each other. Measures clause A.4. 3.5 Data integrity to enhance the security are given in appendix A,

Data integrity is defined as the unchangeability of an information In telecontrol systems, content between a source and its destination. data integrity concerns the probability of undetected errors resulting in wrong information about actual process states in the monitoring direction or unintended actions in the control direction of the system.

Data integrity classes are provided which specify upper limits of on the path from an undetectable information error probabilities, source to its destination, covering data acquisition, information The error probabilities take into account processing and transmission. the residual error probabilities (IEV 371-08-06) and the probabiiity of residual information losses ( I EV 371-0810).

Publication 870-5-I of this series of standards specifies in subclause 4.1 three data integrity classes for quantified upper limits of undetected message errors ("residual message errors"), depending on the bit error rate on the transmission channel. This way of specifying

IS 12746 ( Part 4 ) :1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1999) data integrity classes for telecontrol because the environmental conditions mitted data are to a great extent against undetectable protecting data limited. transmission channels is necessary causing disturbances on transunpredictable and the means of errors by coding methods are

3.5.1

Requirements The average bit error operating with correctly provided with appropriate rate of telecontrol channels adjusted signal and circuit screening should be smaller (IEV 371-08-01) parameters and than p = lo-".

Note.

-

The quality of the transmission channels can be monitored by periodically checking the number of message errors detected. If this number exceeds a limit corresponding to the bit error rate p = 10-4, preventive maintenance of the channel circuit is required.

The value p = lo-" (see figure 1 of Publication 870-5-l) is used as reference for the specification of upper limits of undetectable information errors over the whole path from source to destination which includes the data terminating equipment used for data acquisition and the equipment provided for data evaluation and dispiay.

The

corresponding

data

integrity

classes

are

specified

in

table

5.

Measures clause A. 5. 3.5.2 Data

to

enhance

the

data

integrity

are

given

in

appendix

A,

integrity

classes integrity destination of of classes apply to and refer to: falsification information the information transfer from

The following a source to its the the probability probability

undetected undetected

of loss.

information,

and

Table ~._ _____Data

5 -

Data

integrity -___

classes _._I~ ._~ _. ---

integrity class

Residual information error probability -i IE

IS 12746 (Part4)

:1993

IEC Pub 670-4 ( 1990 ) 3.6 Time parameters referred to systems, are those concerned with together with the transfer the and

The time parameters performance of telecontrol processing of information.

In the field of telecontrol, the most crucial time parameter involves the time taken to transfer information from the source to the Designated as the overall transfer time, it is defined in destination. IEV 371-08-15 as: "The time duration event in the sending station". by which information is delayed station and until presentation after the actual at the receiving

The overall transfer time as well telecontrol systems, for a particular application.

is used as a performance as to specify the major

rating factor for time requirements

the overall transfer time is given In a general sense, the times taken by the information to pass through sections of the telecontrol system. It reflects not only but is also influenced by such factors as: performance,

by the sum of the individual the equipment

the the the the the the the the

data

network

configuration; transmission line methods;

telecontrol transmission preprocessing processing noise level

bandwidth; in the in the transmission in sending station; station;

functions functions on of the

receiving line; time

accumulation priority

events of the

a given

period; protocol.

facilities

data

transmission

The overall transfer telecontrol specific classification. Other 371-08-22), relevant are: time

time system

can only be used thus does and

with not

reference to a lend itself to

parameters,

as

defined

in

IEV

(371-08-16

to

telecontrol maximum start and

transfer and average

time; transfer time;

restart

time. demands on the each information time tvpe

The various requirements. is dealt with

types of information place different Thus, in the following subclauses, separately.

9

IS 12746 ( Part 4 ) :1993 IEC Pub 670-4 ( 1990) 3.6.1 State The information state information may be ordered such such in two as as general categories: indications indications and

high priority state and main alarms;

information

circuit-breaker isolator

low priority state information alarms of minor significance.

The essential overall transfer transferred as overall transfer In are addition to of importance Separating

difference time. fast as time.

between these two categories The high priority information possible and thus should have

concerns the has to be the shortest

the overall transfer in the processing capability ( I EV

time, the following of state information:

time

parameters

371-05-01) separated correctly. such that

The minimum the sequence Time The that resolution

time by which events must be of their occurrence is determined ( I EV 371-05-03) which time two events must tags be different.

minimum time by the corresponding time

be

separated

in

order

Suppression

Time period during which states, generated by noise

the acquisition of or contact bounces,

erroneous changes is suppressed.

of

Acquisition

time a state information required for

The minimum time duration of correct detection and processing. Approved information appendix A, 3.6.1.1

methods of determining the transfer capacity of telecontrol clause A.6.

performance systems are

and given

the in

Requirements equipment shall detect is maintained which and for process longer any than change the of a given

The telecontrol information state acquisition time.

The ratio of the acquisition time to The actual suppression time(s) be <2:1. cation shall allow for the maximum contact input equipment.

the suppression time shall used for a particular applibounce time of the process

be capable of detecting and The telecontrol equipment shall processing the transitions of the input signals from the ON to OFF state as well as from the OFF to ON state. For `particular signals, only the transition from OFF to ON is a relevant information (e.g. incremental information).

10

IS12746(

Part 4) :1993

IEC Pub 870-4(1990)
3.6.1.2 Time requirement classes

applicable to the processing The time requirements information are subject to mutual agreement. The following be used to specify the corresponding requirements.

of state tables can

Table

6 - Separating

capability

classes

Time parameter Unit Separating capability ms

Time class requirement SPl I 50 SP2 5 10 SP3 15 SP4 ZGl

Table

7 - Time

resolution

classes

Time parameter Unit Time resolution ms

Time class requirement TRl 5 1 000
TR2 TR3 TR4

I 100

I 10

I1

3.6.2

Command

information

The, outstation devices : fast than

shall

interface

with

at

least

two

kinds

of

controller

moving devices, 250 ms; devices,

which which

reach move

a new in times

determined from

state

in

less

slow moving minutes.

250 ms to

several

The overall transfer time for which requires that commands priority. 3.6.2.1
Requirements

commands shall be as short as possible, be processed and transmitted at high

The operator shall be able to supervise the execution of an initiated adequate data transmission supervisory This req u i res command. as well as return information or measurands in order to functions, confirm the following: acceptance telecontrol the and correct equipment; of the transfer of the in the command peripheral message by the

execution

initiated

action

equipment.

11

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 670-4 ( 1990 ) In case of slow or very slow moving devices, the operator should be able to observe the intermediate state information (e.g. the transit state of a slow moving isolator). If the intermediate state persists for longer than a specified time, a faulty state information should be generated. 3.6.2.2 Time requirement classes classes have been provided The supplier and the time values. for user the processing are to agree

No time requirement of command information. mutually on the relevant

3.6.3

Measured The time values and 371-08-15),

values

and

set

point

commands with the processing is the overall transfer of measured time (IEV

parameter associated set point commands see subclause 3.6.

The overall transfer time laid down largely on the particular requirements the range of seconds up to minutes. 3.6.4 Telecounting (transmission of

for a telecontrol of that system

system depends and is usually in

integrated

totals)

Integrated totals are supplied to the telecontrol equipment in the form of digital coded values or as incremental pulses which are added together in internal counters. The storage command for the integrated totals may come from the local counter units, or may be transmitted to the outstation by an interrogation command. It should be ensured that the further processing of the data be managed in less than a given command be sent simultaneously to a time and that the storage specified number of outstations.

It has conditions, integrated addition,
`\

to

be ensured that, under specified worst case transmission the time required for processing and transmission of the than the specified totalizing period. In totals is shorter the data integrity requirements have to be fulfilled.

3.7

Overall

accuracy

information is defined as the The overall accuracy of processed deviation between the destination and the source values, expressed in This applies to all information per cent of the nominal full range value. which, between the source and the destination, undergoes a conversion from the analog to the digital representation, or vice versa.

A treatment of the overall accuracy individual sections of the information destination.

involves path,

a consideration from the source

of the to its

11

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990)
Telecontrol Telecontrol system in wide sense sense Analog value Operator's equipment `.:::, >F

I<

4

system

in restricted

I <-

VrlUa

slog

>I<Telaccntrol ecruiplnent Analog >~~jj=q-~~

Digital

value

>I<-

>I

Process scluipnent /=q

Data

circuit

Teleccntrol aquiprneot

Digital

/E

I

9
Information output

>

*

Information input

I

I

I <-A->)

c--_-8d-m-0 : ADC = analog DAC = digital VW = visual

>lCC>l

l ml <-

E---

>I <-F-

>I

digital analog display

ccnverter converter mit.

Figure

1 -

Processing

of

analog

information

"accuracy class" The term actually refers to the class 1 is equivalent to an error the equipment, i.e.

error produced of 1%.

in

If the individual other, the overall

error error

sources are E is calculated

random by:

and

independent

of

each

+
where EA, EB . . . . figure 1. etc., are, single

E;

+

. ..

+

E2 F

(11

errors

corresponding

to

the

sections

in

3.7.1

Accuracy

requirements transmission integrated and totals output should

The accuracy required for the acquisition, set point commands and of measured values, be related to the requirements of the process.

In order requirements the specified Further appendix

to attain the required of the various sections overall accuracy. information concerning clause A. 7. the

overall of figure

accuracy, 1 shall

be

the accuracy higher than

overall

accuracy

is

given

in

A,

13

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990) 3.7.2 Overall accuracy classes classes used are to be specified on the basis of

The overall the following

accuracy table:

Table

8 - Overall

accuracy

classes

Accuracy class Al A2 A3 A4
Ax

Overall E E E E E

error

<- 5.0% 5 2.0x 5 1.03: 5 0.5%

Special class (e.g. digital values)

input

3.7.2.1

Telecontrol

equipment

The assessment of the accuracy class shall include the errors induced in the equipment due to component tolerances, equipment environmental conditions, linearity errors and power supply ageing, tolerances. Excluding all equipment errors, the analog to digital conversion as well as the digital to analog conversion has an inherent error of +1/2 digit. This gives a direct relationship between the number of digits in the digital coded information and the corresponding accuracy class.

Class Ax has been included for which excludes conversion errors. Information The values input Section

information

provided

in

digital

form

C of figure

1 converts the measured coded information. analog

analog-to-digital and presents

the

converter (ADC) result as digital

The input circuit nominal range. The digital

and

the

ADC

shall

maintain

the

accuracy

over

the

overload condition is value with the correct should not

to be sign. the

indicated

by

a

specified

maximum

Processing

degrade

accuracy

of

the

digital

value.

Information

output

-

Section

D of figure

1 converted (DAC). to equivalent

In this section, the digital information is analog values by a digital-to-analog converter

14

IS 12746 ( Part 4 ) :1993 IEC Pub 6704 The accuracy is guaranteed DAC shall not be damaged by only short up to the burden specified. circuit or open circuit of the ( 1990) The load.

3.7.2.2

Other

telecontrol refers shown

syse-m

equipment equipment, operator's equipment

This subclause and the cabling

to the process in sections A,

B,

E and

F of figure

1.

Sections

A and

F and IEC operator's standards equipment (e.g. IEC should be Publications chosen 51 and

Sensors, according 688 of TC Sections

transducers to the relevant 85). B and E

Noise may degrade the screening and cable laying the measuring signals is degrade the accuracy.

information signals in the cables. Suitable shall ensure that the influence of noise on kept as small as possible and does not

4.

Expandability Most telecontrol equipment, during have to be extended or modified to the process it serves. The expandability expresses its ability of to a telecontrol be extended the course accommodate of the its lifetime, will changes made to

system is the or modified.

characteristic

which

Expandability can be evaluated by the effort required or modification and by the duration of the downtime of parts of the system, being extended.

for extension the system, or

The addition of process data and application functions as well as the modification of existing functions generally imply an extension or modification of the equipment, as well as of the software.

The expandability of equipment, considered during the initial design is important that the requirements the equipment specifications.

as a design and development be established

feature, shall phase and thus prior to release

be it of

An assessment requirements : _ extensions equipment extensions avaiIa.biIity system minimal.

of

expandability

should

include

the

following

shall require and software; or modifications and safety; downtime to

a

minimum

rearrangement

of

existing

shall

not

degrade

the

system

reliability,

implement

and

test

the

changes

shall

be

15

IS 12746

( Part 4 ) :1993

IEC Pub 670-4 ( 1990 ) An instrument for telecontrol equipment representing is provided and evaluating appendix B. the expandability of

in

5. 5.1

Influence Electrical

of telecontrol
influenw

equipment

on

the

environment

5.1 . 1

Consumption

requirement for each subsystem supply The maximum peak power interface shall be identified. It shall be possible to calculate the power requirement for any configuration from the manufacturer's published data. 5.1 .2 Starting current .

Table 9 defines the maximum instantaneous current value i for indiwith respect to the time t, for t = 0, to vidual power supply units, the steady state condition, t 2 2 s. The parameter In is the nominal current value for a d.c. or an a.c. power supply.

Table

9 -

Starting

current

classes

i t

Class 51
50 us 1tc1.5
ms

Class 52 if I sl A

Class 53 ix20 A if In51 A i<zo 1n if In>1 A i<20 A if In<2 A i<7 In if I,>2 A if In<3.3 A if In>3.3 A

1.5

ms It<30

ms

if I 12 A

30

ms It<500

ms

~_---~

E
500 ms

It<2 s ___~~~ tz2 s

5.1.3

Cut-refit

harmonic

distortions telecontrol

The current equipment shall

generated by the harmonic distortions not influence the neighbouring equipment.

D.C.

supply alternating (~50 kHz) component shall be of less

The maximum peak-to-peak value of the the consumed current at low frequencies than the larger of the following values: 0.3 I or 250 mA,
where I is the

consumed

current.

16

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4

( 1990)

A.

C . supply
ratio, be less which is given than 5. by the rated

The maximum current waveform peak value/r.m.s. value, shall 2 Acoustic noise

Telecontrol equipment which is to be installed in the vicinity of operating personnel, or in an environment where maintenance personnel will be required to work, shall not generate acoustic noise which could cause injury or fatigue to personnel and shall not interfere with voice communication. The two sets of curves given below are extracted from MIL STD 1472.

37,5 75

75 150

150 300

300 600 Octave

600 1 200

1 200 2 400

4

2 400 800

4 800 9 600

63

125

250 Octave band

500

i 000 2 000
frequency

4 000 ftiz)

a 000

band (Hz)

- center

700/A 9

Figure

2 -

Noise criteria (NC) speech communication

curves

for

Noise control

generated by telecontrol equipment shall not exceed NC-30 room installations and NC-45 for maintenance area installations.

for

5.3

Thermal Under

influence consideration.

17

IS 12746 ( Part 4 ) :1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1996) APPENDIX MEASURES TO ENHANCE A SYSTEM PERFORMANCE

The during

following measures layout the design,

are intended as and implementation

guidelines phases.

to

be

referred

to

,

A. 1

Reliability The system reliability following points: may be improved bi taking into account the

Failure of any component shall not result in loss of functions only those for which the component is directly needed. because telecontrol is concerned with monitoring particular, failure of a component at control of widespread processes, location shall not cause loss of functions at different locations.

but In and one

Failure of any of functions. To protect

component

should

not

result

in

an

undetected

loss

against

multiple

and

cascading vital

component shall be

failures. maintained after

Functions which failures of single

are considered components.

Telecontrol eauipment for power svstems shall be sufficiently u'sually present in them. Nevertheless; insensitive to `disturbances disturbance results in a short-term malfunction, this if an extreme malfunction. shall not lead to permanent

All the debugged It is actual

routines, before

including delivery _ all

subroutines

of

the

software,

shall

be

important case in

to assess programming.

the

conditions

which

may

happen

in

The load of the CPU in should not be too heavy, cases.

a microprocessor-based otherwise failure may

telecontrol take place

system in some

A. 2

Availability The system availability may be improved through appropriate design features, such as adequate equipment redundancy, as well as through the use of supervisory measures which aim at reporting malfunctions, or which may even automatically adopt measures to ensure continuance Such measures may include: of operation.

.-

data acquisition function control function check; scan function check;

check;

18

IS12746( Part 4):1993
IEC Pub 870-4(1990)

poll function check; logging function check; queue overflow supervision, equipment diagnostic aids; calibration checks; power failure/automatic restart; equipment self-check features; automatic switchover; internal watchdog function; data transmission retry feature. An alarm should be generated or manually been disabled and or manual switchover operations be logged or otherwise reported. whenever a function has automatically on failure of any device. All automatic of redundant equipment or units shall

The data transmission retry feature is activated when a remote station does not receive or respond to a valid message, and enables the transmitting station to repeat the message up to the number of times specified by the retry count. Transient errors such as occasional detected transmission errors or temporary overloads of receiving stations are counted and afterwards reported. Persistent errors or failures initiate appropriate alarms.

The correct operation of the communication channels should be continuously verified either continually, through the normal transmission procedures, or periodically, through special test messages.

A .3

Maintainability Provisions to enhance the maintainability of equipment include:

equipment self-tests, localize any failure unit level;

diagnostic and trouble or malfunction to the

shooting procedures to lowest field replaceable

readily isolation; for test

accessible test and/or break the placement of components probes and connectors;

points on cards

to facilitate shall allow

fatit access

suitable installation

grips of

or heavy

handles or bulky

to facilitate units;

the

safe

removal

and

physical provisions to preclude interchange of units of a similar form that are not in fact interchangeable;

or

components

physical provisions components; provisions (e. g . of interchangeable

to

preclude

improper

mounting

of

units

or

labels) units

to facilitate identification or components;

and

interchange

19

IS 12746 ( Part 4 ) :1993 IEC Pub 670-4 ( 1990) measures provisions to ensure that include cables identification, and connectors; orientation and alignment

sensitive adjustment adjustments will not

points should be located be disturbed inadvertently;

or

guarded

so

that

internat controls should not be located If such location cannot be avoided, appropriately shielded and labelled;

close to dangerous the controls

voltages. should be

accessible points under to prevent inadvertent or maintenance work; the preventive failures;

voltage shall short circuits

be located in such a way as during mounting, installation

maintenance

programme

should

minimize that are

"wear

out"

the provision for simulation of equipments remote from the equipment under test.

physically

A. 4

Security In addition to features which enhance procedures shall clause A. 1, additional structure in order to improve security: system reliability be implemented listed the under system

in

in the system shall not result a single component failure anywhere in a critical failure (i.e. a failure which is liable to cause injury to persons or significant damage to material); redundant (covering CPUs) ; of common structures single with functions independent up to the (adaptive) layout of

use of subsystems redundant avoidance

mode

failures; operating functions); procedures (covering local

use of preprogrammed processing and data

special transport

local

internal of

interlock fault

in

control

devices;

indications

locations. account also for the possible for inadvertent operation by

The design of telecontrol systems shall mistakes of the human operator or even the operator or by unauthorized personnel.

A.5

Data

integrity

are aimed at obtaining and measures The following requirements and control) information. In correct and complete sets of (monitoring shall not result in a critical all cases a detected error in a message rate of undetected message errors for failure of the system. The commands, critical information transfers, such as shall fulfil the requirements of data integrity class 13.

20

IS 12746 IEC Pub

( Part 4 ) :1993 8704

( 1990)

Measures

to

improve

data

integrity signal

are: quality;

supervision transmission powerful appropriate

of transmission code with high

redundancy;

error-detecting frame

facilities;

synchronization; procedures such as the select and execute

data transmission command procedure; plausibility repetitive state check;

transmissions

of

identical

information;

estimation; feedback. information

information A. 5.1 Monitored

Different transmission initiation modes require different classes of data integrity with respect to undetected falsification of monitored information and undetected loss of information. Erroneous information is allowed to have a higher probability in cyclic updating systems than in spontaneous telecontrol systems, because erroneous information is most probably corrected during the following cycles.

In order to limit measurand errors conditions, it is good practice to regard of the nominal range. Greater overloads sensors and the transducers and indicated

during transducer the measuring range should be suppressed to the user.

overload
as 120%

by

the

A. 5.2

Commands command output shall be taken control centre up to the output the only output in the message sent the command signal, along in the

Measures against unintended the way from initiation at the outstation.

The shall that outstation ensure corresponding to the address transmitted master station is selected before outputting

circuit by the

One method of achieving this is by decoding the command, selecting The comparison may be done recoding and comparison. the output, automatically and should preferably be performed in the master station after transmission of a return information.

Another recommended method is the select and execute command (IEV 371-03-19) s A select command causes a preparative output operation in the outstation (selection ot the intended output circuit). The effect of this operation is indicated to the operator in the central station by a return information (IEV 371-02-05) upon which the operator may decide to activate the intended operation by input of an execute command or to cancel the operation.

21

IS 12746 ( Part 4 ) :1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990) A.6

Time

parameters

An important time requirement for state information concerns the overall transfer time, which depends not only on the performance of the telecontrol equipment (procedures of transmission, message length, transmission speed, etc.) but also:

on the time; on the master

possible

number

of

changes

of

state

in

a

short

period

of

use which station;

is

made

of

the

received

state

information

at

the

on the disturbances switchings of channels).

on

the

transmission

channels

(repetitions,

One method of defining the conditions determine the overall transfer time for a particular transmission speed under normal Another method is to the performance in terms the possible number consider of: of changes the of worst state

for data throughput single change of state undisturbed conditions. case in 1 s; the conditions and

is to at a

state

the possible number overall transfer time

of changes for the last

of state in 30 s and change of state.

maximum

In the last cake the manufacturer time for the last change of state,

should specify given error-free

the overall transmission.

transfer

Another method is to request the maximum number of events, per time under error-free transmission transmit, the events. The example, limit at of a bit sound error transmission rate smaller

manufacturer period, that conditions,

to specify the it is possible to without queueing

conditions than lo-`.

may

be

fixed,

for

A. 7

Accuracy
Monitoring and requires permanent integrated totals. Analog values further processing control of acquisition are and a of geographically characteristic into. widespread process measured values and digital form before

therefore converted transmission.

caused by differences and fluctuations Noise, may be coupled capacitively and/or field, transmission path and corrupt the information

in the electromagnetic inductively along the signal.

A. 7.1

Analog

values of analog-to-digital conversion should accuracy time requirements , the be and determined ex petted

The method according to interference. Instantaneous

value

method

22

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990)

This method converts the present at a specific instant. to the signal lines and the errors measuring principle, in the result. This method of measuring points have to

signal vilue (information and noise signal) Particular care is required with respect filtering because, as a consequence of this due to series-mode noise are fully reflected is used in all cases where a large number be scanned rapidly.

Integrating

method

This method supplies the mean value of the input signal over the It is practical to take as the integration time the integration period. reciprocal value of the mains-frequency (or an integer multiple). This method is used for signals with a slow rate of change. The acquisition of measured values from a large number of measuring points in a short period of time can also be accomplished by simultaneous use of several analog-to-digital converters.

Additional short-time Additional the range

smoothing measurands

(before or after conversion) changing e.g. from switching over a longer

for suppressing operations. of time (in

mean value calculation of seconds or minutes).

period

A. 7.2

Parallel

coded

information

These values equipment. To to ensure that

are already supplied in a code form to the telecontrol guarantee the data integrity, measures have to be taken the information remains unchanged during acquisition.

A. 7.3

MetqThe

readings points shall period be observed: shall be shorter than the meter overflow

following

the meter-reading time; the time base of

the

meter-reading shall

period be

shall

be

accurate; and processed

all incremental correctly. A. 7.4 Overall transfer

meter

pulses

detected

time flow items is subdivided into several delays from are not relevant for digital values): source to

The information destination (some

follow-up

time

of

process

equipment,

e.g.

of

transducers;

information analog-to-digital

scanning; conversion;

23

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4(1990) time delay to transmission caused by:

interrogation commands, cyclic or spontaneous transmission, informatio i prioritv, information coincidence factor, threshold transmission of measurands

(see

note);

transfer time, depending on the transmission and traffic modes, the required accuracy of the thus the necessary word length); adjustment and follow-up times of the

path, analog

transmission values (and

digital-to-analog

conversion;

follow-up Note.-

time

of

the

operator's

equipment.

Threshold

transmission

Measurands ara transmitted only if they change more than given thresholds (min.1max.1. This technique reduces the amount of data to be transmitted under steady conditions and permits the use of lower transmission speeds, but may affect the accuracy of the measured value.

If the accuracy has to. be maintained gradient-dependent transmission speed, techniques are recommended.

without increasing the measuring transmission

24

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 8704 ( 1990 ) APPENDIX EVALUATION B

OF EXPANDABILITY

The which

expandability are applicable

can be evaluated on the basis of the to both master and remote stations.

following

tables,

The tables should be filled out bv the manufacturer with respect to the facilities offered or needed by the equipment, and the downtime'cin hours) required to implement and test the relevant modifications. The facilities provided for are given below by the letters A to E. Where several facilities B and C, both should be included in the table. are applicable, e.g.

The

tables

distinguish in the to the
of process

between quantity existing
data

two types

of extension data;

:

extensions extensions 1)
Quantity

of process application

functions.

This type of extension results from an increase in the amount of process It involves extensions to the process interface equipment and the data. relevant software, but excludes additions to existing application functions.

For typical extensions size, the manufacturer the equipment, together test..

of 20% and 50% with respect to the current system should state the facilities required `or offered by with the downtime in hours for implementation and

Table

B.l

- Extensions

to process

data

Extension

of . . . . 7 .
I

Extension to
I

. . . . % Facility Time

Facility

Digital' inputs Analog inputs Digital outputs Analog outputs Outstations --Facility

I-L_

Time

A B C D E

not possible additional equipment wiring needed additional software needed pluggable unit already equipped to the final extent

25

IS 12746 ( Part 4 ) :1993
IEC Pub 670-4 ( 1990)

2)

Application
type of functions,

functions
extension such deals with the implementation of additional appli-

as those additional transmission or traffic the existing system software.

This cation

used modes

in data processing, and mainly involves

together extensions

with to

Table

8.2

-

Extensions

to

application

functions

Remote

station

Master

station

tAdditiona1
functions

application. Facility Downtime Facility Downtime

Monitoring
-

functions

Single-point information

- Double-point information - Transient information

- Binary transformer tap changer positions - Counter pulses

- Meter - Time
-

readings
teasing

Analog

values

Command

functions

-

Single Double

commands

-

commands commands

- Pulse

- Setpoint

commands

Facility A
B

C D E

not possible requires additional units software modifications implemented replacement of pluggable software already installed

in the field components

26

IS12746(Part4):1993 IEC Pub 870-4 ( 1990) Extensions to additional processing functions

Table

8.3

-

Processing Limit

functions

Facility

Downtime

processing processing

Threshold Time

synchronization programs

Switching

Load shedding Logging

Facility A B C D E not possible requires additional units software modifications implemented replacement of pluggable software already installed

in the field components

Table

8.4

-

Extensions

to

data

transmission

Traffic Transmission mode Point-to-point Facility Cyclic transmission on demand transmission traffic Time

mode Multi-point . Facility traffic Time

Transmission Spontaneous

Facility A B C D E not possible requires additional units software modifications implemented replacement of pluggable software already installed

in the field components

27
Printed at Dee

KavPrir~urs. New klhl.
lndla

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BEG and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

.

Bureau of Indian Standards

is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to of standardization, marking and quality promote harmonious development of the activities certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
BIS

Copyright

No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments, are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the up for revision. latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook. and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: \ Dnc: No LT 025 ( 1582 )
Amendments Issued Since Publicatioa

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters:
Telephones

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi : 331 01 31. 331 I3 75

I10002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

to all

Offices )

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, Y Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C. 1. T. Scheme VI1 M, V. 1. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western
: SC0 445-446, Sector

Telephone 331 01 31 I 331 13 75 378499, 1 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 1 53 23 84 378561 37 86 62 53 I6 40

35-C, CHANDIGARH
MADRAS

160036
6001

: C. 1. 1`. Campus, 1V Cross Road,
: Manakalaya,

I3

235 02 16, 235 04 42 1 235 15 19, 235 23 15

632 92 95, 632 78 58 632 78 91, 632 78 92 Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COlMBATORE FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GGWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. EY MlDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093 &ted at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

