NAT ATTF IS 9978 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


aq wat — fates 


(FAT JETT ) 


Tendu Leaf — Specification 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 65.160 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM eat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH MT, ay feeett— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


January 2022 Price Group 3 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Divisional Council. 


This standard would help the users in obtaining quality leaf, particularly as raw material for bidis. This standard 
was first published in 1981 and subsequently revised in 1991. It was amended in 2012 where the packing and 
sampling requirements were modified to bring them in line with the then prevailing trade practices. In this second 
revision detailed description of the production, harvesting and processing has been added. The requirements for 
size, texture, colour and odour modified in the grade designations. Requirements regarding maturity has been 
deleted as it will show up in size, colour, texture, for which requirements have been given. Packaging requirement 
modified as per trade practices prevalent. 


In the formulation of this standard, the committee has given due consideration to the prevailing trade practices 
in the country and the different grades prescribed under the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act, 
1937 and Rules framed thereunder. The provisions of packaging and marking are also subject to the requirements 
stipulated under Legal Metrology (Packed Commodities) Rules, 2011. 


The composition of the technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 9978 : 2022 


Indian Standard 
TENDU LEAF — SPECIFICATION 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the requirements for different 
grades of Tendu leaves. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
4905 : 2015/ Random sampling and 
ISO 24153: 2009 randomization procedures 


(first revision) 


3 DESCRIPTION 


The tendu tree is found in mixed deciduous forests in 
many states of our country. The leaves of tendu tree 
(Diospyrus melanoxylon Roxb.) are used for wrapping 
tobacco mixture by rolling with hands to produce bidis. 
Tendu leaf is considered the most suitable wrapper on 
account of the ease with which it can be rolled, its wide 
availability, agreeable flavour, flexibility and resistance 
to decay. Tendu is also known as abnus in Andhra 
Pradesh, kendu in Orissa and West Bengal, tembru in 
Gujarat, kari in Kerala, temburni in Maharashtra, and 
balitupra in Tamil Nadu. The leaf is procured largely 
from Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, and 
Maharashtra, and rest from Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, 
Jharkhand, U.P. and Rajasthan. 


Tree pruning or bush cutting is an important operation 
in the tendu leaf production process. Tendu plant stem 
is cut (coppicing) in the month of February. The leaves 
then sprout and become ready for collection after about 
45 days. 


Immature leavers are dark caramel, dark red or crimson 
and turn green as they mature. Fully matured leaves are 
green, have a leathery shining texture, are elliptical in 
shape with narrow base and acute apex up to 20 cm in 
length and 10 cm in width. The leaves are plucked after 
about 45 days of pruning until the onset of monsoon. 


Plucked leaves are collected in bundles and tied with 
string or grass. A bundle, known as Puda in trade, 
contains 50 to 100 leaves. These bundles are brought to 
collection centers (known as Phad in trade) and handed 
over to the purchaser. It is the purchaser’s responsibility 
to dry and process the leaves at the collection centre. 


For drying, the bundles are spread on clean ground and 
turned upside down as required. After 6 to 8 days, the 
bundles are arranged vertically standing on petioles 
so that hot and dry air circulates freely and dries the 
petioles and midrib, a process known as 'Dhera' drying. 
Drying is complete in about 8 to 10 days. Proper drying 
of leaves is important as too much residual moisture 
makes the leaves black and mouldy with foul odour 
while too much drying makes the leaves brittle resulting 
in loss during handling. 


The leaf bundles are sorted for different grades. 
Elaborate grading scheme prescribed on the basis 
of leaf colour, texture, size shape and other body 
characteristics is followed. Being a produce of nature, 
the quality of the leaf will naturally depend up on 
the edaphic and climatic conditions as well as on 
the methods employed in various operations that is, 
coppicing, plucking, drying, storage, etc. The bundles 
of specific grades are packed in separate bags. Before 
filling the bags, the dried bundles are sprinkled with 
water to soften them, then filled tightly in bags and 
exposed to direct sunlight for 2 days (Bharti process, 
the local name derived from Hindi word which means 
filling). The bags, thus packed and cured can be stored 
till their use for bidi rolling. The quantity of leaves 
packed per bundle varies from state to state, in some 
states the leaves are packed by numbers and in some 
states by mass. Usually, a standard bag contains 
1 000 bundles of 50 leaves each. 


4 PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Size 


Tendu leaves are large sized, upto 20 cm long and 
10 cm wide, elliptical in shape, with narrow base and 
acute apex. Size specifications for various grades are 
given in Table 1. 


4.2 Texture 


Tendu leaves shall be medium to thick, pliable and 
silky and free from hair. They shall not be wrinkled 
or cracked. The leaves should not be soiled and dirty. 


IS 9978 : 2022 


Texture specifications for various grades are given in 
Table 1. 


4.3 Colour 


Tendu leaves colour varies from green to reddish/ 
brownish tinge depending on the maturity of leaf at 
the time of plucking and further processing. Colour 
specifications for various grades are given in Table 1. 


4.4 Odour 


The leaves shall not have any undesirable and extraneous 
odour and on burning shall produce agreeable aroma. 


5 GRADES 


Tendu leaves shall be of the seven grades as given in 
Tablel.The broad morphological characters on which 
leaves are selected and categorized for bidi making 
are size, colour, thickness of leaves, texture, relative 
thickness of midrib and lateral veins, blemishes and 
damages. 


6 PACKAGING 


6.1 Required number or mass of dried and graded 
leaves in bundles shall be packed tightly in a sound and 
clean jute gunny bag. The bag shall be free from any 
insect infestation or fungus contamination or from any 
undesirable smell. Each bag shall contain 7endu leaf of 
one grade designation only. 


6.2 The packages shall be securely closed and sealed 
properly. 
7 MARKING 
Each bag shall be marked on each side with the 
following details: 

a) Description of contents, 

b) Name of the State/Forest of collection, 

c) Name of supplier, 

d) Grade designation, 

e) Net quantity of contents, 

f) Number of leaves per puda, 

g) Date of packing, and 


h) Any other marking required under the Legal 
Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011. 


8 STORAGE 


Tendu leaves bags shall be stored in a clean and dry 
place away from moisture and heat. 


9 SAMPLING 


Representative samples of Tendu leaf shall be drawn and 
conformity of the material in the lot to the specification, 
shall be determined according to the procedure given in 
Annex A. 


IS 9978 : 2022 


Table 1 Grade Designation and Requirement of Tendu Leaf 
( Clauses 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 ) 


Grade Colour Texture Size,Shape,Body and Condition Remarks 
Designation 

(1) D 6) (4) (5) 

I Greenish or Medium texture 18 cm x 8 cm, Min; Good body leaves, free from May contain upto 10 percent of 
greenish white hairs, mould, dirt and holes, with depressed and leaves of Grade II 

few veins. Soft but not too dry or brittle. 

II Greenish white or Medium texture 16 cm x 8 cm, Min; Good body leaves, free May contain upto 20 percent 

greenish yellow from hair, mould, dirt and holes, with depressed of leaves of Grade IV and upto 
veins. Soft but not too dry or brittle. 5 percent of lower dimensions 
leaves of other Grade 

I Greenish white or Medium texture Mixed sizes and shapes. May contain up to 20 percent of 
greenish yellow Good body leaves, free from hairs, mold, dirt leaves of Grade IV. 

and holes, with depressed veins, soft but not too 
dry or brittle. 

Holes not to exceed 5 percent of the total area 
of the damaged leaf. 

IV Dull green to Fair to thick 14 cm x 8 cm, Min; body of leaves semi-coarse Should contain at least 
reddish/brownish texture to coarse, slightly hairy or velvety with slightly 20 percent leaves of Grade IL 
tinge prominent veins. Mould, blemish and holes and may contain up to 10 percent 

together not exceeding 5 percent of the total of leaves of Grade V 
area of the damaged leaf. 

V Dark green to Thick texture 15 cm x 8 cm, Min; coarse body leaves, hairyor Should contain at least 
reddish/brownish velvety, with slightly prominent veins, mould, 20 percent leaves of Grade 
tinge blemish and holes together not exceeding IV and may contain up to 

5 percent of the total area of the damaged leaf. 10 percent leaves of grade VI 

VI Brownish to Thick texture 15 cm x 8 cm, Min; body of leaves coarse, Should contain at least 

reddish brown hairy and velvety with prominent veins, uneven 20 percent leaves of Grade 
or up to 10 wrinkled surface; mould, blemish, V and may contain up to 
and holes together not exceeding 20 percent of 10 percent leaves of Grade VII 
the total area of the damaged leaf. 

VII Mixed colour Mixed texture Mixed sizes and shapes, mixed body leaves, Should contain at least 


hairy and velvety with prominent veins, uneven 
or wrinkled surface, mould blemish and holes 
together not exceeding 30 percent of the total 
area of the damaged leaf. 


20 percent of leaves of Grade VI 


IS 9978 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 9 ) 
SAMPLING OF TENDU LEAF 


A-1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 


A 1.1 Lot All the bundles (Pudas) of Tendu leaf of 
the same grade and collected at a time shall grouped 
together to constitute a lot. 


A-1.2 For ascertaining the conformity of the material to 
the requirements of the specification, samples shall be 
tested for each lot separately. 


A-1.3 The number of bundles to be selected from the 
lot shall depend on the size of the lot and shall be 
according to Table 2. 


Table 2 Scale of Sampling 
( Clauses A-1.3.1 and A-2.1 ) 


No. of Bundlesin Sample Size Acceptance Number 


the Lot 
() (2) (3) 
up to 1 000 30 2 
1 001 to 3 000 50 3 
3 001 to 10 000 80 5 
10 001 and above 125 7 


A-1.3.1 At least 25 percent of the gunny bags, subject 
to a minimum of 2, shall be selected from the lot and 
from each bag so selected approximately equal number 
of bundles shall be selected so as to constitute the 
required sample size given in col 2 of Table 2. 


A-1.3.2 The bundles from the gunny bags shall be 
selected at random. In order to ensure the randomness 
of selection, procedures given in IS 4905 may be 
followed. 


A-2 NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


A-2.1 From each of the bundles selected according to 
A-1.3 a Tendu leaf shall be picked up at random and 
examined for all the requirements of the specification. 
A Tendu leaf failing in one or more of the requirements 
shall be considered as defective. The lot shall be declared 
as conforming to the requirements of the specification 
if the number of defective Zendu leaves found in the 
sample is less than or equal to the corresponding 
acceptance number given in col 3 of Table 2. 


IS 9978 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


Organization 


Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry 
Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry 


Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, 
Hyderabad 


All India Bidi Industry Federation, Pune 


Consumer Education and Research Centre, 
Ahmedabad 


Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 


FICCI Research and Analysis Centre, New Delhi 
Godfrey Phillips India Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research, 
Noida 


ITC Limited, Bangaluru 


National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 


Smokeless Tobacco Association, New Delhi 


Smokeless Tobacco Federation (India), Delhi 


The Association Chambers of Commerce and 
Industries of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 


The Indian Tobacco Association, Guntur 
The Tobacco Institute of India, New Delhi 


Tobacco Board, Min of Commerce and Industry, 
Guntur 


VST Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 


In personal capacity 
DS Group, Noida 


National Tobacco Testing Laboratory, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr D. DAMODAR REDDx (Chairman) 
Dr C. CHANDRASEKHARA RAO 


Dr J. MANJUNATH 
Dr K. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJUN KHANNA 


Ms Do ty A. JANI 
SHRI HARARAYTRIPATHI (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DR M. S. KAMATH (Alternate) 


Dr MOHD SHAUKAT 
Dr L. SWASTICHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI AKHILESH KUMAR PANDEY 


DR BISWAJIT DEB 
SHRI PRANAM NAGARE (Alternate) 


DR YOGESHWER SHUKLA 


DR ROOPA HARIPRASAD 


DR KAMAL KUMAR TVAGI 
DR PARAG VILAS NAIK (Alternate) 


DR VASUMATI N. GOKANI 


SHRI C. K. SHARMA 
Ms NAVNEET KAUR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAV BECHAN 


SHRI SURAJIT GHOSH 
DR MADHAVAN SRIDHARAN (Alternate) 


DR P. SRINIVAS 
Hon Secretary (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARADTANDAN 
Dr P. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN, TOBACCO BOARD 
Suri P. MANOJ Reppy (Alternate) 


SHRI C. VIJAYA KUMAR 
SHRI J. NAGESHWARA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr. C. V. N. Rao 
SHRI C. K. SHARMA 


Dr RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 
Dr K. V. SATYANARAYANA (Alternate I) 
Dr SOBIA GHANI (Alternate II) 


IS 9978 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 


National Tobacco Testing Laboratory, Guwahati Dr PRASENJIT SAHA 
SHRI SANJIB KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST 'E' AND HEAD (FAD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio)) 


Member Secretarv 


SHRIMATI NAVITA YADAV 
SCIENTIST 'D' (FAD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 04 (17441). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalava, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


