**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8511 (1985) : Valves for Suction Socket for Artificial 
Limbs [MHD 10: Medical Laboratory Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



U DC 61 5-478-76 : 621 *646-2 : 61 6-758-089-28 



IS: 8511 -1985 



Indian Standard 



( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 




SPECIFICATION FOR 
VALVES FOR SUCTION SOCKET FOR ARTIFICIAL LIMBS 

( First Revision) 



1. Scope — Dimensional and functional requirements of valves for suction socket used in above knee 
prosthesis sockets (total contact socket) for artificial limbs. 

2. Shape and Dimensions — As shown in Fig. 1 . 

OUTER BODY (FEMALE) 

INNER BODY (MALE) 



SPRING LOADED 
RUBBER SEAL 



WASHER 



r 







25 min* 
30 max. 




VACUUM OR PRESSURE 
RETAINER PLATE 



All dimensions in millimetres. 
FIG. 1 SUCTION SOCKET VALVE 



3. Material 



3.1 Light weight material, such as aluminium alloys or plastics, may be used. The maximum weight 
of the valve assembly shall not exceed 25 g. 

3.2 The plastics shall be non-toxic, non-irritant and inert to the body fluids. 

3.3 The rubber sealing shall be of synthetic quality resistant to body fluid and shall be non-toxic 

3.4 The spring steel wire shall conform to the requirements of IS : 4454 ( Part 2)-1975 'Steel wires 
for cold formed springs : Part 2. Oil hardened and tempered spring steel wire and value spring wire — 
unalloyed {first revision )'. 

3.5 The materials used shall conform to the requirements specified in the relevant Indian Standards 
wherever applicable. 

4. Workmanship and Finish 

4.1 The valve shall permit no air leak between outer and inner body. The spring used to control 
suction shall maintain suitable compression on sealing when assembled. 

4.2 The spring shall be fully hardened and tempered. 

4.3 The valve shall have a smooth finish and robust construction. 

5. Functional Requirements 

5.1 An outer body (female) shall be capable of getting secured permanently into the socket either by 
lamination or by adhesive fixing. It shall also be able to adopt the male body from outside the socket 
preferably by screwing or other such quick process. 



Adopted 25 July 1985 



January 1986, ISI 



Gr 1 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 8511 -1985 

5.2 The inner body may be directly screwed or pressed into the outer body (female) of the socket. 

5.3 A spring loaded rubber seal shall be sandwiched between outer and the inner body in such a 
manner that the air passage from outer to inner body can be completely blocked when outer body is 
screwed into the inner body. It shall also be easily possible to establish air contact (for release of 
vacuum or pressure) between inner and outer body by manual push or pull system of the spring loaded 
seal from outside the socket 

5.4 A representative configuration of one such design is indicated in Fig. 1 explaining these main 
elements of the system. Any other design conforming to the above requirements shall also be 
acceptable." 

6. Tests * 

6.1 Leak Proofness — The valve shall be leakproof when assembled on socket. The test procedure 
shall be as given in 6.1.1 and 6.1.2. 

6.1.1 The^valve shall be suitably connected to a closed space having volume of not less than 1 litre 
and not morerthan 1'1 litre. The air in the closed space shall be evacuated by means of a vacuum 
pump to obtain a vacuum of 80 percent (20 kN/m 2 ). The vacuum pump shall then be stopped and 
drop in vacuum shall be noted. 

6.1.2 The drop in vacuum shall not exceed 20 percent in 20 minutes that is the pressure inside shall 
not exceed 40 kN/m 2 . 

Note — The vacuum shall not normally be achieved in actual use of the prosthesis where these valves are fitted. 
However, to ensure reliable and trouble free service, the above test shall be performed. All precautions shall be taken 
to ensure total cleanliness of the valve. Valve seal shall be properly lubricated prior to test. 

7. Mafrking - Each valve shall be suitably marked with the manufacturer's name, initials or recognized 
trade-mark. 

7.1 /Si Certification Marking — Details available with the Indian Standards Institution. 

8. Packing — As agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. The valves shall be protected 
against damages in transit. 

9. Sampling— Sampling scheme and critertia for acceptance shall be as agreed to between the 
manufacturer and the purchaser. However a recommended sampling plan is given in Appendix A. 



APPENDIX A 

( Ciause 9 ) 
SCALE OF SAMPLING AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY 

A-1. Lot — In any consignment, all the valves produced from the same material of the same shape and 
dimension shall be grouped together to constitute a lot. 

A-2 The number of valves to be selected from each lot shall depend upon the size of the lot and shall 
be in accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1. 

TABLE 1 SCALE OF SAMPLING 

Lot Size Sample Size 

Up to 25 3 

26 „ 50 5 

51 „ 100 8 

101 „ 150 13 

151 and above 20 

A-2.1 These valves shall be selected at random and in order to ensure the randomness of selection, 
procedures given in IS : 4905-1968 'Methods for random sampling' may be followed. 

A-3. Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity — All the valves selected at random in 
accordance with col 1 and 2 of Table 1 shall be tested for shape and dimensions, workmanship and 
finish, functional requirements and leak-proofness. The lot shall be considered as conforming to these 
requirements if none of the valves fail to meet in any of these requirements. 



Printed at Printrade, New Delhi, India 



