**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 4249 (1967) : Classification and methods of tests for 
non-ignitable and self-extinguishing properties of solid 
electrical insulating materials [ETD 2 : Solid Electrical 
Insulating Materials and Insulation Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^i^Vii^^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 4249 1967 

( Reaffirmed 2004 \ 
Edition 1.1 

(1979-10) 

Indian Standard 

CLASSIFICATION AND METHODS OF 

TESTS FOR NON-IGNITABLE AND 

SELF-EXTINGUISHING PROPERTIES OF 

SOLID ELECTRICAL INSULATING 

MATERIALS 

(Incorporating Amendment No. 1) 



UDC 621.315.611 : 620.1 : 536.468 



© BIS 2004 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC 
NEW DELHI 110002 



Price Group 6 



IS : 4249 - 1967 

Indian Standard 

CLASSIFICATION AND METHODS OF 

TESTS FOR NON-IGNITABLE AND 

SELF-EXTINGUISHING PROPERTIES OF 

SOLID ELECTRICAL INSULATING 

MATERIALS 

Insulating Materials Sectional Committee, ETDC 18 

Chairman Representing 

SHRi A. P. Skethapathy Central Water & Power Commission (Power Wing) 

Members 

Shri L. C. JAIN ( Alternate to 
Shrl A. P. Secthapathy) 
SllRl V. Balasubramanian Hindustan Brown Boverl Ltd. Bombay 

SHRI V. D. Erande ( Alternate) 
Sum G. C. Bhaitacharya Heavy Electrlcals (India) Ltd. Bhopal 

Shri P. S. Bhandarkar ( Alternate) 
Shri K. Doraiswamy Dr Becl^ & Co (India) Ltd. Poona 

Shri S. B. Bapat ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. N. Gandhi Permall Wallace Ltd, Biiopal 

Shri C. C. Sakarda ( Alternate) 
Dr H. V. GOPALAKRISHNA Indian Institute of Science. Bangalore 

Shri D. T. Gursahani Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

(Ministry of Works. Housing & Supply) 
Shri S. G. Parange ( Alternate) 
SHRI Harnam Singh Directorate General of Inspection (Ministry of 

Defence) 
Shri S. K. Mani ( Alternate) 
Shri S. J. Hasan Bakellte (India) Pvt Ltd. Bombay 

Shri Y. V. CHirrAi, ( Alternate) 
Shri P. N. Hiriyannaiah Indian Electrical Manufacturers' Association. 

Calcutta: and Kirloskar Electric Co Ltd, 
Bangalore 
Shri B, G. Bhakay ( Alternate)ln6!ian Electrical Manufacturers' Association, 

Calcutta 
Dr B. N. JAYARAM ( Alternate) K\r\osV.aLT Electric Co Ltd. Bangalore 
Shri A. S. Lakshmanan Senapathy Whlteley Pvt Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri B. A. Govindaraj ( Alternate) 
Shri M. S. Mahadevappa NGEF Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri T. Appaswamy ( Alternate) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 4249 1967 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri S. N. Mukfrh National Test House. Calcutta 

Shri S. K. Mukhi:r.ifJ'. ( Alternate) 
Shri A. N. Nimkar Jyoti Limited. Baroda 

Shri P. L. Pradhan ( Alternate) 
Shri P. F. Parikh Hindustan Transmission Products. Bombay 

Shri R. P. Gupta ( Alternate) 
Shri R. K. Tandan National Physical Laboratory (CSIR), New Delhi 

Shri J. S. ZAVt:Rl Bharat Bijlee Ltd. Bombay 

Shri C. E. Bhaskar Rao ( Alternate) 
Shri Y. S. VI-nkateswaran, Director General. ISI ( Ex officio Member) 

Director (Elec tech) ( Secretary) 



IS : 4249 1967 

Indian Standard 

CLASSIFICATION AND METHODS OF 

TESTS FOR NON-IGNITABLE AND 

SELF-EXTINGUISHING PROPERTIES OF 

SOLID ELECTRICAL INSULATING 

MATERIALS 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 13 October 1967, alter the draft finalized by the 
Insulating Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Electrotechnical Division Council. 

0.2 Determination of non-ignitable and self-extinguishing properties of 
solid electrical insulating materials is of great importance for selecting 
proper insulating material for electrical equipment where fire hazards 
are anticipated due to the normal operating conditions of the equipment. 

0.3 The readiness with which a material burns depends upon the 
conditions of test. Such tests are necessarily empirical. Under a given 
condition, a material may fail to ignite. Under a more severe condition, 
it may be ignited and after removal of the source of ignition may be 
self-extinguishing. Under a still more severe condition, the same 
material may continue to burn freely. It is for this reason that, in 
defining such terms as are resisting, free burning, non-ignitable and 
self-extinguishing, it has been necessary to prescribe certain conditions. 

0.4 After examining a large number of tests, which have been 
developed, a series of tests embodying conditions which most nearly 
correspond to working conditions in practice have been selected. The 
user who desires to specify a property, such as non-ignitability has to 
select the test most appropriate to his working conditions and to 
prescribe certain limits with which the materials have to comply on test. 

0.5 For special purposes and for samples of a special nature, it may be 
necessary to specify other limits and sizes of sample than those 
suggested in this standard; the actual figures for use in a particular 
case shall be based on experience and may necessitate experimental 
testing of available materials known to be suitable or unsuitable. 

0.6 In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from the 
following: 

B.S. 738 : 1937 Definitions for the non-ignitable and self-extinguish- 
ing properties of solid electrical insulating materials including 
classification and methods of test. British Standards Institution. 



IS : 4249 1967 

66/3994 Draft British Standard specification for asbestos cement 
boards (incombustible) for electrical purposes ( revision of 
B.S. 3497 : 1962). British Standards histitution. 

0.7 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on methods of 
testing for electrical insulating materials. Other standards published 
so far in the series are: 

IS : 2259-1963 Methods of test for determination of insulation 

resistance of solid insulating materials 
IS : 2260-1963 Recommendations for the conditioning and testing of 

electrical insulating materials 
IS : 2584-1963 Method of test for electric strength of solid insulating 

materials at power frequencies 
IS : 2824-1964 Method for determination of the comparative 

tracking index of solid insulating materials 
IS : 3396-1965 Methods of test for volume and surface resistivities 

of electrical insulating materials 

0.8 This edition 1.1 incorporates Amendment No. 1 (October 1979). 
Side bar indicates modification of the text as the result of 
incorporation of the amendment. 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the classification and methods of test 
applicable to the non ignitable and self extinguishing properties of 
solid electrical insulating materials. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard; the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Arc Resisting — The material is known to be arc resisting if it 
resists under the conditions prescribed in Appendix A, the action of an 
electric arc. 

2.2 Burning - To undergo combustion ( see 2.4 ). 

2.3 Carbonization — The condition in which part of the material is 
dissociated and set free and the carbon constituent is left behind. 
Carbonization is usually the result of heating, but may also be brought 
about by chemical action. 

2.4 Combustion — The combination of a combustible material with a 
supporter of combustion, producing heat and sometimes both light and 
heat. 

2.5 Igniting — To ignite; to set on fire. 

2.6 Ignitable — A material which is capable of being ignited. 

2.7 Free Burning — A material which burns freely and continues to 
do so even after the source of ignition is removed. 

4 



IS : 4249 1967 

2.8 Inflammable — A material which is capable of being easily 
ignited. 

2.9 Non-ignitable — A material which when heated as prescribed in 
Appendix A neither burns nor gives off inflammable vapours. 

2.10 Self-Extinguishing — A material which having ignited when 
heated as prescribed in Appendix B does not continue to burn for more 
than a minute after the source of ignition is removed. 

3. CLASSIFICATION AND GRADING 

3.1 General — The following clauses describe the various hazards 
likely to be encountered in service by the non-ignitable and 
self-extinguishing insulating materials. 

3.2 Power Arc — The electric arc is the most severe artificial heat 
source known. Neither insulating materials nor metallic conductors 
are able to withstand the arc for any length of time. The worst service 
conditions, from this point of view, are experienced in arc-chutes, 
switch-barriers, contactor panels, etc. 

3.2.1 Test — The carbon arc test ( see Appendix A ) subjects the specimen 
to the influence of a 10-ampere arc between two 7-mm diameter carbon 
electrodes which arc maintained in light contact with the surface. 

3.2.2 Grading— Materials subjected to the carbon arc test may be 
graded by the time which elapses before the arc penetrates a test piece 
of specified thickness. 

3.3 Explosive Arc — An explosive arc accompanies the blowing of a fuse 
and is consequently a common service condition in connection with heavy 
duty fusible cut-outs. When insulating material is subjected to an explo- 
sive arc two dissimilar effects take place. The material may disintegrate 
and become pitted or the surface may become carbonized or rendered 
conductive or both by a deposit of the products of the explosive arc. 

3.3.1 Fuse Wire Test — When tested, as described in Appendix C, boards 
of Classes 1 , 2 and 3 shall withstand ten applications of the fuse wire test 
without the surface being rendered conducting. This condition is 
determined by a measurement of the leakage current made immediately 
after each fusing and this current should not exceed one ampere. 

3.3.2 Grading — Materials subjected to the explosive arc test may be 
graded for: 

a) resistance to disintegration by the depth of the pits or grooves 
below the general level, produced by a specified number of 
applications; and 

b) resistance to surface conduction by the number of applications 
withstood by the specimen before developing conduction (leakage 
current exceeding one ampere or by the condition of the surface 



IS : 4249 1967 

after a maximum of ten applications. The following conditions may 
occur: 

1) Worst condition — Surface depreciation bad enough to maintain 
arc. 

2) Arc extinguished but conducting track left which passes 
sufficient current to operate a low reading ammeter. 

3) Arc extinguished, leaving track having insulation resistance less 
than one megohm as measured between the terminals of the 
undisturbed specimen. 

4) Arc extinguished, leaving local carbonization, but high resist- 
ance exceeding one megohm due to discontinuity of track. 

3.4 Weak Intermittent Arcs — Tumbler-switches, lampholders, 
adapters, plugs, plug-sockets and installation accessories generally are 
likely to be subjected to weak intermittent arcs produced by the breaking 
of a circuit carrying a limited load. These arcs, although by no means 
severe individually, are likely to produce progressive deterioration 
leading to ultimate failure. 

3.4.1 No suitable test method has been developed as yet which would 
simulate representative working conditions. In case a test is desired it 
should be planned to simulate in all essential particulars the working 
conditions of the particular application. 

3.5 Flame — In the case of naked flame, the insulating materials are 
subjected to the usual fire hazards, 

3.5.1 Test — The spirit burner test (see Appendix B) provides a 
convenient means of studying the relative facility with which a 
material ignites on exposure to flame, or having ignited, extinguishes 
itself on removal of flame. 

3.5.2 Grading — Materials subjected to the standard flame of the test 
in 3,5.1 may be graded for: 

a) ignitability by the time of exposure before ignition occurs { see 
Note 1 ), and 

b) self-extinction by the time burning continues after removal of the 
flame ( 5eeNote 2 ). 

NorK I — It Is not advisable to grade materials for Ignitability when the time of 
ignition is less than 5 seconds. 

NOTP. 2 — Limiting values of time, for inclusion in material specifications, shall be 
associated with specified ambient draught conditions. 

3.6 Contact with Glowing Hot Body — There are semce conditions 
where insulating materials are in direct contact with glowing hot body, 
for example, in electric heating devices and certain wire wound 
resistances. 



IS : 4249 1967 

3.6.1 re5^— The glowing hot rod test (see Appendix D) provides a 
means for studying both the temperature at which a material ignites 
when in contact with a hot body and the relative extent of the damage 
sustained by these materials at specified temperature for a specified 
period. 

3.6.2 Grading -- The material may be graded by the temperature of 
the hot body to cause ignition and by the extent of the destruction of 
the specimen when subjected to contact under specified conditions. 

3.7 Radiant Heat — Insulating materials used in electric furnaces (for 
example, terminal boards) and high power lamps are subjected to radiant 
heat which may tend to cause ignition, disintegration or other changes. 

3.7.1 Test— The radiant heat test ( see Appendix E ) subjects the test 
piece to controllable heat rays from the glowing walls of a cylindrical 
muffle and provides means for the ignition of any inflammable gases 
which may be given off in the process. 

3.7.2 Grading — The materials may be graded by the temperature at 
which ignition or other specified changes take place. 

3.8 Contact with Intermittent Sparks — Commutators, controllers 
and apparatus for operating flashing signs by means of rotating 
contacts, may subject the insulating materials used in their construction 
to severe operating conditions. This happens when the spark, due to 
normal rupture of the circuit, impinges upon the insulation. To a large 
extent, trouble from this cause may be avoided by careful design 
methods, such as undercutting and air-spacing. Nevertheless designers 
of certain commutating devices may have to select materials for service 
where sparking at rubbing contacts is anticipated. 

3.8.1 Te5^ — The destruction of insulating materials by rotating 
contact is of a nature that cannot be simulated by a standard test. The 
tests, to be of any value, should reproduce the service conditions in 
close detail. 

APPENDIX A 

{ Clauses 2 A, 2.9 and 3.2A) 

METHOD OF CARRYING OUT CARBON ARC TEST 
A 1. TEST PIECE 

A- 1.1 From the board under test, cut four test pieces each about 
100 mm square and condition in accordance with Appendix F. For 
boards of nominal thickness not exceeding 6.35 mm. use test pieces of 



IS : 4249 1967 

the thickness of the board under test; for thicker boards reduce the 
thickness of the test piece to 6.35 mm by machining one surface. 

A 2. APPARATUS 

A-2.1 Use apparatus of the type shown in Fig. 1, 2 and 3. 



v^HINGED BACK 
/ PANEL 330x485 




/-ADJUSTMENT FOR 
y^ STRIKING AND 
CONTROLLING 
CARBON ARC 



HEIGHT ADJUST- 
MENT FOR 
CARBONS 
LOCKING SCREW 
FOR HORIZONTAL 
ADJUSTMENT 



MAIN 
SWITCH 



All dimentioni in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Apparatus for Carbon Arc Test (Front Elevation) 

A-2.2 The test piece is attached to a vertical backplate of suitable arc 
and heat resisting material faced with brass and suspended by hinges. 
The carbons are 7 mm diameter. They lie in a common horizontal 
plane and are inclined at an angle of 60° to each other and to the plane 



8 



IS : 4249 1967 



of the test piece. The pressure of the carbons on the test piece is 
indicated by means of tlie green and white lamps while penetration of 
the test piece by the arc is shown by the red indicator lamp. 



-LIMIT SWITCHES 



HINOCO BACK PANEL 
330KAaS 




it ov^ 

♦ L-T_Jt 

c : 




^VARIABLE 
RESISTANCE 
TO SET ARC 
CURRENT 



-FEED SCREW 
FOR CARBONS 



SWITCH 
INDICATOR LAMPS 
BLUE GLASS WINDOW 



All dimcnsiona in millimetres. 

Fig. 2 Apparatus for Carbon Arc Test (Plan View) 

A-3. PROCEDURE 

A-3.1 Make the test under conditions which allow observation of any 
audible cracking of the test piece. 

A-3.2 When the test piece is reduced in thickness for test, have the arc 
impinge on the original (unmachined) surface. Strike on ac 50 c/s arc 
between the two carbons and then adjust the voltage and current to 
45 V and 10 A respectively. Move the carbons forward by means of the 
hand-wheel until the green lamp is extinguished but not so far forward 
as to illuminate the white lamp. Start timing the test immediately the 
green lamp is extinguished. When necessary, re-adjust the voltage and 



IS : 4249 1967 

current to the stated values and keep them constant as far as possible. 
Maintain the position of the hinged panel throughout the test so that 
neither the green nor white lamp is illuminated; this may be assured 
by a preliminary trial before the arc is struck. 

A-3.3 When the red lamp lights, indicating that the arc has penetrated 
the test piece, or when cracking of the test piece is observed, stop the 
test and record the duration of the test. 

A 4. RESULT 

A-4.1 Calculate the mean time for penetration or cracking of the four 
test pieces. 

SOURCE OF 
50c/« SUPPLY 



I7-4 



•/ 



CIRCUIT 
BREAKER 



5A 



fl 



SLIDING 
RESISTANCE 



SWIKH 

1 



*^ SWITCH*' 
2 



RED /Ov 

lampW 



0-20A 

-©- 



I GREEN 
aAHP 



^WHITE 
^LAMP| 









BACK 
PLATE 



NoTB 1 ~ Switch 1 it arrmnged 10 that it opens when the cmrboot cause an initial 
movement of the hinged panel of about 1*6 mm. 

NoTB 2 — Switch 2 is arranged so that it doses when the hinged panel has been 
pushed forward 9*5 mm* 

Fig. 3 Circuit Diagram for Carbon Arc Test 



10 



IS : 4249 1967 

APPENDIX B 

(Clauses 2.10 and 3.5 A) 

METHOD OF CARRYING OUT THE SPIRIT BURNER TEST 

B.l. PREPARATION OF TEST PIECE 

B-1.1 Take three test pieces 15 mm wide of the thickness of the board 
under test and of sufficient length to give a free length of not less than 
100 mm when clamped as described in B-3.2. Condition the test pieces 
in accordance with Appendix F, 

B 2. SPIRIT BURNER 

B-2.1 Use a spirit burner of the pattern shown in Fig. 4 and having the 
essential dimensions given. 



'LAME TUBE 20 mm 
-FLAME GAUZE 30 MESH 



AIR ORiriCE 



PRIMARY HEATING 
CUP 




CONTROL VALVE 



Vfc 



5 



^ 




^ 



Fig. 4 Spirit Burner 

B-2.2 Use good quality 66 O.P. industrial methylated spirit containing 
5 percent of wood naphtha as the fuel. 



11 



IS : 4249 1967 

B 3.1 PROCEDURE 

3.1 Operate the burner with a control valve more than one half turn 
open and with the level of the fuel in the reservoir 750 ± 75 mm above 
the base of the burner. Confirm the satisfactory operation of the 
burner by inserting a bare copper wire 0.71 mm diameter, having a 
free length of not less than 100 mm in the flame of the burner in the 
position to be occupied by the test piece. The flame is satisfactory for 
this test if the wire melts in less than 6 seconds. 

B-3.2 With the burner functioning satisfactorily, clamp the test piece 
so that it rests in the flame of the burner with its long axis horizontal 
and the 15 mm dimension facing the flame 50 mm above the top of the 
burner. Not less than 100 mm of the test piece is to project from the 
jaws of the clamp and the end of the test piece is to be vertically above 
the edge of the burner as shown in Fig. 5. 

B-3.3 Subject the test piece to the flame for one minute. 

B-3.4 In the case of non-ignitable boards, in subdued light, verify any 
apparent burning of the test piece by momentary removal of the flame. 
Combustion is established if the test piece continues to burn for more 
than one second after removal of the parent flame at any time between 
5 and 60 seconds. 

B-3.5 In the case of self extinguishing boards, remove the flame and 
note the time for which the test piece continues to burn. If the flame 
reaches to within 25 mm of the clamp, discard the results and test a 
new and longer test piece to ascertain the time required for extinction. 
Determine the mean value of tests on three test pieces. 



APPENDIX C 

{Clause 3.3 A) 

METHOD OF CARRYING OUT THE FUSE WIRE TEST 

CI. TEST SPECIMEN 

C-1.1 The test specimen shall consist of two pieces of the material of 
180 mm long and 50 mm wide. Both pieces shall be flat and free from 
surface defects. Two holes should be drilled to make it suitable for 
mounting as shown in Fig. 6. These two boards together comprise a 
single test piece which is conditioned before test in accordance with 
Appendix F. 

12 



IS : 4249 1967 



/^=^ 



T 

13 

± 



( 



PLAN 



Y 



^. 



SPECIMEN 



50 



S 



ELEVATION 



All dimentiom in miUimetres. 

Fig. 5 Arrangement for Spirit Burner Test 

C 2. CLAMPING ARRANGEMENTS 

C-2.1 The specimens shall be clamped together with their working 
surfaces facing each other with a 0.75 mm diameter bare copper fuse 
wire lying centrally between them. The combined test piece together 
shall be clamped between two pieces of suitable insulating materials 
by means of two bolts 90 cm apart to give a general arrangement as 
shown in Fig. 6. The ends of the fuse wire shall be connected to the 
other two bolts, which act as terminals. 

13 



IS : 4249 1967 



■♦■ 







-o- 



<> 



<> 



J 

t 







-fti-s-l— s-4-^*i 



14 



IS : 4249 1967 



C 3. ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT 

C-3.1 The electrical circuit shall be capable of causing a current of 
100 A from a 12 V battery to flow through the copper wire thus fusing 
it within 10 seconds at a final current of not less than 98 A. 
Immediately the wire has been fused, 50 c/s voltage of 500 ± 10 V peak 
shall appear across the fused ends of the wire, the voltage being 
obtained from a specially designed transformer having its secondary in 
series with the fuse blowing circuit. Ammeters shall be provided to 
indicate whether correct fusing current is flowing and also to indicate 
fault current down to less than 1 A rms should the specimen conduct 
after the wire has fused. An overload type instrument is suitable for 
this purpose. A convenient circuit diagram is given in Fig. 7. An 
alternate test circuit arrangement is given in Appendix G. 

Ll"^^ N 



SIGNAL LAMP 
AMBER 




SIGNAL LAMP GREEN* 



1 '^ S X y^TRlCKLE 

L— JV^ CHARGER 



Fig. 7 Circuit Diagram for Fuse Wire Test 

C 4. TEST PROCEDURE 

C-4.1 The specimens are set up in the clamp with the fuse wire in 
position and the ac and dc supplies are switched on simultaneously. 
When the fuse has blown, the supplies shall be maintained for 5 seconds 
and any continuation of current flow observed on the overload 

15 



IS : 4249 - 1967 

instrument. If fault current is observed then the supplies shall be 
switched off for 5 seconds and then reapplied for 5 seconds so that the 
presence of conduction may be detected after fall in the specimen 
temperature. The test shall be repeated on the same board of specimens 
at inteiA^als of 1 and 2 minutes until either conduction occurs or 10 wires 
have been fused. The ten fusings shall be comprised only of wires that 
have fused at the same site on the surface of the specimen. Particles of 
foreign matter resting and adhering to the surfaces of the specimen shall 
be scraped off between each test. The piece of the material under test is 
considered to make a suitable scraper since in this way contamination 
of the specimen is avoided. The number of applications of the test 
withstood by the specimens without conduction occurring shall be 
recorded. Record shall also be made of conduction (fault current) and the 
condition under which it occurs. A specimen shall withstand the test in 
the manner defined in C- 1.1. 

C 5. DETAILS OF THE SPECIAL TRANSFORMER 

C-5.1 The core of the main transformer (see Fig. 8) is of simple 
rectangular shape made up from strips of Unisil 62 in such a way as to 
have a single air gap of approximately 1.6 mm. Both windings are on 
one limb on a spool consisting of 100 x 120 mm diameter P.B.P. tube 
with 245 mm diameter and 12.5 mm thick P.B. fabric end cheeks. The 
secondary winding which is wound on first in order to keep its 
resistance to a minimum has 250 turns of 9.6 x 3.2 mm enamelled 
copper strip. Over this is wound, a primai^ of 125 turns of 1.80 mm 
insulated copper wire. The air gap is adjusted so as to obtain a 
magnetizing current of 5.6 A for 180 volts applied to the primary. 

C 6. DETAILS OF THE BATTERY 

C-6.1 A 12 V battery of about 40 Ah capacity is necessary. It should be 
capable of a high rate of discharge. A trickle charger that may be left 
overnight is convenient although a rapid charge would be an 
alternative. A suitable charging circuit is also included in Fig. 7. 
Connecting leads in the main battery circuit shall be of adequate size 
and kept as short as possible. 

APPENDIX D 

{Clause 3.6 A ) 

GLOWING HOT BODY TEST 

D-1. The specimen shall be conditioned in accordance with Appendix F 
before the test is carried out. 

16 



IS : 4249 1967 



260 



4iP GAP 




All dimensions in millimetrrs. 

Fig. 8 Transformer Core 

D-2. The specimen shall consist of a piece of the material of 
120 X 15 X 10 mm dimensions, or alternatively, for thinner materials, 
120 X 15x3 mm dimensions. 

D-3. The specimen shall be clamped at one end in a horizontal position 
and it shall be arranged that the surface of the free end shall make 
contact at the centre of 15 mm sides with a glowing bar held 
horizontally at right angles to the specimen. 

D-4. The glow-bar shall consist of an electrically heated rod of 
diameter 8 mm and heated length of 80 mm whose 
temperature-current relationship is known and reasonably constant. 

D-5. Suitable apparatus incorporating a glow-bar of silicon carbide is 
shown in Fig. 9. 

17 



IS : 4249 - 1967 







18 



IS : 4249 - 1967 

D-6. The hot rod at a temperature of 650°C shall be placed against the 
test sample. If no ignition occurs during one minute the temperature of 
the bar shall be raised in steps of SO^'C and the test again carried out on 
a new, cold test sample until the material inflames. After each test the 
resulting ash shall be removed from the hot rod. The ignition time shall 
be deemed to be the time in seconds from the instant of application of the 
glow-bar to the specimen to the instant of ignition. The extent of the 
destruction shall be measured by the length of the charred portion in 
centimetres, or by the loss of weight of the specimen. 

APPENDIX E 

(Clause 3,7. 1) 

RADIANT HEAT TEST 

El. Test pieces shall be conditioned in accordance with Appendix F 
before the test is carried out. 

E-2. The size of specimen will depend largely on circumstances, but may 
conveniently be 50 mm long, 15 mm wide and of thickness equal to the 
thickness of the material, provided it is not more than 12.5 mm thick, in 
which case the specimen should be cut down to 12.5 mm thickness. 

E-3, The test specimen shall be fixed centrally in the heating tube of 
the apparatus shown in Fig. 10 and 11 with its long axis vertical, and 
shall be supported throughout the test. 

E-4. A light stirrup of nichrome wire, supported by a length of 
nichrome wire passing through the slit in the adjustable cover, may be 
used for supporting the specimen. 

E-5. During the test the adjustable cover shall be so arranged that 
there is an opening about 6.5 cm^ in area. 

Note — Certain variables, such as the position of the pilot flame, location of 
thermocouples, and the nature and extent of the intake and exhaust air-orifices, 
should be fixed when specifying this test. 

E-6. The apparatus is heated by passing a suitably regulated electric 
current through the nichrome resistance wire surrounding the heating 
tube. 

E-7. The temperature of the tube shall be increased at the uniform 
rate of 300X per hour and the temperature at which the material 
ignites noted. The temperature of the tube shall be taken as that 
shown by a thermocouple situated at the level of the centre of the 
specimen and equidistant from the inner surface of the heating tube 
and the middle of the nearest 13 mm face of the specimen. The wires of 
which the thermocouple is made shall be between 1.40 mm and 
0.45 mm and shall be bare for a length of 25 mm from the junction. 

19 



IS : 4249 1967 



11 ii' r P I 




C/5 

H 

BDu 

tJ <: 

I H 

f3 < 
S tu 

c X 

a g 
1 ° 



O 



20 



IS : 4249 1967 



PILOT 
GAS FLAME 



NICHROME STIRRUP 




THERMOCOUPLE 



-^ ^ «^«Jii 



V #k,V^ "» ^ ^ - 

•* #Jv ^^ /^ *^ ^i* '^ 

': ^ ^^HOR^ONTAL t OF 
^ ^ HEATING CHAMBER 

*S* #^» ^^ 0>m 0>t0 



SPECIMEN 



NICHROME WIRE 
SUPPORT 



Fig. 1 1 Relative Position of Specimen, Thermocouple and 
Pilot Flame in Flammability Test Apparatus 



APPENDIX F 

( Clauses A-IA, B 1.1. C-1.1, D-1 and El ) 

METHOD OF CONDITIONING TEST PIECES 

F-1. Condition the test pieces in a controlled atmosphere of relative 
humidity 65 ± 5 percent and temperature of 27" ± 2"C for 18 to 24 
hours. Arrange them so as to expose the maximum possible surface to 
the controlled atmosphere. Test every test piece in the controlled 
atmosphere or within 3 minutes of removal from it. 

F-2. When a complete test room having the controlled atmosphere is 
not available, the specified relative humidity of 65 ± 5 percent at 
27** ± 2*'C may be obtained in the enclosed test chamber as follows: 

a) Prepare a saturated solution by boiling in water a mixture of 
4 parts by weight of sodium chloride and 9 parts by weight of 
sodium nitrate. Cool the solution and add more of the solid 
mixture than may be taken into solution. 



21 



IS : 4249 - 1967 

b) Expose the saturated solution so that the maximum surface is in 
contact with the air in the chamber, for example, by covering the 
floor of the chamber with a tray containing the saturated 
solution. Maintain excess of solid salt in the liquid so that the 
solution remains, saturated and ensure that the solid remains 
covered by the solution and that the surface of the liquid is free 
from any crust or film of grease, dirt. etc. 

c) Take care to allow free access of the conditioning atmosphere to 
all the test pieces. To ensure uniform conditions throughout the 
chamber, use a fan to circulate air over the surface of the 
saturated solution and around the test pieces. 

d) The correctness of the humidity of the air should be checked from 
time to time. 



APPENDIX G 

(C7aaseC 3.1) 

ALTERNATIVE TEST CIRCUIT FOR FUSE WIRE TEST 
Gl. GENERAL 

G-1.1 The principle of the test employing the alternative circuit is 
same as in Appendix C. except that the bulky transformer used in the 
test circuit of C-3.1 and C-5 is replaced by a mumetal ring core. An 
ordinary ammeter can be used in place of an overload type of ammeter. 

G 2. ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT 

G-2.1 An alternative circuit diagram is given in Fig. 12. 

G2.2 The operation is started by pressing the push button PB 
momentarily which fires the thyristor TH. Instantaneously a current 
of 100 A starts flowing in the fuse wire circuit. The relay RLA picks up 
and closes the contact A energizing relay RLB. This switches on the 
30 V ac supply to the primary of the mumetal ring core through 
contact B2 while its contact Bl locks it. The dc field in the mumetal 
ring core saturates it. Ri limits the current in the primary circuit. As 
soon as the fuse is blown, the core comes out of sSaturation increasing 
the reactance of its primary winding. A small voltage is induced in the 
secondary which after rectification gives a dc signal to the triac. The 
primary of the transformer T2 gets the supply and the ac voltage of 
500 V (peak) appears across the fuse terminals. By this time the 
thyristor is switched off. A deliberate delay is introduced for the triac 

22 



IS : 4249 1967 

gate signal through Rl-C to allow the thyristor to go cut of conduction 
stage. The current is read in the ordinary moving iron ammeter. 






SiJIliU^ 




r, 
r. 



Tj* 



Thuitronii«r2S0/30V 30VA 

liumcCal ring cor« 

8ia« 120 mm O.D. x 70 mm ID x 19*5 mm 
PHmary turm 400-23 SWO 

Stondary tur nt 400 — 25 SWG 
TnHMibrmtr 2S0/555V 500 VA 

100 A current operated relay 

Relay 

30 Volt dc %irorldii( with three n.o. contacU 

■B 300 ohms 5 watts 

-• 22 ohmt 5 watts 

— 100 mid 50V dc electrolytic capacitor 

-400 V, 2-5 A 

mm Thyrhtor 125 A 800 V PIV 

« 500 mA 100 V PIV 

PB - Piuh Button 

Fig. 12 Alternative Cirruit Diagram For Fuse Wire Test 



IWac- 
TH 



23 



IS : 4249 - 1967 

G 3. TEST PROCEDURE 

G-3.1 The specimens in accordance with C-1 are set up in the clamp 
( see C-2 ) with the fuse wire in position and the ac and dc supplies are 
switched on Switch SZ is closed and the push button PB is pressed. 
When the fuse has blown the indication appears by the glowing of 
lamp ' L \ The supplies shall be maintained for 5 seconds and any 
continuation of current flow observed on the ammeter. If the fault 
current is observed, then the switch SZ is opened for 5 seconds and 
again closed for 5 seconds so that the presence of conduction may be 
detected after the fall in specimen temperature. For the next operation 
SI and 52 are opened and the fuse is replaced. The test shall be 
repeated on the same board of specimens at intervals between 1 and 2 
minutes until either conduction occurs or 10 wires have been fused. 
The ten fusings shall be comprised only of wires that have fused at the 
same site on the surface of the specimen. Particles of foreign matter 
resting and adhering to the surfaces of the specimen shall be scrapped 
off between each test. The piece of the material under test is 
considert^d to make a suitable scraper since in this way contamination 
of the specimen is avoided. The number of applications of the test 
withstood by the specimens without conduction occuring shall be 
recorded. Record shall also be made of conduction (fault current) and 
the condition under which it occurs. The specimen shall withstand the 
test in the manner defined in C. 1.1. 

G-4. DETAILS OF THE BATTERY 

G-4.1 A 12V battery of about 40 Ah capacity is necessary. It should be 
capable of a high rate of discharge. A suitable charging circuit is also 
included in Fig. 7. 



24 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS Is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
hamionious development of the activities of standardization, marlcing and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications niay be reproduced in any 
form without the prior pennission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use. In the course 
of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade 
designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addres.sed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need ari.ses on the basis of comments. Standards are also 
reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates 
that no changes are needed; if tiie review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for 
revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in posse.ssion of the latest 
amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Catalogue' and Standards : Monthly 
Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed by Technical Committee : ETDC 18 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue 

Amd. No. 1 October 1979 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002. Telegrams: Manaksanstha 

Telephones: 323 01 31 . 323 33 75. 323 94 02 (Common to all ofnces) 

Regional Offices: Telej^hone 

Central : Manak Bhavan. 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 1 10002 1 323 38 41 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M. V. I. P. Road. Kankurgachi I 337 84 99. 337 85 61 

KOLKATA 700054 1 337 86 26. 337 91 20 

Northern : SCO 335 336, Sector 34 A. CHANDIGARH 160022 J 60 38 13 

I 60 20 25 

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus. IV Cross Road. CHENNAI 6001 13 j 235 02 16. 235 04 42 

1235 15 19.235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya. E9 MIDC. Marol, Andheri (East) | 832 92 95. 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400093 1 832 7891. 832 78 92 

Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATl. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISHAKHAPATNAM 



