**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 12215 (1987) : Code of practice for selection of belt 
feeders [MED 6: Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, 
Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 






UDC 621 -86067-2 : 006-76 ( First Reprint JANUARY 1999 ) ,S : ! 22 J 5 " ] ??* 
. 2 1 (Reaffirmed 1998) 



Indian Standard 
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR SELECTION OF BELT FEEDERS 



1 - Scope — Lays down the code of practice for selection of belt feeders. 

2. Application — Belt feeders are used under bins, hoppers and other type of containers. These will 
handle practically any bulk material which is not too large, hot or will not adhere unduly to the belt. 

3- Construction — Belt feeders are similar in construction to belt conveyors and consist of endless 
belts operating over supporting idlers between head and tail pulley terminals. An illustration is given 
in Fig. 1. Conveyor belts with heavy rubber cover on the carrying side are used to carry the material. 
Closely spaced flator troughed belt idlers provide the necessary support for the belt and the material. 
Skirt plates extend to the full length of the feeder to confine the material and provide necessary 
depth for desired capacity or lump size. 

3.1 Self-contained, sturdy steel frames support and align the head and tail shafts, intermediate 
idlers and the continuous skirt plates. Adjustable rubber strips along the lower edge of the skirt 
plates reduce belt clearance and acts as seals, and prevent possible leakage. Feeder belt, idlers, and 
head and tail pulleys shall conform to IS : 1891 ( Part 1 )-1978 'Specification for rubber conveyor and 
elevator belting : Part 1 General purpose belting ( second revision )', IS : 8598-1 987 'Specification for 
idlers and idler sets for belt conveyors {first revision)' and 1S:8531-1986 'Specification for pulleys 
for belt conveyors ( first teJsion )' respectively. 

3.1.1 The idler size and type for use with the belt feeder is generally similar to that required for 
belt conveyors. However, spacing of the idlers in belt feeder may be different than those in case of 
belt conveyors and may be suitably selected at design stage. 

3.2 Belt Width (W) — Belt width in relation to maximum lump size of material shall be selected in 
accordance with IS : 11692-1985 'Code of practice for selection and design of belt conveyors'. See 
Fig. 1 for belt width W nomenclature. 

3.3 Width of Belt Across Skirt Plates (D)— In general, the maximum dimension of width of belt 
across skirt plates shall not be more than two-thirds the width of the belt W. For flat belt depending 
upon how well it is supported by idlers and how effectively the skirt rubber seals are maintained, 
width of belt across skirt plates ( dimension D ) may be increased more than two-thirds the width of 
belt ( W). However, width of belt across skirt plates, that is, dimension O shall be suitably selected 
while designing the belt feeder. See Fig. 1 for width of belt across skirt plates D nomenclature. 

3.4 Height of Skirt Plates (H) —The height of skirt plates shall be sufficient to contain the volume of 
material as it is loaded on the belt. The height of skirt plates depends upon the lump size of material, 
troughing angle of idlers used and capacity of belt feeder, and this shall be suitably selected while 
designing the belt feeder. See Fig. 1 for height of skirt plates H nomenclature. 

3.5 Variable speed drives are recommended for belt feeders. 

4. Capacity — The capacity of the belt feeder depends on the speed of the belt, width of the belt 
across the skirt plates, height of the skirt plates, troughing angle of idlers used and bulk density of 
material to be handled. 

4.1 Capacity Calculation for Horizontal Belt Feeder— An example (for illustration only) for 
calculating the capacity of a horizontal belt feeder is given below : 

Example 

Belt feeder capacity 
in tonnes per hour = 075 xAxVxSx 60 

where 

A = theoretical cross-section of skirt plates in m 2 and is equal to D x H for feeder with 
fiat belt; 



Adopted 14 October 1987 



June 1988, BIS 



Gr2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BKAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



SKIRT PLATE 



REGULATING GATE 



N> 




Cft 






00 



FIG. I BELT FEEDER (WITH FLAT BELT) ILLUSTRATION 



IS: 12215 -1987 

V = belt speed in m/minute; 

5= bulk density of material in tonne/m 8 ; 

0*75 is a factor of loading and, in the given example, this factor has been assumed to be 
075, that is, the skirt plates are considered loaded 75 percent of theoretical cross- 
seotion A available; and 

60 is the multiplying factor to obtain the capacity per hour, V being the belt speed in 
m/minute. 

4.2 Maximum Belt Speed— Maximum recommended belt speed is 15 m/minute for abrasive 
materials and materials with large size lumps, and 30 m/minute for non-abrasive materials and 
materials with small size lumps. 

5. Feed Chutes — For handling large lump sizes or where the material is likely to fall on the belt 
feeder from a height, special feed chutes shall be provided to avoid severe impact and prevent 
damage to the belt. 

6. Regulating Gates — Adjustable regulating gates may be furnished where required. These shall be 
provided with skirt plates. 

7. Take-up Device — Generally a screw type take-up device shall be provided on all the belt feeders. 
Any special requirements shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 

8. Angle of Inclination — Angles of inclination and declination shall be suitably selected as these 
shah effect the feeder capacity. Maximum recommended angle of inclination is 10 degrees. 

9. Belt Cleaners — Suitable external and internal belt cleaners shall be provided for belt feeder. 

10. Peripheral Force Required on Drive Pulley and kW Rating of Motor— These parameters 
shall be calculated in accordance with IS : 11692-1985 to which any pullout resistance due to 
column height of material in the hopper above the skirt plates shall be added. This pullout resistance 
shall depend upon type of material length of hopper connected with skirt plates and column height 
of material in the hopper above skirt plates and some of the other parameters. Hence, these para- 
meters shall be decided while designing the belt feeder. 

10.1 After calculating peripheral force on drive pulley and with selected belt speed with due 
consideration of drive efficiency required, kW rating and other parameters of the motor shall be 
calculated in accordance with IS : 11692-1985. 

11. Data to be Supplied by the Purchaser— Following information shall be supplied by the 
purchaser with his enquiry/order: 

1) Material to be conveyed; 

2) Material conditions — wet, dry, sticky, greasy, abrasive, and if hot, temperature to be 
stated; 

3) Bulk density of material in kg/m 3 ; 

4) Size of largest lumps ( 3 dimensions ); 

5) Average size of material; 

6) Percentage of largest pieces; 

7) Corrosive reactions on metals, if any; 

8) Belt feeder capacity in tonne per hour: 

a) Rated; and 

b) Design ; 

9) Amount of lift; 

10) Shaft centres ( centres of head and tail pulleys ); 

11) Any restriction on position of drive unit; 

12) Type of cable entry required; 

13) Electric power supply details; 



IS : 12215 -1987 

14) Special safety precautions required; 

15) Sketch of proposed belt feeder required with its location with respect to hopper, bin and 
other type of containers under which it shall be required to work; 

16) Statutory requirement applicable; 

17) Details of spare parts required; and 

18) Any special features of belt feeder required by the purchaser. 

12. Data to be Supplied by the Manufacturer — Following information shall be furnished by the 
manufacturer to the purchaser: 

1 ) Width of belt recommended; 

2) Belt speed in m/minute; 

3) Specifications of belt; 

4) Power required: 

a) At drive pulley shaft; and 

b) At motor shaft; 

5) Details of drive unit; 

6) Pulley diameter, diameter of shaft and type of bearing ( ball/roller ); 

7) Details of idlers; 

8) Peak capacity of belt feeder when handling the specified material; 

9) Details of take-up device; 

10) Type and location of belt cleaners; 

11) Dimensional general arrangement drawing of belt feeder; and 

12) List of spares, if called for in the enquiry order. 

13. Other Requirements — Other requirements, such as quality of material, components, durability 
aspects shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 
Note — Return idlers shall be provided for belt feeders with centres ( C ) more than 3 m. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

The criterion for selection of belt feeders given in this standard are expected to provide guide- 
lines to the manufacturers while designing and manufacturing, and to the users while selecting the 
belt feeders for their requirements. 

A reference to following Indian Standards may further be useful to help selection of feeder 
regarding some of the aspects not covered in this standard: 

IS : 1891 Specification for rubber conveyor and elevator belting, 

( Part 1 J-1978 General purpose belting ( second revision ) , 

(Part 2 )-1 978 Heat resistance belting (first revision), 

( Part 3 )-1978 Oil-resistant belting ( first revision ), 

< Part 4 )-1978 Hygienic belting, 
IS : 7155 Code of recommended practice for conveyor safety ( first revision ), 

(Part 1 )-1986 General information, 

( Part 2)-1986 General safety requirements, 

( Part 3)-1986 Belt conveyors and feeders, and 
IS : 11592-1985 Code of practice for selection and design of belt conveyors. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



