( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS: 10224- 1982

Indian Standard
ER-GONOM-IC PRINCIPLES IN THE DESIGN OF WORK SYSTEMS
Industrial
Chairman SHRI A. K. CRAKRABARTY Members SHRI P. R. SURENDRANATRAN ( Alternate to Shri A. K. Chakrabarty ) Indian Cotton Mills Federation, Bombay SRRI S. P. BHATIA Chief Controllerate of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI CEARANJIT LAL SRRI B. R. DAVE ( Alternate ) DR S. K. CHATTEIIJEF: Directorate General of Health Services Poor B. B. CHATTERJEE ( Alternate ) India Safety of Engineers, Calcutta SRRI P. K. CHAUDHU~I DR D. K. NAP ( A~ternotc ) Sandoz ( India ) Ltd, Thane SHRI N. CHAWLA Loss Prevention Association of India Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. K. DAS SHRI S. PURUSHOTH~XA ( Plllcrnnte) Central Boilers Board, New Delhi SHRI S. C. DEY SHRI S. M. PRASAD ( Alternate ) Standing Committee on Safety for the Steel Industry SHRI D. M. DHAR ( Durgapur Steel Plant ) SHRI A. K. DAS GUPTA ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR ( COMMERCIAL ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( COP~MERCIAL ) ( Alternate ) DIRECTOR GENERAL OF MIXES Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad SAFETY DIRECTOR, MINES SAFETY EQUIYMENT( Alternate ) SHRI DURGESH CHANDRA Century Rayon, Kalyan Snnr JAYANT ADHIA ( Alternate ) SHRI K. H. GANDHI Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SI-IRI SATPAL SINOH ( Alternate) SKRI P. N. Geosrr Institute of Fire Engineers India, New Delhi National Safety Council, Bombay Sanr K. C. GUPTA SHRI N. RA~HAVAN ( Alternate ) Directorate Labour

Safety Advisory Committee,
Rqbresenting

ISAC
Service and

General Factory Advice Institutes, Bombay

( Continued on page 2 )

@ Coprrzght 1982
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the +blisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS

:10224-198i

( Confinucd frompage1 ) Members Representing

Indian Jute Mills Association, Calcutta SII~I R. P. JHA Indian Airlines Corporation, New Delhi SHRI J. D. JIJJNA Srr~r M. N. A~ORA ( Alternate ) Safety Appliances Manufacturers' Association, SHRI M. KANT Bomhav Snnr KIRIT MAR~ ( Alternutc ) The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Ltd, SHRI P. KRISBNAN N~IK Udyogmandal Snn~ LAXMI N~IEAIN Indian National Trade Union Congress, New Delhi SHRX K~R.~N SINGH ( Alternate ) Srrnr H. R. L.~XXIN.~RAYAN Ministry of Shipping and Transport Sunr A. B. THAI~UR (~Alternatc ) SHRJ G. B. MENON Standing Fire Advisory Council, New Delhi SHRI B. K. NARAYAXA RHAGWAN Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI S. SRISATH ( Alternate ) Ministry of Communications SHIEI G. R,+M~MURT~Y SHIZI Y. V. R. REUDY ( Alternate ) ' Directorate General of Ordnance Factories. Calcutta SFTRIS. G. RANADE SHRI S. R. C. RAO Steel Authority of India S HR~R. N. DAS ( Alternate ) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) ROPRESENTATIVB The Safety First Association of India, Bombay SHRI Y. K. S~PRU SHRI A. A. JASDENVALA ( Alternate ) Employees State Insurance Corporation, New Dehli SnRI I. C. S&RI?4 DR K. M. SAXENA ( Alternate ) SHRI I'. SESHADRI Ministrv of Petroleum & Chemicals Slr~tr JAGJIT SINGH ( Alternate) ' Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad DR B. SINGH SIIRI P. R. ROY ( Alternate ) Indian Chemical Manufacturers' Association, SIXRI D. K. SIRKAR Calcutta Srm~ S. J. SHAKMA ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi Sam S. VEXBSWAMY SHRI S. P. VIDYAI~THI All India Manufacturers' Organization, Bombay DR HARI BIIAGWAN, Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficzo Member ) Director ( Chem ) ( Secretary )

Safety

Practices

and Procedures

Subcommittee,

ISAC/S-3

Convener Swnr P. R. SURENDRANATHAN Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour Institutes ( Ministty of Labour ), Bombay

Members SHRI H. GANAPATHY ( Alternate to Shri P. R. Surendranathan ) SEIRI CHARANJIT LAL Chief Controllerate SHRI B. R. DAVE ( Alternate )

of Explosives,

Nagpur

( Continued on page 11 )

IS : 10224- 1982

Indian Standard
ERGONOMIC PRINCIPLES IN THE DESIGN OF WORK SYSTEMS

0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 29 July 1982, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Safety Advisory Committee had been approved by the Executive Committee.

0.2 Technological, economic, organizational and human factors affect the work behaviour performance and well being of people as part of the work systems. The design of the work systems should therefore satisfy human requirements by applying ergonomic knowledge in the light of practical experience. Recognizing the importance of this principle it was decided to adopt ISO/DIS 6385 `Ergonomic principles in the design of work systems', issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 0.3 However, it is recommended that: with other pertinent

a) This standard should be used in conjunction standards, regulations or agreements;

b) Adaptation of this standard may be necessary in order to meet additional requirements of some categories of individuals, for example, in view of age or handicap, or in the case of exceptional working situations, or emergencies; and c) While the principles in this standard are oriented they are applicable to any field of human activity. to industry,

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard establishes the design of work systems.
ergonomic principles as basic guidelines for

15 The ergonomic guiding principles specified in this standard apply to the design of optimal working conditions with regard to human well being, safety and health, taking into account technical and economic efhciency.

IS:10224-1982 2. DEFINITIQNS 2.1 Work System - The work system comprises a combination of people and work equipment, acting together in the work process, to perform the work task, at the work space, in the work environment, under the conditions imposed by the work task. 2.2 Work Task An intended outcome of the work system. furniture,

2.3 Work installations

Equipment - Tools, and other components

machines, vehicles, devices, used in the work system.

2.4 Work Process - The sequence of people, work equipment, materials, work system.

in time and space of the interaction energy and information within a to one or more persons in the

2.5 Work Space -- A volume allocated work system to complete the work task.

2.6 Work Equipment - Physical, chemical, biological, cultural factors surrounding a person in his/her work space. social and cultural factors are not covered by this standard.

social and However,

2.7 Work Stress ( or External Load ) - The sum of those external conditions and demands in the work system which act to disturb a person's physio!ogical and/or psychological state. 2.8 Work Strain ( Internal Reaction ) - The effect of the work stress upon a person in relation to his/her individual characteristics, abilities and capacities. 2.9 Work Fatigue - The local or general non-pathological tion of work strain, comp!etely reversible with rest. 3. GENERAL 3.1 Design GUIDING PRINCIPLES Equipment manifesta-

of Work

Space and of Work

3.1.1 Design in RAtion to Body Dimensions - The design of the work space and work equipment should take into account constraints imposed The work by the body dimensions, with due regard to the work process. In particular: space should he ai!apted to the operator. a) The working height should be adapted to the body dimensions of Seat, work the operator and to the kind of work performed. surface, and/or desk should be designed as a unit to achieve the ~preferred body posture, namely trunk erect, body weight appropriately supported, elbows and the side of body, and forearms approximate!y horizontal; 4

IS : 10224- 1982

b)

The seating physiological cular

arrangement should be adjusted features of the individual;

to the anatomic

and

Cl Sufficient 4 4
3.1.2 Controls

space should be provided for body movements, of.the head, arms, hands, legs, and feet; should be within etc, functional reach; and

in parti-

Grips, handles, knobs, anatomy of the hand.

of controls

should

suit the functional

Design in Relation 10 Body Posture, Muscular Strength and Body Moveshould be such as to avoid unnecessary joints, ligaments, and in other body should be within physiologically desirshould follow natural -rhythms. Body body movement should be in harmony should be paid primarily to the

The design of the work or excessive stra~in in muscles, systems. Strength requirements able limits. Body movements posture, strength exertion and with each other.

ments -

3.1.2.1 following:

BOC$ posture -

Attention

4

The operator should be able to be alternate between sitting and If one of~these postures has to be chosen, sitting is standing. normally preferable to standing unless standing is necessiated by the work process. Where workers are required to work in a standing position, suitable arrangements for sitting should be provided so that they could take advantage of any opportunities for rest which may occur in the course of their work; If high muscle strength has to be exerted, the chain of force or torque vectors through the body should be kept short and simple by allowing suitable body posture and providing appropriate body support; and postures should not cause work fatigue from muscular tension. Alterations in body postures possible. prolonged should be to the physical

b)

Body c> static 3.1.2.2 following:

Muscular strength -

Attention

should be paid primarily

a) Strength capacities b) Muscle strength sources and

demands should be compatible with the and physiological abilities of the operator;

groups involved should be strong enough to meet the demands. If strength demands are excessive, auxiiiary of energy should be introduced into the work system;

5

IS:10224-f982 c) Maintainance
should 3.1.2.3 following: Body of prolonged be avoided. monement Attention static tension in the same muscle to the

should

be paid primarily

4 b) c) d)
3.1.3

A good balance should be established among body movements; motion should be preferred to prolonged immobility; Amplitude, strength, mutually adjustable; speed and accuracy muscular space of movements should be

Movements with great exertion of considerable

requirements should strength; and should

not entail by

Execution and sequencing of movements guiding devices, as appropriate.

be facilitated

Design Concerning Signals, Displays and Controls Signals and displays should be in a manner compatible with the The following points in particular should be com-

3.1.3.1 Signals and dis$ays selected, designed and laid out characteristics of human perception. be noted:

4
b)

The nature and number of signals and displays patible with the characteristics of the information;

In order to achieve clear identification of information where displays are numerous, they should be laid out in space in such a Their way as to furnish reliable orientation clearly and rapidly. arrangement may be a function either of the technical process or of the importance and frequency of use of particular items of information. This may be done by grouping in accordance with the functions of the process, the type of measurements, etc; The nature and design of signals and displays should ensure This applies especially to danger unambiguous perception. Account should be taken, for instance, of the intensity, signals. shape, size, contrast, prominence, and the signal to noise ratio; Rate and direction of change of display of information should be compatible with rate and direction of change of the primary source of that information; protected activities in which observation and monitoring predominate, overload and underload effects should be avoided by design and layout of signals and displays; and

4

d)

In e>

f)

Account shall be taken of the-fact that people in a work system may be illiterate and this fact should be given due consideration while designing the signals and displays. 6

IS:10224-1982 3.1.3.2 Controls - Controls shall be selected, designed and laid out in such a way as to be compatible with characteristics ( particularly of movement ) of that part of the body by which they are operated. Skill, accuracy, speed and strength requirements should be taken into account. The following items may be considered in particular:

a) b)

Type, design and layout of controls control task taking into account human learned and innate responses; Travel of controls and control the basis of the control task and pometric data; should movement, be mutually of equipment compatible;

should correspond to the characteristics including be selected on and anthroinformation to avoid

resistance should of biomechanical response,

C) Control 4

and display identifiable

Function confusion;

the controls

should

be easily

e) Where

controls are numerous they should be laid out so as to This may be ensure safe, unambiguous and quick operation. done similarly as for signals by grouping them according to their functions in the process, to the order in which they are used, etc; and Critical controls operations. of the Work should be safeguarded against inadvertent

f>
3.2

Design

Environment

3.2.1 The work environment should be designed and maintained so that physical, chemical and biological conditions have no noxious effect on people but serve to ensure their health, as well as their capacity and Account shall be taken of objectively measurable readiness to work. phenomena and of subjective assessments. 3.2.2 Depending on the work system particular to the following points: it is necessary to pay attention in

a) The dimensions of the work premises ( general work and space for work related traffic ) should its orientation suitability; b) Air renewal should factors, for example: i) Number ii) Intensity be {adjusted with regard

layout, space for be adequate and to the following

of persons

in the room, work involved, 7

of the physical

IS : 10224 * 1982
iii) Dimensions ment), iv) Emission v) Appliances vi) Thermal of the premises of pollutants consuming conditions; ( taking account of bvork equip-

in the room, oxygen, and

c) Thermal conditions at the work place should be adjusted in accordance with local climatic conditions, taking into account mainIy: i) Air temperature, ii) Air humidity, iii) Air velocity, radiation, of the physical of clothing work involved, and equipment; visual perception Special attention

iv) Thermal v) Intensity vi) Properties

and special

protective

d) Lighting should be such as to provide optimal for the required activities without strain. should be paid to the following: i) Luminance, ii) Colour, iii) Distribution ~of light, glare from

iv) Absence of disturbances
V)

and undesirable reflections, shadows after images and stroboscopic effects, and colour, and

and

Contrast

in luminance and

vi)

Age of operators;

0) In the selection of the colours for the room and for the \vork equipment, their effects on the distribution of lumjnances, on the structure and quality of the field of vision, land on the perception of safety colours, should be taken into account; f) The acoustic work environment should be such that noxious or annoying effects of noise are avoided, including those effects due Account should be taken in particular of the to outside sources. following factors: i) Sound pressure level,

8

IS:10224ii) Frequency iii) Distribution iv) Perception v) Speech spectrum, overtime, of acoustic signals, and

1!?62

intelligibility;

g) Vibrations and impacts transmitted to man should not attain levels causing physical damage, physio-pathological reactions or sensorimotor disturbances; and h) Exposure of workers to dangerous tions should be avoided: materials and harmful radia-

i) During outdoor work, adequate protection should be provided against adverse climatic effects ( for example, against heat, cold, wind, rain, snow and ice ). 3.3 Design of the Work Procese safeguard the workers' facilitate task perforunderloading. Overtransgressing, respectirange of physiological and as monotonous

3.3.1 The design of the work process should health~and safety, promote their well being, and mance, in particular by avoiding overloading and loading and underloading is likely to result from ,vely, the upper or lower limits of the operational and/or psychologica! functions, for example: a) physical or sensory overloading underloading vigilance. or produce work

fatigue; sensed

b) conversely, diminishes

3.3.2 The physical and psychological stresses depend not only on factors considered in 3.1 an;l 3.2 but also on the content and repetitiveness of operations and on the workers' control over the work process. 3.3.3 For achieving the objectives given in 3.1.1 attention should directed to implementation of one or more of the following methods improving the quality of the work process: be of

a) Having one operator perform several successive operations belonging to the same work function, instead of several operators (job en1 argement ); b) Having one operator perform successive operations belonging to different work functions, instead of several operators. For example, assembiy operations followed by quality checks performed by the operator who also removes defects ( job enrichment );

c) Change of activity as, for example, voluntary workers on an assembly line or in a team autonomous group; and d) Breaks, orgmnined or non-organized. a0ove measure,

job rotation among workin-g within an

3.3.3.1 In implementing the should be paid to the following: Q) Variations b) Differences age; and c) Individual in vigilance

particular

attention

and work capacity among

over day and night; and changes with

in work capacity development.

operators,

10

IS:10224 - 1982
( Continued from page 2 ) Members CHIEF &WlNEER (ELEcTUICIL) Representing Industries, Energy and Labour Department, ment of Maharashtra Govern-

SUPEKINTENDUW ENGINEER ( INSPECTION ) ( Alternate ) CRIXF INSPECTOR OF BOILERS, Central Boilers Board, New Delhi KARNATAKA Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad Director MINES SAFETY DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF MINES SAFETY ( SG ) ( A&rnntc ) Chief Inspectorate of Factories, Government of SHRI V. N. KHOLKUTE Maharashtra S~sr G. R. GIJJAR ( Altsrnats ) Director of Factories & Boilers, Government of SRRI S. KRISHNAN N~IX Kerala Standing Fire Advisory Council, New Delhi SHRI G. B. MENW National Safety Council, Bombay SHRI N. C. MUKHEI~JEB SHRI N. RAORAVAI+ ( Alternate ) The Tata Iron & Steel Company Ltd. ,_ .Tamsbedour SHR1V.K. MUP,TBY _ 1 ?~EIRIK. N. BHATTACHAILYA ( Alternate)

11

