**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10959 (1984) : Glossary of terms for sealants for 
building purposes (ISO 6927-1981) [CED 13: Building 
Construction Practices including Painting, Varnishing and 
Allied Finishing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



18:10959 -1984 

UPC 693224: 69158:001-4 ( First Reprint AUGUST 1 998 ) ( Re^?Led*2?02^ 



Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR SEALANTS FOR 
BUILDING PURPOSES 

( ISO Title : Building Construction — Jointing 
Products — Sealants — Vocabulary ) 



CO 



E 
£ 
o 
o 

c 
o 

u 

0) 
€0 



c 
o 
u 

c 



National Foreword 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 6927 - 1981 'Building construction — Jointing 
products — Sealants — Vocabulary', issued by the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO), was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Building 
Construction Practices Sectional Committee and approval of the Civil Engineering Division Council. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, it should be read as 
'Indian Standard'. 

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting it 
in this Indian Standard. Consequently, foot-notes in relation to French version stand deleted. 



Adopted 27 June 1984 



September 1984, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS : 10959 
ISO 6927 



1984 
1981 



Introduction 

This International Standard does not include all 
necessary technical terms on jointing products. 
The given selection has been based on relations 
with other standards and the need for definitions 
before specific test methods are elaborated. 

Material properties are defined in general terms 
without reference to related quantitative aspects 
such as the influence of specitic test conditions, 
for example, temperature or rate of strain. 

1 Scope and field of application 

This Internationa! Standard defines technical terms 
for sealants for building purposes and applies to 
joints filled with hardening, plastic or elastic 
materials which are not preformed. 

2 Terms and definitions 

2.1 to seal : To place the appropriate products in 
the joint in order to prevent the penetration of 
moisture and/or the passage of air between the 
elements, components, and assemblies made of 
the same or dissimilar materials. 

2.2 sealant : A material which, applied in an 
unformed state to a joint, seals it by adhering to 
appropriate surfaces within the joint. 

2.3 elastic sealant : Sealant which after appli- 
cation exhibits predominantly elastic behaviour, 
i.e, remaining stresses induced in the sealant as 
a result of joint movement are almost proportional 
to the strain. 

2.4 plastic sealant : A sealant which after appli- 
cation retains predominantly plastic properties, 
i.e. the remaining stresses induced in the sealant 
as a result of joint movement are rapidly relieved. 



2.7 Joint movement amplitude 

2.7.1 for extension/compression movements : 

Difference between the maximum and the mini- 
mum width of a given joint caused by extension/ 
compression movements. 

2.7.2 for shearing movements : Maximum 
length of the motion, measured in a direction 
parallel to the sliding, of two points on the faces 
of the joint which were initially located on a line 
perpendicular to the axis of the joint. 

2.8 movement capability : Quantitative state- 
ment of the ability of a sealant to accommodate 
movement of the joint into which it has been 
filled, while maintaining an effective seal, 

2.9 primer : Surface coating applied to the faces 
of the joint before placing the sealant in order to 
ensure its adhesion. 

2.10 back-up material : Material inserted in a 
joint, which limits the depth of sealant applied, 
and which defines the back profile of the sealant. 

2.11 compatibility : For a sealant, the property 
of remaining in contact with another material 
without unfavourable physical or chemical 
interactions. 

2.12 cohesion : Property of a sealant subjected 
to tensile strain to hold together by intermolecular 
attraction. 



2.5 one component sealant 

use. 



Sealant ready for 



2.6 multi-component sealant : Sealant suppli- 
ed in the form of several separate components to 
be mixed together before use, in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions. 



2.13 cohesion failure 

a sealant. 



Rupture in the body of 



2.14 adhesion : Property of a sealant to stick to 
a given substrate. 

2.15 adhesion failure : Rupture at the interface 
between a sealant and a substrate. 

2.16 elastic recovery : Property of a sealant 
whereby the initial shape and dimensions of the 
material are wholly or partially restored on remo- 
val of the forces causing deformation. 



2.17 slump^) : Flow of a sealant out of a 
having a vertical surface. 



joint 



2.18 secant tensile modulus : Ratio between 
the tensile stress of a sealant at a particular rela- 
tive elongation and that relative elongation. 



1 ) Also designated "sagging" 



2.19 application life ; Time after mixing a multi- 
component sealant (or after opening a sealed 
container of a one-component seajant) within 
which the material may be successfully applied to 
a joint, at a stated temperature. 

2.20 tooling^) : Method used, following appli- 
cation, to force the sealant into a joint in order 
to ensure contact between the sealant and the 
interface and to improve the surface appearance. 

2.21 open time of the primer : Time after the 
application of the primer during which the sealant 
can be successfully applied. 

2.22 tack-free time : Time after which a sealant 
surface looses its tackiness so that dust no longer 
adheres. 

2.23 depth of \the sealant : Smallest distance 
between the surface of the sealant and its back 
profile. 



IS : 10959-1984 
ISO 6927-1981 

2.24 cure : Irreversible transformation of a sealant 
from a liquid or paste-like state into a hardened 
or rubber-like solid state. 

2.25 sealant durability : Probable service life of 
a sealant during the given conditions of use. 

2.26 service life : Period of time during which a 
sealant fulfills its functions. 

In practice, the period between the date of the 

first application of a sealant to a joint and the 

date when the product ceases to fulfil its 
functions. 

2.27 storage life : Period following manufacture, 
during which a sealant stored under defined con- 
ditions, may be used and will then maintain its 
functional characteristics.^^ 



1 ) This term covers two actions which Correspond to two different tefms ih Ffeneh, *'3errage lissage". 

2) That is, having properties necessary for satisfactory performance* 



Reprography Unit. BIS, New Delhi, India 



