Rd WS IS 12258 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


ATT TAS TAM Seley STAT VI 
ay eR Sisal (detenta) & fere 
aadh strait Stare 


( TET JARIT ) 


Technical Supply Condition for Air 

Screw Compressors (Oil-Flooded) 

for General Purpose and Industrial 
Applications 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 23.140 


© BIS 2023 


STRE Ach aT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR HAF, 9 SEEL SITE HH AMT, Ay Reet - 110002 
w———-— MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 6 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Compressor, Blowers, and Exhausters Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1987. This standard is being revised again to keep pace with the latest 
technological developments and international practices. In this revision, the following major changes have been 
made: 


a) Areference clause has been added mentioning the latest version of all the referred standards; and 
b) Clauses 5.1.5, 7.4, and 7.6 have been modified. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
Observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 *Rules 
for rounding off numerical values (second revision) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 12258 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


TECHNICAL SUPPLY CONDITION FOR AIR SCREW 
COMPRESSORS (OIL-FLOODED) FOR GENERAL PURPOSE 
AND INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the minimum requirements 
for air screw compressors (oil-flooded type) for 
general purpose and industrial applications using 
prime movers up to 370 kW. 


1.2 The standard does not cover the mobile air screw 
compressors, dry (oil-free) screw compressors, air 
conditioning and refrigeration screw compressors. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to the 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 919 (Part 1) : 2014/ Geometrical product 

ISO 286-1 : 2010 specifications (GPS) — 
ISO code system for 
tolerances on linear sizes 
(third revision) 


IS 2825 : 1969 Code for unfired pressure 


vessels 


IS/ISO 3857-2 : 1977 Compressors, pneumatic 
tools and machines — 
Vocabulary: Part 2 
Compressors 


IS 4503 : 1967 Specification for shell 


and tube type heat 


exchangers 

IS 5456 : 2006 Testing of positive 
displacement type air 
compressors and 
exhausters — Code of 
practice (second 
revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions as given 
in IS/ISO 3857-2 shall apply. 


4 ENQUIRY AND PROPOSAL 
4.1 Enquiry 


The purchaser shall complete the data as given in 
Annex A to the extent possible 
and applicable, and also specify the known 
abnormal conditions of workings. In addition, the 
purchaser may also specify any of his additional 
requirements. 


4.2 Proposal 


In reply to the enquiry by the purchaser, the supplier 
shall supply a list of all the components and 
accessories along with any other details required by 
the purchaser. 


4.2.1 The proposal shall include either a specific 
statement that all equipment are in strict 
compliance with the purchaser’s specifications or a 
specific list of deviations therefrom shall be 
furnished. 


4.2.2 If required by the purchaser, the charges for 
deputing the supplier's representative for 
supervision of erection shall be furnished. 


4.2.3 The supplier shall furnish any special tools 
required for installation and maintenance work at 
additional charges. 


4.3 Guarantee 
4.3.1 Performance Guarantee 


The compressors shall be guaranteed for satisfactory 
performance at the specified operating conditions. 
These include a guarantee for capacity and power at 
the time of the performance test. The tolerances to 
be allowed on the capacity and power consumption 
shall be in accordance with IS 5456. 


4.3.2 Workmanship Guarantee 


All equipment, components and spare parts, other 
than bought-out components, shall be guaranteed by 
the supplier against manufacturing defects which 
arise from defective or improper materials or poor 
and faulty workmanship. This guarantee shall be 
applicable for a period of 12 months from the date 


IS 12258 : 2023 


of supply or 2 000 working hours from the date of 
installation of the compressor, whichever is earlier. 
If any defects or malperformance is established 
during the guaranteed period, the supplier shall 
make all necessary or desirable alterations, repairs 
and replacements free of charge. 


5 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 Parts subjected to air pressure shall have 
sufficient strength. 


5.1.1 If an electrical prime mover is used, proper 
earthing shall be ensured by the agency responsible 
for the installation of compressors. 


5.1.2 Every part shall have interchangeability and 
shall be ensured, while manufacturing, to avoid any 
deviation in the performance of the compressor. 


5.1.3 Generally parts shall be manufactured to *fits 
and tolerances’ of IS 919 (Part 1) which ensure the 
proper functioning of compressors. 


5.1.4 Manufacturer shall reserve the right to make 
modifications reflecting improvements in 
performance/life of the compressor. This shall not 
affect the guarantee mentioned in 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. 


5.1.5 Maximum allowable working pressure shall 
exceed the rated discharge pressure by at least 
10 percent or 1 bar, whichever is greater, but shall 
be lower than the safety valve set pressure. 


5.2 Materials 
5.2.1 Casing and Bearing Housing 


The thickness of the casing and bearing housing 
shall be adequate and suitable for maximum design 
working pressures. 


5.2.2 The casing jacket cooling, whenever provided, 
shall be designed to prevent any leakage of gas into 
the coolant. 


5.2.3 Compressor housing shall have a built-in oil 
sump of adequate capacity or a separately provided 
container depending upon the design aspects. 


5.3 Rotors 


5.3.1 Rotors shall be of forged steel, rolled bar or 
cast iron materials depending upon the design 
aspects and physical size to screw compressors. 
These may be single-piece or two-piece construction 
of similar materials. In the case of smaller rotors, 
two different materials may be used for constructing 
rotor assembly, enabling the use of non-ferrous and 
polymers. 


5.3.2 Normally, by and large (4 + 6) lobe 
arrangement is accepted by various manufacturers 
but this shall also be with other lobe combinations 
depending upon the specific design. 


5.4 Valves and Filters 


5.4.1 Receiver-cum-oil separator shall be provided 
with a safety valve to prevent abnormal pressure 
rising and to ensure the safety of the unit. 


5.4.2 Suitably designed inlet control valves shall be 
provided so that they operate smoothly, free from 
malfunctioning and rusting, etc. 


5.4.3 Suction air filters shall be selected such that 
they offer minimum resistance to suction and 
shall be effective for dust prevention. 


5.5 Air/Oil separation system shall be provided to 
form an integral part of the operational package 
with replaceable separation element. 


5.5.1 The oil separator system shall be redesigned so 
that the oil carry over through discharge air shall 
not exceed 1 litre per cubic metre per 100 h. 
This shall be termed oil consumption and the 
measurement of oil consumption shall be carried out 
as mentioned in IS 5456. 


5.5.2 The vessel used to accommodate oil and 
separator elements shall conform to IS 2825. 


5.6 Cooling System 


An efficient cooling system for oil/air shall be 
provided such that lubricating oil/air temperature 
shall be maintained within the limits specified by the 
manufacturer. 


5.7 Lubrication System 


It shall consist of a built-in oil reservoir with 
compressor housing or a separator oil filter, with or 
without the built-in by-pass valve, injection port and 
hoses connecting the oil cooler compressor housing, 
ideally the control system shall be such when 
restriction covered by filter exceeds present limits, 
the compressor shall stop. However, when the 
situation demands, the filter shall be provided with 
the by-pass valve so that compressor is not stopped 
tll such time the filter element is changed. The 
circulation of oil may be arranged by a separate 
electric motor or the drive may be taken from either 
rotor shaft extension. The oil reservoir capacity shall 
be such that it stores an adequate amount of 
lubricating oil which circulates through the closed- 
loop system. It is important that oil temperature at 
the acceptable minimum level and acceptable 
maximum level shall be maintained so that 


condensation is not separated out at a minimum 
temperature within the oil system and also to ensure 
the discharge air temperature shall not run very high 
at maximum temperature since it is a close oil 
system. 


5.8 Lubricating Oil 


The manufacturer shall recommend a proper 
lubricating oil considering the operating conditions 
based on the information provided by the purchaser. 


6 PRIME MOVER AND DRIVE EQUIPMENTS 


The supplier shall specify the type of prime 
mover/drive in the enquiry according to Annex A. 


6.1 Prime Mover 
6.1.1 Electric Motor 


Serving as the main driver, shall be of continuous 
rating. It shall have minimum at 5 percent margin 
over power required by the compressor under the 
rated operating conditions considering the 
tolerances as specified in IS 5456. 


6.1.2 Electric motor shall have enough starting 
torque to be able to start compressor from rest 
to the full load running condition under specified 
starting system, for example, direction line, star 
delta, autotransformer, etc. 


6.1.3 Proper earthing shall be ensured as agreed to 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser. 


6.2 Internal Combustion Engine 


6.2.1 The purchaser shall specify the expected duty 
to which compressor shall operate to enable the 
manufacturer to select proper sized engine. 


6.2.2 The manufacturer shall ensure that the engine 
shall have minimum 5 percent margin over the 
power required by the compressor under any 
operating condition after taking into account site 
conditions specified by the purchaser. 


6.2.3 The manufacturer shall select the coupling 
after analysis of the system and considering 
variable speed. 


6.2.4 The engine selected shall be a governed engine 
and the governing class shall be selected 
based on the duty specified by the purchaser. 


7 AUXILIARY EQUIPMENT 
7.1 Coolers 


The purchaser shall specify the air discharge 
temperature required to enable the manufacturer to 


IS 12258 : 2023 


provide a suitable cooler. The cooler shall conform 
to IS 4503. 


7.2 Air Receiver 


The receiver, whenever supplied, shall conform to 
IS 2825. This is an additional receiver than provided 
as an oil separator with the package. 


7.3 Guards 


7.3.1 Guards shall be of removable type provided on 
all movable parts which are considered to 
be hazardous to opening personnel. 


7.3.2 If guards are not easily removable type, an 
opening (if necessary with covers or suitable mesh) 
shall be provided to have access to any part requiring 
attention. 


7.3.3 When the  belt-driven compressor is 
considered, the belts shall be selected to transmit the 
maximum shaft power of the compressor. The belt 
drive design shall also be suitable for the same and 
appropriately be provided with the guard. The slide 
rails used under the motor for taking up belt 
slackness (after some running of the unit) shall be 
selected such that it provides enough room for 
tightening. 


7.4 Silencer 


7.4.1 The purchaser shall specify the required noise 
level of the unit or as applicable by state regulations. 


7.4.2 The manufacturer shall provide the silencer to 
limit noise level according to the agreement. 


7.5 Piping 


7.5.1 The pipe work required with the compressor, 
when given as a package (with the receiver or with 
the base plate), shall consist of: 


a) Air piping (hose or metallic type) for final 
discharge, that is, compressor to 
after-cooler (if after cooler is a part of 
supply); and 

b) Auxiliary pipe  work-oil cooler to 
compressor (depending upon compressor 
design) hose or metallic type, drain and 
vent and instrument air. 


7.5.2 The scope of supply of pipe work by the 
supplier shall be properly defined with terminal 
points clearly fixed. The supplier shall supply all 
pipe work to interconnected items of his supply 
reducing the number of terminal points for the 
purchaser's connection, to a minimum when the 
scope of supply shall be mutually agreed upon. 


IS 12258 : 2023 


7.5.3 Auxiliary pipe work, that is, oil cooler to 
compressor, drain, vent and instrument air shall be 
suitably fixed on the package. 


7.5.4 Unless otherwise specified, the supplier shall 
supply the pipe work of his choice. 


7.6 Instrumentation and Safety Device 


Following instrumentation shall be provided by the 
manufacturer: 


a) Delivery pressure gauge; 

b) Lubricating oil pressure gauge; 

c) Lubricating oil/air delivery temperature 
gauge; 

d) Hour meter for recording running hours; 

e) Safety valve on air/oil separator vessel; 

f) Differential pressure gauge for lubricating 
oil filter (optional); 

g) Differential pressure gauge for oil 
separator elements (optional); 

h) High lubricating oil temperature safety 
switch; 

jp High air discharge pressure safety switch 
(optional); 

k) Clogging indicator for air suction filter; 

m) Low water pressure safety switch (if water 
coolant systems are used); and 

n) High cooling water temperature safety 
switch (if a water coolant system is used). 


Additional instruments for  electric-driven 
compressors shall be provided as per the agreement 
between the manufacturer and buyer. 


8 CONTROLS 


8.1 Automatic start-stop mode of operation makes or 
breaks electric contact to the motor at predetermined 
pressures. This type of regulation shall be used when 
the demand for air is small or intermittent, but where 
pressure shall be continuously maintained. 


8.2 Constant speed mode of operating unloads the 
compressor at predetermined pressure while the 
the motor continues to operate. This type of 
regulation shall be used when the demand for air is 
practically constant at the capacity of the 
compressor. 


8.3 Dual control permits a normal selection between 
constant speed control and automatic start/ 
stop control, depending upon the air requirements. 


9 NAME PLATE AND ROTATION ARROW 
9.1 Name plate shall be securely attached at an easily 


accessible point on the compressor and to any other 
major auxiliary equipment. 


9.2 Rotation arrow shall be cast in or attached to the 
major item of rotating equipment. 


10 TESTS ON COMPRESSORS 


10.1 The tests, other than hydrostatic and pressure 
tests, shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's 
requirements unless otherwise specified. 


10.2 Air receiver (when supplied) and cooler shall 
be subjected to the hydrostatic test pressure of 
15 times the design pressure or in accordance with 
the specified requirements. 


11 PREPARATION FOR DISPATCH 


11.1 After the test and inspection are completed, all 
exposed machined surfaces shall be coated with 
suitable rust preventive. 


11.2 Unmachined external surfaces shall be cleaned 
thoroughly and painted with a suitable paint. 


11.3 All openings shall be provided with plastic or 
metal closures. 


12 DOCUMENTATION 


12.1 The following data and drawings shall be 
furnished by the supplier, in addition, any other 
documentation mutually agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier before placement of the 
the order shall be furnished. 


12.1.1 Manufacturers shall provide data as required 
by the data sheet given in Annex A along with 
deviations and exceptions, etc. 


12.1.2. Overall arrangement, drawing of the 
compressor, prime mover and other accessories 
shall be provided. The drawing shall also show the 
following: 


a) All principal dimensions, including those 
required for purchasers foundations and 
maintenance, and withdrawal space; 

b) The direction of rotation of the drive shaft; 
and 

c) Position of foundation bolts. 


12.1.3 If the prime mover is not included in the 
supply, the relevant data for the prime mover 
shall be supplied. 


12.1.4 Schematic drawing of the control system, 
when required and not covered in maintenance and 
operating instruction book, cooling system and 
outline dimensional drawing for accessories such as 
after cooler and instrument panel, make, type, size, 
etc, shall be indicated for all these accessories. 


12.1.5 Maintenance and Operating Instructions 


The manufacturer shall supply the literature, such as 
the user handbook (operating manual), part 
identification manual and maintenance manual to 
the purchaser. 


12.1.6 Certificate for pressure vessels to which these 
are designed and manufactured shall be 


issued. 


12.1.7 Material certificates for materials used in the 


IS 12258 : 2023 


manufacture of the compressor and all test reports 
for mechanical, performance tests and other tests 
shall be supplied, as mutually agreed between the 
supplier and the purchaser. 


12.1.8 Required data for ordering spare parts shall 
be furnished. 


12.1.9 The number of copies for drawings and 
documents shall be mutually agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 


IS 12258 : 2023 


ANNEX A 


(Clauses 4.1, 6 and 12.1.1) 


DATASHEET CONTAINING PURCHASER'S SPECIFICATIONS 


A-1 GENERAL 

a) No.ofunits — Running/standby; 

b) Site; 

C) Service — Continuous/intermittent; 

d) Installation — Indoor/outdoor with 
roof/outdoor without roof; 

e) Type of driver — Electric motor/diesel 
engine/petrol engine; 

f) Prime mover furnished by 
purchaser/supplier; and 

g) Used as portable/stationary. 


A-2 REQUIRED OPERATING CONDITION 


a) 


b) 


c) 
d) 
e) 


Site Data 

1) Barometric pressure; 

2) Relative humidity; Max 

Min 

3) Ambient temperature, at the filter; 
Max 
Min 

4) Environmental condition — 
Clean/very dusty/in any unusual 
corrosive atmosphere; 


5) Any special electrical equipment 
required because of hazard 
(Orr ian r A NAA 
Grade o sedes 
DIVISION = 2: a teases g 


6) Cooling water supply for coolers — 
Type of water, pressure and 
temperature of supply and return (if 
applicable); 

Electrical supply characteristics (required, 

if the prime mover is a motor); 

Capacity required (each machine); 

Discharge pressure; and 

Discharge temperature required (specify 

only if after-cooler is required). 


A-3 CAPACITY CONTROL 


a) 


For maintaining air receiver pressure at — 
kg/cm?, this shall be done by; 


1) Suction valve unloader; 
pc start/stop; and 


b) 


Any other requirements. 


A-4 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 


f) 


g 


Maximum allowable speed (rpm) at prime 
mover shaft; 


Special materials; 
Type of filter for air; 


Design code for air receiver and heat 
exchanger; 
Standard to which prime mover shall 
conform; 
Transmission — V-Belt 

Flat belt 

Belt box 

Direct or drive; and 


Any special type of couplings. 


A-5 SCOPE OF SUPPLY 


a) 
b) 


Prime mover; 

Additional instrumentation; 

Additional safety devices; 
After-cooler; 

Air receiver; 

Safety valves-compressor, receiver; 
Air filter, lube filter, separation system; 
Cooling water piping for alter-coolers (if 
applicable); 

Instrument panel; 

Special tools; 

Spare parts and operations manual; 
Foundation plane (if applicable); and 


GAD-auto and manual 
de-pressurization on shutdown. 


compressor 


A-6 INSPECTION AND TESTS 


a) 
b) 


Shop inspection required; 

Test to be withstood; 

Hydro test of the compressor housing; 
Mechanical run test; 

Performance test; 

Strip test; and 


Run test of the prime mover (if applicable) 
(at supplier's end). 


IS 12258 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Compressor, Blowers and Exhausters Sectional Committee, MED 22 


Organization 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Atlas Copco India Limited, Pune 


Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi 


Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 

Boldrocchi Indian Private Limited, Gurugram 

Burckhardt Compression India Private Limited, 
Noida 


CSIR - National 
Bengaluru 


Aerospace Laboratories, 

CSIR - National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defense, New Delhi 

Dresser - Rand India Private Limited, Pune 

ELGI Equipments Limited, Coimbatore 


Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 


Gail (India) Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Register of Shipping, Mumbai 


Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Ahmedabad 


Kirloskar Pneumatic Company Limited, Pune 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. RAVI (Chairperson) 
SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 


SHRI PRASAD YADAV 
SHRI ATUL GAIKWAD (Alternate) 


SHRI S. DURAIRAJ 
SHRI Y. V. RAMA LAKSHMI (Alternate) 


SHRI KANNAN V. V. 


SHRI NOKESH AGGARWAL 
SHRI PIYUSH GOEL (Alternate) 


SHRIR. S. GUNAJI 
SHRI A. BHASKAR PRABHUNE (Alternate) 


SHRI THENNAVARAJAN S. 
DR RAJESH KUMAR 
PROF (DR) M. SINGH (Alternate) 


LT COL DEEPAK SHARMA 
SHRIU. R. RAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. H. VYAS 
SHRIJ. B. RAVAL (Alternate) 


SHRI JAYARAJ B. 
SHRI S. SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. DUGGAL 
SHRI MAHESH EASWARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH GEDA 


SHRI M. RAMBABU 
SHRI V. V. RAJSEKHAR (Alternate) 


SHRI GAUTAM MISRA 


SHRI SUNEET DIGIKAR 
SHRI KARTHIK S. (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESH K. V. 
SHRI DILEEP PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI PRAMOD KUMAR YADAV 
SHRI AMIT SAXENA (Alternate) 


IS 12258 : 2023 


Organization 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


National Fertilizers Limited, Noida 


Neuman and Esser Compressor Application Centre 
Private Limited, Pune 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


Oil and Natural Gas 


New Delhi 


Corporation Limited, 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


Reliance India Limited, Mumbai 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 


(RDSO), Lucknow 


Tata Chemicals Limited, Mumbai 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai 


TLT Engineering India Private Limited, Indrad 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SUJOY BANERJEE 
SHRI A. K. MODI (Alternate) 


SHRI M. N. GOYAL 
SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR AGARWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ATUL AGARWAL 
SHRI MAHESH DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI ANUJ KUMAR SHAHI 
SHRI DOONDESHWAR V. (Alternate) 


SHRI BRAJ KISHOR RAI 
SHRI RITUJIT HAZARIKA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. MANDILWAR 
SHRI AJAY K.S. RUHEL (Alternate) 


SHRIS. K. GARYALI 
SHRI RANJIT S. MUNDRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATNAM SINGH 
SHRI VIJAY KUMAR GORL(Alternate) 


SHRI M. S. PRASAD 
SHRI AJOY KUMAR SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI 
SHRI ASLAM BASHA B. (Alternate) 


SHRI MUKESH K. JAIN 
SHRI SANJAY MAKWANA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 22 (20153). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, l 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


