TAT ATT IS 15475 (Part 6) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


Ati & їч qua гата A ета AA 
‚їп 
“тл 6 Henican utao 
(чест gastaron ) 
Code of Recommended Practice for 
Amusement Rides Safety 


Part 6 Performance Tests 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 97.200.40 


© BIS 2022 


RAT AM et 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Vee” нф чач, 9 919% MS AH AMT, Ag {6 - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2022 Price Group 5 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee, 
MED 6 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 6) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting, Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional Committee 
had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


Amusement parks in India are becoming quite common and people visit these parks quite often. In order to ensure 
their safety in amusement parks or while enjoying the rides, an attempt has been made to stipulate safety in the 
form of a National Code. It is hoped that organizers of amusement parks, manufacturers of rides would make use 
of these codes to ensure the overall safety of human beings and equipment at such places. 


This revision has been taken up to keep pace with the latest technological developments and international 
practices. This revision incorporates the following major changes : 


a) Clause 4 and 5 were modified. 


The code of recommended practice for amusement rides safety is in six parts. This standard covers the necessary 
performance tests for amusement rides. Other parts in this series under the general title are as follows : 


Part 1 General information 

Part2 Safety requirements 

Part3 Design, manufacture, and erection 

Part4 Selection training and supervision of operators 

Part5 Operation and maintenance procedures 

The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 


‘Rules for rounding off numerical values’ (second revision). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15475 (Part 6) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF RECOMMENDED PRACTICE FOR AMUSEMENT RIDES 
SAFETY 


PART 6 PERFORMANCE TESTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 6) covers the basic tests which 
shall be conducted on amusement rides or devices 
during prototype development, installation or 
erection, major modifications, and normal operation 
to determine that the performance of the ride or 
device meets the specified design criteria and 
requirements. 


This standard is intended for use of manufacturers, 
owners/operators, and those persons or agencies 
involved in the installation and operational testing of 
amusement rides and devices. 


This standard does not purport to cover all the safety 
concerns associated with its use. 


This code is not intended to contravene the provision 
of any of the existing Government regulations. It is 
the responsibility of the user of this code to establish 
appropriate safety and health practices and comply 
with regulatory and statutory requirements prior to 
the use of the ride or device for carrying passengers 
for their amusement. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute the 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of 
the standards indicated below : 


IS No. Title 


2026 (Part3) Power transformers : Part 3 

: 2018 insulation levels, dielectric tests 
and external clearances in air 
(fourth revision) 


10724 : 1990 Acceptance standard for 
magnetic particle testing of steel 
castings (first revision) 


IS No. Title 
12938: 1990 Acceptance standards for 
radiographic inspection of steel 


castings 


IS 13805 General standard for qualification 

2004 and certification of поп- 
Destructive testing personnel — 
Specification (first revision) 


15475(Part Code of recommended practice 
1) : 2022 for amusement rides safety — 
Part 1 General information 


15475 (Part Code of recommended practice 


5) : 2022 for amusement rides safety — 
Part 5 Operation and 
maintenance procedures 

ІЅЛЕС Protection against lightning — 

62305-3 : Part 3 physical damage to 

2010 structures and life hazard 

3 TERMINOLOGY 


3.1 For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions, in addition to those given in IS 15475 
(Part 1) shall apply. 


3.1.1 Installation or Erection — The actual work at 
site relating to construction or the physical setting up 
and making ready for use of a ride or device. 


3.1.2 Major Modification — Any change in either 
the structural or operational characteristics of the 
ride, which will alter its performance from that 
specified in the manufacturer's design criteria. 


3.1.3 Prototype — Final operational assembly of a 
newly developed ride or device. 


4 DEVELOPMENTAL TESTING AT 
MANUFACTURER'S WORKS 


4.1 Manufacturer or designer shall develop test 
procedures and arrange testing facilities for 
conducting various tests on a prototype amusement 
ride or device in order to determine appropriateness 
for use of an entire system of ride or device 
including its major parts. 


IS 15475 (Part 6) : 2022 


4.2 Following design parameters shall Бе 
determined or evaluated during testing at the 
manufacturer's end: 


a) Safe design load/forces; 

b) Relevant deflections caused by various 
motions or application of designed load; 

c) Operational limits in various conditions 
including environmental; 

а) Start and restart criteria in various 
conditions, such as no-load, load, overload, 
etc, to determine operational limits and 
restrictions; 

e) Component variability; and 

f) Material and weld tests. 


4.3 The amusement ride shall be examined by the 
Ride Inspector upon completion of the installation 
works and thereafter regularly at a frequency not less 
than once every 12 months. The examination shall 
cover the structure, electrical and mechanical 
systems, control and safety systems, and all other 
systems which may affect the integrity and safe 
operation of the ride. The following tests and 
verifications, as appropriate, shall be included in the 
examination: 


a) Overall inspection with regard to proper 
manufacture and installation as specified in 
the design documents and this Code; 

b) Conformity of the main dimensions, safety 
envelopes, and clearances necessary for the 
safe and free running of moving parts; 

c) Functional tests of the control system and 
protective devices; 

а) Checking and measurement of the 
performance of brakes and safety-criticals 
ystems in normal апа emergency 
conditions; 

e) Testing of the pneumatic and hydraulic 
systems; 

f) Electrical tests; 

g) Non-destructive tests for welds and 
structural works; 

h) Checking and measurement of the 
performance of the ride under full load and 
unbalanced load іп all operating 
conditions; 

j) Measurement of speeds, accelerations, 
and/or for a customs check against the 
design. 


4.4 Performance Tests 


After installation/erection of complete prototype 
amusement ride or device, the following operational 
characteristics shall be verified and compared with 
test records of manufacturer/designer. 


a) Motion/travel (circular, vertical, horizontal 
or inclined); 


b) Operational limits; 

c) Forces or dynamic effect on passenger(s); 

d) Maximum exposure time per element of 
ride or device/ride duration; 

e) Reaction of the ride structure to collision 
with buffers/performance of special 
devices provided for buffering. 


5 INSTALLATION TESTING AT USERS/ 
OWNER SITE 


5.1 After installation of an amusement ride or 
amusement device all the tests conducted at 
manufacturers works shall be conducted and 
compared with the test results to determine that the 
newly installed ride or device conforms to the 
original design criteria. 


5.1.1 Test results and observations shall be 
comparable within acceptable limits. 


5.2 All the recommended tests relevant to the 
installation shall be conducted on the basis of 
acceptance test procedures. In addition to tests in 
5.1, additional tests relevant to the installation shall 
be conducted but shall not be limited as follows : 


5.2.1 Acceptance testing of major structural 
components. 


5.2.2 Acceptance testing of construction operations 
such as welding and fastening as per appropriate 
code of practice. 


5.2.3 Performance Testing 


Series of specified tests that can be the basis to 
determine that the new installed ride or device is safe 
for carrying passengers for amusement purposes and 
also meets the original design criteria. 


5.3 Endurance Test 


Each amusement ride or amusement device shall be 
operated for a fixed number of operating cycles as 
agreed between the manufacturer and owner/user in 
order to determine the stability and capability of the 
ride or device during expected or declared service 
life. 


5.4 Full Load Test 


This shall be carried out by operating the ride at the 
nominal speed and under the designed service 
conditions, with equivalent dummy loads placed on 
the passenger units. Continuous running of the ride 
at full load for a prolonged period may be required 
to verify the reliability of the ride. 


5.5 Unbalanced Load Test 


This test shall be carried out with the configurations 
specified by the manufacturer or decided by the 
surveyor. Such configurations shall be properly 
documented. The Surveyor shall not proceed with 
the unbalanced load test if there is any adverse 
vibration, harmonic oscillation, or abnormal 
movement of the ride or its foundation/footing. 


5.6 Continuity of Protective Conductors 


Every protective conductor, including all 
conductors and any extraneous conductive parts 
used for equipotential bonding, shall be tested for 
continuity. 


5.7 Insulation Resistance 


The insulation resistance of the electrical works 
shall be measured and shall be not less than the 
following values when tested with a 1 000 V 
insulation tester. 


a) Insulation resistance to the earth 1 MQ 

b) Insulation resistance between poles or 
phase 1 MQ 

c) Insulation resistance of equipment 0.5 MQ 


5.8 Verification of Polarity 
A test of polarity shall be carried out to verify that 


a) Every fuse and single-pole control and the 
protective device is connected in the phase 
conductor only; 

b) Center-contact bayonet and Edison-type 
screw lamp holders in circuits having an 
earthed neutral conductor, have their outer 
or screwed contacts connected to that 
neutral conductor; and 

c) Wiring works are sound and correctly 
connected. 


5.9 Tests for Hydraulic and Pneumatic System 


The following basic items, which are pertinent to the 
typical hydraulic and pneumatic system, shall be 
checked and attended to. 


a) Ram and cylinder condition; 

b) Levelling switches; 

с) Pipeworks, joints, bolts, and fixings; stop 
valve; oil reservoir; pump and motor; 

d) Control valves, pilot and leveling valves; 
overrun and cut-off devices; overload relief 
valve; 

е) Air release cock and anti-siphon valve; 

f) Pressure vessel. 


Besides, the following tests shall be carried out to 
establish the integrity of a hydraulic or pneumatic 


IS 15475 (Part 6) : 2022 


system and its components as per the designer or 
manufacturer’s specifications. 


a) Functional test to ascertain the correct 
operation of the system and all safety 
devices; 

b) Pressure tests to every part of the hydraulic 
or pneumatic system at the maximum 
working pressure sustained under all 
conditions of intended use. 


5.10 Earth Fault Loop Impedance and Earth 
Electrode Resistance 


A test shall be carried out to verify the effectiveness 
of the earthing by means of a phase-earth loop tester. 
The impedance for each loop shall not exceed the 
requirements as stipulated in IS 2026 (Part 3). 


5.11 Functions of Protective Devices 


Every residual current device shall be tested with a 
residual current device tester simulating an earth 
fault or other methods complying with relevant 
standards. 


Air circuit breakers, molded case circuit breakers, 
miniature circuit breakers, isolators, switches, and 
indicative devices should be checked by hand 
operation. 


Overload and fault current protection characteristics 
of protective relays shall be verified with a second 
injection test. 


5.12 Lightning Protection System 


For outdoor amusement rides involving tall and 
massive structures, an assessment of the risk of 
being struck by lightning shall be made as per 
IS/TEC 62305-3. 


6 APPROVAL OF REGULATORY/ 
STATUTORY AUTHORITY PRIOR TO USE 


6.1 The manufacturer/designer shall obtain the 
approval of competent authority if required for use 
of an amusement ride or an amusement device for 
carrying a passenger for amusement purposes. 


6.1.1 Necessary license or approval of competent 
authority obtained shall be provided to the owner/ 
purchaser/user of ride or device, if applicable. 


6.2 The operator on erection/installation and 
conducting the performance tests shall request the 
inspecting or statutory authority to verify the 
performance tests and other safety requirements 
necessary for use of ride or device for the purpose 
intended. 


IS 15475 (Part 6) : 2022 


6.2.1 The operator of the ride or device shall also 
arrange the testing facility required during periodic 
inspections of statutory/regulatory authority if 
required. 


7 CHARACTERISTICS OF PERFORMANCE 
TESTS DURING NORMAL OPERATION 


7.1 The manufacturer/designer of the ride shall 
recommend performing all those tests that have been 
satisfactorily conducted by them prior to sale. 


7.1.1 Frequency/interval for the above tests shall 
also be stated by the manufacturer/designer. 


7.1.2 Test results of all the developmental tests 
conducted by the manufacturer shall be the basis for 
comparison within the allowed tolerances limits. 


7.2 Performance tests to be conducted during normal 
operation shall be such that amusement ride, device, 
or element can reasonably expect to pass during the 
declared design life, assuming that Ше 
recommended operation and maintenance 
procedures as specified in IS 15475 (Part 5) shall be 
followed. 


7.3 All tests shall be reasonable and the operator can 
perform these tests with the help of qualified/trained 
personnel or a testing agency. 


7.4 Any operational test including load testing 
performed on an amusement ride, device, or element 
shall be completely non-destructive in nature. 
Overload testing exceeding the safe limits shall not 
be allowed to be performed. 


7.5 Any installation or operation testing conducted 
on ride, device, or element shall be accomplished 


within the rated limits as recommended by the 
manufacturer. 


8 NON-DESTRUCTIVE TESTING (NDT) 


8.1 Non-destructive testing shall be used to verify 
the integrity of the components which cannot be 
evaluated by other conventional test methods due to 
their design, location, or installation. 


8.2 Non-destructive testing shall be performed by 
qualified NDT personnel. For guidance IS 13805 
may be referred. 


8.3 The manufacturer shall recommend components 
to be tested and acceptance criteria shall also be 
specified. For guidance IS 10724 and IS 12938 may 
be referred. 


8.4 NDT schedule shall be defined in terms of hours 
or days or other units of operations. 


8.5 Components found to have relevant indications 
of the defect, imperfection or discontinuities shall be 
replaced or reconditioned. 


8.5.1 Integrity of the reconditioned components 
shall be further tested to determine the usefulness or 
serviceability of the component. 


8.6 All the test results or observations shall be 
recorded and compared with the earlier 
results/observations. 


8.7 The manufacturer/designer may recommend the 
NDT method where certain test methods may 
endanger other components on the ride or device. 


IS 15475 (Part 6) : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Continuous Bulk Conveying, Elevating, Hoisting Aerial Ropeways and Related Equipment Sectional 
Committee, MED 06 


Organization 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


CSIR — Central Institute for Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


Conveyor and Ropeway Services Private 
Limited, Kolkata 


Desein Private Limited, New Delhi 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and 
Labour Institutes, Mumbai 


Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanba 


Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur 


Elecon Engineering Company Limited, Gujarat 


Indian Association of Amusement Parks and 
Industries, Mumbai 


Lepton Projects Private Limited, Ghaziabad 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Mcnally Bharat Engineering Company Limited, 
Kolkata 


Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, 
New Delhi 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


National Mineral Development Corporation, 
Hyderabad 


Phoenix Conveyor Belt India Private Limited, 
Kolkata 


Polo Amusement Park Lmited, Gurugram 


Project and Development India Limited, Noida 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 


Representative(s) 


SHRI SANDEEP MEHRA (Chairman) 


SHRI DEBASHISH BASAK 
SHRI GIRENDRA M. PRASAD (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SHEKHAR CHKRAVARTY 
SHRI KAMAL KUMAR BOSE (Alternate) 


SHRI H. К. GUPTA 

SHRI ARVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 
SHRI G. Р. NJALINGAPPA 

SHRI Н M BHANDARI (Alternate) 


SHRI D. В. NAYAK 
SHRI VIJAY YADAORAO BARAPATRE (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI DEEPAK BISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRIC. S. SHAH 
SHRI K. S. KODIA (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADEEP SHARMA 
SHRI ANIL PADWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY KUMAR 
SHRI PIYUSH RATHI (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJOY BHATTACHAR 
SHRI AMIT PAL (Alternate) 
SHRI SANJOY MAITI 
SHRI SANDIPAN DAW (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL PRUTHI 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI O. P. KALIA 


SHRI ALOK KUMAR MEHTA 
SHRI S. SURENDER (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV SHARMA 
SHRI ASOKE KUM. GHOSH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH CHAWLA 


SHRI NARENDRA SINGH 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 


IS 15475 (Part 6) : 2022 


Organization 
Ropeway and Resorts Private Limited, Kolkata 


TRF Limited (A Tata Enterprise), Jamshedpur 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi 
Mumbai 


Usha Breco Limited, Ghaziabad 
Usha Martin Limited, Ranchi 
In personal capacity (145/4A, South Sinthi 


Road, Kolkata — 700050) 


In personal capacity (BH/V1/SF, VIP Floors 
Sector 81, DPS Faridabad, Haryana - 121007) 


In personal capacity (F-7B DDA MIG Flats, 
Hari Nagar, New Delhi - 110006) 


In personal capacity (20 D, Dhakuria Station 
Road, Kolkata - 700031) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI A.K. KINRA 


SHRIN. K. SINGH 
SHRI SUBHASH SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI SUJOY MATTI 
SHRI SHIREESH S. SWAMI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANOJ PANWAR 
SHRI SANJEEV DHARIWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SUBRATA DUTTA 

SHRI SANDEEP JAISWAL (Alternate) 
SHRI C. K. KARMAKAR 
SHRI ASHUTOSH BHADRA 


SHRI S. C. GANDHI 


SHRI RANJAN MUKHERJEE 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
Scientist ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 06 (18113). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


