IRRI He IS 11371 : 2022 
Indian Standard [ Amalgamating IS 11371 and IS 13105 ] 


eai zeara seara & Aht Hero, 
Frau athe dém œ fet fate 


( Teel JAGET ) 


Method for Macroetch Testing, 
Inspection and Rating of Wrought 
Steel Products 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 77.040.99 


© BIS 2022 


anda ATA SAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Seru TH Art, ay freh _ 110002 


A et MANAR BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2022 Price Group 4 


Metallography and Heat-Treatment Sectional Committee, MTD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Metallography and Heat-Treatment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1985. In the current revision, inspection and rating of using macroetch test for 
steel product have been included which were previously covered separately in IS 13015 : 1991 “Macroetch testing, 
inspection and rating of steel product”, the Committee decided to merge IS 11371 : 1985 Methods for Macroetch 
test wrought steel and IS 13015 : 1991 Macroetch testing, inspection and rating of steel product as IS 11371. 


In this revision following modifications have been made: 
a) Sampling plan have been added; 
b) Clause on Preparation of sample has been added; 
c) Clause on Macroetchants for steel have been modified to include all reagents; and 
d) Clause on Examination of Specimens has been added. 


The composition of the Committee and the Panel responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at 
AnnexC. 


For the purpose of whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, observed or 
calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for 
rounding off numerical values ( second revision )’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11371 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


METHOD FOR MACROETCH TESTING, INSPECTION 
AND RATING OF WROUGHT STEEL PRODUCTS 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the method of macroetching, 
for evaluating wrought steel products, such as bars, 
billets, blooms, sheets, plates and forgings. 


1.1.1 This method is limited in application to wrought 
products of carbon and alloy steels. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


2.1 Dendritic Structure — Primary crystals of 
dendritic structure formed during solidification of steel, 
still remaining after working. 


2.2 Ingot Pattern — A pattern developed during 
solidification of the ingot which appears as a zone of 
demarcation between the columnar and heterogeneous 
region of ingot and persists even after reduction to the 
stage of inspection. 


2.3 Segregation — Variation in the density of corrosive 
effect caused by segregation during solidification. 
When this phenomenon occurs at the central portion it 
is called centre segregation. 


2.4 Porosity or Looseness — A spongy pattern caused 
by the development of fast corrosive effect on the entire 
section or the central portion of the steel material. 


2.5 Pit/Pin Hole — A spotty pattern of small visible 
cavities caused by etching out of inclusions or 
microconstituents from the finished surface of the 
specimen. 


2.6 Pipe — A discontinuity associated with segregated 
impurities caused by shrinkage during solidification 
of steel. This may be carried through the various 
manufacturing processes to the finished product. 


2.7 Burst — A distinct pattern of cracks in the central 
region without any segregated impurities caused by 
improper forging or rolling. 


2.8 Seam, Laps — A surface imperfection on wrought 
steel due to folding of one portion of the surface metal 
over another at any stage of working without being 
unwelded. 


2.9 Thermal Cracks or Flakes — Short discontinuous 
internal cracks caused by stresses produced by localized 
transformation and hydrogen solubility effects during 
cooling after hot working. Also called shatter cracks 
and hairline cracks. 


2.10 Flow Lines — Lines which appear on the polished 
and macroetched surface of a metal and indicate the 
direction in which plastic flow has taken place during 
fabrication. 


3. GENERAL USES 


3.1 Significance 


The data obtained from macro examination of steel 
provides important indications regarding heterogeneity 
of a material and consequently determine its 
serviceability. Macroetch test method is used as an 
evaluating technique for revealing: 


a) Variations in structure, such as grain size, flow 
lines, columnar structure, dendrites, etc; 


b) Variations in chemical composition as evidenced 
by segregation, coring, etc; and 

c) Presence of discontinuities and voids produced 
during manufacture such as seams, laps, porosity, 
flakes, bursts, rupture cracks, etc. 


4 SAMPLING 


4.1 Sampling Plan 


When in accordance with the requirements of the 
enquiry or contract, forgings, billets, blooms, etc, are 
subjected to macroetch testing and inspection, the 
sampling plan shall be made as per the agreement 
between the manufacturer and the purchaser and shall 
include the following: 


a) The stage of manufacture at which the test shall be 
carried out; 

b) Location and number of specimen per test to be 
examined; and 

c) The type, size, number, location and orientation of 
heterogeneities that are considered injurious. 
NOTE — When note specifies the procedure of the test 


may be selected by the manufacture to satisfy the relevant 
requirements. 


IS 11371 : 2022 


4.2 Selection of Samples 


By macroetching appropriately selected samples/sections 
at an early stage of manufacture, defective material may 
be detected early thereby avoiding wasteful end product. 
Sampling may be done after ingot breakdown and after 
most chances of bursts and flakes occurring have passed. 
While stages of examination shall depend on agreement 
between manufacturers and the purchasers, it is usually 
carried out at semi-finished and/or finished stage. 
Sampling may be done systematically or on a random 
basis. 


4.3 Billets, Blooms and Hot-Rolled Products 


Discs are usually cut from these products near the ends 
covering entire cross section of the product. 


4.4 Forgings 


Discs may be cut transverse to the long dimension 
to reveal defects like cracks, bursts, flakes, etc. For 
revealing flow lines, forgings should be cut parallel to 
the long dimension. 

NOTE — The discs cut from hot-rolled products or forgings 


should not be too large to handle, usually 12 to 25 mm 
thickness and maximum 75 cm? in cross section will do. 


5 PREPARATION OF SAMPLE 


5.1 Sampling preparation need not be elaborate. Any 
method for preparing a smooth surface with a minimum 
amount of cold work will be satisfactory. 


5.2 For hot mill products, such as bars, billets, etc, the 
disc cut with parting tool is prepared by facing on a 
lathe or by grinding. But the specimen must be kept 
sufficiently cool to prevent heating the surface to an 
excessively high temperature. 


5.3 For inspection purpose, finishing on 120 grit 
grinding wheel or on No. 00 or No. 000 emery papers 
should be done, when maximum amount of detail 
careful preparation may be necessary to provide a 
smooth surface with a minimum amount of cold work. 
This is achieved by polishing the specimen with a 
series of metallographic papers to obtain the desired 
smooth polished surface. It should be ensured that the 
polished surface of the specimen remains free from 
contamination with dirt, oil grease, etc. 


6 MACROETCHANTS FOR STEEL 


Selection of macro etchants for steel depends on the 
purpose of examination and types of alloy grades 
(see Annex A: Table 1). The reagents should be of good 
quality but need not be of analytical grade. The solution 
should be clean, clear, free from suspended particles, 
scum, etc. Maximum precautions are to be taken while 
handling, mixing or heating the chemicals. 


7 PROCEDURE 


7.1 Macroetching should be carried out in containers 
which shall be fairly resistant to the attack of the 
etching reagents. Dishes or trays made of porcelain, 
heat resistant glass or a corrosion resistant glass or a 
corrosion resistant alloy may be used as etch tanks. 


7.2 The prepared specimen should be put directly into 
the etching solution with the surfaces to be examined 
either face up or vertical to permit the gas generated to 
escape freely. The specimens being etched should not 
be too close to each other or to the tank, if it is metallic, 
to avoid non-uniform etching. 


7.3 When etching is carried out above room temperature, 
the etchant should be first heated to the required 
temperature and then the specimen is immersed in it. 
To get best reproducible results, especially when the 
total volume of the specimen is higher to the volume 
of the solution, the specimen should also be heated in a 
water-bath, to the etching solution temperature, before 
immersed in the hot etchant. 


7.4 The etching periods, recommended in Table 1 
are only intended as a guide. The time required to 
develop the desired results in a particular test may be 
determined by frequent examination of the specimen 
as etching proceeds, since it depends on many factors 
including method of manufacture to the steel, heat 
treatment, alloy content, surface preparation, etc. The 
actual time to develop a proper structure may be quite 
different from the one suggested in Table 1. 


7.5 Ranges of etching temperature for various etchants 
have been indicated in Table 1. 


7.6 After completion of etching, the specimen should 
be washed immediately under running water using a 
stiff fibre brush to remove deposit of smut from the 
surface, rinsed again, dried with alcohol and cleaned 
air, and kept in a dry place. 


8 EXAMINATION OF SPECIMENS 


8.1 After drying (except when using ammonium 
persulfate etchant), the macrostructure shall be 
examined carefully. A series of photographs of etched 
specimens are presented in two groups (provided in 
Annexure II). 
8.1.1 Plate I 
Grades series for three conditions: 

a) Sub-surface conditions, 

b) Random conditions, and 

c) Centre segregation. 


8.1.2 Plate II 


Consists of a group of photographs showing various 
other conditions like pattern, flute, crack, gassy, butt 
tears, splash, flakes. 


While examining, the macroetched specimens, the 
appearance of the specimen is compared to the 
photographs in plate I and the photograph number most 
nearly representing the appearance in each ofthe series 
is reported. 


The specimen will also be compared against plate II, 
and the presence of any of the conditions in plate II will 
be reported. 


It may be noted that the presence of ingot pattern is 
acceptable in any degree, but defects like flute cracks, 
gassy, butt tears, flakes are not acceptable in any degree. 


8.1.3 The general standard of acceptance will be relative 
to end use considerations. The acceptability rating shall 
be decided between the purchaser and the producer. 


IS 11371 : 2022 


9 REPORTING OF RESULTS 


Reports should include full information on type and 
composition of the steel, cross-sectional dimension of 
the specimen and conditions or defects observed. The 
observed defects may be grouped by type and location. 


10 INSPECTION 


10.1 Wherever macroetch testing is stipulated, 
agreement should reach between the manufacturer and 
the purchaser regarding following: 


a) The stage of manufacture at which test shall be 
conducted; 

b) The number and locations of the specimens to be 
examined; 

c) The necessary surface preparation prior to etching 
of specimen; 

d) The etching procedure; and 

e) Permissible degree to which each of the defects 
listed in 2.3 to 2.10 may be tolerated for each of 
the end products. 


IS 11371 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 6 ) 
Table 1 Macroetchants for Iron and Steel 
SI Composition Alloys Temperature Etching Time Surface Characteristics 
No. Required Revealed 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
°C Minutes 
1 HCI 50 ml Plain and alloy 70-80 45-60 AorB Segregation, porosity, 
H,O 50 ml steels, high speed hardness penetration, 
tool steels, cutlery cracks, inclusions, 
steels and stainless dendrites, flow lines, 
steels soft spots, structure 
and weld examination 
2 HCI 38 ml H,SO, 12 ml do do Do BorC do 
H,O 50 ml 
3 HCI 50 ml H,SO, 7 ml do do Do AorB do 
H,O 18 ml 
4 Ammonium copper Steels other than Room Immerse undisturbed B Macrostructure of 
chloride 10-35 g stainless and heat temperature for about 5 min. steel material of 
H,O 100 ml resisting steels Remove copper comparatively large 
deposit by cloth. size 
Repeat the process for 
3-10 times 
5 HCI50 ml HNO, 25 ml Stainless and high do 10-15 AorB Same as SÍ No. 1 
H,O 25 ml alloy steel 
6 HCI 50 ml saturated Stainless and high 70-80 15-30 B or C Same as SÍ No. 1 
solution of CuSO, in H,O temperature alloy 
25 ml 
7 HNO, 5-25 percent water Plain and low alloy Room 5-30 C Carburization, 
or ethanol rest steels temperature decarburization, 
hardness penetration, 
cracks, segregation 
and weld examination 
8 H,SO, 10 ml Plain, low and high do 24-60 C Inclusions, porosity, 
H,O 90 ml alloy steels pipe, blow holes on 
large sections 
9  H,SO, 10 ml H,O 90 ml do 70-80 15-60 C do 
10 CuCl, 2H,O 25 g Plain and low alloy Room Until the surface BorC Phosphorous rich 
MgCl, 6 H,0 20 g steels temperature appears coppery areas and banding 
HCI 10 ml 
Ethanol 500 ml 
11. (NH,),S,0, do do Swab until desired C Grain size and weld 
50g H,O 500 ml etch is obtained examination 
12 CuCl, 6 gm FeCl, 6 gm Low carbon steel do Heat the specimen to C Show strain lines 
HCI 10 ml 200 °C and immerse 
Ethanol 100 ml 
13 CuNH,Cl 120 g Plain and alloy Room 5-30 C Produces strong 
H,0 1 000 ml HCI 50 ml steels, high speed temperature relief effect to reveal 


Ethanol 500 ml 


A = Saw cut or machined surface. 


B = Average ground surface. 


C = Polished surface. 


tool steels, cutlery 
steels and stainless 
steels 


segregation 


NOTE — All acids shall be concentrated in strength. Commercial grades ordinarily may be used instead of other grades of reagents. 


IS 11371 : 2022 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 8.1 ) 


C-5 


Centre Segregation —Plate 1 ( Concluded) 


IS 11371 : 2022 


PATTERN 


FLAKES 


FLUTE CRACKS BUTT TEARS SPLASH 
Plate 2 


IS 11371 : 2022 


ANNEX C 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Metallography and Heat-Treatment Sectional Committee, MTD 22 


Organization Representative(s) 


Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Ministry DR AMIT BHATTACHARJEE (Chairman) 
of Defence, Hyderabad SHRI M. BUCHI BHANU (Alternate) 


Bharat Forge Limited, Pune SHRI SURESH ARANGI 
SHRI SAGAR Bapat (Alternate) 


Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, New Delhi SHRI VEMANA UDAY KUMAR 
SHRI VARUN PANWAR (Alternate) 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry of SHRI K. SAHA 


Defence, Ichapur SHRI KARTIKEY SHARMA (Alternate) 
Durgapur Steel Plant, Sail Durgapur SHRI R. S. TIWARI 
Hindalco Industries Limited, Mumbai DR VIVEK SRIVASTAVA 
SHRI PRABI PURUSOTHAMAN (Alternate) 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Bengaluru SHRI S. SIVARAMKRISHNAN 
SHRI D. K. DE (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai PROF NITYANANDA PRABHU 
PROF K. NARASIMHAN (Alternate) 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur DR ANISH UPADHYAY 
DR KRISHAN BISWAS (Alternate) 
Institute of Indian Foundrymen, New Delhi SHRI A. K. ANAND 
JSW Steel Limited, Raigad SHRI GOUTAM MUKHERJEE 
SHRI KRISHNA RAMAVATH (Alternate) 
Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited, Hyderabad SHRI S. K. CHANDRA 
Mukand Limited, Thane SHRI DOMINIC SAVIO 
National Test House, Kolkata DR P. KANJILAL 
Research Designs and Standards Organization SHRI VASANT D. MEHARKARE 
(RDSO), Lucknow SHRI B. R .VERMA (Alternate) 
Tata Motors Limited, Pune SHRI PRADEEP KULKARNI 


SHRI SHAILESH SONWANE (Alternate) 


Tata Motors Limited, Jamshedpur SHRI MANASHI ADHIKARI 
DR GOUTAM MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI N. SURYANARAYANA, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (MTD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI VISHAL KUMAR RANA, 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (MTD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 22 (13397). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Ronnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


