IS : 8790 (Part II ) - 1978 ( hdliined 1996 ) ( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS WORKING IN HAZARDOUS AREAS
PART II ELECTRIC-BATTERY-POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS ( First Reprint JUNE 1997 )

UDC

621.868-835

: 614.87

BIJREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR

STANDARD-S
SHAH ZAFAR MARC 110002

NEW DELHI

Gr 5

November

197i

IS : 8790 (Part

II ) - 1978 ( Reaffied 19% )

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS WORKING IN HAZARDOUS AREAS
PART II ELECTRIC-BATTERY-POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS
Trucks Sectional Committee,
Representing Macneill to & Magor Ltd, Calcutta

Industrial
Chairman SHRI K. C. UNNI-~EAN

MCPD

22

Members
Research, Organiaation Designs & Standarda ( Mmistry of Railways ), Lucltnow SHRI B. M. CKOPRA ( Altcmute ) Ministry of Defence ( Air Wing ) Wo CDR I. J. BHALLA SQN LDB INDER GROVER ( Ak6rnate ) Indian Ports Association, New Delhi SH~I A. K. BISWAE Indian Airliner, New Delhi SHBI M. S. EKB~TE SERI S. Snn ( Altrrnate ) Chief Inspectorate of Engineering ( Ministry of SEBI P. K. GHOSE Defence ), Punt MAJ V. R. BANAHATTI ( Altermats ) Directorate General of Ordnance Factories ( Ministry SHBI G. GOPAKUYAR of Dcfence ), Calcutta Directorate General, Factory Advice Service & SHRI K. C. GIJPTA Labour Institute, Bombay SERI V NUOOPAL ( Alkmat~ ) JOINT DIE EOTOR, T R A r v I o Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) BRIO T. C. JOSEPH Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi LT-601. R. SHI~DA~AX~I ( Altntmtr ) Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, SHRI M. T. KANEE NCY-Delhi Vehicle Research & Development F,stabli&ment h4~~ V. N. KIRANDB ( Ministry of Defencc ),' Ahmednagar MAJ T~J PA& ( AItrrnotr )
corrdERcrAL

SHRI S. GUPTA ( Alternate Shri K. C. Unnithan ) SHRI V. ANA~~D

(Cmhwdonpolr
Q Coprright BUREAU `I'i& OF IiUDIAN 1978 STANDARDS

2)

nblication is protected under the l&a Ce@@ Ad ( XIV of 1957 ) and repr OB n&on in whole or in part by any meatts except wstb mitten permission of the publihr rim11 be deemed to be an infnngement qf copyright under the raid Act.

IS : 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978 .
( Continucdfrom page 1 ) Members SHRI S. S. KHO~LA Reprewnfing Directorate General New Delhi of Technical Development,

SRRI D. P. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Bombay Port Trust, Bombay .` Srrar 0. D'MELLO SHRI Q. H. TAUFIQ ( &mate ) Gujarat Industrial Trucks Ltd, Bombay SH~I G. D. MODI SHRI A. G. MODI ( Alternate ) Godrej & Boyce Mfg Co Pvt *Ltd, Bombay SHBI D. N. PEBTONJI SHRI H. F. RA~INA ( Altcrnatc) Standard Batteries Ltd, Bombay SERI R. A. PHAYADE SHRI M. F. GOVADIA ( Alternate ) Jost's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. R. PRASAD SHRI D. G. BHAVE ( Alternate ) Escorts Limited, Farldabad SHRI RIPDAMAN SINQH SRRI L. R. CHOUDHARY ( Alternate ) Voltas Limited, Bombay %IRl P. F. S~TRNA SERI V. K. TALWAR ( Alternate 1 Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi SHRI B. R. SINQH SHRI S. C~ITTARANJAN ( Alternate ) Pallets Sectional Committee, MCPD 5, IS1 CAPT N. A. TAMHANE Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SARI P. S. DAS. Director ( MCPD ) (Secretary )

Forklift Trucks Subcommittee,
Convener SHR~ P. F. SET&A
SHRI V. K. TALWAR ( Alternate

MCPD 22 : I

Voltas Limited, Bombay

Research, Designs 8s Standards Organization ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow SHRI B. M. CHOPRA (Alternate ) Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of SHRI V. P. DEWAN Defence ). New Delhi LT-COL V. P. DHALL ( Alternate ) Direczmte General of Supplies & Disposals, New SHRI M. T. KANSE 1 -P _.___ Godrej & Boyce Mfg Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SHRI D. N. PESTONJI SHRI M. K. MEHTA ( Alternate ) Standard Batteries Ltd, Bombay SHRI R. A. PHAYADE SHRI M. F. GOVADIA ( Afternate ) Jest's Engineering Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI K. R. PRASAD SHRI T. T. GALA ( Alternate ) Garden Reach Shipbuilders & Engineers Ltd, SHRI S. K. SINHA Calcutta SHRI A. K. JOARDAR ( Alternate ) Macneill & Magor Ltd, Calcutta SHRI K. C UNNITHAN Srrar S. GUPTA ( Alternate )

Shri P. F. Sethna ) SHRI V. ANAND

to

2

IS I 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978

Indian Standard
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS WORKING IN HAZARDOUS AREAS
PART II ELECTRIC-BATTERY-POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard (Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 May 1978, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Trucks Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 Safety in industrial operations is of extreme importance in order to avoid loss of human life or equipment and as incentive to the workmen involved in these operations. As more and more industrial trucks are used for load movement in industries with potentially hazardous atmospheres there is a need for guidelines for the economization in risks involved not only in the design and manufacture or conversion of trucks, but also for their operation and maintenance. It is difficult to make all areas absolutely free of hazardous atmosphere but it is possible and may be more economical to devise means to ensure a safe operation for the industrial trucks in hazardous atmospheres. 0.3 Industrial trucks may be powered with an electric battery or internal combustion engine. Therefore this standard is issued in the following two parts: a) Part I Internal combustion engine-powered trucks, and b) Part II Electric-battery-powered industrial trucks. 0.4 The areas where the hazardous handling operation occur can be identified with the works and stores dealing with explosives and petroleum based products, motor spirits, plastics, petro-chemicals, paints, cosmetics, LPG, besides oil refineries, airport refilling zones, oil and gas exploration and production rigs, artificial fibre plants, dye works, fertilizer plants, mines and many chemical works. 0.5 The hazard factor in terms of fire and/or explosives risk to the personnel and property depends upon the presence of air/gas, vapour or powder mixture present in ciritical proportion which, if ignited by.hot surface, hot gases, flame or sparks could cause an explosion or conflagration. 3

IS

I

8790 ( Part

II ) - 1978

0.6 The question of truck operation in hazardous environment must go farther than the approved designs of the machine. The safety of the total environment must be considered, namely, air circulation, ventilation, layout, types of flooring, presence of ramps and other equipment, etc, as also the question of maintaining the flame-proofed trucks. 0.7 Efforts have been made to ensure provision of the legislation in safety in the operation of industrial trucks in the hazardous areas as applicable to individual industries. No comprehensive guidelines have been in existence. 0.8 Wherever any requirement has been stipulated by statutory the same shall prevail over the requirement under this standard. 0.9 In the preparation the following: BS of this standard, assistance has been derived order, from

CP 1003 : Part I : 1964 Electrical apparatus and associated equipment for use in explosive atmospheres of gas or vapour other than mining applications, Part I Choice, installation and maintenance of flame-proof and intrinsically-safe equipment. British Standards Institution, UK. internal USA.

ANSI B56.4-1972 Standard for safety industrial trucks, combustion engine-powered. Underwriters' Laboratories,

NFPA 505-1975 Fire safety standard for powered industrial trucks, including type designations and areas of use. National Fire Protection Association, USA.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
hazard aspects ( Part II ) covers fire, of electric-battery-powered does not cover electric-shock, and industrial trucks. possible hazard explosionaspects of

1.1.1 This standard such equipment.

other

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For apply *
flammable the purpose of this standard the following definitions shall any

2.1 Hazardous

Atmosphere

gas or vapour

- An atmosphere containing in a concentration capable of ignition.

2.2 Hazardous Area - An area where during hazardous atmosphere is likely to occur in sufficient a hazard. 4

normal operations, a quantity to constitute

IS : 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978
.An area, excluding an oil field, in which any flammable liquid, gas or vapour although processed, handled or stored, is so well under conditions of control that its liability to produce a hazardous atmosphere in sufficient quantity to constitute a hazard is only likely to occur under abnormal conditions. 2.4 Safe Atmosphere - An atmosphere not falling within definition of hazardous atmosphere and incapable of ignition. the

2.3 Remotely Hazardous Area -

2.5 Safe Area area or remotely

An area no part of which lies within either hazardous area. OF ELECTRIC TRUCKS

a hazardous

3. IDENTIFICATION

3.0 For the purpose of this standird the industrial designated as under, depending upon the type.

trucks

shall

be

3.1 Electric-battery-powered
initial letter

industrial trucks are designated by the `E' and are powered by batteries supplying 150 V or less. Electric-battery-powered safety guards. industrial trucks having

3,i.i l-y@ E minimum acceptable

3.1.2 Type, EE - Electric-battery-powered with safeguards in addition to those required 3.1.3 Type 1 EX - Electric'-bat&y-powered hazardous locations in Zone 0.

industrial trucks provided for Type E electric trucks. industrial trucks for

_ 4. CLASSIFICATION

OF HAZAl$DOUS

AREAS

4.1 In determining the risk of fire or explosion from the presence of flammable liquids; gases or vapours, the zones with such characteristics have been divided into the following three categories according to the degree of probability of the presence of hazardous atmosphere. Cl.1 <one 0 Area.s

4.1.1.1 An area in which hazardous atmosphere is continuously present shall fall under this category. This classification is applicable only where it is expected that a hazardous atmosphere will exist continuously. The statistical average duration for which the hazardous atmosphere is present is more than 1 000 hours per annum. b 4.1.1.2 Since a hazardous atmosphere exists continuously, any failure of electrical apparatus installed in a Zone 0 area would almost certainly tead to fire or explosion. Therefore, any installed electrical apparatus shall afford a degree of protection/as near as practicable to the absolute.
5

IS t 8798 ( Part II ) - 1978 4.1.2 &e I Areas - An area in which a hazardous atmosphere is likely to occur under normal operating conditions shall fall under this category. This classification fs applied to areas in which a hazardous atmosphere is likely to occur at any time, an4 which, therefore, require the fullest practicable application of measures to prevent the occurrence of a hazardous condition at any time and in any circumstances. The statistical average duration foe-which the hazardous atmosphere is present is between 10 hours and 1000 hours per annum. 4.1.3 <one- 2 &as - An area in `which a hazardous atmosphere is likely to occur,only under abnormal operating conditions shall fall under this category. This classification is applicable only where a fire or explosion hazard is unlikely and may be caused only by the simultaneous and improbably o_ccurrence or. an arc or spark resulting from an electrical failure and a hazardous atmosphere arising through failure of the conditions of control, It presupposes that any hazardous atmosphere resulting from an abnormal occurrence is rapidly dispersed so that possible contact with the electrical apparatus is of minimum duration. Any situation which allows a hazardous atmosphere to collect, such as pit or trench, although, it may be in the open air, shall in itself be classified as Zone 1 area, even though the surrounding area is classified as Zone 2. The statistical average duration for which the hazar'dous atmosphere is present is less than 10 hours per annum. 4.2 The three basic conditions'whitih of fire or explosion are as under: a) Presence in b) .Mixing of proportions and c) Occurrence are to be satisfied for the occurrence

sufficient quantity of a flammable gas or vapour; the flammable gas or vapour with air or oxygen in required to produce an explosive or ignitable mixture; of ignition.

4.2.1 In applying this principle to any potential hazard, the quantity of the substance that might be liberated, its physihl characteristics and the natural tendency of vapours to disperse in the atmosphere shall be recognized. 5. TYPE E INDUSTRIAL ELECTRIC TRUCKS shall comply with 5.1 Construction 5.1.1_General - A Type E industrial electric truck the following requirements.

5.1.1.1 All w,iring and other current-carrying parts of an industrial electric truck shall be. so constructed and enclosed as to protect them from physical injury and to resist the abuses to which they may be bubjected. 6

IS r 8799 (-Part II ) - 1978 5.1.1.2 Except as specified in 5.1.4.7 all electrical wiring, shall be mounted within the body of the truck. parts, including

5.1.1.3 Contactors and fuses shall be `so located as to be readily accessible for servicing, such as complete replacement or the replacement of contacts and inspection after the removal of cover or covers. Other arcing and operating parts shall be accessible for servicing and inspection. 5.1.1.4 No uninsulated current-carrying outer surface of the truck. part shall be exposed on the

5.1.1.5 A gasket employed between a cover and a box `shall be cemented or otherwise secured to one of the gasketed surfaces. 5.1.1.6 A drip pan shall not permit the collection of oil.

5.1.1.7 A current-carrying part of the power circuit, other than a resistor, shall be of nonferrous metal, except as covered in 5.1.4.14. Ferrous metal may be used for a resistor terminal in the power circuit and for all parts of the lighting, warning-signal, and other auxiliary and motor-control circuits. Steel, other than stainless, shall be zinc-coated, cadmium-plated, or equivalently protected against corrosion. 5.1.2 Motors and Resistors

.5.1.2.1 Unless they are enclosed, power-circuit resistors shall be located to provide free air circulation about the resistance elements. Power-circuit resistors shall be installed so as to minimize the. possibility of physical damage. 5.1.2.2 If the motor lead wires do not pass out of a motor directly into an acceptable raceway, or if they are brought out through the motor case, they shall pass through openings provided with an insulating bushing fastened in place. 5.1.2.3 Terminals for a motor or for a power circuit resistor shall comply with the requirements of 5.1.33 to 5.1.3.5. 5.i.3 Electric Controls 5.1.3.1 All- arcing parts in power circuits shall be enclosed or installed so as to minimize the possibility of flame or molten metal reaching surrounding combustible material on the truck. 5.1.3.2 Reversing controIlers shall be interlocked, cally and/or electrically. 7 either mechani-

IS : 8799 ( Part II ) - 1978 5.1.3.3 Terminals and terminal construction shall be of such size and shape as to provide the necessary capacity and mechanical support for the conductors connected to them. Terminals employing a threaded screw or bolt for securing the conducting lug to a terminal plate shall provide a minimum of two full threads in the metal. All terminal nuts shall be fastened by lockwashers or equivalent means to prevent loosening of conductors.
5.1.3.4 A base for the support of a live part shall be treated fibre, siljconemoulded-phenolic composition, sheet-phenolic composition, melamine-polyester impregnated glass-fibre laminated sheet, coldmoulded composition, treated asbestos-cement composition, or other nonabsorptive noncombustible material, evaluated in accordance with 5.1.3.5. 5.1.3.5 In determining the acceptability of `a material, other than one specifically mentioned in 5.1.3.4 for the support of a live part, ' consideration shall be given to it \ resistance to moisture, to its physical strength if it is exposed or otherwise subject to physical damage, to the means for securing it in place, and whether or not the material is so located as to be adversely affected by operation of the equipment in service-particularly by arcing. The performance of a material with respect to these properties is to be evaluated in comparison to the per: formance of a material given in 5.1.3.4.

5.1.4 Wiring covered conforming Battery 5.1.4.1

The cables used shall to IS : 5755-1970*.

be

mineral

insulated

metal

leads shall comply with the requirements

of 5.1.8.

5.1.4.2 The internal wiring of an electric truck shall consist of general use wire or appliance-wiring material of a type or types that are suitable for the particular application. This wiring shall be chosen with respect to the temperature and conditions to which the wiring may in ` Indian be subjected as determined during the tests pres ribed Standard performance testing of electric battery pow Jr ed industrial truck working in hazardous areas ' ( utier prefiaration ).
NOTE - Until the standard under preparation is published, subject to agreenient between the concerned parties. the matter shall be

5.1.4.3 Bare conductors with noncarbonizable beads.

may

be insulated

with insulating

tubing

or

5.1.4.4 A short length of rubber-insulated conductor exposed to temperatures which normally are in excess of the acceptable temperatures for the compound involved ( such as to resistor terminals ) is
*Specification for mineral conductors. * insulated aluminium sheathed cables with aluminium

IS:8790

( Part

II ) - 1978

acceptable if supplementary heat-resistant insulation as per the requirements of dielectric withstand test of ` Indian Standard performance testing of electric battery powered industrial truck working in hazardous areas ' ( undo ~reparution ) is employed on the individual conductors ta safeguard against failure of the insulation because of deterioration of the An insulating sleeve shall be secured in place. rubber. 5.1.4.5 Except as given in 5.1.4.6 and 5.1.4.7 all wiring shall be protected against physical damage: (a) by enclosing it in the body of the truck; (b) by enclosing it in metal raceway, such as armoured cable, rigid metal conduit, or electrical metallic tubing; or (c) by protecting it with metal, phenolic composition, or other thermosetting material of equivalent mechanical strength and resistance to impact. The electrical wiring mounted on booms, lifts: and similar parts shall be installed so as to minimize the possibility of physical damage and kinking. 5.1.4.6 Protection for insulated leads located within .the operator's compartment is not required if the walls and floor of this compartment are of metal, phenolic composition, or other thermosetting material of equivalent mechanical strength and resistance to impact, and if the leads are not likely to -be subjected to physical injury by the operator. 5.1.4.7 Conductors connected to moving or movable parts which cannot be protected as indicated in 5.1.4.5 are to be designed for their intended use and shall satisfy the test requirements in this standard. Particular attention shall be given to resistance of conductors to damage resulting from flexing, abrasion, or impact. . Flexible metal conduit may be used only for flexible connections subject to small and infrequent movements. 5.1.4.8 Except where plug and receptacle splicing devices are used, splices in the internal wiring of the truck shall be employed only at connections to lead provided as part of components of the device. 5.1.4.9 All the splices and connections mentioned in 5.1.4.8 shall be mechanically secure and shall provide adequate and reliable electrical contact without strain on connections and terminals. A splice shall be provided with insulation equivalent to that on the wires involved. 5.1.4.10 A hole by means ofwhich insulated conductors pass through a sheet-metal wall shall be provided with a smooth well-rounded bushing or shall have smooth, well-rounded surfaces upon which the insulated conductors may bear. 5.1.4.11 Wireways shall be smooth and free from sharp edges, burrs, fins, or moving parts that can damage,wiring. 9

IS :8790 ( Part II ) - 1978
5.1.4.i2 All internal-wiring connections shall be made with solder lugs or pressure-type wire connectors, except that control wiring and other small conductors may be connected by crimped or soldered specialtype lugs or eyelets. 5.1.4.13 Terminal lugs shall be so arranged that in any position of shifting they cannot contact either the frame of the truck or other electrical circuits, or the shanks of the lugs shall be provided with insulation equiv"alent to that on the conductor. 5.1.4.14 No part of the frame or enclosure of the truck shall be in electrical contact with current-carrying parts or used as a part of the electrical circuit except that, for trucks having a nominal 24-volt rating, the frame of the truck may be used as a part of the electrical circuit if the circuit is protected by an overcurrent device or disconnect switch or connector. The switch or connector shall be positive in action and readily and quickly operatable by the driver of the vehicle without leaving his normal driving position. 5.1.5 Overcurrent Devices

5.1.5.1 An overcurrent device of suitable capacity, as determined by the size necessary to prevent overheating of the smallest conductor in the circuit, shall be provided in a light, warning-signal, or other auxiliary circuit. S&h a protective device may also be used in a motor-control circuit. A 1.25-mm conductor may be considered to be protected by an overcurrent device of 15 ampere rating or setting. 5.1.5.2 The need of an overcurrent device in the power circuit is to be determined on the basis of the burnout test as given in ` Indian Standard performance testing of electric battery powered industrial truck working in hazardous areas' ( underprepciration ) and not by the need for protecting in the wiring against overloads' of short duration. Alsd, an overcurrent device may be required on the basis of 5.1.4.14. 5.1.5.3 An overcurrent protective device provided in a control circuit in accordance with 5.1.5.1 or an overcurrent device in a power circuit provided in accordance with 5.1.5.2 is to be lqcated as close as Such a device is to be identified as practicable to the battery terminals. to the maximum rating of the overcurrent protection to be employed, and it is recommended that it also be identified to indicate the circuit in which it is emplo?ed. 5.1.6 Battey Enclosure be provided enclosure. 10 with support and proteztion,

5.1.6.1 The battery shall by means of a noncombustible

IS: 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978 5.1.6.2 A metal cover shall have such strength and rigidity that, in conjunction with an air spacing provided between it and the battery terminals, the battery terminals are not short-circuited when a force of 12 kN/ms is applied to the cover. In lieu of the spacing, insulation designed to prevent short-circuiting of the battery terminais shall be secured to the inner surface of a metal battery-compartment cover.
5.1.7

Bath-y

5.1.7.1 A battery provided `with a noncombustible tray and cover intended to form the ultimate enclosure for the battery shall comply with the requirements of 5.1.6.
5.1.7.2 The battery enclosure shall ventilation that minimizes the possibility hydrogen-air mixtures above the battery. be provided with means for of accumulation of explosive

5.1.7.3 A battery of nominal voltage rati:g and representative of maximum ampere-hour capacity rating is to be supplied for the purpose of examining the truck. 5.1.7.4 Cells employing metal containers ( such as alkaline batteries ) shall be insulated from one another and from a metal tray or metal Insulation of wood or other material shall be battery compartment. (a) treated or painted to minimize deterioration by the battery electrolyte, and (b) constructed to minimize the risk of damage to the insulation in the normal operation and maintenance of the truck. 5.1.7.5 The connections shall be such that the potential two adjacent cells is not more than 24 volts ( nominal ). 5.1.7.6 the battery direction. Means shall be provided from moving more than between any

as a part of the truck to restrain a total of 10 mm in a horizontal

5.1.8 Battery Leads - Battery leads shall be of a size and currentcarrying capacity adequate for the application. They shall be neoprene insulated or insulated with an equivalent material, resistant to acids and/ or alkalis, and able to withstand flexing, handling, and impact at temperatures between 54�C and minus 29�C. The average insulation thickness shall be not less than 1.5 mm for a conductor from 3.15 to 6'30 mm in diameter and not less than 2 mm for a conductor from 7'10 to 11'2 mm in diameter. 5.1.9

Battery Plugs and Receptacles
be equipped with a battery protection as required for conother

5.1.9.1 Each electric truck shall located to provide physical nector electrical parts of the truck.
11

IS I 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978 5.1.9.2 One part of the connector shall be permanently mounted to The length of the cable either the truck or the battery enclosure. attached to the free part of the connector shall be as short as practicable, without interfering with the disconnecting operation and without placing stress on terminals.
5.1.9.3 The live parts shall nector to minimize the possibility 5.1.9.4 A battery connector its particular appplication. be recessed from of sh6rt-circuiting. shall have the the face of the con-

proper

rating

for use in

5.1.9.5 The removable portion of the connector with means for being grasped during removal. 5.1.10 Lights Lampholders and lamps shall be totally against 5.1.10.1

shall

be provided

enclosed. physical damage by

5.1.10.2 A lamp bars, grids, recessing,

lens4shall be protected or equivalent means.

5.1.10.3 When bayonet-type lampholders are employed, the spacing within the lampholder between live parts of opposite polarity and between live parts and noncurrent-carrying metal parts other than the enclosure shall not be less than 2 mm measured through air or over the surface of insulating material. 5.1.11 Horn :- The coil and other electrical or warning device shall be enclosed. 6. TYPE parts of an electrical horn

EE INDUSTRIAL 6.1 Construction

ELECTRIC

TRUCKS

6.1.1 General - A Type the following requirements trucks.

EE industrial in addition

electric truck shall comply with to those for Type E industrid-

6.1.1.1 Except as given in 5.1.4.7, the assembly of an industrial truck shall be such as to enclose or physically+rotect, either individually or, collectively, all wiring and other current-carrying parts. 6.1.2 enclosed. 6.1.2.2 If hand holes are provided in the motor enclosures, they shall be provided with metal bands to close the .openings. The bands shall be not less than 0'65 mm in thickness and provided with a means, such as thumbscrew, latch, or the equivalent, for retaining the band in a closed position. 12

kotors
type, or shall be completely

6.1.2.1 A motor shall be of the enclosed

IS I ,879O ( Part II) - 1978 6.1.3 Resistors
6.1.3.1 A resistor in the power circuit shall be provided with a substantial, flanged or equivalent, tight-fitting metal enclosure without openings for ventilation in accordance with 6.1.3.2 and 6.1.3.3. 6.1.3.2 An enclosure and/or enclosure cover not within the body of the truck shall be formed of not less than 3 mm thick cast metal or 6 mm thick steel plate. An enclosure located within the body of the truck may be formed of sheet metal not less than 1.3 mm thick. 6.1.3.3 To provide an overlap as indicated in Table 1, the enclosure and/or enclosure cover shall have flanges or the equivelent for the full length of the edges.
TABLE 1 ENCLOSURE AND/OR ENCLOSURE COVER OVERLAP MAXIMUM S~ACINQ 0F FASTEVERS (5) mm Not specified 150 Not specified

TYPE OB MATING SURFACE (1) i) ii) iii) (2) Ground or machined Not ground or machined Not ground or machined

OVERLAP

PEovIsIoN OF GASKET (4) No No Yes

(3) mm 12 12 6

6.1.4 Electric Controls 6.1.4.1 Switches, controllers, contactors, and similar arcing parts provided in the power circuit shall be housed in a flanged or equivalent tight-fitting metal without enclosure openings for ventilation in accordance with 6.1.3.1 and 6.1.3.2.
6.1.4.2 The switches, controllers, contactors provided in the control circuit shall be enclosed. and similar arcing parts

6.1.4.3 A non-metallic material used to provide an enclosure in accordance with 5.1.11 or 6.1.4.2 shall be phenolic or an equivalent thermosetting material. These n&erials shall be considered with respect to the following properties: a) b) c) d) e) Mechanical Resistance strength, to impact, properties, and

Moisture-absorptive Combustibility,

Resistance to distortion at temperatures to which the material may be subjected as determined during the tests described in. 13

IS:8790 ( Part II ) - 1978 6.1.5 JV;r;ag - Except as given in 5.1.4.6 and 5.1.4.7, be protected against physical damage as follows: a) By enclosing it in the body of the truck; b) By enclosing it in a metal raceway, such as armoured cable, rigid metal conduit, or electrical metallic tubing; or c) By protecting it with metal or with either phenolic composition or other thermosetting materials of no greater combustibility than phenolic. This enclosure or protection shall prevent any flame or molten material, which may be caused by an electrical disturbance in the wiring, from reaching surrounding combustibld material. 6.1.6 Overcurrent D&es 6.1.6.1 Overcurrent devices, including fuses, provided in the power circuit, shall be housed in a flanged or equivalent, tight-fitting, metal enclosure without openings for ventilation in accordance with 6.1.3.2 and 6.1.3.3. 6.1.6.2 Overcurrent devices, including circuit, shall be enclosed ( see 6.1.4.3 ). fuses, provided in the control all wiring shall

6.1.7 Battery Enclosure 6.1.7.1 The battery enclosure shall be provided with a cover with means for locking the cover in the closed position to deter opening by unauthorized persons. Insulation designed to prevent shorting of the terminals shall be secured to the inner surface of a metal enclosure over terminals. 6.1.7.2 All upper openings shall be covered with a heavy-gauge wire, mesh, expanded metal, or a perforated cover. The size and shape of the shall prevent passage of a rod having a diameter greater opening than 12 mm. If the distance between an uninsulated live part and the opening is greater than 100 mm, the opening may be large than previously mentioned, provided no opening passes a rod having a diameter greater than 20 mm. 6.1.8 WheeLr and lyres - All wheels shall be rubber-tyred or constructed of nonsparking material. At least two tyres and wheels shall be constructed of electrically conductive material, or some other equivalent static-discharge device, such as a conductive ground strap, shall be provided ( see 7.6 ). 7. TYPE EX INDUSTRIAL ELECTRIC HAZARDOUS LOCATIONS TRUCKS FOR

.7.0 Type EX electric truck for use in Zone 0 shall comply with the following requirements in addition to those for Type EE industrial electric truck. 14

IS : 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978 7.1 The electric parts and wiring shall be encased in a metal enclosure capable of ivithstanding explosions of Zone 0 or vapour-air mixture that may occur within it, and of preventing the ignition of the gas or vapour surrounding the enclosure by sparks, flashes, or explosions of the gas or vapour within the enclosure. 7.2 Motors - A motor, shall comply with the requirements for electric motors and generators for use in hazardous locations, Zone 0. No belt drive shall be provided with the motor unless the belts are of electrically conductive material or are enclosed in accordance with 7.1. There shall be no slippage of the belt that may cause temperature-rise which could ignite explosive atmospheres of Zone 0. 7.3 Battery Enclosure 7.3.1 The battery shall be provided with support and protection by means of a non-combustrble enclosure equivalent.in strength to sheet steel not less than 5 mm thickness. The cover shall be provided with means for locking in the closed .position to deter opening by unauthorized persons. Insulation designed to prevent shorting of the battery terminals shall be secured to the inner surface of a metal cover. 7.3.2 The battery enclosure shall be provided with means for ventilation that minimizes the possibility of accumulation of explosive Ventilating openings shall be hydrogen-air mixtures above the battery. designed to prevent access to the cell terminals from the outside. 7.4 Battery 7.4.1 A suitable battery shall be provided for a Type EX truck. 7.4.2 Ignition of the ambient gases or vapours shall be prevented *by either inert gas under pressure in the battery case or by having the current-carrying parts of the battery insulated or protected against possible contact with foreign objects when cover is closed. 7.5 Battery Plugs and Receptacles

the receptacle contacts are live, or the plug shall be locked in its receptac$e to deter removal by unauthorized persons. 7L5.2 A receptacle used for charging purposes. only shall be provided with a cover or dummy plug that is to be locked in place when the battery is not being charged to prevent access to live terminals while the equipment is in operation. 15

with a switch that the plug can neither be inserted nor withdrawn while

7.5;1 The ` running'

plug for an electric truck shall be so interlocked

iS : 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978 7.5.3 A plug shall have a holding device or clamp to minimize any stresses on the plug while it is in its receptacle. A clamp shall be provided in the plug to grip the cable and minimize stress on the connection within the plug. 7.6 Wheels and Tyres - All wheels shall be rubber-tyred or constructed of nonsparking material. At least two tyres and wheels `shall be constructed of electrically conductive material, or some other equivalent static discharge device shall be provided. Nonmetallic conductive tyres and wheels shall have.a resistanceaof not more thap 250 000 ohms when measured between the wheel hub an< a metal plate on which the wheel rests. 7.7 Safeguards Against Mechanical Sparks - The exposed portion of metal parts given in Table 2 shall be made of or covered with medium brass, bronze, copper, or aluminium, with a hardness not more than Rockwell B66, or shall be of other material suitable for the purpose. In lieu of the exposed portion being made of, or covered with, such material, a bumper of band made of wood or such materials may be used.
TABLE SL 2 EXPOSED PORTlONS OF METAL PARTS

PART (?)
Truck body Tractor body

EXPOSED PORTION
(3) Sides, rear Sides, rear, front Sides Sides Front Front, sides, top, bottom Front, Ends Inner and outer surfaces of clamping arms, clamp support, ,ccntre spacer, and odtTr surfaces of clamping assembly support Front Front, sides, top, bottom sides

No. (1)

i)
ii) iii) iv) v)

Wheel hub* Wheel rim* ForL: a) Vertical member b) Horizontal c) Rack member

vi) vii)

For carriage Barrel clamp or barrel hand.ling attachment Boom and hook attachment: a) Vertical member member b) Horizontal

, viii)

*Wheel hubs and wheel rims require protection only if they project beyond the body of `the truck or tractor while the truck or tractoi is moving in a straight line.

16

IS : 8790 ( Pait II ) - 1978 8. MAINTENANCE OF INDUSTRIAL . .8.1 General - It is essential that the operated industrial trucks be maintained; truck not in safe operating condition shall .8.2 Precaution% 8.2.1 Repairs shall not be made in hazardous areas falling under Zones 0, 1 and 2. -. 8.2.2 Repairs to the electrical system of battery-powered industrial trucks shall be performed only after the battery has been disconnected. 8.3 All parts of any industrial truck requiring replacement shall be replaced only with parts providing the same degree of fire safety as those used in the original design. 8.4 When the temperature of any part zf any truck is found to be in excess of its normal operating temperature and which creates a hazardous condition, the vehicle shall be removed from service ahd not returned to service until the cause `for such overheating has been eliminated. 8.5-Industrial trucks shall be kept in a clean condition, reasonably free of lint, excess oil, and grease. Noncombustible agents are preferred for cleaning trucks. Precautions regarding toxicity, ventilation, and fire hazard shall be in consonance with the agent or solvent used. 9. MARKING 9.1 Type E Industrial Electric Trucks 9.1.1 A Type E industrial electric truck following where the markings will be visible: a) Name or trade-mark shall be marked with the S. `TRUCKS fire safety built into powerany power-operated industrial be removed from service.

of the manufacturer;

b) Type designation ( Type E ); c) Catalogue designation or equivalent identification; d) Battery nominal voltage and maximum ampere-hour capacity at five hour rate. If the battery is not furnished with the truck by the truck manufacturer, the truck shall be marked with the names of the manufacturers of the recommended batteries and the eatalogue designations or equivalent battery identification in such location that the marking is readily visible. Such equivalent identification may be a reference to the construction requirements in this standard for the battery intended to be used with the truck; 17

IS : 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978 e) Maximum rated load loading, as follows: in kg, including type and position of

i)
ii)

Platform or pallet trucks ( low lift and nonelevating ) -load rating in kg, with load centre near the centre of the load engaging means.

Platform trucks (high lift ) - Ioad rating in kg, at a specified load centre that the truck can transport and stack to a height established by the truck manufacturer. hauling rating in kg lift height, and iii) Forklift trucks -load location of load centre in mm from vertical surface of forks when in a vertical plane. iv) Tractors - drawbar pull in Newtons. appropriate combination of ratings v) Combination trucks -the as required for two or more of the foregoing types. f) Replacement fuse size located on or adjacent to fuseholders.

9.1.1.1 A battery for use with a Type E industrial electric truck shall be marked with the battery nominal voltage, ampere-hour capacity, battery manufacturer's name, and the catalogue designation or equivalent identification. 9.1.1.2 A schematic or pictorial furnished with each truck. 9.2 Type EE Industrial circuit wiring diagram shall be

Electric Trucks

9.2.1 Each Type EE industrial electric truck shall be marked where the markings'are visible with the following:

4
b) 4 4

Name or trade-mark

of the manufacturer;

Type designation ( Type EE ); Catalogue designation or equivalent identification; Battery nominal voltage and maximum ampere-hour capacity at five hour rate. If the battery is not furnished with the truck by the truck manufacturer, the truck shall be marked with the names of the recommended batteries and the catalogue designations or sequivalent identification in such location that the marking is readily visible. Such equivalent identification may be a reference to the construction requirements in this standard for the battery intended to be used with the truck; Maximum rated load in. kg, including loading 1 see 9.1.1 (e) 1; and Replacement type and position of

4 f)

fuse size located on or adjacent to fuseholders. 18

IS : 8790 ( Part II ) - 1978 9.2.1.1 A battery for use with a Type EE industrial electric truck shall be marked with the battery nominal voltage, ampere-hour capacity, battery manufacturer's name, and the catalogue designation or equivalent identification. 9.2.1.2 A schematic or furnished with each truck. 9.3 Type EX Industrial pictorial circuit wiring diagram shall be

.

Electric

Trucks

for Hazardous

Locations shall be

9.3.1 marked

A Type EX industrial truck where the markings are visible or trade-mark designation Type ( Type EX );

for hazardous location, with the following:

a>Name
b) d)

of the manufacturer; hazardous location in which the truck is

Class and group of the c>intended to be used; A .statement calling enclosures of electrical in hazardous area; Catalogue Nominal designation voltage rating

attention to the necessity for keeping parts and wiring tightly assembled while or equivalent identification; the wiring type and position diagram shall of be

of the battery;

Maximum rated load in kg, including the loading [ see 9.1.1 (e) 1. 9.3.1.1 A schematic furnished with each truck. or pictorial circuit

19

