**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13147 (1991) : Black Oxide Coating on Stainless Steel 
Parts [MTD 7: Light Metals and their Alloys] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13147:1991 

( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 

Indian Standard 

BLACK OXIDE COATING ON STAINLESS 
STEEL PARTS — SPECIFICATION 



UDC 621-794-61 : 669-14-018-8 



© BIS 1991 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

August 1991 Price Group 1 



Metallic and Non-Metallic Finishes Sectional Committee, MTD 20 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Metallic and Non- Metallic Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical 
Engineering Division Council. 

The black oxide coating is intended to be used for providing black surface on stainless steel parts that 
cannot tolerate any dimensional build up. It is also used for decorative purposes and to reduce the 
light reflection from the parts. 

In laying down this standard, due weightage has been given to practices prevailing in this country in 
addition to relating it to international co-ordination among standards and practices prevailing in 
different countries. 

In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from MIL-C-13924 B, US Military 
specihcation. 



IS 13147 : 1991 



Indian Standard 



BLACK OXIDE COATING ON STAINLESS 
STEEL PARTS — SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies the requirements for 
the black oxide coating on stainless steel parts. 

2 REFERENCES 

2.1 The following Indian standards listed below 
are necessary adjuncts to this standard: 
IS No, Title 

9844 : 1981 Method of testing corrosion 

resistance of electroplated and 
anodized aluminium coatings 
by neutral salt spray test 

11826 ; 1986 Recommended practice for 

chemical colouring for engi- 
neering components in general 
and for bicycle components 

3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

3.1 The stainless steel parts may, as far as practi- 
cable, be coated in accordance with IS 11826: 
1986. 

4 COATING REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 Freedom from Defects 

The coating shall be uniform in colour with glossy 
black to dull black appearance depending on the 
condition of the basis metal and it shall cover the 



basis metal completely without any voids or 
breaks. 

4.2 Visual Tests 

Processed parts arc inspected visually under 
strong light. The coating shall show no indication 
of any reddish brown and green smut. 

4.3 Corrosion Test 

Processed parts are washed in distilled water, 
dried with a soft cloth and then subjected to 
5 percent salt-spray for a period of 96 hours. 
When tested in accordance with IS 9844 : 1981. 
At the end of the test, parts shall show no signs of 
basis metal corrosion. 

4.4 Quality of Oxide Coating ( Oxalic Acid Test ) 

Place three drops of 5 percent by volume oxalic 
acid solution on the part under test and the reac - 
tion shall be observed for a period of 8 mmutes . 
Then the part is washed with water and compared 
to Fig. 1 for acceptance. 

A light grey centre with light border colour as in 
Fig. lA indicates poor quality coating. A grey 
black centre with a light border as in Fig. IB 
indicates a border line quality coating. A black 
or dark brown centre with a light border indicates 
a good quality coating as in Fig. IC. 




1A A Poor Quality Coating ib A Borderline Qaality Coating 1C A Good Quality Coating 

Fig. 1 Assessment of Quality of Black Oxide Coatings 



I 



IS 13147 : 1991 



5 SAMPLING 

5.1 Sampling for Production Control 

Statistical quality control is recommended for 
controlling the quality of chemical colouring of 
components. For this purpose, it is recommended 
that the articles that are coloured shall be taken 
from a place in the bath which is likely to give 
light shade and subjected to the test specified 
in 4,2, 4,3 and 4,4. 

5.2 Sampling for Acceptance of a Lot 

For the purpose of this sampling, a lot shall be 
divided into sub-lots consisting of 100 articles or 



part thereof of any such articles, as are coloured 
at one time in the same bath. Two samples shall 
be selected from each sub-lot and subjected to the 
tests specified in 4.2, 4.3 and 4.4. 

5.3 Criteria of Acceptance 

If these samples pass the tests, the sub-lot repre- 
sented by them shall be accepted, [f one or both 
the samples should fail, two further samples shall 
be selected from the same sub-lot and subjected to 
the tests. If both these samples pass the tests, the 
sub-lot shall be considered as conforming to the 
standard. If either of them fails in any of the 
tests, the sub-lot shall be rejected. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of the Indian 
Standards, Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



