UDC

629-114'4

: 621'642'34'038 : 629'13'065

IS : 9290 Indian Standard

- 1979

( Reaffirmed 2000 )

AIRCRAFT

SPECIFICATION FOR FUEL SERVICING VEHICLES
of vehicles for servicing engine and for facilities of for

1. Scope - Specifies the requirements for the design and construction aircraft with standard grades of aviation fuel operated by the vehicle loading the cargo tanksof these vehicles.
Note 1 -Aircraft
requirements

fuel servicing tank vehicles which are used on public highways shall also comply with the statutory for plying on such highways in addition to the stipulations of the Indian Petroleum Manual. of the statutory requirements

any provisions Note 2 - Nothing given in this standard is intended to contravene covering the design, fabrication and use of aircraft fuel servicing vehicles.

2. Terminology 2.1 Aircraft Fuel Servicing Hydrant Vehicle ( Hydrant Dispenser) to transfer fue~l between an aircraft fuel hydrant and an aircraft. -A vehicle equipped with facilities

2.2 Aircraft Fuel Servicing Tank Vehicle ( Fueler ) - Any vehicle ( tank truck, tank fuel trailer, tank semitrailer, tank vehicle) designed for or employed in the transportation or transfer of fuel ir;to or from an aircraft. 2.3 Aircraft of aircraft. 2.4 Baffle-A 2.5 Bulk-head Servicing Ramp or Apron -An area or position at an airport used for the fuel servicing

non liquid-tight -A liquid-tight

transverse transverse refers

partition closoie

in a cargo tank. between compartments fuel of a cargo tank. the reinforcement

2.6 Carcass Saturation -This materials of a hose carcass.

to the condition

where

has permeated

2.7 Cargo TankAny container which has a liquid capacity above 500 litres used for carrying aircraft fuel and mounted permanently or otherwise secured on a tank vehicle. This term does not apply to any container used for the purpose of supplying fuel for the propulsion of the tank vehicle on which the cargo tank is mounted. 2.8 Compartment A liquid tight division in the cargo tank.

2.9 Deadman Control -A device which will not allow the flow of fuel from the system to any hose in the system supplying fuel to the aircraft unless the control Js held open by an operator. 2.10 Deck Platform
tion between

-

A platform

which

is either fixed or movable

to facilitate

the fuelling

connec-

the vehicle

and aircraft.

2.11 Fixed Fueling System-An arrangement of aviation fuel storage, pumps, piping and associated equipment and dispensing hydrants, cabinets and/or pits at an airfield designed to service aircraft from locations established by the installation of the equipment.

2.12

Fueler-

( see Aircraft

Fuel Ser.vicing Tank Vehicle.

) fuel

This does not include fuelling and defuelling of aircraft fuel tanks. 2.13 Fuel Servicing -The transfer operations and testing air&+$ fuel systems during maintenance-and overhaul of aircraft. 2.14 Fuel Servicing Cabinet - A fulty enclosed structure above the surface of the ground it is possible to dispense fuel into aircraft without any additional equipment. 2.25 Fuel Servicing Pit-A pit suitably covered flush with the ramp containing make it possible to dispense fuel into aircraft without additional equipment.

from which

all equipment

which

Adopted

13 June

1979

I .
INDIAN MANAK

@ July 1980, ISI

I

CJP a -

STANDARDS INSTITUTION BHAVAN, 0 BAHARUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 9290 - I 979
2.16 Fuel Storage Facilities - Fuel sto:age and/or both the following ways: facilities for airport installations may be provided in one

~a) Primary storage facilities -Tanks for storage of aviation which are generally located remotely from aircraft servicing

fuel and associated and movement areas.

facilities

b) Operating storage facilitiesWhen provided, these are of smaller capacity than the primary storage facilities and are generally located as close as practical to the aircraft servicing aprons.
2.17 Headand Bulk Head-

A liquid-tight

transverse

closure

at the end of the cargo tank. of fuel only after

2.18 Hydrant the matching 2.19 Pressure

- An outlet in a fixed fuelling system designed to permit the transfer fuel connection on the dispensing equipment is properly attached.

a) b) cl 4

Burst Design

pressure

-This

is the pressure

at which

any

randomly

selected

component

will

rupture.
pressure --The pressure for which a system or component is designed. It shall always be equal or exceed the service pressure which include surge pressure. The design pressure shall never be exceeded except during pressure tests. pressure pressure - The pressure existing in a system under either flow or static pmrnp's maximum no flow head but excluding surge pressures.

Operating Service

condior in

tions against component the system.

-The maximum pressure excluding test pressure to which a system may be subjected. It includes any surge pressure which may be developed

e>Test

pressure -The pressure to which the system or a component of such system is tested to verify the integrity of the system or the component. It may be expressed as a percentage of the service pressure or the design pressure.

2.20 Standard Grades of Aviation Fuel - A fuel of whatever octane rating used in aircraft aviation gasoline and blends of hydrocarbons commonly referred to as Jet Fuels.

including

2.21 Tank Fuel Trailer-A vehicle that is not self-propelled and which has a cargo tank mounted thereon or built as an integral part thereof and used for the transportation of aviation fuel and so constructed that practically all of its weight and load rests on its own wheels. 2.22 Tank or built as that when rests upon
Semitrailer - A vehicle that is not self-propelled, which has a cargo tank mounted thereon an integral part thereof and used for the transportation of aviation fuel and so constructed drawn by a tractor by~means of a fifth wheel connection some part of its weight and load the towing vehicle.

2.23 Tank Truck - Any single self-propelled motor or vehicle thereon, and used for the transportation of aviation fuel. 2.24
Tank Vehicle -Any

equipped

with

a cargo

tank mounted

tank truck, tank fuel trailer or tractor fuel between

and tank semitrailer

combination. the operating

2.25 Transfer Pipeline - Piping used to transfer storage tanks, if any and the hydrant. 3. Design 3.1 Cargo and Constructional
Tanks

the main storage facility,

Requirements

3.1.1 Cargo tanks shall be constructed of mild steel ( low alloy) low carbon ( high tensile) steel and aluminium alloys or any other suitable material as may be approved by the statutory authorities from time to time. The material used shall comply with the specification mutually agreed between The steel tanks shall be suitably lined inside with a non-corrosive the supplier and the purchaser. coating fully compatible with all grades of aviation fuel that are likely to be used. The tank shall be designed to be of maximum cross-section so as to reduce length but shall be of such shape that it It should be of robust construction for the carriage of shall sit on the chassis as low as possible. the designed quantity of fuel without skin or gusset failure occurring in operation.

3.1.1 .I Tanks constructed of aluminium alloys shall be of all welded construction. The welded joints shall be made in accordance with recognized good practice by an inert gas/arc welding process using appropriate electrodes. 2

IS:9290-

1979

3.1 .I.2 At the time of manufacture, every cargo tank shall be tested by a minimum air or hydrostatic pressure of 20 kPa applied to the whole tank or each compartment thereof, if the tanks are compartmented. Such pressure shall be maintained for a period of at least five minutes, during which, if the test is by air-pressure, the entire exterior surface of all the joints shall be coated with a solution of soap and water, heavy oil, or other material suitable for the purpose, foaming or bubbling of which will indicate the pressure of leaks. Hydrostatic pressure, if used, shall be gauged at the top of the tank. The tank shall be inspected at the joints for the issuance of liquid to indicate leaks. Any leakage discovered by either of the methods described, above, or by any other method, shall be deemed as evidence of failure to meet the requirements of this specification. 3.1.2 Cargo tanks piping and connections - Magnesium any portion of an aircraft fuel servicing tank vehicle. 3.1.3 required Bulk heads-Aircraft fuel servicing to have bulk heads or compartments. tank vehicles shall not be used in the construction of

used solely

on an airport

shall

not

be

3.1.4 Baffles - Every cargo tank shall be provided with baffles, the number of which shall be such that the linear distance/liquid capacity between any two adjacent baffles or between any tank head or bulk head and the baffles nearest it, shall not exceed I.5 metres/5 000 litres, whichever is less. ~The cross-sectional area of each baffle shall be not less than 80 percent of the cross-sectional area of the tank and the thickness of such baffles shatl be not less than that required -for heads and bulk heads of the cargo tank in which installed. 3.1.5 Venting of cargo tanks-The tank shall be fitted with manholes, with cover and vents. Each cargo tank shall be provided with a normal vent having a minimum through area of 285 mmz. The pressure vent shall be set to open at not more than 7 kPa pressure and vacuum vents shall be designed to prevent loss of liquid through the vent in case of vehicle upset. If the tank is designed to be loaded or unloaded with the manhole cover/covers closed, the vent or vents shall be designed to limit the vacuum to 7 kPa and the tank pressure to 20 kPa on the basis of maximum product transfer rate. Unless effective protection against overflowing is made to prevent the pressure from exceeding 20 kPa in case of accidental overflowing, the minimum venting capacity for pressure actuated vents shall be 170 m3 of air per hour at 35 kPa. Pressure actuated devices shall be designed so as to prevent leakage of liquid past the device in case of surge or vehicle upset but shall function in case of pressure rise when in upset position. 3.1.5.1 Total capacity for venting - Each cargo tank shall be provided with one or more devices as above with sufficient capacity to limit the tank internal pressure to 35 kPa. If the pressure actuated venting ~does not provide adequate venting additional capacity shall be provided by adding fusible venting devices each having a minimum area of 800 mm2. Fusible vent or vents shall be actuated by elements which operate at a temperature not exceeding 120�C. Not less than two such devices shall At least one such device shall be located close to each end of the cargo be used on any cargo tank. The other vents shall be located near the centre of the tank to minimize tank or tank compartment. surge spillage when the vehicle is stopping or accelerating. Each venting device shall be flow tested in the ranges specified in the applicable preceding paragraphs. The actual rated flow capacity of the vent at the pressure at which it is determined shall The fusible vent shall have its flow determined at 35 kPa differential. be stamped on the device. 3.1.6 Manhole covers - Manhole dome covers shall be provided with a forward mounted operating hinge, self latching catches to hold the cover closed, and fitted with liquid-tight seals or gaskets designed to prevent spillage or leakage from overturn or the weather. Flashing shall be provided around manhole dome covers to prevent spilled fuel from draining near possible sources of ignition including the engine, the engine exhaust system, electrical equipment or into any portion of the vehicle housing auxiliary equipment. The manhole opening shall be protected against overturn damage by rigid member/members firmly fixed to the tank and extending a minimum of 25 mm above any cover, handle, vent opening or projection of the unit. Overturn protection shall be adequately braced to prevent collapse. Where overturn protection creates a trough or pocket apt to collect rain water it shall have a drain that is exterior to the cargo tank. 3.1.7 Pipe lines - All pipe lines for product discharge and intake shall be of adequate cross-section and rated for at least 800 kPa. Elbows and fittings shall be kept to a minimum and where used All pipe lines and fittings shall be of aluminium alloy or any shall Abe of the preformed welding type. Flanged connections and approved flexible couplings shall be provided other suitable material. wherever necessary to facilitate easy servicing and replacement of components and also to avoid Brackets or supports shall be used to provide rigidity to the piping failure due to chassis flexures. and to support it if any section or component is removed for servicing. 3

IS :9290- 1979
All openings in the cargo tank compartments connected to pipe or tubing shall be plugged unless the pipe or tubing is fitted with a spring loaded check valve, a self-closing valve or similar device to prevent the accidental discharge of fuel in case of equipment malfunction or line breakage. On tank fuel trailers or tank semitrailer units the use of a pump on the tractor unit with flexible connections to the trailer shall be prohibited unless the flexible connections are arranged above the liquid level of the tank in order to prevent gravity or siphon discharge in case of break in the connection or piping. 3.1.8 Tank out/et valves-The outlet/outlets of each cargo tanks shall be equipped with a reliable and efficient shutoff valve/valves located inside the shell or in the sump when it is an integral part of the shell and designed so that the valves shall be kept closed except during loading and unloading operations. The operating mechanism for each tank outlet valve shall be adjacent to the fuel delivery system operating controls and shall be arranged so that the outlet valves may be simultaneously and instantly closed in the event of fire or other emergency. There shall also be a secondary control for each shut off valve. The secondary control mechanism shall be ~easily accessible but remote from all openings and discharge faucets. 3.2 Fuel Dispensing
System

3.2.1 The fuel dispensing which would comprise of the pump, flow metres, air eliminator, filter separator and hose reels, shall be suitably mounted on an independent sub-chassis frame which is independent of the vehicle or the trailer chassis and which can be assembled by means of suitable threaded fasteners to the vehicle or trailer chassis. If there are more than one dispensing system, each system shall be provided with an isolating valve at a convenient location so that any one system not in use may be completely isolated from the pressure control valve.

3.2.2 Pump -The fuel dispensing system shall incorporate a pump specially designed and constructed for handling aviation grade fuels. It shall be capable-of withstanding the design and test pressures of the system and deliver the fuel at the rated flow and pressure to aircraft. The pump shall incorporate conducting mechanical seals to avoid fire hazards due to static charges. The pump shall be compact in size and capable of being driven by the chassis/tractor engine or by a separate engine as the case may be depending on the design of the system, The suction and delivery posts of the pump shall be of such sizes to afford a clear liquid way for drawing fuel from the cargo tank and deliver it through the system with minimum pressure losses. 3.2.3 Pressure control valve -The system shall incorporate a pressure control valve ( PCV ) so that fuel is delivered to aircraft at a desired preset pressure. The PCV shall be of either the restricter type or the by-pass type and shall operate on the pressure of the fuel sensed at the end of the hose delivering fuel to the aircraft or by any other means which simulate the pressure obtained at the hose end. The operation of the valve shall be through a calibrated spring air pressure bias or fuel pressure. 3.2.4 Fuel metering equipment - The system shall contain one or more metering equipment that would measure accurately the fuel delivered to aircraft within the limits of accuracy specified by the The meter shall be designed to withstand the fuel system design and statutory authority concerned. test pressures and be capable of handling all grades of aviation fuel and the rated flow. Means shall be provided to indicate the rate of flow of the fuel being delivered to the aircraft, if required by the purchaser. In addition, each cargo tank shall contents of the tank in litres. The dip-stick the statutory authority concerned. be provided with shall be calibrated a calibrated dip-stick indicating the to the required accuracy specified by

3.2.5 Fi/ter[Water separator-The system shall incorporate a fuel filter or a filter-cum-water separator of sufficient capacity and flow rate, so that all fuel delivered to aircraft at a time are filtered to remove solid particles and water to a degree and efficiency as agreed to by the supplier and the purchaser. The filter/water separator body and the elements used shall be suitable for use with all grades of aviation fuel. The~unit shall incorporate a means to measure pressure differential across it. 3.2.6 Air eliminator-An air eliminator shall be provided before remove all traces of air from the fuel flowing through the meters. the fuel metering equipment to

3.2.7 Hose reels - To facilitate storage and ground handling of delivery hoses, one or more hose reels may be incorporated. Each reel shall provide storage for the required length of hose of prescribed diameter. The drum diameter of the reel shall be greater than the minimum diameter of service reeling drums specified in IS : 5797-1970 `Specification for electrically bonded aircraft 4

IS:9290- 1979
Arrangements shall be made for rewinding the hose manually or by power as fuelling rubber hose'. required. The hoses shall be coupled to the hose reel in a manner which will prevent undue bending action or mechanical stress on the hose or hose couplings. 3.2.8 Fuelling hoses - The system shall be provided with one or more hoses of the specified diameter and length. The hoses shall comply with IS : 5797-1970. If required the valve which monitors the flow of fuel from and aircraft fuel servicing vehicle shall have a deadman control which shall be held by the fuel serviceman to permit flow of fuel. The flow control system shall be designed The hose coupling to minimize surge pressure ahead of the flow control valve, when it is closed. connection shall conform to IS : 7264-1974 ' Dimensions for aircraft pressure refuelling connection `. servicing shall not have notches or latches 3.2.9 Nozzles and couplings - Nozzles for overwing They shall also be provided with in the handle which could allow the valve to be locked open. bonding clip and wire for connecting to the aircraft being serviced. Couplings for underwing servicing shall be designed so that they shall be securely seated and locked in the mating connection on the aircraft before the poppet valve is opened. It shall not be possible to disengage the nozzle from the aircraft fitting until the poppet valve is fully closed. 3.2.10 System layout -The provide easy access to different not difficult. layout of the fuel dispensing system shall be compact and shall parts so that servicing, dismantling and re-assembly operations are

All controls, meters and instruments are to be so grouped that fuel dispensing operations is Fuel connections which are liable to be made or broken at fairly controlled by a single operator. regular intervals and in which there is a likelihood of fuel remaining are to be of non-ferrous material preferably gun-metal/bronze conforming to recognised standards. The connections should be so designed that fuel leaks could be easily detected and rectified. Foot-holds, handgrips, access ladders and walkways are to be provided as required. These are to be of the non-slip type. All fuel seals, packings and washers are required to be suitable for use with all grades of aviation gasoline and turbine fuel. shall be located beneath 3.3 Exhaust System - No portion of the exhaust system of the engine(s) or near the servicing platform or any part of the cargo delivery system. Where required, adequate shielding shall be installed so that fuel spillage from the cargo tank vent or overflow systems does not come into contact with the exhaust system(s). Flame engine(s). arrestor(s) of an approved design shall be fitted to the exhaust pipe(s) of the

3.4 Vehicle Fuel System-Vehicle fuel system shall be so designed, constructed and installed as to present no unusual hazard and no part of any fuel tank or container or intake pipeshall project beyond the overall width of any tank vehicle upon which it is mounted. All fuel tanks shall be so arranged as to vent during filling operations and to permit drainage without removal from their mountings. 3.5 Vehicle services. Brakes -Vehicle brakes shall be of acceptable commercial quality for this type of vehicle

Each fuel trailer, and semitrailer shall be equipped with reliable brakes adequate provision shall be made for their efficient operation from the driver's drawing the trailer or semitrailer. If so required suitab!e the vehicle is fuelling/defuelling

on all wheels, and seat of the vehicle

arrangement shall be made so that vehicle brakes are kept applied when an aircraft. This device shall have an over-riding emergency release. shall be firmly and securely recognized good practice. attached to the vehicle

3.6 Fuel Trailers and Semitrailers -Trailers drawing them, in a manner conforming with

Trailer connections shall be such as to prevent the towed vehicle from whipping or swerving from side to side dangerously or unreasonably and shall cause the trailer to follow substantially in the path of the towing vehicle. 3.7 Nectrical System -The electrical system shall incorporate a master isolating switch located in the driver's cab, to conform to petroleum regulations. The circuitry shall be heavily insulated and the wiring shall be so fixed and protected as to reduce as far as possible the risk of damage. The generator, battery, switches and fuzes shall be carried in front of fire resistant screen ahead of the fuel dispensing system and cargo tank. Means of cutting off the current supply close to the battery by a switch shall be provided. All wiring is to be carried out with oil resistant cables encased in 5

`!S : 9z90 - 1979 "
metallic conduits. All circuifsshall have over-current protection. Terminal connections shall be firmly attached with snap-or screw type end fittings. The vehicle shall be provided with lights and other fittings as agreed to between the supplier and.purchaser. .I Electrical service wiring between the- tractor and cargo ta _ trailer or semitreiler vehicle shall be designed for heavy duty service. The cable .shall multi-connector plug terminal mounted on the trailer. The connector shall engage a pos Q device. 3.8 The vehicle 4. Safety shall be provided with suitable deck platform, if re

Requirements

4.1 Electrostatic Protection -The vehicle shall be bonded electrically throughout. The cargo tank, , the fuel dispensing unit, the tractor and the trailers are to be fitted~with positive electrical connections. Earthing spikes and bonding leadswith, end,fittings and length of conductors.shall,ba provided to the Instructions for bonding and earthing are to be mutual agreement of the supplier and purchaser. prominently marked on- the vehicle/trailer. Suitable bonding strips between the ends of ~pipes and unions are to be provided. Earthing aluminium plate for concrete surfaces shall also be provided. 4.2 Fire Protection -The chemical fire extinguisher. that is, fixed chassis/tractor shall be supplied according vehicle shall be adequately protected against The equipment needed in this respect would depend trailer combination and the quantity of fuel carried to the mutual agreement between the supplier and fire by means of dry on the type of vehicle, in the cargo tank, and the purchaser.

4.2.1 Extinguishers shall be mounted in a location remote from probable fire hazards. Extinguishers located in enclosed compartments shall be readily accessible and their location shall be clearly marked in letters at least 50 mm high. 4.2.2 `No smoking' notices shall be prominently displayed on the refueler body on all four sides. followinS perfor-

5. Performance -The system would be capable of fulfilling one or more of `the :-mance requirements as mutually agreed to between the purchaser and the supplser:, _ I I a) To fuel aircraft; ,, _ ."1. b) To defuel aircraft; _ , c) To fill up its own cargo tank from an outside tank by its oyn.pover; _ d) To act as a fuel dispensing e) As a hydrant f) Circulation dispenser: of the product

source, such as an underground and an outside

or overground

system ~between an aircraft, * - ' in the cargo tank; and

source of fuel;

g) To fill up the cargo tank by its own power from barrels. The system shall be so engineered to meet the above chance of entry of extraneous matter into the fuel system. performance requirements * 4' 1 without any

6. Name-Plates - All important comp.onents of the fuel dispensing plates as mutually agreed to between the purctiaser and the supplier.

system shalj bear metal name-

7. Storage Space -Adequate storage spaceshall be provided for storingsafely all loose equipment required to carry out any of the functions given in 5. In addition, storage space shall also be provided for any test equipment required`to be carried with the'vehicle. 8. Gauges and Controls - Gauges and contrqls are to be provided as specified by the purchaser They shall be grouped together and mounted on a conveniently located and agreed to by the supplier. panel so that operations are controhed by one man. * 9. Protective #-Treatment -The' vehicle ' shall `be treated and painted to prevent corrosion by The type of paint used shall be mutually weathering and by contact with-all grades of aviation fuel. agreed to between the supplier and the purchaser. k . .I 0. Testing -The vehicle shall' `be ,subjected between the supplier and the purchaser. .to inspection and testing as mutually agreed to

EXPLANATORY
This standard has been based on the informations Development and Production ( Air ), Ministry of Defence, 6

NOTE
supplied by the Directorate New Delhi., of Technical

Printed

at Delhi

Printers,

Delhi, hdia

