ÉT TAE IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard [ Superseding IS 1476 (Part 1) and IS 15750] 


ater чуйя+ч тета — Raat stie 
чагат fafat 
WNT 2 eR Ten fva ЭЧТ 


Household Refrigerating 
Appliances — Characteristics 
and Test Methods 


Part 2 Performance Requirements 


ICS 97.030; 97.040.30 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM эъ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR Чач, 9 serere TH AMT, 45 fref - 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2021 Price Group 10 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Refrigeration 
and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


These household refrigerating appliances, which are factory-assembled and cooled by internal natural convection 
including mechanical and absorption type (direct cool) or forced air circulation (frost-free), were earlier covered 
in two separate standards that is, IS 1476 (Part 1) and IS 15750 respectively. 


The standard on direct cool refrigerator that is, IS 1476 (Part 1) was first published in 1959 followed by the 
revisions in the years 1971, 1979, and 2000. The standard on frost-free refrigerator that is, IS 15750 was published 
in 2006. 


This standard supersedes IS 1476 (Part 1) : 2000 ‘Performance of household refrigerating appliance — 
Refrigerators with or without low temperature compartment: Part 1 Energy consumption and performance’ and 
IS 15750 : 2006 ‘Household frost-free refrigerating appliances — Refrigerators cooled by internal forced air 
circulation — Characteristics and test methods — Specification’. 


In the light of the development taken place at the international level, the technical committee decided to make a 
composite standard on refrigerator to cover the requirements of both direct cool and frost-free refrigerators. 


This Indian Standard is published in three parts. The other parts in this series are: 
Part] General requirements 
Part 3 Energy consumption and volume 


In this revised standard various larger capacities, construction, and design which have been introduced in 
the Indian market have been covered. In addition to include new types, design, and capacities, the energy 
consumption limits of refrigerators covered in the earlier version of IS 1476 (Part 1) and IS 15750 have been 
modified. 


This standard is based оп ТЕС 62552-2 : 2015 ‘Household refrigerating appliances — Characteristics and test 
methods — Part 2: Performance requirements’ issued by International Electro Technical Commission (IEC) 
except for the following: 


a) Water vapour condensation test specified in Annex D applies to only class ST and T refrigerating 
appliances; and 
b) Specific tolerance limits on the stated or declared value of the manufacturer in respect of the pull-down 
test, cooling capacity test, freezing capacity test, and ice making capacity test have been specified. 
The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex E. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the results of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


Contents 
Page No. 
1 SCOPE Е 1 
2 REFERENCES m 1 
3 TERMS, DEFINITIONS AND SYMBOLS ii 1 
4 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND TESTS ” 1 
5 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 5 2 
6 STORAGE TEST ЫЫ; 2 
7 COOLING CAPACITY TEST s П 
8 FREEZING CAPACITY TEST us 13 
9 AUTOMATIC ICE-MAKING CAPACITY TEST x 17 
ANNEXA PULL-DOWN TEST = 19 
ANNEXB WINE STORAGE APPLIANCES AND COMPARTMENTS; STORAGE TEST .. 20 
ANNEX С TEMPERATURE RISE TEST wi 122 
ANNEX О WATER VAPOUR CONDENSATION TEST ec. 22 
ANNEXE COMMITTEE COMPOSITION . 24 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Fig.1 Location of Packages in Frozen Compartment, Showing Clearances 6 
Fig.2 Location of Test Packages and M-Packages, in Frozen Compartment (1 of 3) 7 
Fig.2 Location of Test Packages and M-Packages, in Frozen Compartment (2 of 3) 8 
Fig.2 Location of Test Packages and M-Packages, in Frozen Compartment (3 of 3) 9 
Fig.3 Storage Test Sequence s 11 
Fig.4 Filling of A Shelf with Test Packages and M-Packages for Cooling Capacity Test ... 14 
Fig. 5 | Condensation Codes we. 3 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Test Summary s 3 
Table2 Compartment Temperatures ot 4 
Table 3. Chill Compartment Storage Load a 4 
Table 4 Requirements for Periods S and E а: 10 
Table 5 — Pull-down Temperatures for Compartments a 20 


Table 6 Humidity Conversions T 23 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


HOUSEHOLD REFRIGERATING APPLIANCES — 
CHARACTERISTICS AND TEST METHODS 


PART 2 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 2) specifies the essential 
characteristics of household refrigerating appliances 
cooled by internal natural convection or forced air 
circulation, and specifies test methods for checking the 
characteristics. 


1.2 This standard describes the methods for the 
determination of performance requirements. Although 
there is some commonality in the set-ups for different 
tests (and so it may be an advantage to apply them all to 
one sample), these are separate tests to evaluate specific 
characteristics of the sample being tested. 


1.3 This standard does not specify a procedure to 
generalise the results from sample test results to a 
prediction of the characteristics of the whole population 
from which that sample was selected. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 


17550 (Part 1) Household refrigerating appliances: 
: 2021 Characteristics and test methods: 
Part 1 General requirements 


17550 (Part 3) 
: 2021 


Household refrigerating appliances: 
Characteristics and test methods: 
Part 3 Energy consumption and 
volume 


3 TERMS, DEFINITIONS AND SYMBOLS 


For the purposes of this standard, the terms, definitions 
and symbols given in IS 17550 (Part 1) shall apply. 


4 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS AND 
TESTS 


4.1 General 


This standard sets out tests to assess the performance of 
household and similar refrigerating appliances. 


4.2 Storage Test 


The storage test is used to establish whether the 
refrigerating appliance is capable of maintaining 
suitable internal storage temperatures in a range of 
ambient conditions defined under the climate classes 
for which it is rated (see 6). 


4.3 Cooling Capacity Test 


The cooling capacity test is used to measure the load 
processing capability of fresh food compartments by 
determining the time to pull-down a specified test load 
from ambient to a specified temperature (see 7). 


4.4 Freezing Capacity Test 


The freezing capacity test is used to measure the load 
processing capability of frozen compartments by 
determining the time to pull-down a specified test load 
from ambient to a specified temperature. This test 1s 
required to establish whether a frozen compartment 
also qualifies for a four-star performance rating (see 8). 


4.5 Automatic Ice-Making Capacity Test 


The ice-making capacity test is used to determine the 
quantity of new ice cubes that can be produced over a 
specified period of time (see 9). 


4.6 Other Tests 


Other tests, as applicable to be performed are given in 
the Annex. 


These tests are as follows: 


a) Pull-down test (Annex A) — This test is performed 
to measure the reserve refrigerating capacity of 
a refrigerating appliance. The time required to 
pull-down the appliance to the temperatures 
specified in Table 5 shall not be more than the 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


value stated by the manufacturer by more than 10 
percent of the latter; 


Wine storage test (Annex B) — This test 
is performed to check compliance with the 
requirements of Part 2 at appropriate ambient 
temperatures for the various climate classes; 


b 


wm 


с 


ме 


Temperature rise test (Annex С) — This test 
is performed to determine the time taken for 
the temperature to rise in the warmest test 
package from —18 °C to —9 °C after the power 
is disconnected. It is applicable to refrigerating 
appliances with one or more three-star or four-star 
compartments; and 


d 


— 


Water vapour condensation test (Annex D) — 
This test is performed to determine the extent of 
water condensation on the external surface of the 
refrigerating appliance under specified ambient 
conditions. 


4.7 Test Summary 


Table 1 provides a summary of the tests to be performed. 


5 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 


Unless otherwise noted, test room set-up and 
instrumentation shall be as specified in Annex A of 
IS 17550 (Part 1). 


Unless otherwise noted, installation and set-up of 
shelves, drawers, bins, flaps and controls, etc. shall be 
as specified in Annex B of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


6 STORAGE TEST 


6.1 Objective 


The purpose of this test is to check that the refrigerating 
appliance is capable of maintaining specified internal 
temperatures at different ambient temperatures. 


Under the conditions specified in this clause 
(clause 6) and at the ambient temperatures for the 
appropriate climate classes as specified in A-3.2.3 of 
IS 17550 (Part 1), the refrigerating appliance shall be 
capable of maintaining, simultaneously, the required 
compartment temperatures (within the permitted 
temperature deviations during the defrost and recovery 
period) as given in Table 2. 


To meet these test requirements, there shall be, for 
each ambient temperature, at least one control setting 
at which all compartments meet the specified internal 
temperatures. The control(s) however, may be adjusted 
for testing at different ambient. 

NOTE — Because the frozen compartment loading is largely 


the same as that for the freezing capacity test, there may be an 
advantage in doing these tests consecutively. 


6.2 Preparation of Refrigerating Appliance 


The test room ambient shall be as specified in A-3.2.3 
of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


The refrigerating appliance shall be installed in the test 
room in accordance with Annex B of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


Refrigerating appliances with — anti-condensation 
heater(s) which are permanently on during normal use 
shall be tested with the heater(s) operating. 


Anti-condensation heaters which can be manually 
controlled by the user shall be switched on and, if 
adjustable, they shall be set at their maximum heating 
rate. 


Anti-condensation heaters which are automatically 
controlled shall be allowed to operate normally. 


The empty refrigerating appliance should be set up and 
operated until it has reached equilibrium at or close to 
the temperatures specified in Table 2. 


Any automatic icemaker shall be configured so that 
no new ice is made during the test, but shall otherwise 
remain operational. However, connection to a water 
supply may be omitted if it can be demonstrated that the 
absence or presence of a connection to a water supply 
would make no difference to the results of this test. 


6.3 Air Temperature Sensor Location and Test and 
M-Package Loading 


6.31  Unfrozen Compartments (Except Chill 


Compartment and Wine Storage Compartment) 


For determining the storage temperatures of these 
compartments, air temperature sensors shall be located 
in accordance with D-2.2 of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


NOTE — See Annex B, Wine storage appliances and 
compartments; storage test. 


6.3.2 Chill Compartments 


6.3.2.1 General 


АП test packages and M-packages shall be as specified 
in C-2 b) of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


For determining the storage temperature of any chill 
compartment, the storage load shall be in accordance 
with 6.3.2.2. 


The temperature Т; (see Table 2) shall be measured 
in M-packages positioned or suspended so that their 
largest surface is horizontal. They may be positioned 
directly on the floor of the compartment/drawer but 
shall always be at least 15 mm away from all walls and 
ceilings and from the other packages of the test load. 


In these compartments, M-packages shall be placed in 
diagonally opposite corners. 


In the case of a compartment with special subdivisions 
(shelves, etc.) which are part of the design, if the 
dimensions are too small to allow the horizontal 
positioning of the M-packages, it 1s permissible to 
position them vertically. 


If the dimensions are too small to accommodate an 
M-package (for example, in door shelves), a special 


2021 


IS 17550 (Part 2) 


-g xeuuy ur poyroeds зле s1ojoure1ed 159] оделој5 IUM 6 


"зопорозола әзе} золпрозола 159] әш *sonpoooud 1591 [enprarpur оу pue o[qe] srt ur ejep поомјод Aouedojosrp Auk Jo juoAe од u Z 
“(1 Hed) OSSLI SI ut L'E 225 '51од 45 jo suonrugop 104 | 


SALON 
(ç med) OSSLI SI Ut 1 AQEL ш se so1nje1oduro) 1591 Аблоџо > dwa [ети] L pue LS 
зопјел үетиш p|ou ој, ом вәӘехов4 IO} Do TE uonesuopuo;) q xouuy (пл 
Do 81- poytoods зом dwa [еттш 
Кио 
sjuour1eduioo 2281-1904 189) 9821015 әш 10) SV sogexoeq 2o ST esu шә, 2 xouuy (IA 
Oo £t dwa [еттш 
Kquo [eur ом sogexoeq Do £t имор- V Xouuy (^ 
UIDUITUTUI/UIRUTTXE N C [QLL 10] SY dug [еги] 
ом ом sogexoeq et Sup[eur-oot omy 6 osne[) (A1 
UIDUITUTUI/UIRUITXE AT pounseour JON C GEL dwa [еги] 
[eur pue uorsinoxo ѕәд 576 ом 5574 Kquo soSexoed-[q sogexoeq 2o ST Ároedeo Surzoo1, g әвпе| 2 (ш 
ош 
шпипшш/ә8еләлу /атпилхеуу с ALL ASOF t+ TAL dwg [еги] 
Ашо euy рео] 1591 104 ом sogexoeq Do ST Аповдео Surjoog / osne (п 
хе чвор 302150] WoW dwa [еги] 
зопјел (еп рјоц ој, SOA ON SOR ON soseyoeg Snore, о821015 9 әвпе|2) (т 
ар (01) (6) (8) ш (9) (s) (p) (£) (0) (D 
poj1ejs seu jso] 193j€ 1836 811310) 
зупошолтђом әлпҙеләбшәт, y pue ç Jejg у puc р 186 0197 THO poog uso1q pue &ngueq шәташу 1591, pue xouuy/asne[.) ‘ON IS 


(py Əsnp]O ) 
Алешшп 1591, ү әче]. 


IS 17550 (Раг%2): 2021 


Table 2 Compartment Temperatures 


( Table 1) 
SI C 
No. 
Compartment type 
Fresh Food Three-star Two-star One-star Zero- Chill Cellar Pantry 
and Four-star star 
(0 (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
i) Tw Ту Ta Tia Tews Тез Те Та Та T eini Toma 
H) OST) Tom <+4 <= 18 ==]2 <-6 <0 BST gets %2<1., %14<7,,,5%20 
1; 3 <+8 <+14 
m 
average average maximum maximum maximum average instantaneous average average 


а The superscripts attached to the symbol T correspond to the three-star and four-star, two-star or one-star compartment temperature. 


> During a defrost and recovery period, these storage temperatures of frost-free refrigerating appliances are permitted to rise by no more 


than 3 K. 


NOTE — For definitions of symbols, see 3.7 in IS 17550 (Part 1). 


support shall be used to position the M-package next 
to the shelf and as close as possible to the door liner. 


The temperature of the chill compartment is the 
instantaneous temperature of any M-package in 
that compartment. The temperatures and conditions 
specified in Table 2 shall apply. 


6.3.2.2 Chill compartment storage load 


The compartment shall be loaded with the number of 
packages specified in Table 3. 


There shall always be at least two M-packages and test 
packages may be replaced by M-packages. 


Table 3 Chill Compartment Storage Load 
( Clause 6.3.2.2) 


SI No. Volume (У) of Chill Compartment Number of 
0 Packages 
(в) (2) (3) 
i) V<10 2 
ii) 10</<20 3 
iii) 20</<30 4 
іу) 30<V<40 5 
у) 40 < У < 50 6 
vi) 50<V<60 7 
vii) 60<V<70 8 
viii) 70</<80 9 
іх) у> 80 10 


6.3.3 Frozen Compartments/Sections 


6.3.3.1 General 


Temperatures shall be measured in M-packages, which 
are distributed throughout the load of test packages as 


specified in the test package placement (6.3.3.3). They 
shall be placed as specified in 6.3.3.4. 


The temperature of each section, or compartment, 
is the maximum temperature of any M-package in 
that section or compartment. The temperatures and 
conditions specified in Table 2 shall apply. 


6.3.3.2 Packages 


All packages (test packages and M-packages) shall be 
as specified in Annex C of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


The packages shall have previously been brought to 
the approximate compartment temperature as set out in 
Table 2. 


Wetting of packages to freeze them together is not 
permitted but to keep packages aligned in a stack, they 
may be strapped together with non-metallic strapping. 


The use of spacers to maintain free air spaces between 
stacks of packages is permissible provided that the 
spacers are of the smallest practicable cross-section and 
of low thermal mass and conductivity and are placed 
in such a way that they do not significantly interfere 
with normal air circulation. A few 15 mm diameter 
spherical plastic beads threaded on vertical ties 
strapping stacks of packages together would meet these 
requirements. 


6.3.3.3 Package placement 


6.3.3.3.1 General 
Packages shall be placed as follows: 


a) The compartment (including any door storage) 
shall be filled with as many packages as possible 
while still complying with the air passage and 
clearance requirements in 6.3.3.3.2 and 6.3.3.3.3; 


b) Packages оп shelves shall be placed so that the 
front of the front row is in line with the front of 
the shelf and they shall be arranged symmetrically 
about the front-to-back centre line of the shelf. 
Where lack of symmetry in the compartment 
makes this impossible, the stacking shall be as 
symmetrical as possible; 


с 


ме 


Stacks shall be made directly on each horizontal 

surface intended for storage (see Fig. 1 and 2). The 

packages shall be stacked vertically ( that is, with 

each package fully covering the one below with 

no off-sets in the stacks). 

1) Except for door storage, the packages shall be 
placed with their largest surface horizontal. 


Shelves with ribs, etc. are considered to be 
horizontal surfaces. If necessary, packers may be 
used in shelf depressions to stabilise stacks; 


d 


М7 


Packages in door storage shall be placed so that the 
free air spaces between the packages and the inner 
surface of the door and between the packages and 
the retainer are equal. 


1) For door storage, if there is not enough space 
to place packages horizontally they shall be 
placed vertically. If there is sufficient height 
available packages placed vertically shall be 
stacked (see Fig. 2Е). 


If required, because of the bottom shape of the 
door storage, minimal packaging may be used to 
keep the packages central and vertical; 


e) When the vertical surface is the inner surface of a 
door, the stacks shall be loaded as follows: 


1) ifthere is a marked load limit line, the packages 
shall be loaded up to that line (see Fig. 1A); 
and 


2) if there is no load limit line, but a natural load 
limit, the packages shall be loaded up to that 
limit (see Fig. 1B). 

Internal doors, edges of shelves, baskets and flaps 

are considered natural load limits; 


f) When the intersection of a horizontal loading 
surface and a vertical surface is radiused, the 
bottom package of any stack shall be placed in 
direct contact with the horizontal loading surface 
(see Fig. 1E); 


If a subdivision is provided specifically for 
non-automatic making and storing of ice and 


wa 


5 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


is not removable without the use of tools, the 
ice cube trays shall be filled with water, and the 
contents frozen and placed in position before the 
compartment is loaded with packages; otherwise, 
the ice cube trays and the subdivisions shall be 
removed and the whole compartment loaded with 
packages; and 


h) In a refrigerating appliance fitted with an 
automatic icemaker, any dedicated ice storage 
bin shall remain in place and be filled with 
packages. 


6.3.3.3.2 Side clearance 


Minimum clearances of 15 mm shall be calculated 
from the nominal dimensions of the test packages and 
shall be left between adjacent stacks of packages and 
between package stacks and the compartment walls 
and ducts etc. (see Fig. 1). As far as practicable, spaces 
between packages shall be equal across each horizontal 
dimension. 


Where the storage is in containers, as far as the internal 
radiuses allow, the packages shall be stacked right up to 
the internal walls of the containers. 


Where packages, when frozen, are slightly larger than 
the nominal dimensions, the actual air spaces may be 
less than 15 mm in some cases. Refer to Annex C of 
IS 17550 (Part 1) for permitted tolerances on package 
dimensions. 


6.3.3.3.3 Top clearance 


The vertical clearance between the upper face of the 
highest package and the load limit, the shelf or the 
horizontal surface situated immediately above shall 
be less than 60 mm but not less than 10 mm (that is, 
10 mm < clearance < 60 mm). 


Similarly, for a top-opening type of compartment 
without a load limit line, the vertical clearance between 
the upper face of the highest package and the inner 
surface of the lid above shall be less than 60 mm but not 
less than 10 mm ( that is, 10 mm < clearance < 60 mm). 


The only exception is that for compartments with a 
height of less than 60 mm which have been claimed 
as volume, the vertical clearance between the 
upper edge of the highest package and the horizontal 
surface situated immediately above may be less 
than 10 mm (but the package shall still not touch the 
ceiling). 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


MARKED LOAD NATURAL LOAD 
LIMIT LIMIT 
1A SIDE VIEW - MARKED LOAD LIMIT 1B SIDE VIEW - NATURAL LOAD LIMIT 


CONTAINERS/ 
DRAWERS 


SIDE VIEW - NO SHELVES FRONT VIEW - NO SHELVES TOP VIEW - NO SHELVES 


1E LOADING ON HORIZONTAL SURFACE ONLY 


All horizontal dimensions marked shall be 215 mm. 
All vertical clearances shall be >10 mm апа <60 mm. 


Fic. 1 LOCATION OF PACKAGES IN FROZEN COMPARTMENT, SHOWING CLEARANCES 


6.3.3.4 Measurement package placement 


6.3.3.4.1 Front opening compartments 


M-packages shall replace test packages as indicated in 
Fig. 2A, B, C, D, and E. 


The general arrangement is to place two M-packages in 
diagonally opposite corners in the top layer and in the 
opposite two diagonally opposite corners in the bottom 
layer. 


If a front-opening compartment has an opening height 
of | meter or greater, an M-package shall replace a test 
package at the geometric mid-point of the front stacks. 


Where the compartment is at the bottom of the cabinet 
and there is a compressor step, another M-package 
shall replace the lowest test package that is most nearly 
directly above the compressor. 


Where there are test packages in door storage, an 
M-package shall replace the topmost test package 
that is the opposite side of the cabinet from the front 
M-package on the top shelf. Another shall replace 
the lowest test package in the door storage that is the 
opposite side from the lowest front M-package. If 
the door storage space is over 1 m high, the middle 


TMP 

TMP 
UG, 1 
xa TMP. 
= 
2 
= TMP, 
a^ 
za 


SIDE VIEW FRONT VIEW 


2A WIDTH « 245 mm 
ТМР, 


LLQ LB A 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


front M-package shall be placed in the corresponding 
position in the door storage rather than in the cabinet 
itself (position TMP.. rather than TMP, in Fig. 2E). 


Where it is not possible to place M-packages in the 
numbers or positions specified, they shall be loaded in 
numbers and positions as nearly as practicable to the 
specified location and in positions which will provide 
an equivalent result. 


If a compartment is too small to accommodate the 
specified M-packages with the required clearances, 
then fewer packages, as appropriate, shall be used. 


In all cases where the number or location of 
M-packages differs from that specified, the details of 
the adopted alternative shall be recorded for any test 
reporting. 


6.3.3.4.2 Top opening compartments including chest 


freezers 


M-packages shall replace test packages in the four 
corners and centre top, centre bottom and on top of the 
compressor. If there is no compressor step this package 
shall be placed in the bottom corner or end position 
which is likely to be warmest (see Fig. 2F and 2G). 


SIDE VIEW FRONT VIEW 


2B 245 mm € WIDTH « 360 mm 


TMP, TMP, — DOOR 


ШЕ! 


VA A AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV. 


7 
2 
7 
Й 
Й 
Z 
— 


= 


TMP, 
SIDE VIEW Е 


FRONT VIEW a: 


2C FULL WIDTH COMPARTMENT WITH DOOR STORAGE 


Fic. 2 Location or TEST PACKAGES AND M-PACKAGES, IN FROZEN COMPARTMENT (1 OF 3) 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


FRONT VIEW 


SIDE VIEW 


2D FULL WIDTH COMPARTMENT WITH FIXED ICE CUBE TRAY RACKS, ICE 
BINS WITH MIRROR M - PACKAGE POSITIONS 


SNIN3dO 


Ë 


FRONT VIEW 


SIDE VIEW 


2 E TALL COMPARTMENT SHOWING MID-HEIGHT M - PACKAGE ADDED 


Fic. 2 Location OF TEST PACKAGES AND M-PACKAGES, IN FROZEN COMPARTMENT (2 OF 3) 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


TMP 
10 
TMP TMP, 
An LLL. 
TMP. [e ez is % TMP, 
| | 
TMP 
1 L 11 
TMP 
TMP, 13 
~ 
TMP44 
2 F CHEST FREEZER 
TMP о 
TMP, = 
“<%“%%%%е е 22 Ж А “А 
t ms TMP, @ 
А <$ 
7 
ТМР,; 7 
LL TMPis ЕСЕ И 
= ЖЖ Ж 
TMP, , 
2 G CHEST FREEZER ( STEPPED LINER ) 
Key to Fig. 2 TMP; = alternative location for TMP, when a 
Front opening compartments tall compartment has door storage. 
TMP = top front left? M-package Chest freezers and other top opening compartments 
x 1 
TMP, = top back right* М-раскаве TMP, - top left front M-package 
TMP, = bottom front right? M-package TMP; = top left back M-package 
TMP, = bottom back Іей" M-package ТМР = top right front M-package 
TMP, = compressor step M-package TMP,, = top right back M-package 
TMP, = door top right* M-package TMP,, = centre top 
(right when the door is shut) TMP, = centre bottom 
TMP, - door bottom left* M-package TMP,, = above the compressor or bottom 
(left when the door is shut) corner or end likely to be warmest 
TMP, = mid height, mid width package when 


opening height > 1m 
а Ifasymmetry is such that it is better to put TMP, in the top front right corner (for example as in Fig. 2D, then all other M-packages shall 
also be swapped to the opposite side (i.e. all “lefts” become “rights” and all “rights” become “lefts’’) 


Left and right are from the viewpoint of the front of the cabinet with the door shut. 


Fic. 2 Location ОР TEST PACKAGES AND M-PACKAGES, IN FROZEN COMPARTMENT (3 OF 3) 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


6.4 Test Procedure 


6.4.1 Overview 


Once all temperatures are in compliance with Table 2, 
the test period is usually up to about 24 h long. A “pass” 
requires temperatures to be in compliance with Table 2 
(including allowed excursions) throughout the entire 
test period and average temperatures of each package in 
a 3 h block at the end (period Ë) to not be significantly 
warmer than their average temperature in the 3 h block 
at the start (period S) (see Fig. 3). 


If the refrigerating appliance has a defrost control 
cycle at least one defrost and recovery period has to be 
included between the periods 5 and Е. 


6.4.2 Details 


The test shall start after all temperatures are in 
compliance with Table 2. 


Table 4 specifies where periods S and Е are located and 
their lengths. 


For refrigerating appliances with irregular cycles, the 
lengths of periods S and E and time between them may 
be increased. 


6.4.3 Compliance Criteria 


Throughout the entire test period all temperatures 
shall be in compliance with Table 2 (including allowed 
defrost and recovery period excursions). 


The average temperature of no package in period E shall 
be more than 0. 2 K higher than its average temperature 
in period 5. 


6.5 Storage Temperature 


The refrigerating appliance shall maintain 
simultaneously, the required storage temperatures in the 
different compartments (and the permitted temperature 
deviations during the defrost and recovery period) as 
given in Table 2. 


6.6 Data to be Recorded 
The following data shall be recorded for each test (as 
applicable): 

a) The ambient temperature; 


b) The setting(s) of any user-adjustable temperature 
control device(s) and any other user-adjustable 
control(s), damper(s) etc.; 


Table 4 Requirements for Periods S and E 
( Clause 6.4.2 ) 


SI Item Are there Without Defrost With more than One Defrost With only one Defrost 
No. Temperature Control Cycles Control Cycles Starting within Control Cycle Starting 
Control a 24 h test within a 24 h Test 
Cycles? 
(0 (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) Length of No Each period shall be at least 3 h long 
periodus and. Yes Each period shall consist of the same integral number of temperature control cycles 
totalling not less than 3 h. 
ii) Location of No Any convenient time Period 5 ends just before a defrost and recovery period begins. 
period S Yes 
ii) Location of No Period Е ends at least Period £ ends just before the Period £ ends at least 24 h 
period Е 24 h after period S beginning of the last defrost after period 5 begins and 
begins and recovery period that begins before the beginning of the 
within 24 h of the start of next defrost and recovery 
period S period 
Yes Period Е ends with Period Е ends with the Period Е ends with the 


the conclusion of a 
temperature control 


cycle that is in progress 


at least 24 h after the 


beginning of period 5 


conclusion of the last 
temperature control cycle 
completed before the beginning 
of the last defrost and recovery 
period that begins within 24 h 
from the start of period S 


conclusion of a temperature 
control cycle that is in 
progress at least 24 h after 
period S begins and before 
the beginning of the next 
defrost and recovery period 


EXAMPLE 1 — For a refrigerating appliance with a defrost control cycle of 10 h, if period S is 3 h long, the second defrost and recovery period will 
start 13 h from the beginning of the test and the third will start 23 h from the beginning of the test. Thus, the test will include two complete defrost 


control cycles and end about 23 h after period S begins. 


EXAMPLE 2 — For a refrigerating appliance with a defrost control cycle of 11 h, if period 5 is 3 h long, the second defrost and recovery period will 
start 14 h from the beginning ofthe test and the third would start 25 h from the beginning ofthe test. Thus, the test will include only one complete defrost 


control cycle and end about 14 h after period 5 begins. 


EXAMPLE 3 — For a refrigerating appliance with a defrost control cycle of 22 h, if period S is 3 h long, the second defrost and recovery period would 
start 25 h from the beginning of the test. Thus, the test will include only one complete defrost control cycle and end about 24 h after period S begins. 


10 


А5 5НОКТ 

AS POSSIBLE 
REFERENCE 
TEMPERATURE 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


TEMPERATURE RISE 
DURING DEFROST AND 
RECOVERY 


ш 
x 
2 
т — d 
Ini PERIOD S TIME ABOVE PERIOD E 
š n CONTROL REFERENCE n CONTROL 
ш CYCLES > 3h CYCLES > 3h 
T package. ies T package. ict 0.2 К 
TIME 


Fic. 3 STORAGE TEST SEQUENCE 


c) The value of the fresh food storage temperature 
Т апа the values of 7, ,Т, and T, ; 


d) For frozen compartments the values of the 
maximum  temperature(s) of the warmest 
M-package [see k)] during period 5 (reference 
temperature), the duration of the temperature 
rise above the reference temperature during the 
defrost and recovery period and the maximum 
temperature rise above the reference temperature 
during the defrost and recovery period; 

The average temperature and the maximum 
temperature for each M-package in period E and 
period S; 


e 


— 


The value of the zero-star storage temperature 
Ts and the values of d.d ss апат. ; 


zàm? 
The value ofthe maximum and minimum recorded 
chill compartment Т and the values of T... for 
each of the M-packages; 


~ 


5 


h) The value of the cellar compartment T „and the 
values of T, , T, , T. , as appropriate; 


clm ` c2m ^ c3m’ 
j) The value of the pantry compartment 7 s and the 
values of T  , T, , Т. , as appropriate; 


ріп” ` p2m ^ p3m? 
k) Adiagram of the storage plan showing locations of 
test packages and M-packages in all compartments 

as applicable; 


m) A diagram or tabulation of the location of the 
M-package with the highest maximum temperature 


in each of these compartments and in any two-star 
section, and the location of the M-packages with 
the highest maximum temperature during any 
temperature deviation as a result of the defrost 
control cycle; and 


n 


wm 


The rating of the compartment (or parts of 
compartments) by type. 


7 COOLING CAPACITY TEST 


7.1 Objective 


The purpose of this test is to measure the cooling 
capability of fresh food compartments by determining 
the time for a load of 4.5 kg per 100 1 of volume to be 
cooled from + 25 °C to + 10 °C. 


7.2 Set-up Procedure 


7.2.1 Ambient Temperature 


The ambient temperature shall be 25 °C [see A-3.2.3 of 
IS 17550 (Part 1)]. 


7.2.2 Installation 


The refrigerating appliance shall be installed in 
accordance with Annex B of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


Refrigerating appliances with — anti-condensation 
heater(s) which are permanently on during normal use 
shall be tested with the heater(s) operating. 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


Anti-condensation heaters which can be manually 
controlled by the user shall be switched on and, if 
adjustable, they shall be set at their maximum heating 
rate. 


Anti-condensation heaters which are automatically 
controlled shall be allowed to operate normally. 


All internal accessories supplied with the refrigerating 
appliance shall be in their respective positions. 


Before the test load is added, all compartments shall 
be empty. Their temperatures shall be determined as 
specified in Annex D of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


After stable operating conditions have been attained, 
for all compartments except for the fresh food 
compartment (see 7.3), the temperatures shall be in 
accordance with Table 2 with the following exceptions: 


a) The average starting temperature of any 
compartment(s) with no lower temperature 
limit(s) specified in Table 2 shall be no more than 
2 K below the target temperature; 

b) In the case of a refrigerating appliance where the 

compartment temperatures cannot be adjusted 

independently, if such a setting is not possible, the 
non-complying compartments below the bottom 
limit shall be set to be as warm as possible; and 


For the frozen compartments, the target 
temperatures shall be reached by the average 
compartment temperatures (Тада) instead of the 
warmest temperatures of the M-packages. 


с) 


7.2.3 Adjustment of Compartments 


Where the volumes of a cellar or chill compartment and 
the fresh food compartment can be adjusted by the user 
in relation to each other, the fresh food compartment 
shall be adjusted to its greatest possible volume. This 
volume is used as a basis for the test. 


7.2.4 Arrangement of Shelves 


If adjustable, a shelf shall be positioned at each of three 
levels so that the centres of M-packages placed directly 
on the shelves (or bottom of the baskets etc.) have the 
smallest possible vertical distance to the temperature 
measurement points TMP,, TMP, and TMP, as 
specified in Annex D of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


Packages shall not be placed in vegetable drawers, 
crispers or similar containers. However, when drawers 
and/or bins wholly or predominantly occupy the space 
within a fresh food compartment the bottoms of the 
drawers or bins shall be regarded as shelves. Packages 
shall be placed within these drawers or bins in positions 
specified below. 
NOTE — For compartments without vegetable drawers, 
crispers or similar containers, the bottom of the inner container 
or any divider(s) separating compartments is considered to be 
the lowest shelf. 


12 


If no appropriate position can be found for 3 levels in 
refrigerating appliances with little height, for example 
box evaporators as shown in a) of Fig. 13 of IS 17550 
(Part 1) only levels TMP, and TMP, shall be used for 
testing. 


Shelves with adjustable positions which are not used 
for the loading shall be distributed uniformly in 
the refrigerating appliance with care taken that the 
positions selected have as little influence as possible on 
the cooling time of the packages. 


A minimum vertical distance of 15 mm shall be 
maintained between the packages and any shelf 
(or basket) located above them. 


7.3 Test Procedure 


7.3.1 General 


The fresh food compartment shall have a mean 
temperature of T. — + 4 °C + 0.5 K at stable operating 
conditions. If the mean temperature cannot be adjusted 
within these limits, the result shall be determined 
from two measurements by interpolation, whereby 
the temperature during one test shall be colder and the 
temperature during the other test shall be warmer than 
the target temperature. The difference between the two 
test temperatures shall not be greater than 4 K. 


Except as in the paragraph below changes of the 
settings of the control devices are not permitted once 
stable temperatures complying with Table 2 have been 
reached at the beginning of the test. 


If the refrigerating appliance is provided with a 
“quick cooling” (fast cooling) function this should be 
activated, according to the instructions, at the moment 
of inserting the load. 
NOTE — To qualify as a “quick cooling” function, the 
operation of the function will automatically terminate at a later 
time. Manually setting the thermostat colder and then manually 
setting it warmer at a later time, does not qualify as a” quick 
cooling” function. 
Test packages and M-packages, as specified in Annex C 
of IS 17550 (Part 1), shall be used for loading. 


Before insertion, the test packages and M-packages 
shall be stabilised at a temperature of + 25 °C + 0.5 K. 


For models with defrost control cycles, the packages 
should be added when stability has been regained and 
temperature criteria met after a defrost and recovery 
period. The test should not overlap a defrost and 
recovery period. 


The packages shall be placed quickly into the 
compartment. Where required by the loading, the 
measuring devices for measuring points TMP , TMP, 
and TMP, may be removed or moved aside. 


The temperatures of the M-packages shall be recorded 
until the arithmetic mean of the instantaneous 


temperatures of all M-packages has reached + 10 °C. 
The time required to reach this temperature shall be 
recorded. 


7.3.2 Positioning of the Load in the Fresh Food 
Compartment 


The loading shall be 4.5 kg/100 | volume of the fresh 
food compartment. The calculated load shall be rounded 
to the nearest 0.5 kg. 


When possible, the same number of packages shall be 
allocated to each shelf. Where the number of packages 
to be distributed is not an exact multiple of the number 
of shelves, any extra packages shall be allocated one 
per shelf starting from the bottom, that is the difference 
between the final loadings on different shelves shall not 
be greater than one package. 


The packages shall be placed horizontally in the 
refrigerating appliance (that is, with their greatest 
area in direct contact with the appropriate shelf 
(or compartment floor or bin or basket bottom). 


As far as practicable, spaces between packages shall 
be equal across each horizontal dimension. A minimum 
side-to-side and front-to-back clearance of 15 mm 
shall be maintained between packages and between 
packages and walls or solid-wall containers. Dedicated 
ventilation openings in the shelves shall not be covered. 
The packages shall not extend beyond the edges of the 
shelves. 


The first layer of packages shall be distributed evenly 
across the width and depth of each shelf and arranged 
symmetrically about the front-to-back centreline 
(see Fig. 4). Where lack of symmetry makes this 
impossible, the loading shall be as symmetrical as 
possible. 


If the loading at any level is physically prevented from 
being arranged as specified (as, for example, if a layer 
were required at a level where storage provided by 
two equal width bins would prevent the placement of 
a central row, or where there is less than 360 mm shelf 
depth in front of a compressor step) then alternative 
positions shall be selected which most nearly match 
those specified. The alternative positions selected shall 
be recorded. 


Package shall be arranged in, at most, a 
3 x 3 configuration, that is no more than nine packages 
shall be placed in any one layer. 


If the maximum allowed allocation of packages for 
the first layer on any shelf has been made, and further 
packages are still required to be placed on that shelf, a 
second layer shall follow the same stacking sequence 
as for the first layer. Packages in any subsequent layers 
shall be stacked vertically, that is with each package 
fully covering the one below with no off-sets in the 
stacks. 


13 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


NOTE — The text in this sub-clause describes how the 
package positions are selected, not necessarily the sequence in 
which they are loaded for a test. 


7.3.3 M-packages 


Unless the total loading is less than 3 kg, six M-packages 
shall be used for all types of refrigerating appliances. 
If the total loading is 3 kg or less, M-packages alone 
shall be used. A maximum of two M-packages shall be 
placed in the bottom layer of each of the three levels. 


For a loading of more than 3 packages the M-packages 
shall be arranged diagonally at the outer positions of 
loading as in Fig. 4. 

The M-packages shall be used in the bottom layers only 
of relevant levels. Any further layer required shall be 
made up of test packages only. 

Diagonally opposite positions for M-packages shall be 
chosen alternately for shelves positioned directly one 
above the other. 


7.4 Data to be Recorded 
The following data shall be recorded: 
a) Load mass, in kg; 
b) Volume of the fresh food compartment used for 
testing; 
c) Cooling time, in hours (to one decimal place); 
d) Any shelf, drawer or bin positions which differ 
from those specified; 
e) Any package positions which differ from those 
specified; and 
f) Settings of any “quick cooling” functions used. 


7.5 Compliance Requirement 


The cooling time shall not be more than 10 percent of 
the value stated by the manufacturer. 


8 FREEZING CAPACITY TEST 


8.1 Objective 


The purpose of this test is to measure the freezing 
capacity of freezer compartment(s). If the capacity is 
great enough the compartment(s) may also be rated as a 
four-star compartment(s). 


8.2 Method Overview 


Apart from space for the light load, ballast packages 
are loaded into the frozen compartment(s) as for the 
storage test (see 6). The refrigerating appliance is 
operated till temperatures are stable and in compliance 
with Table 2. Then a load of packages at + 25 °C is 
added. This is the so-called light load representing a 
food load to be processed. It is 3.5 kg/100 | of volume 
for compartments operating at —18 °C. The time to 
freeze this load to — 18 °C is measured. When this can 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ұл “а Ж. 


ALL DIMENSIONS MARKED SHALL BE > 15 mm 


Fic. 4 FILLING oF A SHELF WITH TEST PACKAGES AND M-PACKAGES FOR COOLING CAPACITY TEST 


14 


be achieved in no more than 24 ћ and other maximum 
temperature-excursion conditions are met, a four-star 
compartment rating may be claimed. 

NOTE — Because the frozen compartment loading is largely 


the same as for the storage test, there may be an advantage in 
doing these tests consecutively. 


8.3 Set-up Procedure 


8.3.1 Ambient Temperature 


The ambient temperature shall be 25 °C [see A-3.2.3 of 
IS 17550 (Part 1)]. 


8.3.2 Preparation of the Refrigerating Appliance 


8.3.2.1 General 


The refrigerating appliance shall be installed according 
to Annex B of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


If the configuration of the refrigerating appliance can be 
changed by the user, the configuration with the greatest 
volume at the lowest temperatures shall be used for this 
test. 


Refrigerating appliances with — anti-condensation 
heater(s) which are permanently on during normal use 
shall be tested with the heater(s) operating. 


Anti-condensation heaters which can be manually 
controlled by the user shall be switched on and, if 
adjustable, they shall be set at their maximum heating 
rate. 


Anti-condensation heaters which are automatically 
controlled shall be allowed to operate normally. 


The empty refrigerating appliance should be set up and 
operated until it has reached equilibrium at, or close to, 
the temperatures specified in Table 2. 


8.3.2.2 Measurement of temperature of chill 
compartment and all compartments operating above 
0 ?C 

During the test, the chill compartment temperature is 
not measured, but it shall be loaded with test packages 
as for the storage temperature measurement (see 
6.3.2). For determining the storage temperature of 
the compartments normally operating above 0 ?C, 
measurement points shall be as per Annex D of 
IS 17550 (Part 1) but with M-packages used instead of 
cylinders. 


8.3.3 Loading of Refrigerating Appliance 
8.3.3.1 Frozen compartment(s) — Ballast load 


8.3.3.1.1 General 


Apart from space for the light load in the appropriate 
– 18 °C compartment(s), ballast packages are brought to 
the approximate compartment temperatures and loaded 
into the frozen compartment(s) as for the storage test 
(see 6). 


15 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


In the -18 9С compartment(s), up to 3 packages of 
the ballast load may be left out to make room for each 
package of light load that is to be accommodated. 


If the instructions indicate that there is a separate 
section for freezing food, this section shall be used for 
the light load. 


8.3.3.1.2 M-package placement in the ballast load to 
accommodate the light load 


The M-packages in the ballast load shall be located 
as for the storage test apart from any locations that 
are disrupted by the need to leave space for the light 
load. In that case, the M-packages shall be placed in 
the nearest equivalent position to that specified for the 
storage test and the new positions recorded. If there are 
stacks of ballast load packages beside the light load an 
M-package shall also replace the top test package in at 
least one ofthose stacks on each side ofthe light load. If 
there 15 ballast load above the light load an M-package 
shall replace a test package in the centre of the layer 
immediately above the light load. If there is ballast load 
below the light load an M-package may replace a test 
package in the centre of the layer immediately below 
the light load. 


8.3.3.2 Refrigerating appliances with | separate 
three-star compartment 
If a refrigerating appliance has а separate 


three-star compartment with its own external access 
door or lid, and the instructions recommend that, before 
freezing, frozen food already in storage be placed in 
that compartment while leaving space in the freezer 
compartment to receive the load for freezing (that 1s, 
the three-star compartment is to be regarded as an 
extension of the freezer compartment), a freezing time 
claim based upon this method of use is permissible, 
provided that: 


a) When tested according to this method of use, 
the claimed freezing time is confirmed and 
the temperature requirements for the other 
compartments [see 8.5 a) to g)], if applicable, are 
fulfilled during the freezing capacity test; and 


b 


— 


The light load used in the freezer compartment 15 
at least equivalent to 3.5 kg/100 | of the combined 
volumes ofthe freezer compartment and three-star 
compartment. 


To meet the requirement that no more than 3 packages 
of ballast load shall be left out to make room for each 
light load package, it is likely that some ballast load 
will still be required to be retained in the freezer 
compartment. 


8.4 Test Procedure 


8.4.1 Starting Conditions 


After all relevant control devices have been adjusted 
as required, the loaded refrigerating appliance is left to 
run until stable operating conditions are reached. 


IS 17550 (Раг%2): 2021 


After stable operating conditions have been attained, 
internal temperature(s) shall be in accordance with 
Table 2 except that the starting temperature of any 
compartment(s) with no lower temperature limit(s) 
specified in that table shall be no more than 2 K below 
the target temperature. 


In the case of a refrigerating appliance where the 
compartment temperatures cannot be adjusted 
independently, if such a setting is not possible, the non- 
complying compartments below the bottom limit shall 
be set to be as warm as possible. 


The temperature indication succession from left to right 
in Table 2 also indicates the order of precedence in the 
case of several temperature possibilities. 


In some circumstances it might be unnecessary to 
carry out the stabilisation specified here before the 
stabilisation specified in 8.4.2. 


8.4.2 Setting of Control Devices 


Ifthe refrigerating appliance is provided with means fora 
pre-freezing (fast-freezing or quick-freezing) operation, 
after stable operating conditions in accordance with 
8.4.1 have been attained, the refrigerating appliance 
shall be set in operation in the pre-freezing condition 
according to the instructions. The procedure specified 
in 8.4.3 shall then be carried out. 


If there are no special instructions for pre-freezing, the 
procedure according to 8.4.3 shall be carried out after 
the refrigerating appliance has reached stable operating 
conditions in accordance with the temperature 
requirements of 8.4.1. 


8.4.3 Freezing of the Light Load 


After the conditions specified in 8.4.2 have been 
attained, the light load shall be introduced. For models 
with defrost control cycles, the light load should be 
added when stability has been regained and temperature 
criteria met after a defrost and recovery period. This test 
should not overlap a defrost and recovery period. When 
stability has been achieved prior to the introduction of 
the light load, apart from as in 8.4.2, changes of setting 
of manually adjustable controls are no longer permitted. 


The light load shall be 3.5 kg/100 | of the total volume 
of all compartments (excluding any two-star sections) 
being evaluated for four-star ratings. The calculated 
load shall be rounded to the nearest 0.5 kg except that 
in no case shall it be less than 2.0 kg. 


The light load is made from packages which have 
previously been brought to a temperature of + 25 °C 
+1K. 

The light load packages shall be placed flat and 
positioned taking into account the instructions and the 
requirements of the loading storage plan (see 6). If no 
instructions are given, the packages shall be placed such 
that they are likely to be frozen as rapidly as possible. 


16 


Light load packages shall be separated by at least 
15 mm from ballast load packages. The use of spacers 
between adjacent stacks of packages is permitted, but 
other spacing methods are not (see 6.3.3.2). 


M-packages shall be uniformly distributed throughout 
the light load with at least one as close as practicable to 
its geometric centre. There shall be one M-package per 
3 kg of light load, with a minimum of 2 M-packages. 


8.4.4 Intermediate Test Data to be Recorded 


The temperatures of the M-packages in the ballast load 
and in the light load shall be recorded, together with 
those of the M-packages in the other compartment(s), 
if any. This shall be done until the arithmetic mean of 
the instantaneous temperatures of all the M-packages in 
the light load reaches < – 18 °C. The time necessary for 
reaching this temperature shall be noted. 


8.5 Criteria to Achieve a Four-Star Compartment 
Rating 

A compartment achieves a four-star rating if the 
arithmetic mean of the instantaneous temperatures of 
all the M-packages in the light load reaches < —18 °C 
in no more than 24 h and as follows: 


a) Unless a defrost and recovery period overlaps the 
test, the maximum temperature of any M-packages 
of the ballast load remains < – 15 °C and at the end 
of the test the maximum temperature of the warmest 
M-package of the ballast load is € — 18 °C; 


If a defrost and recovery period does overlap the 
test, the maximum temperature of any M-packages 
of the ballast load remains < —12 °C during the 
defrost and recovery period and at the end of the 
test the maximum temperature of the warmest 
M-package of the ballast load is < — 18 °C; 


The maximum temperature of the warmest 
M-package in any separate three-star compartment 
not used for ballast in accordance with 8.3.3.2 
remains € —18 ?C (plus the allowed excursions 
during any defrost and recovery period as specified 
in Table 2); 


The maximum temperature of the warmest 
M-package in any two-star section or compartment 
remains < —12 °C (plus the allowed excursions 
during a defrost and recovery period as specified 
in Table 2); 


The maximum temperature of the warmest 
M-package in any one-star compartment remains 
<-6 °C; 

The instantaneous compartment average 
temperature 7, of the fresh food compartment 
during the test does not exceed + 7 °C, with 7, 7, 
T, each remaining between —1 °C and + 10 °C; and 


The instantaneous temperatures Т, Tos Т, as 
appropriate of the cellar compartment do not drop 


below 0 °С. 


b 


wm 


с) 


d) 


е) 


8.6 Data to be Recorded 

The following data are to be recorded: 
a) The mass, in kilograms, of the ballast load; 
b) The mass, in kilograms, of the light load; 
c) The freezing time, in hours, of the light load; 
d) The volume of the relevant compartments; 


е) The warmest temperature measured іп the 
M-packages in the ballast load stored during the 
light-load freezing capacity test, together with the 
warmest temperature measured in the M-packages 
in any three-star compartment, two-star section 
or compartment and in any one-star compartment 
and the duration of the temperature deviation 
above —18 °C (or —12 °C as appropriate) and the 
duration of any defrost control cycle (see Table 2); 


The highest and lowest values of 7, 7,, Т, and 
Т, T<, T<, if applicable; 


C1? ` C2? c» 
g) The settings of all temperature control devices, 
including timer(s), if any; 


f) 


h) A diagram of the storage plan for the refrigerating 
appliance showing the location of the M-packages 
and the location of the warmest M-package(s) for 
both the ballast load and the light load; 


If the refrigerating appliance is fitted with a 
device intended to set the refrigeration of the 
freezer compartment into continuous operation 
when freezing and then to revert to thermostatic 
operation automatically, the time which elapsed 
before it reverted to normal thermostatically 
controlled operation; 

Whether, with the light load being at least 3.5 kg 
of packages per 100 litres of its volume and in no 
case less than 2.0 kg, the freezing time is achieved 
in no more than 24 h; and 


wa 


j 


k 


— 


m) The specific freezing capacity (x) in [kg/12 h] = 
| М, х12 "| 
where 


At, 
M = the light load (kg), and 
At,— the freezing time (h). 
8.7 Compliance Requirement 
The specific freezing capacity shall not be less than 
10 percent of the value stated by the manufacturer. 


9 AUTOMATIC ICE-MAKING CAPACITY TEST 


9.1 Objective 


The purpose of this test is to determine the ice-making 
capacity of automatic icemakers in refrigerating 
appliance. 


17 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


9.2 Procedure 


9.2.1 Ambient and Water Temperatures 


The ambient temperature and water supply temperature 
shall be 25 ?C [see A-3.2.3 of IS 17550 (Part 1)]. 


If the refrigerating appliance 1s connected to a water 
supply, the water temperature shall be measured at the 
point of connection to the refrigerating appliance. 


9.2.2 Preparation of Refrigerating Appliance 


The refrigerating appliance shall be installed in 
accordance with Annex B of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


All compartment shall be empty. Their average air 
temperatures shall be determined as specified in 
Annex D of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


Refrigerating appliances with — anti-condensation 
heater(s) which are permanently on during normal use 
shall be tested with the heater(s) operating. 


Anti-condensation heaters which can be manually 
controlled by the user shall be switched on and, if 
adjustable, they shall be set at their maximum heating 
rate. 


Anti-condensation heaters which are automatically 
controlled shall be allowed to operate normally. 


АП internal accessories supplied with the refrigerating 
appliance shall be in their respective positions except 
that any manually filled ice cube trays shall be removed. 


After stable operating conditions have been attained, 
internal temperature(s) shall be in accordance with 
Table 2 except that the average starting temperature of 
any compartment(s) with no lower temperature limit(s) 
specified in that table shall be no more than 2 K below 
the target temperature. 


In the case of a refrigerating appliance where the 
compartment temperatures cannot be adjusted 
independently, if such a setting is not possible, the non- 
complying compartments below the bottom limit shall 
be set to be as warm as possible. 


The cellar compartment shall be as small as possible 
(if the size is adjustable), with temperature control 
devices (flaps, etc) set in accordance with the 
instructions or, in the absence of any instructions, set to 
achieve the temperatures in Table 2. 


Where the refrigerating appliance has a defrost control 
cycle, it shall remain in operation for this test but the 
ice-making capacity test should not overlap a defrost 
and recovery period. 


9.2.3 Test Procedures 


9.2.3.1 Direct water connection type 


Automatic icemakers ofthe direct water connection type 
shall be connected in accordance with the instructions 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


to a water supply having а temperature of 25 °C +1 K. 
Prior to initiation of the ice-making capacity test, the 
automatic icemaker shall have been operating for a 
sufficient time to ensure proper operation. There shall 
be no evidence of free water having entered the storage 
bin. 

For cycling icemakers, the test shall begin at the 
completion of the water-fill portion of a cycle. For 
continuous (non-cycling) ice-making devices, the test 
may be started at any time after steady state ice-making 
conditions have been established. The ice storage bin 
shall be emptied and repositioned at the time the test 
is started. 


The test shall continue uninterrupted for a minimum of 
12 h for continuous icemakers and for 12 h plus the 
additional time required to complete a whole number 
of cycles for cycling icemakers. If the storage bin 
is emptied during the test to ensure uninterrupted 
operation, the ice shall be weighted and this amount 
added to the weight of the ice in the storage bin at the 
termination of the test. 


At completion of the test, the ice in the storage bin shall 
be weighed. If there is evidence of free water having 
entered the storage bin, the test shall be repeated at 
least once. If this condition continues, the test shall be 
stopped and the condition reported. 


The time duration of the test shall be recorded for use 
in calculating the ice-making capacity in kilograms per 
twenty-four hours. 


9.2.3.2 Tank-type 


To ensure proper operation, prior to initiation of the 
ice-making capacity test, the automatic icemaker shall 
have 300 g of water with an initial temperature of 
25 °C+1 K in the tank and shall operate for a minimum 
of 12 h until the minimum water level is reached 
and no more ice is being made. There shall be no 
evidence of free water having entered the ice storage 
bin. 


18 


The door which gives access to the ice storage bin shall 
be opened and the ice in the ice storage bin shall be 
removed. The door shall be kept open for one minute. 


The tank shall be filled with the maximum quantity 
of water (at 25 °C+1 К) that is specified in the 
instructions. The tank shall be reinstalled. The time 
between tank removal and reinstallation shall be less 
than one minute. The door of the compartment which 
gives access to the tank shall be kept open for 1 min. 


The test start shall be at the time of first water filling of 
the ice mould after the tank has been re-installed. 


The test shall continue uninterrupted for a minimum of 
12 h for continuous ice-making and for 12 h plus the 
additional time required to complete a whole number 
of cycles for cycling icemakers. At the completion of 
the test, the ice in the ice storage bin shall be weighed. 
The cycles may be detected by monitoring temperature 
on the bottom of the ice mould. 

The duration of the test shall be recorded for use in 
calculating the ice-making capacity in kilograms per 
twenty-four hours. 


9.3 Data to be Recorded 


The following data shall be recorded for each test 
(as applicable): 

a) Type, model number and serial number of the 
icemaker; 


b) Average compartment temperature for each 
compartment at the beginning of the test; 


c) The ice-making capacity in kg/24 h; and 

d) Temperature control settings. 
9.4 Compliance Requirement 
The ice-making capacity shall not be less than 
10 percent of the value stated by the manufacturer. 


9.5 The schedule of type, acceptance, and routine tests 
are given in 20 of Part 1 of this standard. 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX А 
( Clauses 4.6 and 4.7 ) 


( Normative ) 


PULL-DOWN TEST 


A-1 GENERAL 


The purpose of this test is to measure the reserve 
capacity of a refrigerating appliance, particularly for 
high ambient temperature environments. This test is 
not applicable to stand-alone wine storage appliance 
or wine storage compartments within the refrigerating 
appliance. 


A-2 METHOD OVERVIEW 


The pull-down part of the test begins when the 
whole refrigerating appliance, including the inside, 
is in thermal equilibrium with the test room at 43 °C. 
The refrigerating appliance is then switched on and 
run to determine the time taken to meet pull-down 
temperature(s) as specified in Table 5. 


A-3 SET-UP PROCEDURE 


A-3.1 Test Room Ambient Temperature 


The temperature of the test room shall be set at 43 °C 
throughout the temperature stabilization period and for 
the duration of the test. It shall be maintained at 42.5 °C 
or warmer except, when verifying a supplier’s claimed 
performance when it shall be maintained at 43.0 °C 
t 0.5 К. 


А-3.2 Installation 


The refrigerating appliance shall be installed according 
to Annex B of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


A-3.3 Disconnection of Devices 


Compressor overload devices shall not be disconnected 
or bridged. Any other device which might prevent 
continuous operation of the refrigerating system during 
a pull-down test and which can be controlled by the 
user shall be disabled or set so that continuous operation 
of the cooling system occurs for the duration of 
the test. Temperature controls shall be set (or bridged) 
and, where possible and necessary, automatic defrost 
systems are disabled to ensure continuous operation 
for this test. Where the defrost system cannot be 
disabled without adversely affecting the performance, 
the controls shall be set to the manufacturer's default 
or recommended position. 


A-3.4 User-adjustable Features 


User-adjustable baffles and temperature controls shall 
be set as required to obtain an optimum result. 


This includes those on multi-function compartments, 
if any, where such adjustment does not take the 


19 


temperature performance of those compartments 
outside the specified range for their coldest claimed 
functions. 


This excludes baffles and controls on convenience 
features. These shall be set on the coldest setting. 


A-3.5 Internal Components 


Any thermal storage devices, for example, ice-bricks or 
similar that are removable without the use of a tool shall 
be removed for all tests, irrespective of instructions. 


АП other internal components shall be positioned (ог 
removed) as specified in B-2.5.1 of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


Any remaining ice cube trays shall be empty for the 
duration of the test. 


A-3.6 Determination of Compartment Temperature 


Air temperature sensors shall be located in all 
compartments as specified in Annex D of IS 17550 
(Part 1), except for zero-star compartments, where no 
temperature measurements are required. 


A-4 TEST PROCEDURE 


A-4.1 General 


The test procedure shall be as follows: 


A-4.2 Heat Soak 


With the test room ambient at 43 °C, and the refrigerating 
appliance switched off, open all doors, drawers and lids 
on the refrigerating appliance and let it stand to allow 
the whole refrigerating appliance to reach the ambient 
temperature. 
NOTE — Experience suggests that at least six hours with 
the refrigerating appliance’s door(s) open in the test room is 
usually required to meet the equilibrium requirements below. 
Close the doors but do not switch the refrigerating 
appliance on. The refrigerating appliance has reached 
the required starting condition for a pull-down test when, 
over a period of 30 min either of the following applies: 
a) The average compartment temperature in each 
compartment does not vary by more than 0.3 °C; 
or 
b) 1) For a test to determine the performance 
of a refrigerating appliance the average 
compartment temperature in each 
compartment does not fall below 43 °C; and 
2 


— 


For a test to verify claimed performance, the 
average temperature of each compartment 
does not rise above 43 °C. 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


А-4.3 Pull-down 


Start the refrigerating appliance and operate it until 
the average air temperature in all compartments is 
simultaneously at or below their applicable pull-down 
temperatures in Table 5. 
NOTE — As the compartment temperature is continuously 
falling during a pull-down test, the instantaneous compartment 
temperature at any time is the arithmetic mean of the air 
temperatures ofall measurement points within the compartment 
or sub-compartment at that time. 


A-5 TEST END-POINT 


The test can be terminated when the average air 
temperature in all compartment is simultaneously at or 
below their applicable pull-down temperatures. 


Pull-down temperatures shall be as specified in Table 5. 


Table 5 Pull-down Temperatures for 
Compartments 


( Clauses 4.6, A-4.3 and А-5) 


SI No. Compartment Average Air Temperature, 

Type "О 

(1) (2) (3) 

1) Рапігу 20 

ii) Cellar 15 

iii) Fresh food 8 

iv) Chill 6 

v) Zero star No requirement 

vi) ] star -1 


SI No. Compartment Average Air Temperature, 
Type "G 
0) (2) (3) 
vii) 2 star -7 
viii) 3 and 4 star =12 


A-6 DATA TO BE RECORDED 


The following data shall be recorded for each test 
(as applicable): 

a) The period from the start of the test until all 
compartments are simultaneously at or below the 
target temperatures in Table 5; 

b) The average air temperature reached in each 
compartment; 

c) Where applicable, any alternative positions for 


air temperature sensors (all in accordance with 
Annex D of IS 17550 (Part 1); 


d) The function 
compartment; 


selected for each multi-use 


e) The position of each user-adjustable baffle which 
may affect operating temperatures in any space 
in the refrigerating appliance (including space in 
convenience features as well as in compartments); 


f) Settings of all 
controls; 


user-adjustable temperature 


g) Settings of all other user-adjustable switches and 
controls; and 

h) Any disconnection, bridging or modification in 
any way of any devices for the test. 


ANNEX B 
( Clauses 4.6 and 4.7 ) 


( Normative ) 


WINE STORAGE APPLIANCES AND COMPARTMENTS; STORAGE TEST 


B-1 OBJECTIVE 


The purpose of this test is to check compliance with 
the requirements of this standard at each of the ambient 
temperatures [see A-3.2.3 in IS 17550 (Part 1) for the 
appropriate climate class]. 


B-2 STORAGE 
REQUIREMENTS 


TEMPERATURE 


Under the conditions specified in this clause and for 
each claimed climate class, the wine storage appliance 
shall be capable of maintaining, simultaneously, the 
required storage temperatures in all compartments (and 
the permitted temperature deviations during the defrost 


20 


and recovery period where applicable) as defined below. 


Storage temperature requirements: 


Allowed operating range for а wine storage 
compartment. 
Ту 75 САТ = +20 °С 


Temperature for a wine storage compartment shall be 
able to operate down to: 


T. = 12 °G 


wma — 
If a wine storage appliance or compartment cannot 
achieve < + 12 °C in this test, it will be classified and 
tested as a pantry compartment. It cannot claim to be a 
wine storage compartment according to this standard. 


If there аге two ог more wine storage compartments 
in one refrigerating appliance, the temperature 
setting range can be subdivided with only part of the 
temperature range in each wine storage compartment. 
(For example, a wine storage appliance with two 
compartments, one rated from + 6 °C to +14 °C and the 
other from + 10 °C to + 18 °C would comply with this 
requirement). 


During a defrost and recovery period the temperatures 
T yma Of any wine storage compartment is not permitted 
to rise by more than 1.5 K above the average of that 


compartment. 


NOTES 
1 This is a smaller excursion than allowed in footnote b) to 
Table 2. 


2 Ап example of a defrost control cycle for a 
frost-free refrigerator-freezer is given in Fig. 1 of IS 17550 
(Part 1). 


B-3 MEASUREMENT OF COMPARTMENT 
TEMPERATURE 


For determining the storage temperature of these 
compartments, M-packages shall be located in 
accordance with G-6 of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


B-4 PREPARATION OF REFRIGERATING 
APPLIANCE 


The wine storage appliance shall be installed in the 
test room in accordance with Annex B of IS 17550 
(Part 1). Ifthe wine storage appliance has user-adjustable 
temperature control devices, they shall be set at the 
positions recommended in the instructions for normal 
use at the appropriate ambient temperature. When 
the devices are not user-adjustable, the measurement 
shall be carried out on the refrigerating appliance as 
delivered. Readjustment of user-adjustable temperature 
controls is allowed. 


If the wine storage appliance includes more than one 
wine storage compartment and the volumes of those 
compartments can be changed in relation to one another 
by the user, the compartments shall be adjusted so that 
the compartment with the temperature furthest from the 
test-room ambient has the largest volume. 


If a wine storage compartment volume is adjustable 
in relation to another colder compartment type as 
specified in Table 2 the wine storage compartment shall 
be adjusted to its minimum volume. 


Where a wine storage compartment has setting options 
for both uniform temperature and multiple temperature 
zones, the uniform temperature setting shall be selected 
for testing. 


Wine storage appliances and compartments with anti- 
condensation heater(s) which are permanently on 
during normal use shall be tested with the heater(s) 
operating. 


21 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


Anti-condensation heaters which can be manually 
controlled by the user shall be switched on and, if 
adjustable, they shall be set at their maximum heating 
rate. 


Anti-condensation heaters which are automatically 
controlled shall be allowed to operate normally. 


B-5 MEASUREMENTS 


B-5.1 General 


For the appropriate ambient temperature, temperature 
control device(s) and other controls, if any, shall be 
adjusted, as necessary, to a position which is likely 
to give storage temperatures which comply with 
requirements in this clause, after stable operating 
conditions have been attained. 


B-5.2 Conditions for Demonstration of Compliance 


The following conditions shall all be met to demonstrate 
compliance: 


a) Except during any freezing or cooling capacity 
test, the average of all temperature amplitudes 
at each measurement point in each wine storage 
compartment Tą; during the whole test period 
shall stay within + 0.5 K [see G-7 of IS 17550 
(Part 1)]; 


During any freezing or cooling capacity test 
the average of all temperature amplitudes at 
each measurement point in each wine storage 
compartment Tu; during the whole test period 
shall stay within = 1.5 K [see G-7 of IS 17550 
(Part 1)]; and 


The integrated time averages of the temperatures 


b) 


с 


— 


Tig Shall stay between + 5 °C and + 20 °C. The 
arithmetic average Tyma of Tus Тұл» Twm 


shall be equal to or below + 12?C [see G-3.1 of 
IS 17550 (Part 1)]. 


B-6 DATA TO BE RECORDED 


The following data shall be recorded for each test (as 
applicable): 


a) The ambient temperature(s); 


b) For each ambient, the setting(s) of temperature 
control device(s) and other controls, if any 
(if user-adjustable); 


с) For each ambient the value of the wine storage 


temperature Tyma and the values of T... T... and 
T . 


w3m? 
d) For each ambient the average of all temperature 
amplitudes at each measurement point; 
e) For each ambient the time averaged compartment 
humidity; and 


f) The number of standard bottles that can be 
accommodated [see G-5.2 of IS 17550 (Part 1)]. 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 4.6 and 4.7 ) 
( Normative ) 


TEMPERATURE RISE TEST 


C-1 OBJECTIVE 


The purpose of this test is to check the time for the 
temperature rise of packages in a refrigerating appliance 
with one or more three-star or four-star compartments. 


C-2 PROCEDURE 


C-2.1 Ambient Temperature 

The ambient temperature shall be 25 °C [see A-3.2.3 of 
IS 17550 (Part 1)]. 

C-2.2 Preparation of Refrigerating Appliance 


The refrigerating appliance shall be installed according 
to Annex B of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


It shall be prepared, stabilized and loaded with test 
packages and M-packages [as for the storage test 
(see 6)]. 


C-2.3 Operation of the Refrigerating Appliance 


The controls shall be set and the refrigerating appliance 
operated till all frozen compartments are at or colder 
than the temperatures specified in Table 2. 


C-3 TEST PERIOD AND MEASUREMENTS 


The power supply to the refrigerating appliance shall 
be switched off once stable operating conditions have 


been achieved. For automatic-defrosting refrigerating 
appliances, this shall be during the stable part of the 
defrost control cycle. 

The times shall be noted when the first M-package 
in any three-star or four-star compartment reaches 
-18 °C and when the first M-package in any of these 
compartments first reaches — 9 °C. 


NOTE — The first M-package to reach — 18 °C may not be the 
first to reach – 9 °С. 


C-4 TEMPERATURE RISE TIME 


This is the difference between the two times noted in 
C-3. 


C-5 DATA TO BE RECORDED 
The following data shall be recorded for each test 
(as applicable): 
a) the ambient temperature; and 
b) the time for the temperature rise from —18 °C to 
=9 °C. 
C-6 COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENT 


At the end of the test, the time for temperature rise 
shall not be less than 10 percent of the value declared 
by the manufacturer. 


ANNEX D 
( Clauses 4.6 and 4.7 ) 


( Normative ) 


WATER VAPOUR CONDENSATION TEST 


D-1 OBJECTIVE 


The purpose of this test is to determine the extent 
of condensation of water on the external surface of 
the refrigerating appliance under specified ambient 
conditions. 


D-2 PROCEDURE 


D-2.1 Ambient Temperature 
The ambient temperature shall be: 
+ 32 °C for class ST and T refrigerating appliances. 


22 


D-2.2 Relative Humidity 
The humidity shall be such that the time averaged value 
of the dew point is: 


+ 27 °C + 0.5 K for class ST and T refrigerating 
appliances. 


Two times the standard deviation of the recorded dew 
point values during the test shall be less than zero point 
five degrees kelvin. 


For relevant conversions between dew point, relative 
humidity and wet bulb temperatures, see Table 6. 


Table 6 Humidity Conversions 
( Clause D-2.2 ) 


SINo. Ambient Dew Relative Wet bulb at 
Point Humidity 1 013.25 mb 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1) 32°C 27°C 75 percent 28.3 °C 


D-2.3 Preparation of Refrigerating Appliance 


The refrigerating appliance shall be installed in 
accordance with Annex B of IS 17550 (Part 1). 


Compartment average air temperatures shall be 
determined as specified in Annex D of IS 17550 
(Part 1) and throughout the test average compartment 
air temperatures shall be at or below the target 
temperatures for an energy test in specified in Table 1 
of IS 17550 (Part 3). 


D-2.4 Operation of the Refrigerating Appliance 


If anti-condensation heaters are provided which can 
be switched on and off by the user, these shall be 
switched off. If, however, running water appears on 
the external surface of the refrigerating appliance, the 
test shall be repeated with the anti-condensation heaters 
switched on and, if adjustable, set at maximum heating. 
Anti-condensation heaters which are automatically 
controlled shall be allowed to operate normally. 


Anti-condensation heater control settings or adjustment 
for refrigerating appliances with any anti-condensation 
heaters which are partly automatically controlled shall 
be set as requested by the person or authority requesting 
the test. 


D-2.5 Test Period 


After stable operating conditions have been attained, 
all external surfaces of the refrigerating appliance shall 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


be carefully wiped dry with a clean cloth and the test 
continued for a period of 24 h. The observation period 
shall be selected during the period when condensation 
is most likely to occur. 


D-3 OBSERVATIONS 


During the test period, external surface areas exhibiting 
fog, droplets or running water shall be outlined and 
coded by the letters “А”, “В” апа “С”, respectively. 
See Fig. 5. 


D-4 DATA TO BE RECORDED 


The following data shall be recorded for each test 
(as applicable): 


a) A coded sketch may be made showing the 
running water area appearing during the test on all 
external surfaces. Code C as shown in Fig. 5 may 
be used to indicate this. Codes A and B may also 
be included; 


b) The selected test period; 
c) The duration of the period of observation; 


d) Whether any manual switch provided for anti- 
condensation heaters was switched on or off or 
adjusted in accordance with D-2.4; 


e) Whether any semi-automatic anti-condensation 
heaters control was present, how it was set and 
how it functioned; and 


f) Whether any automatic anti-condensation heaters 
control was present and how it functioned. 
D-5 COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENT 


At the end of the test, no running water shall appear 
externally. 


A 
KEY: 
A-FOG 
B - DROPLETS 


C - RUNNING WATER 


== EHHE 


Fic. 5 CONDENSATION CODES 


23 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


АММЕХ Е 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Sectional Committee, MED 03 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Annapurna Electronics and Services Ltd, Hyderabad 
BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, 
Chennai 


Blue Star Limited, Mumbai 


Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi 


Carrier Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Limited, 
Gurugram 


Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Danfoss Industries Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Electrical Research and Development Association, 
Vadodara 

Emerson Climate Technologies(India) Pvt. Ltd, Karad 

Godrej & Boyce Manufacturing Company Limited, 
Mumbai 

Honeywell International India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Chemical Engg, Kolkata 

Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 

Ingersoll Rand India Limited, Bengaluru 

International Copper Association India, Mumbai 


Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


LG Electronics India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Pror (Dr) Ravi Kumar (Chairman) 


Suri G. K. PRASAD 
Suri J. S. Sastry (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR LOGANATHAN 
SHRI BALASUBRAMANIAN ANAND (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA BHAMBURE 
SHRI SUNIL Kumar JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 
SHRI KAMRAN SHAIKH (Alternate) 
Ms ПЕЕРБНКНА WADHWA (ҮР) 
Suet T. Р. ASHwIN (ҮР) 


SHRI BIMAL TANDON 
Suri D. BHATTACHARYA (Alternate) 


Dr P. CHANDRA SEKHAR 
ӛнкі GUJALA В. BALARAJA (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


SHRI MADHUR SEHGAL 
Suri K. L. NAGAHARI (Alternate Т) 
Suri M. N. S. V. Кіклм Kumar (Alternate П) 


SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
Suri RAKESH PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHETHAN THOLPADY 
Suri D. P. ПЕБРАХРЕ (Alternate) 


SHRI BunziN J. WADIA 
Suri A. A. ACHAREKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR KAVALATH 
Dr Nitin Karwa (Alternate) 


Dr D. SATHIYAMOORTHY 
Dr Supr K. Das (Alternate) 


Dr ЈУОПЕМАУ MATHUR 
ӛнкі ASHISH RAKHEJA (Alternate) 


SHRI M. VENKANNA 
Suri J. GuRUsAMY (Alternate) 


SHRI MAYUR KARMAKAR 
SHRI SHANKAR SAPALIGA (Alternate) 


SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 
ӛнкі C. M. РАТНАК (Alternate) 


SHRI ADITYA ANIL 
Suri ВАЈАТ SRIVASTAVA (Alternate) 


24 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


Organization(s) Representative(s) 
National Thermal Power Corporation, Noida Suri D. K. SURYANARAYAN 
Suri S. K. Jua (Alternate) 
Refrigeration & Airconditioning Manufacturers SHRI GURMEET SINGH 
Association, New Delhi Suri R. K. Menta (Alternate) 
Samsung India Electronics Pvt Ltd, Noida SHRI GAURAV CHOUDHARY 
SHRI KALICHARAN SAHU (Alternate) 
Sierra Aircon Private Limited, Gurugram Suri D. K. MUDGAL 
Suri S. Duman (Alternate) 
The Chemours India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram SHRI VIKAS MEHTA 
ӛнкі Мізніт SHAH (Alternate) 
UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru SHRI V. MANJUNATH 
SHRI SATISH Kumar (Alternate) 
Voltas Ltd, Mumbai SHRI SRINIVASAN MOTURI 
Suri А. D. KuMBHAR (Alternate) 
Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer ӛнкі H. S. WADHWA 
Voice, New Delhi Suri B. K. МОКНОРАРНУАУ (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (H.No. 03, Savita Vihar, Delhi) Suri J. K. AGRAWAL 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur SHRI P. K. MUKHERJEE 
Vihar, Рћахе-1 Extension, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms Кнознво JYOTSNA KINDO 
Scientist “С? (MED), BIS 


Panel on Household Refrigerating Appliances 


Organization Representative(s) 


In personal capacity (506/2, Kirti Apartments, Mayur | Suri P. К. MUKHERJEE (Convener) 
Vihar, Phase-1 Extension, Delhi) 


In personal capacity, (F-88, Abdul Fazal Enclave, Suri S. Т.Н. Farmi (Co-Convener) 
Jamia Nagar, New Delhi) 

Bureau of Energy Efficiency, New Delhi SHRI SAMEER PANDITA 

Central Power Research Institute, Bengaluru Suri А. R. Ravi KUMAR 

Voluntary Organization in Interest of Consumer SHRI B. K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
Voice, New Delhi 

Intertek India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI BALVINDER ARORA 

Electrical Research and Development Association, SHRI GAUTAM BRAHMBHATT 
Vadodara 


BSH Household Appliances Manufacturing Pvt Ltd, SHRI MADHANRAJ RAMALINGAM 
Chennai 


UL India Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru ӛнкі V. MANJUNATH 


Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad 


25 


IS 17550 (Part 2) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


Indian Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air Dr JvoriRMAY MATHUR 
Conditioning Engineers (ISHRAE), New Delhi 
Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi SHRI CHANDRA BHUSHAN 


Consumer Electronics and Appliances Manufacturers Suri Конт KUMAR SINGH 
Association, New Delhi Suri Amit СНАРНА (A/ternate) 


Voltas Beko, New Delhi SHRI ANSHU DHANDA 


Member Secretary 


Ms Кноѕнво JYOTSNA KINDO 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


26 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 03 (12797). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


