( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS:8146-1976

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF REVERBERATION TIME IN AUDITORIA
Acoustics
Chairman

Sectional

Committee,

LTDC

5

Representing National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi

DR M. PANCHOLY
Members

Ahuja Radios, New Delhi SHRI I. S. AHUJA All India Radio and Electronics Association, Bombay SHRI H. K. L. ARORA SHRI R. G. KESWANI ( Alternate ) ( Bombay ) SHRI ARUP CRAUDHURI ( Alternate ) ( Calcutta ) SHRI L. S. V. EASWAR ( Alternate ) ( Madras ) DR A. S. BHADURI National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. P. GHOSH ( Alrcrnate ) LFCOL T. R. BHALOTRA Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SRRI S. N. KUNDU ( Alternate ) SHRI P. S. ENDLAW Director General of Posts and Telegraphs Depart ment, New Delhi JOINT DIRECTOR, STANDARDS Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New Delhi ( S & T j-11 DEPUTY DII~IFZTOR, STANDARDS ( S & T ) ( Alternate ) SHRI J. S. MONGA Bolton Industrial Corporation, New Delhi SHRI M. S. MONGA ( Alternate ) CYDE B. G. MUDHOLKAR Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SHRI M. S. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) SHRI K. D. PAVATE Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani SHRI M. R. KAPOOR ( Alternate ) Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore DR B. S. RAMAKRISHNA Directorate General of All India Radio, New Delhi RESEARCH ENGINEER SHRI M. SANKARALINGAD~ DR D. L. SUBRAHMANYAM Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals ( Inspection Wing ) Sarabhai Electronic Research Centre, Ahmadabad ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1976 STANDARDS INSTITUTION

INDIAN

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

B : 8146- 1976 ( Continued from page 1 )
Members
SURVEYOR

Refiresentinp Central Public Works Department, New Delhi

c*I, __- l-11 E&XJTI~E E N0 I NE E R ( CD0 ) ( Akernote) SHRI L. K. VISITANATIJ K. G. ( Alternate ) SHRI D. P. ( Alternate ) SHRI N. SRINIVASAN, Director ( Electronics

OF WORKS ( ELECTRI-

- SHRI

Philips India Ltd, Calcutta; and The Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association. Bombay A.~WANI Phiiips India Ltd, Calcutta The Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay Director General, ISI (Ex-&:io Member ) Secretary

SIIARMA

)

SHRI P. K. BISWAS Assistant Director ( Electronics

), IS1

2

IS : 8146- 1976

Indian Standard
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF REVERBERATION TIME IN AUDITORIA
0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 July 1976, after the draft finalized by the Acoustics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics and Telecommunications Division Council. 0.2 The general evaluation of sound decay in an auditorium in its working condition depends on many parameters, for example the properties of the source. However, the reverberation time is the physical value which is commonly used to describe the acoustical behaviour of auditoria of all kinds. 0.3 At present, several methods exist for the measurement tion time and there are some new ideas in this field. of reverbera-

0.3.1 Each of these methods may give a different result for the same The reasons for such differences lie in the~different types of auditorium. signal employed as well as the methods of recording the decay of sound. There is an urgent need to standardize the most popular method so that it is possible to compare the data obtained by this one method. assistance has been derived from 0.4 While preparing this standard, ISO 3382-1975 ` Measurement of reverberation time in auditoria ' issued by the International Organization for Standardization. 0.5 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard
tion time auditorium procedure, data and of specifies a method for the measurement of reverberain auditoria by describing the state of occupancy of an for which the reverberation time is required, the ~measurement and the method of evaluating the the apparatus necessary, presenting the test report.

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

3

IS z81469 1976 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose
IS: 1885 ( Part III/Set of this standard, the terms and definitious 8)-1974* an-d the following shall apply. given in

2.1 Reverberation Time - Of an enclosure, for a sound of a given frequency or frequency band, the time that would be required for the sound pressure level in the enclosure to decrease by 60 decibels, after the source has been stopped.
NOTF - This definition is based on the assumption that in the ideal case the dependence of sound pressure level upon time is a straight-line relationship and that the background noise level is sufficiently low.

2.2

States of Occupancy

prepared for a performance and 2.2.1 Em)@ State - The auditorium ready for receiving performers and public, but without these persons present. occupied by the performers only 2.2.2 Studio State - The auditorium ( without public ), for example at rehearsals or during sound recordings. The number of performers and other persons, such as technicians, shall correspond to the usual number. 2.2;3 public. with the performers and the Occupied State - The auditorium The number of persons shall correspond to the usual number.

3. MEASUREMENT

PROCEDURES
time the by

3.0 There
of auditoria,

are at least three significant values for the reverberation which depend on different states of occupancy.

3.0.1 An accurate description of the state of occupancy of auditorium is of decisive importance in assessing the results obtained measuring the reverberation time.

~3.0.2 The auditorium may be regarded as ' occupied' when 80 to 100 The presence of a choir percent of the auditorium seats are occupied. would constitute an extraordinary occupancy above the normal value. Furthermore, the number of members of the orchestra shall correspond to the usual number. 3.0.3 In theatres, a distinction shall be made between ` safety curtain pit open ' and UP ' and ' safety curtain down ' and between ` orchestra corchestra pit closed `, as also between `orchestra seated on the stage ' with and without concert enclosure. In all these cases measurement If the safety curtain is up, the amount of furnishing of may be useful. the stage is of importance and shall be described.
*Electrotechnical vocabulary: Part III Acoustics, Section 8 Architectural acoustics,

4

IS I 8146 - 1976 3.1 Empty State

3.1.1 Sound Source - The sound should preferably be generated by loudspeakers which should be as non-directional as possible. For the sound signal, preferably a noise limited by filters with a band-width neither greater than one octave nor less than l/3 octave shall be used. The sound source shall produce a sound pressure level at least 40 dB above the background level in the corresponding frequency band. It shall be placed near to the real sound source (stage, podium, pulpit, etc) but several positions are also permitted, for example orchestra pit, stage and choir.
NOTE 1 - In churches and concert-halls, an organ may be used as the sound source. In order to excite as many eigentones as possible, all semitones in each corresponding frequency range shall be played. NOTE 2 - In auditoria measurement may also be made by means of impulses from pistol shots and from other sources that are not themselves reverberant. NOTE 3 - When using an impulse, care shall be taken that there are sufficiently high sound pressure levels at both low and very high frequencies. Therefore, it is advisable that, before the measurement is made in the auditorium, a frequency analysis of the impulse should be carried out-in the laboratory, for example in a reverberation room. The sound source may be considered to be adequate only if, in all frequency bands, a sound pressure level 40 dB above the auditorium background level can be urpected in the auditorium.

3.1.2

Recording the Reverberation

3.1.2.1 Apparatus - The recording apparatus shall consist of a microphone as non-directional as possible, as amplifier, and a recording system. The apparatus shall be provided with l/3 or octave band filters (see IS : 6964-1973* ). Octave band filters may be sufficient if l/3 octave bands of noise are radiated. The recording system may consist of a level recorder, a cathode ray tube with a logarithmic amplifier or other adequate equipment with which it is possible to verify the straightness of the slope ( level versus time ). The recording system shall be suitable for handling decay rates of at least 300 dB/s. The time-scale of the recording system shall be adjusted sn that the decay curves have a slope of about 45". If the sound decay is initially recorded on magnetic tape, the linear frequency characteristics of the tape recorder should cover the frequency range of interest ( see 3.1.3 ), and its dynamic range should be at least 40 dB. Care shall be taken that the recording level allows an adequate signal to noise ratio. The speed of the magnetic tape and the paper speed of the level recorder shall be checked. The tape speed shall be the same for both recording and play-back. No overloading shall
*Specification for octave, half-octave and third-octave and vibrations. band filters for analysis of sound

5

IS : 8146 - 1976 be allowed in any stage of the measuring apparatus. noise sources are used peak level indicating devices checking the overloading, When impulsive are necessary for

NOTE - When magnetic tape recordings are employed, sufficient time should be allowed for the decay, before energising the studio again with warbled tone. This will help in the transcribed decay curve to exhibit the noise level more prominently.

3.1.2.2 Evaluation - The record of the decay shall be evaluated over a range of least 30 dB; in the case of a steady-state sound field, this range shall be extended from 5 to 35 dB below the initial level. In this range a straight line shall be fitted as closely as possible to the decay curve. The slope of this straight line determines the reverberation time. Records which show a significant curvature shall be excluded from evaluation.
NOTE - Where the decay characteristic takes the form of a broken curve consisting of two straight lines, each extending over a range of at least 20 dB, the reverberation times corresponding to the upper and lower limrts shall be stated.

3.1.2.3 .Number of records - The reverberation time shall be measured at not less than three microphone positions, with at least two records at each position. In large ( more than 1 000 m3 ) or complex ( for example coupled ) auditoria, more measurements will be necessary. In small auditoria, at low frequencies, it may be of assistance to place the microphone near the corner of the auditorium. In other instances the microphone may occupy any convenient position in the auditorium. The microphone shall not, however, be placed so close to the source as to be in its direct sound field. In large auditoria it shall be about 10 to 15 m from the sound source. 3.1.3 Frequency Range of Measurements - The reverberation time shall be measured at least within the frequency range from 125 to 4000 Hz at intervals of l/3 octave, even if the sound source is fed with l/3 octave band noise and one octave band filters are used in the receiving apparatus or vice-versa. 3.2 Studio State and Occupied State

3.2.1 Sound Source - The sound source should preferably be the same as in 3.1.1 but since, in these states, one cannot always expect the audience to endure a measurement by means of filtered noise at sixteen frequencies, unfiltered noise may be used; this noise signal shall be 40 dB above the auditorium background level in all frequency bands. A noise signal having equal energy per octave (pink noise ) may be found to be suitable. 6

IS : 8146- f976,
NOTE 1 - Furthermore, the orchestra may passages of musical compositions followed by shall be taken that disturbances do not arise ( for example undamped kettle drum, double piano, etc ) or from applause. be used as a sound source. Fortissimo adequately long pauses are suitable. Care from instruments with self-reverberation bass especially with open strings, cymbal, the

NOTE 2 - It is possible to damp the instruments referred to immediatrly after musical break but breaks provided by woodwind and brass only are preferable.

3.2.2

Recording the Reverberation

specified in 3.1.2.1 shall apply. 3.2.2.1 Apparatus - The requirements For the playback of sound recordings, the reverberation shall be analyzed with l/3 octave filters. 3.2.2.2 apply. 3.2.2.3 &umber of records - The microphone shall be set up in at least two positions in the auditorium chosen in accordance with the use of the auditorium, for example, in the stalls and on the balconies. The microphone shall be set up at least 1 m above the heads of the audience and, in large auditoria, shall be about 10 to 15 m from the sound source or from the edge of the platform. If steady sound sources are used, at least two records shall be taken at each position; for impulses ( pistol shots, ~etc), at least four records shall be taken at each position; for musical breaks (see Note), at least six records shall be taken at each position.
NOTE - Musical breaks are periods, when all the instruments having played all together so as to establish the highest sound pressure level, suddenly stop playing, thus giving a pause after the passage of this high level. Percussion instruments and others having long resonance time of their own have to be suitably muffled.

Evaluation -

The

requirements

specified

in

3.1.2.2

shall

3.2.3 Frequency with 3.1.3. 4. STATEMENT

Range

of

Measurement -

shall

be

in

accordance

OF RESULTS

4.1 Tables 4.1.1 The

and Curves

average of the evaluated reverberation times for each frequency of measurement shall be plotted at l/3 octave intervals in the form of a graph. Moreover, the reverberation times shall be stated in a table with the results underlined for the preferred octave series 125, 250, 500, l 000, 2 000, 4 000 Hz ( see IS : 2264-1963* >. 4.1.2 If, however, there are pronounced differences between the reverberation times ( for example, more than 10 percent) in various parts of the auditorium ( for example, below balconies ), the average-value for each part of the auditorium shall be evaluated and presented separately.
*Preferred frequencies for acoustical measurements.

7

IS t 8146.1976

4.1.3 In the case of graphs, the points shall be connected by strai ht lines. The abscissa shall present frequency on a logarithmic scale. 7! he ordinate may present the reverberation time on a logarithmic scale such that a doubling of the reverberation time corresponds to two octaves on the abscissa. Alternatively, the ordinate may present a linear time-scale such that one second corresponds to one decade along the abscissa. A distance of 5 cm per decade is preferred.
4.2 Test Report -The were made in conformity test report shall state that with this Indian Standard. tested; section of the auditorium, with scale; the measurements It shall include:

a) the name of the auditorium b) the plan and longitudinal c) the volume of the auditorium;

NOTE - If the auditorium is not completely enclosed, an explanation shall be given of how the stated volume is defined.

4

the number and type of seats ( for example, whether upholstered or not ); if upholstered: thickness and kind of upholstery, kind of covering material (porous or non-porous, seats raised or lowered ); a description ceiling; condition of the shape and material of the walls and the

4

f> the id the h) for

state ( empty,

studio or occupied equipment the safety

) of the auditorium; such as curtains; or decorative curtains enclo-

of variable

theatres, whether were up or down;

curtain

3
k)

a description sure, etc;

of the stage furnishing, and relative humidity

including

any concert

the temperature

in tbe auditorium; employed;

m) the type and position

of sound sources

a description of the sound signal, in particular whether steady or impulsive ( in the case of musical breaks, the composition and if possible bar number shall be given ); P) the microphone tudinal section; q) the description tape recorders r) the date zation. positions, preferably shown on a plan and longiwhether organi-

of measuring apparatus were employed; and and name

and, in particular, of the measuring

of measurement

8

