(Reaffirmed 2001)

IS : 11315 ( Part 2 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART Rock Mechanics
Chairman DR BHAWANI SINQH Members Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh, Roorkee Dr!n:::o!a ( CW & PRS ) Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune SHRI S. L. MOEHASHI ( Alternate ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTOR New Delhi Karnataka Research DIRECTOR ( CHIEF ENGINEER ) Engineering Station, Krishnarajasagara SHRI R. NARA SIMHA IYENCJAR( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station ( CSIR ), Dhanbad DR A. K. DUBE Irrigation and Power Department, Government of SHRI P. S. GOSAL Punjab, Amritsar DR UDAY V. KUL~ARNI Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay DR G. S. MzHROTR~ Cent;~or~~lding Research Institute ( CSIR ), Associated Instrument Manufacturers ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi PROF T. S. NAQARAJ ( Alternate ) Geological Survey of India, Calcutta SH~I P. L. NARULA Central Road Research Institute SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Alternate ) PROF T. RAMAMURTHY Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR G. V. RAO ( Alternate ) DR Y. V. RAMANA National Geophysical Research Institute ( CSIR ), Hyderabad Indian Geotechnical Society, Delhi DR G. V. RAO ( Continued on page 2 ) @ Coprright 1987 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.
SHRI A. Grrosn SHRI M. D. NAIR

2

SPACING Committee, BDC 73

Sectional

RepreSGntiflg University of Roorkee, OFFICER Roorkee

ASSISTANT RESEARCH

( Alter&c )

IS : 11315( Part 2 ) - 1987 ( Continued jfompagc1 )
Membrrs
KESBARCH

Rcprrsrnting ) Irrig$o; Department, Government of Maharashtra

OFFICER ( MERI

SECRETARY DIRECTOR (C) ( Alfcrnafr ) SHRI C. D. THATTE SRRI G. RAXAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi Irrigation Department, Government of Ahmadabad Director General, BIS ( Ex-oficio Member ) Secrchry Gujarat,

Joint Director

SHRI K. M. MATHUR

( Civ Engg ), BIS

Rock Slope Engineering, Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee, BDC 73 : 4 Conv.wlcr
PROF L. S. SRIVASTAVA Members DR R. K. BHANDARI SHRI A. GHOSH ( Altcrnats ) SHRI B. D. BALIQA Central Building Roorkee Central Mining Dhanbad Cemindia Company Research Research Institute Institute ( CSIR ), ( CSIR ), University of Roorkee, Roorkee

Limited, Bombay SHRI A. P. B~NERJEE SHRI D. J. KETKAR ( Alternate ) Jaiprakash Associates Pvt Ltd, New Delhi SHRI D. G. KADKADE SHRI R. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Central Road Research Institute SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHRI P. J. RAO ( Afternate ) Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi DR T. RAI.~AXURTHY DR K. G. SHARYA ( Ahnuts ) Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur DR YUDHBIR

2

IS : 11315( Part 2 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DISCONTINUITIES IN ROCK MASS
PART 2 SPACING

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 2 ) `was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 4 May 1987, after the draft finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In view of the advancement in the field of rock mechanics, a number of methods for assessing the strength characteristics of the rock and rock masses are being formulated by Rock Slope Engineering and Foundation on Rock and Rock Mass Improvement Subcommittee of Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee. The majority of rock masses, in particular those within a few hundred metres from the surface, behave as discontinuous with the discontinuities largely determining the mechanical It i,s, therefore, essential that structure of a rock mass and behaviour. the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described and quantified to have a complete and unified description of rock masses and discontinuities, and it may be possible to design engineering structures in rock with a minimum of expense in-situ testing. Careful field descriptions will enhance the value of in-situ tests that are performed since the interpretation and extrapolation of results will be made more reliable. 0.3 Discontinuity is the general term for any mechanical discontinuity in a rock mass, along which the rock mass has zero or low tensile strength. It is the collective term for most types of joints, weak bedding planes, weak schistocity planes, weakness zones, shear zones and faults. The ten parameters selected for rock mass survey to describe discontinuities are orientation sapcing, persistance, roughness, wall strength, aperture, number of sets and block size. These parameters are filling, seepage, also evaluated from study of drill cores to obtain information on the discontinuities. 3

IS : 11315( Part 2 ) - 1987 0.4 It
is essential that both the structures of a rock mass and the nature of its discontinuities are carefully described for determining the mechanical behaviour. This Indian Standard covering various parameters to describe discontinuities in rock masses is being formulated in various This part covers spacing. parts each part covering one parameter.

0.5 Spacing describes the perpendicular distance between adjacent discontinultles and normally refers to the mean or modal spacing of a set of joints. 0.6 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : Z-1960*. with to be

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the method for spacing of discontinuity sets in rock mass.
2. TERMINOLOGY quantitative description of

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, in IS : 11358-1986t shall apply. 3. GENERAL 3.1 The

the

definitions

of

terms

given

spacing of adjacent discontinuities largely controls the size of Several closely spaced sets tend to give individual blocks of intact rock. conditions of low mass cohesion whereas those that are widely spaced are These effects depend much more likely to yield interlocking conditions. upon the persistence of the individual discontinuities.

3.2 In exceptional cases a close spacing may change the mode of failure of a rock mass from translational to circular or even to flow ( like a close spacing, `sugar cube' shear zone in quartzite ). With exceptionally the orientation is of little consequence as failure may occur through rotation or rolling of the small rock pieces. 3.3 The importance of deformation are present, number of discontinuities spacing increases when other conditions for that is low shear strength and a sufficiegt or joints sets for slip to occur.

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rctised). tGlossary of terms applicable to rock mechanics.

4

IS : 11315( Part 2 ) - 1987 3.4 The
spacing of individual discontinuities and associated sets has a strong influence on the mass permeability and seepage characteristics. In general, the hydraulic conductivity of any given set will be inversely proportional to the spacing, if individual joint apertures are comparable.

3.5 Spacing describes the perpendicular distance between adjacent discontinuities measured with a measuring tape ( at least 3 m length ) calibrated in mm divisions. Compass and clinometer are used to measure the angle between the measuring tape and the observed discontinuity set. 4. PROCEDURE 4.1 The measuring tape is held along the exposure such that the surface tape trace of the discontinuity set being measured is approximately perpendicular to the tape ( Fig. 1 ) and the distance adjacent discontiIf the tape is not perpendicular, directional bias nuities is recorded. corrections are required to obtain the true spacing. 4.2 All distances ( d ) between adjacent discontinuities are measured and recorded over a sampling length not less than 3 m ( or the thickness of the rock unit being observed, if this is less than 3 m ). The sampling length should preferably be greater than ten times the estimated spacing. The distances ( d ) should be measured to within 5 percent of their absolute values. 4.3 The smallest angle ( a) between joint set is measured with a compass 4.4 The equation: most S = common the measuring to the nearest ) spacing is tape and the observed 5". calculated from the

( modal

dm sin a

where dm is the most common ( modal ) distance measured. It is helpful to present the variation in spacing by means of a histogram as illustrated in Fig. 2.
NOTE 1 - The use of a measuring tape and compass is strongly recommended, but it is not essential if the engineering geologist is experienced in taking these measurements using visual judgement. This will depend on the degree of precision required. It should be borne in mind that discontinuities such as joints may not be sufficiently parallel in a given set to justify great precision. NOTE 2 - The average value of individual modal spacings ( Sr, S,, etc ) represents the average dimension of typical rock block ( Fig. 1 ) , if persistence is assumed. Other methods of representing block size from observations of spacing are described in Part 10. NOTE 3 - In any given discontinuity set, domains with recognizably similar spacing may be separated by more massive rock containing a few widely spaced discontinuities. Block diagrams ( Fig. 1 ) or histograms ( Fig. 2 ) can be used to indicate this type of variability. NOTE 4 - In general, fractures cause by blast damage should be excluded consideration when measuring the spacing of discontinuities. 5 from

a ---+---

20 ~.. VERY CLOSE '

60
CLOSE I

200

600

2000

6000mm :' f :'

MODERATE

WIDE

VERY WIDE

-, EC

Fxa.

HISTOGRAMSHOWING MODAL, MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM SPACING OBTAINED FROM OBSERVATIONOF THE SPACING OF ONE SET. SUGGESTED DESCRIPTIONS GIVEN AT BASE OF HISTOGRAM

IS : 11315 ( Part

2 ) - 1987
exposures are of limited extent or absent, estimate spacing in the upper 20-30 m. reliable relationship between frequency, and the longitudinal or compression ( P seismic Several that is, ) wave

NOTE 5 - In cases where rock refraction techniques can be used to investigators have found a fairly number of discontinuities per metre, velocity Vp.

NOTE 6 - The spacing or frequency of discontinuities can also be determined from analysis of drill core and from borehole viewing techniques such as borehole television cameras, photographic cameras and borehole periscopes.

5. PRESENTATION

OF RESULTS

5.1 The minimum, modal and maximum spacing, S ( Min ), S and S ( Max ) should be recorded for each discontinuity set. The distributions can conveniently be presented as histograms, one for each set ( Fig. 2 ). The following terminology can be used:
Description Spacing

Very close spacing Close spacing Moderate spacing Wide spacing Very wide spacing

<60mm 60-200 mm 200-600 mm 600-2 000 mm > 2 000

5.2 A convenient method of presenting large number of spacing measurements, for which statistical treatment may be required is the use Frequency curves for of histograms, one for each set of discontinuities. each set can be drawn on the same diagram, giving an immediate impression of the respective modal values and dispersions ( using mean in place of modal spacings may help to eliminate difficulties with samples having multiple, poorly-defined modes, and with samples with modes at very small spacing that is from negative exponential distributions ). 5.3 Spacing may also be expressed as the inverse, that is, number of discontinuities per metre. This is termed frequency.

8

