NAT HA IS 5742 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


ata GAIA sik chitin A afer 
yrsat Ay roarai 


( Teel JAQ ) 


Glossary of Terms Relating to 
Industrial Screen and Screening 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 19.120 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 TEE TH HM, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2022 Price Group 7 


Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering 
Division Council. 


A series of Indian Standards relating to Industrial screen and screening has been prepared. These include a large 
number of terms and symbols used for defining Industrial screen and screening. The extensive use of these terms 
and symbols had necessitated the preparation of this Indian standard. 


This standard was originally published in 1970 in two parts as: 
IS 5742 terms and symbols for sieve bottoms 
Part 1 Woven and welded wire screens 
Part 2 Perforated plates 
In this revision, the following modifications have been made: 
a) The erstwhile Part 1 and Part 2 of the standard have been merged thereby including terms and 
definitions relating to wire screens and perforated plates, at one place; and 


b) The standard has been aligned with ISO 9045 : 1990 ‘Industrial screens and screening’ to the extent 
required thereby also adding number of new terms and their definitions. 
In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this 
country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following publications: 


ISO 9045 : 1990 Industrial screens and screening — vocabulary. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 5742 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO INDUSTRIAL 
SCREEN AND SCREENING 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers various terms, symbols 
and their explanations with illustrations relating to 
industrial screen and screening. 


1.2 The terms and their definition given in this standard 
are grouped under the following heads: 

a) Material to be screened; 

b) Industrial screens; 

c) The screening process; and 

d) Products of screening. 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


2.1 Material to be Screened 


2.1.1 Agglomerate — Several particles adhering 
together. 


2.1.2 Angle of Repose — Angle to the horizontal which 
a material will assume naturally when in a stationary 
pile. 


2.1.3 Bone Dry — Material having no surface moisture. 


2.1.4 Bulk Density — The mass in air per unit volume 
of bulk particulate material, including the voids within 
and between particles. 


2.1.5 Feed — Material supplied to a screen for a 
screening process. 


2.1.6 Fines — Particles smaller than a specified size. 


2.1.7 Inherent Moisture — contained moisture: Liquid, 
usually water, held within a sample of a material, 
normally expressed as a percentage of the sample mass. 


2.1.8 Particle (Deprecated: Grain) — Discrete element 
of the material to be screened regardless of its size. 


2.1.9 Particle Size; Sieve Size of a Particle — Smallest 
sieve aperture through which a particle will pass if 
presented in the most favourable attitude. 


2.1.10 Percent Solids — Ratio of dry solids to the 
total solid liquid mixture of material, expressed as a 
percentage by mass. 


2.1.11 Relative Density (Deprecated: Specific 
Gravity) — Ratio of the mass in air of a solid particle 
of a given volume to the mass of an equal volume of 
water. 


2.1.12 Surface Moisture — Liquid adhering to the 
exposed surfaces of the particles of a sample of material, 
normally expressed as a percentage of the sample mass. 


2.2 Industrial Screens 


2.2.1 Amplitude — Maximum displacement from the 
mean position in an oscillating motion. In the case 
of rectilinear motion it is half of the total movement; 
for elliptical motion it is half of the major axis of the 
ellipse. 


2.2.2 Aperture Size (W, in Warp W, In Weft W) — 
Distance between two adjacent warp or weft wires 
measured across the projected level of the cloth. 


ES 
4 


IS 5742 : 2022 


2.2.3 Arrangement of Holes (in Perforated Plate) 3) In straight rows (Q,): 
a) Round holes 


1) In staggered rows (R,): El HE + EI 
60° 
Ae 
Or) E: 4 c) Elongated holes 


1) Staggered with overlapping (LR, ): 


D 


2) In diagonally staggered rows (R,): 


3) In straight rows (R, ): 


b) Square holes 
1) Parallel (staggered) (O, ): 


d) Hexagonal holes 
1) Staggered: 


2.2.4 Backing Screen — Coarse screen placed under a 
finer screening surface for support. 


2.2.5 Bar Screen — Stationary inclined screen, 
comprising longitudinal bars, spaced at regular 
intervals, on to which the material to be screened is fed 
at the upper end. 


2.2.6 Bridge Width (c) — Smallest unperforated length 
between two neighbouring holes measured on punch 
entry side in a perforated plate. 


— c j 


$0 


2.2.7 Centre Distance Between Wires — (t, in Warp ta 
in Weft £) 


Sum of aperture and half the diameters of the adjacent 
wires, strands or threads of diameters d, and d,, 
respectively (W +d/2 + d,/2) measured across the 
projected level of the cloth. The simplified measurement 
is permissible where the cloth is made up of wires 
(strands, threads) of identical diameter d (=d,=d,). 


Ws 


4 


ds 


a 


o 


| 
| 


ale We 
too 


Following are the different types of mesh depending 
upon centre distance between wire: 


a) Square Mesh — Warp and weft wires (strands, 
threads) are the same distance apart W, = W, 


H 


| 
i 
ltn, 


IS 5742 : 2022 


b) Long or Slit Mesh — Warp wires (strands, threads) 
closer together than weft wires (strands, threads) 
W, <W 


u 


k 


c) Broad Mesh — Warp wires (strands, threads) 
further apart than weft wires (strands, threads) 
W, > W, 


4 
u 


d) Rectangle Mesh (R) — Formed by plain wires 
or by wires crimped or stamped vertically to the 
cloth level, when Wa > W, but Wa <3W. 


£ 


a 


Wa 


e) Slot Mesh (S) — Formed by plain wires or by 
wires crimped or stamped vertically to the cloth 
level, when W,>3W.. 


E 
Bi 


IS 5742 : 2022 


f) Zero Mesh — Warp wires (strands or threads) 
widely spaced weft wires (strands or threads) as 
closely spaced as possible (Dutch cloth) W, = 0. 


i N 


Lea 


2.2.8 Crimp — Successive bends in a wire which result 
from preforming or weaving. 


2.2.9 Dutch Weave 


a) Single plain Dutch weave, also called raps, 
cordurey, Dutch or basket weave, or zero mesh 
(SPW). 


b) Reverse plain Dutch weave, similar to the SPW 
but woven “the other way”, that is, thinner and 
more warp wires, thicker and less weft wires 
(RPD). 


0000000000000 000000000 


c) Dutch twill weave or double twill weave, has twice 
the number of weft wires of the same diameter as 
the SPW cloth ‘light-right’ weave (DTW). 


m et mu ee ee > 


d) BMTor ‘OPEN DTW’ isa broad mesh twill weave 
woven similarly to the DTW cloth, but not ‘light 


tight ; the weft wires are further apart and slightly 
irregular 


EEE ICON ZO, NT 


Z LEE EEE 
EEE EEE VEEL: 


ZL 


ETA LLL 


<a A RO 


2.2.10 Eccentricity — Maximum displacement from 
the mean position in a circular oscillating motion, for 
example: the radius of the circle. 


2.2.11 Edge Preparation — The fabrication on the 
edges of a screen section for holding or tensioning 
purposes. 


2.2.12 End Tensioning — Tensioning of the screen 
section parallel to the flow of the material on the 
screening surface. 


2.2.13 Equivalent Round Hole — Diameter of the 
round holes in a perforated plate which will screen 
similarly to a perforated plate or a woven wire cloth 
with specified square apertures. 


2.2.14 Fixed Screen; Static Screen — Stationary 
inclined screen used to remove a proportion of the fines 
from a dry feed or a proportion of the liquid and the 
fines from a pulp or slurry, by force of gravity. 


2.2.15 Frequency — For vibrating screen, the number 
of oscillations made by the screen per unit of time, 
expressed in hertz (Hz). 


2.2.16 Grizzly — Rugged screen comprising fixed 
or moving bars, discs, or shaped tumblers or rollers, 
normally used for screening comparatively large 
particles, for example: greater than 100 mm. 


2.2.17 Guard Screen — Screen used to prevent the 
entry into a machine of coarse particles which might 
interfere with its operation. 


2.2.18 Hole Length (1) (in Perforated Plate) — Longest 
dimension of the hole. 


[<< | — [l 


2.2.19 Hole Width (W) (in Perforated Plate) 


a) For round holes — Diameter of the perforation. 


b) For square holes — Length of the side of the hole. 


c) For elongated holes — Smaller dimension of the 
hole. 


d) For hexagonal holes — Diameter of the inscribed 
circle. 


2.2.20 Hook — Metal edge used to stretch and/or to 
fasten the screen section. 


2.2.21 High Speed Screen — Inclined screen, with a 
rectilinear or circular oscillating motion, normally 
operated at a frequency greater than 20 Hz. 


2.2.22 Horizontal Screen — Vibrating screen with a 
motion which is substantially in a straight line in the 
vertical, normally installed horizontally, but may be 
inclined up to 8°. 


IS 5742 : 2022 


2.2.23 Inclined Screen — Vibrating screen with a 
rectilinear or circular oscillating motion, normally 
installed at an angle between 10° and 36°. 


2.2.24 Mesh Count — Number of apertures per unit of 
linear measure in a woven wire cloth or wire screen. 


2.2.25 Multiplex 


Twill weave, 4 shaft, multiple strands in warp and 
weft, left lay multiplex 


u nn ee 


EXAMPLE OF COVERED WEFT WIRE 


PORC AAA 


2.2.26 Passage Cross Section — The cut made 
perpendicular to the plane of sieving through the 
middle of a hole in a perforated plate. 


a) Parallel 


b) Conical 


2.2.27 Percentage Open Area 
a) For woven wire cloth and wire screens, the ratio 
of the total area of the apertures to the total area of 
the cloth or the screen. 
b) For perforated plate, the ratio of the total area of 
the holes to the total area of the perforated part of 
the plate (excluding any non-perforated parts). 


2.2.28 Perforated Plate — Screening surface consisting 
of a plate with uniform holes in a regular arrangements. 


2.2.29 Perforated Plate Side 


a) Length of the side of the perforated plate in the 
direction of the larger hole spacing (a). 


IS 5742 : 2022 


b) Length of the side of the perforated plate in the 
direction of the smaller hole spacing (4,). 


— b, _ =- 


2.2.30 Pitch (of Hole in Perforated Plate) — Distance 
between corresponding points of two adjacent apertures 
in a woven wire cloth, a wire screen or a perforated 
plate. Following are the type of pitch: 
a) For round holes (t) — Distance between centre of 
two neighbouring holes. 


1=042=c+W 


b) For square holes (t): 


1) Straight and diagonal rows — Distance 
between centres of two neighbouring square 
holes. 

t=c+W 


2) Parallel rows of staggered hole — Distance 
between the centres of two neighbouring 
square holes or distance between centres of 
two rows of square holes. 


t=c+W 


c) For elongated holes 
1) Straight rows of holes 

i) Transverse pitch (t,) — Distance 
between centres of two neighbouring 
elongated holes, measured along the line 
perpendicular to their longitudinal axis. 

Lc FW 

ii) Longitudinal pitch (t,) — Distance 
between centres of two neighbouring 
elongated holes along their longitudinal 
axis. 


2) Staggered holes (non-overlapping) 

i) Transverse pitch (t,) — Distance between 
centres of two neighbouring elongated 
holes, measured transverse to their 
longitudinal axis. 


hac, tw 
ii) Longitudinal pitch (t,) — Distance 
between centres of two neighbouring, 
staggered elongated holes rows, measured 


IS 5742 : 2022 


along the longitudinal direction of the b) Plain weave, double warp 
holes. 


3) Staggered holes (overlapping) 


i) Transverse pitch (t,) — Distance between 
centres of two non-staggered elongated 
holes, measured perpendicular to the 
longitudinal axis of the holes without 
considering the staggered hole in between. 


t=2c,+2W 
ii) Longitudinal pitch (t,) — Distance between 
centres of two neighbouring elongated holes, 
measured along their longitudinal axis. 


=c, +I 


2.2.32 Plain Weaves, Woven with Precrimped Wire 
a) Form A — Double crimp 


2.2.31 Plain Weave — Weave in which every warp wire 
crosses alternately above and below every weft wire 
and vice versa. Following are the types of plain weave: 


a) Plain weave 
SEO ee E a Se TB, 
“Nee Eee e 


b) Form B — Single intermediate crimp 


IS 5742 : 2022 


c) Form C — Double intermediate crimp 


HEH 
ERRE 


d) Form D — Lock crimp 


ne ug m 


e) Form E — Flat top crimp 


SSeS — o 
2.2.33 Plain Wire — Wire which has not been crimped 


or stamped prior to weaving. 


2.2.34 Plate Thickness — Thickness of the plate before 
perforation. 


2.2.35 Precrimped Wire — Wire, which has been 
crimped prior to weaving 


ee NS E 


2.2.36 Prestamped Wire — Wire, which has been 
stamped prior to weaving 


EE I] 


2.2.37 Punch Side — Surface of a perforated plate from 
which the punch entered. 


2.2.38 Reciprocating Screen, Jigging Screen — Screen 
or pair of screens to which a combined horizontal 
and vertical motion is imparted by a crank-shaft and 
connecting rods, the screening surfaces being horizontal 
or inclined at a small angle. 


2.2.39 Relieving Deck — Screen, mounted above 
another screen, with apertures normally at least twice 
the size of those in the lower deck, used to reduce the 
load and wear of the lower screening surface. 


2.2.40 Resonance Screen — Screen with a period of 
oscillation close to the natural period of oscillation of 
the resilient mounting. 


2.2.41 Revolving Screen; Trommel — Screen in which 
the screening surface is formed into a cylinder or 
frustum of a cone, mounted on a horizontal or near- 
horizontal rotating shaft or on revolving rollers. The 
material to be screened is fed into the interior of the 
revolving screen. 


2.2.42 Rod Screen — Screening surface consisting of 
parallel wire rods positioned at right angles to the flow 
of material on the screen. 


2.2.43 Roll Screen — Screen consisting of a number of 
horizontal rotating shafts, fitted with elements arranged 
to provide screening apertures. 


2.2.44 Round Hole Equivalent — The dimensions of the 
square apertures in a perforated plate or in a wire cloth 
which will screen similarly to a perforated plate with 
specified round or a woven wire screen respectively. 


2.2.45 Screen — Device for carrying out the process of 
screening for industrial purposes. 


NOTE — The term 
abbreviation for ‘screening surface’ or ‘screen deck’ (see 
2.2.48). 


‘screen’ is also a commonly used 


2.2.46 Screen Opening — The clear space between the 
wires, strands or threads. 


2.2.47 Screen Panel — Finished piece of screening 
medium complete with edge preparation. 


2.2.48 Screening Surface; Screen Deck — A sheet 
with regular openings of the same size in a regular 
arrangement for screening purposes (see 2.3.11). 


2.2.49 Side Tensioning — Tensioning of the screen 
section at right angles to the flow of the material on the 
screening surface. 


2.2.50 Sieve Bend — Device for screening fine particles 
suspended in liquid by means of a stationary curved 
panel, whereby the finer particles are removed from the 
bulk of the liquid in the underflow. It is also used as a 
first stage dewatering device. 


2.2.51 Sifter — Type of screen having a rotary motion 
substantially in the plane of the screening surface, 
normally used for the screening of comparatively small 
particles, for example: less than 1 mm. 


2.2.52 Stroke; Throw — Distance between the extreme 
positions of an oscillating motion. The stroke is equal 
to twice the amplitude. 


2.2.53 Twilled Weave — Weave in which every warp 
wire crosses alternately above and below every second 
weft wire and vice versa. Following are the type of 
Twill weave (right or left lay): 


a) Twill weave, 3 shaft, i“ lay 


Cc twill weave with 


wa 


Herringbone twill, 4 shaft, 


change 
aa 


IS 5742 : 2022 


d) Satin weave, 5 shaft, right lay 


@ © 6. 28 8 6 9-23 
—— AN 


2.2.54 Types of Holes — Following are the types of 
holes in perforated plate: 
a) Round holes (R) — Holes of circular shape; 
b) Squares holes (O) — Holes of square shape; 
c) Elongated holes (LR) — Elongated holes with 
rounded ends; 
d) Hexagonal holes (H) — Holes with six sides 
‚and 
e) Other holes — All other holes are used for sieving 
only in special cases. 


2.2.55 Undersize Control Screen; Breakage Screen — 
Screen used for the removal of undesirable undersize 
from a material. 


2.2.56 Unperforated Border/Margin — Distance 
between two outside edges of the holes of the extreme 
row and the edge of the plate, measured perpendicular 
to the latter on punch entry side. 


a) For equal borders 


e= Inthe direction of the greater distance between 
the hole rows; and 


f= Inthe direction of the smaller distance between 
the hole rows. 


IS 5742 : 2022 


b) For unequal borders 
e, = Smaller unperforated border; 
e, = Bigger unperforated border; 
J, = Smaller unperforated border; and 
J,= Bigger unperforated border. 


ef, e = f 
L | DAAA 
Sa AZ E 
DEM TE ae 
UA a er 
¡GAME A A 
Y E E 


e2 


1 


2.2.57 Vibrating Screen — Screen oscillated either by 
mechanical or by electrical means. 


2.2.58 Warp (k) — All wires, strands or threads running 
parallel to the cloth selvedge. 


2.2.59 Weave — The way in which warp and weft wires 
cross each other. 


2.2.60 Wedge Wire Screen; Profile Wire Deck — 
Screening surface of triangular or trapezoidal 
cross-section spaced from each other at a fixed 
dimension; the underflow thus passes through an 
aperture of increasing cross-section. 


2.2.61 Weft (s) — All wires, strands or threads running 
at right angles to the cloth selvedge. 


2.2.62 Welded Mesh 
a) Form F — Welded mesh 


2.2.63 Wire Diameter (d, in Warp d, in Weft d) — 
Measured across the projected level of the finished 
cloth. 


2.2.64 Wire for Screens — Single cored round, square 
or other forms of cross-section made out of metal or 
other synthetic material. 


10 


2.2.65 Woven Wire Cloth; Wire Screen — Screening 
surface, produced by a wire weaving process or by 
pressure-welding of two layers of parallel wires. The 
wires form square or rectangular apertures of uniform 
size. They may be precrimped before weaving. 
NOTE — In English, flexible screening surfaces which can be 
rolled up are usually designated as ‘woven wire cloth’. More 
rigid surfaces, predominantly made from precrimped wires 
and/or produced by pressure-welding, are designated as ‘wire 
screen’. 


2.3 The Screening Process 


2.3.1 Blinding; Clogging — The condition where very 
fine particles adhere to a screening surface and reduce 
the apertures or close them completely. 


2.3.2 De-dusting; Polishing — Removal of very fine 
particles from a feed by dry methods. 


2.3.3 De-sliming — Removal of very fine particles 
from a feed by dry methods. 


2.3.4 Dewatering — Removal of free water from solid 
material. 


2.3.5 Direction of Flow — Direction in which the 
material is led over the screen. It is fixed by the method 
of working of the sieving arrangement. 


2.3.6 Dry Screening — Screening without the aid of a 
liquid. 


2.3.7 Overflow — That portion of the feed discharged 
from the screening surface without having passed 
through the apertures. 


2.3.8 Pegging — The condition where particles wedge 
in the screen apertures. 


2.3.9 Rinsing — Removal by spraying, usually with 
water, of fine or foreign material present among or 
adhering to larger particles. 


2.3.10 Scaling — Removal of a small amount of the 
feed, usually unwanted oversize material. 


2.3.11 Screening — Industrial process of separation of 
solid particulate material according to particle size by 
causing part to remain on a screening surface provided 
with apertures through which the remainder passes. 


2.3.12 Sizing — Screening of particulate material into 
fractions, each defined by limits of size. 


2.3.13 Stratification — Process whereby the larger 
size particles rise to the top of a bed of material being 
shaken or vibrated, while the smaller size particles sift 
through the voids and find their way to the bottom of 
the bed. 


2.3.14 Underflow — That portion ofthe feed which has 
passed through the apertures of a screening surface. 


2.3.15 Wet Screening — Screening with the aid of a 
liquid, usually in the form of a spray. 


2.4 Products of Screening 


2.4.1 Mean Size — The weighted average particle 
size of a sample, batch or consignment of particulate 
material. 


2.4.2 Near-Sized Material; Near-Mesh Material — 
Particles approximating in size to the aperture size of 
the screening surface. 


11 


IS 5742 : 2022 


2.4.3 Nominal Size — The particle size used to describe 
a product of a sizing operation. 


2.4.4 Oversize — Screened product of a size greater 
than a specified size. 


2.4.5 Product — In general, the material resulting from 
any operation. In particular, the final material produced 
from a series of operations, for example: screened 
product, finished product, etc. 


2.4.6 Size Fraction — The interval between two quoted 
limiting sizes of the material with particle sizes between 
those limits. 


2.4.7 Undersize — Screened product of a size smaller 
than a specified size. 


IS 5742 : 2022 


ANNEXA 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSTION 
Sieves, Sieving and Other Sizing Methods Sectional Committee, CED 55 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity, (90, Savita Vihar, Vikas Marg, 


Delhi 110092), Delhi 
AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 


Associated Soapstone Distributing Co Pvt Ltd, 
Jaipur 


Cement Corporation of India Limited, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 
Haver Standard India Pvt Limited, Mumbai 

Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Industrial Wire Netting Company, New Delhi 


Jayant Scientific Industries, Mumbai 
MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-chief’s 
Branch, Integrated HQ of Ministry of Defence, 
New Delhi 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Faridabad 


National Mineral Development Corporation 
Limited, Hyderabad 


National Test House, Kolkata 


Steel Authority of India Ltd, Kolkata 


Tata Steel Limited (Mines Division), Singhbhum 
Ultratech Cement Ltd, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr R. P. SINGHAL (Chairman) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
SHRI MADAN KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIKRAM GOLCHA 
SHRI DILIP JHA (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI SARASWATHI DEVI 
SHRI ANURAG KUMAR SANI (Alternate) 


SHRI VINAYAK RAI 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI AMARDEEP SINGH 
Suri B. K. MUNZMI (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 
DR PRADEEP KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SANJAY YADAV 
Dr Nita DILAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVEN H. SHAH 
SHRI VIKRAM D. SHAH (Alternate) 


Suri M. G. RAUT 
SHRI V. A. SONTAKKEY (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI KESHAV GUPTA 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri D. K. SINGH 
Suri S. N. HAZRA (Alternate) 


SHRI P. K. JAIN 
SHRI SOMESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SURESH KUMAR 
Suri G. J. NAIDU (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. SHARMA 
SHRI G. V. Rao (Alternate) 


SHRI VIVEK SHARMA 
SHRIMATI MAYMOLE BOBEN (Alternate) 


SHRI BIPIN KUMAR GRI 
SHRI SIBABRATA BASAK (Alternate) 


SHRI NIRMAL K. BHATTACHARJEE 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRAN K. P. 
SHRI DEVENDRA PANDEY (Alternate) 


12 


IS 5742 : 2022 


Organization Representative(s) 
In Personal Capacity (Indian Institute of ProF B. PITCHUMANI 
Technology, Hauz Khas, New Delhi 110 016 ) 
In personal capacity (B-129, F-2, Ramprastha SHRI VIRENDRA BABU 
Colony, Ghaziabad 201011), Ghaziabad 
BIS Directorate General SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-office) ] 


Member Secretary 


Dr MANOJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


13 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part ofthese publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 55 (17613). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western E Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAL 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


