Waa Wah IS 15700 : 2018 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


Wad wat ugha — aw 
War Gaal gaT War 
Tora Haa 
(Veer Fata ) 


Quality Management 
Systems — Requirements for 
Service Quality by Public 
Service Organizations 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 03.120.10 


© BIS 2018 


Rds AM oR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM AJA, 9 Fags SL Art, ae feeet-110002 
wasi MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2018 Price Group 3 


Quality Management Sectional Committee, MSD 02 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Quality Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division 
Council. 


All organizations, large or small, have an established system for managing their business. A quality management 
system aids an organization in managing its business activities with quality of services as a primary objective. 
Quality management system helps an organization establish processes that enable it to provide quality service 
consistently. Quality management standards do not prescribe or define service characteristics or norms that are 
usually specified in citizens’ charter (first party), service level agreements (second party) or regulations or service 
standards (third party). Hence quality management system standards do not substitute but complement service 
standards. The use of service standards together with quality management system standards not only helps in 
maintaining but also in improving quality of services, which results in enhancing customers’ satisfaction. 


One practical difficulty in achieving service delivery excellence is the lack of a common understanding on what 
is considered excellent, satisfactory or acceptable quality of service delivery across different organizations and 
geographical locations. In this context, the role of service norms in public services becomes significant. If service 
norms are clearly laid down and widely known, service-recipients know what to expect and service-providers 
also know what must be delivered. Therefore, the fundamental tenet of this standard is laying down and clearly 
communicating service norms (including norms for grievance redress) and taking necessary steps to ensure that 
the norms are consistently met. 


This standard is generic in nature and meant for implementation by Public Service Organizations (PSO), a term 
which covers governmental as well as other organizations. Department of Administrative Reforms & Public 
Grievances, Government of India has specified a set of requirements called SEVOTTAM for Ministries, Government 
Departments and other organizations having a direct interface with the public for delivery of services. 


Some Government Departments especially Ministries do not have direct interface with citizens and instead deal 
primarily with ‘clients’ who could be internal customers. However, these Government Departments/Ministries in 
their role as regulators and/or policy makers, indirectly affect the public at large and can therefore, be treated as 
Public Service Organizations. The contents of this edition of the standard have been suitably modified to also 
address such organizations. 


Quality management systems standards take into consideration eight quality management principles, namely, 
customer focus, leadership, involvement of people, process approach, system approach to management, continual 
improvement, factual approach to decision making, and mutually beneficial supplier relationships, which are 
relevant and applicable to all organizations providing service. 


This standard has been specifically designed for the public service organizations, and in its formulation, 
considerable assistance has been drawn from IS/ISO 9000 series of standards, IS/ISO 10002 : 2004 ‘Quality 
management — Customer satisfaction — Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations’ and Government 
of India guidelines on ‘citizens’ charter’ and ‘Public grievance handling’. The users are encouraged to refer to 
IS 15800 : 2007 ‘Quality management systems — Guidelines for service quality by public service organization’, 
as it provides guidance on IS 15700. It also includes examples to effectively explain the concepts of IS 15700. 


This standard can be used by internal and external parties, including certification bodies, to assess the organization’s 
ability to meet customer, regulatory and statutory requirements. 


IS 15700 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS — REQUIREMENTS 
FOR SERVICE QUALITY BY PUBLIC SERVICE 
ORGANIZATIONS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies requirements for a quality 
management system where a public service organization 


a) needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently 
provide effective and efficient service that 
meets customer and applicable legal, statutory 
and regulatory requirements; 


b) aims to enhance customer satisfaction; and 


c) aims to continually improve its service and 
service delivery process. 


1.2 The requirements for complaints handling process 
covered in this standard do not apply for employment 
related disputes and/or disputes referred for resolution 
outside an organization. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provision, which 
through reference in this text constitutes provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent edition of the standard indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


15800 : 2007 Quality management systems — 
Guidelines for service quality by 


public service organizations 


IS/ISO 9000: Quality management systems — 

2005 Fundamentals and vocabulary (third 
revision) 

IS/ISO 10002: Quality management — Customer 

2004 satisfaction — Guidelines for 


complaints handling in organizations 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the following terms 
and definitions, in addition to that given in IS/ISO 9000 
shall apply. 


3.1 Citizens’ Charter — It is a written document 
declaring the intentions and the commitment of an 
organization for providing effective and efficient 


service, taking into account customer’s expectations 
and minimum acceptable levels of service, thereby 
providing assurance that the organization complies 
with its declared service quality standards. 


NOTES 


1 It may also sometimes be called Clients’ Charter or Citizens’/ 
Clients’ Charter depending upon whether the organization is 
primarily dealing with client or both citizen and client. 


2 The term ‘Clients’ Charter’ may be used to address services 
being rendered to other Government Agencies, State 
Government or own internal departments. 


3.2 Complaint (Grievance) — Expression of 
dissatisfaction made to an organization related to its 
products, services and/or process(es), where a response 
or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected. 


3.3 Complainant — Person, organization, or its 
representative, making a complaint. 


3.4 Complaints Handling Objective — Something 
sought, or aimed for, related to complaints handling. 


3.5 Customer — Organization or person that receives 
a product and/or service. 


NOTES 


1 Example, consumer, client, citizen, end-user, beneficiary or 
purchaser. 


2 The customer can be internal or external to the organization. 


3.6 Customer Satisfaction — Customer’s perception 
of the degree to which the customer’s requirements 
have been fulfilled. 


NOTES 


1 Customer complaints are a common indicator of low customer 
satisfaction but their absence does not necessarily imply high 
customer satisfaction. 
2 Even when customer requirements have been agreed with 
the customer and fulfilled, this does not necessarily ensure high 
customer satisfaction. 


3.7 Feedback — Opinions, comments, suggestions 
and expressions of satisfaction/dissatisfaction when a 
response is not explicitly expected. 


3.8 Non-Conformity — Non-fulfilment of a 
requirement. 


3.9 Public Service Organization — An organization 
which provides service(s) to public at large and/or 
whose activities influence public interest. 


IS 15700 : 2018 


Example: 


Government ministries and departments, Regulatory 
bodies, Public utility service providers, branches/units 
of multi-location organizations, etc. 


NOTE — Wherever, the term ‘organization’ has been used in 
this standard, it means ‘public service organization’. 


3.10 Quality — Degree to which a set of inherent 
characteristics fulfils requirements. 
NOTES 
1 The ‘requirements’ include product and/or service 
requirements. 


2 ‘Inherent’, as opposed to ‘assigned’, means existing in 
something, especially as a permanent characteristic. 


3.11 Service — The results generated, by activities at 
the interface between the organization and the customer 


and by organization’s internal activities, to meet 
customer requirements. 


3.12 Service Delivery — The organization’s activities, 
including those at the customer interface, necessary to 
provide the service. 


3.13 Service Quality Objectives — Something 
sought, or aimed for, related to service quality. 
3.14 Service Quality Policy — The overall intentions 


and direction of an organization as regards service 
quality, as formally expressed by top management. 


3.15 Stakeholder (Interested Party) — Person or 
group having an interest in the performance or success 
of an organization. 


Example: 
Customers, owners, people in an organization, suppliers, 
bankers, unions, partners or society. 

NOTE — A group can comprise an organization, a part thereof, 


or more than one organization. 


3.16 Top Management — Person or group of people, 
who directs and controls an organization at the highest 
level. 


4 DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS 
4.1 General 


The organization shall document the following: 


a) Service quality manual; 

b) Citizens’ charter; 

c) Any other document needed by the 
organization for effective planning, operation 
and control of its service and service delivery 
processes; and 

d) Records required by this standard (see 4.4). 


4.2 Service Quality Manual 


The organization shall establish and maintain a service 
quality manual which includes 


a) scope of service quality management system; 


b) service quality policy; 

c) service quality objectives; 

d) complaints handling objectives; 

e) responsibility and authority of personnel at 
relevant levels within the scope of this 
standard; 

f) documented procedures required by this 
standard; 

g) description of service processes including 
service delivery processes and those needed 
to directly support them (see 7.2); and 

h) other documents, needed by the organization 
for effective planning, operation and control 
of its service and service delivery processes, 
or reference to them. 


4.3 Control of Documents 


4.3.1 All the documents required by this standard or 
identified by the organization as essential for its service 
quality management system shall be 


a) approved for adequacy prior to issue; 

b) reviewed periodically, updated as necessary 
and re-approved. The changes made shall be 
identified and the nature of change shall be 
clearly stated; and 

c) legible and identifiable indicating their current 
revision status. 


4.3.2 The organization shall 


a) maintain a master list of all documents, which 
also identifies their current revision status; 

b) maintain distribution list of all such 
documents; 

c) ensure that the current versions of applicable 
documents are available at point of use; 

d) ensure that obsolete documents, if retained for 
any purpose, are suitably identified to prevent 
their unintended use; and 

e) ensure that the documents of external origin 
are identified and their distribution controlled. 


4.3.3 A documented procedure shall be established to 
define the controls needed for the above. 


4.4 Control of Records 


Records (including files) shall be maintained to provide 
evidence of conformity to requirements and for the 
effective operation of the management system for service 
quality. The records shall remain legible, readily 
identifiable and easily retrievable. The method of 
identification, storage, protection, disposal of each record, 
their retention time and responsibility for each of these 
activities shall be established in a documented procedure. 


5 MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY 


5.1 Management Commitment 
Top management shall 


a) establish the service quality policy (see 5.3.1); 

b) establish the citizens’ charter (see 7.1); 

c) ensure that service quality objectives and 
complaints handling objectives are established; 

d) conduct management reviews; and 

e) ensure the availability of resources. 


5.2 Customer Focus 


Top management shall ensure that the customer 
requirements are determined and are met with the aim 
of enhancing customer satisfaction. 


5.3 Service Quality Policy 


5.3.1 Top management shall ensure that service quality 
policy 

a) is documented; 

b) is appropriate to the purpose of the 
organization; 

c) is made available to all stakeholders; 

d) is communicated and understood within the 
organization; 

e) includes a commitment to comply with 
requirements and to continually improve the 
effectiveness of the quality management 
system; and 

f) is reviewed for continuing suitability. 


5.3.2 The service quality policy shall provide a 
framework for establishing and reviewing service 
quality objectives. 


5.4 Objectives 


Service quality objectives shall be consistent with the 
service quality policy and shall be established at 
relevant functions and levels within the organization. 
All the objectives shall be measurable and documented. 


5.5 When establishing the above policy and objectives, 
the following factors shall be taken into account: 


a) The internal and external context of the 
organization; 
b) Input of customers and other stakeholders; 


c) Any relevant legal, statutory and regulatory 
requirements; and 
d) Financial, operational and other 


organizational requirements. 


5.6 Responsibility, Authority and Communication 


5.6.1 Top management shall ensure that the 
responsibilities and authorities are established at 


IS 15700 : 2018 


relevant functions and levels, and communicated 
within the organization. 


5.6.2 Working Group for Citizens’ Charter 


Top management shall constitute a working group for 
formulation and review of the citizens’ charter. The 
working group shall include representatives from top 
management, middle management, staff association/ 
unions, customers and other stakeholders. The selection 
of team members shall be done in a transparent manner, 
the details of which are accessible to public. 


NOTES 


1 Where a Citizens’ Charter has already been formulated at 
the apex level, the unit level top management may adapt it in 
accordance with the services offered. 


2 The unit may set up a working group for the adaption of the 
Citizens’ Charter, if required. 


5.6.2.1 The responsibilities of the working group shall 
include 


a) identifying all service recipients of the 
organization; 

b) identifying all key services provided by the 
organization; 

c) preparing a draft Citizens’ Charter in 
consultation with stakeholders; 

d) formally issuing/releasing the Citizens’ 
Charter after its approval by appropriate 
authority; and 

e) reviewing and updating the Citizens’ Charter, 
as necessary, based on the feedback and 
continuing suitability. 


5.6.3 Nodal Officer 


5.6.3.1 Top management shall appoint a nodal officer 
who, shall have responsibilities and authority, which 
include 


a) ensuring that processes needed for the service, 
service delivery, citizens’ charter and 
complaints handling and obtaining feedback 
are established, implemented and maintained; 

b) acting as member-secretary of the working 
group for formulation and review of the 
Citizens’ Charter; 

c) reporting to top management of any 
complaints which have a significant impact 
on the organization; 

d) reporting to the top management on the 
performance of the service quality 
management system; and 

e) planning and organizing internal audit 
(see 8.3). 


NOTES 
1 In larger organizations, the responsibility of nodal officer 
may be delegated at different levels. 


IS 15700 : 2018 


2 Large organizations having multiple units may have nodal 
officers at the apex level and at the unit level. 

3 While nodal officer at apex level shall be responsible for the 
above, he may take the help of other officers in the organization, 
if required, on account of administrative exigencies or in public 
interest. 

4 The responsibility of the nodal officer may also include 
liaison with the certifying body. 


5.6.4 Internal Communication 


Top management shall ensure that appropriate 
communication processes are established within the 
organization so that effective communication takes 
place for the various processes related to service(s), 
Citizens’ Charter and complaints handling. 


5.7 Management Review 


5.7.1 Top management shall review the organization’ s 
management systems for service quality, Citizens’ 
Charter and complaints handling at planned intervals 
to ensure their continuing suitability, adequacy, 
efficiency and effectiveness. This review shall include 
assessing opportunities for improvement and the need 
for changes, including the service quality policy and 
objectives. Records of management reviews shall be 
maintained (see 4.4). 


5.7.2 The input to management review shall include 
information on 


a) follow-up actions from previous reviews; 

b) results of internal audit (see 8.3) and external 
audits to this standard, if any; 

c) customer feedback; 

d) changing customer requirements; 

e) change in external environment including 
technological changes; 

f) Change in statutory/regulatory requirements 
affecting service delivery; 

g) feedback from other stakeholders; 

h) extent to which objectives are achieved; 

j) status of preventive/corrective actions; 

k) review of service outcomes and process 
performance; 

m) complaints; and 

n) recommendations for improvement. 


5.7.3 Review output shall include any decisions and 
actions related to 


a) improvement in service quality standards; 

b) improvement in customer satisfaction; 

c) improvement in the management systems for 
service quality, Citizens’ Charter and 
complaints handling; and 

d) Resource needs. 


6 RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 


6.1 The organization shall determine and provide 
resources for effective implementation of management 


systems for service quality, Citizens’ Charter and 
complaints handling. The resources shall include 
human resources, infrastructure and work environment. 


6.2 The organization shall ensure that the personnel are 


a) selected on the basis of capability to satisfy 
defined job specifications; 

b) trained to ensure that they understand the tasks 
to be performed and the objectives to be 
achieved including how they contribute to the 
achievement of objectives; 

c) aware of their responsibilities including 
promptly reporting on complaints/feedback 
which have a significant impact on the 
organization; and 

d) aware of procedures to be followed and 
information to be given to the customers. 


6.2.1 The training records shall be maintained (see 4.4). 


6.2.2 The organization shall ensure that the personnel, 
who are in direct contact with the customers 


a) are available and accessible, as specified; 

b) are sensitized to treat customers in a courteous 
manner; 

c) respond promptly to customer’s enquiry/ 
complaint; 

d) provide accurate, updated and complete 
information; and 

e) possess good interpersonal and good 
communication skills. 


6.3 Infrastructure and Work Environment 


The organization shall determine, provide and maintain 
the infrastructure and work environment necessary for 
effective service quality and complaints handling. 


7 CITIZENS’ CHARTER, SERVICE PROVISION 
AND COMPLAINTS HANDLING 


7.1 Citizens’ Charter 
7.1.1 The Citizens’ Charter shall contain 


a) vision and mission statement of the organization; 

b) list of key service(s) being offered by the 
organization; 

c) measurable service norms for the service(s) 
provided and remedies available to the 
customer for non-compliance to these norms; 

d) the name, address, telephone number and other 
contact details of the public grievance officer; 

e) expectations of the organization from its 
customers; 

f) information on the date of issue of the 
Citizens’ Charter and who all were consulted 
during its preparation; and 

g) description or reference to complaints 
handling process. 


7.1.2 The Citizens’ Charter shall 


a) 
b) 


d) 
e) 


be documented; 

represent a systematic effort of the 
organization to focus on its commitment 
towards its customers; 

be simple and easily understandable and also 
printed in local languages, as required; 

be non-discriminatory; 

be periodically reviewed for continued 
suitability; and 

be updated based on changes in services 
offered, delivery mechanisms and service 
standards or any other input. 


7.2 Service Provision 


The organization shall 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


g) 


h) 


aD) 


k) 


devise a suitable method to ensure that 
services being provided by the organization 
take into account expectations of the customer 
and regulatory requirements; 

ensure that the service delivery processes are in 
line with the service norms(standards) declared 
in the Citizen’s Charter, service quality policy 
and objectives defined by the organization; 
ensure that the quality of the products and/or 
services purchased and/or outsourced meets 
requirements, which affects its service quality; 
where the service delivery involves other public 
service organizations, develop suitable/ 
effective service level agreements and channels 
of communication with them to ensure 
seamless and uninterrupted flow of services; 
ensure availability of procedures/work 
instructions, information, wherever necessary, 
and their implementation so that service 
delivery processes are carried out, as designed 
and specified; 

ensure that equipment and facilities that 
constitute a part of service delivery, are 
suitable and conform to standards established 
by the organization. The equipment shall be 
maintained and verified at periodic intervals; 
ensure suitable infrastructure in line with the 
service delivery requirements; 

identify relevant verification activities in the 
service delivery process flow and at the service 
delivery interface and ensure that verification 
is carried out by responsible persons; 
identify, verify, protect and safeguard the 
customer property and information, whenever 
provided by the customer for its use in service; 
ensure implementation of monitoring and 
measuring mechanisms for service norms as 
specified in the Citizens’ Charter; 


IS 15700 : 2018 


m) ensure availability of clear and precise 


n) 


p) 


q) 


information and/or instructions to customers for 
effective service and service delivery process; 


ensure professional, honest and courteous 
behaviour of the service delivery personnel; 


review the changes to regulatory and policy 
changes for their impact to service delivery 
processes, and provide timely information in 
this regard to existing and potential customers; 
and 


make a provision for emergency preparedness 
to ensure essential service levels to customers 
in the event of a crisis. 


7.3 Complaints Handling 


The organization shall establish a documented 
procedure for complaint handling process. 


Various steps in the complaints handling process shall 
include the following: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


g) 


Identification of complaint prone areas in a 
systematic manner and determine the time 
norms for their redress; 


Establishing complaints handling objectives, 
as appropriate; 
Providing information concerning complaints 
handling process in clear language and formats 
accessible to all. Such information shall include: 
1) where and how the complaints can be made, 
2) minimum information to be provided by 
complainant, and 
3) time limits within which the complaint 
will be closed. 
Widely publicizing the information about 
complaints handling process through print, web 
and other media. The name, address, telephone 
number and other contact details of the public 
grievance officer of the organization shall also 
be displayed prominently at the reception and 
other convenient places in the organization; 


Unique identification of the complaint and 
recording necessary information including 
relevant details of complainant, remedy 
requested, due date of redress, relevant data 
related to the complaint and immediate action 
to be taken (if any); 


Scrutiny of the type and nature of complaint 
and its prioritization depending upon its 
seriousness and gravity; 
Acknowledgement of each complaint 
promptly giving the complaint number along 
with an indication of the redress time and the 
contact details of the employee to be contacted 
for all future correspondence; 


IS 15700 : 2018 


h) Investigation of relevant circumstances and 
information relating to the complaint. The level 
of investigation shall be commensurate with 
the seriousness and severity of the complaint. 
If the complaint cannot be immediately 
resolved, it shall be dealt in a manner which 
would lead to its effective redress as soon as 
possible and the complainant be intimated; 


j) Communication of the decision to the 
complainant regarding his complaint 
immediately after the decision is taken and 
getting his feedback. In case the decision is 
not in line with the remedy requested by the 
complainant, the justification for the decision 
taken along with alternative internal and 
external recourse available for appeal shall 
also be intimated and the complaint shall then 
be closed; and 


k) The organization shall establish an appeals 
mechanism in case the complainant is not 
satisfied with the remedy offered. The appeal 
mechanism shall ensure independence to ensure 
complete objectivity in handling the appeal. 


8 IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING, 
MEASUREMENT AND IMPROVEMENT 


8.1 Implementation 
The organization shall 


a) establish single-window system at points of 
public contact to facilitate disposal of service 
requests; 


b) set up information and facilitation centres and 
help-lines for information on procedures, 
service request status, etc; 


c) widely publicize the Citizens’ Charter through 
organization’s website, and other media; 

d) prominently display the Citizens’ Charter; and 

e) publish annually the data relating to 
performance viz-a-viz commitment made in 
Citizens’ Charter in the annual report or by 
any other suitable means. 


8.2 Monitoring and Measurement 


8.2.1 The organization shall monitor and measure, 
where applicable 


a) the characteristics of the service and service 
delivery processes to verify that the service 
quality objectives and service norms have 
been met. This shall also be carried out at all 
stages and locations where the organization 
has an interface with the customer; 


b) the performance viz-a-viz commitment made 
in the citizens’ charter and complaints handling 


procedure on a regular basis and report to top 
management with recommendations for 
improvement; and 


c) the working of the complaints handling 
machinery through random checks. 


NOTE — Information appearing in the media may be 
considered for suitable action, as appropriate. 


8.2.1.1 Records of the verification of conformity shall 
be maintained (see 4.4). 


8.2.2 Customer Satisfaction 


The organization shall establish and implement a 
system for measuring customer satisfaction through 
suitably designed methodology. This information shall 
be used for establishing the service norms, quality 
objectives and for continual improvement. 


8.3 Internal Audit 


The organization shall conduct internal audits at 
planned intervals to determine whether the 
management system for service quality conforms to 
the requirements of this standard and to the documents 
established by the organization. An audit plan shall be 
documented indicating the scope, frequency of audit, 
auditor(s), auditee and audit date(s)/time. The 
objectives of audit may include recommendations for 
further improvement. Selection of auditors and conduct 
of audits shall ensure objectivity and impartiality of 
the audit process. Auditors shall not audit their own 
work. The auditee shall ensure that actions are taken 
without undue delay to eliminate detected non- 
conformities and their causes. Follow-up activities shall 
include the verification of the actions taken and 
reporting of verification results. Records of the audits 
shall be maintained (see 4.4). 


NOTE — Guidance can be taken from IS/ISO 19011. 


8.4 Analysis of Data 


The organization shall analyze the data collected during 
monitoring and measurement (see 8.2.1) including 
complaints received and customer satisfaction 
(see 8.2.2) to determine current level of performance 
and opportunities for continual improvement, 
particularly where non-conformities are recurring. 


8.5 Improvement 
8.5.1 Corrective and Preventive Actions 


The organization shall take action to eliminate the 
cause(s) of non-conformities and potential cause(s) in 
order to prevent recurrence and occurrence 
respectively. These shall be appropriate to the effects 
of the non-conformities encountered and potential 
problems. Records of action taken and improvements 
effected shall be maintained (see 4.4). 


IS 15700 : 2018 


ANNEX A 
(Informative) 


(Foreword) 
MATRIX BETWEEN IS 15700 AND SEVOTTAM 


A-1 Indian Standard IS 15700 is generic in nature 
meant for implementation by Public Service 
Organizations (PSO), a term which covers 
governmental as well as other organizations. In 
SEVOTTAM the term organization means 
Ministries/Departments having a direct interface with 
the public for delivery of services. The IS 15700 


prescribes requirements for compliance by PSOs for 
implementation of the standard. SEVOTTAM 
Framework has three Modules, each having three sets 
of criteria which are further divided into 11 elements. 
The matrix given below links the various 
requirements of IS 15700 to the 33 elements of the 
SEVOTTAM criteria: 


IS 15700 SEVOTTAM 
Clause Requirement Element Description 
4.1 General — To document Service Quality Manual, 1.1.2 Understanding service recipient 
Citizens’ Charter, Documents needed by organization, expectations 
Records required by the standard 
4.2 Service Quality Manual to include Scope of SOMS, 1.1.2 Understanding service recipient 
Service Delivery Processes, Service quality policy and expectations. 
objectives, Complaints handling objectives, | 1.1.3 Aligning services offered with 
Responsibility and Authority of personnel, Procedure service recipient expectations 
and other Documents 
4.3 Procedure for Control of Documents 1.1.2 Organization shall have document 
specifying the expectations of the 
service recipients and shall devise 
method to ensure’ that its 
understanding about service 
recipients is correct. 

1.1.3 Organization shall have document 
indicating benchmark standards for 
the main services that it offers. 

3.3.1 Basic infrastructure and facilities 
for service recipients (Forms to be 
available at point of use) 

44 Procedure for Control of Records 

5.1 Top Management Commitment to Establish Service SEVOTTAM guidelines mention of 
quality policy, citizens’ charter, Service quality the ‘organization’ to carry out 
objectives and complaint handling objectives. Conduct various activities. 
management reviews. Ensure availability of resources 

5.2 Customer Focus 1.1.1 Identification of services offered 
Top Management to ensure determination of customer and their standards 
requirements and meeting them to enhance customer] 12 Understanding service recipient 
satisfaction expectations 

3.1.1 Determining and improving citizen 
satisfaction levels 

3.1.2 Measuring citizen satisfaction 
levels across the organization and 
field offices 

5.3 Documented Service Quality Policy 1.1.1 Identification of services offered 


and their standards 


IS 15700 : 2018 
IS 15700 SEVOTTAM 
Clause Requirement Element Description 
5.3.1 |- Appropriateness to purpose of organization 1.3.1 Charter effectiveness assessment 
— Is made available to all stakeholders 1.3.2 Alignment of charter with changes 
— Communicated and understood within the in environment 
organization 1.3.3 Awareness about revision in service 
— Commitment to comply with reguirements and standards and charter 
continually improve the effectiveness of Service 
OMS 
— is reviewed for continuing suitability 
5.3.2. |Service Quality Policy to provide a frame work for 


establishing and reviewing service quality objectives 


5.4 Service Quality Objectives to be Consistent with|1.1.3 Aligning services offered with 
Service Quality Policy, Established at relevant service recipient expectations 
functions and levels, Measurable and documented 22.1 Deena- ime noms Tor 

grievance handling 
2.3.2 Action on grievance prone areas 
through Annual Action Plan 

5.5 Service Quality Objectives to be established taking | 1.1.3 Aligning services offered with 
into account the internal and external context of the service recipient expectations 
organization, input of customers and other 221 Determination. ot trie nonas For 
stakeholders, relevant legal, statutory & regulatory . . 

. : ‘ grievance handling 
requirements, and financial, operational and 
organizational requirements 

5.6.1 |Responsibility, Authority and Communication 3.2.2 Willingness of employee to accept 
Established at relevant functions and levels, related to responsibility. This element 
the scope of the standard and communicated within the requires the organization to specify 
organization duties and responsibilities of 

citizen-facing staff (only) 

5.6.2 |Working Group for Formulation of Citizen Charter 1.1.4 Preparation of Citizens’ Charter 
Includes representatives from top management, middle 1.1.5 Differences in service delivery 
management, staff association/unions, customers and . . 

; : performance across field offices 
other stakeholders. Selection done in transparent 
manner, the details of which are accessible to public 
5.6.2.1 Wa ka of Working Group 1.1.4 Preparation of Citizens’ Charter 
Identification of all service recipients 122 Communication: aboùt ditfetences 
— Identification of all key services provided . . 
BA in actual and prescribed standards 
— Preparation of draft citizen charter i l 
— Formal issue/release of citizen charter after [2-3-3 Action on stlevance: prone: areas 
approval by Appropriate Authority through Charter Review 
— Review and _updation based on Feedback and]3 13 Using citizen satisfaction 
continuing suitability measurement for charter review 

5.6.3 |Nodal Officer 

— Establish, implement and maintain processes 


needed for the service, service delivery, citizens’ 
charter and complaints handling and obtaining 
feedback. 

Member secretary of the working group for 
formulation of citizens’ charter. 

Reporting to top management on performance of 
service quality, citizens’ charter and complaints 
handling. 


IS 15700 : 2018 


IS 15700 SEVOTTAM 
Clause Requirement Element Description 
— Planning and organizing internal quality audit 
5.6.4 |Internal Communication 1.1.5 |Understanding of Charter Content 
1.3.3 | Awareness about revision in service 
standards and charter 
2.3.4 |Action on grievance prone areas 
through internal co-ordination 
3.14 |Creating a citizen focused 
environment across field offices 
5.7 Management Review of organization’s management! 1.3.1 |Charter effectiveness assessment 
systems for service quality, Citizens’ charter and) 2.3.1 (Identification of grievance prone 
complaints handling at planned intervals areas 
2.3.4 |Action on grievance prone areas 
through internal co-ordination 
2.3.5 |Awareness about progress of 
controlling grievance prone areas 
6.1 Resource Management 3.3.2 |Resource requirement to meet 
Organization to determine and provide human, prescribed service standards 
infrastructure resources and work environment 
6.2 Human Resources 1.1.5  |Understanding of Charter Content 
— Personnel selected on the basis of capability, trained, 1-3.3. | Awareness about revision in service 
aware of their responsibilities and procedures and standards and charter 
information to be given to customers. 3.2.1 Employee behaviour for courtesy, 
— Personnel in direct contact with customers are punctuality, delivery promptness 
available and accessible, sensitized to treat 3.3.1 Basic infrastructure and facilities 
customers in a courteous manner, respond for service recipients 
promptly to customers enquiry/complaint,| 3-3-3 [Efficient use of available resources 
provide accurate, updated and complete for continuous improvement 
information and possess good interpersonal and 
good communication skills 
6.3 Infrastructure and Environment 3.3.1 |Basic infrastructure and facilities 
for service recipients 
7.1 Citizens’ Charter — 1.1.1 |Identification of services offered 
— Vision and mission statement and their standards 
ee 112 Jundestanding service recipient 
— Remedies available to the customer for non- expectations 
compliance to standards. 1.1.3 |Aligning services offered with 
— Citizens’ charter to focus on commitment towards service recipient expectations 
customers.. , 1.1.4 |Preparation of Citizens’ Charter 
— Itis printed in local languages, as required, non- 
discriminatory 1.3.1 |Charter effectiveness assessment 
— Describes or refers to complaints handling) 1.3.2 Alignment of charter with changes 
process, contains details of PGO in environment 
— Citizen's Charter periodically reviewed : : 
— Highlights expectations of the organization from 2.3.3 [Action on grievance prone areas 
its customers. through Charter Review 
— Provides information on the date of issue of the) 3.1.3 |Using citizen satisfaction measure- 
citizens’ charter and persons who were consulted ment for charter review 
during its preparation 
7.2 Service Provision — The organization to ensure 1.1.3 |Aligning services offered with 


service recipient expectations 


IS 15700 : 2018 
IS 15700 SEVOTTAM 
Clause Requirement Element Description 
— Services provided to take into account expectations} 1.2.1 |Comparison of actual with 
of the customer and regulatory requirements prescribed standards 
— Service delivery processes in line with defined! 222 |Adherence to time norms for 
objectives grievance handling 
— Assure quality of products and/or services $35) Reshurce. Teauirement. to. Theet 
purchased and/or outsourced, which effects its in . T 
; : prescribed service standards 
service quality 
— Service provision through required infrastructure 
— Implementation of monitoring and measurement 
including time norms as specified in the citizen’s 
charter. 
7.3 Procedure for Complaints Handling 2.1.1 |Public awareness of grievance 
— Widely publicizing information about complaints lodging process 
handling process through print, web, other media.) 2.1.2 |Convenience to public in lodging a 
Prominent display of details of PGO. grievance 
— Communication of decision to complainant. 2.1.3 [Classification of grievances at the 
— Establish an appeals mechanism point of receipt 
2.2.3 |Disposal of grievances 
8.1 Single-window system at points of public contact 
— Facilitation centres and helplines 
—  Publicizing citizens’ charter 
— Publish annual performance data (commitment 
relating to citizen’s charter) 
8.2.1 |Monitoring and measurement of service and service| 1.2.1 |Comparison of actual with 
delivery processes at all stages and locations having prescribed standards 
interface with customer 2.2.1 |Determination of time norms for 
— Meeting service quality objectives and service grievance handling 
standards. 2.2.2 |Adherence to time norms for 
— Commitment made in the citizens’ charter and grievance handling 
complaints handling procedure to be measured and| 2.2.3 | Disposal of grievances 
monitored Action on grievance prone areas 
— Working of complaints handling machinery through Charter Review 
through random checks 
— Maintaining records of the evidence of conformity 
8.2.2 |Customer Satisfaction 2.3.2 |Action on grievance prone areas 
— System for measuring customer satisfaction through Annual Action Plan 
— Information to be used for continual improvement | 3.1.1 |Determining and improving citizen 
satisfaction levels 
3.1.2 |Measuring citizen satisfaction 
levels across the organization and 
field offices 
8.3 Internal Audit — At planned intervals and Follow-up} 1.2.1 |Comparison of actual with 
activities to include verification of actions taken and prescribed standards 
reporting of verification results. 2.3.4 |Action on grievance prone areas 
through internal co-ordination 
8.4 Analysis of data — Monitoring, Measurement and| 1.2.3 |Elimination of differences in actual 
Customer satisfaction data to be analysed to determine and prescribed standards 
current level of performance and opportunities for] 2.3.1 |Identification of grievance prone 
continual improvement particularly areas 
where non-conformities are recurring. 3.1.3 |Using citizen satisfaction 
measurement for charter review 
8.5.1 |Improvement through Corrective and Preventive}! 1.2.2 |Communication about differences 
Actions in actual and prescribed standards 


10 


IS 15700 : 2018 


IS 15700 


SEVOTTAM 


Clause 


Requirement 


Element 


Description 


Eliminating cause(s) of non-conformities and potential 
cause(s) for preventing recurrence and occurrence 


respectively. 


1.2.3 


Elimination of differences in actual 
and prescribed standards 

Action on grievance prone areas 
through Annual Action Plan 

Action on grievance prone areas 
through internal co-ordination 
Efficient use of available resources 
for continuous improvement 


Willingness of employee to accept 
responsibility (Establish mechanism 
to recognize and reward staff 
members who contribute towards 
improving the quality of service 
delivery) 


3.2.3 


Employee motivation for service 
delivery improvements (Encourage 
staff to provide suggestions and 
take proactive action for improving 
service quality 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 02 (0473). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


