тт Aah IS 17392 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Чегет егете armar гет — 
adani 


( TEAT YARAT ) 


Disaster Management in Drinking 
Water Utility — Requirements 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.060.01 


© BIS 2023 


aea нч oat 
Ly BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
er ey HAH чач, 9 FRIST BS THK MT, 4$ Reed - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2023 Price Group 10 


Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee had 
been approved by the Service Sector Division Council. 


Water is a basic need to maintain the health and development of any community, inconsistency in the quantity 
and quality of water supply may produce devastating situations. Therefore, water utilities must maintain water 
supply systems that qualitatively and quantitatively meet the regulatory requirements to ensure minimal 
interruptions in the supply of drinking water. Given the impact of disasters on water supply systems such as the 
rupture and dislocation of mains and distribution pipes, contamination of water sources or damage to treatment 
facilities, mitigation and prevention are very important. 


Disasters may occur by natural or manmade phenomena. To control or minimize its risk, it is essential to know 
the characteristics of the disaster and its impact on water utility. The approach of a water utility when preparing 
for any disaster should encompass all pertinent aspects of the water supply. The water utility needs to co-operate 
with all relevant authorities concerned with the disaster. Efficient disaster management should ensure that the 
actions taken before, during, and after the disaster should consider the natural environment as well as the impact 
on the health and well-being of the population. Effective communications with the public are necessary to establish 
trust in the water utility by disclosing important information appropriately in the area affected by a disaster or in 
neighboring areas. 


This standard deals with the preparation, response, and recovery of drinking water supply systems from any 
natural or manmade disasters. It enumerates the steps that should be taken in preparing the water utility for a 
disaster situation (pre-disaster phase). It then provides requirements on how a disaster should be dealt with (the 
disaster phase). Guidelines on reestablishing services (post-disaster phase) and on drawing conclusions and 
revising procedures for future events follow. 


While preparing this Indian Standard, assistance has been taken from ISO 24518 : 2015 on ‘Activities relating to 
drinking water and wastewater services — Crisis management of water utilities’. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex E. 


IS 17392 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


DISASTER MANAGEMENT IN DRINKING WATER UTILITY — 
REQUIREMENTS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies the requirements for disaster 
management in drinking water utilities of all sizes to 
prepare, respond, and recover from any natural or 
manmade disasters. 


NOTE — Disaster management in drinking water utility 
may vary depending on the specific circumstances and the 
scale of the disaster. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions 
of this standard. At the time of publication, the 
editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreement based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent edition of 
these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 10500 : 2012 Drinking water — 
Specifications (second 


revision) 


IS 17482 : 2020 Drinking water supply 
management system | — 
Requirements for piped 
drinking water supply 


service 


IS 18182 : 2023 Management of assets of 
drinking water supply 


system — Guidelines 


IS 18188 : 2023 Service activities relating to 
drinking water supply, 
wastewater and stormwater 


systems — Vocabulary 


IS/ISO 45001: Occupational health and 
2018 safety management systems 
— Requirements with 

guidance for use 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, in addition to the 
definitions given in IS 18188, the following shall 


apply. 


3.1 Alternate Drinking Water Supply (ADWS) 
— Drinking water provided to users by means other 


than through the normal piped drinking water 
system. 


3.2 Disaster — A sudden or unexpected or 
calamitous event or a natural catastrophe that causes 
huge or massive losses to a community or society or 
human or property or material or economic or 
environment. 


NOTE — Disaster can be natural or anthropogenic. 


3.3 Disaster Management — A continuous and 
integrated process of planning, organizing, 
coordinating and implementing measures that are 
necessary or expedient for the prevention of danger 
or threat of any disaster; mitigation or reduction of 
risk of any disaster or its severity or consequences; 
capacity-building; preparedness to deal with any 
disaster; prompt response to any threatening disaster 
situation or disaster; assessing the severity or 
magnitude of effects of any disaster; evacuation, 
rescue and relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction. 


3.4 Drinking Water Supply System — System 
providing the functions of abstracting, transporting, 
treating, storing, distributing and supplying drinking 
water to end users. 


3.5 Drinking Water Utility — Whole set of a 
society or a body or an organization dealing with 
drinking water and has processes, activities, means 
and resources necessary for abstracting, 
transporting, treating, distributing the drinking water 
and providing the associated services including risk 
and disaster management. 


NOTES 


1 Some key features of a drinking water utility are as 
follows: 

a) its mission, to provide drinking water services; 

b) its physical area of responsibility and the 
population within this area; 

c) its responsible body; 

d) the general organization with the function of 
operator being carried out by the responsible 
body, or by legally distinct operators; and 

e) the type of physical systems used to provide the 
services, with various degrees of centralization. 

2 The term drinking water utility addresses a utility dealing 
only with drinking water. 


3.6 Emergency Operation Plan (EOP) — 
Document specifying which procedures and 
associated resources should be applied by whom and 
where to a particular type of disaster. 


IS 17392 : 2023 


3.7 Interested Party/Stakeholder — A person or a 
group or a society or an organization having an 
interest and concern and is involved in the services 
or performance of the drinking water utility. 


NOTE — Consumers, building owners, relevant authorities, 
responsible bodies, external product and/or service 
suppliers, contractors, communities, environmental 
associations, financial institutions, scientific and technical 
organizations, laboratories are some examples of interested 
parties/stakeholders. 


3.8 External Organization — Organizations 
working outside the scope of disaster management 
in the drinking water utility, although the outsourced 
function or process is within the scope. 


NOTE — The concept of external organization includes, but 
is not limited to, sole trader, company, corporation, firm, 
enterprise, authority, partnership, charity or institution, or 
part or combination thereof, whether incorporated or not, 
public or private. 


3.9 Outsource — An arrangement where an 
external organization performs part of the drinking 
water utility function or process. 


3.10 Relevant Authority — Public body at 
National, Regional, or Local levels empowered to 
set general acts, or rules, or policies, or plans or 
guidelines or requirements, or to check compliance 
with these rules, to assist in response plan of 
drinking water utilities that are located under their 
area of jurisdiction. 


3.11 Recovery Plan — Provision of policies, 
procedures and processes that are necessary to 
restore operations critical to the resumption of 
service. 


NOTE — Recovery represents the last stage to be carried 
out during the disaster phase and the post-disaster phase 
prior to the changeover to routine operations. 


3.12 Safety Audit — A systematic, objective, 
documented and independent evaluation to 
determine whether the activities conform to the 
requirements of the safety systems and procedures. 


3.13 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 
(SCADA) — System operating with coded signals 
over communication channels in order to provide 
control of equipment and to acquire information 
about the status of the equipment for display or 
recording functions. 


4 DISASTER MANAGEMENT IN DRINKING 
WATER UTILITY 


4.1 Principles of Disaster Management 


The drinking water utility shall consider the 
following principles in its disaster management: 


a) Respecting the primacy of human life and 
human dignity through social, cultural, and 
gender neutrality and impartiality; 


b) Risk management approach; 

c) Sharing of relevant information and 
perspective; 

d) Emphasizes the importance of safety for 
both responders and those impacted; 

e) Flexibility (adaptability, scalability, and 
subsidiarity) of the system; and 

f) Emphasize continual improvement to 
enhance performance. 


4.2 General Requirements 
The drinking water utility shall: 


a) determine external and internal issues that 
are relevant to its purpose and its strategic 
direction and that affect its ability to achieve 
the intended outcome(s) of its disaster 
management; 

b) identify relevant interested parties and their 
requirements and feedback of these 
interested parties; 

c) identify natural and manmade disasters that 
could have an impact on general services 
provided by the utility, including those that 
the drinking water utility has not yet 
experienced; 

d) develop comprehensive emergency operation 
plans for all phases of disaster including pre 
disaster, onset disaster and post disaster 
phases; 

e) establish robust communication systems to 
disseminate emergency alerts, coordinate 
response efforts, and provide information to 
the public; 

f) implement a robust water quality 
monitoring program to detect and address 
any potential contamination issues during 
disasters; 

g) promote public awareness about emergency 
preparedness, safe water handling practices, 
and conservation measures; and 

h) establish effective collaboration апа 
coordination mechanisms with relevant 


stakeholders, including government 
agencies, emergency management 
organizations, NGOs, and community 
groups. 


4.3 Determining the Scope of the Disaster 
Management 


The drinking water utility shall determine the 
boundaries and applicability of disaster 
management to establish the scope. While 
determining the scope, the drinking water utility 
shall consider the following: 


a) The principles referred in 4.1; and 
b) Requirements referred in 4.2. 


The scope of disaster management shall be available 
as documented information. 


4.4 Records 


To the extent necessary, the drinking water utility 
shall: 


a) maintain documented information to 
support the operation of its processes; 

b) retain documented information to have 
confidence that the processes are being 
carried out as per the planned schedule; 

c) maintain the records of the workforce 
employed and needed, as per schedule; and 

d) maintain records to establish traceability of 
processes causing  major/minor  non- 
conformity. 


5 LEADERSHIP AND COMMITMENT 
5.1 General 


The top management shall demonstrate leadership 
and commitment with respect to the processes of 
disaster management while ensuring the following: 


a) Scope and objectives of the disaster 
management аге established апа аге 
compatible with the strategic direction of 
the drinking water utility; 

b) Integration of the disaster management 
requirements into the core activities of 
drinking water utility; 

c) Promoting the use of the process approach 
and risk-based thinking; 

d) Resources needed for disaster management 
are available; 

e) Communicating the importance of effective 
disaster management; 

f) Activities of disaster management achieve 
their intended outcome(s); 

g) Directing and supporting persons to 
contribute to the effectiveness of disaster 
management; and 

h) Promoting continual improvement. 


5.2 Policy 


5.2.1 Top management shall establish a disaster 
management policy that: 


a) is appropriate to the purpose of the drinking 
water utility; 

b) provides a framework for setting disaster 
objectives; 

c) includes a commitment to satisfy applicable 
requirements; and 

d) includes a commitment to continual 
improvement of disaster management 
processes. 


5.2.2 The disaster management policy shall be: 


a) available as documented information; 


IS 17392 : 2023 


b) communicated within the drinking water 
utility; and 

c) available to interested parties, as 
appropriate. 


5.2.3 The drinking water utility shall develop a 
policy for disaster management that includes the 
following: 


a) Importance and place of disaster 
management within the overall strategy of 
the drinking water utility; and 

b) Level of commitment of the top 
management to this issue. 


5.3 Structural Organization for Responding to 
Disaster Situation 


5.3.1 General 


To enable quick planning, speedy acquisition of 
information and rapid response to a disaster, the 
drinking water utility shall establish an efficient and 
structured Disaster Management Team (DMT) and 
assign roles and responsibilities to the personnel 
involved in the team to ensure improvement in the 
performance of the following task: 


a) Ascertaining and assessment of the 


situation; 

b) Decision-making and implementation of 
decisions; 

c) Monitoring and ensuring the 
implementation; 


d) Documenting key decisions and recording 
actions taken; 

e) Communicating internally and externally; 

f) Continued supplying of adequate resources 
to deal with the disaster; 

g) Providing alternate drinking water to its end 
users if required; and 

h) Coordinating the event. 


NOTES 


1 The DMT may formulate — sub-teams (operational 
employees of drinking water utility working in control 
rooms, laboratories, procurement and others) that carry out 
its orders. 


2 Guidance on the structure of DMT is provided in 
Annex A. 


The details of personnel involved in DMT shall be 
defined in advance at the planning stage. The details 
of the personnel with their contact number shall be 
published on the drinking water utility’s official 
website, if any. 


5.3.2 Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities of 
Drinking Water Utility 


Top management shall ensure that the 


IS 17392 : 2023 


responsibilities and authorities for relevant roles are 
assigned, communicated and understood within the 
drinking water utility to ensure the following: 


a) Activities of disaster management conform 
to the requirements of this standard; 

b) Processes are delivering their intended 
output(s); 

c) Reporting on the performance of the disaster 
management and on opportunities for 
improvement іп particular to top 
management; 

d) Promotion of customer focus throughout the 
drinking water utility; 

e) Plan of action is available in case of disaster 
(anthropogenic or natural); and 

f) Necessary training of individuals involved 
in disaster management is provided. 


6 PLANNING 
6.1 Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities 


6.1.1 When planning for disaster management, the 
drinking water utility shall consider the principles 
referred in 4.1 and the requirements referred in 4.2 
and determine the risks and opportunities. 


6.1.2 The drinking water utility shall plan: 


a) actions to address these risks and 
opportunities; 
b) how to: 


1) integrate and implement the actions into 
its processes of disaster management; and 

2) evaluate the effectiveness of these 
actions. 


6.1.3 Disaster management processes shall enable 
the drinking water utility to manage a disaster in 
order to shorten its duration and mitigate its effects. 


6.1.4 Risk assessment and its mitigation shall be 
included as part of pre disaster, onset disaster and 
post disaster phases. 


6.1.5 The drinking water utility shall determine the 
thresholds that necessitate the activation of its 
emergency operation plan. 


NOTE — Options to address risks can include preventive 
and corrective measures, eliminating the risk source, 
changing the likelihood or consequences. 


6.2 Disaster Management Objectives 


6.2.1 The drinking water utility shall establish 
objectives at relevant functions and levels in its 
disaster management with the following 
characteristics: 


a) Consistency with the disaster management 
policy and requirement of this standard; 
b) Measurable (if practicable); 


c) Monitored; 
d) Communicated; and 
e) Updated, as appropriate. 


The drinking water utility shall document 
information on disaster management objectives. 


6.2.2 When planning how to achieve its disaster 
management objectives, the drinking water utility 
shall determine the following: 


a) The present status; 

b) Detailed actions on things to be done; 
c) What resources will be required; 

d) Who will be responsible; 

e) How it will be done; 

f) When it will be completed; and 

g) Method of evaluation for results. 


6.2.3 Objectives shall consider, as appropriate, the 
following but not limited to: 


a) encouraging mitigation measures based on 
technology, traditional wisdom апа 
environmental sustainability; 

b) efficient mechanism for identification, 
assessment and monitoring of risks; 

c) security of the physical resources; 

d) ensuring reconstruction as an opportunity to 
build disaster resilient structures to ensure 
safety; 

e) prioritization of assets and operations for 
restoration of service taking the criticality of 
the service or users into consideration; 

f) establishing intermediate restoration 
objectives and conditions to be achieved; 

h) establishing a target timescale for the 
restoration of utility service, while 
considering levels of service to be achieved 
during the phases of disaster; 

j) establishing thresholds at which point pre- 
determined actions will commence or 
terminate; 

k) timely internal and external communication; 

m) deciding on the amount and the timescale 
for the provision of ADWS to the disaster 
affected areas; 

n) deciding on the type of ADWS such as 
bottled water, water tankers and the 
timescale for their provision; and 

p) provisions of support to special categories of 
end users like hospitals, evacuation shelters, 
homes for the elderly, government and 
military establishments, and persons with 
special needs. 


6.3 Risk Identification and Vulnerability 
Analysis 


6.3.1 Risk Identification 


The drinking water utility shall identify risks that 
affect its objectives. The techniques being used 


to identify the risks shall Бе relevant, 
appropriate and up-to-date. 


The following factors, but not limited to, shall be 
considered during the identification of risks: 


a) Sources (tangible or intangible); 

b) Causes and events; 

c) Threats and opportunities; 

d) Vulnerabilities and capabilities; 

e) Changes in the external and internal context; 

f) Indicators of emerging risks; 

g) Nature and value of assets and resources; 

h) Consequences and their impact on 
objectives; 

j) Limitations of knowledge and reliability of 
information; and 

k) Time-related factors. 


NOTES 


1 The organization should identify risks, and whether 
their sources are under its control. 

2 There may be more than one type of outcome, 
which may result in a variety of tangible or intangible 
consequences. 

3 For the identification of natural hazards associated 
with a particular geographical region, the drinking 
water utility may refer to different hazard maps laid 
by National Disaster Management Authority or Indian 
Meteorological Department. 


4 Drinking water utility should be aware of incidents 
that may trigger a disaster. 


5 The list of examples of risks associated with drinking 
water supply systems and their impact is given in 
Annex B. 


6.3.2 Vulnerability Analysis 


The drinking water utility shall analyze potential 
threats to the drinking water supply system in its 
vulnerability analysis under the following 
categories: 


a) Physical vulnerability; 
b) Operational vulnerability; and 
c) Organizational vulnerability. 


6.3.2.1 Physical Vulnerability 


The drinking water utility shall estimate the possible 
damage to infrastructure components as well as the 
area that would impact the operations of the drinking 
water supply system for every associated risk. 


Examples: For the ease in the analysis, the 
following priorities can be selected ш the 
drinking water supply system: 


a) Priority 1 (High): More than 50 percent of 
components affected; 


b) Priority 2 (Medium): Between 25 percent 
and 50 percent of components affected; and 


IS 17392 : 2023 


c) Priority 3 (Low): Less than 25 percent of 
components affected. 


NOTES 


1 Having a well developed asset management plan enables 
drinking water utilities to optimize resource allocation, 
enhance infrastructure reliability, and deliver high-quality 
services to consumers. It also ensures strategic management 
and maintenance of the physical assets in its physical 
vulnerability analysis. 

2For the preparation of the asset management plan, 
guidance may be taken from IS 18182. 

3 The components identified under physical vulnerability 
analysis should preferably be indicated in the direction of 
flow of water and must be classified in the following 
manner: intakes (different types) and their structures, main 
pipelines, treatment plants, pump stations, storage tanks, 
and distribution system. 

4 Functional description of the system (flow volume, level, 
pressure, quality of the service) should be provided in the 
physical vulnerability analysis. 

5Simulate possible events and analyze the expected 
consequences to the system. These estimates should also 
include the population, institutions, and environmental 
elements potentially affected. 


6.3.2.2 Operational vulnerability 


To determine operational vulnerability, the top 
management shall: 


a) identify the system's operational aspects 
such as capacity, demand, deficit or surplus 
volume; 

b) quantify the capacity of each component and 
subsystem to operate in certain conditions, 
bearing in mind quantity, quality, and 
continuity to be maintained; 

c) identify the critical assets and infrastructure 
ofthe drinking water supply system that may 
affect the drinking water supply system; and 

d) identify measures to protect these critical 
assets and infrastructure. 


6.3.2.3 Organizational vulnerability 


The drinking water utility shall determine the 
response capacity of the drinking water utility, 
considering the available resources. 


NOTE — In some cases, it may prove necessary to consider 
the cultural and socioeconomic characteristics of the 
community that benefits from the drinking water supply. 


6.3.3 The drinking water utility shall document 
information collected in its risk identification and 
vulnerability analysis including the following 
details but not limited to: 


a) GIS based geographical location and hydro- 
meteorological information of the drinking 
water utility; 

b) GIS based 2-D line diagram of the assets of 
the drinking water supply system including 
the location of each asset; 


IS 17392 : 2023 


c) Base map of area served by the drinking 
water utility showing key assets such as 
pipelines, valves, pumps and others; 

d) Type of area served by the drinking water 
utility (domestic, industrial, institutional) 
and estimated water demand of that 
particular area; 

e) Methodology adopted to prepare the 
vulnerability maps; 

f) History of any disaster that occurred and its 
impact on drinking water utility; 

g) Determine the vulnerability index (low, 
moderate, high, very high and sever); and 

h) Challenges and areas of improvement. 


NOTE — Organizational Vulnerability Index should be 
determine based on following grounds, but not limited to; 


a) Statistics provided on disaster incidents and the 
damage caused by them — the areas where the 
incidence of disasters happen repeatedly are the most 
sensitive areas; 

b) Based on available resources — In areas/districts 
where the required resources are not available in 
adequate quantity with the department, the area 
belongs to the sensitive area in terms of disaster; and 


c) Areas distant from the main route — Areas where 
there is no accessibility facility or where there is no 
road facility. Generally, such areas are more sensitive 
than those connected to road. 


6.4 Emergency Operation Plan (EOP) 
6.4.1 General 


The drinking water utility shall consider the 
protection of health, safety and the environment as 
the purpose of the emergency planning specific to 
each probable disaster. 


6.4.2 When defining the scope of the EOP, the 
drinking water utility shall consider the following: 


a) Geographical situation and changes in 
the nature of disasters according to the same 
and the potential damage and its effects; 

b) Risk and vulnerability analysis as a part 
of EOP; 

c) Types of disaster to be addressed in the plan; 

d) Types of disaster to Бе specifically 
excluded from the plan (for example, 
because they are addressed by other plans); 

e) Responsibilities and limitations due to 
areas of jurisdiction; and 

f) Scale of emergencies, line of action for 
evacuation or safety. 


6.4.3 EOP shall be, 


a) dynamic in nature; 

b) clear, concise, and complete; 

c) designed with the participation of relevant 
interested parties/stakeholders; 

d) categorized as pre disaster, onset disaster 
and post disaster measures; 


е) 


g) 


h) 


D 


k) 


having criteria and methods (including 
monitoring, measurements and related 
performance indicators) needed to ensure 
the effective operation and control of these 
processes; 

designing a series of activities that enable 
prompt response and proper execution; 
available in both electronic and hard copy 
formats to all interested parties/stakeholders 
identified within the EOP; 

specify functions of each person or group 
involved in emergency operations based on 
the existing resources; 

updated whenever there is a change in 
resources, personnel training, or the 
vulnerability of the system; 

prioritizing the activities to be carried out 
with specific timeframe for completion; 


m) widely disseminated and known by the staff; 


n) 


and 
incorporating the local culture of the region. 


NOTES 


1 The EOP may be prepared as a stand-alone plan or 
as an annexure to another EOP. 

2 Even if the EOP is stand alone, it could be integrated 
with the other EOP(s) if the plans are activated 
concurrently. 


6.4.4 Elements of EOP for Pre Disaster Phase 


The following elements, but not limited to, shall be 
created as part of the routine operation of the 
drinking water utility: 


a) 


b) 


g) 


h) 


Promoting prevention, preparedness and 
mitigation at all levels through knowledge, 
innovation and education; 

Procedures for assessing the risk to public 
health and the environment and determining 
risk control measures and risk 
communications; 

Means of maintaining personnel safety 
including risk assessment, evacuation and 
shelter planning, off-site protective actions, 
first aid and emergency medical treatment; 
Identification of sensitive areas based on 
vulnerability analysis; 

Assessment of both the likelihood and its 
potential impacts on the drinking water 
supply system; 

Systems, processes and procedures to 
monitor the parameters that enable the 
recognition of the beginning of a disaster as 
early as possible; 

Processes and procedures to be assigned to 
DMT(s); 

Infrastructure strengthening by ensuring, 


1) preparation of guidelines for the 
protection of physical assets; 


2) periodic repair and cleaning of 
vulnerable assets of drinking water 
supply system; 

3) repair or rehabilitation of physical assets 
on priority basis depending on the 
sensitivity/vulnerability assessment; 


j) Procedure to provide the ADWS, if needed, 
in the timescale required; 

k) Ensuring that the quality of ADWS 
confirms to IS 10500; 

m) Identification of temporary points of 
distribution (TPDs) for the provision of 
ADWS; 


n) Identification of priority supply points (such 
as hospitals) and forecasting their water 
demand; 

p) Need assessment and capacity building of 
staff and community by ensuring, 


1) adequate training to the concerned 
personnel involved in disaster 
management; 

2) training/orientations to carry out the 
duties indicated in the EOP; 

3) awareness drives at the community 
level; 

4) active participation in the Mock drills; 

5) awareness raising campaigns on water 
and sanitation management and health 
outcomes; and 

6) training of identified personnel on how 
to develop timely апа effective 
communication skills to inform the 
public, partners, and stakeholders about 
recommendations; 


q) Mutual aid arrangements between the 
drinking water utility and other utilities in 
the event of a disaster; 

r) Cooperation with relevant external 
organizations and procedure to 
communicate; 

s) Arrangements to ensure the availability of 
resources necessary to respond to the scale 
of the emergency anticipated by the drinking 
water utility; 

t) Ensure that assets of drinking water supply 
system have reliable backup power sources, 
such as generators, to maintain operation 
during power outages; 


u) Ensure backup for water sources available, 
such as wells, reservoirs, or alternative 
supply systems, to ensure a continuous 
water supply even if one source is affected 
by a disaster; 


IS 17392 : 2023 


v) Provision for the precise and prompt 
situation ascertainment for the assessment 
of type and extent of physical damage; 

w) Maintain an adequate inventory of treated 
water reserves in storage tanks or reservoirs 
to meet the increased demand during 
emergencies; 

y) Ensure that the water treatment plants have 
sufficient capacity to handle increased 
demand during emergencies; 

Z) Mechanism to communicate and coordinate 
with nodal agencies (public or private) to 
receive early information/warning in case of 
disaster backed by responsive and failsafe 
communication with information 
technology support; and 

aa) Mechanism to coordinate with the associate 
departments like ^ District Disaster 
Management Agency, local urban bodies, 
Panchayati Raj Organizations, Health 
Department and local community. 


NOTES 


1 Fire stations, police stations, and other government 
agencies undertaking emergency response activities 
are not recommended as distribution sites. 

2 It is recommended to install the distribution sites at 

minimum distance of 1 km from the shelter points. 

3 List of nodal agencies providing early information/ 
warning is provided in Annex C. 


6.4.5 Elements of EOP for On-disaster Phase 


The drinking water utility shall consider the 
following activities in its EOP during the disaster 
phase: 


a) Mechanism for accurate, timely, false safe 
and comprehensive broadcasting of disaster 
warnings to potential communities to be 
affected by the disaster; 

b) Consistent coordination with the relevant 
stakeholder so that the latest information 1s 
updated about the disaster; 

c) Concerned officials at all levels of disaster 
management are followed-up so that they 
are ready to respond to the disaster situation; 

d) Prompt and precise assessment of the 
following components of drinking water 
supply system: 


1) Contamination of the water source and 
damage of the raw-water intake; 

2) Damage to Ше civil structures, 
including raw-water intake, water 
treatment plant, pumping station, 
distribution network and others; 


IS 17392 : 2023 


3) Mechanical damage, loss of power 
supply, contamination due to flooding; 

4) Damage to both sewerage and water 
mains in the same locality, with local 
seepage into water pipes where the 
pressure is reduced; and 

5) Plumbing of domestic or public 
buildings, resulting in back siphonage; 


е) Provision of ADWS for affected people by 
managing with the available resources, till 
drinking water supply system facilities 
become operational; 

f) Provision for relief, and aid to the victims by 
adopting appropriate measures; 

g) Provision for declaration of demonization 
and termination of the special task, and upon 
deactivation, the operation shifts to the post- 
disaster phase of evaluation; and 

h) Assessment of the surplus or the remaining 
capacity to provide the required utility 
services, including an estimate of the time 
required to rehabilitate the systems. 


Standing orders related to disaster and preparedness 
shall be reviewed on an annual basis and the 
reviewed standing order shall be circulated among 
all concerned stakeholders for information and 
compliance. 


NOTES 


1 With time, as mitigation measures are carried out and 
equipment is obtained for emergencies, the onset disaster 
measures should be modified. 

2 When issuing warning, special attention should be given 
on the words used for warning. It should always be kept in 
mind that the language of warning is simple and that can 
be understood by a common man. 


6.4.6 Elements of EOP for Post Disaster Phase 


The drinking water utility shall prepare post-disaster 
plan while considering the following: 


a) Establish criteria to select priority recovery 
points; 

b) Provision of separate situation assessment to 
detect the damage in disaster affected areas, 
prioritize repairs, and restore service as 
quickly as possible; 

c) Quality check of affected components of the 
drinking water supply system; 

d) Disinfection of affected components of the 
drinking water supply system; 

€) Prevention and mitigation measures when 
designing the new construction or retrofitting 
plans, so as to prevent reoccurrence and 
nonconformity in future; 

f) Criteria for the deployment of the measures 
for recovery; 


g) Implementation of the recovery plan such as 
repairing the damage, verification, and 
restoring the utility service; 

h) Identify rehabilitation and reconstruction 
measures to restore the utility services to the 
normal situation; and 

j) Set criteria for assessments during the 
recovery stage. 


6.4 Planning of Changes 


When the drinking water utility determines the need 
for changes in the disaster management processes, 
the changes shall be carried out in a planned manner. 
The drinking water utility shall consider the, 


a) need for the change and the expected gain; 


b) purpose of the changes and their 
potential consequences on the drinking 
water quality and related services; 


C) integrity of the disaster management; 
d) availability of resources; and 


e) allocation or reallocation of responsibilities 
and authorities. 


7 SUPPORT 

7.1 Resource Management 
7.1.1 General 

The drinking water utility shall: 


a) determine and provide the resources needed 
for the establishment, implementation, 
maintenance and continual improvement of 
disaster management; 

b) prepare procedures to make sure that one or 
more communication path(s) remain 
continuously available together with the 
documents and tools that are indispensable 
for disaster management; 

c) take all steps practical to ensure the 
availability of the necessary resources 
needed for managing a disaster according to 
the EOP within the timescales required; 

d) determine, provide and maintain the 
infrastructure necessary for the operation of 
its processes and to achieve conformity with 
the requirements of this standard; 


€) incorporate advances in information 
management, technological resources such 
as geographic information systems (GIS), 
supervisory control and data acquisition 
(SCADA) systems while dealing disaster 
management to have the best possible 
information available for effective decision- 
making; and 


f) identify the authority for mobilizing and 
requisitioning resources. 


NOTE — Infrastructure can include safety equipment, 
transportation, energy supply, emergency control room, 
advanced technologies (including hardware and software). 


7.2 Competence 
The drinking water utility shall: 


a) determine the necessary competence of 
person(s) doing work under its control 
that affects the performance of the drinking 
water utility; 

b) ensure that these persons are competent on the 
basis of appropriate education, training or 
experience; 

c) take actions to acquire the necessary 
competence, where applicable, and evaluate 
the effectiveness of the actions taken; and 

d) retain appropriate documented information 
as evidence of competence. 


NOTE — Applicable actions may include the provision of 
training, mentoring, re-assignment of currently employed 
persons, or the hiring or contracting of competent persons. 


7.3 Training and Exercises 


The drinking water utility shall identify the type and 
frequency of the training and exercises to be 
provided to their relevant personnel. 


The drinking water utility shall ensure that the 
training and exercise program considers the 
following: 


a) The level of competency required of the 
personnel; 

b) Consistency with the objectives of disaster 
management; 

c) Predetermined outcome, tabletop exercises, 
simulations, and fully operational exercises; 

d) Procedures for evaluating the competency to 
handle a disaster situation; 

e) Communication channel as a part of training 
and exercise; 

f) Realistic scenarios and risk assessments; 

g) Carefully planned so that minimum risk of 
disruption to normal operational processes; 

h) Clearly defined objectives and result in a 
post-exercise report that contains 


recommendations; 
j) Emergency resources such as 
communication equipment, response 


equipment, and backup generators are tested 
during an exercise; and 

k) Prevention and mitigation measures are 
familiarized. 

NOTE — The report of the training and exercises conducted 


by the drinking water utility should be documented. This 
report may be used to improve disaster management 


IS 17392 : 2023 


arrangements, including the capability of the people 
involved in the exercise, in a timely manner. 


7.4 Awareness 


The officer and staff doing work under the drinking 
water utility's control shall be aware of: 


a) the disaster management policy; 

b) their contribution to the effectiveness of 
disaster management, including the 
benefits of improved performance; and 

с) the implications of not conforming with the 
requirements mentioned in this standard. 


7.5 Operational Arrangement 


The drinking water utility shall establish operational 
agreements, where appropriate, with relevant 
external organizations considering the following: 


a) Role of each party for the type of incident 
identified; 

b) coordination and  inter-organizational 
communication arrangement; 

c) procedures for the dissemination of public 
communication; 

d) exchange of relevant information to 
improve the EOP; and 

e) exchange of information regarding changes 
in the circumstances within Ше 
organization, that could influence the 
operation of the EOP. 


The drinking water utility shall periodically evaluate 
the performance of disaster management to 
determine whether the objectives апа benefits 
involving operational agreements are being met and 
use the results of these evaluations when making 
joint decisions about continual improvement. 


NOTES 


1 The drinking water utility may establish operational 
agreements with local, regional, national and international 
authorities concerning mutual assistance, governments on 
different levels to provide disaster management resources, 
private/non-governmental organizations for food, shelter, 
health services, relevant authorities for emergency power 
supply, transportation, communications, delivery of 
medications, vaccine, and private industries in order to 
ensure continuity of operations (delivery of relevant 
products). 

2 Variety of channels and techniques such as mass media 
(radio, television, newspapers), megaphone vans, religious 
services, social media, or community message boards 
should be used to disseminate relevant information such as 
which locations will have access to the utility services, on 
what days and at what time. 


7.6 Communication and Coordination 
7.6.1 General 


The drinking water utility shall determine the need 


IS 17392 : 2023 


for internal and external communications relevant to 
disaster management including: 


a) person authorized to perform 
communication; 

b) what to communicate; 

c) when to communicate; and 

d) how to communicate. 


7.6.2 Internal Communications and Coordination 


The drinking water utility shall communicate the 
following information to all those within the utility 
identified in initiating and implementing the EOP: 


a) The role they are identified for; 

b) The process and procedures they are required 
to follow; 

c) The training and exercise that they are 
intended to perform in the execution of the 
plan; and 

d) Any change to disaster management that 
is pertinent to their role. 


NOTE — The drinking water utility should determine the 
frequency of such communications to ensure that its state 
of preparedness is maintained. 


7.6.3 External Communications and Coordination 


The drinking water utility shall ensure open 
communication with the external organization 
identified in its EOP. This shall aim to ensure 
compliance with the operational agreement as 
given in 7.5. 


In case of a disaster situation, details of the incident 
shall be communicated to all the relevant 
stakeholders. 


The drinking water utility shall agree with all 
identified external organizations on the frequency, 
method and format of such communications. 


7.7 Documented Information 
7.7.1 The disaster management shall include, 


a) documented information required by this 
Indian Standard; and 

b) documented information determined by the 
drinking water utility as being necessary for 
the effectiveness of disaster management. 


NOTE — The extent of documented information for 
disaster management can differ from one water utility to 
another due to: 


a) the size of the water utility and its type of activities, 
processes, products and services; 

b) the complexity of processes and their interactions; 
and 

c) the competence of people. 


7.7.2 All procedures for dealing with a disaster, 
nominations to the DMT, collaboration agreements 
with external organizations, lists of equipment and 


their location, special arrangements shall be 
documented to an extent that is accurate and 
complete but remains easy to understand. The 
documents, which may be either in electronic or 
paper format or both, shall be stored in a safe, but 
accessible place, including off site locations so that 
they can be retrieved quickly when the need arises. 


When creating and updating documented 
information, the drinking water utility shall ensure 
the following: 


a) Identification and description of the document 
(title, date, author, or reference number); 

b) Format (language, software version, 
graphics) and media (paper, electronic); and 

c) Review and approval for suitability 
and adequacy. 


All decisions shall be recorded in writing, and the 
reason for each decision shall be documented. 


In the event of a disaster, the alerting of the DMT as 
well as its work shall be documented for later 
reference. 


Any changes (internal or external) that impact the 
drinking water utility shall be reviewed in relation to 
its disaster management. The review shall also 
identify any new critical activities that need to be 
included in the disaster management. 


NOTE — This information should be updated in the 
incident briefing form as per Annex D. 


7.7.3 Documented information required in 
disaster management shall be controlled to ensure, 


a) it is available and suitable for use, where 
and when it is needed; and 

b) it is adequately protected from loss of 
confidentiality, improper use, or loss of 
integrity. 


7.7.4 Documented information of external origin 
determined by the drinking water utility to be 
necessary for the planning and operation of the 
disaster management shall be identified as 
appropriate, and controlled by considering the 
following: 


a) Distribution, access (permission to view 
or permission and authority to view and 
make changes), retrieval and use; 

b) Storage апа preservation, including 
preservation of legibility; 

c) Control of changes (version control); and 

d) Retention and disposal. 


The drinking water utility shall have at least one 
backup set of documented information stored 
offsite, but readily accessible. 


8 OPERATION 
8.1 Operational Planning and Control 


8.1.1 The drinking water utility shall plan, 
implement and control the processes needed to meet 
requirements and implement the actions by: 


a) establishing criteria for the processes; 

b) implementing control of the processes in 
accordance with the criteria; and 

c) documenting information to the extent 
necessary to have confidence that the 
processes have been carried out as planned. 


8.1.2 The drinking water utility shall control 
planned changes and review the consequences of 
unintended changes, taking action to mitigate any 
adverse effects, as necessary. 


8.1.3 The drinking water utility shall ensure that 
externally provided processes are controlled. 


NOTE — The drinking water utility may refer to 
IS 17482 for further information on control of externally 
provided processes, products and services. 


8.1.4 The drinking water utility shall ensure that key 
processes of external organizations outside its 
control, but upon which its own disaster 
management processes rely are monitored. This 
monitoring activity shall include both planned and 
unplanned changes which may affect the integrity of 
its own processes. 


8.2 Response 
8.2.1 General 


When the criteria of the disaster situation are met, 
the drinking water utility shall: 


a) activate the DMT; 

b) activate links with other DMT at National, 
State, or Regional level and external 
organizations; and 

c) transfer applicable authority to the DMT. 


NOTE — It shall be recognized that knowledge and 
information can be incomplete and that the situation 
continues to evolve and change rapidly during this phase. 


8.2.2 Activating the DMT 


The procedures for convening the DMT shall be 
defined in advance at the planning stage (pre disaster 
phase) that determines whom to inform and in which 
manner. 


The following steps shall be taken so that the DMT 
acts as soon as possible: 


a) Decision for the DMT to convene, including 
the designation of the head of the DMT; 


b) Check the availability of all the members of 


11 


IS 17392 : 2023 


the DMT and ensure immediate replacement 
of any non-available member deemed 
essential. 


8.2.3 Establish and Activate Links with Other 
РМТ) 


The head of DMT shall ensure, 


a) establishment of links to 
external DMT(s); 

b) activation of the links with other DMT(s) of 
relevant external organizations identified 
under the EOP; 

c) activate communication channels; 

d) availability of the necessary resources 
needed; and 

e) activate communication with the nodal 
agencies handling the disaster. 


appropriate 


8.2.4 Alternate Drinking Water Supply through 
Atlernate Source 


The drinking water utility shall ensure the target 
levels of minimum per capita alternate drinking 
water supply of 2 litres for first 3 days, subsequently, 
8 litres for next 5 days and further 10 litres for 
21 days from the date of announcement of disaster. 


NOTE — These figures can be suitably increased based on 
the availability of water sources and accessibility to the end 
users. 


8.2.5 Transfer of Decision Making Authority to the 
DMT 


The transfer of relevant decision-making authority 
following the convening of the DMT from normal 
corporate to organizational structures (from the head 
of top management to the head of the DMT) shall 
encompass: 


a) any required adjustments to authority to 
make financial commitments; 

b) transfer of locations and equipment; and 

c) transfer of all relevant documents prepared 
during the preparedness phase. 


8.2.6 Workflow of the DMT 


Once the DMT team is activated, it shall undertake 
the following: 


a) Situation ascertainment апа situation 
assessment — The assessment of the 
situation results from the analyses, 


interpretation and integration of the findings 
of the situation ascertainment; 

b) Decision making — The head of the DMT 
with the input of their team shall make 
decisions based on the resources and 
information available. All decisions shall 
become documented information; 


IS 17392 : 2023 


c) Implementation of decisions and issuing of 
orders — The head of the DMT shall issue 
the necessary orders on the basis of the 
decisions taken; 


d) Supervision and operational control — The 
head of the DMT shall supervise and control 
the execution of orders to ensure that orders 
are carried out properly; and 


e) Communications and cooperation — The 
head of the DMT shall ensure that the 
communications plans are implemented to 
ensure effective communications within the 
DMT(s), with customers and the general 
public, external organizations, relevant 
stakeholders and within the drinking water 
utility. 


The head of the DMT shall also ensure that the 
protocols agreed with the relevant authorities are 
enacted. 


8.3 Recovery to Normal Operation 


The DMT shall allocate operational team for the 
recovery to normal operation. The sequence of 
actions during the recovery stage shall be: 


a) Recovery Plan — The DMT shall develop 
a priority recovery plan based on clear 
criteria for determining the order of 
priorities and deployment of the measures 
for recovery; 


b) Implementation of the Recovery Plan — 
The DMT shall implement the recovery 
plan by repairing the damage, verification 
and restoring the service; and 


c) Assessments During Recovery Stage — 
The DMT shall conduct a separate situation 
assessment, in order to evaluate the 
situation during the recovery stage. 


NOTE — Refer Fig. 1 for schematic workflow of Disaster 
Management Team (DMT). 


8.4 Termination of the Work of DMT 


When clear and sufficient information for the 
resumption of normal operational management is 
available, deactivation of the DMT shall be 
declared by the top management. 


Upon deactivation of the DMT, the operation shall 
shift to the post disaster phase of evaluation and 
review followed by consideration of continuous 
improvement actions. 


NOTE — The drinking water utility may outsource 
responsibility related to collection of information, 
monitoring and measurement, risk assessment, intelligence 
and investigations or any other activity identified by the top 
management to other departments or organizations, if 
required. 


12 


9 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 


9.1 Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis and 
Evaluation 


9.1.1 The drinking water utility shall determine 
the following: 


a) What needs to be monitored and measured; 

b) The methods for monitoring, 
measurement, analysis and evaluation, as 
applicable, to ensure valid results; 

c) When the monitoring and measuring 


shall be performed; 

d) When the results from monitoring and 
measurement shall be analyzed and 
evaluated. 


The drinking water utility shall retain appropriate 
documented information as evidence of the results 
and evaluate the performance and effectiveness. 


9.1.2 Monitoring of the disaster management 
shall include the effectiveness of the following: 


a) Implementation of the disaster management 
in the drinking water utility; 

b) Operation during a disaster; 

c) Operation during an exercise. 


9.1.3 System Evaluation 


The drinking water utility shall evaluate the 
procedures, and capabilities through periodic 
reviews, testing, post disaster reports, lessons 
learned, performance evaluations, safety audits and 
exercises. The procedures shall be updated 
promptly to reflect significant changes due to 
these factors. 


Consistent with its commitment to compliance, the 
drinking water utility shall establish, implement 
and maintain procedures for periodically 
evaluating compliance with applicable legal 
requirements and compare industry good practices 
and compliance with its own policy and objectives 
related to disaster management. 


The drinking water utility shall keep records of 
the results of the periodic evaluations. 


9.2 Safety Audit 
9.2.1 Objectives of Safety Audit 


The drinking water utility shall ensure that safety 
audits and assessments of processes of the disaster 
management are conducted at planned intervals to 
provide information on whether the disaster 
management, 


a) conforms to: 


1) drinking water utility’s own requirements 
for its disaster management; 


IMPROVEMENT/FURTHER DEVELOPMENT OF DISASTER MANAGEMENT 


IS 17392 : 2023 


PREPAREDNESS 
STRUCTURAL 
ORGANIZATION 


ACTIVATE DISASTER 
MANAGEMENT TEAM 


SITUATION 
ASCERTAINMENT 


SITUATION 
ASSESSMENT 


LOOP 


DECISION MAKING 


IMPLEMENTATION OF 
DECISIONS/ISSUING OF 
ORDERS 


o 
o 
ш 
o 
О 
c 
a 
= 
< 
ш 
= 
H 
2 
ш 
> 
ш 
o 
< 
2 
< 
> 
c 
ш 
Е 
[7] 
< 
0 
а 


COMMUNICATIONS 


SUPERVISION AND 
CONTROL 


TERMINATION OF THE 
WORK OF DMT 


MANAGEMENT 
REVIEW 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC WORKFLOW OF A DISASTER MANAGEMENT TEAM (DMT) 


13 


IS 17392 : 2023 


2) requirements of this standard; 
3) all relevant specific arrangements; and 
4) is effectively implemented and maintained. 


The drinking water utility shall establish procedures 
to, 


a) plan, establish, implement and maintain safety 
audit or assessment program(s), including the 
frequency, methods, responsibilities, planning 
requirements and reporting. 

b) the safety audit program(s) shall take into 
consideration the importance of the processes 
concerned, the resilience of operations 
concerned and the results of previous safety 
audits; 

c) define the safety audit criteria and its scope; 


d) select auditors and conduct safety audits to 
ensure objectivity and the impartiality of the 
safety audit process; 

e) ensure that the results of the safety audits are 
reported to the top management; and 


f) document information as evidence of the 
implementation of the safety audit program 
and the results. 


Safety audit and assessment procedures shall be 
established, implemented and maintained that 
address responsibilities and requirements for 
planning and conducting audits, reporting results 
and retaining associated records, determination of 
safety audit criteria, scope, frequency and 
methods, and provide information on the results of 
audits to management. 


Assessment shall be conducted against the drinking 
water utility's objectives. 


9.2.2 Methodology and Technique for Safety Audit 


The drinking water utility shall ensure that the 
following methodology and techniques is being 
applied in the drinking water utility during safety 
audit: 


a) Overview on safety shall be taken 
scientifically, evaluating the level of safety 
practice under several parameters using 
standardized evaluation from IS/ISO 45001; 

b) The drinking water utility shall forward a 
copy of the auditor's report along with his 
comments to the top management within 
30 days after completion of such audit; 

c) Periodically safety visit inspection at 
plant/installation shall be done by top 
management as and when required; 

d) Safety register shall be signed Ьу 
authorised person; and 


14 


e) Any delay in restoration shall be brought 
under the notice of top management. 


9.3 Management Review 


Top management shall review the disaster 
management, at planned intervals, to ensure its 
continuing suitability, adequacy and effectiveness. 


The management review shall include consideration 
of the following: 


a) The status of actions 
management reviews; 

b) Changes in external and internal issues that 
are relevant to the disaster management; 


from previous 


c) Information on the performance, including 
trends in the following: 


1) Nonconformities and corrective actions; 


2) Monitoring and measurement results; 
and 
3) Audit results; 


d) Opportunities for continual improvement. 


The outputs of the management review shall include 
decisions related to continual improvement 
opportunities and any need for changes to the 
disaster management. 


The drinking water utility shall 
information as evidence of the 
management reviews. 


document 
results of 


10 IMPROVEMENT 
10.1 Nonconformity and Corrective Action 


10.1.1 When a nonconformity occurs, the drinking 
water utility shall react to the nonconformity, and 
take necessary actions to control and correct it. The 
drinking water utility shall evaluate the need for 
action to eliminate the causes of the nonconformity, 
in order that it does not recur or occur elsewhere by, 


a) reviewing the nonconformity; 

b) determining the — causes of Ше 
nonconformity; 

с) determining if similar nonconformities 
exist, or could potentially occur; 

d) implement any action needed; 

e) review the effectiveness of any corrective 
action taken; and 

f) make amendments or adapt changes to 
the disaster management, if necessary. 


10.1.2 Corrective activities shall be appropriate to 
the effects of the nonconformities encountered. 


10.1.3 The drinking water utility shall document 
information as evidence of the nature of the 
nonconformities and/or any subsequent actions 
taken, and the results of any corrective action. 


10.1.4 The drinking water utility shall establish, 
implement and maintain procedures for dealing with 
actual and potential shortfalls in the disaster 
management system and for taking improvement and 
corrective actions. The procedures shall define 
criteria for the following: 


a) Identifying the shortfalls of the disaster 
management and taking actions to mitigate 
their impact and avoid their recurrence; 


b) Evaluating the need for actions to improve 
the disaster management plan’s shortfalls 
and implementing appropriate actions 
designed to avoid their occurrence to a 
specified timeline; 


c) Recording the results of corrective actions 
and improvement actions taken; and 


d) Reviewing the effectiveness of the 
corrective and improvement actions taken. 


15 


IS 17392 : 2023 


10.1.5 Actions taken shall be appropriate to the 
magnitude of the problems, risk and their potential 
impacts. The drinking water utility shall ensure that 
any necessary changes are made to disaster 
management documentation within а specified 
timeline. 


10.2 Continual Improvement 


The drinking water utility shall continually improve 
the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the 
disaster management. 


The outputs from management reviews shall include 
any decisions and actions related to possible changes 
to the disaster management policy, objectives, 
targets and other elements of the disaster 
management, consistent with the commitment to 
continual improvement. 


IS 17392 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.3.1) 


STRUCTURE OF DISASTER MANAGEMENT TEAM (DMT) 


A-1 The drinking water utility may include the 
following personnel in the DMT: 


a) Head of DMT — Officer with authority and 


b 


c) Expert 


d 


МУ 


) 


control of the incident/disaster, ordering and 
release of resources. The head should have 
the overall authority and responsibility for 
conducting incident operations and should 
be responsible for the management of 
tactical operations at the disaster site. The 
head can appoint sub teams which will work 
in accordance with the emergency operation 
plan. 


Public Relation Officer — Responsible for 
interfacing with the public and media; 
coordination with external organizations, 
relevant authorities and other agencies 
during disaster; communicating with early 
warning system as a part of EOP with 
incident-related information requirements. 


Advisor/Consultant Expert 
advisors/consultants should provide specific 
knowledge involved in the emergency 
response. 


Planning Team — Collection, evaluation 
and timely sharing of incident information 
and intelligence; status reports including 
assigned resources and staffing; 
development and documentation of 
emergency operation plan; information 
gathering, sharing and documentation at 
each stage of disaster such as pre, post and 
onset of disaster. 


e) Safety Officer — Conduct training and mock 


5 


h) Information 


) 


drills; hazard reduction; protection of 
people, property and environment; control 
of incident and transition to recovery phase. 


Operation Officer — Timely storage of 
necessary material to meet the drinking 
water needs of disaster affected areas by 
ensuring availability of required assets such 
as specials tools and plants (T&P), spare 
parts of centrifugal pumping plant, hand 
pipe and submersible pump in the secured 
stock of the drinking water utility; incident 


support and resources; facilities, 
transportation, supplies, equipment 
maintenance, fuel, food service and medical 
services for incident personnel; 
communications and information 
technology support. 

Logistics Officer — Ordering resources 
from off-incident locations; providing 
facilities, security (of any disaster 
management command facilities), 
transportation, supplies, equipment- 
maintenance and fuel, food services and 
emergency responder medical services, 


including inoculations, as required. 


and Communication 
Technology Support — Provides secure IT- 
infrastructure, defines roles and rights for 
software applications, evaluates the system 
performances and plans ЮП Баск 
communication and IT structures. 


ANNEX В 
(Clause 6.3.1) 


IS 17392 : 2023 


EXAMPLES OF RISK IN CONTINUOUS (24*7) DRINKING WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM AND THEIR 
ASSOCIATED IMPACT 


Table 1 Types of Risk and Levels of Impact 


(Clause 6.3.1) 


SI No. Type of Risk Low Impact High Impact 
(1) Q) (3) (4) 
i) Public Health 
a) Water Supply — Interruption a) No water supply for less a) No water supply for greater than 
than 6 h to atleast 10 12 h to atleast 50 percent of end 
percent of end users, users, 
b) No water supply for 6 h b) No water supply for greater than 
to 12 h to at least 12 h to 100 percent of end users. 
25 percent of end users. 
b) Water Supply — Contamination a) Weak contamination to a) Weak contamination to 
25 percent of properties, 50 percent of properties, can not 
can be cured by boiling, be cured by boiling, 
b) Moderate contamination b) Moderate contamination (don't 
(don't drink) to drink) to 50 percent of 
25 percent of consumers. consumers. 
Water Supply — Severely 50 percent of consumers are Greater than 50 percent of 
discolored water affected consumers are affected 
i) Environmental 
Flooding — Internal and/or Ina localized area In a widespread area 


external sewage flooding affecting 
a property 


Flooding — Processing of deferred 
blockages 


Watercourse pollution 


Chemical release to the 


environment 


Over 100 percent of normal 
blockage levels for 1 to 3 
regions deferred until the next 
day. 


a) Minor Fish kill, 


b) Short term widespread 
environmental damage, 


с) Significant visible gross 
pollution or littering of 
watercourse. 


Significant breach — local 
procedures invoked 
emergency services attend. 


Over 100 percent of normal 
obstruction levels for more than 
three regions deferred until the next 
day. 


a) Major Fish kill, 


b) Long term widespread 
environmental damage, 


c) Extensive visible gross pollution 
or watercourse littering, 


d) Loss/closure of watercourse for 
amenity use. 


Major release beyond boundary 
potential evacuation/casualties 


IS 17392 : 2023 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


SI No. Type of Risk Low Impact High Impact 
0) (2) (3) (4) 
ii) Property 
Dams Where remedial or preventative Significant danger of dam failure 
action is necessary to safeguard necessitating major mobilization of 
the structure. resources. Urgent drawdown. 
Telemetry Urgent Loss of several sites Prolonged widespread failure. 
Facilities Where remedial or preventative Significant danger of dam failure 
action is necessary to safeguard necessitating major mobilization of 
the structure. Urgent resources. Urgent drawdown. 
investigation 
iv) Reputation 


Public Interest/stakeholder 
impact 


Significant existing or potential 
adverse media interest in a 
Local office issue. 


Authority wide issues requiring a 
coordinated response. 


IS 17392 : 2023 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 6.4.4) 
EARLY WARNING SYSTEM 


C-1 The early warning system plays an important 
role in reducing the risks of any type of disaster. An 
organization that has a more active early warning 
system from the state to the district level has lesser 
risk in the context of the disaster. The early warning 
system shall work in both directions, from top to 
bottom and from bottom to top. That is, prior 
warnings or information received from the 
government are important for preparing the 
community for disaster relief and it is also necessary 


for the administration to take information from the 
community to plan locally. 


C-2 NODAL AGENCY FOR EARLY 
INFORMATION/WARNING 


Institutions authorized by the Government of India 
to give initial warning during the various disasters in 
respect of disasters at the department level are as 
follows: 


Table 2 Institutions Authorized by the Government of India to Issue Early Warning for Different 


Disasters 
(Clause 6.4.4) 
SI No. Disaster Authorized Institution 
О) (2) (3) 
1) Flood Central Water Commission 
ii) Heavy Rain/ Cloud Burst, Landslide Geological Survey of India 
iii) Avalanche Snow/Ice and Avalanche Study Establishment 
iv) Heat Wave and Cold Wave Indian Meteorological Department 
v) Cyclones Indian Meteorological Department 
vi) Tsunami Indian Tsunami Early Warning Centre 
(ITEWC) 
Indian National Centre for Oceanic 
Information Services 
vii) Chemical Disaster Ministry of Environment and Forest 
viii) Biological Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
ix) Nuclear/Radiological Department of Atomic Energy 


IS 17392 : 2023 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 7.7.2) 


INCIDENT BRIEFING FORM 


D-1 The drinking water utility shall provide 
following information, but not limited to, in the 
incident briefing form: 


a) Brief of the incident including type of 


b 


МУ 


disaster (including fire, earthquake, 
landslide, flood, cyclone and other), date, 
time and source of first warning received by 
the drinking water utility, intensity of 
disaster (low, moderate, high, sever), 
duration of disaster, impact of drinking 
water utility, name and designation of 
officer and command; 

Site layout and affected areas with date and 
time of preparation; 


c) Details of following actions taken: 


1) Provision of ADWS; 

2) Provision of water supply at priority 
supply point such as hospital, fire 
stations, transit camps, relief camps; 


20 


d) Summary 


3) Status of physical assets including their 
unit ID; 

4) Status of power supply; 

5) Status of transportation services; 

6) Emergency arrangement for restoration 
and maintenance of drinking water 
supply system; 

7) Difficulty in any in response including 
mobilization of resources and 
manpower; and 

8) Other. 


of the resource allocation 
including resource type, quantity, site of 
deployment and assignments; 


e) Threats, if any, which may be increase 


severity of incident; and 


f) List of tasks assigned with name of 


concerned officer. 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 


IS 17392 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Drinking Water Supply, Wastewater and Stormwater Systems and Services Sectional Committee, SSD 14 


Organization 
Military Engineer Services, New Delhi 


Brihan Mumbai Municipal Corporation, Mumbai 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 


Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering 
Organization, New Delhi 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi 


Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board, Chennai 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 
Lucknow 

Delhi Jal Board, New Delhi 

Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, Gurugram 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Institute of Engineers India, New Delhi 


L&T-Sargent & Lundy Limited, Vadodara 


Maharashtra Jeevan Pradhikaran, Mumbai 


Military Engineer Services, Bengaluru 


21 


Representative(s) 
SHRI SUNEEL KUMAR ARORA (Chairperson) 


SHRI ANIL RAGUNATH KOTKAR 
SHRI О. S. MUDRAS (Alternate) 


SHRI VISHAL GANDHI 
SHRI DANISH MEENA (Alternate) 


DR RAMAKANT 
SHRI DIVAKAR AGRAWAL 
SHRI CHANDRA SHEKHAR AZAD (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK KUMAR 
SHRI PANKAJ KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR SUMITA SINGHAL 


MSN. MANIMEGALAI 
MS G. MAGARAJOTHI (Alternate) 


DR PREETI CHATURVEDI BHARGAVA 
DR SATYAKAM PATNAIK (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY SHARMA 
SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK (Alternate) 


Ms MONIKA BAHL 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI PARVEEN KUMAR GOEL 
Ms ANTARA DAS (Alternate) 


PROF ARUN KUMAR 
PROF V. ARYA (Alternate) 


DR К. S. HARI PRASAD 
PROF ZULFEQUAR AHMAD (Alternate) 


SHRI J. C. SINGHAL 


SHRI KARTHICK BELLIGUNDU 
SHRI AKASH KUMAR DINESHBHAI SHAH (Alternate) 


Ms MOHUA SALILKANTI BANERJEE 
MS PALLAVI P. CHOUGULE (Alternate) 


SHRI PADMANABH MANIYAR 


IS 17392 : 2023 


Organization 


Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation, New Delhi 


National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute (NEERI) - CSIR, Nagpur 


National Institute of Disaster 


New Delhi 


Management, 


National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee 


Public Health Engineering Department, Kolkata 


Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


Saviram Engineering Consultants Private Limited, 
Civil Engineering Department, Noida 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 
Voluntary Organisation in Interest of Consumer 
Education (VOICE), New Delhi 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, 
Gurugram 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 103, H.No. 3-3- 
108/Kr/103, SV Enclave, New Friends 
Colony - 2, Attapur, Hyderabad) 


In Personal Capacity (C/o ‘A’ Mess, Near Div Chowk, 
Durpin Dhara, Kalimpong ) 


In Personal Capacity (House No. 7, Northex Model 
Town Extension, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR DHARMENDRA KUMAR GUPTA 
MS BHAWNA SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR KUMAR 
DR PRANAV NAGARNAIK 

DR P. K. LABHASETWAR (Alternate) 
PROF CHANDAN GHOSH 

PROF AMIR ALI KHAN (Alternate 1) 


PROF AJINDER WALIA (Alternate П) 


DR MUKESH KUMAR SHARMA 
DR RAJESH SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI HEMANTA KOLEY 
SHRI SOUMITRA CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


MS ANUJA ANAND 
SHRI GIRISH CHANDRA MISHRA 
DR SONIA GROVER 

MS NIYATI SETH (Alternate) 


SHRI В. К. MUKHOPADHYAY 
SHRI К. C. CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJAT JAIN 


SHRI RAJESHWAR RAO BANDARI 


СОГА. К. CHAUBEY 


SHRI R. S. TYAGI 


SHRI S. К. KANOGIA, SCIENTIST 
SENIOR DIRECTOR AND HEAD (SERVICE SECTOR) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
KUMARI PRIYANKA SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(SERVICE SECTOR), BIS 


22 


‘F’/ 


IS 17392 : 2023 


Panel for drafting standard on Disaster/Crisis Management, SSD 14/P4 


Organization 


Water and Power Consultancy Services Limited, 
Gurugram 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 
Lucknow 


Central Public Health and Environmental 
Engineering Organization, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 

Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 


Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
National Institute of Disaster Management, 

New Delhi 
Quality Council of India, New Delhi 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 
Unity IE World Private Limited, Pune 


In Personal Capacity (C/o ‘A’ Mess, Near Div 
Chowk, Durpin Dhara, Kalimpong) 


In Personal Capacity (House No. 7, Northex 
Model Town Extension, New Delhi) 


23 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJAT JAIN (Convener) 


DR PREETI CHATURVEDI BHARGAVA (Co-convener) 


DR RAMAKANT 


Ms MONIKA BAHL 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA 


PROF DEEPAK KHARE 


DR CHANDAN GHOSH 


Ms ANUJA ANAND 


DR SONIA GROVER 


SHRI DUBASH MEHERZADE 
SHRI MAHESH PATHAK 


СОГА. К. CHAUBEY 


SHRI R. S. TYAGI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:SSD 14 (20621). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6% Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 23670012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


