IS 10060 : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2019) 


MAA AAP 

UI BSS ёч. AA 9 Кио a a — 
Ufa ет 
(чет чта ) 


Indian Standard 


GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATION FOR POWER HOUSE 
SITES — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.020 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


January 2013 Price Group 3 


Geological Investigations and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee, WRD 5 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Geological Investigations and Subsurface Exploration Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Water Resources Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1981. This revision is proposed to reflect the experience gained on the 
subject since then. 


With the increasing demand for power in the country, an increasingly large number of power houses are being 
built. One of the major requirements in planning, design and construction of these power houses is proper 
and adequate subsurface investigation. The object of subsurface and related site investigation is to provide 
the engineer with as much information as possible about the ground conditions, for example, the thickness of 
overburden and other geological features of the area. This Code has been formulated to serve as a guide in 
such investigations. 


The methods of subsurface investigation enable vertical sections of the strata to be drawn based on core 
drilling and in-situ tests, samples tested for determining characteristics, such as, shear strength parameters, 
bearing capacity of the soil, permeability, water table, and soil and/or rock type classification. This information 
together with the normal topographical survey provides the engineer with complete details of the site and 
enables him to prepare economical designs for the power house structures. 


In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to co-ordination among the standards and 
practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. 


It has been assumed in this standard that the execution of its provisions is entrusted to appropriately 
qualified and experienced people, for whose guidance it has been formulated. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in 
the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 10060 : 2013 


Indian Standard 


GEOTECHNICAL INVESTIGATION FOR POWER HOUSE 
SITES — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard gives guidance on the type, extent 
and details of subsurface exploration needed in 
connection with hydroelectric power houses both 
surface and underground. 


1.1.1 This standard provides guidelines for planning 
the exploratory work, through various stages of the 
project development. These recommendations may 
have to be modified for individual projects, depending 
upon the site conditions and other conditions 
peculiar to each project, such as height and 
importance of the power house and the heterogeneity 
of foundation formations. 


1.2 The term subsurface exploration, as used herein, 
covers all types of exploration connected with 
determination of the nature and extent of surface and 
subsurface media at or near the power house site. 


1.3 This standard does not, however, cover the 
types and methods of exploration for materials of 
construction for power houses, such as, aggregate 
and material for riprap. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on these standards are encouraged 
to investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

1888 : 1982 Method of load test on soils 
(second revision) 

1892 : 1979 Code of practice for subsurface 
investigations for foundations 
(first revision) 

1893 : 1984 Criteria for earthquake resistant 
design of structures (fourth 
revision) 

2131:1981 Method for standard penetration 


test for soils (first revision) 


IS No. Title 


5249 : 1992 Method of test for determination 
of dynamic properties of soil 


(second revision) 


5529 Code of practice for in-situ 


permeability test: 

Tests in overburden (first 
revision) 

Tests in bedrock (second 
revision) 


(Part 1): 1985 
(Part 2) : 2006 


6955 : 2008 Code of practice for subsurface 
exploration for earth and rockfill 


dams (first revision) 


6926 : 1996 Diamonds core drilling for site 
investigation for river valley 
projects — Code of practice (first 
revision) 

7317: 1993 Code of practice for uniaxial 
jacking test for deformation 


modulus of rock (first revision) 


13946 Determination of rock stress — 


Code of practice. 


(Part 1):1994 Using hydraulic fracturing 


technique 


(Part 4): 1994 Using flat jack technique 


3 GENERAL 


3.1 In the design of some components of power 
house structure foundations, special attention is 
given to the effect of vibrations and sensitivity to 
settlements. Hence, the results of subsurface 
exploration should provide enough data for the study 
of these features and exploration should be very 
detailed and thorough. Faults, shear zones, 
weathered horizon and joints found in the rock mass 
constituting the foundation shall be demarcated. All 
changes in rock type and formation contacts shall 
be studied in detail. 


3.2 The type and extent of exploration shall be 
commensurate with the size and importance of the 
project and will depend upon the size of the power 
house and the type of foundation. 


IS 10060 : 2013 


3.3 Subsurface explorations in connection with a 
power house shall cover a specified area around the 
power house site and shall be carried out to a 
specified depth. All subsurface explorations are to 
be planned and executed subsequent to the 
geological mapping of the power house complex 
Depending upon the type of power house, 
investigation should be required for the following 
areas of the power house complex: 


a) Forebay; 

b) Penstocks; 

c) Locations of turbine and generators; 
d) Switch and transformer yards; and 
e) Other power house components. 


3.3.1 A complete programme of exploration shall be 
able to give information regarding the following 
points: 


a) Types of different soil and rock masses that 
exists in the foundation; 


b) Location, sequence, thickness and aerial 
extent of each soil/rock stratum, including a 
description and classification of the soils 
and rocks, their mineral and chemical 
constituents and their structure, 
stratification in the undisturbed state, 
significant geological or other structural 
features, such as, buried channels, seams, 
joints and fissures; 


c) Depth and type of bedrock as well as the 
location, sequence, thickness, aerial extent, 
altitude, depth of weathering, soundness, 
and description of rock within the depth of 
exploration [see IS 13946 (Part 1) and 
IS 13946 (Part 4)]; 


d) Characteristics of the ground water, 
including whether the water table is perched 
or normal, influent or affluent, direction of 
flow of ground water, depth of and pressure 
in artesian zones and chemical quality of 
ground water; and 


e) Engineering properties of the overburden 
and bedrocks [see IS 5529 (Part 1) and 
IS 5529 (Part 2)]. 


3.3.2 Exploration shall also be needed for study of 
the following problems: 


a) Determination of stability of slope adjacent 
to power house excavation; 

b) Determination of the stability and erosion 
characteristics of the tail race channel (to 
know, if lining is required); 


c) Effect of seepage water on subsurface 
material; and 


d) Landslides, rockfalls and avalanches — 
The stability of glacial and fluvioglacial 
material with thin soil cap, creep of soil 
covered hill slopes, etc, shall be studied. In 
the case of power houses placed at the foot 
of a hill or on a steep hillside, the hill slope 
shall be examined for existing or potential 
landslides or rockfalls. The location of power 
houses in high altitude areas shall take into 
account the possibility of avalanches 
affecting the stability of the power houses. 


3.4 For soils, test in accordance with IS 2131 and 
IS 6955 may be conducted at the required locations. 


3.4.1 Wherever drilling in rock is resorted to, NX or 
larger size would be preferably used as large diameter 
cores would be useful for studying joint patterns 
and fracturing (see IS 6926). As loads are heavy, 
shear tests on rock samples may be necessary. 


3.5 For general principles and procedures to be 
followed for investigation and sampling, reference 
may be made to IS 1892. For exploration by pits, 
trenches, boring, drifts and shafts, references may 
be made to IS 6955. 


3.6 The extent of foundation exploration required 
for power houses of given size varies from site to 
site, depending on the subsurface conditions. The 
exploration generally proceeds in stages, the details 
of each stage growing out of the one before. It 
normally follows a learn-as-you-go procedure, in 
which characteristics of the subsurface geological 
conditions are developed in progressively greater 
detail as the exploration proceeds. 


3.7 The subsurface exploration required for a power 
house are grouped under the following stages: 


a) Reconnaissance or pre-feasibility stage; 

b) Preliminary investigation or feasibility 
stage; 

c) Detailed investigation or DPR stage; and 

d) Construction stage. 


3.7.1 The type of investigations required for the last 
3 stages will be the same, only difference being in 
the details of information gathered, quantitatively. 
Therefore, after describing the reconnaissance stage 
investigations, the type of information required for 
the last 3 stages are described together and then the 
quantitative detail of information for all the 3 stages. 
If it is found that the properties of foundation material 
vary too much, then, in each bay, information shall 
be gathered at least at 3 points. 


3.8 Type of Information Required 
3.8.1 Settlement 


3.8.1.1 For finding out the safety of the power 
house, in so far as uniform and equal settlement are 
concerned, the following investigations shall be 
carried out: 


a) A chart showing the strata below final 
foundation level up to one-and-a-half times 
the width of the substructure of the power 
house housing the main generating 
equipment shall be prepared. Investigations 
shall be carried out to find out if there are 
compressible clay or other objectionable 
layers within this depth. In rock with 
adequate bearing characteristics the bore 
holes need to penetrate only about 8 m. For 
the purpose of investigation, unless 
otherwise known, it may be assumed that 
the foundation of hydroelectric plants 
generally are 9 m to 12 m below the original 
ground surface. 

b) Safe bearing capacity at the foundation level 
of the power house site shall be found out 
in (1) dry, (2) normal, and (3) submerged 
foundation conditions. To determine safe 
bearing capacity, plate load test indicated 
in IS 1888 should be considered. 


3.8.1.2 In order to predict any settlement, modulus 
of deformation of the foundation shall be found for 
dry, normal and submerged conditions of the strata. 


3.8.2 Sliding 


For the stability of the power house, it is important 
to see that the horizontal forces acting above any 
plane and tending to slide the structure along that 
plane are not greater than the resisting forces of 
friction or the shear strength of the materials of 
foundations forming the plane. 


3.8.3 Ground Water Conditions 


In order to find the extent of submergence of the 
foundation medium, high and low spring levels at 
the site of the power house shall be recorded. 


3.8.4 Dynamic Stability 


For the determination of dynamic stability, dynamic 
properties of the soil shall be determined in 
accordance with IS 5249 and also to the requirements 
of IS 1893. 


3.8.5 Any other characteristics required by the field 
or design engineer for a particular locality shall also 
be determined. 


4 HYDROELECTRIC SURFACE POWER 
HOUSES 


4.1 Reconnaissance or Pre-feasibility Stage 


IS 10060 : 2013 


4.1.1 The scope of investigation during this stage 
is confined to the investigation of the suitability of 
constructing a surface hydel power house in the area 
where the required drop is available to create head 
for generation of electricity. The investigation with 
the general reconnaissance of the area shall be done 
on | : 25 000 or 1: 50 000 scale topographic maps 
having contour interval of 20 m or 40 m, so as to 
establish broad topographical and geological 
features of the foundation material. 


4.1.2 Incase the site is near hilly slopes, stability of 
the hill slopes shall be investigated. In sites subject 
to avalanches, the direction of avalanche routes and 
the magnitude of avalanches shall be studied. 


4.1.3 Incase of sites at high altitude, investigation 
shall clearly bear out the suitability of foundation 
material with particular reference to the following 
conditions: 


a) Permafrost; and 


b) Stability of glacial and diluroglacial material 
with a thin soil cap. 


4.1.4 The hydrogeological conditions of the 
foundation material shall be investigated in detail. 


4.2 Preliminary Investigation or Feasibility Stage 
4.2.1 Objectives, Types and Method of Exploration 


During this stage, data for formulation of the project 
and extent of detailed investigations, as required, 
are collected. The coverage of exploration shall be 
adequate for examination of the feasibility, which 
includes preliminary estimation of the cost and 
evaluation of the benefits. This stage also includes 
studies for preliminary choice of the alignment as 
well as the height of the power house. This stage of 
exploration includes the following: 


a) Geological mapping on 1 : 1 000 to 1 : 5 000 
scale at 1 m to 5 m contour interval; 


b) Exploration by test pits, trenches, drifts and 
shafts; 


c) Exploration by geophysical methods; 

d) Exploration by drilling using coring and 
non-coring methods or by other boring 
methods; 


e) Determination of the depth of water table 
and evaluation of field permeability; 
observation of temperature, pressure and 
discharge of springs not at the surface or in 
exploratory borings, trenches, etc; 

f) Field penetration and field density test in 
overburden; and 

g) Laboratory tests on representative samples 
and undisturbed samples for the 
determination of engineering properties of 


IS 10060 : 2013 


the overburden material. 


4.2.2 After locating the most suitable site from the 
results of reconnaissance stage investigation, 
information specified in 3.8 shall be found out for 
one point only situated at the middle of possible 
power house layout. 


4.2.3 In case of location in alluvium soil, 
investigation shall bring out presence, if any, of 
layers of silt, peat, quick sand or a high content of 
clay, which might cause foundation problems. 


4.3 Detailed Investigation or DPR Stage 


4.3.1 These investigations are required for obtaining 
data required for detailed design of all structures 
related to the power house. These investigations 
shall be conducted at the final location of the power 
house and appurtenant works fixed from preliminary 
stage investigations. 


4.3.2 In this stage of investigation, all data required 
for detailed design and preparation of construction 
drawings shall be collected. Close co-ordination is 
essential between the work of the organizations for 
exploration, geological work and design. 


4.3.3 Investigations at this stage shall comprise the 
following : 


a) Updation of geological maps on 1:1000 scale; 


b) Incase of high open cuts, shear parameters 
of overburden or joints in rocks may be 
determined by in-situ testing; 


c) Collection of geological data on joints and 
other discontinuities must be intensive in 
DPR stage; 


d) Use of geophysical methods to define in 
detail the subsurface conditions, such as 
the depth to bed rock or depth to water table 
in specific sections of the power house base. 
During this stage, use of borehole 
geophysical methods, such as electrical 
logging, as and when required, may be found 
advantageous to define particular 
characteristics of overburden and bed rock; 


e) Intensive exploration by drilling and pitting 
(trenches and shafts where found 
necessary) of the foundation to determine 
spatial distribution and characteristics of 
different types of foundation materials in 
relation to specific design features. Two to 
four or more holes (covering the area) may 
be drilled to satisfactorily portray the 
geological condition and delineate weak and 
vulnerable zones, if any. Holes shall be drilled 
to a depth of one to two times the maximum 
width of the structures or 10 m in the fresh 


rock whichever is less; 


f) In view of slope stability problems, it is 
imperative that the back slope is investigated 
by exploratory drifts to especially observe 
the nature of discontinuities and for rock 
mechanics test; 


g) Defining of geohydrological characteristics 
of the foundations and their environments 
through pumping in or pumping out tests, 
as dictated by site conditions; 

h) Ascertaining the  groutability of 
foundations, if required, through trial 
grouting of specified reaches; 


j) If the power house foundation consists of 
alluvium material (high silt sand deposit, 
reverine terrace, etc) special field test shall 
be carried out which shall include, 


1) Drilling of holes; 

2) Standard penetation tests; 

3) Cone penetration tests; 

4) Grain size analyses; 

5) Cyclic simple shear tests; 

6) Resonant column tests; and 
7) Geophysical tests. 


NOTE — Based on the results of the above tests, 
interpretation may be carried out whether the soil 
is susceptible to liquefaction under the maximum 
credible earthquake. 


k) In-situ rock mechanics tests аге to be carried 
out for determining the load bearing 
capacity, shear strength parameters 
(с and Ф) and stress measurement of the 
foundation. 


m) Laboratory tests, namely compressive 
strength (uniaxial and triaxial), tensile 
strength; and modulus of elasticity, density, 
specific gravity, void ratios, porosity and 
permeability are to be carried out in the rock 
samples. 


4.3.4 Information specified in 3.8 may be obtained 
for at least one point situated at the middle of the 
unit bay, erection bay and control bay. More bore- 
holes may be required, depending upon the 
geological conditions. 


4.4 Construction Stage 


Construction stage exploration shall aim at making 
available data generally for the evaluation of specific 
foundation preparation and treatment. In case, after 
actual excavation, it is found that the properties of 
foundation material vary too much, then, in each bay, 
information shall be gathered at least at 3 points. A 
complete record of the foundation features shall be 


maintained at this stage. This is essential for the 
solution of post construction problems, if any. 
Foundation grade geotechnical mapping on 1 : 100 
or 1 : 200 scale should be done. 


5 HYDROELECTRIC UNDERGROUND POWER 
HOUSES 


5.1 Reconnaissance or Pre-feasibility Stage 


5.1.1 The scope of investigations during this stage 
is confined to the selection of the most suitable sites 
from the geological considerations, besides 
satisfying the engineering requirements. The 
investigation shall proceed with the general 
reconnaissance of the area on | : 50 000 scale topo- 
maps having contour of 20 m or 40 m to establish 
broad geomorphologic features. Lithological 
characters and attitude of the host rock and its major 
jointing, shear zone and pattern, and the major 
structural and tectonic features, such as folds, faults 
and thrusts, shall be recorded and their significance 
in terms of the seismicity of the area shall be 
evaluated. After eliminating obviously unsatisfactory 
sites, reconnaissance stage explorations shall be 
done to establish the nature and extent of overburden 
cover and major active or potential slide features 
along the slope. Preferably, thinly bedded fissile and 
highly fractured rocks shall be avoided and slope 
configuration shall be studied with reference to 
stability and availability of sound rock cover over 
the cavity. A programme of surface and subsurface 
investigations shall be chalked out for the selected 
site to establish the depth of open and slump joints 
or potential slide mass as well as depth to sound 
rock over the proposed cavity. 


5.1.2 Surveys 


5.1.2.1 Topographic survey on 1 : 25 000 or 1 : 50 000 
scale shall be carried out, extending from the head 
race tunnel end to the tail race tunnel end and 
covering the hill slope for 150 m on either side of the 
proposed sites of the power house structure and 
penstocks. This shall be used as a base map for 
detailed geological mapping in the preliminary stage 
of investigation to demarcate significant geological 
and structural features of the area. Generally digitized 
toposheets on 1 : 50 000 or 1 : 25 000 scale are available 
from Survey of India. 


5.2 Preliminary Investigation or Feasibility Stage 


5.2.1 In this stage the objective of investigations is 
to select the most suitable site for a power house 
based on the interpretations of surface and 
subsurface exploration data, and comparative 
evaluation of the various alternatives. Detailed 
geological mapping on 1 : 5 000 scale shall be carried 
out prior to the recommended subsurface exploration 


IS 10060 : 2013 


and at least the following features shall be recorded: 


a) Various lithological units present in the area, 
their altitudes and continuity, susceptibility 
to weathering, geometry of the structural 
weak planes such as joints, nature of filling 
of the planes of discontinuity, slip planes, 
shear zones, folds and faults; 


b) Demarcation of covered area with remarks 
on the nature of the material, creep and slide 
features; 


c) Ground water conditions; 


d) Existence and nature of springs — hot or 
cold; and 


e) Pressure of any oil or gas shows. 


5.2.2 Depending upon the site conditions some 
shallow drill holes to decipher the depth to bedrock 
and overburden thickness at the site may be done. 


5.3 Detailed Investigation or DPR Stage 


5.3.1 Geological mapping on 1:1 000 scale with 
contour interval as dictated by site condition. 


5.3.2 The objective of the investigation is to provide 
a fairly clear picture of the existing geological 
conditions likely to be present at the power house 
cavity for design of the cavity and outline of the 
excavation programme and treatment. 


5.3.3 Based on the results of detailed surface 
geological mapping, a programme of subsurface 
exploration by drifting shall be made which should 
extend upto the tentative power house location, in 
order to have a detailed assessment of geological 
discontinuities and the stress field present at the 
power house site. The drift shall preferably run along 
the long axis of the power house having 2 to 3 cross- 
cuts on either side extending upto the power house 
cavity walls. The drift may preferably be kept at the 
haunch level of the roof arch. 


The observations gathered during the exploratory 
drifting should include, 


a) lithologic characteristics of the various rock 
units; 

b) their suitability to tunneling; 

c) 3-D geological mapping of the exploratory 
tunnels/drifts; 

d) depth to sound rock; 

e) nature, spacing and continuity of prominent 
joints, slip planes, minor and major shear 
seams zones; and 

f) study of stress field. 


Based on the results of subsurface explorations and 
in in-situ stress, suitable recommendations regarding 


IS 10060 : 2013 


the location and orientation of the power house 
cavity shall be decided. If these studies indicate the 
presence of adverse geological discontinuities with 
reference to the long axis of the power house, the 
orientation of the cavity shall be suitably modified 
keeping in view the prevailing stress field. In general, 
it is undesirable to have prominent geological 
discontinuities parallel or nearly parallel to the long 
axis of the power house or along high walls and rock 
cuts. 


The exploratory drifts also facilitate collection of rock 
samples of various types for determination of elastic 
or various other properties in the laboratory in 
addition to conducting various in-situ tests for 
designing support system, lining and rock blotting. 


5.3.4 Critical geological observations shall be made 
in the exploratory drifts made in the cavity area and 
the drill holes drilled earlier. The observations in the 
exploratory tunnel should include limit of slump 
joints or glide cracks and study of stress field. The 
drilling and drifting shall be done as per 5.3.3. In 
addition, 2 to 3 exploratory drill holes down to draft 
tube level are required to be done from exploratory 
drifts. Possibility of mechanized drifting by small 
diameter TBM (tunnel boring machine) may be 
explored depending on the site conditions and 
accessibility. Rock mechanics studies regarding 
geological discontinuities shall be correlated with 
surface observations and drill hole data. Suitable 
number of tests shall be performed for the 
determination of in-situ modulus of elasticity, 
Poisson’s ratio, modulus of deformation, shear 
parameters and determination of stress field in 
various directions (see IS 7317) and also the properties 
of important shear zone materials and joint fillings. 


5.3.5 Investigations shall cover an area around the 
cavity of 3 to 5 times its larger dimension, depending 
upon the geological complexities deciphered in the 
preliminary investigation stage. 


5.4 Construction Stage Investigations 


5.4.1 Three dimensional (3 D) mapping on 1 : 100 or 
1 : 200 scale of the underground power house cavern 
should be carried out to identify and delineate 
lithological bands, structural discontinuities like 
joints, shears, faults, etc, and water seepage zones. 
The rock mass classification using Q and RMR shall 
be attempted on the basis of different key-parameters 
collected during 3-D mapping. Based on the Q and 
RMR values, suitable support systems — passive 
(steel ribs) and active (rock bolts) with wire mesh 
shotcreting are provided. 


During this stage focus should be laid on the 
instrumentation of cavern. The instrumentation for 
monitoring the underground power house caverns 
are categorized into two systems, namely, 


a) Strata monitoring system — To monitor rock 
mass deformation, stress changes and pore 
water pressure. 


b) Support monitoring system — To monitor 
deformation and load on supports. 


The strata monitoring is done by using single point 
or multi-point borehole extensometers, closure 
meters (tape extensometers), peizometers, etc. The 
support monitoring is done by using load cells, 
pressure cells and pull out tester. Micro-seismic/ 
nano-seismic monitoring (real time, on line) is very 
useful, during construction and post-construction 
stages, for detecting micro-cracking/displacement/ 
deformation in rock mass around cavern by fixing 
sensors or geophones at different locations in 
boreholes. 


The information provided by instrumentation and 
monitoring yields a better understanding of the 
structure’s response mechanism to various stresses 
to which they are subjected. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in course of implementing the standard, 
of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be 
addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 


should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 5 (452). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amendment No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14, СІТ. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 23379120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, ГУ Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
22542519, 22542315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANATHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


