(Reaffirmed 2000)

IS : 6398 - 1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EDDY CURRENT TESTING OF SEAMLESS FERROUS PIPES AND TUBES

( First Revision )
Non-Destructive
Chairman SHRI N. V. PANDIT Membm Walchandnagar Industries Ltd, Walchandnagar, Dist, Pune SHRI D. R. KOLHATKAR ( Altcrnatc 1 Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, SHRI M. K. B~NERJEE . Jamshedpur SHRI A. R. HOBE ( Ahrnatc ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI J. N. B~AWAL SERI K. L. BARUI ( Alternate) National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New DR V. N. BINDAL Delhi DR ASHOK KUMAR ( Aftamatc ) Mining and Allied Machinery Corpn. Ltd, SHRI T. K. BOSE Durgapur SHRI S. KUMAR `( Altcmatr ) . Indian Tube Co Ltd, Jamshedpur SHRI G. CHATTERJEE ACC-Vickers Baboock Ltd, Durgapur SHRI R. N. DAB Central Boilers Board, New Delhi SHRI S. C. DEY DIRECTOR (MET-3), DEPUTY Ministry of Railways RDSO, LTJCKNOW CEEMIST & METALLURQIST, WR, AJMER ( Alternate ) Steel Authority of India Ltd (Rourkela Steel SHRI V. EASWARN Plant), Rourkela SERI M. C. JOSHI ( Alternate ) Air India, Bombay SHRI K. N. KINI . SHRI A. V. KULEARNI ( Altcrnatr )
SHRI

Testing Sectional Committee,
Representing M.

SMDC 25

M. Suri & Associates (P) Ltd, Bombay

E. B. ARUHAHARI

( Continued on page 2 )

Q Copyright 1983 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Zndian CopVright Act (XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the Dub&her shall be deemed to be an infringement of coovritzht under the said Act.

`IS : 6398 - 1983
( Continued from pap Members N. KOSHI SHRI K. V. NARASIMHA RAO SHRI S. K. PANDALA S~sr U. M~HAN RAO ( Alfernate
SHRI

1)
Representing Minis try of Shipping and Transport The K. C. P. Ltd, Tiruvottiur, Madras Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi I )
The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur (R&D Centre for

SHRI P. v. SAsrHy (Al&r&e SHRI A. S. PRASAD SHRI S. A. HAQUE ( Alternate DR G. RAI
SHKI SHRI

II )

)

SUDHAKAR JKA ( Alternate ) Steel Authority N. S. RAMA MUI~THY Bhilai

Steel Authority of India Ltd, Iron and Steel 1. ,, Ranchi

of India Ltd ( Bhilai Steel Plant). Plates & Vessels Ltd,

SHRI SHRI

R. S. DUBEY ( Alternate ) D. S. P. RAO

Bharat Heavy Visakhapatnam

S. ABIMOORTHY ( Alternate ) Mukand Iron & Steel Works Ltd, Bombay S. RAMASWAMY Ministry of Defence (DGI) SHRI B. N. RAY SHRI S. R. MAZUMDAR ( Alternate I Central Mechanical Engineering Research DR S. ROY Institute ( CSIR ) Durgapur Steel Authority of India Ltd, ( Bokaro Steel Ltd), SHRI S. R. SAHU Bokaro Steel City SHRI G. C. PRASAD ( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad SHKI N. L. SaO Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, Trivanorum DR B. K. SARKAR SHRI C. R. SATYA ( Alternate ) Burn & Co Ltd, Howrah SHRI T. K. SEN SHRI P. DASGUPTA ( Alternate ) Heavy Engineering Corporation Ltd, Ranchi SHRI R. B. SINGH Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi S~rrr N. M. WALEOHA Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI R. R. WAMORRAR
SHRI SHRI SHRI

Director

SHR1 K. bALAHAMAMooRTHy K:RAQHAVENDHAN,

(

Attefnats)
Director

General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio

Member)

( Strut & Met

)
Secretary SHRI B. MUKHEBJI Deputy Director ( Metals ), IS1

2

IS : 6398 - 1983

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR EDDY CURRENT TESTING OF SEAMLESS FERROUS PIPES AND TUBES

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 August 1983, after the draft finalized by the Non-Destructive Testing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1971. In this revision more and reference standard has been details about testing procedures incorporat.ed. This standard is intended to be a guide for method of The recomeddy current testing of seamless ferrous pipes and tubes. mendations given in this standard are based on accepted current practices. 0.3 This standard applies to the eddy current testing of ferrous pipes and tubes only. Eddy,current testing of non-ferrous tubes will be covered in a separate standard. 0.4 In the preparation of this standard, the following publications: assistance has been derived from

BS 3889 : Part 2A - 1965 Methods for non-destructive testing of pipes and tubes : Eddy current testing of ferrous pipes and tubes. British Standards Institution, UK. BS 3889 : Part 2B - 1966 Methods for non-destructive testing of pipes and tubes : Eddy current testing of non-ferrous tubes. British Standards Institution, UK. ASTM E 309 - 1977 Recommended practice for eddy current testing of steel tubular products with magnetic saturation. American Society of Testing and Materials, USA. 3

IS : 6398 - 1983 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes the methods of eddy current detection of defects in seamless pipes and tubular products of outer diameter from approximately 3.0 to 250-O mm. This standard is applicable only to ferrous pipes of uniform cross section and composition.
2. PRINCIPLE

OF TEST

2.1 The test is performed by passing the tube through or in the proximity of a coil(s) energized with alternating current at one or more frequencies. This alternating current induces eddy, currents to flow in the tube as a result of electromagnetic induction. The test coil detects the resultant electromagnetic flux related to these currents. The presence of discontinuities in the tube shall cause change in flow of eddy currents. Where a discontinuity is present, the eddy current flow is impeded and changed in direction, causing significant changes in the associated electromagnetic field. In the case of ferrous tubes the extent of change in electromagnetic field is also dependent upon the magnetic permeability of the material. The permeability variations inherent in ferrous tubes is often the cause of anamolous test results. The problem can be solved by the application of strong magnetic field in the region of the examining coil.
During the passage of the tube the changes in electromagnetic response caused by the presence of discontinuities in the tube are detected by the test coil which are amplified and modified in order to actuate an audio or visual indicating device (such as a cathode ray oscilloscope or a recorder ), a mechanical marker or a combination of these. 3. TERMINOLOGY 3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply.

3.1 Test Coil Assembly - One or more coils supplied with alternating current and placed in proximity to, and, therefore, electromagnetically The test coil assembly induces coupled to the material being tested. eddy currents in the material being tested and responds to variations in The coil these eddy currents caused by discontinuities in the material. may be either a probe coil or an encircling coil of the absolute or differential type. 3.2 Depth of Penetration - For a given material and for given conditions of test coil assembly, frequency of alternating current supplied 4

IS:6398

- 1983

to coil, etc, the magnetic field strength and consequently the intensity of induced eddy currents in the material decreases in value from the surface ( close to the coil ) towards the interior of the material. The depth at which the magnetic field strength OF the intensity of induced eddy currents has decreased to l/e ( or 37 percent 1 of its surface value is called ` depth of penetration ' where e is the base of Neperian logarithm. Synonymous terms are ` standard depth of penetration ' and ` skin depth `. 3.3 Eddy Currents by the time or space - Electrical currents caused to flow in a conductor variation, or both, of an applied magnetic field.

3.4 Effective Depth of Penetration - Though theoretically the intensity of induced currents reduce to zero at infinite depth, for practical purposes considering the test system and detection capability, the induced eddy currents in the material do reach zero value at finite depth beyond which the test system does not ` see ' the material. This depth in the material at which the induced eddy current intensity practically reduces to zero is called ` effective depth of penetration `. In effect, the test system does not detect any defect situated beyond the effective depth of penetration in the material.
NOTE - The frequency of alternating current fed to the coil assembly shall be so chosen that wall thickness of the material is less than the effective depth of penetration and the condition stipulated in 5.4 is satisfied.

3.5 End Effect ( or Edge Effect ) - The effect of the magnetic field caused by the geometric boundaries of the test specimen that makes it impractical to apply electromagnetic test methods to the associated regions of the test specimen. A large indication generally develops which masks the indication of discontinuities in this region. 3.6 Filters one or more frequencies.

It is a network
frequency

that transmits energy bands and attenuates

at frequencies within energy at all other

3.7 Magnetic Saturation ( Applicable for Ferrous Pipes and Tubes Only ) - A state wherein a magnetic material, as a result of the application of a strong magnetic field, exhibits a sufficiently small degree of its magnetic characteristics, such as permeability and hysteresis that the only properties subject to measurements or variations are its dimensions and electrical conductivity. 3.8 Permanent Magnet - A material has been strongly magnetized. of high magnetic retentivity that

3.9 Speed Effect - This is the phenomena in which a change in signal voltage is caused by the relative motion between the specimen and a test coil assembly. 5

IS : 6398 - 1983
4. EQUIPMENT 4.1 The main apparatus shall consist of a source of alternating current of a fixed or variable frequency applied to a test coil assembly, and an electronic detecting system to sense.and indicate variations in the output of the coil assembly. The detecting system may include a phase selector and filter circuit. The frequency of the instrument shall be such that the effective depth of penetration is greater than the wall thickness of the tube under inspection. For guidance of users, a graph indicating the variation of depth of penetration with frequency of alternating current through the test coil for various materials is given in Appendix A. 4.2 Other Accessories - A recorder ( X-Y-< storage oscilloscope ), an alarm or a marking system shall be used along with the main equipment. 4.3 Driving System - A material transport and guiding system shall be provided, if necessary, which will advance the tube at the required rate. There shall be no excessive vibration or misorientation of the tube and the feed speed shall be constant within f 10 percent. The driving system shall in no way damage the tubes being tested. 4.4 Magnetic Saturation Unit ( Applicable for Ferrous Pipes and the desired degree of magnetic saturation, a Tubes ) - To achieve suitably cooled coil energized by direct current and surrounding the test coil assembly and the material under inspection may be used. Permanent The magnets may also be used to achieve the required saturation. absence of permeability noise may be taken as an indication of sufficient saturation. 5. TEST ,PROCEDURE Staadard

5.1 Reference

5.1.1 A reference standard free from natural defects and of convenient length shall be prepared from a length of tube of the same size, composition and metallurgical conditions as the tubes to be inspected. The reference standard selected shall exhibit low background noise when it is tested at high sensitivity. 5.1.2 Holes drilled through the wall radially or rectangular notches cut on the outside surface of the tube shall be used as reference defects. Three such defects shall be introduced in the reference standard suitably separated ( about 450 mm ) from one another and from the end axially, While drilling the hole or cutting the and 120" apart circumferentially. notch, care shall be taken to avoid overheating of the area and to remove excessive burrs on the surface. The use of centre-punch shall be avoided. The surface shall not be damaged while handling. 6

IS:6398-

1983

NOTE 1 - The reference standard shall be frequently examined for damages like scars and dents. NOTE 2 - Unless, otherwise agreed, longitudinal notches shall be used. Notches on the inner surface shall be used if mutually agreed between the manufacturer and

purchaser.

NOTE 3 -When a single notch or drill cut on the reference standard is used, rotate the calibration standard in 120" increments and adjust the equipment SO as to get equal responses from the artificial discontinuity.

I I :

5.1.5 The diameter of the holes or the dimensions of the notches may specification and shall be subject of according to the product agreement between the contracting parties. Appendix B may be used as a guideline for the dimensions of the reference holes or notches.

be

5.2 End Effect - The end effect should be determined by drilling a series of holes or notches near one or both of the ends of a special
calibration tube and passing the tube through the tester to determine the distance from the tube end at which the discontinuity is not detected. When notches or holes are made at one end only, pass the tube through the coil twice, once each with the notches or holes at the leading and tailing ends. The end effect shall betdetermined only once for each size, gauge, It need not be repeated during each speed and test frequency. calibration check. 5.5 Surface Preparation - The surface of the tube shal1 be free from metallic particles, other foreign materials and roughness that may interfere with the interpretation of the test results. 5.4 Adjustment of the Instrument - The reference standard shall be passed through or in the proximity of the test coil at the same speed and in the same manner as the tubes would be passed during inspection. The instrument settings, the frequency and the speed of the test shall be optimized to get consistently more or less equal and distinct indications The alarm level shall be so set that from all the three reference defects. an alarm is given each time a defect passes the test coil. This setting of the instrument should not be altered during testing of the subsequent lot.

5.5

or in the Method of Tbstihg - The tubes shall be passed through proximity of the -test coil with the speed being maintained within f 10 Webbling, vibrations, and the misorientapercent of its nominal value. tion of tube axis with respect to coil axis shall be kept minimum. Any section or length of tubing giving a defect indication equal to or greater than that produced by the reference standard shall be segregated from the material producing indication of lesser electrical magnitude. 7

IS :6398 - 1983
5.6 The proper functioning of the equipment shall be checked (a) at the beginning of the test, (b) every four hours during production run (c) after finishing the test, and (d) whenever malfunctioning is suspected. If malfunctioning is confirmed all the tubes which have been tested since the last satisfactory calibration shall be re-tested. 5.7 In the case of inspection of ferrous have to be made for demagnetizing inspection. 6. LEVEL OF ACCEPTANCE pipes and tubes,.provisions the tubes, if necessary, shall after

6.1 The acceptance stindard shall be subject to agreement between the All indications of discontinuities which are equal to contracting parties. or greater than the agreed values may be the cause for rejection. 6.1.1 In subjected ultrasonic or absence 7. REPORT 7.1 The case higher sensitivity is required, the test jobs should be to magnetic stray flux testing, magnetic particle testing or testing as complementary method for assessing the presence of discontinuities. OF TEST RESULTS the following number information: where applicable;

test report

shall contain drawing

a) Component b) c) 4
Specification Surface Make

reference

of material,

including

its dimension;

condition

of the tubes;

of the instrument; of the coil assembly including of magnetic saturation; used and instrument size and extent chart setting; inner diameter of test

e) Description f 1 Frequency Id
Location

coil, method

of defects; and during the test.

h) Recorder

where available;

j) Any unusual

occurrence

encountered 8

IS : 6398 - 1983

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.1 )

A

VARIATION OF DEPTH OF PENETRATION WITH FREQUENCY OF ALTERNATING CURRENT

Figure 1 indicates the variation of depth of penetration with frequency of alternating current through the test coil for various ( materials.

$

1

APPENDIX ( Clause 51.3 )

B

RECOMMENDED DIMENSIONS OF REFERENCE HOLES AND NOTCHES R-l. The following table may be used as a guide for determining size of the holes when they are used as reference standard:
Outer Diameter of Tube ( Nominal ) I+---__-h_____~

the

mm

Diameter of the Drill (see IS : 5101-1969* ) mm

Above 6 19 25 32 38 44 50 63 140
NOTE The diameter

Up to and Including
6

0'50 0.65 0.80 0.95 l-05 l-15 l-30 l-65 2-7 3.2
of + 0'18 mm. -0

19 25 32 38 44 50 63 140 250
of the hole may have a tolerance

*Specification

for twist drills, parallel shanks, jobber series.

9

01

DEPTH OF PENETRATION--~ (cm) at r.l 41. N

E861- 8669 : SI

IS :6398-1983
B-2. When the standald following dimensions: Notch Notch Notch length width depth defect is a notch, 6-25 mm 1 mm, MUX This is usually specified as a percentage of nominal wall is 5-percent thickness t, that and lo-percent depth notches of 0.3 f of 0.3 f 0.05 mm. 0.05 mm. the notch shall have the

a) 5Percent Depth Notch 5 percent t, + 15 percent b) IO-Percent Depth .votch 10 percent t, & 15 percent
Other

with minimum with minimum

NOTE -

notch depths and shapes may be used by agreement.

11

