**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7503-2 (1988) : Glossary of terms used in rubber 
industry. Part 2: Definitions of Additives [PCD 13: Rubber 
and Rubber Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS :7503( Part 2) -1988 

Indian Standard 

( Reaffirmed 2000 ) 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
RUBBER INDUSTRY 

PART 2 DEFINITIONS OF ADDITIVES 

( First Revision ) 



UDC 001-4 : 6784 



® Copyright 1988 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 

Gil October 1988 



!S: 7S03(Part2)-l98S 



Indian Standard 



GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
RUBBER INDUSTRY 

PART 2 DEFINmONS OF ADDITIVES 

( First Revision ) 



0. FOREWORD 



0.1 This Indian Standard (Part 2) (First Revision) 
was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
on 5 February 1988, after the draft finalized 
by the Rubber Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Petroleum, Coal and Related 
Products Division Council. 

0.2 This standard was originally formulated in 
six parts of IS : 7503 'Glossary of terms used 
in rubber industry', covering the following terms 
and definitions: 

( Part 1 ) - 1974 Definitions of general terms 
*and terms pertaining to 
latex and physical chemical 
properties and testing, com- 
monly used in rubber trade 
and industry 
( Part 2 ) - 1976 Terms relating to compound- 
ing process, machinery and 
vulcanization used in rubber 
industry 
( Part 3 ) - 1979 Terms relating to calender- 
ing, coating, and .moulding 
commonly used in rubber 
trade and industry 
( Part 4 ) - 1979 Terms relating to extrusion 
commonly used in rubber 
trade and industry 
Terms relating to process 
Definitions relating to 
cellular materials 

The various terms had been grouped together 
into the above six parts, as and when they came 
up. However, keeping in view the latest ratio- 
nalized classification, existing in ISO 1382 : 1982, 
these terms have now been re-grouped into six 
parts ( Parts 1 to 6 ) afresh under new rationalized 
and amplified classifications as follows: 

Part 1 Definitions of basic terms 

( general terms and basic terms 
concerning latex ) 

Part 2 Definitions of additives 



(Parts) - 1981 
( Part 6 ) - 1986 



( general terms, additives relating to 
vulcanization, protective agent, 
fillers and colours, extenders and 
plasticizers, special chemicals and 
latex additives ) 

Part 3 Definitions relating to properties and 
testing 

( general terms, uncured properties, 
properties and testing relating to 
cure, mechanical and physical pro- 
perties, degradation properties and 
testing, properties and test specific 
for latex and chemical properties 
and tests) 

Part 4 Definitions relating to processing 

(general terms, processing machine 
and processing of latex) 
Part 5 Defi nitions relating to products — 
Hoses 

Part 6 Definitions relating to cellular mate- 
rials 

0.3 In the present revised standards, some of the 
terms listed below which were present in the 
original parts of IS : 7503 have now been deleted 
and some new terms have been included: 

a) Terms deleted — Accelerated ultra, anti- 
cracking agent, banding time, book, calen- 
der crown, chalk blower, clamp, co-elficient 
of vulcanization, core, density, die holder, 
dielectric, dielectric constant, dielectric 
strength, dilatancy, doubling machine, 
draw, dumb-bell test piece, elongation, face 
cloth, former, frame, gum dipping, haul-off" 
equipment, impulse, inhibitor, insert pin, 
iodine number, miscelle, modulus, mould 
finish, peak cure, pelletizer, premature 
coagulation, rate of cure, raw rubber, 
relative density, rubber hydrocarbon, sepa- 
rating agent, sheet rubber, shrink, skim- 
med fabric, stock, thixotropy, tip, treated 
liner, under cure, viscosity, vulcanizate 
and warming mill. 



IS : im ( Part 1 ) - 19&8 



b) Terms added — Adhesion strength, cute 
rate index, field latex, mix, Mooney 
viscosity, stress relaxation, and visco- 
elasticity. 

0,4 In the preparation of this standard, assist- 
ance has been derived from the following 
publications: 

a) ISO 1382- 1982 Rubber vocabulary. 



International Organization for 

Standardization (ISO). 

b) BS 3558 : 1980 Glossary of rubber terms. 
British Standards Institution. 

0.5 In case there is any difference between the 
definitions in this glossary and those in the 
standards for individual materials, the latter 
shall prevail. 



1, SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 2 ) defines the terms 
relating to additives commonly used in rubber 
industry. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 General 

2.1.1 Compounding Ingredients — A substance 
added to a polymer or latex to form a mix. 

2.2 Additive Related to Vulcanization 

2.2.1 Accelerator — A compounding ingre- 
dient used in small amounts with a curing agent 
to increase the speed of vulcanization and/or to 
enhance the physical properties of the vulcani- 
zate. 

2.2.2 Activator — A compounding ingredient 
used in small proportions to increase the effec- 
tiveness of an accelerator. 

2.2.3 Retarder — A compounding ingredient 
used in small amounts to reduce the tendency of 
a rubber mix to vulcanize prematurely. 

2.2.4 Vulcanizing Agent (Curing Agent) — 
Material(s) added to rubber compound to bring 
about vulcanization. 

2.3 Protective Agent 

2-3.1 Antioxidant — A compounding ingre- 
dient used to retard deterioration caused by 
oxidation. 

2.3.2 Antiozonent — A compounding ingre- 
dient which retards deterioration caused by 
ozone. 

2.4 Fillers and Colours 

2.4.1 Carbon Black — Material consisting 
essentially of elemental carbon in the form 
of near- spherical particles with major dia- 
meters less than 1 ^m generally coalesced into 
aggregates. 

Note — Carbon blacks vary in particle size and 
are used very widely in rubber compounds as rein- 
forcing fillers. 

2.4.2 Clay — Any naturally occurring mineral 
substance consisting predominantly of hydrat- 
ed aluminium silicates. They are used as fillers 
in rubber compounds, some of them having mild 
reinforcing properties. 

2.4.3 Filler — A solid compounding ingredient 
which may be added in relatively large propor- 
tions to a rubber to achieve specific properties. 



2.4.4 Inert Filler {Diluent) — A filler having 
no reinforcing effect. 

2.4.5 Reinforcing Filler — A filler used to 
increase physical properties of the rubber vul- 
canizate. 

2.5 Extenders and Plasticizers 

2.5.1 Extender — An organic material used as 
a replacement for a portion of the rubber re- 
quired in a compound. 

2.5.2 Plasticizer — A compounding ingredient 
used to reduce the viscosity of the rubber to 

facilitate processing or incorporation of fillers. 

2.6 Special Chemicals 

2.6.1 Blowing Agent — A compounding ingre- 
dient used to produce gas either by chemical or 
thermal action or both in manufacture of hollow 
or cellular articles. 

2.6.2 Bonding Agent — A substance or mixture 
of substances used to bond rubber with other 
materials. 

2.6.3 Flame Retardant — A substance used to 
reduce or delay markedly the ignition and/or 
combustion of rubber product, 

2.6.4 Mould Lubricant — A material used to 
prevent a moulded product from adhering to the 
mould. 

2.6.5 Peptizing Agent — A compounding ingre- 
dient used in small proportions to accelerate by 
chemical action the softening of rubber under 
the influence of mechanical action or heat or 
both. 

2.7 Latex Additives 

2.7.1 Coagulant — Substance used for causing 
coagulation [ see 2.3.2 of IS : 7503 ( Part 4 ) - 
1988]. 

2.7.2 Flocculent — Substance used for causing 
flocculation [see 2.3.4 of IS : 7503 (Part 4 ) - 
1988]. 

2.7.3 Gelling Agent — Substance which when 
added to a latex causes it to gel. 

2.7.4 Heat Sensitizer — A gelling agent effec- 
tive only at elevated temperature. 

2.7.5 Thickening Agent — A compoundmg in- 
gredient used to produce very marked thicken- 
ing effects on latex over and above those due 
purely to a high solid content. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi^ India 



