UR AT MI IS 6136: 2023 
Indian Standard 


Ss t eqs fra 
STIL Aw 


(TEC Hiem 


Basic Requirements for Cathode Ray 
Tubes 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 31.100 


©BIS 2023 


UR AAG equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAP ugi 9 FSR ME TH HM, Ag elt. 110002 
VAL MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 


www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2023 Price Group 4 


Electronic Display Devices and Systems Sectional Committee, LITD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by Electronic Display Devices and systems Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electronics 
and Information Technology Division Council. 


This Indian standard was first published in 1971. This revision has been brought out to bring the standard in the 
latest style and format of the Indian Standards. 


This standard deals with the general aspects of cathode ray tubes used in oscilloscopes, television, radar, etc. and 
the format for the presentation of device data to be furnished for specific types of cathode ray tubes. 


The object of preparing this standard on cathode ray tubes is to provide a guideline for specifying the properties 
of the tubes for the intended applications thus facilitating comparison and choice between similar products. It is 
considered desirable that the data sheets brought out by the manufacturers describing the performance and 
dimensions of these devices should contain as a minimum certain information and that this information should be 
quoted in the same terms by all the manufacturers. The adoption of this standard, it is expected, will assist in 
ensuring such uniform presentation of performance characteristics of cathode ray tubes. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6136 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR CATHODE RAY TUBES 


(First Revision) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the basic requirements relating 
to cathode ray tubes, such as those used in 
oscilloscopes, television and radar and the format 
for the presentation of device data to be furnished 
for specific types of cathode ray tubes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standard given below contains provisions, 
which through reference in this text constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreement based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of the standards listed as follows: 


IS No. Title 

IS 1885 Electrotechnical vocabulary: 
(Part 4/Section 4) Part 4 Electron tubes, Section 
4 Cathode — Ray tubes — 
Electrotechnical vocabulary 
— Electronic tubes 

Graphical symbols used in 
electro technology: Part 9 
Electron tubes and valves 
(other than microwave tubes 


IS 2032 (Part 9) 


and valves) 

IS 5323 Letter symbols and 
abbreviations for electron 
tubes 

IS 5627 Methods of measurement of 
radar and oscilloscope cathode 
— Ray tubes 


Dimensions of cathode ray 
tubes: Part 1 Tube outlines 
Dimensions of cathode ray 
tubes: Part 2 Bases 

IS 6214 Specifications for phosphors 
for cathode ray tubes 


IS 5840 (Part 1) 


IS 5840 (Part 2) 


3 TYPE DESIGNATIONS 


3.1 The type designation of cathode ray tubes shall 
consist of number followed by two letter-numeral 
combinations, describing details as given in 3.1.1 to 
3.13. 


3.1.1 The first number shall indicate the tube screen 
size in millimeters (diameter in the case of round 


tubes and diagonal in the case of rectangular tubes). 


3.1.2 The next letter-numeral combination shall 
represent the type of tube. The letter shall be °C’ 
indicating that it is a cathode ray tube, the 
associating number indicating the tube type in the 
series of cathode ray tubes, depending upon its 
electrical and mechanical parameters. 


3.1.3 The second letter-numeral combination shall 
indicate the type of phosphor used for the screen 
coating. 


NOTE — Phosphor designation is based on accepted 


commercial designation. Reference may be made to IS 6214 
(Specification for phosphors for cathode ray tubes). Thus in 
the type designation 70 C1P1, Pl represents the Pl type of 
phosphor corresponding to Sheet 1 of IS 6214. 


4 DESIGNATION OF CATHODE RAY TUBE 
DEFLECTION PLATES 


4.1 For Tubes Using Single Beam 


For tubes using single beam, the designation of the 
deflection plates shall be as follows: 


a) The plates responsible for the displacement of 
the spot in the X direction shall be designated 
X and X». and 


b) The plates responsible for the displacement in 
the Y direction shall be designated Y ¡, and Yo. 


IS 6136 : 2023 


4.1.1 The relative positions of the deflection plates as 
viewed from the neck end of the tube shall be as 
shown in Fig. 1. 


FIG. 1 RELATIVE POSITION OF DEFLECTION PLATES IN A SINGLE-BEAM CATHODE RAY TUBE 


4.2 For Tubes Using Double Beam 


For tubes using double beam, the designation of the 
deflection plates shall be as follows: 


a) The plates responsible for the displacement of 
the spot in the X direction shall be designated X’ 
and X>for the first beam and Xy” and X» for the 
second beam; and 


b) The plate responsible for the displacement of the 
spot in the Y direction shall be designated Y1' and 
Y2' of the first beam and Y ¡”and Y?" for the second 


beam. 


4.2.1 The relative positions of the deflection plates 
as viewed from the neck end of the tube shall be as 


shown in Fig. 2. 


FIG. 2 RELATIVE POSITION OF DEFLECTION PLATES IN A DOUBLE-BEAM CATHODE RAY TUBE 


5 SPECIFYING THE DEVICE DATA 


5.1 All ratings for cathode ray tubes are based on 
absolute maximum rating system (see also Annex 
A). 


6 PROFORMA FOR THE PRESENTATION 
OF DEVICE DATA 


6.1 The proforma for the presentation of the device 


data shall include the following: 


a) Type designation — see 3. 
b) Designation of deflection plates — see 4. 
c) Electrode details 


d) Tube dimensions — see IS 5840 (Part 1) 
Dimensions of cathode ray tubes: Part 1 Tube 
outlines. 


e) Base, base dimensions and base-pin 
connections - The base (such as phenolic 
molded, all glass), base dimensions [see IS 5840 
(Part 2)], and base-pin connections to the various 
electrodes of the tubes shall be specified. The 
angle a between X axis and the key of the base 
shall always be specified (see Fig. 1 and 2). 


D Screen types — The types of phosphor 
employed shall be specified by referring to the 
relevant sheet of IS 6214. 


g) Type of focusing — The type of focusing 
whether electrostatic or electromagnetic shall 
be specified. 


h) Type of deflection - The type of deflection 
whether electrostatic or electromagnetic shall 
be specified. 


j) Useful screen dimensions - Minimum useful 
screen dimensions shall be specified. 


k) Operating characteristics - The limiting 
values, that is the safe- maximum and minimum 
values for the operating characteristics such as 
electrode voltages and currents, electrical 
characteristics deflection factor, line width, and 
inter-electrode capacitance, shall be specified as 
applicable to the particular type of cathode ray 


tube. 
NOTE — The values specified shall correspond to the 
methods of measurements prescribed in IS 5627. 


IS 6136 : 2023 


7 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


7.1 The manufacturer shall furnish additional 
details and the characteristics that may be 
necessary for specific applications. 


IS 6136 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 5.1) 


ABSOLUTE MAXIMUM RATING SYSTEM 


A-1 Absolute maximum ratings are limiting values 
of operating and environmental conditions 
applicable to any electronic device of a specified 
type as defined by its published data, which should 
not be exceeded under the worst probable 
conditions. 


A-2 These values are chosen by the device 
manufacturer to provide acceptable serviceability of 
the device taking no responsibility for equipment 
variations, environmental variations, and the effects 
of changes in operating conditions due to variations 
in the characteristics of the device under 
consideration of all other electronic devices in the 
equipment. 


A-3 The equipment manufacturer should design so 
that initially and throughout life, no absolute 
maximum value for the intended service is exceeded 
with any device under the worst possible operating 
conditions with respect to supply voltage variations, 
equipment component variations, equipment control 
adjustments, load variations, signal variations, 
environ- mental conditions and variations in 
characteristics ofthe device under consideration and 
of all other electronic devices in the equipment. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:LITD 04 (18841). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRE Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8* Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA6 LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


