( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS I 10235 ( Part

III ) - 1982

lndiun Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN ORTWOPAEDICS
PART III
Orthopaedic

ORTHOPAEDIC

SURGERY

Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee, CPDC 24
Chairman Da K. S. MASALAWALA Bombay Mutual Terrace Building 534, Sandhurst Bridge Bombay

Members SHXI S. C. BHATTACEARYA

Representing

Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited, New Delhi SHR~ P. R. T. TEULASIN~A~~ ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGAFMS ) COL A. S. CHAHAL LT-COL 13. J . MOOKRER JEE ( Alternate ) Delhi Administration, New Delhi DR G. C. DAS Denartment of Health & Familv Welfare, GovernDR S. K. DUTTA * ment of West Bengal, Calcutta Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) SIIRI K. K. GRAI LT-COL I. A. KEAN ( Alternate ) Punjab Surgical Instruments Manufacturers & SHRI M. L. GUPTA Suppliers Association, Jullundur National Metallurgical Laboratory ( CSIR ), SHRI R. D. GUPTA Jamshedpur Vikas Orrhopaedic Corporation, New Delhi SEIRI B. M. KAU,SRIK Sushrut Surgicals Pvt Ltd, Bombay SMT VENAL PITRE SIJRI V. R. Gosx ( Alternate ) The Metropolitan Surgical Works, Delhi SHRI A. L. SAIQAL SRR~ Asno~ KUMAR ( Alternate ) Health & Family Welfare Department, GovernDR T. K. SHA~MUQASUNDARAM ment of Tamil Nadu, Madras Directorate of Health Services. Government of DR R. P. SIN~H Bihar, Patna Jmperial Surgical Co Pvt Ltd, Bombay SERI R. N. Vro Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) DE A. S. SETHI, Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ) Secfetag Deputy SHRI D. K. AQBAWAL Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ), IS1

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the of copyright under the said Act. publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement

IS : 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS IN ORTHOPAEDICS
PART III ORTHOPAEDIC SURGERY

0.
0.1

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 17 May 1982, after the draft finalized by the Orthopaedic Instruments and Accessories Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 0.2 The definition of an item is very important as it provides information on its technical aspects. Uniformity in definitions will also eliminate different interpretations and disputes. 0.3 This Indian Standard is based on ISO/DP Part III - Orthopaedic Surgery - Terminology International Organisation for Standardization. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies definitions relevant to orthopaedic surgery. 6017/111*2 c Implants for Surgery ' issued by the

2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 Anatomy
Term

and Physiology -

General
Dejnition

Skeleton

Vertebral SPINE Upper

column

limb girdle

Bony and cartilaginous framework of body. Divisible into axial skeleton ( skull, spine, ribs, sternum and pelvis ) and appendicular skeleton ( bones of upper and lower limbs ). Axial skeleton of body composed of multiple individual units vertebrae sacrum and coccyx together with invertebral discs. Comprising the collar bone ( clavicle ) and shoulder blade ( scapula ) and associated joints. ( Formerly shoulder girdle ).
NOTE- There
left. Contrast lower are two upper limb girdle. limb girdles-right and

2

IS I 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Shoulder Axilla ARMPIT Arm Between Hollow wall. upper under Dejnition limb girdle shoulder ) Upper Humerus ( anatomical front and arm ( anatomical upper ).

between limb ).

arm and chest shoulder and

( Anatomical. elbow ( bone: Between fossa arm

between

Elbow Antecubital Forearm Wrist Hand Palm

) and forearm.

Area overlying Between Between

of elbow joint. radius and ulna).

elbow and wrist ( bones: forearm distal and carpus. to wrist

Upper limb and fingers.

including

palm,

thumb

Anterior aspect of hand excluding thumb and fingers. Includes thenar eminence at base of thumb and hypothenar eminence at base of little finger. ( Adj ) Pertaining to palm of hand and contrast dorsal ). ( compare plantar

Palmar Thumb Fingers

First and most lateral digit of the hand proximal and distal phalanges ).

( two bones:

Index ( forefinger ) Medial four digits of the hand. most lateral, middle ( long ), ring and little, the most medial ( three bones in each finger: proximal, middle and distal phalanges ) ( see Fig. 1 ).
NOTE by number. Fingers should be named and not designated

Lower

limb girdle

pelvic girdle. ) Comprising the two hip bones together with the sacrum and their associated joints bounded by buttock, loin, groin and thigh. Between lower limb girdle and thigh. and hip and above knee the

( Formerly

Hip Thigh Knee Popliteal fossa

Lower limb between groin below ( bone: femur ). Between thigh knee joint. and leg

( anatomical

) around

Area at back of knee joint. 3

IS t 10235 ( Part 111) - 1982

ABDUCTION I

I

-

AXIS

OF THE HAN0

FIG, 1

THE HAND

Term Leg Shin Calf Peroneal Ankle Foot Sole Plantar Heel _

DeJnition ( Anatomical. ) Lower limb between knee and ankle ( shin and calf ) ( bones: tibia and fibula ). Hard anterior part of leg ( anatomical Posterior part of leg ( anatomical ). to ).

( Adj. ) Alternative term to fibular pertaining lateral aspect of leg ( anatomical ). Between leg ( anatomical ) and foot.

That part of lower limb distal to ankle. Under surface of foot. ( Adj. ) Pertaining to the sole of the foot. Posterior part of foot and sole related to calcaneus. 4

tS t 10235 ( P8l't 111) - 1982 Term Instep Ball of foot Hindfoot Forefoot Toes DeJinition Area between heel and ball of foot including longitudinal arch. Distal part of sole between instep and toes. Posterior half of foot related including heel. Distal part of foot related including ball of foot. to tarsal bones and medial

to metatarsal

bones and

Digits of foot ( see also Fig. 2 ): first - great toe or hallus ( two bones: proximal and distal phalanges ); second to fifth ( three bones each: proximal, middle and distal phalanges ): fifth - toe, also called little toe.

Digit

General term referring to thumb, toe.
ABDUCTION : v AOOUCTrON

any finger or any

I

v

MEDICAL

TOES

AXIS OF FIG.

THE

FOOT

2

THE

FOOT

1S I 10235 ( Part III) - 1982 Term 2.2 Bones and Cartilages
Bone Epiphysis Individual element of skeleton. ( Adj. epiphyseal. ) Growth region of a bone. Initially composed of hayaline cartilage later acquiring bony A surface centre which gradually replaces cartilage. may persist to form articular cartilage of the adjacent joint, and another adjacent to shaft of the bone ( diaphysis ), which forms epiphyseal cartilage plate, disappearing when growth ceases. ( Adj. diaphyseal. ) Part of bone between ephyseal plates of their sites. Diaphysis of long bone. ( Adj. metaphyseal. ) End of diaphysis of long bone adjoining epiphysis. ( Adj. periosteal. ) Membrane on free bone ( compare perichondrium ). ( Adj. perichondreal. ) Membrane of non-articular cartilage. surface of DeJinition

Diaphysis Shaft Metaphysis Periosteum Perichondrium Condyle

on free surface

( Adj. condylar. ) Rounded expansion forming part of end of bone adjacent to joint ( for example medial and laterial femoral condyle at knee ). Projection from condyle ( for example medial laterial humeral epicondyles at elbow ). and

Epicondyle, Tuberosity

Broad eminence on bone, often giving attachment to ligament or muscle, especially tendon ( for example greater and lesser tuberosity at upper end of humerus ). Also applied to patholoAs tuberosity, but smaller. gical nodules ( notably the lesion characteristic of tuberculosis ). Projection at upper end of femur elsewhere called tuberosity. Greater trochanter is large projection at upper end of femur to which abductor muscles of hip ( gluteus, medius and minimus ) are attached. Lesser trochanter is prominent process below neck of femur to which main flexor muscle of hip ( iliopsoas ) is attached. 6

Tubercle

Trochanter

IS : 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Trochlea DeJinition ( Adj. trochlear. ) Structure acting as a pulley, for example trochlea of the lower end of the humerus which articulates with the trochlear notices on the ulna. Seed like bone developed in tendon which moves over bony prominence. ) Typical vertebra ( Pl. vertebrae, udj. vertebral. comprises cylindrical body with an arch posteriorly forming part of vertebral canal containing spinal cord and spinal nerves with coverings ( meninges ). Bodies are separated by intervertebral discs, comprising peripheral annulus fibrosus and central nucleus pulposus. Vertebral column has seven cervical, twelve thoracic ( or dorsal ), five lumbar, five sacral and four ( usually ) coccygeal vertebrae. Sacral vertebrae are fused together and coccygeal vertebrae are rudimentary. Vertebrae of different regions vary greatly; first cervical ( atlas ) and second cervical ( axis ) vertebrae are particularly specialized and thoracic vertebrae articulate with ribs. ( Adj. sacral. ) Fused sacral vertebrae lying caudal to lumbar vertebrae and articulating with OS coxae. ( Adj. coccygeal. ) ( Tail bone. ) Consists of usually four rudimentary vertebrae lying caudal to sacrum. ( Adj. sternal. ) Bone forming anterior mid-line part of skeleton of chest wall. Articulates with inner end of clavicle and costal cartilages. Curved bony structure lying in chest wall. There are Posteriorly they articulate with twelve pairs of ribs. thoracic vertebrae; anteriorly upper ten pairs are fused to costal cartilages which articulate with sternum. ( Adj. clavicular. ) Medial end articulates with upper part of sternum and outer end with acromium process of scapula. Part of upper limb girdle. ( Adj. scapular. ) Roughly triangular flat bone forming part of upper limb girdle. Characterized by two processes acromion and caracoid, and shallow oval articular surface, glenoid, acromion articulates with outer end of clavicle; glenoid articulates with humberus. 7

Sesamoid Vertebra

bone

Sacrum coccyx Sternum BREAST Rib

BONE

Clavicle COLLAR Scapula SHOULDER BLADE

BONE

IS : 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Humerus Dejnition ( PI. humeri, ad'. humeral. ) Upper arm bone. Proximal end characterized by convex head and two tuberosities. Head articulates with glenoid cavity of scapula forming shoulder joint. Distal end characterized by two epicondyles and rounded articular condyle which articulates with proximal ends of radius and ulna ( elbow joint ). ( Pl. radii, au!!. radial. ) Lateral of two forearm bones. Proximal end ( head ) rounded and articulates with humerus ( elbow joint ) and with ulna. Distal expanded end forms which articulates with carpal bones ( wrist joint ) and also head of ulna. Movement between radius and ulna termed pronation and supination ( see pronation and supination ). ( Pl. ulnae, adj. ulnar. ) Medial of two forearm bones. Proximal end characterized by trochlear notch which articulates with humerus ( elbow joint ) and olecranon process ( point of elbow ). Proximal end also articulates with radius as does distal end ( head ). Head also characterized by prominent styloid process. ( Ad'. carpal. ) Composed of scaphoid, lunate, triquetrum, trapeziun, : trapezoid, capitate, hamate, and proximally with distal pisiform bones. Articuates end of radius; distally with metacarpus. ( Adj. metacarpal. ) Comprises five metacarpal bones lying between carpus and digits. First metacarpal relates to thumb and second to index, third to middle, fourth to ring and fifth to little fingers. ( Formerly OS innominatum. ) Comprising ilium, ischium and pubis, Main part of lower limb girdle, articulating with sacrum and head of femur ( hip joint ). Anteriorly the two OS coxae articulate at symphysis pubis. In child constituent bones are separated by Y-shaped, epiphyseal cartilage in acetabulum ( cup-shaped depression forming part of hip joint ). ( Pl. feomra, a~". femoral. ) Thgh bone. Upper end bears trochanters for muscle attachments and neck carrying head ( ball of hip joint ), articulating with acetabulum or socket in pelvis. Lower end is extended into two condyles, articulating with patella and tibia ( knee joint ).

Radius

Ulna

Carpus

Metacarpus

OS Coxae HIP BONE

Femur

IS t 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982
Term

Definition (a) Anatomical: Plate ation of trabeculae of femur inferiorly of bone formed by condensat junction of neck and shaft and posteriorly.

Calcar

femorale

(b) Surgical: Commonly used to denote very strong area at root of neck of femur inferiorly at junction with shaft just above lesser trochanter. Patella KNEE ( PI. patellage, adj. patellar. ) Bone of knee joint, lying in quadriceps tendon, having articular cartilage on its posterior surface which glides over front of articular surface of lower end of femur. ( PI. tibiae, udj. tibia]. ) Major bone of shin proper ), extending from knee to ankle. BONE ( leg

CAP

Tibia Fibula SPLINT

( PI. Fibulage, udj. fibular. ) Lesser bone of leg proper, serving mainly for attachment of muscles. The lower end forms the outer prominence of the ankle joint. ( Adj. talar. ) ( Formerly lying between lower end foot. astragalus. ) Tarsal bone of tibia and remainder of

Talus

Calcaneus CALCANIUM OS CALCIS Tarsus

( PI. calcanei, udj. calcaneal. ) Tarsal bone forming heel, into which achilles tendon ( tendocalcaneus ) is inserted. ( Adj tarsal. ) Consists of talus, calcaneus, navicular, These bones cuboid and three cuneiform bones. form the hindfoot. ( Adj. metatarsal. ) Composed of five metatarsal bones which lie between tarsus and tors and which form forefoot. ( PI. phalanges, adj. phalangeal. ) Bone of finger or and distal in thumb and great toe; toe - proximal proximal, middle and distal in other digits. Skeleton of head. Upper part forms box ( cranium See Part I of this standard ) to protect brain, anterior and lower part underlies face and jaws. 9

Metatarsus

Phalanx

Skull

IS t 10235'( Part M) - 1982
Term Maxilla DcJnition ( PI. maxillae, adj. maxillary. ) Maxillae, right and left, form whole of upper jaw and contain upper teeth. ( Adj. mandibular, ) Bone of lower jaw containing lower teeth and articulating with skull at temporo mandibular joint.

Mandible

2.3 Joints Joint ARTICULATION Symphysis ( Adj. articular. ) Occurs where of skeleton meet one another. two or more bones

( Pl. symphyses, adj. symphyseal. ) Joint between bone ends covered by hyaline cartilage with intervening fibrous disc, All symphyses are in median plane, for example, symphysis pubis at front of lower limb girdle and intervertebral discs. Little movement occurs at these joints. joint Joint between bone ends covered by hyaline articular cartilage with joint cavity around bone ends filled with synovial fluid and surrounded by capsule lined by synovial membrane. Usually considerable range of movement possible at synovial joints. Thin membrane lining synovial joint ( except over articular cartilage ), bursae and parts of some It secretes synovial fluid which serves as tendons. lubricant and which is important in nutrition of articular cartilage. ( Anatomical joint. ) ( adj. capsular. ) Fibrous sleeve of

Synovial

Synovium -SYNOVIAL MEMBRANE

Capsule Meniscus

( Pl. menisci, adj. meniscal. ) Disc crescent of fibrosurfaces of certain joints, for cartilage between example, so-called 6cartilage ' in knee joint. ( Pl. bursae, adj. bursal. ) Sac lined by synovium. Found at places of friction or potential friction as normal structure ( anatomical bursa ), ,or as abnormal structure friction ( adventitious bursa ). Also used to describe normal diverticulum of joint ( for example, suprapatellar bursa ). 10

Bursa

IS : 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982
Term Dejinition

Flexion

Angular movement at a joint in the sagittal in the direction shown in Fig. 3.

plane

is slightly oblique to NOTE - Flexion at the shoulder the sagittal plane, the upper limb being carried forwards towards the median plane. Flexion of the thumb is almost completely in the coronal plane the thumb being moved across the palm. Dorsi-flexion of the foot is an extension movement. Flexion of the ankle causes plantar flexion of the foot.

ELBOW

FLEXION

HIP FLEXION

FIG. 3

FLEXION MOVEMENTS

ES: 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Extension Definition Angular movement at a joint in the sagittal in the direction shown in Fig. 4. plane

NOTE-Extension at the shoulder is sIightIy oblique to the sagittal plane, the arm being carried/backwards away from the median plane. Extension of the thumb is almost in the coronal plane, the thumb being carried away from the hand. Extension of the foot is called dorsi-flexion. Extension of the ankle causes dorsi-flexion of the foot.

SHOULDER (E~ACKWARO~ EXTENSION

HIP

EXTENSION

Fro. 4

EXTENSION MOVEMENTS

Adduction

Angular movement at joint in a coronal plane towards the median plane of the body except that (a) in the hand adduction refers to movement towards an axis through the middle finger and the third metacarpal bone, and (b) in the foot an axis through the second toe and second metatarsal bone. Contrast with abduction.
NOTE - Adduction of the thumb carries the thumb towards the palm, almost in the sagittal plane.

I2

SS I 10235 ( Part Ilf ) - 1982
Term Dejhition

Abduction

Angular movement at joint in a coronal plane away from the median plane of the body except that (a) in the hand, abduction refers to movement away from an axis through the middle finger and third metacarpal bone, and (b) in the foot, an axis through the second toe and second metatarsal bone. Contrast with adduction.
NOTE - In abduction of the thumb, the thumb carried away from the palm in the sagittal plane.

is

Pronation Supination Opposition

Rotating forearm inwards; for example with elbow bent, palm faces downwards ( contrast supination ) . Rotating forearm outwards; for example with elbow bent, palm faces upwards ( contrast pronation ). Composite movement of thumb partly abduction and partly rotation around longitudinal axis so that tip of thumb may be brought to touch tips of fingers. Movement of limb around longitudinal axis. In external rotation anterior aspect of limb turns to face laterally; in internal rotation anterior aspect of limb turns to face medially. Composite movement of flexion, adduction, extension and abduction as one circular movement. Only possible at certain joints, for example shoulder and hip joints. Combined adduction and plantar flexion of the foot so that the sole tends to face the median plane. Compare with eversion. Combined abduction and dorsi-flexion of the foot SO that the sole tends to face away from the median plane. Compare with inversion. Articulation between condyle jaw ) and base of skull. of mandible ( lower

Rotation

Circumduction

Inversion

Eversion

Temporomandibular joint Atlanto-occipital joint Atlanto-axial joint

Articulation between base of skull and first cervical vertebra ( axis vertebra ). Articulation between first ( axis ) and second ( atlas ) certical vertebrae.

13,

IS : 10235 ( Part 111) - l%k! Term Sterno clavicular joint Dejnition Joint between medial end of clavicle and sternum. Movement at this and acromio clavicular joint allow considerable movements between upper limb girdle and chest wall thus increasing considerably range of movement of whole upper limb. Joint between lateral process of scapula. end of clavicle and acromion

Acromic joint

clavicular

Shoulder joint GLENOHUMERAL JOINT

Joint between shallow glenoid cavity of scapula and convex head of humerus. Muscles which abduct shoulder joint ( supraspinatus and deltoid ) have special surgical importance. Movements of the upper limb girdle involve the shoulder, acromio-clavicular and Sterno-clavicular joints and movement between the scapula and chest wall. Joint between distal end of humerus ( bone of arm proper ) and proximal ends of radius and ulna ( bones of forearm ). Extended by triceps muscle in back of arm and flexed by brachialis and biceps muscles. Latter muscle also supinates forearm.

Elbow joint

Radio-uInar

joints

Superior and inferior joints at each end of radius and ulna allow rotatory movements of forearm termed pronation and supination. Joint between distal end of radius and proximal row of carpal bones - scaphoid, lunate and triquetrum. Joint between carpal and metacarpal bones. Of importance is carpometacarpal joint of thumb adapted to allow wide range of movement of thumb, particularly opposition. Joint between metacarpal of any digit of hand. bone and proximal phalanx

Wrist joint Carpometacarpal joint

Metacarpophalangeal Interphalangeal joint

Joint between phalanges of digits. In all fingers and second to fifth toes there are tow interphalangeal between proximal and middle joints - proximal phalanges and distal between middle and distal phalanges, Articulation between sacrum and iliac part of OS coxae. Although synovial joint it has very little movement.

Sacro-iliac

joint

14

1s I 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Hip joint Dejnition Ball and socket joint between convex hezd of femur and concave acetabulum or socket in OS coxae ( bony pelvis ). Joint between femur and tibia, including between femur and patella ( knee cap ). Joint between tibia, fibula and talus. also joints

Knee joint Ankle joint Subtalar joints

( Formerly talo-calcaneal joint. ) Bipartite joint between the talus and calcaneus which in association with the talonavicular joint allows movements of inversion and eversion. Joint between talus and calcaneus navicular and cuboid bones distally. A complex joint bones proximally distally. proximally and cuboid bones bone

Midtarsal

joint

Tarsometatarsal joint Metatarsophalangeal joint

between cuneiform and and bases of metatarsal ) of metatarsal

Joint between distal end ( head and proximal phalanx of toe.

2.4 Muscle and Ligaments Muscle Muscle Muscle origin insertion Aggregation of muscle fibres. Lean meat. proximal

Attachment of one end of muscle. Usually end in a limb ( contrast insertion ).

One attachment of muscle or tendon of muscle. Usually distal attachment in limb ( contrast origin ). Activation of muscle tissue. change occurs in length. ( contrast

Contraction Isometric contraction Isotonic contraction

Contraction of muscle without Increase in tension in muscle isotonic contraction ).

Contraction of a muscle without change in tension within the muscle but with shortening of the muscle ( contrast isometric contraction ). Muscle over point of shoulder originating from upper limb girdle inserted into humerus and concerned with abduction of shoulder joint. 15

Deltoid muscle LIGAMENTUM PATELLAE

IS : 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982
Term Dejnition

Biceps muscle

Commonly muscle forming prominent bulge on front of upper arm - biceps brachii. There is also a biceps muscle in thigh ( biceps femoris ) one of the Hamstring muscles. Small muscles at base of thumb eminence of palm. Muscles overlying fifth metacarpal hypothenar eminence of palm. forming bone thenar forming

Thenar

muscles muscles

Hypothenar Intrinsic

muscles

Small muscles in hand and foot which help to control movements of digits - include thenar, hypothenar, interosseous, lubrical and some other muscles. ( PI. glutei, udj. Gluteal. ) Large muscles forming bulk of buttock and responsible for abduction and Most important in maintenextension of hip joint. ance of upright posture during standing and locomotion. Muscle of front of thigh whose contraction ( straightens ) knee. extends

Gluteus muscle

Qti&$,eps

femoris

Hamstring muscles Calf muscles

Muscles of back of thigh which flex ( bend ) knee. ) Responsible for bulk of ( Triceps surae -obsolete. calf. Contraction depresses front of foot ( as in tiptoeing ) - therefore important in walking, running and jumping. Large tendon inserted into calcaneus ( heel bone ) and powered by calf muscles. Contraction of calf muscles pulls up heel so depressing forefoot.

Tendo Achillis TEND0 CALCANEUS ACHILLES TENDON Patellar ligament

Tethers lower part of patella to tibia thus acting as tendon of quadriceps muscle, contraction extends knee; hence alternative name patellar tendon contrary to official nomenclature and convention of qualifying name of tendon by name of its muscle. ` patellar ' tendon
irregular terminology Example of ( sic ) bearing ( P T B ) prosthesis or related orthosis. NOTE -

IS : 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Ligamenturn teres Definition containing Rounded ligament - like structure artery joining head of femur to inferior part acetabulum of OS coxae ( pelvic bone ). Two ligaments in knee joint, joining Called anterior and posterior they of tibia on femur. an of

Cruciate

ligaments

femur to tibia. prevent gliding

2.5 Pathology Rarefaction Osteoporosis Term indicating thinning of bone in radiographs.

Thinning of the mineralised components of a bone with or without reduction of the number of trabeculae. This may affect part of or the whole of a bone or the skeleton. Histiological appearance characteristic of lack of vitamin D: loss of calcium salts from bone with increase in unmineralized tissue ( osteoid ). Unmineralixed new fibre with osteocytes. Bone which graphs. Abnormal appears bone denser tissue; than mainly normal collagen on radio-

Osteomalacia

Osteoid Sclerosis Dysplasia Fracture Traumatic Green fracture

development

of bone during

growth.

Break in a bone. Fracture Incomplete Traumatic bone. fracture due to violence. traumatic fracture fracture of immature bone. of a

stick fracture

Infracture Avulsion

of part of the circumference

Fracture which results in a fragment of bone being pulled off by soft tissues ( for example ligament or muscle ). Of bone, fracture often incomplete unaccustomed pattern of activity. 17 resulting from

Fatigue

fracture

IS t 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982
Term

Dejhition Fracture of diseased bones, for example bone eroded by tumour or bone rendered fragile by constitutional disease or disuse such as osteogenesis imperfecta, osteitis deformans ( paget's disease ), osteoporosis or osteomalacia; in the last terms pseudo fracture, insufficiency fracture, transformation zone or looser's zone are often applied. ( Compound fracture - deprecated. external wound in continuity. ( Simple fracture - deprecated. overlying wound in continuity. ) ) Fracture with Fracture without on each

Pathological fracture

Open fracture Closed fracture Undisplaced fracture Displaced fracture Complicated fracture Union

Fracture with no shift of bone fragments side of fracture line.

Fracture in which there is shift of bone fragments at fracture site. Fracture with injury to adjacent important structure, for example major nerve or artery. ( Fracture. ) Union has occurred when there is no longer clinically detectable movement at, nor pain on, stressing fracture site. ( Fracture, ) Failure of fracture to unite within usually acceptable time for that particular fracture. Cortex has not grown across bone ends. With prolongation of efficient conservative treatment union usually occurs. ( Fracture. ) Established failure of union of fracture. Cortex has extended across fracture surfaces creating separate bones with persistent gap ( pseud arthrosis ). Union cannot be expected without operation. ( Fracture. ) Union at fracture with displacement of bone ends from normal anatomical position causing physiological disability. ( Fracture. ) Repair tissue which develops around Callus present before union fractured ends of bone. occurs may be called provisional callus. Bone formation in callus is initially poorly organized ( woven bone ) but following union remodelling occurs to form cortical or cancellous bone as appropriate. 18

Delayed union

Non-union

Malunion

Callus

IS : 10235 ( Part If1 ) - 1981 Term Consolidation Dejhition ( Fracture. ) Consolidation has occurred when fracture callus has been converted into normal bone. The fractured bone can now assume normal function: ( Fractures and joints. ) ( Noun stability. ) Indicates that displacement is unlikely without further injury. Inflammation reaction of periosteum.

Stable Periostitis Periosteal

Appearance of new bone formation under periosteum usually resulting from stripping up of periosteum from bone. ( Adj. osteomyelitic. ) Infection acute but can be chronic. of bone. Usually process

Osteomyelitis Osteitis Exostosis deformans

( Paget's disease. ) Benign, painful reactive occurring in bone particularly in older age.

Projection from a bone due to minor aberration during growth. Usually solitary but may be multipleinherited disease ( diaphyseai aclasis ). Malignant tumour of bone - cells of tumour being predominantly bone producing cells ( contrast chondrosarcoma and fibrosarcoma ). Malignant tumour cartilage ( contrast of bone whose cells tend to form osteosarcoma and fibrosarcoma ).

Osteosarcoma

Chondrosarcoma Giant cell tumour OSTEOCLASTOMA

Tumour of bone consisting of giant cell with background of spindle or oval cells occurring at the ends of skeletally mature bone. Tumour may be benign but commonly recurs after removal and may become frankly malignant. Tumours and cysts, all benign, occurring in bone, that contain giant cells and may be confused with giant cell tumour. ( Ad'. ) Indicates affection of one bone only ( contrast polyostotic and compare monarticular ). ( Au". ) Indicating affection of many monostotic and compare polyarthritic bones ). ( contrast from

` Giant cell variants ' Monostotic Polyostotic Apophysitis

Inflammation of an apophysis usually resulting excessive muscle stress on the apophysis.

tS t lb235 ( Part 111) - 1982 Term Osteochondritis
Dejnition

Affection of bone and overlying articular cartilage probably due to damage to the blood supply of the affected bone. Usually occurs in adolescents and young adults. Death of bone due to interruption of blood supply.

Avascular of bone

necrosis

Spondylolysis Spondylolisthesis

Break in the posterior

arch of vertebra.

Condition in which body of vertebra slips forward on body of vertebra below. May result from spondylolysis. Changes in spine due to degenerative changes in intervertebral discs. Characterized. by narrowing of disc space, osteophyte formation and sclerosis of bone adjacent to disc space. Inflammation of synovial membrane.

Spondylosis

Synovitis Synovial Arthrosis Haemarthrosis Pyoarthrosis effusion

Collection of fluid within joint secreted by synovium in response to injury, inflammation, etc. Non-infective disease of joint. due to haemorrhage

Blood within joint cavity ( usually following injury ).

Pus within joint cavity arising from infection outside the joint and before the joint tissues become infected. Compare with septic arthritis.
OS-

Osteoarthrosis teooarthritis Chondromalacia Arthritis

Degenerative changes occurring in joint characterized by pain, swelling, stiffness, loss of articular cartilage, bone sclerosis and osteophyte formation. Softening of osteoarthrosis. articular cartilage. Loosely First used to stage indicate synovitis of

Inflammation of joint. any joint pathology.

arthritis Septic PYOARTHRITIS Rheumatoid ritis arth-

Inflammation of joint due to infectionwith pus in joint ( contrast pyoarthrosis) .

Arthritis associated with rheumatoid disease characterized by effusion, synovitis, bone erosion and pannus formation.

20

1s t 10235 ( Part III ) - l!W?
Term

Dejinition ( Adj. Monarthritic ) Arthritis joint ( contrast polyarthritis ). ( Ad!. Polyarthritic ) ( compare monarthritis Arthritis ). affecting affecting only one joints

Monarthritis Polyarthritis Osteophyte

many

New bone formation at margin of articular cartilage occurring in osteoarthrosis or resulting from stripping up of soft tissues at margin of joint. (Joint. ) Complete loss of congruent articulation of the bones, forming a joint in association with abnormality of or damage to the joint capsule. dislocadisloca(b$nt,
1 .

Dislocation

Congenital tion Traumatic tion Pathological cation Subluxation Recurrent tion Habitual tion Ankylosis

)

D is 1ocation

present

before

or at time

of

( Joint.

)

Dislocation

due to injury.

dislo-

(Joint. ) Dislocation of joint due to disease affecting the tissues comprising the joint or paralysis of muscles controlling the joint. This usually Incomplete dislocation. (Joint. ) results in some loss of function of the affected joint.

disloca-

(Joint. ) Repeated dislocation resulting from loading which would be usually insufficient to dislocate a normal joint. ( Joint. ) Dislocation of joint ever joint is used, for example patella on bending knee. which lateral occurs whendislocation of

disloca-

Stiffening of joint due to damage to joint surfaces by disease or injury. Ankylosis may be fibrous or bony ( compare arthrodesis ). novial. ) Cyst derived !e?don sheath . Benign. Malignant Any disease Inflammation tumour derived from synovium from synovial of joint tissue. or

Ganglion Synovioma Myopathy Myositis

of muscle

tissues,

of muscle.

21;

IS t 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982, Term DcJnition

Post traumatic myositis ossificances

Formation of bone within muscle or tendon following injury to muscle often close to bone. Commonly occurs at the elbow, in the quadriceps muscles in the thigh and in the origin of the hamstring muscles. Inflammation Inflammation of synovium of tendon sheath. of bursa.

Tenosynovitis Bursitis Fasciitis

Literally, inflammation of fascia but usually used more loosely indicating any affection of fascia, for example palmar fasciitis ( Dupuytren's contracture ). Locally aggressive proliferation of fibrous tissue cells prone to recur after excision. Malignant tumour derived from fibrous tissue. Involuntarily painful. sustained contraction of muscle, usually with fatigue

Fibromatosis Fibrosarcoma Muscle spasm Cramp 2.6 Deformities Valgus

Painful muscle spasm often associated or upset body chemistry.
and Abnormalities

( ,iV.Valgum, F. Valga. ) Deformity or displacement in which axis of distal segment deviates away from mid-line in relation to proximal segment (see Fig. 5 and 6 ). If deviation is in shaft of a bone distant from joint, valgus is used to qualify the particular bone, for example tibia valga for medially bowed tibia or femur valgum for medially bowed femur. Exceptionally, deviation is at joint itself. More often, deviation is extra-articular in juxta-articular bone, that is close to the joint, when customarily ( but not always ) valgus is used loosely to qualify name of the joint, for example cubitus valgus where site of deformity is commonly in lower end of humerus. At hip valgus deformity is commonly at base of neck of femur (angle between upper part of femur and shaft is widened ). Strictly, this is femur valgum and not abduction deformity at hip joint itself, but is by custom described as coxa valga referring to hip as a region rather than purely as a joint. 22

ts t lo236 ( Part Ii1)*

1982.

VARUS

NORMAL

VALGUS

CUBITUS VARUS

METATARSUS VARUS

VALGUS

Fm.5

VARUSANDVALOUS

CONDITIONS

23

IS : 102s5 (Pari 111) - 1982

EPIPHYSEAL

COXA

VARA

I \ '

I

CERVICAL n

COXA

VARA

'

FIG. 6 Term

VARUSAND VALCWS CONDITIONS AT NECK OF FEMUR DeJinition Valgus also applied to osteotomies or prostheses designed to produce such anatomical deviation, for example valgus osteotomy to produce valgus deviation or to correct varus.
NOTE - In relation to prostheses valgus should not be used to indicate angle at which, at operation, stem of prosthesis is inserted in relation to axis of shaft of bone but should only be used to indicate anatomical position consequently produced in relation to the associated joint. If stem of prosthesis is not placed axially in the shaft of the bone its position should be described as being abducted or abducted relative to the axis of that bone.

\ T?
`\
COXA VALGA \ \ \ \,I \ I\

I

Varus

( Jv. Varum, f. Vara ) Deformity or displacement in which axis of distal segment deviates towards mid-line in relation to proximal segment ( see Fig. 5 and 6). 24

IS : 10235 ( Part,111 ) I 1982 Term Dejinition If deviation is in shaft of a bone distant from joint, varus is used to qualify the particular bone, for example tibia vara for laterally bowed tibia or femur varum for laterally bowed femur. Exceptionally, deviation is at joint itself. More often, deviation is extra-articular in juxta-articular bone, i. e. close to the joint when customarily ( but not always ) varus is used loosely to qualify name of the joint, for example cubitus varus where site of deformity is commonly in lower end of humerus. In hip, varus deformity can be at epiphyseal plate of femoral head ( epiphyseal coxa vara ), or at neck of femur ( cervical coxa vara ), both tending to narrow angle between upper part and shaft of femur. Strictly this is femur varum and not abduction deformity at hip joint itself, but it is by custom described as coxa vara referring to hip as a region Varus also applied rather than purely as a joint. to osteotomies or protheses designed to produce such anatomical deviation, for example varus osteotomy to produce varus deviation of to correct valgus.
NOTE - In relation to prostheses, yarus should not be used to indicate angle at which, at operation, stem of prosthesis is inserted in relation to axis of shaft of bone but should only be used to indicate anatomical position consequently produced in relation to the associated joint. If stem of prosthesis is not placed axially in the shaft of the bone its position should be described as being adducted or abducted relative to the axis of that bone.

Abduction mity

defor-

Deformity in which limb bone is angled towards angulation is towards abduction deformity and

distal to damaged joint or median plane. In thumb plane of palm ( contrast compare adduction ).

Abduction mity

defor-

Deformity in which limb distal to affected joint or bone is angled away from medial plane. In thumb angulation is away from plane of palm ( contrast adduction deformity and compare abduction ). Deformity at a joint in which the range of movement in one or more planes is limited so that the joint cannot be brought to the neutral position. Some movement is possible from the position of fixed deformity and away from the neutral position (compare ankylosis ).

Fixed

deformity

!S t 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Fixed flexion Definition Fixed deformity in which joint is held in flexed position and cannot be extended to the straight or neutral position. Fixed deformity in which joint is held in adducted position and cannot be abducted to the neutral or mid position. Fixed deformity in which joint is held abducted and cannot be brought to the neutral or mid position. rotaFixed deformity in which joint is held in internal rotation and cannot be externally rotated to reach the mid position of movement. Fixed deformity in which joint is held in external rotation and cannot be internally rotated to reach the mid position of movement. Alternative term used with respect fixed plantar Aexion deformity. to the foot with

Fixed

adduction

Fixed

abduction

Fixed internal tion Fixed rotation Equinus Calcaneus

external

Deformity. Term applied to fixed dorsiflexion deformity of foot ( so called because weight is now borne on heel ) - see calcaneus ( bone ). Condition of joint in which ligaments and capsule are looser than normal, allowing excessive or abnormal movement to occur at joint. Position of flexion or a range of flexion movements of a joint greater than normally expected. Position of extension or a range of extension movements of a joint greater than normally expected. ( Muscle. ) Pathological shortening of soft tissues in the region of a joint resulting in restriction of the range of movement of the joint. Deformity of foot due to dropping of forefoot resulting in high arch at instep. Usually associated with claw toes. Foot with an exaggerated longitudinal arch, bilateral, usually developmental, often familial. The toes are not involved as part of this deformity. 26

Joint

laxity

Hyperflexion Hyperextension Contracture

Pes cavus

Pes arcuatus

tS : fO235 ( part 111) - 1982 Term Pes planus FLAT FOOT Claw toes Dejinition Deformity of foot due to collapse inner border of foot. of the arch on

Deformity of toes in which interphalangeal joints are flexed and metacarsophalangeal joint are hyperThe position of toes cannot be corrected extended. by muscle action. deformity Fixed flexion interphalangeal joints. deformity of the proximal or distal joint of toe, or of both of these of distal interphalangeal joint of

Hammer

Mallet

deformity defor-

Flexion deformity finger or thumb. Deformity proximal mity.

Swan neck mity

of finger comprising interphalangeal joint

hyperextension of and mallet defor-

Boutonnierre deformity BUTTONHOLE DEFORMITY Muscle wasting

Deformity of finger comprising fixed flexion deformity of proximal interphalengeal and hyperextension of distal interphalangeal joint. Atrophy of muscle due to disuse, injury or from paralysis. for example after

2.7 Surgical Procedures Reduction Act of restoring normal (a) ( Of a fracture. ) relationship between fragments of fractured bone. (b) ( Of a joint. ) Act of restoring congruous articulation of a dislocated or subluxed joint. ( Fracture. ) Action of holding fracture or joint in reduced position. External fixation achieved by applying splints to affected limb: Internal fixation achieved by applying plates and screws, intramedullary nails, bone grafts, etc. Fixation of fracture fragments by means of implants.

Fixation

Osteosynthesis Osteotomy

Cutting bone with surgical instruments. This may be used to correct bone or joint deformities or to relieve pain in osteoarthritic joints. 27

1s 8 10235 ( Part llf ) - 1982

Term
Adduction tomy Abduction tomy Osteoclasis osteo-

Dejlnition
Osteotomy performed to angulate bone so that limb distal to osteotomy is adducted compared with its original position. Osteotomy performed to angulate bone so that limb distal to osteotomy is abducted compared with its original position. Therapeutic fracture of bone to correct deformity ( compare same word for cellular erosion of bone by osteoclasts ). s t e oCutting partly through bone remainder ( used if angulation ted or produced ). followed by breaking alone is to be correc-

osteo-

Osteotomy-0 clasis Laminectomy

Excision of laminae (posterior part of arch of vertebra ). Hemilaminectomy is excision of lamina on one side only. disExcision of intervertebral disc. In cervical spine this is achieved through anterior approach. In lumbar spine, posterior approach is used-laminectomy or hemilaminectomy may be used to facilitate the excision. Inspection instrument Incision Division Excision Excision Excision of the interior ( arthroscope of joint. of capsule of capsule of synovial of meniscus of joint. of joint. membrane ( usually from joint or tendon. of a joint ). through a special

Intervertebral cectomy

Arthroscopy Arthrotomy Capsulotomy Capsulectomy Synovectomy Meniscectomy Arthroplasty

from knee ).

Refashioning of a joint to improve joint function by reshaping, with or without excision of bone or interposition of natural or artificial materials. Replacement of part ( partial joint by an endoprosthesis. Operation functional ) or whole ( total ) of

Joint

replacement

Arthrodesis JOINT FUSION

to stiffen permanently a joint in the bes position ( compare ankyiosis ).

28,

1s t 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Disarticulation Tenotomy Tenolysis Tenodesis Tendon transfer Amputation Division increase Freeing through DeJnition joint. of an operation tissues. using tendon site to to

of tendon often as part or decrease its length. tendon from surrounding to bone,

Fixation of tendon to act as a ligament.

usually

Transfer of insertion of tendon alter point of action of associated Transplantation place damaged tendon transfer Division Exclusion Excision Freeing

to another muscle.

Tendon transplant TENDON GRAFT Fasciotomy Fasciectomy Neurectomy Neurolysis

of autogenous tendon graft to reFrequent use of term for tendon. is deprecated.

of fascia. of fascia. of nerve. nerve from surrounding tissues.

2.8 Surgical Instruments Osteotome Tenotome Type of chisel for cutting bone.

Knife with a small blade designed originally for dividing tendons subcutaneously through a small skin puncture instead of through a more extensive incision. Fixed bladed menisectomy. knife of various designs used during

Meniscotome Periosteal elevator RUGINE File Rasp

Instrument with a flat or curved soft tissues from bone. Tool for removing material cutting action of fine ridges.

blade used to strip or by the

by abrasion

Coarse file with teeth in the form of raised points Specially shaped rasps used to smooth bone edges. are used to ream holes in medulla of bones to accept stemmed internal prostheses. Rotary drill used to bore holes. 29

Drill

IS: 10235( Part III ) - 1982 Term Reamer Broach Rotary cutting racy to parallel
Definition

tool used to enlarge or tapered hoies.

or impart

accu-

Cutting tool for machining holes consisting of a shaft carrying a transverse cutting edges, The tool is driven or pulled through a roughly finished hole. Small rotary file or rasp of suitable profile.

Burr Awl

Pointed instrument for making holes in bone often with eye near tip through which suture material can be threaded. Hand-powered. Instrument used to cut a screwthread hole before inserting a non-self-tapping Flattened to retract in a drilled screws. and used

Tap Lever Mallet Punch

instrument passed round a bone soft tissues away from it. used in orthopaedic

Any form of hammer

surgery.

Blunt rod for conducting driving force of mallet. Bone punch has flattened end ( in operative surgery, punch is not a piercing tool ). forforRONforsaw Forceps designed to grip bone. with hinged blade stiffener along Forceps with straight for cutting bone. or slightly curved of bone, sharp for edges

Bone-cutting ceps Bone-nibbling ceps BONE GEUR Bone-holding ceps Amputation Hacksaw Wire saw

Forceps for biting into edge Gouge and punch forceps.

example

Tenon type saw, usually back edge. Saw with holder. narrow

detachable

in bow-shaped

( for example Gigli saw ). Flexible saw passed subperiosteally behind bone to divide it by side-to-side Threaded extraduraly through burr holes, motion. it can be used for resecting cranial bone. Instrument used for measuring motion at joint. 30 angular deformity or

Gonimeter

IS Term 2.9 Implants General Fastener
Fastening Systems

I

102% ( Part 111) - 1982

DeJnition
and Devices

Any device to attach another implant to bone or another implant. May also be used to its own to fix bone fragments together. Implant adapted to obtain fixation bone fragments together. by compressing

Compression implant Wires Wire

Metal product of uniform cross-section prcduced by drawing process. Hard drawn resilient wire usually up to 2.0 mm diameter. Softened malleable wire of up to 1.2 mm diameter may be used. Malleable strand of monofilament up to l-2 mm diameter. WIRE wire or braided wire

Wire suture Guide GUIDE Transfixion

Wire used to direct placing of an implant. Usually 2.5 mm diameter. It may be etched with graduation marks. Rigid wire up to 2 mm diameter, used for fixation of bone fragments and fractures of smaller bones or arthrodesis of small joints. Usually supplied with three-sided shank and diamond point. ( for example Kirschner wire. ) Wire of high tensile strength used for application of skeletal traction. Wire is held taut by distraction stirrup.

Traction

wire

Pins and rods Pin Relatively rigid hard drawn wire used for skeletal traction pins, transfixion pins and other rigid wire fixation devices. Usually of 2.0 mm to 4'0 mm diameter. pin ( For example steinmann pin. ) Pin used for application of skeletal traction. 2 5 mm to 6.0 mm diameter and between 200 mm and 250 mm in length, with trochar or diamond point at one end and three-face shank at other end. 31

Traction

fS : 10235( hrt Term Transfixion pin

Iif ) - 1982 DeJnition Pin used to secure fractures of neck of femur or secure epiphysis of upper end of femur. 2.5 mm to 4.0 mm diameter with various lengths up to 300 mm. A part of the shaft may be screw threaded. Any rod used to stabilize the spine, Harrington's rods used in the treatment for example of scoliosis.

Spinal

rod

Nails and staples Nail ( As fastener. ) Metal implant of form with traditional nail. Used for holding ments of bone or articular cartilage. Metal implant of U-form adapted bone. Forged or cast for strength. comparable small fraginto

Staple Bone screws Bone screw

for driving

Screws devised

for use in bone. from rod,

They

may be:

(a) machined (b) cast, and (c) machined Head Head recess

from cast blanks. for screwdriver

Expanded end of screw with recess and with countersink if present.

Aperture into which screwdriver fits to provide turning movement during insertion of screw. Recess may be single slot, crossed slots, or recessed shape, for example hexagonal. Surface of cylindrical portion of head and countersink. between rounded top

Land Head Shank Thread run out countersink

Pressure face beneath head spherical, conical or flat.

of screw.

This may be thread run

Unthreaded portion of screw between out and countersink portion of head. Bnd of threads beneath head of screw.

Screw thread

Ridge of uniform section surface of cylinder point. End of screw, usually 32

in form of helix on external

Screw point

blunt,

driven

into bone.

tS I 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982 Term Self-tapping flute Dejnition Groove machined in leading edge of screw intersecting several threads to provide cutting edge which enables screw to cut its own thread in a drilled hole in bone. Screw with self-tapping Screw without self-tapping flutes on point, flutes.

Self-tapping

screw

Non-self-tapping screw Bolts, nuts and washers Bolt

Fully or partially externally threa,ded rod with either hexagonal slotted head or round domed head with cross slot. bolt Bolt with thread. nylon insert fitted flush with cresh of

Self-locking Nut Self-locking Plain washer

Shaped metal collar, usually hexagonal, with internal screw thread to mate with externally threaded device. nut Nut with device to prevent loosening. under

Annular device used to protect bone surface a nut or screw head by distributing pressure.

Locking

washer

Washer designed to prevent nut or bolt from turning. In surgery it is either hexagonal with four ridges or oblong with two narrow sides bent at an angle of 90".

Other nails Hip nail Finned nail, nowadays cannulated, with head that may be plain or adapted for fixation with a corresponding trochanteric plate. nail Freely telescopic hip nail as part of nail plate.

Salf-ad justing

Medullary nail INTRAMEDULLARY NAIL

Implant for introduction into narrow cavity of long bones forming internal splint. Nail may be straight ( for example or curved and of V-, clover-leaf kuntscher nail ) or circular cross section.

2.10 Bone Plates, Nail Plates and Blade Plates Bone plate usually metal, of various sizes Strip of material, perforated by a number of holes. Used in conjunction with screws or other fastening devices to join frag ments of bone. 33

IS : 10235 ( Part III ) - 1982
Term Dejinition

Self-compressing plate V Nail plate

Plate designed so that longitudinal bone fragments is achieved when tightened onto the plate. Bone plate continuing into is lodged within the bone. is at an angle to the plate. Plate continuing within the bone. into

compression of screws are fully

a formed section, which Usually the formed part which is lodged

Blade-plate Spinal plate

a flat section

Curved or straight plate usually used in pairs to hold two or more vertebrae together and applied posteriorly using bolts and nuts.

2.11 Joint Replacements Partial joint replacement Implant which is a substitute for one or part of one, or part of both articular surfaces of a joint. Fixation of a component to bone may be achieved by grouting material ( for exmaple, acrylic cement ), by ingrowth of bone into slots or porous surfaces or by fastening devices. Implant which is a substitute for all load transmission ( but not necessarily all articular ) surfaces of a joint, except for total joint replacement at the knee and elbow, the patello-femoral and radio-humeral joints respectively may not be replaced. Joint replacement in which components are linked in such a way that the bearing surfaces remain in contact throughout the range of movement of the joint in the unloaded state. Joint replacement in which components are linked in such a way that in the unloaded state separation of the components may occur during some or all of the available range of movement. Joint replacement in which there is no mechanical attachment between the components. Functional stability in the body depends on their geometry and the restraint of the surrounding body tissues,

Total joint replacement

Totally constrained joint replacement

Partially constrained joint replacement

Non-restrained replacement

joint

34

