INATT HTA IS 15223 : 2016 


] Reaffirmed 2021 
Indian Standard (Reaffirme ) 
(Reaffirmed 2022) 


WAA Tet — datt fete — 
fafsrfie 


( gesit qx STU ) 


Automotive Vehicles — Interior 
Fittings — Specification 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 43.040 


O BIS 2016 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM gei, 9 Tue pi Art, we feeei-110002 
Lk MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2016 Price Group 7 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories and Garage Equipment Sectional Committee, TED 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories and Garage Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Transport Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 2002. This revision has been under taken based on the experience gained 
over the years and need for its alignment with European practice. 


In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from ECE Regulation 21 ‘Uniform provisions 
concerning the approval of vehicles with regard to their interior fittings’. 


The Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 15223 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE VEHICLES — INTERIOR FITTINGS — 
SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the requirement of interior fittings 
for M1 category of vehicles in respect of following: 


a) The interior parts of the passenger 
compartment other than the rear-view mirror 
or mirrors, 


b) The arrangement of the controls, 
c) The roof or opening roof, and 
d) The seat-back and the rear parts of seats. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below. 


IS No. Title 
13749 : 1993 Automotive vehicles — 
Determination of H-point — Method 
of test 
14272 : 2011 Automotive vehicles — Types — 
Terminology 
15140 : 2003 Automotive vehicles — Safety belt 


assembly — Specification 
Automotive vehicles — Procedure 
for determining the ‘H’ point and the 
torso angle for 50th percentile adult 
male in seating positions of motor 
vehicles 

Automotive vehicles — Seats, their 
anchorages and head restraints for 
category M1 


13749 : 2009 


15546 : 2005 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in IS 14272 and the following definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Approval of a Vehicle — Approval of a vehicle 
means the approval of a vehicle type with regard to its 
interior fittings. 


32 Vehicle Type — Vehicle type with regard to the 
interior fittings of the passenger compartment means 
vehicles of category M1 which do not differ in such 
essential respects as, 


a) the arrangement of controls; 


b) thelines and constituent materials of the body 
work of the passenger compartment; 

c) the performance of the protective system, if 
the reference zone within the head impact 
zone determined according to Annex E 
(dynamic evaluation) is chosen by the vehicle 
manufacturer. 


Vehicles that differ only in the performance of the 
protective system(s) belong to the same vehicle type 
if they offer an equal or better protection for the 
occupants compared with the system or vehicle 
submitted to the technical service responsible for 
conducting the approval tests. 


3.3 Reference Zone (see Notes 1 and 2) — The head 
impact zone as defined in Annex A, or at the choice of 
manufacturer, according to Annex E except (see Notes 
l and 2): 


a) The area bounded by the forward horizontal 
projection of a circle circumscribing the outer 
limits of the steering control, increased by a 
peripheral band 127 mm in width; this area is 
bounded below by the horizontal plane 
tangential to the lower edge of the steering 
control when the latter is in the position for 
driving straight ahead (see Note 2); 

b) The part of the surface of the instrument panel 
comprised between the edge of the area 
specified in (a) and the nearest inner side-wall 
of the vehicle; this part of the surface is 
bounded below by the horizontal plane 
tangential to the lower edge of the steering 
control; and 


c) The windscreen side pillars. 


NOTES 

1 The reference zone is outlined without rear view mirror. The 
energy-dissipation test is accomplished without the rear view 
mirror. The pendulum shall not impact the mirror mounting. 


IS 15223 : 2016 


2 The exempted area behind the steering wheel as defined by 
these clauses is also valid for the head impact area of the front 
passengers. 


In the case of adjustable steering wheels the zone finally 
exempted is reduced to the common area of the exempted zones 
for each of the driving positions which the steering wheel may 
assume. 


In the case where it is possible to choose between various 
steering wheels the exempted zone is determined by the use of 
the least favorable steering wheel having the smallest diameter. 


3.4 Level of the Instrument Panel — The line defined 
by the points of contact of vertical tangents to the 
instrument panel ( see Note). 


NOTE — The level of the instrument panel extends over the 
entire width of the passenger compartment and is defined by 
the rearmost points of contact of a vertical line with the surface 
of the instrument panel when the line is moved across the width 
of the vehicle. Where two or more points of contact occur 
simultaneously, the lower point of contact shall be used to 
establish the level of the instrument panel. In the case of 
consoles, if it is not possible to determine the level of the 
instrument panel by reference to the points of contact of a 
vertical line the level of the instrument panel shall be where a 
horizontal line 25.4 mm above the ‘H’ point of the front seats 
intersects the console. 


3.5 Roof — The upper part of the vehicle extended 
from the upper edge of the windscreen to the upper 
edge of the rear window, bounded at the sides by the 
upper framework of the sidewalls ( see Note ). 


NOTE — At the vehicle sides the roof shall commence at the 
upper edge of the door aperture. In the normal case, the lateral 
roof limits will be represented by the contours formed by the 
bottom edge (lateral view) of the remaining body when the door 
has been opened. In the case of windows, the lateral limitation 
of the roof will be the continuous transparent line (penetration 
point of the lateral windowpanes). At the posts, the lateral roof 
limitation will pass through the connecting line between the 
transparent lines. The definition of roof is also valid for any 
opening for the roof, in the closed position, of a vehicle as 
defined in 3.7 or 3.8. For measuring purposes, downward facing 
flanges shall be ignored. These will be considered as forming 
part of the vehicle sidewall. 


ROOF 


ROOF LIMIT 


DOOR 


3.6 Belt Line — It is the line constituted by the 
transparent lower contour of the side windows of the 
vehicle. 


3.7 Convertible Vehicle — It is a vehicle where, in 
certain configurations there is no rigid part of the 
vehicle body above the belt line with exception of the 
front roof supports and/or the roll-over bars and/or the 
safety belt anchorage points ( see Notes 1 and 2 and 
Note under 3.5 ). 


NOTES 


1 A non-removable rear window is understood to be a rigid 
structural element. 


2 Cars with non-removable rear windows of rigid material are 
considered to be cars with opening roofs as defined under 3.8. 


3.8 Vehicle with Opening Roof — It is a vehicle of 
which only the roof or a part of it can be folded back 
or be opened, or may slide, leaving the existing 
structural elements of the vehicle above the belt line 
(see Note under 3.5). 


3.9 Folding ( Tip-up ) Seat — It is an auxiliary seat 
intended for occasional use and is normally folded out 
of the way. 


3.10 Protective System — Protective system means 
interior fittings and devices intended to restrain the 
occupants. 


3.11 Type of a Protective System — Type of a 
protective system means a category of protective 
devices, which do not differ in such essential respects 
as, 


a) their technology, 
b) their geometry, and 
c) their constituent materials. 


3.12 ‘H’ Point — The co-ordinates of the pivot point 
of the 50th percentile 3-D machine measured using 
the procedure described in IS 13749. 


3.13 Airbag — A device installed to supplement safety 
belts and restraint systems in power driven vehicles, 
that is systems which in the event of a severe impact 
affecting the vehicle automatically deploy a flexible 
structure intended to limit, by compression of the gas 
contained within it, the severity of the contacts of one 
or more parts of an occupant of the vehicle with the 
interior of the passenger compartment. 


3.14 Sharp Edge — An edge of a rigid material having 
a radius of curvature of less than 2.5 mm except in the 
case of projections of less than 3.2 mm, measured from 
the panel according to the procedure described in C-1. 
If the height of the projection is less than 3.2 mm, the 
minimum radius of curvature shall not apply provided 
the height of the projection is not more than half its 
width and its edges are blunted (see Notes 1 and 2). 


NOTES 


1 In case of a gap between the edge of a rigid material and the 
panel, this edge shall be rounded to a minimum radius of 
curvature depending on the gap shown in the table in the note 
under 4.1.1. This also applies, if the height of the projection, 
determined according to the procedure described in C-1, is equal 
or less than 3.2 mm. 


2 If the gap is located in a zone where a head impact test has to 
be carried out, the edges which can be contacted during the 
test(s) resulting from displacement of parts shall be protected 
by a minimum radius of 2.5 mm 


3.15 R Point or the Seating Reference Point — It is 
the design point defined by the manufacturer which 
has co-ordinates determined in relation to the vehicle 
structure and corresponds to the theoretical positions 
of the point of torso/legs rotation for the lowest and 
the most rearmost normal driving position or position 
of use given to each seat provided by the vehicle 
manufacturer ( see IS 15546 and IS 13749 ). 


NOTE — For the purpose of this standard R point can be used 
instead of H point as per manufacturer's choice. 


4 SPECIFICATION 


4.1 Forward interior parts of the passenger 
compartment above the level of the instrument panel 
in front of the front seat ‘H’ points, excluding the side 
doors. 


4.1.1 The reference zone defined in 3.3 shall not 
contain any sharp edges likely to increase the risk of 
serious injury to the occupants. If the head impact area 
is determined according to Annex A, the parts referred 
in 4.1.2 to 4.1.6 shall be deemed satisfactory if they 
comply with the requirements of those clauses. If the 
head impact area is determined according to Annex E, 
the requirements of 4.1.7 shall apply ( see Notes 1 
and 2). 


NOTES 


1 A sharp edge is an edge of a rigid material having a radius of 
curvature of less than 2.5 mm except in the case of projections 
of less than 3.2 mm, measured from the panel. In this case, the 
minimum radius of curvature shall not apply provided the height 
of the projection is not more than half its width and its edges 
are blunted. 


2 Grills are considered to comply with the regulations if they 
meet the minimum requirements of the following table: 


Gap Flat Elements Rounded 
Between Elements 
Elements Minimum 

Radius 
(mm) e,/minimu minimum (mm) 
m(mm) radius (mm) 
0-10 1.5 0.25 0.50 
10-15 2.0 0.33 0.75 
15 - 20 3.0 0.50 1.25 


IS 15223 : 2016 


MINIMUM RADIUS 


4.1.2 Vehicle parts within the reference zone with the 
exception of those which are not part of the instrument 
panel and which are placed at less than 10 cm from 
glazed surfaces shall be energy dissipating as 
prescribed in Annex B. Those parts within the reference 
zone which satisfy both of the following conditions 
shall also be excluded from consideration if (see Note) : 


a) during a test in accordance with the 
requirements of Annex B, the pendulum 
makes contact with parts outside the 
reference zone; and 


b) the parts to be tested are placed less than 
10 cm away from the parts contacted outside 
the reference zone. This distance being 
measured on the surface of the reference zone, 
any metal support fittings shall have no 
protruding edges. 


NOTE — During the test, it is determined whether parts within 
the impact zone used for reinforcement may be displaced or 
protrude so as to increase the hazards to passengers or the 
severity of injuries. 


4.1.3 The lower edge of the instrument panel shall, 
unless it meets the requirement of point (see 4.1.2) 
above, shall be rounded to a radius of curvature of not 
less than 19 mm ( see Note ). 


NOTE — These two concepts (level and lower edge of the 
instrument panel) may be distinct. However, this point is 
included in 4.1. (.... above the level of the instrument panel ...) 
and, therefore is applicable only where these two concepts are 
combined. In the case where the two concepts are not combined, 
that is where the bottom edge of the instrument panel is located 
below the level of the instrument panel, it will be considered 
under 4.3.1 (a) by reference to 4.8. 


4.1.4 Switches, pull-knobs etc made of rigid material 
which measured in accordance with the method 
described in Annex C project from 3.2 mm to 9.5 mm 
from the panel, shall have a cross-sectional area of not 
less than 2 cm? measured 2.5 mm from the point 
projecting farthest, and shall have rounded edges with 
a radius of curvature of not less than 2.5 mm 
(see Notes 1 to 3 ). 


NOTES 


1 If a pull handle or knob has a width dimension equal to or 
more than 50 mm and is located in a zone such that if it were 
less than 50 mm in width the maximum projection would be 
determined using the headform measuring apparatus of C-2. 


2 The maximum projection shall be determined in accordance 
with C-1 that is, by using a 165 mm diameter sphere and 


6e 


determining the maximum variation in height of the “y” axis. 


IS 15223 : 2016 


The cross-sectional area shall be measured in a plane parallel 
to the surface on which the component is mounted. 


3 Push type switches which are operable by a force not 
exceeding 15 N may be checked in operated condition at the 
discretion of the Manufacturer. 


4.1.5 If these components project more than 9.5 mm 
from the surface of the instrument panel, they shall be 
so designed and constructed as to be able, under the 
effect of a longitudinal horizontal force of 37.8 daN 
delivered by a flat ended ram of not more than 50 mm 
diameter, either to retract into the surface of the panel 
until they do not project by more than 9.5 mm or to 
become detached. In the latter case, no dangerous 
projections of more than 9.5 mm shall remain; a cross- 
section not more than 6.5 mm from the point of 
maximum projection shall be not less than 6.5 cm? in 
area ( see Note ). 


NOTE — 4.1.4 and 4.1.5 complement each other; the first 
sentence of 4.1.5 (that is a force of 37.8 daN for retraction or 
detachment) is applied and then 4.1.4 in case of retraction up 
to a protrusion between 3.2 and 9.5 mm or, in the case of 
detachment, the two last sentences of 4.1.5 (the cross-section 
area is measured before the force is applied). However, if, under 
practical circumstances 4.1.4 must be applied (retraction to less 
than 9.5 mm and over 3.2 mm) it could be more convenient, at 
the manufacturer’s discretion, to verify the specifications of 
4.1.4 before applying the force of 37.8 daN specified in 4.1.5. 


FORCE 


37.8daN 


DETACHMENT 
REMAINING AREA 
PART s 9.5 mm 


RETRACTION TO 
UNDER 9.5mm 


PARAGRAPH 4.1.4 PARAGRAPH 4 .1. 5 


(AREA OF ORIGINAL 
PART 2 6.5 cm ) 


4.1.6 In the case of a projection consisting of a 
component made of non-rigid material of less than 50 
shore A hardness mounted on a rigid support, the 
requirements of points 4.1.4 and 4.1.5 shall apply only 
to the rigid support or it shall be demonstrated by test 
according to the procedure described in Annex B that 
the soft material of less than 50 shore A hardness will 
not be cut so as to contact the support during the 
specified impact test. In that case the radius 
requirements shall not apply ( see Notes 1 and 2 ). 


NOTES 


1 Since, in the presence of soft materials, the requirements apply 
only to the rigid support, the projection is measured for the 
rigid support only. 


2 The shore hardness measurement is made on samples of the 
test subject itself. Where, due to the condition of the material, 
it is impossible to carry out a hardness measurement by the 
shore A procedure, comparable measurements shall be used for 
evaluation. 


4.1.7 In case of determination of head impact zone as 
per Annex E, the following shall apply. 


4.1.7.1 If the protective system of the vehicle type 
cannot prevent head contacts of the occupants defined 
in E-1.2.1 with the instrument panel, and a dynamic 
reference zone according to Annex E is determined, 
the requirements of 4.1.2 to 4.1.6 are applicable only 
to the parts located in that zone. 


Parts in other areas of the dashboard above the level 
of the instrument panel, if contactable by a 165 mm 
diameter sphere, shall be at least blunted. 


4.1.7.2 If the protective system of the vehicle type is 
able to prevent head contacts of the occupants defined 
in E-1.2.1 with the instrument panel and therefore no 
reference zone can be determined, the requirements 
of 4.1.2 to 4.1.6 are not applicable to this vehicle type. 


Parts of the dashboard above the level of the instrument 
panel, if contactable by a 165 mm diameter sphere, 
shall be at least blunted. 


4.2 Forward interior parts of the passenger 
compartment below the level of the instrument panel 
and in front of the front seat ‘H’ Point, excluding the 
side doors and the pedals. 


4.2.1 Except for the pedals and their fixtures and those 
components that cannot be contacted by the device 
described in Annex D and used in accordance with the 
procedure described there, components covered by 4.2, 
such as switches, the ignition key, etc, shall comply 
with the requirements of 4.1.4 to 4.1.6 (see Notes 1 
and 2). 


NOTES 


1 Foot pedals, their arms and immediate pivotal mechanism, 
but not the surrounding support metal, shall be excluded from 
consideration. 

2 The ignition key is deemed to satisfy the requirements of this 
clause if the protruding part of its shank consists of a material 
of between 60 and 80 shore A hardness and a thickness of at 
least 5 mm, or is covered with such a material of 2 mm minimum 
thickness on all surfaces. 


4.2.2 The handbrake control, if mounted on or under 
the instrument panel, shall be so placed that, when it is 
in the position of rest, there is no possibility of 
occupants of the vehicle striking against it in the event 
of a frontal impact. If this condition is not met, the 
surface of the control shall satisfy the requirements of 
4.3.1 (c) ( see Note ). 


NOTE — The criterion to determine whether the parking brake 
control can be contacted is the use of, 


a) the simulated head specified in Annex A, if the control is 
located above or on the level of the instrument panel (to be 
tested in accordance with 4.1 and within the impact zone); and 
b) the knee specified in Annex D, if the control element is 
located below the level of the instrument panel [in this case the 
control lever is tested in accordance with 4.3.1 (c)]. 


4.2.3 Shelves and other similar items shall be so 
designed and constructed that the supports in no case 
have protruding edges and they meet one or the other 
of the following conditions (see Note). 


NOTE — The technical specifications listed in 4.2.3 apply also 
to shelves and those parts of consoles below the level of the 
instrument panel located between the front seats, provided that 
these are located in front of the ‘H’ point. If a cavity is closed it 
will be treated as a glove compartment and not be subject to 
these specifications. 


4.2.3.1 The part facing the vehicle shall present a 
surface not less than 25 mm high with edges rounded 
to a radius of curvature of not less than 3.2 mm. This 
surface shall consist of or be covered with an energy 
dissipating material as defined in Annex B and shall 
be tested accordingly. The impact being applied in a 
horizontal longitudinal direction ( see Note ). 


NOTE — The dimensions specified refer to the surface before 
the addition of material of less than 50 shore A hardness (see 
4.2.4). Energy-dissipating tests shall be conducted in the spirit 
of Annex B. 


4.2.3.2 Shelves and other similar items shall, under the 
effect of a forward-acting horizontal longitudinal force 
of 37.8 daN exerted by a cylinder of 110 mm diameter 
with its axis vertical, become detached, break up, be 
substantially distorted or retract without producing 
dangerous features on the rim of the shelf. The force 
must be directed at the strongest part of the shelves or 
other similar items ( see Notes 1 to 3 ). 


NOTES 


1 If a shelf becomes detached or breaks up, no dangerous features 
must result; this applies not only to the rim but also to other 
edges facing into the passenger compartment as a result of the 
applied force. 


2 The strongest part of the shelf shall be considered to be 
adjacent to a fixture. Also, "substantially distorted" shall mean 
that, under the effect of the applied force, the deflection of the 
shelf, measured from the initial point of contact with the test 
cylinder, must be a fold or a deformation visible to the naked 
eye. Elastic deformation shall be admissible. 


3 The length of the test cylinder shall be at least 50 mm. 


4.2.4 If the items in question contain a part made of 
material less than 50 shore A hardness when fitted to a 
rigid support, the above requirements, except for the 
requirements covered by Annex B relating to energy- 
absorption, shall apply only to the rigid support or it 
can be demonstrated by sufficient tests according to 
the procedure described in Annex B that the soft 
material of less than 50 shore A hardness will not be 
cut so as to contact the support during the specified 
impact test. In that case the radius requirements shall 


not apply. 


4.3 Other interior fittings in the passenger compartment 
in front of the transverse plane passing through the 
torso reference line of the manikin placed on the 
rearmost seats ( see Note ). 


IS 15223 : 2016 


The requirements of 4.3.1 apply to control handles, 
levers, knobs and to any protruding objects not referred 
in 4.1 and 4.2 [ see 4.3.1 (b) ]. 


NOTE — ‘Other parts’ shall include such parts as window 
catches, seat belt upper anchorages and other parts located in 
the foot space and at the door side, unless these parts have been 
treated previously or are exempted in the text. 


4.3.1 If the items referred in 4.3 are so placed that 
occupants of the vehicle can contact them, they shall 
meet the requirements of 4.3.1 to 4.3.3. If these items 
can be contacted by a 165 mm diameter sphere and 
above the lowest H point of the front seats and 
forward of the transverse plane of the torso reference 
line of the manikin on the rearmost seat and outside 
the zones defined in 3.3 (a) and 3.3 (b), these 
requirements shall be considered to have been 
fulfilled ( see Note 1 ) if, 


a) their surface terminates in rounded edges, the 
radii of curvature being not less than 3.2 mm 
(see Note 2), 


b) control levers and knobs shall be so designed 
and constructed that, under the effect of a 
forward-acting longitudinal horizontal force 
of 37.8 daN either the projection in its most 
unfavourable position shall be reduced to not 
more than 25 mm from the surface of the 
panel or the said fittings shall become 
detached or bent. In the latter two cases, no 
dangerous projections shall remain. Window 
winders may, project 35 mm from the surface 
of the panel (see Note 3), and 


c) the hand brake control, when in the released 
position, and the gear lever, when in any 
forward gear position, have, except when 
placed in the zones given in 3.3 (a) and 3.3 
(b) and in the zones below the horizontal plane 
passing through the ‘H’ point of the front 
seats, shall have a surface area of at least 6.5 
cm? measured at a cross-section normal to the 
longitudinal horizontal direction up to a 
distance of 6.5 mm from the farthest 
projecting part, the radius of curvature being 
not less than 3.2 mm (see Note 4 ). 


NOTES 


1 The space between the forward bulkhead and the instrument 
panel which is located higher than the bottom edge of the 
instrument panel is not subject to the specifications of 4.3. 


2 The 3.2 mm radius applies to all contactable components 
covered by 4.3 when considered in all positions of use. As 
exceptions, glove compartments shall be considered only in the 
closed position; seat belts will normally be considered only in 
the fastened position, but any part which has a fixed stowage 
position shall also comply with the 3.2 mm radius requirement 
in that stowed position. 


3 The reference surface is found by application of the device 
described in C-2, with a force of 2 daN. Where this is not 


IS 15223 : 2016 


possible, the method described in C-1, shall be used with a 
force of 2 daN. 


The evaluation of dangerous projections is subject to the 
discretion of the Testing Agency responsible for the tests. 


The force of 37.8 daN is applied even if the original projection 
is less than 35 or 25 mm, as applicable. The projection is 
measured under the applied load. 


The horizontal, longitudinal force of 37.8 daN is normally 
applied by means of a flat ended ram of not more than 50 mm 
diameter but, where this is not possible, an equivalent method 
may be used; for instance, by removing obstacles. 


With new modern door designs, window winders handle is 
sometimes surrounded by the form of the door panel. It is often 
difficult or impossible for an occupant to touch the handle with 
his knees. It is up to the Testing Agency to decide in this case 
with the agreement of the manufacturer whether or not to carry 
out the push test as described or not. 


4 The furthest projecting part, in the case of a gear lever, is that 
part of the grip or knob first contacted by a vertical transverse 
plane moved in a longitudinal, horizontal direction. If any part 
of a gear lever or handbrake lies above the *H" point level, that 
lever will have to be considered as if the whole of it were above 
the ‘H’ point level. 


4.3.2 The requirements in 4.3.1(c) shall not apply to 
floor-mounted handbrake controls; for such controls if 
the height of the any part in the released position is above 
a horizontal plane passing through the lowest “H’ point 
of the front seats, the control shall have a cross sectional 
area of at least 6.5 cm? measured in a horizontal plane 
not more than 6.5 mm from the farthest projecting part 
(measured in the vertical direction). The radius of 
curvature shall not be less than 3.2 mm. 


4.3.3 Other items of equipment in the vehicle not 
covered by the preceding clauses such as seat slide 
rails, equipment for regulating the horizontal or vertical 
part of the seat, devices for rolling up safety belts etc, 
shall not be subject to any of these provisions if they 
are situated below a horizontal line passing through 
the *H' point of each seat, even though the occupant is 
likely to come into contact with such items (see Note). 


NOTE — Where the horizontal plane(s) passing through the 
‘H’ point of the lowest front and rear seats do not coincide, 
then a vertical plane perpendicular to the vehicle' s longitudinal 
axis shall be determined, passing through the front seat ‘H’ 
point. The exempted zone will then be considered separately 
for both the front and rear passenger compartments, relative to 
their respective ‘H’ point and up to the vertical plane defined 
above. 


4.3.3.1 Components mounted on the roof, but which 
are not part of roof structure such as grab handles, lights 
and sun visors etc. shall have a radius of curvature of 
not less than 3.2 mm and in addition the width of the 
projecting parts shall not be less than the amount of 
their downward projection. Alternatively these 
components shall pass the energy dissipating test in 
accordance with the requirements of Annex B. These 
requirements are applicable only if these parts are 
contactable by the 165 mm diameter sphere attached 
to the apparatus mentioned in A-1 whose length is less 


than or equal to 1 000 mm ( see Note). 


NOTE — Movable sun visors shall be considered in all positions 
of use. The frames of sun visors shall not be regarded as rigid 
supports (see 4.3.4). 


4.3.4 If the parts considered above comprise a 
component made of material of less than 50 shore A 
hardness, mounted on a rigid support, the above 
requirements shall apply only to the rigid support or it 
can be demonstrated by sufficient tests according to 
the procedure described in Annex B that the soft 
material of less than 50 shore A hardness will not be 
cut so as to contact the support during the specified 
impact test. In that case the radius requirements shall 


not apply. 
4.4 Roof (see Note 1) 


4.4.1 The requirements of 4.4.2 to 4.4.4 apply to the 
inner face of the roof and do not apply to such parts of 
the roof which cannot be touched by a sphere of 165 
mm diameter attached to the apparatus mentioned 
in A-1 whose length is less than or equal to 1 000 mm. 


4.4.2 That part of the inner face of the roof which is 
situated above or forward of the occupants shall exhibit 
no dangerous roughness at sharp edges, directed 
rearwards or downwards. The width of the projecting 
parts shall not be less than the amount of their 
downward projection and the edges shall have a radius 
of curvature of not less than 5 mm. In particular, the 
rigid roof sticks or ribs with the exception of header 
rail of the glazed surfaces and door frames shall not 
project downwards more than 19 mm ( see Note 2) 


NOTES 


1 When the roof is tested to measure those protrusions and parts 
which can be contacted by a ball having a diameter of 165 mm, 
the roof lining must be removed. When evaluating the specified 
radii the proportions and properties attributable to the materials 
of the roof lining shall be taken into consideration. The roof 
testing area shall extend in front of and above the transverse 
plane limited by the torso reference line of the manikin placed 
on the rearmost seat. 


2 See 4.1.1 for definition of ‘sharp edges’. 


The downward projection shall be measured normal to the roof 
in accordance with C-1. 


The width of the projecting part shall be measured at right angles 
to the line of the projection. In particular the rigid roof sticks 
or ribs shall not project away from the inner surface of the roof 
more than 19 mm. 


4.4.3 If the roof sticks or ribs do not meet the 
requirements of 4.4.2, they shall pass the energy 
dissipating test as prescribed in Annex B. 


4.4.4 The metal wires which stretch the lining of the 
roof and the frames of the sun visors must have a 
maximum diameter of 5 mm or be able to absorb the 
energy as prescribed in Annex B. Non-rigid attachment 
elements of the frames of the sunvisor shall meet the 
requirements of 4.3.3.1. 


4.5 Vehicles with an Opening Roof (see Note 1) 
4.5.1 Requirements 


4.5.1.1 The following requirements and those of 4.4 
above shall apply to vehicles with an opening roof 
when the roof is in the closed position. 


4.5.1.2 In addition, the opening and operating devices 
shall (see Note 2) : 


a) beso designed and constructed as to exclude 
as far as possible accidental or inopportune 
operation as far as possible (see Note 2); 


b) their surfaces shall terminate in rounded 
edges, the radius of curvature being not less 
than 5 mm (see Note 2); and 


c) be accommodated, when in the position of 
rest, in areas which cannot be contacted by a 
sphere 165 mm in diameter. If this condition 
cannot be met, the opening and operating 
devices shall, in the position of rest, either 
remain retracted or be so designed and 
constructed that, under the effect of a force 
of 37.8 daN applied in the direction of impact 
defined in Annex B as the tangent to the 
trajectory of the headform, either the 
projection as described in Annex C shall be 
reduced to not more than 25 mm beyond the 
surface on which the devices are mounted or 
the devices shall become detached; in the 
latter case no dangerous projections shall 
remain (see Note 3). 

NOTES 


1 Any roof ribs on opening roofs must meet 4.4 if they are 
contactable by a 165 mm diameter sphere; 


2 The opening and operating devices when in a position of rest 
and with the roof closed must meet all of the specified 
conditions. 


3 The force of 37.8 daN is applied even if the original projection 
is 25 mm or less. The projection is measured under the applied 
load. 


The force of 37.8 daN applied in the direction of impact defined 
in Annex B as the tangent to the trajectory of the headform is 
normally applied by means of a flat-ended ram of not more than 
50 mm diameter, but where this is not possible an equivalent 
method may be used; for instance, by removing obstacles. 


The ‘position of rest’ means the position of the operating device 
when it is in the locked position. 


4.6 Convertible Vehicles (see Note 1) 


4.6.1 In the case of convertible vehicles, only the 
underside of the top of the roll bar and the top of the 
wind-screen frame in all its normal utilization positions 
shall comply with the requirements of 4.4. The system 
of folding rods or links used to support a non-rigid 
roof shall, where they are situated above and forward 
of the occupants, exhibit no dangerous roughness or 
sharp edges, directed rearwards or downwards (see 
Note 2). 


IS 15223 : 2016 


NOTES 


1 The rod system of convertible tops does not represent a roll- 
over bar. 


2 The top part of the windscreen frame starts above the 
transparent contour of the windscreen. 


4.7 Rear Parts of Seats Anchored to the Vehicle 
4.7.1 Requirements 


4.7.1.1 The surface of the rear parts of seats shall exhibit 
no dangerous roughness or sharp edges likely to increase 
the risk or severity of injury to the occupants (see Note). 


NOTE — See 4.1.1 for definition of ‘sharp edge’. 


4.7.1.2 Except as provided in 4.7.1.3 to 4.7.1.7 that 
part of the back of the front seat which is in the head 
impact zone, defined in Annex A, shall be energy 
dissipating, as prescribed in Annex B. For determining 
the head impact zone, the front seats shall, if they are 
adjustable, be in the rearmost driving position with their 
backs inclined as near as possible to 25? unless 
indicated otherwise by the manufacturer (see Note). 


NOTE — In defining the head impact zone of the back of the 
front seats any structure necessary to support the seat back shall 
be considered as a component of this seat back. 


4.7.1.3 In the case of separate front seats, the rear 
passengers head impact zone shall extend for 10 cm 
on either side of the seat central line, in the top part of 
the rear of the seat back. 


4.7.1.4 In the case of seat fitted with head restraint, 
each test shall be carried out with the head restraint in 
the lowest position and at a point situated on the vertical 
line passing through the centre of the head restraint. 


4.7.1.5 In the case of a seat which is designed to be 
fitted in several types of vehicle, the impact zone shall 
be determined by the vehicle whose rearmost driving 
seat position is, of each of the types considered, the 
least favourable; the resultant impact zone will be 
deemed adequate for the other types. 


4.7.1.6 In the case of front bench seats, the impact zone 
shall extend between the longitudinal vertical planes 
10 cm outboard of the centre line of each designated 
outboard seating position. The centre line of each 
outboard seating position of a bench seat shall be 
specified by the manufacturer. 


4.7.1.7 In the head impact zone outside the limits 
prescribed in 4.7.1.3 to 4.7.1.6, the seat frame structure 
shall be padded to avoid direct contact of the head with 
it; and, in these zones, shall have a radius of curvature 
of at least 5 mm. These parts may alternatively satisfy 
the energy dissipation requirements specified in 
Annex B (see Note). 


NOTE — The padding of the seat frame structure shall also 
avoid dangerous roughness and sharp edges likely to increase 
the risk of serious injuries to the occupants. 


IS 15223 : 2016 


4.7.2 These requirements shall not apply to the 
rearmost seats, to seats facing sideways or rearwards, 
to back to back or to folding seats. If the impact zones 
of the seats, head restraints and their supports contain 
parts covered with material softer than 50 shore A 
hardness, the above requirements, with the exception 
of those relating to energy dissipation described in 
Annex B, shall apply only to the rigid parts. 


4.7.3 The requirement of 4.7 shall be considered to be 
satisfied in the case of rear parts of seats that are part 
of a vehicle type approved under IS 15546. 


4.8 Other not Mentioned Fittings 


4.8.1 The requirements of 4 shall apply to such fittings 
not mentioned in previous clauses as according to their 
location, are capable of being contacted by the 
occupants in accordance with the various procedures 
prescribe in 4.1 to 4.7. If the contactable members of 
such fittings are made of material of less than 50 shore 
A hardness mounted on a rigid support the 
requirements shall apply only to the rigid support, or 
it can be demonstrated by sufficient tests according to 
the procedure described in Annex B that the soft 
material of less than 50 shore A hardness will not be 
cut during the specified impact test. In that case the 
required radius shall apply to the soft surface only. 


4.8.2 For parts like a centre console, for example, or 
other components of the vehicle which belong to 4.8.1, 
it is not necessary to perform an energy dissipation test 
according to Annex B to any component contactable 
by the device and procedure specified in Annex A if in 
the opinion of the Test Agency the occupant’s head is 
unlikely to contact the component, because of the 
restraint system(s) installed in the vehicle, or 


Because the manufacturer can prove the lack of such 
contact using, for example, the method described in 
Annex E, or any equivalent method. 


5 MODIFICATIONS AND EXTENSION OF 
APPROVAL OF THE VEHICLE TYPE 


5.1 Every modification of the vehicle type shall be 
notified to the Test Agency which approved the vehicle 
type. The Test Agency may then either: 


5.1.1 Consider that the modifications made are unlikely 
to have an appreciable adverse effect and that in any 
case the vehicle still complies with the requirements; or 


5.1.2 Require a further test report from the test agency 
responsible for conducting the tests. 


5.2 Confirmation or refusal of approval, specifying 
the alterations, shall be communicated to the vehicle 
manufacturer. 


ANNEX A 
(Clauses 3.3, 4.1.1, 4.2.2, 4.3.3.1, 4.7.1.2 and 4.8.2) 
DETERMINATION OF HEAD IMPACT ZONE 


A-1 The head-impact zone comprises all the non- 
glazed surfaces of the interior of a vehicle which are 
capable of entering into static contact with a spherical 
head 165 mm in diameter that is an integral part of a 
measuring apparatus whose dimension from the pivotal 
point of the hip to the top of the head is continuously 
adjustable between 736 mm and 840 mm. 


A-2 The zone must be determined by the following 
procedure or its graphic equivalent. 


A-2.1 The pivotal point of the measuring apparatus 
shall be placed as follows for each seating position for 
which the manufacturer has made provision: 


A-2.1.1 In the case of sliding seats, 


a) atthe ‘H’point ( see Note 1 ); and 


b) at a point situated horizontally 127 mm 
forward of the ‘H’ point and either at a height 
resulting from the variation in the height of 
the ‘H’ point caused by a forward shift of 
127 mm or 19 mm (see Note 2). 


NOTES 


1 For determining the ‘H’ point of any seat, other seats may be 
removed if necessary. 


2 The choice between the two procedures for determining height 
is to be left to the manufacturer. 


A-2.1.2 In the case of non-sliding seats: 
A-2.1.2.1 At the H-point of the seat considered. 


A-2.2 All points of contact situated forward of the ‘H’ 
point shall be determined, for each dimension from 
the pivoted point to the top of the head capable of being 


measured by the measuring apparatus within the 
interior dimensions of the vehicle (see Note ). 
NOTE — When determining points of contact, the length of 
the arm of the measuring apparatus is not changed during a 


particular operation. Each operation starts from the vertical 
position. 


A-2.2.1 In the case where the headform, with the arm 
set at minimum length, overlaps the front seat, from 
the rear ‘H’ point, no contact point is established for 
this particular operation. 


A-2.3 With measuring apparatus vertical, possible points 
of contact shall be determined by pivoting it forwards 
and downwards through all arcs of vertical planes as far 
as 90° on either side of the longitudinal vertical plane 


IS 15223 : 2016 


of the vehicle which passes through the ‘H’ point. 


A-2.3.1 To determine the points of contact, the length 
of the arm of the measuring apparatus shall not be 
changed during any given excursion. Each excursion 
shall start from a vertical position. 


A-3 A ‘point of contact’ is a point at which the head 
of the apparatus touches a part of the interior of the 
vehicle. The maximum downward movement shall be 
downward movement to a position where the head is 
tangential to a horizontal plane situated 25.4 mm above 
the ‘H’ point (see Note). 

NOTE — The 25.4 mm dimension means the measurement from 


a horizontal plane passing through the ‘H?’ point to the horizontal 
tangent to the lower profile of the headform. 


ANNEX B 


[Clauses 4.1.2, 4.1.6, 4.2.3.1, 4.2.4, 4.3.3.1, 4.3.4, 4.4.3, 4.4.4, 4.5.1.2(c), 
4.7.1.2, 4.7.1.7, 4.7.2, 4.8.1 and 4.8.2] 


l 
PROCEDURE FOR TESTING ENERGY DISSIPATING MATERIALS 


B-1 SETTING UP, TEST APPARATUS AND 
PROCEDURE 


B-1.1 Setting Up 


B-1.1.1 The component made of energy-dissipating 
materials shall be mounted and tested on the structural 
supporting member on which it is to be installed on 
the vehicle. The test shall preferably be carried out, 
where possible, directly on the body. The structural 
member, or the body, shall be firmly attached to the 
test bench so that it does not move under impact. 


B-1.1.2 However, at the manufacturer’s request, the 
component may be mounted on a fitting simulating 
installation on the vehicle, on condition that the 
assembly comprising the component and the fitting has 
the same geometrical arrangement as, and a degree of 
rigidity not lower and an energy-dissipating capacity 
not higher than those of the real assembly comprising 
the component and the structural supporting member. 


B-1.2 Test Apparatus 


B-1.2.1 The apparatus shall consist of a pendulum 
whose pivot is supported by ball-bearings and whose 
reduced mass at its centre of percussion is 6.8 kg. The 


lower extremity of the pendulum consists of a rigid 
headform 165 mm in diameter whose centre is identical 
with the centre of percussion of the pendulum. 
NOTE — The relationship of the reduced mass ‘m; of the 
pendulum to the total mass *m' of the pendulum at a distance 
‘a’ between the centre of percussion and the axis of the rotation 


and at a distance ‘/’ between the centre of gravity and the axis 
of rotation is given by the following formula: 


m =m. 


B-1.2.2 The head form shall be fitted with 2 
accelerometers, all capable of measuring values in the 
direction of impact. 


B-1.3 Recording Instruments 


The recording instruments used shall be such that 
measurements can be made with the following degrees 
of accuracy: 


B-1.3.1 Acceleration 


a) Accuracy = +5 percent of the real value; 
b) Frequency response = up to 1 000 Hz; and 


C) Cross axis sensitivity = > 5 percent of the 
lowest point on the scale. 


IS 15223 : 2016 


B-1.3.2 Speed 


a) Accuracy = +2.5 percent of the real value; and 
b) Sensitivity = 0.5 km/h. 


B-1.3.3 Time Recording 


a) The instrumentation shall enable the action 
to be recorded throughout its duration 
and readings to be made to within 1/1 000th 
of a second; and 
b) The beginning of the impact at the moment 
of first contact between the headform and the 
test component shall be noted on the 
recordings used for analyzing the test. 


B-1.4 Test Procedure ( see Note ) 


B-1.4.1 At every point of impact on the surface to be 
tested, the direction of impact shall be the tangent to 
the trajectory of the headform of the measuring 
apparatus described in Annex A. 


B-1.4.1.1 For testing the parts as given in 4.3.3.1 
and 4.4.3, the arm of the measuring apparatus shall be 
lengthened until contact is made with the part to be 
considered, up to a limit of 1 000 mm between the 
pivot point and the top of the head of the apparatus. 
However any roof sticks of ribs referred in 4.4.3 which 
cannot be contacted shall remain subject to the 
requirement of 4.4.2 with the exception of that relating 
to the height of the projection. 


B-1.4.2 Where the angle between the direction of 
impact and the perpendicular to the surface at the point 
of impact is 5? or less, the test shall be carried out in 
such a way that the tangent to the trajectory of the 
centre of percussion of the pendulum coincides with 
the direction of impact. The headform shall strike the 


test component at a speed of 24.1 km/h; or, in case of 
components which cover an uninflated airbag, at a 
speed of 19.3 km/h. This speed shall be achieved either 
by the mere energy of propulsion or by using an 
additional impelling device. 


B-1.4.3 Where the angle between the direction of 
impact and perpendicular to the surface at the point of 
impact is more than 5°, the test may be carried out in 
such a way that the tangent to the trajectory of the 
centre of percussion of the pendulum coincides with 
the perpendicular to the point of impact. The test speed 
shall then be reduced to the value of the normal 
component of the speed prescribed in B-1.4.2. 


B-1.4.4 The test shall be conducted with a free motion 
impactor, or with a linear impactor or rotational 
pendulum impactor with mutual agreement between 
Test Agency and Manufacturer. 


NOTE — The breakage of any component during the energy- 
dissipation test (see Note under 4.1.2). 


B-2 RESULTS 


In tests carried out according to the above procedures, 
the deceleration of the headform shall not exceed 80 g 
continuously for more than 3 millisecond. The 
deceleration rate taken shall be the average of the 
readings of the two decelerometers. 


B-3 EQUIVALENT PROCEDURES 


B-3.1 Equivalent test procedures shall be permitted, 
on condition that the results required in B-2 may be 
obtained. 


B-3.2 Responsibility for demonstrating the equivalence 
of a method other than that described in B-1 shall rest 
with the person using such method. 


ANNEX C 
[Clauses 4.1.4, 4.5.1.2(c) and notes under 4.1.4, 4.3.1(b), 4.4.2] 
METHOD OF MEASURING PROJECTIONS 


C-1 To determine the amount by which an item projects 
in relation to the panel on which it is mounted, a 
165 mm diameter sphere shall be moved along and be 
kept in contact with the component under 
consideration, starting from the initial position of 
contact with the component under consideration. The 
projection's value is the largest of all possible 
variations ‘y’, the variation measured from the centre 
of the sphere perpendicular to the panel. 


C-1.1 If the panels and components, etc, are covered 
with materials softer than 50 shore A hardness, the 


10 


procedure for measuring the projections described 
above shall apply only after removal of such materials. 


C-2 The projection of switches, pull-knobs, etc, situated 
in the reference area shall be measured by using the test 
apparatus and procedures described below. 


C-2.1 Apparatus 


C-2.1.1 The apparatus for measuring projections shall 
consist of a hemispherical headform 165 mm in 
diameter, in which there is a sliding ram of 50 mm 
diameter. 


C-2.1.2 Relative positions of the flat end of the ram 
and the edge of the headform shall be shown as a 
graduated scale on which a mobile index shall register 
the maximum measurement achieved when the 
apparatus is moved away from the item tested. A 
minimum distance of 30 mm shall be measurable; the 
measuring scale shall be graduated in half millimeter 
to make possible an indication of the extent of the 
projections in question. 


C-2.1.3 Gauging Procedure 


C-2.1.3.1 The apparatus shall be placed on a flat surface 
so that its axis is perpendicular to that surface. When 
the flat end of the ram contacts the surface, the scale 
shall be set at zero. 


C-2.1.3.2 A 10 mm strut shall be inserted between the 
flat end of the ram and the retaining surface; a check 
shall be made to ensure that the mobile index records 
this measurement. 


C-2.1.4 The apparatus for measuring projections is 
illustrated in Fig. 1. 


C-2.2 Test Procedure 


C-2.2.1 A cavity shall be formed in the headform by 
pulling back the ram and the mobile index shall be 


GRADUATED SCALE 
WITH MOBILE INDEX 


RAM HEADFORM 


IS 15223 : 2016 


placed against the ram. 


C-2.2.2 The apparatus shall be applied to the projection 
to be measured so that the headform contacts the 
maximum surrounding surface area with a force not 
exceeding 2 daN. 


C-2.2.3 The ram shall be pushed forward until it makes 
contact with the projection to be measured and the 
amount of the projection shall be observed on the scale. 


C-2.2.4 The head form shall be adjusted to obtain 
maximum projection. The amount of the projection 
shall be recorded. 


C-2.2.5 If two or more controls are situated sufficiently 
close for the ram or the headform to contact them 
simultaneously, they shall be treated as follows: 


C-2.2.5.1 Multiple controls, all of which can be 
contained in the headform cavity, shall be regarded as 
forming a single projection. 


C-2.2.5.2 If other controls prevent normal testing by 
contacting the headform, they shall be removed and 
the test shall be conducted without them. They may 
subsequently be reinstalled and tested in their turn with 
other controls that have been removed to facilitate the 
procedure. 


FORCE 
INDICATOR 


HANDLE 


Fic. 1 APPARATUS FOR MEASURING PROJECTIONS 


IS 15223 : 2016 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 4.2.1) 
APPARATUS AND PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATION OF 4.2.1 OF SPECIFICATION 


D-1 Those parts (switches, pull-knobs, etc) which can 
be contacted by using the apparatus and procedure 
described below shall be considered as being likely to 
be contacted by the knees of an occupant. Foot operated 
controls are fitted as foot pedals. 


D-2 APPARATUS 


D-2.1 Diagram of Apparatus ( see Fig. 2 ) 


D-3 PROCEDURE 


D-3.1 The apparatus may be placed in any position 
below the level of the instrument panel so that, 


a) 


the plane XX' remains parallel to the median 
longitudinal plane of the vehicle; 
b) the axis X can be rotated above and below 


the horizontal through angles up to 30°. 


D-3.2 In carrying out the above test, all materials of 
less than 50 shore A hardness shall be removed. 


1 


250 


Ta 


| 


Fic. 2 APPARATUS FOR CHECKING KNEE CONTACT OF OCCUPANTS 


ANNEX E 
[ Clauses 3.2 (c), 3.3, 4.1.1, 4.1.7, 4.1.7.1 and 4.8.2 ] 
DETERMINATION OF A DYNAMICALLY DETERMINED HEAD IMPACT ZONE 


E-1 DETERMINATION OF THE 
DYNAMICALLY DETERMINED HEAD 
IMPACT ZONE WITH REGARD TO THE 
PROTECTIVE SYSTEM 


E-1.1 Differing from the procedure described in 
Annex A the applicant may prove, by a procedure 
accepted by the test agency responsible for conducting 
the tests, that a dynamically determined head impact 
zone is relevant for this vehicle type. 


12 


E-1.2 A suitable method to prove a dynamically 
determined head impact zone may be either: 


E-1.2.1 Vehicle Impact Tests 


To determine the sequence of movement of the 
occupants with regard to the protective system installed 
in the vehicle type, using the frontal impact conditions 
in the range of +30° against a fixed rigid barrier with 
an impact speed of at least 48.3 km/h. Normally it will 
be sufficient to test at 0°, + 30? and — 30°. 


The dynamically determined head impact zone has to 
be evaluated for the occupants represented by adult 
dummies of the types 5th percentile female, 50th 
percentile male and 95th percentile male, each placed 
in its recommended seating position before the test as 
defined by the manufacturer. 


E-1.2.2 Sled Tests 


The sequence of movement shall be investigated under 
the effect of the deceleration time diagram given in 
IS 15140 (change of velocity 50 km/h) respecting the 
above prescribed dummy family and producing a 
direction of a forward displacement of the respective 
dummies corresponding to the movement of the 
dummies during real frontal impact tests according 
to E-1.2.1. 


The direction of the forward displacement of the dummies 
is deemed satisfactory, if the centre line of the test object, 
normally a body shell, covers the range of +18° from the 
longitudinal centerline of the sled. Normally it will be 
sufficient to test at 0°, 18? and —18°, or 


E-1.2.3 Simulated Impact Testing 


The sequence of movements of the occupants, 


13 


IS 15223 : 2016 


represented by the dummy family described in E-1.2.1 
above shall be investigated as described in E-1.2.1 or 
E-1.2.2. The simulation method shall be validated by 
at least three of the impact conditions as prescribed in 
E-1.2.1 or E-1.2.2 above. 


E-2 The dynamically determined head impact zone 
includes all areas of the instrument panel that may be 
contacted by the head of restraint occupants using the 
protective system installed in the vehicle type. 


E-3 If the vehicle type can be fitted with different 
protective systems it is sufficient to investigate the 
protective system with the minimum performance. 
However, protective systems that can be deactivated 
by the driver or the occupant have to be set as 
recommended and indicated by the manufacturer in 
the owner’s manual. 


If the manufacturer provide for permanent deactivation 
of a part of the protective system, then this part has to 
be set to the deactivated configuration. 


E-4 The manufacturer or his representative is entitled 
to present calculations, simulations, test data or test 
results, which sufficiently prove the dynamically 
determined head impact zone. 


IS 15223 : 2016 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Automotive Body, Chassis, Accessories and Garage Equipment Sectional Committee, TED 06 


Organization 
Automotive Research Association of India, Pune 
Asahi India Glass Ltd, Distt Rewari 
Ashok Leyland Ltd, Chennai 


Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, New Delhi 
Autoliv IFB India Ltd, Bangalore 


Automotive Component Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 

Bajaj Auto Ltd, Pune 

Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune 

Central Farm Machinery Training & Testing Institute (CFMTTD, 
P.O. Budni (M.P.) 

Controllerate of Quality Assurance (Vehicles), Ahmednagar 

Eicher Tractors, Pithampur 

Force Motors Ltd, Pune 


General Motors India Pvt Ltd, Halol 


ICAT, Manesar 
Institute of Road Traffic Education (IRTE), New Delhi 


Kum. Rajshree Parmar Memorial Foundation, Pune 


Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation, Mumbai 


Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd, Nashik 


Maruti Suzuki India Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises, New Delhi 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, New Delhi 
Transport Commissioner Office, Mumbai 


Ordnance Factory Board, Vehicle Factory, Jabalpur 


Rane TRW Steering Systems Ltd, Singaperumal Koil 


Ruby Bus Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


MSME, Delhi 


Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturer (SIAM), New Dehli 


14 


Representative(s) 
Suri A. V. MANNIKAR (Chairman) 
Suri Mirza Aar BEG 


SHRI ALFRED NIXON MENDEZ 
Suri S. Arun (Alternate) 


Director (TECHNICAL) 


Suri V. RAGHU 
Suri S. RANGARAJAN (Alternate) 


SHRI Upay HARITE 
SHRI JITENDER RANA (Alternate) 


SHRI R. NARASIMHAN 
Suri A. V. Kumpuar (Alternate) 


Suri D. P. SASTE 
Suri T. R. Marre (Alternate) 


Suri C. R. Lon 
Suri C. V. Cuimote (Alternate) 


Joint CONTROLLER (QAD-B) 


Deputy CONTROLLER (Qap-B)] (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJINDER S. SACHDEVA 


Suri ViMAL MULCHANDANI (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SHIVARAMAN 
Suri L. B. Bam. (Alternate) 


SHRI NEERAJ GUPTA 
SHRI RAJENDRA KHILE (Alternate) 


Suri S. KALIA 


Suri Ronit BALUJA 
Suri G. C. Kuxreti (Alternate) 


SHRI CHANDMAL M. PARMAR 


Suri S. P. JADHAV 
Suri Karate (Alternate) 


SHRI B. BHAUMIK 
Suri Z. A. MUJAWAR (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDRA MALHOTRA 
Suni Deerak PANDA (Alternate) 


Suri B. N. Das 
Suri R. K. JaiswaL (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR RoAD TRANSPORT 
Suri P. B. JADHAV 


Suri P. K. ARORA 
Suri A. K. Maurya (Alternate) 


Suri B. AYYAPPAN 


Suri L. RADHAKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Suri PANKAJ D KAPASHI 
Suri V. M. Buise (Alternate) 


Suri K. L. Rao 
Suri K. K. Funpa (Alternate) 


Suri K. K. GANDHI 
SHRI Amir Kumar (Alternate) 


IS 15223 : 2016 


Organization Representative(s) 
Sutlej Motors Ltd, Jallandhar Suri K. S. WILKHU 
Swaraj Mazda Ltd, Ropar Suri S. R. AGRAHARI 


SHRI LAKHINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


Tata Motors Ltd, Pune Suri P. K. BANERJEE 
Suri Firoz Kuan (Alternate) 


Toyota Kirloskar Motors Ltd, Bangalore SHRI SUDEEP DALVI 
Suni S. SAKTHIVELAN (Alternate) 


Tractor Manufacturers’ Association, New Delhi Suri T. C. GOPALAN 
Suri T. R. Kesavan (Alternate) 


Vehicles Research & Development Establishment, Ahmednagar Suri D. PANDURENGAN 
Suni S. RAMAKRISHNA (Alternate) 


Venkos & Company, Patna Suri V. N. SHARMA 
Suri SAIFUDDIN Hussain (Alternate) 


Volvo India Pvt Ltd, Bangalore SHRI KARTHIK SARMA 
Suri P. K. Hucan (Alternate) 


Mahindra Trucks and Buses Limited, Pune Suri K. NAGARAJU 
Suri V. G. KULKARNI (Alternate) 


BIS Directorate General Suri P. C. Joen, Scientist ‘F and Head (TED) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri D. K. SINGLA 
Scientist ‘D’ (TED), BIS 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards ` Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 06 (0935). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


