IS 14776 (Part 1) : 2000 ISO/TR 10314-l : 1990
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard

INDUSTRIAL

AUTOMATION PRODUCTION

SHOP FLOOR
AND A

PART 1 REFERENCE MODEL FOR STANDARDIZATION METHODOLOGY FOR IDENTIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS

ICS

25.040.40

0 BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Murch 2000

Price Group 9

Industrial

and Production

Automation

Systems and Robotics Sectional Committee,

BP/PE 18

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO/TR 10314-l : 1990 Industrial automation - Shop floor production - Part 1 : Reference model for standardization and a methodology for identification of requirements' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Industrial and Production Automation Systems and Robotics Sectional Committee and approval of the Basic and Production Engineering Division Council. This standard does not include the development of individual standards themselves but rather the establishment of common frame work, in terms of a reference model to assist future standards developments. The text of the IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviation except the word `report'. Wherever the word `report' appears referring to this standard, it should read as `Indian
Standarcl'

IS 14776(Part1):2000 Iso/TR 103141:1990

Indian Standard

INDUSTRIALAUTOMATIONPRODUCTION

SHOPFLOOR

PART 1 REFERENCE MODEL FOR STANDARDIZATION AND A METHODOLOGY FOR IDENTIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS

1

Scope and Meld of Application

1.1 Scope This report presents and describes a means of identijring where new or revised manufacturing standards may be required. It establis~hes a Reference Model for Shop Floor Production, which is then used as the basis for developing a methodology for the identification and extraction of areas for standards. The assumptions used to develop the Reference Model are:
l

the field of interest is the manufacture of discrete parts and in particular the production (physical realisation) of these parts, the Reference Model needs to be open-ended so that it can be revised to incorporate new technologies, and the Reference Model needs to be generic in nature so that it can -be applied to a wide range of -applications and is not directed to a particular organisational structure of manufacturing. that the Reference Model: framework for understanding

0

0

It is emphasised
a

provides a conceptual manufacturing and

0

can be used to identify areas of standards necessary manufacturing systems.

to integrate

The Reference Model does not however provide a methodology for designing, implementing, operating and maintaining any existing or future manufacturing automation system. There may be a need to develop

IS 14776(Part19:2000 ISOrrR mn4-l:l!#O

other Reference IvIodels which can be used for those purposes, perhaps based on the work described in this report. The development of such models is beyond the scope of this technical report.

1.2 Field of Application The Reference Model described in this report is intended for use in the identification of standards within the Shop Floor Production area of manufacturing. Manufacturing is perceived to be all inclusive, from customer order through to delivery of the product. Twelve manufacturing functions have been identified as being a part of manufacturing. The following is a list of these twelve functions, together with illustrative, non-exhaustive activities typically related to these functions: I ) Corporate management, e.g. l Direction of enterprise . Strategic planning l Feasibility study for investment l Risk management 2) Finance, e.g. l Financial planning l Corporate budgeting l Financial accounting Marketing and sales, e.g. l Marketing research l Advertising 0 Sales forecasting l Sales scheduling l Pricing l Sales (order, delivery, invoice) l Product service Research and Development, e.g. lR&Dplanning l Basic research l Applied research . Product development l Manufacturing development

3)

4)

IS 14776(Partl):2000 ISO/TR 103141:1990

5)

Product design and Production engineering, e.g. 0 Define product specifications l Preliminary desi n and testing 0 Detailed design * Design arralysis, test, evaluation 0 Revise design 0 Release design for production planning 0 Proj~ect management l Process planning l Programming of numerical control and programmable * Tooling 0 Plant engineering 0 Bill of material l Quality assurance planning of production l Production configuration Production management, e.g. l Production scheduling 0 Product and Inventory control l Production monitoring l General maintenance request 0 Quality control l Cost control and cost management Procurement, e.g. l Vendor performance l Purchasing 0 Receiving l General stores Shipping, e.g. l Product storage l Distribution

control

6)

7)

8)

9) Waste material treatment, e.g. 0 Waste material processing 0 Waste material storage

IS 14776(Part1):2000 ISO/TR 10314-1:1990

101 Resource management, l Facility management l Tool control l Energy management l Time and Attendance l Facility security l Health and Safety l Environment control

e.g.

11) Maintenance management, l Preventive maintenance l Corrective maintenance

e.g.

12) Shop Floor Production, e.g. l Material store l Transport material l Transform material l Incoming inspection l In-process gauging and testing l In-process audit -0 Product audit As shown in Figure 1 and described in the definitions which follow in Section 2.2, these functions tend to be grouped under three main headings. Items 11 through to 4) are functions of the Enterprise concerned with strategic long term planning activities. Items 5) throug [h to 11) are functions of the Facility, concerned with tactical pianning of the production process, resource management and product modelling. The final item, 12) Shop Floor Production, is a function which involves the activities that actually create a physical product. The twelve manufacturing functions are interrelated and a single Reference Model covering all twelve functions would be desirable. After careful study of e.dsting work, it was decided that the development of a single Reference Model covering every function of manufacturing was not manageable at this time. The area of Shop Floor Production on the other hand has s-hown an urgent need for and a willingness to adopt standards. The Reference Model described in this technical report is intended to guide the planning for and the development of standards to assist the integration of an automated Shop Floor Production system. It is recognised that the Shop Floor Production function will be required to interface with
4

IS 14776(Part1):2000 ISO/TR 10314-1:1990

functions (and their activities) outside the scope of Shop Floor Production itself. Figure 2 is a clarification of how major functions manufacturing might be interrelated.

of

In the future, Reference Models for manufacturing that include Enterprise and Facility functions may be developed. Any future modelling work in the area of manufacturing should take account of the Reference Model far Shop Floor Production presented here and every effort should be made to ensure compatibility between the Reference Model for Shop Floor Production and any Facility or Enterprise Reference Models that may be developed.

2

Terminology

2.1

General

A number of terms are described in this chapter to provide a better understanding b-y the user of this report. These descriptions are intended to be used solely in the context of this report and are not intended to be general definitions.

2.2 Specific 2.2.1

terms

Reference Model: a means of describing the activities and components of manufacturing through the use of figure(s) and text. Discrete Parts Manufacturing: systems of functions for producing products or parts consisting of discrete elements. Function: a grouping of several activities performed to realise some manufacturing objective. Activity: inputs. a manufacturing process which causes some change in

2.2.2

2.2.3

2.2.4

2.2.5

Level: a collection of activities which form a degree of subordination in a hierarchical arrangement.

Is 14776(Partl):2006 I!JolTR10314.l:l!wO

2.2.6

Enterprise: an entire manufacturing unit consisting of a corporate component and one or more Facility components. The corporate component is responsible for interactions between the external environment of the Enterprise and the Facility or Facilities, and also for the control of functions within the Facility or Facilities. Facility: a component of an Enterprise which excludes corporate functions. The Facility is responsible for providing support and direction for Enterprise and Shop Floor `. Production activities. Shop Floor Production: a component of a Facility whose function is directly related to the production of discrete parts and/ or products. Shop Floor Production describe the structure Interaction: the Subjects the Subjects Production. Model: the basic model used to within Shop Floor Production.

2.2.7

2.2.8

2.2.9

2.2.10

an interrelationship or interconnection between within Shop Floor Production, and aIso between and Actions within or external to Shop Floor

2.2.11

Generic Activity Model: a generic model used to describe the execution of activities within Shop Floor Production and their interactions with functions interfacing to Shop Flsor Production.

3

Abbreviations

Several abbreviations
l l l l l l

are used in this report:

GAM SFPM ST TF TP VE

Generic Activity Model Shop Floor Production Model Store Transform Transport Verify

6

IS 14776(Partl):2000 IsoiTR 103141:1990

4

Objectives for Manufacturing Standardisation

4.1

General information 4.1.1
The objectives

of standardisation as follows:

IS0 has pointed out the objectives of standardisation
l l l l l

mutual understanding health, safety, protection of environment interface, interchangeability fitness for purpose variety control. The concept of Standards Viewpoints

4.1.2

The process of standardisation for manufacturing is to define areas of standards. to select aspects to be standardised and to define standards based on the state of the art. In this report. the following Standards Viewpoints (defined in 4.2) have been selected to identify the needs of standards in the manufacturing field ~derived from the guidance of the above IS0 objectives: Safety Environment Compatibility Performance Operability Maintainability Reliability Qualifkations Description These nine Standards Viewpoints, together with the Reference are used in the proposed methodology for extracting areas of standards. Model,

7

IS 14776(Part1):2000 ISO/TR 10314-1:1990

4.2 Standards

Viewpoints for Manufacturing

Nine Standards Viewpoints for manufacturing are defined as fellows and are to be applied to any area where standards may apply: 4.2.1 Safety Viewpoint

Safety is concerned with the effect on safety that normal and erroneous operation of the manufacturing facility would have on the operating personnel, the equipment and the work in progress. It also covers the need for traceability, that is the ability to trace the sequence of manufacturing processes and components used in manufacture. Hence define design and operation standards to ensure safe operation. 4.2.2 Environment Viewpoint

Environment is concerned with the effect that operating entities can have on the physical environment both during the manufacturing activity itself and as a by-product of that activity. In each case both normal and ~failure~modes should be considered. Hence identify standards which define each effect, how it is to be measured and norms for acceptable operation. 4.2.3 Compatibility Viewpoint

Compatibility is concerned with interchangeability and interdependence, and addresses issues related to interfacing. Hence define design and operation standards to ensure compatibility. 4.2.4 Performance Viewpoint

Performance is concerned with the performance aspects which can be categorised in terms of spe-ed, quality of finish (output), resources consumed etc. Hence identify standards to define these qualities and appropriate specifications.

IS 14776(Partl):2000 ISO/TR 10314.1:1990

4.2.5

Operability

Viewpoint

Operability is concerned with all aspects of human interactions with It is essentially concern-ed with easy the manufacturing environment. operation and the avoidance of improper operation under both normal and erroneous conditions. Hence define design and operation standards to ensure easy and correct operation. 4.2.6 Maintainability Viewpoint

Maintainability is concerned with reducing downtime and the risks and costs of evolution. It is very important to enable easy maintenance of all manufacturing constituents and the system itself. to maintain a known status for each manufacturing entity and its documentation and to support traceability where required. Hence define design and operation standards to ensure easy maintenance. 4.2.7 Reliability Viewpoint

Reliability is concerned with all aspects of how a system is designed and operated to meet specified levels of availability. This starts with the reliability of individual elements and components. and goes up to the reliability of the entire system and organ&at&n. Hence define design and operation standards to ensure reliability. 4.2.8 Qualifications Viewpoint

Qualifications are concerned with the quality of personnel for achieving the proper design and operation of manufacturing entities. The viewpoint is essentially concerned with the training of operators as qualified experts. Hence define design and operation standards for the qualifications of personnel for managing manufacturing activities. 4.2.9 Description View-point

Description is concerned with all aspects of how the design and operation of manufacturing entities are defined and described to provide all persons concerned with a means of mutual understanding. It is essentially concerned with the terminology, identification and Hence define design and operation description of documents. standards to ensure mutual understanding in the manufacturing field.

IS 14776(Partl):2000 ISO/TR 10314.1:1990

5 The Reference Model for Shop Floor Production

5.1 %eneral Information This chapter describes the Reference Model developed to be used in the identification of standards within Shop Floor Production. The Reference Model presented in the following three sections is in many ways a synthesis of a variety of efisting models. Firstly the major activities undertaken for manufacturing are identified as a context for Shop Floor Production. Secondly a Shop Floor Production Model (SFPM) is presented which groups Shop Floor activities into hierarchical levels. Thirdly a Generic Activity Model (GAM) is presented to model the various activities within each level of the SFPM. Each activity in Shop Floor Production can be represented by an instance of the GAM. The various elements of the GAM will have different interpretations for any given activity. The intent of this Reference Model is to assist in identifying where standards may be required and the detail is not sufficient for other purposes such as providing a basis for designing or implementing a manufacturing system. The Reference Model presents a functional view of the Enterprise, Facility and Shop Floor Production.

5.2 The Context of Shop Floor Production Section 1.2 sets out the scope of manufacturing, identi@ng 12 major functions. Figure 1 shows one example of how Shop Floor Production takes place in a context established by those other functions. Accordingly interactions occur between many of the activities of Shop Floor ProducUon and those of the Facility, and to a lesser extent with those of the Enterprise itself. The methodology described later allows for these interactions to be identified, in addiUon to the interacUons occurring within Shop Floor Production itself.

10

IS 14776(Part1):2000 ISO/TR 10314131990

5.3 The Shop Floor Production

Model (SFPM)

Shop Floor Production is distinguished from the other eleven manufacturing functions identified in Section 1.2 by the fact that it contains those activities which are directly engaged in producing parts. It is common practice to group these activities into several levels. In this report, a four level model is selected to present the activities of the Shop Floor Production function. It is quite likely that specific manufacturing implementations may require more or less than four levels, but four levels seem sufficient for the purpose of identifying areas of standards. Also this report identifies four types of manufacturing activity. each type corresponding to each level of Shop Floor Production. There can be (and generally are) several activities in progress at the same time at each level. The types of activity are:

1)
2)
3) 4)

execute shop floor production processes command shop floor production processes co-ordinate shop floor production processes supervise shop floor production processes.

The four level model in Figure 3 illustrates the structure of Shop Floor Production. This model is called the Shop Floor Production Model (SFPM). The figure shows the name of each level and the corresponding type of activities at this level together with its description.

5.4 The Generic Activity Model (GAM) This technical report approaches the modelling of those characteristics relevant to standards identification within the SFPM through the concept of an activity. A Generic Activity Model (GAM) as shown in Figure 4 has been developed to model the execution of the various activities at each level. The internals of the GAM represent an interrelated set of four Subjects and four Actions. The Subjects and Actions are defined below:

11

IS 14776(Part1):2000 ISO/TR 10314-1:1990

5.4.1 a)

Four Subjects Control Information (i) which includes:

command information, normally flowing from a higher level to a lower level, which initiates, alters or terminates an activity, status information which is generated in direct response to a command and normally flows in the opposite direction to the command,

(ii)

(iii) request information which corresponds to control information for control interaction within a level (peer to peer), if any, and (iv) response information which corresponds to status information for control interaction within a level (peer to peer), if any. b) Data: all information other than control information for or resulting from the performance of an activity. required

c)

Material: Material is a production object of the manufacturing activity. Material includes all the physical matter that enters the product during manufacturing: raw materials, parts and assemblies. auxiliary materials, Froducts and scrap material. Resources: Resources are all the physical means required to carry out the manufacturing that are not Material. Resources include transform. transport, verify and storage equipment: tools and ftiures; data processing and communication systems: basic resources such as supply material, energy, space and time: personnel.

d)

is defined here to consist of Note: The general class of "information" control information and data. that is as the union of a) and b) above. 5.4.2 a) Four Actions Transform: The act of .changing control information, data, material or resources from one form to another form, or one

12

IS 14776(Partl):2000 ISO/TR 103141:1990

state to another state. Transform includes encoding or -parsing information, decomposing commands, and cutting, forming, assembling, or adjusting mate-r&l or resources.

b)

Transport: The act of moving control information, data, material, or resources from one point in the ~enterprise to another. Verify: The act of assessing the compliance of all transformed control information, data, material and resources to determine their conformance to a specification. Store: The act of retaining control information. data, material or resources at a specified location within Shop Floor Production or Facility until they are required to -be transported.

4

d)

The GAM describes the execution of activities in terms of four Subjects (Control Information, Data, Material, Resources) and four Actions (Transform. Transport, Verify, Store). The GAM is developed from a view that the realisation of manufacturing activities can be represented in terms of these four Subjects and four Actions. The representation of a given activity will be a specific instance (an instantiation) of the CAM in which specific correspondences (bindings) are established between the elements of the GAM (Subjects, Actions) and the entities which correspond to those elements for that paxticu1a.r manufacturing activity. Not all elements of the GAM will be present in every instance - the lowest level of Shop Floor Production for example does not have command and status information for the non-existent level below. Major manufacturing activities may be decomposed into (sublactivities in a horizontal fashion (into a series of further activities) or in a vertical/ hierarchical fashion (into levels of activities). The GAM is generic in the sense that it can be applied to all activities. Establishing specific GAM bindings to particular manufacturing activities yields specific Subjects and Actions. The A- and B-type procedures described in Section 6 can then make use of these specific Subjects and Actions in identifying areas of standards.

13

IS 14776(Pati1):2000 ISO/TR 10314-l : 1990

6

Methodology

for extracting

areas of standards

6.1

General Information

There are a number of interactions among activities. and among Subjects and Actions within activities, which are used to identify the area of standardisation in manufacturing. Therefore the methodology consists of examining the various activities, Subjects and Actions in various relationships and connections to determine if a standards requirement is defined. The goal of standardisation is to permit more effective relationships and connections between two or more objects. In manufacturing, objects may be machine-to-machine relationships and/ or connections, or man-tomachine relationships and/ or interactions. The Reference Model described in the preceding chapter is essentially declarative rather than procedural - that is it presents a set of concepts and a hierarchical approach by which a manufacturing Enterprise can be better understood. The Model defines useful manufacturing functions, characteristics and relationships amongst them. It is also necessary to show how they can be used to identify standards areas for manufacturing. This chapter provides such a methodology standards. for extracting area-s of

6.2 Overall approach The way in which the various elements of the Reference Model are used to identify standards is illustrated in Figure 5. The various activities of manufacturing are grouped into twelve major functions. One of these, Shop Floor Production, is further modelled by a four level model, SFPM (Figure 3). The various activities at each level of SFPM can each be modelled by the GAM (Figure 4). with each such instantiated model resulting in bindings for GAM concepts (Subjects, Actions). The activities of SFPM can be combined into vertical and horizontal arrangements and this fact is recognised in the procedures of 6.3 which identify potential areas for standards, each of which can be represented by a cell entry in the matrices of Figure 6.
14

I!314776(Partl):2000 IsomR 10314.1:1990

Once a potential standards area has been identified (a non-empty entry) it should be examin ed in the light of
.

cell

the technologies of interest, i.e. the technologies that might be evident in the Subjects and Actions for that area. and the Standards Viewpoints described in Section 4.2.

0

These two concerns act as filters which restrict areas of standards to those which are reahsable with current technology and which reflect the objectives of standardisation.

6.3 Extraction

Procedures

These procedures use the concepts of the Reference Model and describe how these can be examined to identify potential areas for standards. The approach places strong emphasis on interactions between elements of a system. Consequently it is expected to produce areas of potential standards which are prerequisites for systems integration. The various combinations in the Reference Model alluded to above are examined by applying the two kinds of procedures defined below to each of the Standards Viewpoints. It is im-portant to note that:
.

each of the two kinds of procedure of one another,

can be applied independently

0

the same standard might arise from applying different procedures and the application of these procedures is not guaranteed to produce an exhaustive list of standards but rather to clarify areas of standards. Procedures procedures A: the *Interrelationship within a level"

l

6.3.1

These procedures are used for extracting areas of standards for interrelationship between Subject and Action, Subject and Subject, and Action and Action corresponding to each level of the SFPM.
15

I!314776(Part1):2000 Iso/TR 10314-l:l!wO

For each activity, these procedures should be applied to extract areas where standards may apply. Procedure Al: Subject-Action interrelationship

For each activity in each level of the SFPM, consider any possible Subject-Action interrelationship for applicable areas of standards. Procedure A2: Subject interrelationship

For each activity in each level of the SFPM. consider any possible Subject-Subject interrelationship for applicable areas of standards. Procedure A3: Action interrelationship

For each activity in each level of the SFPM, consider any possible Action-Action interrelationship for applicable areas of standards. 6.3.2 Procedures B: the "External" procedures

These procedures are used for extracting areas of standards for interrelationship between activities for both vertical and horizontal structure. For each activity these procedures should be applied to extract areas where standards may apply. Procedure Bl: Horizontal interrelationship

For each level of the SFPM consider any possible interrelationships between Shop Floor Production and other manufacturing functions (the context functions 1.. 11 of 1.2) for applicable areas of standards. Procedure B2: Vertical interrelationship

For each level of the SFPM consider any possible Subject interrelationship with the level above and below for applicable areas of standards, and hence relevant Subject attributes.

16

Is 14776~(Part1_):2000 Iso/TR 1031~1:1990

6.4 Matrix Representation

of Identification

Procedures

Corresponding to each procedure (Al, A2, A3. Bl, B2) it is possible to envisage a matrix which represents that procedure graphically. These are shown schematically in Figure 6. Each cell of each matrix represents a potential area for standards. Similar matrices are used in Part 2 of this report to show the standards areas identified through the application of these procedures, as well as worksheets for other usmersof the Reference Model and its methodology.

This document is Part 1 of a report on a means to identify where industrial automation standards for Shop Floor Production may be required. It has described a Reference Model which may be used as a systematic method for determining areas for standards development work. Part 2 of the report describes an application of the methodology which utilises this Reference Model in identifying these areas, catalogues them and cross-references them with standards already completed or in the process of development.
\

IS 14776(Part1):2000 ISO/TR 10314-1:1990

Enterprise *

Corporate management Finance Marketing & Sales Research & Development

Facility *

Product design & Production Engineering Production management Procurement Shipping Waste material treatment Resources management Maintenance management

Shop Floor -Production

Shop Floor Production

Figure 1 - Typical Grouping of Manufacturing

* The combination of Enterprise and Facility form the context of Shop Floor Production as described in 5.2.

18

Sales Forecast
Finance Policy

Product Availability

Product Quality

CORPORATE MANAGEMENT

Budget Production Status I

L

Marketing Policy

\ + I I MARi<ETING & SALES

+

,

Ship Status Order 1 v " PRODUCTIONMANAGEMENT (Quality, Cost, Delivery) I J ,

R&D Requirements

RESEARCH 8. DEVELOPMENT

Prqduct Design Requirements

I Purchase Order Engineering Information

Technical

h 4
PRODUCTION
I

Bill of Materials

ENGINEERING

M----r
SHOP FLOOR PRODUCTION

I

Production Commands Product Information Products )

Ship Order ,I

SHIPPING

I
I
_t__L1
3

-c Waste
l

t
Procured Resourceg* RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 5: cr"

WASTE MATERIAL TREATMENT

-w-

PROCUREMENT I

MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT

I
S

Production

Status

Figure 2 - Typical Arrangements of Manufacturing Functions

IS 14776(Part1):2000 ISO/TR 10314-1:1990

Level

Sub-Activity

Responsibility

4

Section /Area

Supervise shop floor production process

Supervising and co-ordinating the production and supp~orting the jobs and obtaining and allocating resources to the jobs

3

Cell

Co-ordinate shop floor production process

Sequencing and supervising the jobs at the shop floor production process

2

Station

Command shop floor production process

Directing and co-ordinating the shop floor production process

1

Equipment

Execute shop floor production process

Executing the job of shop floor production according to commands

Figure 3 - Shop floor production

model (SFPM)

20

IS 14776(Partl):2000 I!SO/TR10314-1:1990

Information

**

Resources

f

`r Material

Material

l

l

information

l

*

( TP, TF, VE, ST)

Information

l

*

Resources

Resources

Information

l

*

Resources

* Actions {TP, TF, VE, ST) on Material are defined only at Level 1 TP TF VE ST = = = = Transport Transform Verify Store

* * Information is defined in the text to include both control and data components.

For strict hierarchies, horizontal Information flows are restricted to data components

Figure 4

-

Generic Activity Model

ISO/TR

1s 14776(Partl):2OOQ 10314-1:1990

Matrix Representing Areas of Potential Standards

Figure 5 - Overall Approach to idenjifying

areas of standards

NOTE:

Part 2 will also use concepts of appropriate technologies and Standards Viewpoints to restrict potential areas for standards into those which are practical and desirable.

22

hreau

of Indian Standards Stanrlcrds Act, 1986 to promote and quality certification of goods

BIS is ;I statutory institution established under the B~rreau of`hdian harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and attending to connected matters in the country.

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writin g of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquirie\ relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also re\,ie\iccl periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users 01` Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring IO the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and `Standards: Monthly Additions' This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. BPNE 18 ( 021 1 ).

Amendmhts Anlend No.

Issued Since Publication Text Affected

Date of Issue

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110 002 Telephones : 323 01 3 1, 323 33 7.5, 323 94 02 Regional
cenlrnl

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone

Offices
:

:

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110 002

Shah Zafar Marg 1

323 76 17 323 38 41 85 61 91 20

Eastern

: l/14 C. LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi CALCUTTA 700 0.54 : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022

1

337 84 99,337 337 86 26,337

Northern

1 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 113 1 Western : Manakalaya, I?1 MIDC, MUMBAl 400 093 Marol, Andheri (East)

60 3843 60 20 25

235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 8327891,8327892

Branches

: AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE.KAlKOT.THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printogaph, New Delh, Ph.: 5726847

