**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 9151 (1979) : Glossary of terms for process equipment 
[MED 17: Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UOC 66*023:001-4 IS . 9^5^ -1979 




Indian Standard 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS FOR 
PROCESS EQUIPMENT 



( Reaffirmed 2006 ) 



1. Scope — Covers the terminology relating to various types of process equipment used in chemical 
and allied industries. 

2. Terminology 

2.1 Agitator — An equipment used for operations like mixing, blending, dissolution, precipitation, 
extraction and dispersion. The assembly consists of impeller, impeller shaft and drive including 
other parts such as gland and bearing used in conjunction with the above. 

2.2 Autoclave — Generally, vertical cylindricaf pressure vessel equipped generally with an agitator, 
reated or cooled either In an external jacket or internal coils or both in order to facilitate chremical 
heaction. 

2.3 Boiler — An open vessel in which a process is carried out. It may be of vertical, cylindrical, 
horizontal, U or basin shape. It may be fitted with a loose lid to exclude dust. 

2.4 Centrifuges 

2.4.1 Centrifuge — A machine intended for separation of solids from liquids and so designed to 
subject the material being processed to centrifugal force such that liquid phase is forced through a 
permeable membrane such as screen for separation from the solid phase. 

2.4.2 Batch centrifuge — A centrifuge in which solid phase or the residue is removed after each 
centrifugal operation. 

2.4.3 Continuous centrifuge — A centrifuge in which solid phase or the residue Is removed 
continuously. 

2.5 Centrifugal Separator — A machine which subjects a mass or a stream of mixed liquids to 
centrifugal force, thereby separating them. 

2.6 Chimney or Stacks — A tall vertical cylinder with its top open to atmosphere to vent waste gases 
or other fluids into the atmosphere, 

* 

2.7 Column ( Tower j — A vertical, cylindrical vessel intended for carrying out either adding, stripp- 
ing, distillation, extraction, absorption or adsorption. 

This may be a tall vessel fitted internally with plates or packed with various types of packings 
to facilitate intimate contact of vapour and liquid phases. 

2.8 Condenser — A cooling equipment the primary purpose of which is the removal of latent heat of 
incoming vapours. It may be either shell and tube or direct contact type. 

2.9 Cooler — An equipment primarily employed to cool process fluids, water or air being primarily 
the cooling medium. It may be either a shell and tube, cascade or finned tube type. 

2.10 Cooling Tower — A tower used to cool water by means of contact with air, the tower may have 
a natural or forced or induced draught. 

2.11 Crystallizer — A vessel primarily intended for carrying out crystallization of solids in super- 
saturated solutions. It may be a pan of vertical, cylindrical, U or basin shell fitted with a coil for 
either heating, cooling or both. Usually, it is fitted with a stirring mechanism. 

2.12 Deaerators — A vessel wherein dissolved air is removed by heating with steam. 



Adopted 30 March 1979 



© October 1979, ISI 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



15:9151-1979 

2.13 Demisters — A device or vessel wherein entrained mist in gases is removed by suitable packing 
or layers of wire mesh. 

2.14 Desuperheater — A vessel in which superheated fluid is brought in contact with respective 
liquid spray to make it saturated or less highly superheated. Usuallyi it implies steam-water 
system. 

2.15 Drier — A vessel provided with heating arrangement in which solutions or suspensions are 
reduced to dry powders or wet materia! reduced to the dry condition. It may be a pan of vertical, 
cylindrical, U or basin shape. If closed, to enable the vapour to be collected and led away, it may 
be vertical cylindrical, horizontal cylindrical or U shape. Most driers are fitted with stirring 
equipment and In many cases they operate under vacuum. 

Note — A cylindrical drier used for air-drying using blower and heating coil may also be classified under this 
category. 

2.16 Evaporator — A vessel provided with heating arrangement for concentrating liquids containfrrg 
solids in solution or suspension. It may be a pan of vertical, cylindrical or basin shape. 

If, closed to enable the vapour to be collected and led away, it may be of vertical cylindrical, 
horizontal cylindrical or basin shape. These types are sometimes fitted with stirring mechanism 
and the closed pattern frequently operates under vacuum. 

2.17 Filter — An equipment used to separate fluids and suspended solids either for recovery of 
solids, classification of fluid or both simultaneously. The fluid flows through the pores In a cloth, 
wire mesh or granular bed and thus the solid is sieved out. 

2.18 Fired Heater — A directly fired tubular equipment used in various heating, treating and 
vapourizing servrces by directly firing either liquid or gaseous fuels. These are also called furnaces 
in petroleum and petro-chemical industry. 

It may be vertical, cylindrical, box or cubicle type having heating coils, burners and stack. It is 
normally lined inside with refractory. 

2.19 Granulator — A rotating cylinder or pan wherein powder is converted into granules by a liquid 
spray. 

2.20 Heat Exchanger — An equipment which transfers heat between two process streams through an 
intervening surface. 

It may be either shell and tube, double pipe, coil, plate or finned tube type. 

2.21 Heater — An equipment which is primarily used to heat process fluid. Steam is usually emplo- 
yed for this purpose, also, any other heat transfer fluid may serve the purpose like hot recirculated 
oil in oil refineries. 

It may be either shell and tube, double pipe or coil type. 

2.22 Incinerator — An equipment employed For burning of the refuse and converting the same into 
ash under controlled conditions of smokeless and odourless combustion. Normally, the equipment 
is used at site. 

2.23 Mixer— A vessel provided with the equipment for stirring and mixing the charge. It may be of 
cylindrical, square, rectangular, conical, U, basin or Y shape, open as a pan or closed to 
exclude dust or to confine fumes. It may be in-line mixer without stirrer in U or cylindrical shape. 

2.24 Pan —An open vessel in which a process is carried out. It may be of vertical, cylindrical, 
horizontal, U or basin shape. It may be fitted with a loose lid to exclude dust. 

2.25 Reboller — An exchanger employed to supply heat requirements at the bottom of distillation 
columns. 

2.28 Separator — A vessel either of vertical cylindrical shape, with a flat or conical bottom or of 
horizontal shape used for separation of immiscible liquids of different specific gravities. It is some- 
times provided with heating equipment and is frequently closed to exclude dust or confine fumes. 

Note — Oil separators in use at refineries to skim oil from mixture of oil and water settling the mixture in open 
pond is included in this category. 



IS: 9151 -1979 

2.27 Still — A closed vessel from which volatile components are vaporized, collected and recovered. 
It may be of vertical cylindrical, horizontal cyiindricai or basin shape and may be provided with 
heating equipment. Many stills operate under vacuum and In some cases stirring equipment is 
provided. 

2.28 Thickener — An equipmer^t in which gravitational settling of solid particles that are suspended 
in a liquid is carried out. This may be a vertical cylindrical vessel with a conical or flat bottom. 
Continuous thickener is normally fitted with a slowly revolving plough plates for removing the 
settled sludge. 

2.29 Vapourizer — \Nhen not used for the formation of steam and does not form part of distillation 
process a vapourizing exchanger is simply called vapourizer. 

It is shell and tube type apparatus. 

2.30 Waste Heat Boiler — A boiler in which the sensible heat of a process stream or a waste gas is 
recovered thereby generating steam. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

Chemical and allied industries cover a wide range of operations and processes and 
consequently use varied categories of process vessels such as pans, evaporators and heat 
exchangers, stills and columns, reaction vessels and autoclaves, separators, mixers and crystalli- 
zers, and driers to suit individual requirements. In order to overcome the confusion which exists In 
industry regarding above names applied to various process vessels, an attempt has been made to 
give unambiguous definitions in this standard. 

In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from BS; 3161-1960 Sfzes 
of process vessels for chemical and allied industries issued by the British Standards Institution. 

The terminology of crushing and grinding equipment and that for conveying equipment are 
covered in 18:3612-1966 * Classification and methods for measuring capacity of crushing and 
grinding equipment' and IS; 4240-1967 'Glossary of conveyor terms and definitions' respectively. 
For the capacity and sizes, IS : 4179-1967 ' Sizes of process vessels and leading dimensions' and 
18:2843-1964 'Recommendation on nominal capacities for process equipment' and 13:2844-1964 
'Recommendation on nominal diameters for process equipment' may be referred. 



printed at New tndia Printing Press, Khur)a, India 



