HAND BOOK ON GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS

BUREAU

OF

fNOlAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110 002

SP: 45-1988
FIRST PUBLISHED APRIL 1988

@BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

UDC 001.4/677 (021) ISBN 81-7061-009-5

Price Rs. 350.00

PRINTED IN INDIA at The Central Electric Press, A-12/1. Naraina Ind. Area, Phase-l, New Delhi-110028 PUBLISHED BY THE BUREAU OF INDIAN

STANDARDS,

NEW DELHi-110002,

SP:45-1988

FOREWORD Bureau of Indian Standards (formerly known as Indian Standards Institution) has been formulating national standards, in a variety of disciplines having direct relevance to industry, trade, cornme.-. rce and consumer. The work so far carried out in the field of industry and 986 different sectors of the covers textiles, standards have been formulated covering various aspects like of test, codes of practice, specifications of products, methods glossary of textile terms etc. The standards relating to glossary out with a view to enabling terms have been brought of textile with enforcement to users and those concerned the technologists, access to clear and widely used definitions for easy have easy interpretation in day-to-day working. For some time now, a strong need has been felt to make avaiin the form of easy to handle glossary standards lable various Textile Division Council (TDC) Handbook. Recognising the need, of BIS decided to compile the various glosssary on textile terms brought out by the Sectional Committees working under TDC in the Handbook has been compiled with the form of a Handbook. The arrange the terms assistance of BIS Computer Centre in order to alphabetically and to provide for the most acceptable definition for a given term. It includes 19 Indian standards on glossary brought out by the 12 Sectional Committees and covers definitions of more than 3300 textile terms. The Handbook is a single collection of most commonly used textile terms in the textile industry. It does not include the and it is proposed to )glossary dealing with textile machinery cover the same under a separate Handbook in due course. Similarly, the two standards on glossary dealing with (a) Textiles - Stitch Types (IS:10789-1983) and (b) Textiles - Seam Types (IS:11121-1987) brought out by Apparels (Ready - Made Garments) Sectional Committee, TDC 43, have not been included in the Handbook as these have by adopting standards been issued under dual numbering system, issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). reference and use, it is necessary that these standards For easy should continue as such. illustrations have been 127 For better understanding, for better usefulness, SI included in the Handbook. Similarly Units - basic as well as those recommended for textiles and conversion factors for yarn counts have been included for use and information of the users. The Handbook will satisfy the long felt need of textile and others engaged in the profession. It is technologists, users hoped that it will contribute to a better understanding and usage is expected to be of immense help as of the terms. The Handbook this would : (a) avoid ambiguity and misinterpretation (i) of terms;

SP:45-1988

(b)

provide fabrics,

better infornatian regarding finishes, processes etc.;

fibres,

yarns,

(c) assist the manufacturers in identifying and their principal causes; (d)
(e)

various

defects

guide and consumer; serve as students

educate

the

organized

purchasers

and the

a teaching and and technologists.

learning

aid

for teachers,

(ii)

OF HANDBOOK COMPOSITION OF EXPERTS PANEL FOR COMPILA'I'ION OF GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS
_-.__ -"_----_--.--.---.---.-_---

&nvener Dr. (Mrs) G.Fc. Phalgumani llembers Shri G. Balasubramaniam

_Representinq Textiles Committee, Bombay

Shri N.S. Mehta Dr. V.G. Munshi Dr. P. R.
Roy

Dr. T.V.K.

Srivastava

Shri R.I. Midha Director (Tex)

Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, Ahmedabac! Star Industrial & Textile IZnterprises Ltd, Bombay Cotton Technological Research Laboratory, Bornbag The Ahmedabad Textile Mills Association, Ahmedabad Office of the Textile Commissioner, Govt. of India Bombay Director General (BIS) (j& -. officio Member)

Secretaries SHRI O.P. KHULLAR Joint Director (Tex), BIS SHRI M.S. VERMA Deputy Director (Tex), Bf:3

(iii)

SP:45-1988

CONTENTS
1.

PAGE
1

LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS INCLUDED IN THE HANDBOOK ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS USED DEFINITIONS OF TEXTILE TERMS

.

3 4

4.

TABLES
TABLE 1 - INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS IS1 UNITS) TABLE 2 - RECOMMENDED SI UNITS FOR TEXTILES TABLE 3 - CONVERSION FACTORS FOR YARN COUNTS DIRECT SYSTEMS AND TEX TABLE 4 - CONVERSION FACTORS FOR YARN COUNTS INDIRECT SYSTEMS AND TEX 296
297 299

299

5.

APPENDIX
LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS REFERRED IN THE HANDBOOK 300

FIG.

7

WEFT

BAR

(P. 20)

FIG.

13

BROKEN

END

(MISSING

END)

(P. 36)

FIG.

14

BROKEN

PATTERN

(P.. 36j

FIG.

19

CRACK

(P. 66)

FIG.

22

TORN

SELVEDGE

(P. 76)

FIG.

23

LOOPY

SELVEDGE

(Pa 76)

FIG.

24

SLACK SELVEDGE

(P. 77)

FIG.

27

DOUBLE

ENDS (P. 63)

FIG.

32

FLOAT

(P. 109)

FIG.

35

GOUT

(P. 119)

FIG.

72

REED

MARK

(P. 207)

FIG.

73

REEDINESS

(P. 208)

FIG.

93

SHUTTLE

FLY (P. 231)

FIG.

99

SMASH

(P. 239)

FIG.

111

TEMPLE

MARK

(P. 259)

FIG.

124

WEFT

SNARLS

(P. 284)

FIG.

125

WEFT

TRAIL

(P. 285)

SP:45-1988

LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS ON GLOSSARY OF TEXTILE TERMS INCLUDED IN THEHANDBOOK &
1.

SECTIONAL COMMITS

m

ST,&Q&Q)(S~

TITLE

Physical Methods of i) IS:232-1985 Test Sectional Committee, TDC 1 ii) IS:2364-1987

c

Glossary of Textile Terms - Natural Fibres (second Revision) Glossary of Textile Terms - Woven Fabrics (Second Revision) Glossary of Terms Pertaiiii) IS:4125-1987 ning to Defects in Fabrics (First Revision) iv) IS:4910 (Part Methods of Test for Tyre Cords Yarns, and Tyre VI)-1970 Cord Fabrics Made from Man-Made Fibres: Part VI Definitions of Terms. v) IS:11265-1985 Glossary of Terms Pertaining to Defects in Yarns Made from Natural Fibres. i) IS:5476-1986 Glossary of Terms Relating to Jute (First Revision) Glossary of Textile Terms - Wool and Other Animal Fibres, their Processing and Products.

2.

Jute and Jute Products Sectional Committee, TDC 3 Wool and Wool Products Sectional Committee, TDC 4

3.

i) IS:11206-1984

4.

Chemical Methods of i) IS:9603-1980 Test Sectional Committee, TDC 5 ii) IS:9603 (Part II>-1985

Glossary of Terms Pertaining to Textile Processing. Glossary of Terms Pertaining to Textile Processing : Part 2. iii) IS:9603 (Part Glossary of Terms Pertaining to Textile ProcesIII)-1986 sing : Part 3. i) IS:1324-1966 Glossary of Textile Terms to Man-Made Relating Fibre and Fabric Industry .' (First Revision 1. Generic Names for ManMade Fibres. Glossary of Terms Relating to Fibre Ropes and Cordage (First Revision).

5.

'Silk, Man-Made Fibre and Products Section1 Committee, TDC 10

ii) IS:6239-1971

6

Cordage Sectional Committee, TDC 14

i) IS:3871-1984

1

SF':45--1988

7.

Hosiery Products (Other than Yarn) Sectional Committee, TDC 15 Narrow Fabr,ics, Webbings nnd Braids Sectional Committee, TDC 25 Textile Materials for Aerospace Purposes Sectional Committee, TDC 27 Textile Floor Coverings Sectional Committee, TDC 36 Textile Materials for Marine/Fishing Purposes Sectional Coommittee, TDC 42 Apparels (Ready-Made Garments) Sectional Committee, TDC 43

i) IS:3596-.1967'Glossary of Tkrms ting to Hosiery.

Rela-

8.

i)IS:12111-1987

Glossary of Terms Relating to Narrow Fabrics.

9.

i)IS:11367-1985

Glossary of Terms Relating to Textile Materials for Aerospace Purposes.

10.

i)IS:11205-1984

Classification and Terminology of Textiie Floor Coverings. Glossary of Terms Relating to Netting for Fishing-Basic Terms.

11.

i) IS:4402-1967

12.

i)IS:12110--1987

Glossary of Terms used in Apparel Industry.

2

.

SP:45-1988

ABBREVIATIONS

AND SYMBOLS

USED

approx cN/tex CP CSP dia DW e.g. fm i.e. mPa s m/s n Nm
Nm -

approximately centi Newton centi Poise Count Strength Product per tex

diameter Double Warp (Latin
:

for example fathom that milli metre noun Newton Metric pound metre Count

exempli

gratia)

is (Latin Pascal

:

id est)

second

per second

psi rev/min RH
S

per square

inch

revolution Relative second synthetic temperature turns turns degree verb namely

per minute Humidity

syndet temp tpm tpi oTw
V

detergent

per metre per inch Twaddle

viz

(Latin

:

Videlicet)

3

SP:45-1988

DEFINITIONS

OF TEXTILE

TERMS

A-Twill Bag - Bags made from A-Twill cloth, the standard dimensions being 112 x 67.5 cm and weighing 1190 g (see also IS:1943-1964). A-Twill having Cloth - A double warp, 102 ends/dm and 35 2/l twill picks/dm weave sacking and weighing made jute cloth 760 g/mz. from camel

Aba (also Abaya, Abba) - Sleeveless or goat hair, worn by Arabs. Abaca & 'Manila Hemp'.

outergarment,

Abraded Yarn -' Continuous filament yarn in which the outer filaments have been purposely cut or abraded at intervals to bring about a certain degree of hairiness. Abraded Yarns are usually plied with other yarns before using. Abrasion -- The wearing another surface. away of any part of a material against

Absolute Humidity - The mass of volume of air. This is expressed Humidity' ) .

water vapours present in un'it in g/m3 (see also 'Relative

Absorbent Cotton - Cotton fibre chemically treated after removing as completely as possible all fatty and other non-cellulosic ingradients, to render it adequately absorbent. Absorbent Cotton may be sterilized for,certain end uses, e.g. medical purposes. Accelerant - A substance, which, when speeds up the processing treatment. added to a treatment bath,

Accordian Fabric - A weft-knitted fabric showing a figure design in two or more colours, which is produced on one set of needles by knitting, tucking and missing; and in which tuck loops are introduced to eliminate long lengths of floating thread at the back.

FIG. Accordian Pleats one another. -

1

ACCORDIAN straight

FABRIC pleats usually parallel -,o

Narrow

Acetate - A specific term used for man-made fibres, monofilaments and continuous filament yarns of acetylated cellulose, with less amount of non-fibre forming material or without it. 4

5P:45-1388

Constitution
but at least

:

Secondary cellulose

acetate. wherein less than 92 groups are acetylated.

Characteristiic

: Cellulose acetate, 74 percent of the hydroxyl

Acetate Modified - Acetate products cellulose acetate and containing a fibre-forming material. Acetylation - The process
an organic compound/polymer of introducing containing

composed principally of certain amount of other

an acetyl radical hydroxyl group.

into

Note 1 - The term acetylation
of combining cellulose with Note 2 -- .A partial in the form of fibre, ties.

is used to describe acetic anhydride.

the process

acetylation is sometimes applied to cotton yarn or fabric to give it special proper'-

Acid Ageing
vapour.

- Ageing

in which

a volatile

acid

is present

in the

Acid We

-

substantivity dyebath.

An anionic for protein

dye characterized fibres and usually

by relatively high applied from an acid

Acrylic Constitution
percent
: Linear macromolecules comprising (by mass) in the chain of the recurring

at least unit :

85

-CHrtHCN

Examples

:

Polyacrylonitrile
(

:

CHr-CH

I CN

1, -

and acrylic copolymer

:

X -[

KH2-~H)_ICt&l p-

Adhesion - The property of treated tyre yarn:< or cords by which they tend to adhere to the rubber. It is expressed in terms of kgf for a fixed denier of the yarn.

ADHI - An Indian term for light-weight fabric in plain weave. It is used as shirting in tropical countries, and also as the ground fabric for CHIKAN, KAMDANI, etc. (see also 'CHIKAN and KAMDANI'). Aeolian - A warp rib dress material made of cotton warp and silk, 5

SP:45-1968

man-made a glossy

fibre or worsted weft. The cloth finish, and is piece dyed.

is light

in weight,

has

Aerated Yarn - A special type of viscose yarn, in which is It is also or some inert gas. enclosed a small amount of air yarn'. known as 'hollow filament', 'tubular yarn' or 'macaroni - Pertaining to the properties Aerospace both the earth's atmosphere and space. of and activities in

substantivity. It Affinity - The quantitative expression of potential of the dye in the chemical is the difference *ween and the corresponding chemical its standard state in the fibre potential in the dyebath. Afgalaine ( Afghalaine) covers wool, now the term containing: (a) woollen Originally, plain--weave cloth made from Afghan all-wool dress fabric

warp with woollen

weft,

or

(b) worsted warp with woollen weft. In both types, the warp 2 twist, arranged end and end, while is usually S and the woollen weft is S twist. in a material under specified After Glow - Persistence of glow removal of an external ignition test conditions, after the source or after the cessation (natural or induced) of flamjng of the material. to fix/remove/improve After Treating - Usually a process material. colour/resin on previously treated the

fibre is After-Chrome Process - A method of dyeing in which the and then worked in a separate bath first dyed with the dye containing the chromium mordant or in the same bath by adding the mordant after exhausting the dye. in which After-Welt - A band on a stocking, following the welt, stitch or yarn or both. Also there is a variation of quality, 'Anti-Run-Down Courses', 'Garter known as 'Anti-ladder Band', 'Shadow Welt'.(m Fig. 49 >. Band', 'Ladder Stop', and fabric Ageing - A process in which in absence of air. saturated steam Ager - A chamber used for ageing. is exposed to moist, or

Agricultural purposes. It

Twine - A sisal twine used mainly for agricultural 'Hay Baler Twine'. is also known as

Air Permeability - The rate of air flow. through fabric under differential pressures between the two fabric surfaces. Expressed metre of per square generally in cubic metres of air per minute a sta$ed pressure difference between the two surfaces fabric at of the fabric. 6

SP:45-1988

Air

Ventilated

within a the suit

Suit - A suit designed to keep the body temperature comfortable range by discharging conditioned air from over the body surface.

Air Wicking

- It is air permeability in the plane of'the fabric. The passage of air longitudinally along or through yarns in a fabric that has been encased and cured, e.g. in rubber or other elastomers. Airflow - A method of measuring the average

fibre diameter

of a

sample of
ALAPAT Alaska Yarn Yarn

wool.
- &

(a) under 'Coir Yarn'. as Merino Yarn.

- Same

Albacore

Line

fishing. The
Albatross

- A 3-strand line primarily intended for albacore line is made of hemp, cotton or synthetic yarns.

- A fine

pebbly surface
Alginate Constitution Example:

light-weight plain weave wool created by crepe yarn.

fabric with a

:

Metallic salts of alginic acid.

Calcium alginate.

coo-

H

H P

All-Wool - A textile material comprising wool fibres only subject to the tolerances given below :

1) Manufacturing tolerance up impurities, and

to 3

perce,lt of inadvertent

2) An allowance up to 5 percent of material other than wool fibres used to provide a decorative or ornamentation effect.
Note 1 - All reference to the percentage content means percentages by mass calculated from the mass of materials when in standard condition, namely, their oven dry mass plus the appropriate regain.

Note 2 - In all cases the more detailed descriptiion of the contents of the material shall be given by indicating the percentages of the wool and other fibres in descending order used in the manufacture of the textile material. However, such a dsscrip. tion should not be misleading. 7

SP:45-1988

Allowance (Body Tolerance) garment measurements over Allowance (Seam Margin)'].

- The extra dimensions [see body measurements

allowed on also 'Seam

Aloe - Leaf fibre obtained from the Aloe plants ('Furcraca foetida' and 'Furcraca ginantea willemettiana'), a native of Brazil, but cultivated on commercial scale in Mauritus and India. Alpaca --Denotes an animal fibre, yarn as well as fabric. spun yarn made from alpaca

(a) Yarn -- Worsted fibres. (b) Fabric - A

or woollen

fabric

made

from Alpaca

Fibres. describe fabrics alpaca weft, and is deprecated.

Note - The term has been used to made from black cotton warp and subsequently piece-dyed. This usage Alpaca Fibre (Hair) - Fibre from the fleece ated animal of the same name, or of the inhabit the high mountain regions of South lustrous and of various colours and of fine 'of' 18-3@ cm. ALWAN - An Indian term denoting fabric pashmina or merino wool, or other

Df the semi-.domesticboth of which llama, America.It is soft, quality with a length

in plain weave made from fibres and used as shawl.

Amazon - A fine, lightly milled and raised dress fabric, generally woven in 5 thread warp satin with worsted warp and woollen weft. Ambhar CHARKIM - A simple hand-operated wooden frame contrivance for spinning yarn from natural fibres, working on principle of ring spinning with roller drafting. American Lutreola Ammonia uptake, treated Anchor Mink (Mink) Vision). A most valued fur fibre (genus: Mustela-

Process -.A process used for cotton for increased dye lustre and strength in which the cotton material is in liquid ammonia at -33oC. Fall - Manila Rope used for hoisting anchor to the deck.

ANGAVASTRAM -- A superfine fabric, mildly scoured or bleached, approximately 2 m long and 1 m wide with colour woven or jariborders and cross borders, generally worn over the shoulders as part of the traditional dress in South India. Angel Lace (Knitting) - A warp-knitted fabric made on a beardedneedle or compound-needle machine. is made The fabric with separating threads, usually of secondary cellulose acetate, which are dissolved out to leave narrow strips for trimmings. .Angle of Lay - The angle the axis of the rope. which a strand of the rope makes with

8

SP:45-1988

ANGOCHA towel.

-

An Indian

term

for

a cotton

handloom

fabric

used

as

Angle of Wind - The angle contained between a wrap of yarn on the surface of a package and the diametrical plane of the package. Note angle, - Other angles are yarn-crossing angle and yarn-reversal

AB C-

Angle

of wind Angle of crossing Angle of reversal

FIG.

2

ANGLES MADE BY YARN WRAPS ON THE SURFACE OF A PACKAGE (CHEESE) as well as fabric: or wool

Angola

- Denotes

yarn

(a) Angola Yarn and man-made (b) Anmla angola Angora Fibre (aI Angora caniculus). Note mohair.

Yarn made from wool and cotton, fibres, blended together.

Fabric - A plain or twill weave fabric made from
yarn warp and angola yarn weft.

- The hair

of Angora

rabbit

[genus:
referred

(LePUS

- The hair

of Angora

goat

is

to as

Yarn - An extremely soft yarn made (b) Angora of Angora rabbit. It may contain a small other fibres to facilitate spinning. cc> Angora Fabric - A fabric woven from Angora term weft

from the hair proportion of

yarn.

Note fabrics

- The use containing

of this to mohair

to refer to union is not recommended.

Angora Goat - An ancient breed of goats originally from Asia minor but now largely grown in Texas, Turkey and South Africa. They range from 35 to 60 kg in mass and grow a long curly fleece which often reaches the ground. The commercial name for the fibre is Mohair.
9

SP:45-1988

Aniline

-'A fast black colour produced Black of aniline on a textile material.
Aniline Salt

by the oxidation hydrochloride.

-

Chemically

known

as

aniline

Animal

such as Fibres --Fibres derived from domesticated animals sheep, goat, rabbits, camel and other fur-bearing animals primarily for use as textile fibres.

- A chemical process designed to confer on man-made fibres an affinity for dyestuffs normally used on wool. The process is carried out during or after the manufacture of the fibres. Animalizing Anionic Dye - A dye that dissociates in aqueous solution

to give

a coloured, ANJENGO Yarn tile
Anklet

negatively charged
- &

ion.

(b) under 'Coir Yarn'. (a) under 'Anklet'.

Socks

- See

(a) A knitted footwear where the length of the leg portion just covers the ankle. It has either a turn-over top, elastic top or rib top. Also known as 'Ankle Socks' and 'Tennis Socks'. (b) A tubular band knitted on round machines with elastic threads laid-in; used by sportsmen for support and protection to the ankle.

FIG.
Anorak

3

ANKLET to give a

- A lined and hooded hip length jacket designed

degree of
Anti-Chlor

protection from

inclement weather.

- A chemical used to remove residual traces of active chlorine from materials that have been bleached, chlorinated, or otherwise treated by means of hypochlorite or other oxidizing liquors containing active chlorine. Examples are sodium bisulphite or thiosulphate, sulphurous acid and peroxides. Anti-Crease

Process - A chemical or mechanical treatment or both of fabric to increase its capacity of recovery from wrinkling or mussing.

10

SP:45-1988

Anti-G Suit (G-Suit) -. A suit that exerts pressure parts of the body to prevent or retard and lower blood in these areas under positive ac,celeration. Anti-Ladder Band - See 'After-Welt'. 'After-Welt'.

on the abdomen the pooling of

Anti-Run--Down

Courses

- See

Anti-Shrink -. Descriptive of textile materials that are dimensioin case nally stable under normal conditions of usage. However, containing wool, the term anti-shrink or of fabrics of yarns shrink-resistant denotes non-felting. Shrink-Resistant Stabilized Anti-Shrink Fabric ( Pre-shrunk, Fabric) - A fabric which has dimensional stability of +1 percent both in warpway and weftway. - Treatment designed to prevent Anti-Shrink Treatment or laundering. from shrinking when subjected to wetting fabrics

- A substance capable of preventing, reducing, Anti.-Static Agent or quickl.y dissipating elactrical charges that might otherwise be produced. - A stabilized diazonium compound which Antidiazotate in a strong by stabilization of the diazonium salt sodium hydroxide (106*Tw). Antique yarns. Satin - A heayy, dull-lustered fabric, woven is obtained solution of

with

fancy

Apex - The highest descent.

point

in canopy

of

a parachute

in a vertical

design Applique - A cutout material for ornamentation, shade of material. AR&TORY Yarn a

or shape attached to the face of a frequently of a different type and/or

(c) under

'Coir Yarn'. hosiery which features

Argyle - A term describing a diagonal effects in different

style of colours.

narrow fabric having three series Argyle Gimp - A woven figured and warp. Two s_eries consist of three gimp cords laid of wefts flat, the round or third series consists of two gimp cords and series of three gimp cords form a forms a plain weave. The two through the warp every double,weave raised pattern by passing sixth p?ck alternately and returing ove,r the top of the warp. The overall wVdth is about 15 mm. The warp-is usually of rayon. Armure - A dress fabric in modified or broken warp rib weaves effect is rendered waved lines. The wave exhibiting horizontal conspicuous by using in the warp, mohair and merino wool or 2 twist arranged end and merino wool and cotton yarns, in S and end. 11

SP:45-1988

Arrasene

-

A cord of -man-made fibre used for embroidery purpose.
Wool -- Jute

Artificial

have

been -

given A

a

or other type of non-wool fibres which chemical finish to impart a woolly handle. occuring -mineral of fibrous texture.

Asbesfos Asbestos

naturally

Yarn

- A twisted assemblage of:

(a) Asbestos fibre; (b) Asbestos and other fibres; (c) Asbestos, other fibres and wires; and (d) Asbestos

and other other yarn.
Yarn See

fibres with

an insert of cotton or

ASHTAMUDY
Associated

(d) under

'Coir Yarn'.

Air Mass - The mass of air which moves relative to the

air stream
Assortment

at the

same velocity as the canopy.

(Jute) The selection and classification of raw jute according to grades prior to packing or baling (see 'Grading of Jute').

Astrakhan - Pelt along with the curled wool of a stillborn or very young lamb from the Middle East. Typical example is black Karakul lamb skins. Astrakhan (Knitted) - A soft thick weft-knitted fabric with curled or crimped yarn in-laid on a tuck-miss basis.

Fabric, Woven - A curled-pile fabric made to imitate the fleece of a still-born or very young Karakul Lamb. The effect is obtained by special manufacturing processes or by a pretreatment of the pile yarn, which is set while held in the form of a helix. Astrakhan Atmospheric Conditions for Testing (Standard) - The atmosphere in which physical tests on textile materials are performed. It has a relative humidity of 65 +2 percent and a temperature of 270 + 2oC (see also IS:6359-1971). Atmospheric
r

Fading

textile material
Australian Bran

- The fading of by the action of (or A-Bran Bag)

colour of dyed or printed certain acidic gases.

Bag

with 47 ends/dm and 47 picks/dm and weighing approximately 565 g.
Atlas

- A selvedged hessian bag normally measuring 124.5~76 cm

(a) Atlas (Single) - A warp-knitted fabric characterized by having one set of threads progressively traversing in a -diagonal direction for a number of courses and returning
12

SP:45-1988

ultimately in similar manner to the original wale. Also known as 'Single Atlas' and 'Single Vandyke'.

FIG

4

-.

ATLAS (SINGLIE1

(b) Atlas (Double) - A warp-knitted fabric characterized by having two sets of threads making single-atlas traverses, course by course, in opposite direction. Also known as 'Double Atlas' and 'Double Vandyke'. Australian Cornsack - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking bag (without stripes),measuring about 104 x 58.5 cm (normally with 102 ends/dm and 35 picks/dm), weighing approximately 1020 g (B also IS:2875-1964). (See also 'Cornsack Bag').. Australian Cornsack Cloth - & Australian Woolpack &_Q 'Cornsack 'New Jute Cloth'. Woolpack'.

Autolevelling - Automatic and continuous adjustment of draft in accordance with changes in .the thickness of the incoming sliver in worsted processing with a view to obtaining uniformity in the linear density of the sliver. Avivage - The after treatment of desulphurized and rinsed rayon yarns in order to give a soft hand to the stock. Axial Cord - A central rigging line joihing the apex of a parachute to the lower extremities of the rigging lines. Axminster Carpet - Cut pile carpets, woven on machines, by inserting successive weft-wise rows of piles (Tufts) according to a pre-determined arrangemet of colours. There are four different types of Axminster Carpets as given below. For further details, (see IS:11205-1984). (a) Chenille Axminster - A carpet in which the pile is composed of so-called 'Chenille' yarns ('Chenille Fur') manufactured on a special machine and then inserted during fixed weaving. A carpet manufactured on jacquard tufts of yarn, cut after selection 13

. (W Gripper. Axmlns ter loom in which the

SP:45-1988

from appropriate creels, are weaving by grippers. (cl

inserted at

the point of

Spool Axminster - A carpet manufactured on a loom on which yarns of each weft row are wrapped on a separate spool, according to the required design. The tufts are separated from the yarns presented at the point of weaving after inserting in the substrate.

Cd) Gripper-Spool Axminster - A carpet manufactured on a loom in which the yarns for each weft-wise row is wound on aiseparate spool as for spool axminster weaving. Tufts point of severed from the yarns are inserted at the weaving by 'grippers' as in 'gripper Axminster weaving'

Azlon - A generic term for fibres or filaments manufactured from modified proteins or derivatives thereof, with less amounts of non-fibre forming material 'or without it.
Azoic - The production of an insoluble azo compound on a Dyeing substrate by interaction of diazotized amino (azoic diazo component) and a coupling component (azoic coupling component). - Indicates a quality of Jute (m

B-Bottom B-Twill

'Grading of Jute')

Bag - A bag made from B-Twill Cloth, the standard dimens-

ions and

mass being

as given in IS:2566-1984.

B-Twill Cloth - A double warp 2/i twill weave sacking jute cloth with 76 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm and weighing 643 g/mz. (see also IS:3667-1984). Baby Flannel Baby Hood - A light-weight flannel used for children's garments

- A round headwear for,,babies with or without sun shade.

FIG. 5
Baby Suit

BABY`HOOD (WITHOUT SUN SHADE)

- A set of knitted outwear for babies consisting of coat or frock and two or more of the following:

Headwear, Trousers or nickers, mittens.
Back Beam -

Bootees or

socks, Gloves or

A

beam

from

which yarn is fed during the sizing

process.
Back Coating - The operation of depositing a bonding agent on the back of a textile floor covering to ensure its penetration into the substrate of the textile floor covering without reaching the use-surface.

14

SP:45-lf88

Back Greige

(Seam Impression)

the back greige or during printing.

- This is a seam impression from cushion fabric against which the fabric runs

- Absorbent undyed cloth used to support and carry Back Grey fabric being printed, and also to protect the blanket from contamination by surplus print paste. Back Rise - The

centre back
Back Stitch

distance on a garment of the waist line.

from the

crotch to the

- A hand stitch used to seam garment parts. So called because the needle, on emerging, goes back to be inserted at the end of the previous stitch.

- A strap across the back of a garment usually fitted Rack Strap with a buckle, or other method of adjustable fastening, and used to adjust the fit of the garment, within limits, to the wearer's requirements. Back Tacking - Sewing and reverse sewing at the beginning or end of a seam to secure the stitching.

Back Warp (or Weft), Backing Warp (or Weft) - Additional warp (or weft) on the back of a fabric, bound or stiched to the ground structure so that it does not interfere with the appearance of the face, giving greater weight, thickness, warmth, etc. Back-and-Fore - A hand stitch employed for sewing linings Stitch and pockets. It involves taking a back stitch and then a running stitch before the needle is removed. - A strip of material placed on the under side of part of

Backing

a garment
Backing

to act

as a reinforcement.

Fabric, Secondary Backing - A fabric which forms an additional stabilizing layer in the substrate of a textile floor covering and which often forms the final coating or layer. Backing Backs Yarn - Yarn used on the back of fabric for plated hosiery.

- A trade term used in Australia to denote wool removed from the back region of the fleece when it is ud sound, has a very perished tip or extreme amount of dust and sand, and is distinctly different from the rest of the fleece.

Backwashing - The continuous washing (or man-made fibre) slivers before combing.

of or

dyed or undyed wool after gilling and/or

Note - Usually, in,the Bradford system of wool top-making, it is done before combing, and in the French system after combing. In case of dyed sliver,backwashing is always done before recombing. B&washing Machine - A chain of 15 two or more bowls set up with.

SP:45-1988

provision for continuous washing of dyed or undyed worsted slivers and having provision for drying the washed slivers (either by hot air or by contact with heated cylinders), and for gilling them after drying.
Backwinding - A term describing the process of unravelling a knitted fabric and winding the yarn for re-using. Bad Cast - An abruptly increased diameter in a raw silk thread. 'Usually caused by the improper joining of a single cocoon filament to the thread during the reeling operation.

Bad Cover (a) A fabric appearance in which the spaces between the threads are more pronounced than required. The amount of cover can be affected by loom adjustments, sett, or count of reed, or by the construction of the yarns used. (b) The appearance of a finished fabric in which the surface is not covered or the underlying structure concealed by the finishing materials used to the degree required.
Principal Cause5 - This defect often occurs undersett fabric or through poor finishing. Bad Odour
- An objectionable smell fermented starch, mildew, chemicals from any other source.

in an

such as of some fats, oils, or contamination of cloth the weave to use has been severely for defects that

Bad Place

- Localized

places where

disturbed. Note - This term is convenient sometimes defy description.
Badger BAFTA

- Fur fibre of badger (genus: Mele

meleg).

An Indian term for a fabric made with silk warp and cotton weft, used as dress material.

Bagging

(Finishing) - Tacking together of two selvedges of a fabric to form a tube in order to prevent the selvedges from curling during wet processing. (Jute) - A single plain weave. - Sewing

Bagging

or

double-warp, of cloth

heavy along

jute cloth the selvedge

usually in
Bagging

(Wool)

a

piece

before milling.

Baeem3 out - A method of joining facings and/or linings to the outer material of a garment by sewing them together face to face in the form of a bag and then turning the garment out to the right side.
16

SF:45-1988

spun, fine merino Baize - A plain woven, heavily milled, woollen wool fabric with raised pile surface, piece dyed in bright colours, usually red or green, and used for covering tables, screens, lining for instrument boxes and/the like. Bal Collar - A high millitary collar on'a Balmacaan be worn turned up and bottomed or lying flat.

Balaclave Cap - A long knitted headwear made ortailored out of plain or rib-knitted 'tubular fabric. Also known as 'TOPA'.
s`, -.

FIG. 6 BALACLAVE CAP Balance - The relation of one section of a garment to another in harmony with the natural attitude of the figure, especially that of back and front lengths. Balance Marks - Notches or threads in garment parts, which help to preserve the balance of the garment by serving as guides during assembly. They are generally put at side seams, in the scye, shoulder seams, hind arm and forearm seams and elsewhere as necessary.
Balanced Cloth - A fabric having the same count of yarn in warp and weft and the same number of ends and picks per unit length.

__--c
coat. It can
.*'

`1, :

Balanced Twist - The twist in a plied yarn (or cord) is said to be balanced if the yarn or cord does not twist on itself when held in the form of an open-loop.
- A light-weight plain-knitted cotton fabric generally used for underwear. This name orignates from the town Balbriggan in Ireland. Balbriggan

of defined Bale - A compressed package material in a form convenient for transit.
Bale

quantity of textile

(Gunny) - A rectangular or square shaped compressed rigid package containing jute fabrics or bags wrapped with bale covering with outer layer stitched and bound by metal hoops. Bale (KUTCEIA) (Jute) - A package of raw jute consisting of various ,heads (or MORAHS), usually weighing 150 or 130 kg and sometimes only 55 kg. It is compressed in a hand or steam-operated press and is bound with jute ropes. Bale (Loose) or BORNE - A partly-pressed (also called halfpressed) package containing textile material.

Bale (lTJccA)

(Jute)

-

It is

hydraulically pressed 17

bale of raw

SP:45-1988

jute usually bound with jute ropes. Its standard 120x45~50 cm and its nominal net and gross mass kg respectively.

size is are 180 and 185

Bale (Silk) ,- A defined quantity of raw silk carefully a cotton 'shirt' and 'gunny cloth'. Baler fibre Baling bales. Twine - Twine manufactured out of natural intended for agricultural purposes. Hoops Hot rolled steel strips

packed

in

or synthetic or tie

used to fasten

'

:Baling Rope - Rope made from natural binding bales

or synthetic

fibre

used

for

Ball (Yarn) - A package of hand-knitted of a ball without support. Ball Top - A cross-wound worsted system. on the self-supporting

yarn

wound

in

the shape produced

sliver

package

on a warping mill, is Ball Warp - Warp, which after being wound bunched together in twistless rope form and then made into a ball or similar form - The application Ball-Warp Sizing form of ball warp or rope. of size to warp yarn in the

Ballooning (Yarn) - The appearance of the curved paths of running yarns during spinning, doubling, or winding on, or while they are being withdrawn over-end from packages under appropriate yarnyarn is withdrawn through a guide winding conditions, e.g. when (often called a ballooning eye) placed above and in line with the at an adequate distance from it; the yarn axis of the package (travelling at sufficient yarn-winding speed) assumes the appearance: of a balloon shape as it revolves during withdrawal from the package. The package may be stationary or rotated in the opposite direction from that of the original winding of the packages. Note - The shape of the factors, among which are: (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) Bandage 'Bands secure. BANIAN ballon is determined by several

of the passage of yarn around a package, air-resistance centrifugal force exerted on the revolving yarn, the count and type of yarn, yarn-winding speed, and the length of the balloon. Cloth Straps - 6ee 'Gauze' bound round a bale or case to keep it

tightly

-.An Indian term denoting

all types of vests

(m

'Vest').

SP:45-1988

Banner Cloth - A plain weave fabric of cotton, wool or silk used for the fabrication of flags, banners and buntings. Bannockburn - A firmly woven cheviot tweed in 2/2 twill weave (straight twill or herringbone) having single and two-ply yarns one-and-one in both warp and weft. Originally the two-ply yarns were made by plying a single yarn identical to the one used in the fabric with a white yarn for use in the warp and with a dark yarn for use in the weft, but modern Bennockburn tweeds favour the count of the coloured single yarns approximating to the resultant count of the ply yarns, which are white-colour and/or light-dark woollen grandrelle or marl yarns, warp and weft. Bar (Knitting) - A fault in a knitted fabric appearing as a light or dark stripe and arising from defferences in (a) Lustre, I(b)Dyeing affinity (or unlevel dyeing), (c) Yarn spacing or loop length, or (d) Yarn count; or from defective plating.
Bar Tacking - Reinforcement by means of stitching at points of stress, e.g. buttonholes, pocket corners, seam ends and belt loops.

A bar running across the full width of a piece which -. differs in appearance from the adjacent normal cloth. It may be shady or solid in appearance and may or may not run parallel to the picks. This is a general term covering a number of specific defects as under :
Bar (1) Finishina -

A bar due to uneven appearance of fabric.

Principal Causes - Machine stoppage during the middle of processing, defective processing in case of woollen and worsted fabrics, etc. (2) Pick Bar - A bar in which the pick spacing is different from that in the normal cloth. Types of pick bar are the following: a) Starting Pla e (Setting on Place) - An isolated narrow bar running Earallel with the picks starting abruptly and gradually shading away to normal clbth. This is due to an abrupt change in the pick spacing followed by a gradual reversion to normal pick spacing. Principal Causes finding, unweaving of stopage.
Note
.

Restarting loom after pick pulling-back, prolonged loom

- These bars may also be referred to as standing

places or 'known.

pulling-back places if the precise cause is

b) Weaving Bar - A bar which usually shades away to normal cloth at both its edges. It owes its appearance to a change in pick spacing, and may repeat at- regular intervals throughout appreciable length or even the whole length of a
piece.

19

SP:45-1988

Prindipal Causes - Mechanical fault on the loom; e.g. faulty gearing in take-up motion, bent beam gudgeons, uneven or ecentric beam ruffles, uneven bearing surface at some point in the let-off-motion, etc.

Note - Bars of this type associated with the take-up or let-off motion are also referred to as mention marks (3) Shade Bar (Dye Bar) - A bar that has developed a different shade from the- adjacent cloth during, or subsequent to, dyeing and finishing owing to damage or contamination of otherwise normal cloth or weft yarn prior to weaving. (4) Tension Bar - A bar composed of weft yarn that has been stretched more, or less, than the normal weft prior to, or during, weaving. Such a bar may appear as cockled bar in those cases where stretch has been sufficient to cause cockle on subsequent contraction of this weft (B 'Cockle').
Principal Cause - Faulty manipulation or some mechanical fault in the winding machine, incorrect tensioning in the shuttle during weaving, faulty yarn excessively moistened at some stage contraction of this weft (s 'Cockle').

(5) Weft Bar - A bar i.e. solid in appearance, is clearly defined, runs parallel with the picks, and contains weft that is different in material, count, filaments, twist, lustre, colour or shade from the adjacent normal weft.
Principle

in weft

Cause - This defect is often caused by variation yarn characteristics.

FIG. 7

WEFT BAR

Barathea - A heavy worsted fabric of pebbled appearance in rib or twilled hopsack weave. It may be made from merino wool or its blends with man-made fibres and given a clear finish for use as dress material.
`.

20

SP:45-1988

Barras Hessen -. A coarse linen in Holland. originally produced

fabric

similar

to

sack cloth;

Basic Dye -- A cationic dye characterized by high substantivity for the acidic types of acrylic tannin mordanted cotton. Basified Viscose - Viscose rayon which treatment with synthetic resins in such a dyed with dyes normally used for wool. Basket Cloth passes ends picks. - A fabric in which alternately over each group and under

its relatively fibres and for

has been modified by way that it can be

of two or more warp groups of two cr more

Bassinas - The after reeling. Bast Fibre the stems

waste

silk

obtained

from

the

residue

cocoon

- Fibre obtained from of various plants.

the

cell

layers

surrounding

acidifying soap solution Bast Liquor, - A bath liquor prepared by It is used in silk that has been used for degumming of silk. dyeing as it greatly facilitates the production of a level shade. (An artificial bast liquor is prepared from a solution of gelatin in soap). Basting - Temporary stitching either by hand or machine to hold garment parts in the correct position for a subsequent permanent sewing operation. Batch (Jute) - A quantity various assortments from to produce yarn of desired of raw jute which has been selected and is intended to be mixed together type or quality. a treatment is given in which prior period for a specific to to

Batch Process - A process a textile material and stored further processing.

Batching (Jute) - The process of selection into batches and piling fibres with oil-in-water emulsion treating jite if needed, prior to carding.

and it,

Batchwise Processing -~Processing of materials as lots or batches in which the whole of each batch is subjected to one stage of the process at a time. Bates Valve - A one-way and which nozzle filling valve fixed to a bag to facilitate eliminates sewing after filling.

soft napped material of wool or Bath Coating - A light-weight, infants Slankets, cotton..The fabric is used for coverings, bath robes etc. Bathing bathing Costume or swimming. A tight-fitting tailored knitwear Also known as 'Swimming Costume'. 31 us& in

SP:45-1988

Bathing Batik

Trunk

- See

'Trunk' fabric printed by Batik system.

- A plain woven

Note - The method of dyeing in which wax is applied to the cloth and then removed at places where the dyeing is to be done. Batiste - A soft, It may now be made fine, plain-woven fabric, originally in a variety of other fibres. of flax.

Batting - An American term used to denote superimposed Batt; carded webs of the fibre in sheet form, e.g. wadding. Battens - Wooden slats put on the bales and held means of bands to keep the shape of the bale intact. in place by

Baulk Finish - A finish in which the material is`milled in the grease to the desired dimensions, scoured, dyed, lightly stentered to width and lightly pressed. Note - The object of this finish, which is applied only to woollen materials, is to preserve the original character of the cloth. The material is finished without being raised. Bave (Silk) - The bifilar of two filaments (brins) sericin. Beach Yarn
Beam

thread spun by the silkworm. that are cemented together 'Coir Yarn'. made out of superior

It consists by gum or

- &

(e) under rope

Cable-laid 4 mm diameter.

quality

hemp of

Beam Dyeing beam.

- The dyeing

of yarn or fabric

wound

on a perforated

Beaming - Winding of warp yarns of cloth on a tube or a beam. Bearded Motes - m 'Motes'.

on

the

warp

beam

or winding

Bearers - Of trousers. Sections fastened to the side seams to take the weight of the trousers when the fronts arle opened. Eearers for whole fall trousers contain the pockets. Beaver Cloth -- A heavy, firm textured cloth made from woollen yarns, which is milled, raised and cut close on the face so as to simulate natural beaver skin. Beaver Fur '- The undercoat of fine but North American aquatic rodent of genus: medullated fibres from Castor canadensig.

Beaver-been - A heavily wefted fabric of the moleskin type, trouserings. Example : A popular cotton used chiefly for heavy variety consisting of 32 ends/in. (80 ends/dm) 2-18s (295 to 32 tex) warp with 280-400 picks/in. (700 to 1000 picks/dm) of 20s-16s 22

SP:45-1988

weft (30-37 tex) piece the back when finished. sateen.

dyed, and having It is a heavier

a short, fabric

soft 'nap' on than imperial

Bed Ticking - A strong, closely woven, twilled usually in which may be yarn dyed or printed, dsed for beds, mattresses and pillows.

cotton material It is stripes.

line of 19 mm size made from hemp or Bedding Line - Hawser-laid One end of line is whipped and other is made into jute yarn. is used line is about 4.5 m and a loop. The overall length of for tying the beddings. Bedford Cord - A cloth showing rounded cords in the with pronounced sunken lines between, produced by is the weave. The weave on the face of the cords but other weaves may be used. There are weft floats of the cords on the back. Wadding ends may be used of the cords. the prominence warp direction the nature of usually plain on the width to accentuate

on linen and cotton fabrics Beetling - A finishing process used the threads and improve the to close up the spaces between appearance and handle by subjecting the previously dampened cloth to a hammering by a series of wooden mallets or "Failers" which and eliminates any improves the lustre flattens the threads, 'Thready' open appearance. fabric Beige - Soft dress 2 and 2 twill weave. BELANI - w 'CHARKHA - A fibre made in worsted warp and weft in

(Gin)'. with a dolley, for the tolling of

Boll Rope bells.

rope fitted

Bellies - A trade term used in Australia to denote wool which has been removed from the belly region and which is free from pizzle stain and skin pieces. Belt Loop - A loop of material or of a garment to receive the waist thread a belt. which is sewn into

- A generic term covering all Belting (Industrial and Mechanical) rolls of material from which belts are made forms of belts, and transmission of power or for the up, that are designed for the purpose of conveying or elevating. Bengaline - A cloth with a more or less striking warp rib appearacross the fabric, produced from cotton or worsted ance running in part from yarns, or yarns, silk or other continuous fiIament being silk warp any of the materials named, a typical example and worsted weft. The warp rib or corded effect may be prodaced by employing any of the following methods :
(1)

suitabe

thickness

and 23

setting

of warp

and weft threads

SP:45-1988

(2) suitable warp rib weaves, and (3) a combination of (1) and (2). Beret (Knitted) - A round, soft-felted, knitted headwear with flat loose top and tight-fitting at the forehead.

FIG. 8
Berlin

BERET

Wool Yarn - A brightly coloured knitting yarn used chiefly for emboridery and fancy knitting by hand. Bertna - A kind of cape or collar, sometimes of lace. It is often used for dress trimmings and attached to the edge of a low-backed waist.

Besom .-A pocket edges.
Beypore, Yarn

featuring a (f) under

stitched fold 'Coir Yarn'.

on upper

and lower

- See

Bias (Bow, Skewness) -. A fabric condition in which warp and weft yarns are straight but may vary from the perpendicular to one another by a degree which is unaceptable in that fabric. Principal Causes - This defect is often caused by inadequate control of.the fabric during open width washing. Bias (Garment) - Direction at an angle to warp and weft. True bias is at an angle of 450 to both warp and weft. Other usage includes bias cutting and cutting on the bias which is also known as 'Cutting on the Cross'. Bias Bag - Bag fabricated by cutting across the bias tubing according to required size and folding and stitching along with one of the open ends. Binding - A strip of material cut from a woven fabric at an acute angle to the warp (usually 450) and sometimes folded along one or both edges.

Bias

Bias

Construction - Arrangement of the gores such that the direction of the threads of the fabric makes an angle usually of 450, with the centre line of the gore. Cut - Fabric cut at an angle to the

Bias

warp and

weft threads.

Bias Tubing - Continuous length of cloth (usually hessian) in a cut or roll suitably stitched lengthwise selvedge to selvedge in a biased way to form a bias tubing!. Here, the weft yarns do not remain at right angles but are kept at an angle of about 30 to 450 tp the length of the tubing.

24

SP:45-1988

Bight - The distance between the stitching line &'see also `Seam Allowance edge of the material Bikini Suit - A two piece, bathing or swimming

and the adjacent (Seam Margin)']. suit for ladies.

Billiard Cloth - A plain woven,heavily milled woollen cloth finish made from fine merino wool with closely cropped fibrous and usually dyed in green colour. obtained from the bast of Hibiscus Sabdariffa BIPiLI - Fibre reeds are associated with underground roots (roselle). The fibre exclusively grown in Andhra Pradesh, are the plants, since generally uprooted,during harvesting. Chemically, it is different from jute in its low lignin content and is in general inferior and jute. It is a substitute for jute. coarser than Binder Twine - Twine made from natural or synthetic fibre intended for agricultural use with reaper binders and combined harvesters. Binding - A narrow fabric designed to protect, garments, blankets,books, a finish to carpets, articles. Note - Certain kinds of tapes, are also used as bindings. webbings, support, and give shoes, and other

ribbons

and braids

a textile Binding (Floor Covering) - Edge-finishing fixed on with the use of a separate binding tape, turned on to the back, to prevent edge fray. Binding-,Off - A term applied Gf a knitted row of lOGpS

floor covering the face then

locking or seaming of the last to fabric to prevent ravelling.

Bird's Eye Back - The back side of a rib-knitted jacquard fabric obtained by knitting even number of needles of one set at one same set at the other. of the feeder and odd number of needles The bird's eye back is produced to eliminate the elongation of of the face stitches. When three colours are used, the back side which look like fabric will have very small and uniform spots bird's eye. Birdseye .- A fabric the spots, result Bit Mats - & having a of the pattern of combination and uniform very small of weave and colour.

' i

(a) under

'Mats (Coir)'.

saturated in molten bitumen and Bitumen Felt - A hessian cloth material coating and through bituminous treated by passage application of mineral powder, like finally given a SL, :rficial talc, slate, and mica. It is used for roofing purposes. Bituminous Surfacing -- A sacking or hessian cloth impregnated coated on both sides with a with low melting point bitumen and It is used as waterproof membrane for high melting point bitumen. canal lining, and surfacing air strips and roads. 25

SF:_45-1988

in Australia to denote wool which is Black - A trade term used pigmented. However, this term is recommended to be used only to denote black pigmented wool. In case of pigmented wools of other colours, either the term 'Coloured' should be used or the may be mentioned, e.g. specific colour 'Off White Wool', 'Grey Tinged', 'Dark Brown Wool'. Blanket - A heavy compact fabric of plain or twill weave made from wool, cotton, rayon, man-made fibres or their blends and given a soft nappy finish. Blankets made from wool are usually felted by heavy milling. Their size varies considerably but usually it is 1.5 to 2 m in width and 2 to 2.5 m in length. The weight of the blanket may vary from 1 to 3 kg. Blanket Cloth raised finish. - A heavy--weight overcoating fabric with a soft,

Blanket Mark - A crimped, or pebbled mark embossed wavy, a fabric by the blanket that covers the heated cylinder used certain finishing processes. Blaze - See 'Floss Silk'. heavily milled

on in

'Blazer, -. A wool flannel somewhat and finished with a short nap. Bleached Fabric - A fabric which

and raised

has undergone

bleaching

treatment

Bleaching - A series of operations of improving (other than by scouring only) the whiteness by decolorizing the natural colouring matter of the textile materials grey state from their with or without removing the added colouring matter. - Bleeding ((Jolour Bleeding) when immersed in colouration of the

from coloured material (a) Loss of dye water or solvent leading to an obvious liquor or of adjacent material. (b) Spreading contiquous of dye from one portion areas.

of a colour

design

to

Madras - A cotton fabric, Bleeding usually handwoven, from coloured yarns, in check designs. The coloured yarns bleed mildly during finishing and the'subsequent washes and tint the rest of the fabric a mutation and create effect. The count of warp and weft used is generally 60s (10 tex) and 40s (15 tex) respectively. Bleeding, IColour - & 'Colour Bleeding', spun with component mixed fibres is 10 percent

Blended Fabric - A fabric made from yarns or filament yarn provided the fibre or more (see also 'Union Fabric'). Blended percent

- A textile material containing not less than 50 Wool of wool fiibres. However, a manufacturing tolerance up to 26

SP:45-1888

contents 3 percent on wool Note 2 under 'All Wool'), Blending

shall

be permitted.

(&

Note

1 and

al - A process of mixing fibres of different (a) Fen lotzf types and varieties to produce yarns having desired characeristics; and lines of - A process of mixing small (b) Wool for Market of wool fibres having desired yield and similar type characteristics. Blending Blind - & Machine - See 'Willey'.

'Sash Cord'. - A stitch (either through the material. by hand or machine) which does

Blind Stitch not go right

and Blinding - A marked caused by wet processing.

undesirable

loss of lustre of fibres on or

be caused by the formation, within or Note - This may scatter light, particles that or other the fibre, of dyes by an alteration in the physical structure of the dye.

Blister Cloth - A double cloth with merino wool face and mohair back wherein differential shrinkage of the face and the back (& 'Relief Fabric'). during finishing leads to blister effect. term adopted Blobby - A trade square indicate short dense, good felting properties. by the Australian Wool Board to usually possessing tipped wool,

Block Construction - Arrangement of the gores such that the direction of the threads of the fabric is parallel to the centre line of the gore. Block Printing - The printing designed woodden blocks. Blocking Out - The action of into manageable blocks which of a garment. - A trade Blocky to indicate a-staple Blood sheep. Bloom The extent of fabrics by hand with carved/

cutting many layers of material may incorporate one or more parts

by the Australian Wool Board term adopted of dense construction and square tip. of exotic strain like merino in cross-bred

(Cotton)
-

- Brightness

and lustre

in raw cotton.

Bloom (wooi) to indicate

wool

A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board of excellent condition, ca trade term adopted by
27

SP: 45-1988

the Australian Wool Board to indicate colour and brightness. Blotch - Any relatively design. Blouse ladies.

wool of excellent

condition,

large area of uniform

colour

in a printed

- A waist length, tight-fitting Also known as 'JUMPER'.

outergarment

worn by

Blow-Room Droppings - Waste mainly consisting of seeds, motes, leaves, stalks, seed coat?,, burrs besides and entangled short fibres resulting from the blow-room treatment of co,tton (see a Is0 'Gutter Fly'). - A process in which steam Blowing (Steam) cloth usually wound on a perforated roller. is blown through

Blown Finish - A finish applied to wool materials, obtained by blowing dry steam through the fabric, which is wrapped on a perforated cylinder with an interlacing cotton fabric. hem blown between Blown Periphery - A portion of the peripherial two rigging lines on another section of the canopy during inflation,and inflating inside out thus forming a lobe. This is sometimes erroneously termed 'Thrown Line'. Blueing - A process to enhance by the use of a blue colouring brightening agent. the appearance of bleached textiles matter with or without flourescent

Bluff Edges (Buffed Edges) stitching (see also 'Bluffing'). Bluffing - The process facings on the forepart finished without outside Blurred Patches - &

Edges

finished

without

outside

of fastening down the front edge of canvas to preserve the shape of edges stitching (see also 'Bluff Edges'). Blotches'.

'Coloured

Boarding - A process of putting the knitted garments on boards of suitable size and shape and then pressing and heating under moist or dry conditions to set the garments to the desired shape and size. Boat Fall - Manila rope or man-made fibre rope of 3- or 4-strand or 8-strand with medium to hard lay; sometimes unkinkable, used in conjuction with a pair of devits or for lowering boat from ships' upper deck (flexible steel wire ropes are also used). Boat Lacing - A 3-strand for securing boat covers Bodice - The section from neck t@ waist. Body - Describes the of a high grade and awnings. woman's dressed hemp line used the body

garment

covering

compact,

solid 28

or firm

feel of

a textile

SP:45-1988

stock or

fabric.

Body Carpet - Plain or unbordered patterned carpet in piece form, traditionally 680 mm or 900 mm wide, mainly used for making up into larger areas by seaming or otherwise joining edge to edge: Note - Greater widths (traditionally less than 1800 mm'are occasionally designated body carpet. Boiled-Off Boiling-Off Liquor - b

'Bast Liquor'. from silk or

other gummy
Boll

The process of removing sericin material from fibres like Ramie.

- The fruit of cotton plant; generally it has 3 to 5 loculi, each of which contains about 6 to 10 seeds, the seeds being covered with cotton fibres. -

Bolt

A

lapped

and

folded

cloth

with a continuous length.

Bolt Rope

- A 3-strand soft laid rope made from hemp, manila sisal or man-made fibre used for edging sails, awnings, stage lashing, etc.

Cloth - A light-weight open fabric characterized by its fine and uniform mesh, used for sifting flour or screen printing. Both warp and weft threads are accurately spaced and are woven in gauze or other non-slip construction in order to maintain the mesh size. Bolting Bombay-Hemp - A soft fibre obtained from the bast of the plant biscus Cannabinus and other Hibiscus species. The plant reaches a height of 3 to 4.5 m and gives long and lustrous fibres fairly similar to jute. Fibre Fabric -

Bonded

more webs or masses material.
Bonded-Pile

of

A non-woven fabric consisting fibres, held together with

of one or a bonding

Bonded Pile Carpet - Pile Textile Floor Covering; carpet in which the pile consists, e.g. of a pleated sheet of textile yarns or fibres secured to a support by a coating or adhesive, or directly to an adhesive which forms the-support. (& 16:11205-1984).

Bonding Agent - A material applied to fibre or yarn assem$.&s, with the intention of maintaining the assembly in the required conformation.
Book (Silk)

kg and in book

- A compressed package of raw silk weighing containing a suitable number of skeins. Cloth -

about 2

Book Binding Book Muslin

binding. It

Fabrics normally made from cotton used is usually coloured and heavily sized. finished open cotton fabric

- A, light-weight stiff
29

SP:45-1988

used in

book binding

and also

as lining

for cheap

cloth.

Bonnet (Knitted) - A knitted headwear and ears and with strings for tying worn by children and ladies .

covering the en'tire head under the' chin. Generally

_--mm--

5rRWS

~

FIG. 9

BONNET

Book-Fold Bolt - A single cut which is lapped and folded into a book-fold illustrated by the heavy line in the figure.(h also IS:2873-1969).

L = Length of lap.

FIG. 10 Book-Silk - & 'Tsatlee Silk'

BOOK-FOLD BOLT

Boom Lift - Manila or man-made fibre rope which passes through tackle blocks attached to the mast and boom. It is used to ; adjust the angle at which the boom is inclined from the mast and shall support the load applied to the full lines. BOOTA or BUTTA - An Indian term for cotton fabric ornamented with spots formed usually by extra warp or weft threads in weaving. Bootee - A knitted footwear with or without seam usually with fancy rib or purl stitches for infants too young to walk. Also known as 'Infantee' and 'Infant Socks'. Border (Sweater) - Bottom portion of knitted outergarment usually made in 1 x 1, 2 x 2 rib or of the same fabric as used for the body of the garment. Bore Spring - Coir rope up to 610 mm in circumference used for mooring in rivers subject to bore tides. Boski - A closely warp and weft. woven dress material usually 30 from spun silk

SP:&5-1988

Botany - The term originates from Botany bay (New South Wales, Australia), from where merino wools were exported to different countries for several decades. Botany Twill - A merino Wool.
Botany Wool

variety

of

worsted

twill

fabrics

made from merino wool

of 60s
Botany

- All tops, yarns and fabrics and above fineness grades. Yarn -

made from from fine

Worsted

Worsted

yarn

merino wool.

Bottom - Indicates a quality of raw jute (m
Bottoming - A thorough scouring bleaching, dyeing or printing.

'Grading of Jute'). in preparation for from plied' a pebbled, with a strip

usually

Boucle - A fabric with uneven looped surface made worste<d or woollen yarns from wool or mohair.

Boulivia - A wool, alpaca or mohair pile cord or ridge effect. of additional
Bourette Bourre

fabric with

Bound Seam - A seam having its material edges bound

material. (Silk) - See (b) under
(Silk) - & &

(French) (French) Fabric

'Noils'.

'Gum

Waste'.

Bourrelet
Bow -

'Relief Fabric'.

The greatest distance parallel to the selvedges between a weft yarn and a straight line drawn between the points at which this yarn meets the selvedges. The straight line connecting the selvedges is perpendicular to both.
Bowing - A defect in knitted fabric caused due to curvature of the courses imposed during knitting or calendering or other. operations.

Bowl - A roller forming part of a nip through which fibre, yarn or fabric is passed in textile processing. Cloth - An all-wool, woollen-spun fabric with a fibrous surface and firm handle. The surface is completely covered with fibres so that no threads are visible. It is woven in a variety of weaves, depending on the weight required. It is used for such purposes as leggings, coachman cloths and billiard cloth. Box

Box Mark - A widthwise fine line showing stained or injured weft due to the rubbing by shuttle when it rebounds from the box.
Principal Causes - Improper adjustment of shuttle box front plate, dirty shuttle boxes, etc.

31

SPi45-1988

Box Pleats

- A form of pleats achieved by double folding material alternately in opposite directions. Box Twine - A 3-ply twine used mainly for general typing purposes: The twine is made from hemp yarn. Bracte Web - An elastic or rigid woven narrow fabric, primarily intended for the manufacture of braces.

Lustre Fabrics - Chiefly used as dress material or for lining, these fabrics are generally made from cotton warp and worsted weft from lustre wools, mohair or alpaca. Typical fabrics include: Bradford

(a) Brilliantines (d) Lorraine lustres (g] Puritan
Bradford Spun -

(b) Glaces (e) Lustre linking (h) Parkin stripes yarn spun on the

(c) Grenada (f) Melange lustre (j) Sicilians Bradford system.

Worsted

Bradford System - One of the systems of worsted drawing and spinning which originated in Britain. This is based on the use of oil 'combed tops and twisted rovings. Braid - A narrow tubular or flat fabric produced by interwining sets of yarn. It is generally used for binding or trimming in widths up to 10 cm.
Braided (or Plaited) Cord - A flax, cotton., hemp or man-made fibre cord of braided construction . It may be with or without

.a central

core.

FIG. 11

BRAIDED CORD

Braided Textile Floor Covering. Without Pile -' Textile floor covering without pile, made of machine-braided cords sewn together. Braiding (Plaiting) - The process of interlacing three or more threads in such a way that they cross one another and are laid together in diagonal formation. Flat, tubular, round or solid constructions may be formed in this way.
Note 1 - There are diametrically opposed opinions between sections of the industy regarding the exact meaning of 'braiding' and 'plaiting'. It is suggested, therefore, that as generic terms 'braiding' and 'plaiting should be considered synonymous.

Note 2 - Fabrics made by this process may be constructed with or without core, gut, filler, or stufffing threads, which are not interlaced in the fabrics.,For some applicatiqns, the-core may 32

SP:45-1988

be of insulated or uninsulated wire, or of rubber or ot&r material. The tubular fabrics may be used as sheath;, or surrounds. Note 3 - In the cordage trade, the term braided' denotes a In solid-braided cordage, particular form of cordage manufacture. but the movement carriers usually travel in one \direction, provides for interlocking between the strands. In a sense, this cord is more of an interlocked twisted cord than a plaited cord. Bran Bag - &.s 'Australian Bran Bag'.

dyes, or Branding -- Marking on fabrics, sacks or bags with inks, trade-mark, content, weight, etc. to indicate pigment colours Brattice is used Cloth - Hessian fabric which after rot and fire-proofing, purposes. in mines as wind screens, and for ventilation starts to roll over on a coat,

Break - The point where the lapel buttonhole. usually at the top Break Factor Card - E&.G 'Count Strength - Feed section

Product'. card.

Breaker

of woollen

Breaking Cord - A flax,cotton or man-made fibre cord of hawserlaid or braided construction used as a weak link to facilitate opening of parachutes at the time of release. Breaking load..: Breaking expressed Elongation (or Extension) - The elongation at the breaking

- The extension at breaking Percent Extension, as a percentage of the original length.

load

- The coefficient I;s characterizing the quality Breaking Factor level of the rope in-so far as breaking load is concerned.It is the formula: =B/n given by G.?2 where B Q is the breaking load in decanewtons or kgf; and is the linear density, in kilotex for net mass (g/m).

- The length of a specimen whose mass is equal Breaking Length to the breaking load. Breaking length expressed in kilometres is to the breaking tenacity expresseQ in g/tex. numerically equal is expressed in Newtons/tex. The Note - Breaking tenacity Newton is the SI unit of force. It is that for-we which when gives it an applied to a body having a mass of one kilogram, square (1 N=9.81 kgf).. per second acceleration of one metre Breaking Load is correctly Note - The load that develops expressed in Newtons: The breaking load, 33 if the breaking tension. It

expressed

in

gram weight

or

SP:45-1983

kilogram weight will vary from place to place depending on the value of the accelaration due to gravity;
Breaking Stress - The maximum stress developed in a specimen stretched -rupture. The force is usually related to the area of the unstrained specimen. If the actual stress, defined in terms of the area of strained specimen, is used, then its maximum value'is called the actual breaking stress. Breaking Breaking Tenacity - &

'Tenacity'

Tension - The maximum tension developed in a specimen stretched to rupture. It is correctly expressed in Newtons. Note - Breaking tension, acceleration due to gravity,

as defined, is independent of the

Bribe

- Synonym for a woollen fent.

Bricklayer

Line - A 3-strand flax, cotton or hemp line used by brick-layers, carpenters and masons for alignment purposes. (See a Is0 'Chalk Line'). (Garment) - A narrow strip of material which is attached to the interlining along the roll of the lapel to hold and control it. Bridle Bridle Briefs (Parachute) - A multi-lagged

strop.

- A tight-fitting underwear without leg portions. Also known as 'CHADDI' and 'JANGHIA'.

Bright (Wool) - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate wool having an attractive white colour. Bright Hessian - A special hessian with high brightness index and cleanliness and of good texture. Silk - Thrown

Bright Bright

silk completely boiled-off or dyed, or both. contrasted to

Yarn .- A general term for lustrous yarn as dull, semi-dull, extra-dull or matt yarn. Bright Yarn (Defect) - A warp or weft yarn of

higher lustre than
chemical

the adjacent

yarns.

Brightening - Partial improvement in colour by suitable treatment of the raw jute or jute product.

34

SP:45-1988

Brilliance luminosity Brilliantine

- That attribute of a colour-s-which measures of its lightness or .darkness. or the degree - &g 'Bradford Lustre Fabrics'.

its

Brin - The ultimate filament of silk as emanating from (3ach gland of the silkworm. Two brins (one from each gland on either side of the body of silkworm) are cemented together by gum or sericin at of the silkworm to emerge as bave or silk strand. the spinneret Bristle Fibre term for a short, stiff and coarse

(a) Gener l_- A generic fibreaand (b) Specific

-- A restricted

term

for the

hair crimp

of

the hog.

- Wool that Broad (Wool) particularly straight fibres.

has no natural

or elasticity,

wool Broad Cloth (Wool)- Merino heavily milled and given a dress Cotton Broad Cloth, used for shirtings. Broad Goods distinguished A

fabric in plain face finish. fabric

or twill

weave,

light-weight

of poplin

type,

- All woven from ribbon.

fabrics

60

cm or more

in width,

as

- A fabric with multiple adjoining ribs which Broad Rib longitudinal effects in face and back of the fabric. Example: 6 X 3 rib. of seamless carpeting

give

Broadloom (Carpets) - Descriptive nally made 2 m or more in width. Broadtail has hair pattern.

traditio-

- The grade of Karacul lambskin lower than astrakhan. It in swirls rather than curls and a very attractive wavy

Brocade - A. jacquard weave fabric of rich appearance. Unlike the design in a 'Damask' which appears to be flat with the surface of the fabric, the design in-a brocade looks as if it were raised or embroidered. Broche - An assemblage of yarn inserted in the same dent of the sley of the loom, the group consisting usually of two ends of the of the pile. chain warp, the yarns of the stuffer warp and those Broken Filament - A fibrous appearance of a fabric made from continuous filament yarn which may be localized or general and which is caused by damage to individual filaments. (See also zF~~~y') Broken Pick (Dropped Pick) only a part of the fabric - A weft yarn width. 35 which is present for

-SF': 45-1988

Principal ing, running Broken caused

Causes - This defect is caused by a weft yarn break-out, or being prematurely released during insertion. End) - A narrow warpwise void'in warp yarn(s) during weaving. a fabric

End (Missing by breakage of

FIG. Broken Pattern printed design

13

BROKEN

END

(MISSING

END) to woven as well as and 'Missing End').

-- Self fabrics

descriptive; applies (see also 'Mispick'

Principal Causes -- Wrong tying of threads, inserting a pick in a wrong shed, incorrect lifting of warp threads, defective working of printing machine, etc.

FIG.

14

BROKEN

PATTERN

Broken Twill ;- Any twill weave in which the move number is not constant, with the result that the continuity of the twill line is broken. Bronzing (Defect) '- A bronze-like 3F appearance on dyed textile

SP:45-1988

materials caused by precipitation/agg&meration dyeing process. during the Bruise An area of localized compression is often

of

the

dye

within

a fabric.

Principal Cause - This defect or crushing of the fabric. Brush Mats - See (b) under

caused

by the squeezing

'Mats'. on one or both surfaces

Brushed Fabric - A fabric in which fibres have been raised by means of brushing.

Brushed Rayon - Woven or knitted rayon fabric which has been given considerable brushing or napping by the teasel treatment or by rollers covered with card clothing used for napping purpose. Brushing - A finishing nap and remove unwanted fabrics. process in which surface fibres circular brushes raise a from knitted or woven

Brushing (Silk) - Act of transferring newly hatched silkworms from the egg sheets or muslin cells on to the rearing trays, or act of removal of floss from the cooked or boiled cocoons for collection of ends for reeling. Brusselette ned, coarse Carpet - A ribbed carpet woven warp and from a fine chain. from a loosely tensio-

Brusselettee -. A jute floor covering made in different weights from jute yarns in plain weave. It is made in different designs, such as prints, stripes, checks and their combinations in different colours. Two beams are generally used, one for the looping yarn and the other for ground yarn. Brussels vertical Carpet -- A loop-pile carpet woven over an unbladed flat (elliptical) wire inserted on edge.

Note - Weaving is carried out in a similar manner to that for Wilton carpet on a Wilton loom and the oarpet is therefore often referred to in the industry as a Brussels Wilton. Many trade names, by force of long usage, have acquir d definite significant meanings of some kind in the minds of %he public. Whereas the names Axminster, Wilton and Brussels, as applied to carpets, may originally have referred to the place of origin, this geographical significance has into one gradually changed implying a quality or method of manufacture. Brussels Wilton .-See 'Brussels Carpet'. .a light-weight

fabric made by impregnating Buckram - A stiff open cloth with adhesives and fillers.

A fabric similar in handle and-appearance Buckskin Fabric to, but heavier than, a doeskin fabric, made from fine merino set, heavily milled, dressed and closely cut. wool, closely 37

SP:45-1988

WUY - A lining from the neck down across the back of an otherwise unlined coat.
Builder Fabric - A square-poven heavy cotton duck made from very heavy ply yarns; it was formerly used in the carcass of rubber tread tyres, but has now been largely replaced by tyre cord warp sheet. Bulk Classing - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate pooling of small quantities of wool from a number of owners into standard lines. - A yarn that has been prepared in such a way as Yarn to have greater covering capacity, or apparent volume than that of conventional yarn of equal linear density and of the same basic material with normal twist. Bulked

Bulky Yarns
(a) Yarns in which the apparent density of the filaments is much lower than the real density, e.g. 'hollow filament yarns', the cross-sectional appearance of which is so grossly irregular that close packing is impossible. (b) Spun yarns made from staple fibres having a high degree of resilience, such as protein fibres, acrylic fibres.
Bull and Calf Rope - A 3-strand manila rope used for oil-well drilling and marine selvage work. (See also 'Bull Rope'). Bull Rope

(a) A 3-strand manila or sisal hard-laid rope used for marine purposes; or (b) Rope led from ring of a buoy to the nose of the bow-spirit of sailing vessel or to the stem of a clipper bowed ship to prevent buoy from bumping the bows at slack water.
Bullion
Co+

covered by

A cord having a twisting other yarns,

core yarn, ususally cotton, usually 'rayon', around it. (m 'Tassels').

BUMBLES - An Indian term for

tassels

Bump Top or Bumped Top - A package made by press-packing layers of horizontally coiled top, built up in cylindrical form round a vertical spindle centrally situated in the removable false base of the sliver can. BumpYarn - Very coarse condenser yarn. The count normally ranges from 260 to 1250 tex.

Bundle - A number of similar garment parts temporarily kept together for convenience of handling (Be al= 'Conventional Bundle System, and Progressive Bundle System'). 38

SP:45-1988

Bundle (Yarn) - Skeins or hanks of yarn of definite into a package of definite mass. Bundle Yarn and hosiery Bunting Bunting m - Yarn, yarns in hank form, transported are usually transported Cloth'

length made up

in bundles. as bundle

Carpet yarns.

'Banner - See

Cloth

`Banner Cloth'

Buried-End Carpet, Buried-Pile Carpet - Tufted pile carpet with a The design constituted by tufts or loops of different colours. yarns not used for the pattern form short loops not visible on the surface of the pile. Burl A small knot or lump in thread - The colouration of or cloth. impurities in wool

Burl Dyeing piece goods.

cellulosic

Burl Mark - A distortion resulting from some superfluous material removed with a or wild yarn being such as a thick slub, waste burling tool. Burlap - & 'Hessian' knots and similar defects in yarn from the fabprior to finishing a woollen or worsted fabric. by the Australian Wool Baord having a dark colour. to

Burling - Removing rjc during mending

Burnt Ends .- A trade term adopted indicate urine stains (on fleece)

Burried Pile Design (Tufted Carpets) - A design formed by highneedles threaded with different low-pile tufting with alternate colou~s $0 that the high pile forms an area of one colour overlayihg,the low (burried) pile of a different colour. weeds which get entangled of certain Burrs - Dry seeds fibrous coat of the sheep before it is shorn. Burw Raw wool containing burrs. shaped seam. to the leg in the

Wurron Knit (Stocking) - Knitted stocking tubular in construction without contour and
bat

Selvedge

- &

(c) under

'Defective

Selvedge'

- The force required to rupture a fabric by Bursting Strength distending it with pressure applied at right angles to the plane of the fabric. It is expressed in terms of force per unit area. Bush Mulberry (Silk) -. Mulberry cultivated as a bush to give more leaves as picking of yield per unit area and to facilitate easy 'Mulberry'). of cultivation (see compared to tree system Butt Seam - A seam which is sewn 39 with the two material edges

SP:45-1988

abutting. Button .-' A knob or disc which of fastening or ornamentation. is attached (For button to garments sizes see as a means 'Ligne'). are

Button Down Collar - The shirt collar fastened to the front of the shirt with Button Stand (Button-Hole buttons are tucked. Stand) ... Part

in which a button

the points closure.

of the garment

on which

Button-Hole Twist - A multiple ply sewing thread of man-made fibre made with a hard twist and used in stitching around the edges of button-holes to give strength. Buttonhole - The hole through which a buttonthe garment in the correct position. Buttons; and are Skin Back -- Balls of fibre woven into the fabric. is, passed to hold

that encircle

the

warp

yarns

Principal Cause - This defect is often caused by the chafing of -the warp yarns by the reed, heald eyes, or drop wires and is usu'ally found in unsized or low--twisted yarns. Cable ropes
-

A balanced rope structure together. It is usually

formed over

by twisting three or more 250 mm in circumference.

Cable Stich -_A knitting stitch, which imparts raised effect to the fabric, formed by two or more groups of adjacent wales passing under and over one another and appearing like a twisted ribbon.

FIG.

15

CABLE

STITCH

Cable Twist -.A cabled yarn, cord or rope construction in which each successive twist is in the opposite direction to the preceding twist, as S/Z/S or Z/S/Z construction. Cabled Yarn --A composite yarn produced 40 by twisting together two

SP:45-1988

or more plied yarns. The individual plied yarns have the same nominal length and tension. (&e also 'Cable Twist and Hawser Twist') CADDIS -. Short jute fibre droppings machines during $rocessing. accumulated under different

Cable-Laid Rope -- A 9.-strand rope in which three primary (hawserare laid) ropes twisted together without a central core.

FIG. C&e Cake -

16

CABLE-LAID package of

(9-STRAND) of man--made to

ROPE fibre in cake yarn. form.

An annular-shaped Sizing Application

size

yarns

Calendered Fabric - A fabric which has normally to smoothen and flatten it, between the yarns or to confer surface with an engraved heated bowl imprint a surface to high lustre the fabric

Fabric'j.

passed through a calender to close the intersections Special calenders glaze. pattern in relief or modify (See alss 'Felt Calendered

Calendering - A process in which a fabric is passed through a calender, normally to smooth and flatten it, to close the inters-glaze. confer surface ections between the yarns, or to Calf - Fashioned or covering oalf portion Calico - A generic and approximately Cambric with 7 shaped part of the leg of socks of the leg. (a Fig. 49). 01 stocking

term for plain weave fabric heavier than muslin having a mass per square metre of upto 120 g. closely woven plain weave fabric usually

-- A light-weight stiff finish.

Camel Hair - The hair of the camel. long (up to 35 cm) and the undercoat and short (5 to 10 cm) Camel Hair 'Fabric Fabric made

The outercoat is soft, light

is coarse and tan in colour

partly

or wholly

from (;:amelhair. of camel

the undercoat Camel &2ir Yarn -- Soft worsted yarn from hair with or without blending with wool.

from hard-. Camlct Fabric .-. A very sturdy plain weave fabric made twisted worsted yarns containing either camel hair or lustre WOC?~S.
41

5P:45-1988

Camlet Yarn

- Hard-twisted

worsted yarn made from lustre wool.

Camouflage - Net used for camouflage purposes made from hard and soft twisted coir yarns with mesh size of 5 cm2 or larger. Camouflage Garnishing Strips - A veriety of narrow hessin strips of varying widths used for military purposes, generally manufactured from standard widths hessian with patent selvedges incorporated at intervals depending upon the corresponding widths of strips required (see also 'Scrim Garnishing').
Camouflage Scrim Hessian - A very open weave light hessian cloth, grey or dyed (see also 'Scrim Garnishing'). Canary Colouration - A canary yellow coloured staining of fleece on the sheep particularly during the hot and humid climate. It 53 unscourable but light fugitive.

-ap
India.

- One of the units of mass
&

(355.6 kg)

in cotton

trade in

Cannage

'Tear

Drop' of a parachute, which provides high

canopy - The fabric body air-drag when inflated. Cantala
cantala.

,- Cantala is. the leaf

fibre obtained

from plant ,birPavq

Canton - Plain merino wool worsted fabric occasionally also made from cotton warp and merino wool weft. This should not be confused with 'CantonFlannel or 'Cantoon' both of which are cotton fabrics. - A sturdy silk dress material with a pebbly crepe Crepe surface with six S threads and six 2 threads in arrangement and two S picks and two 2 picks. Usually woven on box looms. Canton

Canvas - A cloth usually made from cotton, flax, hemp, or jute in weights traditionally ranging from 6 oz/ydz (180 g/m2) and above. The weave is plain .ur double end plain. In cotton canvas, the yarns may be singles but are frequently plied; in other canvases, the yarns are generally singles. The warp predominates, and a feature of' the heavier canvases is the very close packing of the warp, .which is highly crimped over a straight weft. The term canvas covers cloths',with a great variety of usesL but the salient features of all are strength and firmness (see also 'Duck').
C&uwas* (Garment) -. A made-up interlining for

a garment.

Canvas /Jute) - A plain weave cloth made wholly of jute with double warp and single weft interwoven, weighing not less than 407 g/mz. The number of warp threads (ends/&n) shall be .more than 118 and the number of weft threads (pickd/dm) shall not be less than 55.

Canvas Making - The sewing together of all the pieces
42

which.foti

SP:45-1988

the interlining

of a

jacket or coat either by hand or machine. knitted to shape.

Cap - A headwear tailored or

Cap Comforter - A knitted tubular garment without tassels; used for protecting head against cold. (See also 'Comforter').
Capella - A 2/l twill weave mulberry silk fabric generally used as a dress material.

Carbonized Ra(i! Fibre - The ainimal fibre recovered by carbonizing process, whether wet or dry carbonizing. Note - Wool or hair recovered by the wet process is sometimes known as extract. Carbonizing - A process involving the use of acids, acid producing chemicals or acidic gases to eliminate cellulosic matter from mixtures with animal or synthetic fibres. Carded Sliver - The long continuous produced by the carding machine. twistless strand of fibres

Carded Yarn - Yarn, made from cotton or other fibres, which has been carded but not combed. Cardigan - A knitted outergarment with long sleeves and frontopening with a closing device generally buttons and with border. Carding - The separation and partial cleaning by processing of a tangled or matted mass of fibres to a filmy web by working the fibres betweer two closely-spaced, relatively, moving surfaces, clothed with pointed wire, pins spikes or sawteeth.
Cargo Net - A wide meshed natural or man-made fibre ship's cargo.

heavily constructed net, made from ropes, used for loading and unloading Line.

Carpenter Line

- Same

as Bricklayer

Carpet - A floor-covering generally having cut pile surface, traditionally woven, but currently also produced by other methods, e.g.tufting, bonding, or stitching the pile to a b`acking or supporting base (w al= IS:11205-1984). Carpet Backing (Primary) - Pre-formed material which acts as a carrier for the use-surface and which is often additionally used as an anchor for other parts of the substrate. Carpet Backfng (Secondary) - Fabric of the carpet forming an underlay.
Carpet

bounded on the back side

Square - A (with or without a shortest dimension

term applied to a carpet in rectangular form border), traditionally at least 2 m at the and normally loosely laid. 43

sp: 45-1988

Carpet thread

Thread - A high quality hemp, jute, flax or used in binding the edges of carpets. hemp, jute, flax two or more pieces or cotton of carpet.

cotton

sewing

Carpet Twine - A joining together Carpet Wools rily, mixed druggets. Carpet Yarns

twine

used

for

- Coarse wools which fleeces used for Bulky soft

are generally, but not necessathe production of carpets and yarn for use in carpets.

twisted

Carpetting - A collective term for carpets and other manufactured fibrous floor coverings. The back may be covered by a supplementary coating of a bonding or cushioning material. Carrier (Dyeing) - A product added to dye bath to promote the dyeing of hydrophobic synthetic fibres and characterized by affinity for, and ability to swell the fibre. Carrier (Fibre or Yarn) - A fibre or yarn introduced at some stage of processing to support the main component, generally as an aid to further manufacture. Carrier (Spinning) - A positive driven smooth metal roller set between the major drafting rollers on some worsted drawing boxes and spinning frames to control the fibres during drafting. Note 1 - This is used in conjuction with a tumbler.

Note 2 - One, two or three depending on the fibre length

lines of carriers may be employed, of the material being processed.

Carrotting - The modification of the tips of fur fibre by chemical treatment to improve their felting capacity. CARUVA Carved Yarn Pile - See - See (d) under (a) under 'Coir Yarn'.

'Pile'.

Case Cord - A cord consisting of two or more yarns twisted together, each yarn consisting of a cotton yarn covered i a long spiral by several rayon yarns. The resultant cord is sof b and pliable.. Casein Fibre -.A synthetic fibre made from protein, which is obtained from milk by precipitation. namely, casein

Casement Cloth - A light to medium weight weft faced fabric of cotton or man-made fibre yarns generally used for curtains and upholstery. Casement Repp - A fabric heavier than repp used for curtains, hangings, etc, it usually has three to four times more ends than picks. Cashemire de So).e - A high grade taffeta, usually made of fine silk which is given a finish to resemble Cashmere fabrics. yarn, 44

SP:45-1988

Cashmere Fabrics - A variety.of fine merino weft face dress fabrics woven in l-and-2 twill with'a larger number of picks than ends/cm. Such fabrics are shrunk in width during finishing to render the weft more conspicuous. These fabrics do not contain any Cashmere (Pashmina) hair and hence should not be confused with Cashmere, Henriettas and Paramattas which are similar in structure to cashmere fabrics.

Cashmere Goat(genus: Cama hircus) - Found in Ladakh and Tibet. It produces a mixed fleece of coarse outercoat and soft superfne undercoat. In India, Cashmere goat is known as Pashmina goat.
Cashmere Wool

undercoat of pashmina wool
Cashmere Yarn

- The fine soft wool fibre which forms the downy Cashmere goat, popularly known as Pashmina or in the Indian sub-continent. - Yarn made from the undercoat of Cashmere wool.

Note 1 - Yarns, fabrics and garments produced from the fine undercoat of other Asiatic goats.

Note 2 - The terms 'Cashmere', 'Cashmere Fabric' and 'Cassimere' have nothing to do with Cashmere i.e. Pashmina. This is deprecated.
Cassimere -

worsted warp

Twill weave fabrics made from fine wools either in and weft or in worsted warp and woollen weft.

Cat Lines - Manila lines of 4 strands and not less than 32 mm diameter used around a drilling rig for hoisting tools, pipes, etc. (Also known as Cat Head lines). Catch - An underlap of material providing a backing to an opening to take buttons or a zip tape for fastening, e.g. fly-catch, button-catch.

Cationic Dye -.A dye that dissociates in aqueous solution to give a coloured ion*i.e. positively charged (m 'Basic Dye'). Cattle Rope - A 3-strand soft laid rope used by farmers for securing cattle.
Caustic Soda Crepe - A puckered or crepe effect made by shrinking cotton fabrics. action of caustic soda on selected portions of

Cavalry Twill - A firm warp-faced cloth in which the weave gives steep double twill lines separated by pronounced grooves formed by the weft. The name was originally applied to firm heavy-weight cloths'for making riding breeches for cavalry, but was later extended to cover cloths used for rain coats and other clothing purposes. Cellular - A term describing a fabric constructed so as to have a close and orderly distribution of hollows or holes. In woven fabric, this can be achieved by (a) honeycomb,(b) leno, or (c) mock-leno weaves.

45

SP:45-1988

Note - In certain sections of the trade, the term ctively used to describe leno cellular fabrics.

is restri-

Cellulose Imago Print - A cellulosic fabric printed with a dispersion of pigment in a cellulose solution to groduce a white on white or an opaque effect on white or pastel background. Cement Rag -' Bags made from jute fabric, usually measuring 71 x 48 cm and weighing 530 g. It has a valve at the side. It is made from double warp plain weave sacking fabric having 68 ends/dm and 39 picks/dm and weighing approximately 685 g/m2 (w IS: 2580-1982) Centre Centre Root (BOOK CEAL) - & - h under 'Jute Fibre Characteristics'

Selvedge

'Patent Selvedge' from which natural gum has been completely

Cerite removed.

Nett silk

Ceylons - Plain weave fabrics us& for underwear and shirts.

from cotton

warp

and woollen

weft

CHADDAR - An Indian term for cotton fabric in plain, twill, diamond, or honeycomb weave, used as a bed sheet or body cover.
' &ADDIAn Indian term for briefs (m 'Briefs'). in the dyeing or

Chafe Mark - A streak or mark caused finishing of piece goods. Chafes CHAHAR - Rough places in a cloth

by friction

where dress

rubbing fabric made

has occured. in Kashmir.

GUL - A high quality

woollen

CHAHARBAGH Shawl - A woollen fabric of fine mesh produced in the Kashmir valley for use as veil by women. It is generally square in shape and has an area of about 4 m2. Chain Chain la) Carpet - Warp threads, usually woven in pairs, between the warp way lines of pile and alternating over and under the weft. Axminster: Spool-loom Overhead- A portion of the overhead ('c') mechanism of a spool-axminster or gripper-spools loom. The number of links corresponds to the number of rows of pile in one complete repeat of the design, or multiples thereof. The correct row is presented by means of the gripper, or transfer arms to the weaving point as required. Chain Stitch a> Single Chain Stitch - A sewing stitch made from single (Coir) - Warp yarn in a coir matting.

46

: 45-1988

thread as shown below
OY)CCTloN Of

:

SUCCESSIVE

SfllCH

FORMAlION

FIG. 17 b)

SINGLE CHAIN STITCH :

Double Chain Stitch threads as shown below

A

sewing stitch made from two

FIG. 18

DOUELE CHAIN STITCH

Chain Warp - Warp threads, usually woven in pairs, alternating over and under the lower shot (weft yarn) and one or more top shots which are then bound and which enclose the stuffer yarns

and the
Chalk

tufts or

loops forming the pile.

Line - A 3-strand cotton or hemp line used by builders for lining up brickwork and by platers for setting out. The line is used by covering it with chalk powder which is transferred to the brickwork or steel plating by plucking. Challis

(a) A light, soft and pliable fabric of plain or twill weave usually printed in small floral designs but sometimes dyed in plain colours.
(b) A light-weight soft fabric in silk warp and worsted weft

originally made in Norwich (Britain).
Chambery - A dress material from silk or man-made fibre warp and worsted weft in twill weave.

CEAND - A square woollen shawl made in Kashmir for use of veil by women.
Channel - A narrow passage formed between plies of material in garment or by attachment of an additional ply of material, usually to house a draw cord. Channel Patch

envelope to
Chapands

- A channel shaped fabric fitting secured to the enable a rigid member to be laced thereto. - Waste silk from native reeling skin to CHARKHA - Silk yarn spun from inferior cocoons and silk

(French)

silk waste.
Chapie Silk Yam spinners waste.

47

SP:45-1988 Chaporaot -.A very fine woollen dress fabric weave from undercoat of Cashmere goat. made in plain or twill

- The distance from the edge of the specimen exposed Char Length to the flame under specified test conditions, to the upper edge of the charred section of the specimen, expressed in metric units. Character - 4 trade term adopted by the Australian indicate well-defined even crimp in the staple. CHARKHA natural Wool Board yarn to from

- A simple hand-operated contrivance for spinning fibres, also for reeling raw silk. contrivance

CHARKHA (Gin) .-. A simple hand-operated of cotton.
/ bARKHA Cotton - Cotton called BELNI), which 'CHARKHA (Gin)'].

used for ginning

ginned with the aid of CHARKHA is worked invariably by hand.

gin (also [See also

CHARKHA

Silk

- Raw

silk produced from

on CHARKHAS. natural fibres on CHARKHAS.

FE3ARKEA Yarn

- Yarn produced

Charmdines - A merino wool dress fabric with a warp rib effect, produced by a three-shaft twill weave in two fold yarns. Charmuse - Silk, cotton or rayon dress fabric with a satin weave that has a dull back and semi lustrous surface and drapes well. Used for paymer dresses, especially draped gowns. CHARSUTI working as An Indian one. term for fabric with four parallel yarns

Chasing - A cloth finishing operation usually for cotton and linens done on a.calender having five or more rolls. Two layers (in some cases, more) of the cloth are run through the machine at the same time and face to face which gives a characteristic threadiness with a subdued lusture and the threads are not flattened. CEiASSUM (Silk) - A term popular in West Bengal, to denote the silk waste obtained during reeling of cocoons, from polyvoltine races e.g., Bengal Chassum. CHAT - An Indian name CXUVARA Yarn - & for all types of cloth made of jute.

(g) under

'Coir Yarn'.

Checks - A,variety of fabrics having rectangular patterns formed by two or more colours of warp and weft. Checks may also be brought about by the use of fancy yarns, cross dyeing, printing, etc. Cheese - A cylindrical package of yarn usually cross-wound flangeless tube of wood, paper or other material. Cheese Cloth An open light-weight fabric in plain weave on a

made

48

SP:45-1988 from carded cotton yarns originally used for wrapping cheese, meat, etc.
Chemical Cotton Chemically purified cellulose from cotton or cotton linters intended for use in the cellulose industries. Chemicking - Bleaching non-protein fibre materials by means of a dilute hypochlorite solution.

-'An additional lay or layers of interlining in the Chest Piece front shoulder area.
Chesting - A finishing process in which the cloth after passing between all the bowls, usually, five, of a calender from bottom to top is wound upon itself on either of -the two upper bowls and later stripped therefrom. This process reduces the size of the interstices between threads. When the process has been done once, the cloth is described as chested or single-chested and if done twice, the cloth is described as double-chested.
cheviot

(a) A British mountain breed of sheep producing coarse wool. (b) A medium wool of 56's quality or coarser. produced from Cheviot or similar

(c) rough woollen tweeds breeds of sheep.
Cheviot Woollen and medium wools Yarn

require little

- Woollen spun yarn made from cross-bred and used for Cheviot type tweed cloths which felting.

Chiffon i A very light, sheer, open-mesh hard-twisted filament yarns in plain weave. Chiffon

fabric,

made from

Twist - Hard-twisted, single, raw silk thread having about 2000 to 4000 tpm; used for making chiffons, 'Mousseline de Seie' (French), etc. Velvet - A

Chiffon

light-weight, soft velvet with a short thick

pile.
CHIKKAN (or CHICKAN) - An Indian term for any fabric ornamented with eyelet embroidery obtained by a mixture of punch work with button-hole stitch using stem and flat stitches, also for producing conventional foliage and other effects.

Children's Socks
Chinchilla CBINDIES -

- SeamlBss

socks for of a

children. Bolvian rodent.

Soft and

grey fur

Peruvian and are

- Cut pieces of cloth arising during the normal course of

msnufacture

packing,

which

23 cm or less in length. fabric with a

Chintz - A plain woven, brightly coloured, printed
49

SP:45-1988 glazed finish. The glazed finish may be a temporary friction-calendered type or permanent cellulose type. Chintz is generally used for drapperies and dresses. Chlorinated Fabrics -'All wool fabrics which are chlorinated in order to render them nonfelting or to improve their dyeability or printability. The term is also applied to fabrics made from chlorinated wool sliver or yarn. Chlorinated Yarn - Yarn composed of wool fibres treated with chlorine by virtue of which they are rendered nonfelting simultaneously with increased dye absorption. Chlorination - When used with reference to textile processing, a term indicating the reaction of a fibre with chlorine. Wool and wool materials are chlorinated for imparting nonfelting property. Note - The chlorine may be in the form of the gas, or its solution in water, or it may be obtained from a suitable compound. Wet chlorination implies that the goods are treated in aqueous reagent. Dry chlorisolutions containing a chlorine-yielding nation implies treatment under non-aqueous conditions, e.g., by chlorine gas. Chlorofibre Constitution: Linear macromolecules having in the chain more than 50 percent (by mass) of vinyl or chlorinated viny.1 monomeric units, Examples: Poly$inyl chloride: - ( CHrCH Cl),-

and polyvinylidene chloride:
-(CHrC Clz),-

Chop - A trade-mark or ticket on a book of raw silk indicating its grade and name of the producer or shipper. Chopped Weft Weft that has been partially severed.

Chromate Process - A method of dyeing in which the fibre is treated in a dyebath containing a suitable chrome dye together with ammonium chromate, where by a chromium complex is formed within the fibre. Chromatic Colours - Those colours which possess hue, such as red, yellow, blue etc. As distinguished from the achromatic colours such as white, grey, slate, black. Chrome Dye - A mordant dye i.e. capable of forming a chelate complex with a chromium atom. Chrome Mordant Process - A method of dyeing in which the fibre is
50

sl?:45-1358

pre-treated in solution of a chromium compound and subsequently dyed with a chrome dye to yield a dye-chromium complex within the fibre. Chromosol Process - A method of dyeing similar to metachrome used is a double oxalate of except that here mordant process mordant. chromium and sodium or potassium known as chromosol CHUNRI cotton - An Indian term originally (CERJNGRI or CRUNGIDI) and silk sarees dyed by the knot tying method. fabric made in a tubular for

Circular-Knit Fabric -- A circular knitting machine.

form on a

term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to Classing - A trade defined lines according indicate grouping of fleeces into evenly length, colour, etc, (see also 'Wool Classing'). to fineness, Clean Wool Content - The amount of wool base adjusted contents of residuals and regain. Cleanability - The ability normal soil on application of a textile floor of the appropriate covering cleaning to standard to release processes.

Cleanness (Raw Silk) - The degree of cleanness of raw silk panels, determined on the basis of incidence of cleanness defects classimajor and minor defects by using official fied as super major, standard photographs for cleanness. Cleanness is expressed as a percentage. Cleanness Defects - Defects bad casts, knots, slugs, found in raw silk, such as waste, loops and loose ends. corkscrews, to fine worsted suitings or side napless and to show the
/

Clear Finish - Finish usually given dress material to render the face surface structure clearly.

Clear Woollen Finish - Clear face finish given to warp-face woollen fabrics such as buckskin, Venetian and whipcord by manipulations in manufacturing and finishing processes. Clearer Cloth - An all wool or wool blended machinery fabric, a short dense nap, used for covering cleaning devices. with

Clearing - A treatment applied to printed fabrics with the object of removing traces of unwanted dyestuff from, and improving the whiteness of the uncoloured area. The term is also used to denote an anti-chlor treatment given to wool goods that have been chlorinated. The term is also applied for removal of unfixed dyestuff from dyed goods. Clearing (Yarn) - The process of removing imperfections, such as slubs, thick places, thin places, neps, projecting impurities, etc. from the bo'dy of the yarn. Clem - A very small dart which 51 is sewn and not cut.

SP:45-1988

Climbing

Rope

(Mountaineering)
tWG

-

roping to each other safety.

or

mGre

A mountaineering rope used for climbers for the purpose of

Clip Marks - A rectangular area of fabric, 'adjacent to the selvede=, which is characterized by bruising, lustre, surface disturbance, or a difference in colour from the adjacent normal fabric. Principal Cause - This defect is caused by maladjusted stenter

clip.
Clipped Carded Wool - Clipped ~001 with an admixture of carded wool up to 25 percent. Wool cantaining admixture of over 25 percent of carded wool is known as carded wool. Clipped Wool - Same as shorn ~001.

Clock Length - Length of material f,ed into the breaker card for one complete revolution of the clock pointer. Cloque Closing Cloth Cloth Fabric - &

'Relief Fabric'.

- A sewing operation to seal a bagged out garment section. See

'Fabric'
- The principal or

(Garment)

outside,fabric

of a garment.

Note -This is the normal usage in the tailoring trade although any fabric may be described as a cloth.
Cloth, All. Wool Melton Finish

spun yarns
Cloth,

using superfine
for Followers

-- Melton cloth woven from woollenwools. Coats - Heavy twill fabric made from wool.

Blanket

homogenised natural
Cloth,

brown grey

Collar, VBite - An undyed all wool heavy weight fabric wGven in Z-and-2 twill weave from woollen-spun yarns.

Drab Mixture, Woollen, Water Resistant - A heavy, all wool or wool-synthetic fibre blended twill fabric, made from woollen spun yarns, heavily milled and treated for water repellency. It is a khaki mixture shade obtained by blending dyed and undyed fibres. This fabric is used for making overcoats for army personnel. Cloth,

Cloth, Woollen Kersey

- All wool piece dyed 2-and-2 twill fabric.

Cloth, Woollen Superfine - Fabric made from fine merino wool and used mainly for making berets. Cloth, Woollen, Twill Dyed - An all wool or wool-nylon blended 2-and-2 twill weave fabric made from woollen spun yarns, piece dyed and given a milled finish. Clothes Stop Line - A 3-strand hemp or cotton line originaJ.ly used 52

SP:45-1988

as a clothes line purposes.

in naval

vessels, now

used for miscellaneous

Clothing Wool - Virgin wool of short staple length generally used for processing in the woollen system. Cloudiness (a) In a weft knitted fabric, a defect consiting of ill defined areas of varying density attributable to the use of yarns of irregular thickness. (b) In a dyed fabric, a defect consisting of random, fainty defined uneven dyeing. (c) In a bleached fabric, a defect consisting of opaque patches, usually visible only in transmitted light, due to inorganic residue remaining after bleaching (see al= 'Cloudy Cloth'). Cloudy Cloth - A term applied to cloudiness in dyed fabrics caused by uneven dyeing or faulty treatment during finishing. Cloudiness may also be due to defects in the yarns. (See a& 'Colour Blurred' and 'Cloudiness'). Cloudy Web - Generally refers to card web giving a patchy appearance due to uneven distribution of fibres. Cluster - An assemblage of to a single load and generally two or more parachutes attached designed to open simultaneously.

Coarse - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate wool of large fibre diameter. Coat - A sleeved outer garment capable of opening completely down the front and often, as in workwear, described further by length, e.g. 3/4 or full length. Coated Racking - Backing to which rubber or plastics material. has been applied a layer of

Coated Fabric - A textile fabric on which there has been formed in situ on one or both surfaces, a layer, or layers, of firmly adherent coating material. Caated Rope - A rope covered along its whole length with a product intended to improve its performance or to provide it with resistance to.abrasion. COA$'EX - A short length tight-fitting coat generally worn by ladies. Also known as 'KOTI'. Coating - Any fabric used for making coats. Cobbler A piece returned, for 53 redyeing due to off-shade.

SP:45-1988

Cobourg

- Coarser, heavier and stiffer variety of Cashmere fabric.

Cockle - The wrinkled appearance of a fabric in which non-uniform relaxation of shrinkage has occured. (See alsQ 'Cockling'). Principal Causes - Tension variations of ends or picks during weaving, from variations in the degree of stretch imposed on the yarn during earlier processes, from differences in the contraction of two or more yarns used accidentally or unintentionally in the cloth. Note - Defect may be distributed over a large area of cloth or may be confined to.isolated stripes, bars, or streaks.
Cockled Yarn - Defective yarn featured by small slubs usually caused by irregular drafting due to the presence of fibres which are too long for the roll settings.

Cockled Yarn (Linen) - Yarn with isolated loops-of fibres protruding from the yarn surface owing to the relaxation of adjacent fibres that have previously been stretched during process. Cockling (a) The curliness 'Cockle'). or crimpiness in fabrics. (See also

(b) An irregular surface effect in knitted fabrics caused by loop distrotion due to variation in stitch and yarn twist.
Principal Causes - Irregular shrinkage in milling or scouring when yarns of different counts or quality, or with varying tensions are woven together; defective processing; etc.

Cockling: Corrugation; Sanforize wavy or pebbled place in a texture.

Roughness

- A crimped, rippled, fabric showing distortion of the

Principal Causes - This defect is caused during compressive shrinking by over feeding in which the shrinkage imposed on the fabric is greater than that compatible with the construction, or by poor moisture content control.

Cockspur Willey - &
Cocogsack

'Willey, Tenterhook'

- Double-warp 2/l twill weave sacking bags measuring usually 122 x 73.5 cm (normally with 102 ends/dm and 81 picks/dm), weighing approximately 1360 g, and with 5 cm wide green or blue stripes. It is used for packing cocoabeans.

Cocoon (Silk) - The silken shell spun by the silkworm larvae for their protection in the pupal stage.
Cocoonage (Silk) - Appliance

to enable them. to

spin

used for mounting mature silkworms cocoons;;also known as CHANDRIKE. 54

SP : 45-1988

Cod Line - A 3-strand heavy used for inland fishing.

hemp or cotton lightly tarred line

Coffee Twill Bag - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking bag measuring usually 101.5 X 71 cm (with varying ends/dm and picks/dm ranging from .89 to 102 and 31 to 35 respectively), weighing approximately between 1135 and 1600 g, used for packing coffee. Coffin - It is a cotton cord up to 3 mm diameter used by undertakers. Coil - A continuous length of rope or line arranged in the form of a spiral. Coir - A retted fibre obtained from husks of the coconut (,cocos nucifera). Coir Fenders - A spherical or cylindrical bundle of coir ropes or twisted yarns used as a shock absorber at the side of ship or boat for protecting it against the piers.

cdr

R9pe - A rope made from coir fibre mainly used by the shipping industry for mooring or generalpurposes.

Coir Rugs - Matting pieces with or without bristles cut,to the required sizes and finished at the edges.

Coir Yarn
(a) (b)

- Yarn spun from coir fibres by hand or machine usually 2-ply. Different varietie's of coir yarn are as follows:

&&XI' Yw - Superior quality yarn spun by hand machine and having soft twist.

or

BbJJENGO Yarn - Yarn made of clean,natural coloured hard-twisted coir with reasonable smooth appearance and good wearing properties. AMATORY Yarn - Yarn made of clean, natural coloured hard-twisted coir with reasonable smooth appearance and being slightly hairy. UDY or CARUVA Yarn - Yarn made from soaked fibre with medium twist-and reasonable thickness, it'srunnage varies from 100 to 200 ft-lb. mh Ym - Yarn spun from fibres of unsoaked or partly-soaked, coconut husk. It is of light to dark brown colour with varying quantities of pith adhering to the fibres. BEypoRE Ya - Hand-spun yarn having substantial amount of pith adhered to the fibres. Ym hand spun, - Yarn produced from partly-soaked husk, having medium twist and is pithy. 55

(cl

(d)

b>

(f)

(g) m

SP:45-1988

(h)

m Yarn - Hard-twisted machine-spun yarn. It is used for the manufacture of floor covering, ropes and for agricultural purposes.
sz Yarn - Thick hand-spun yarn used in the manufacture of ropes; also_known as 'VANNWM Yarn'. .

W (k)

T-VYCOME Yarn - Yarn similar to vycome yarn spun from shaving bits of yarn collected during spooling or rehanking process for baling.

Cm) VYCOME Yarn - Yarn which is comparatively clean, light in colour, even in twist, and is soft.
Collar (a) Neck band, upright or turned over on a coat, dress, shirt,

etc. (b) Band of lining,-lace or other material, which completes' the upper part of a garment around the neck.

Collar Stand - That part of a collar which joins the neck edge of the garment and terminates at the crease of the collar where the fall commences. Colour

(a) That characteristic of the visual sensation which enables the dye to distinguish difference in its quality, such as may be caused by difference in the spectral distribution of the light rather than by differences in spatial distribution or fluctuations with time. (b) Same as (a), but applied directly to the stimulus or .the source (primary or secondary) giving rise to the sensation. For brevity, the stimulus is often referred to as the colour. (cl That property of an object or stimulus, or quality of a visual sensation, distinguished by its appearance of redness, greenness, etc, in contradictiof to whiteness, greyness, or blackness (i.e. chromatic col'our in contradiction to achromatic colour).
(Coloured) - Refers to those wools containing non-scourable colour, e.g. canary yellow, heavy charcoal stajn, non-scourable brands, and fleece rot. Colour Colour Blurred (Patchy Dyeing) -

Dyed fabric having a patchy

appearance.
Principal Cause - Presence of improperly dispersed dyestuff.

Colour Discharge Printing - The production of coloured design on dyed textile fabrics by printing with a compo+ition cortaining
58

Sl?:45-1988

the discharging agent and action of the discharging
Colour Flecks - A small

other dye agent.

resistant

to discharging appearing in

the cloth

due to

length of coloured yarn unwanted contamination of yarn.

Principal Causes - Coloured threads, fabric pieces, etc., present in fibre bales; colour marking used for identifications at various stages of production; coloured fluff floating in ring . frame department; etc.
Colour Out - Colours missing from an area of design

in a printed by a blocked

fabric. Principal Cause - This defect is screen or a faulty colour supply. often caused

Colour Quality - A specification of colour in terms of both hue and saturation, but not luminance. Colour Smear
Colour Stain - Colour - h

smudged out of the intended design area.

(a) under 'Stains'.

Colour Value - The ratio between the strengthsof the dyes yielding dyeings of equal, visual strengths. In printing, this term is synonymous with tinctorial value. Colour-Contaminated Warp Yarns - A wrong colour appearing in several (though not necessarily adjacent) warp yarns for discrete distances. Principal Cause - This defect may be caused by the contamination of warp yarns of, e.g. one beam during warp preparation or warp dyeing. CoPoured Blotches (Blurred
or

Dark Patches)

- An

unwanted blotch

in a

printed pattern.

Coloured Fibres - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate natural brown, grey or black fibres or tufts grown by an otherwise white sheep and also fibres discoloured and stained by urine or unscourable marking fluid. Coloured Lake - An insoluble compound produced with suitable dyestuffs and metallic salts or bases by means of a precipitating agent.

Coloured Resist Printing - The production of multi-coloured design on textile fabric by dyeing, printing with a resisting agent and another dye resistant to effect of resisting agent and then developing so as to obtain coloured effect on a coloured background.
Comb Sliver

by the

- Continuous comb, for use in

assembly of parallel fibres, delivered the worsted spinning industry.
57

SP:45-1988

Comber's

Waste

- Waste

from the combing operation. It is a soft

waste. Combination Suit - An underwear worn by ladies in which vest and drawers/briefs are knitted in one piece. 'Also known as 'Union suit.' . Combined Fabric; Laminated Fabric - A material composed of two layers at least one of which is a textile fabric, adhering closely together by means of an added adhesive or by the adhesive properties of one or more of the component layers.
Combined Rope - A rope

whose strands steel wires.

made from natural or synthetic fibres are formed from a combination of fibre yarns and

Combined Underlay, Combined Backing - Pre-formed underlay which is attached to the back of the textile floor covering by one of several processes. Combing - Straightening and parallelizing fibres and removing short fibres and imdurities by using a comb or combs assisted by brushes and rollers, pins and sometimes by knives. Combing (Worsted) - A process for preparing comb sliver by removal of noils and impurities such as vegetale matter, kemps and nep$ from the worsted carded sliver. Combing Wool - Virgin wools long enough, generally above 45 mm, to be capable of processing on the worsted system. Comeback Wool - The wool produced by crossing two breeds of sheep to produce a cross-bred, then crossing the cross-bred with one of the original breeds; thus a comeback to the original.
/Note -- This term is usually used in the trade for wools which have bred back towards i'lemerino. -- A knitted tubular garment without tassels; used for protecting neck and chest/head against cold (ae alga 'Cap Comforter'). Comforter

Note Commercial

It is

longer than cap comforter.

Allowance (Conventional Allowance) - An arbitrary value equivalent to the commercial moisture regain plus an approved allowance for finish formally adopted for use with the oven-dry mass when calculating: (a) the linear density, or (b) the commercial or legal mass of a shipment or delivery of any specific textile material.

Commercial Mass (Weight) - The oven-dry mass of textile materials after removal of normal finish plus the mass correspondiing to their commercial moisture regain. Note In case of dipped
58

tyre cord

yarns, the commercial

SP:45-1988

mass is the sum of the oven-dry mass and the mass corresponding to the commercial mositure regain (or commercial allowance) plus an increase for dipping. Commercial Moisture Regain -. The agreed value to be added to the mass of a defined material (after drying it using prescribed methods) in order to obtain its commercial mass, linear density or mass per unit area. It is expressed as a percentage of the mass of the extracted and dried material. Note --The 'commercial moisture regain' and the 'commercial allowance' are sometimes referred to as the 'conventional allowance'. Compatible Dyes - Dyes which, when mixed together, behave in dyeing as a homogeneous dye having similar hue and fastness properties. Compound Fabric, Woven - A generic term for layered fabrics in which the separate layers or plies, each with its own warp and weft, are produced simultaneously and stitched together in one weave process. Cloths comprising two plies are known as double (or two ply) cloths and others by the number of plies they contain, e.g. three ply cloth. Compressibility Ease of squeezing. of a fibre or yarn to

Compressional Resilience - The ability recover from compressional deformation. Conculding Line Zacob's ladder.

- Low-twisted heavy manila yarn used as steps of

Condense Dye - A dye which, during or after application, reacts covalently with itself or other compounds, other than the substrate, to form a molecule of greatly increased size. Condenser (Ring-Doffer or Tape) - The last section of a woollen card. It divides a broad thin web of'fibres into narrow strips, which are then consolidated by rubbing into slubbing of circular cross-section. Condenser-Spun - Descriptive of yarn has been consolidated from strips of spun from slubbing that' card web by rubbing.

Condition (Wool) - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate the presence of grease, wax, suint, moisture, etc. Conditioned Mdss - The mass in the standard atmosphere of a textile for testing. material conditioned

Conditioning - To allow textile materials (raw materials, slivers, yarns and fabrics) to come to hygroscopic equlibrium with the surrounding atmosphere or with the standard atmosphere for testing. (h IS:8359-1971). 59

SP:45-1988

Cone

(a) A conical support on which yarn is wound (b) A conical package 'Drawing'.

;

and

of yarn wound on a conical support.

Cone System - m

Continuous Filament Yarn - A yarn composed of one or more filaments that run the whole length of the yarn. Contour Stitching - Automatic sewing along or near the edge of a garment part. The shape may be predetermined or edge following. Contract Net Weight (Bale)

(a) Cl;t~;,he

weight as obtained from the specified length nominal width and weight per square metre of cloth. 1;.is calculated as follows: weight of a bale (kg)
q

Contract.net NominslwidthO

x Specified length(m) x Weight (a/m21 10s

(b) mThe weight as obtained by multiplying the nominal weight of a bag and specified number of bags per bale.
Contract Regain

which the
Conventional

- The percentage moisture regain on the basis of corrected net mass is calcutated for trading purpose. Bundle System - A production system in which bundles the next operation.

pass for
Convolution Cooking

allocation to

- Natural twist in cotton fibre.

(Silk) - The process by which the silk cocoons are treated in boiling water for a shorttime with a view to softening the filament for easy unwinding during the subsequent reeling process. cop - A package of yarn, tapered at one or both ends, produced on

spinning&frames or weft winders. The cop from spinning either re-wound or directly used as weft in shuttles.

frame is

Copper Number - The mass in mg of copper reduced from the cupric to cuprous state by 100 g'of cotton under specified conditions. This is used as a measure to assess the reducing power of cotton. Cord - A product generally less than 4 mm dia composed of several strands of any construction, twisted or braided and structurally balanced to maintain compactness. Cord Carpet - A

loop-pile carpet

woven over

an unbladed round

wire.
Note - Weaving is carried out in a similar manner to that
60

SP:45-1988 . for Wilton carpet on a Wilton loom, and the carpet often referred to in the industry as cord Wilton. Cordage - All kinds of ropes,lines, from natural or man-made fibres. Cordon and a Yarn - A two-ply single, worsted cords and twines is therefore

manufactured

union yarn made from a single or woollen yarn.

cotton

yarn

Cordonnet Silk - Thick soft silk yarn consisting of two or more strands twisted together in one direction. Each strand being made of a number of singles loosely twisted in the opposite direction. Corduroy - A cut weft-pile fabric in which the cut fibres form the surface. The binding points of the pile wefts are arranged so that, after the pile has been cut, cords or ribs are formed in the direction of warp. . Note - Velveteen appearance. Corduroy (Knitted) fabrics are sometimes cut to give a corduroy

See

'Rib

Fabric

(Knitted)

(2 x 2)'.

Core (or Heart) - An assemblage of yarns with or without twist, used to fill the empty space formed along the axis of the rope and braided cord to prevent distortion in their shape. Core Circumference - The size of a jute, manila, hemp or sisal or synthetic core used in the manufacture of fibre C::ore for steel wire ropes.
I: 3 1:. lP'$.: I L. Board ; _ Core Sample - A trade term adopted b:. ._ 17 *. :. ;,I *,, ? .I to indicate. -..wool:.samp,le drawn by coring me-thcJ;is : ._._.+ .: or consignment.

a combination Core Spun Thread - A thread made from yarns which me of continuous filaments, providing the core and st'aple fibres, providing the sheath. Corkscrew Fabrics - A fine worsted fabric in twill effect is formed running at a flat angle. Corkscrew Yarn which a warp rib

(a) A term which, when applied to conventional. folded yarns, indicates that is faulty due to spiralling of the yarn one or more of the component ends. This ma y be caused by one or more of component ends differing I.n count, twist direction, twist level, or tension from the remainder. (b) A two ply yarn in which a soft-twisted thick wound spirally round a hard-twisted one. thread is

Corkscrews, Heavy - Imperfections in cocoon filament that are more if not than twice the diameter of the yarn, they cause damage removed.

sP:45-1988

Cornsack

Bag - Bags made from,Australian cornsack
x

cloth normally

measuring 104

58.5

cm (m

Is:

2875-1984).

Cornsack Cloth - A double warp, 2/l twill weave sacking jute cloth having 102 ends/dm and 35 picks/dm and weighing 78 g/m2 (B IS:3750-1966). Correct Invoice Mass (Weight) - The mass of a consignment of a textile material which is declared on the invoice. It is usually numerically equal to the commercial mass.* Corrected Net Weight (Bale) - The weight obtained by adjusting the actual net weight on the basis of actual regain to the contract regain. It is calculated as follows:

Corrected Net

Wight of

a Bale (kg) =

Net Weight (kg) x (I00 + Contract Rerr in Percent) (100 + Average Moisture Regain, perzent). Corridor Mats - See (c) under 'Mats'. Corset 1 A stiff tight-fitting undergarment worn by ladies to support body or mould the figure. It extends either from the bust or waist to just below the hips. Cortex - The body of wool or hair fibres. It consists of several elongated cortical cells. In merino type wool, these cortical cells are of two types, namely, reactive component called orthocortex and less reactive component called para-cortex.
Wool - Wool fibres which have felted together during its growth on the body of the sheep to form a cotted fleece. Also known as 'Matted Wool'. Cotted

Cottering - The entanglement of the fibres or filament of a yarn, or of one yarn with another, occuring during their passage through the guiding elements of winding, warping or knitting machines.
Cotton - Unicellular seed hairs of

the

Genus

Cossv~iygl.

Cotton Bagging - Bagging (m also IS:4436-1967).

cloth used for wrapping cotton bales of cotton yarn expressed as

Cotton count - The linear density number of 840-yd hanks/lb. Cotton Flannel - m

'Flannelette'.

Cotton Lap (Warp Knitting) - A traversing motion in the form of open laps in which warp threads progress by one needle space at each course. Cottonsack - A hemmed hessian bag measuring about 216 x 114 cm (normally with 38 ends/dm and 39 picks/dm), weighing approximately 1360g. The bag is usually without stripes and tar sewn. 62

SP:45-1988

Count Count

(Jute) of Reed

- &g

&g

'Grist'. *Reed Number'. a suitable organic component, usually a an a20 salt in such a way as to form

- To combine Coupling phenol, with a diazonium compound.

Count, .Yam Number, Yam Linear Density - A Count of Yam, Yam number indicating the mass per unit length or the length per unit mass of a yarn. Note - Various counting systems, using different units of used must be mass and length, have been in use, so the system system is tex. stated.The recommended Conversions

a) Direct

given that in Systems - To find the count in tex, another system, multiply the given count by the conversion factor. To find the count in any system, given that in tex, divide the count in text by the conversion factor.

b)

given that in tex, Indirect Systems - To find the count the conversion factor by the systems divide in another given count. To find the count in any other system, given that in tex, divide the conversion factor by the tex value. Conversiong - To convert the count in one system Generar to that in another, convert to tex and then convert to the second system by means of the above rules.

YARN COUNT SYSTEHS

a) Direct

Systems Unit of mass Unit of Length Conversion Factor to Tex

System

Tex
Denier Linen (dry spun), hemp, jute Silk Woollen (Aberdeen)

gram gram Pound

kilogram 9 000 metres 14 400 yards
(wyndle >

1 0.111 34.45 11

dram Pound grain

1 000 yards 14 400 yards 20 yards

1.938 34.45

Woollen (American grain)

63

SP:45-1988

b) Indirect System Asbestos Asbestos Cotton Cotton Cotton

System

Unit of Length

Unit of Mass

Conversion Eactor to Tex

(American) (British)

100 yards 50 yards yard 840 yards

(cut)

pound pound ounce

4 960 9 921 31 000 590.5 500 4 960

bump yarn (British) (Continental)

(hank)

pound l/2 kilogram pound

kilometre 100 yards

Glass (USA and Great Britain) Linen Metric' Spun silk Woollen '(Alloa) (wet spun)

300 yards

(lea)

pound kilogram pound 24 pounds

I 654 1 000 590.5 1 033 ._

kilometre 840 yards 11 520 yards
( swndle 1

(hank)

Woollen Woollen Woollen Woollen Woollen Woollen Woollen Worsted

(American (American (Dewsbury)

cut) 300 yards run) 100 yards yard 300 yards 300 yards

(cut)

pound ounce ounce

1 654 310.0 31 000

(Galashiels) (Hawick) (Yorkshire) (Yorkshire)

(cut) (cut)

24 ounce 26 ounce pound dram

2 480 2 687 1 938 1 938 885.8

256 yards.(skein) yard 560 yards (hank)

pound

Count Strength Product - A number obtained by multiplying the breaking load of skein-of yarn by the, count of yarn expressed in an indirect system (e.g. Cotton countx pounds). This is also known as 'Break Factor'. Note - A statement of the break factor of the skein must indicate the circumference and number of wraps in the skein if this is not otherwise apparent; without information on the number of wraps and circumference, a statement of the break factor is not correct. 64

SP:45-1988

Course

- A transverse

row of loops in a knitted

fabric

or garment. along a

Courses per 5 cm - The number of courses fabric or garment. wale of a knitted Cover

in 5 cm measured

degree of evenness and closeness of thread spacing. (a) The Good cover gives the effect of a uniform plane surface with hard twisted yaarns. and cannot be obtained (b) The degree to which, in fabric processing, the underlying structure is concealed by the finishing materials or treatments. Cover Factor - A number that indicates the extent to which the area of a cloth is covered by one set of threads. By introducing can be made in suitable numerical constants, its evaluation of counting. For any cloth there are accordance with any system two cover factors; warp cover factor and weft cover factor. The traditional cover factor in the cotton system (sometimes known as 'Peirce's cover factor') is the ratio of the threads per inch (25 mm) to the square root of the cotton yarn count. Coverall - A one piece being fastened at wrists type of legged workwear and ankles. often capable of

Covering Stitch - A type of chain stitch produced multi-needle machines, used for covering seams.

on twin-or

Covert Coating - A light warp-face shower-proofed overcoating in twill weave characterized by its mottled appearance due to the use of grandrelle yarns or marl yarns in the warp. Usually, it is made with union twist warp (i.e. cotton and wool yarns twisted together) and worsted woollen weft.

cow

Rope

- &$g

'Cattle Rope'. fibre line, a-strand, 4 mm

Crab Line dia used

- Manila, sisal or man-made in fishing.

Cribbing - A process used in the worsted trade to set the fabric in a smooth flat state so that it will not cockle, pucker or processing. The fabric istreated wrinkle during subsequent wet warp-way tension in a hot or boiling in open width and under fabric is aqueous medium, the tension being maintained while the cooling. Cracked Selvedge - A selvedge in which two or more adjacent ruptured. warp yarns, not including the catch thread, are Principal Causes - This defect is often damage or unbalanced warp tensions. caused by mechanical

running parallel to the warp or weft streak Crack - A narrow yarns. (& yarns due to pronounced opening between two adjecent 65

SP:45-1988

also

'Reed

Mark',

'Warp

Crack'

and

'Weft Crack').

Principal Causes - Mechanical defects in the loom such as crank--shaft bearing, clutch not grabbing crank-arm of loose promptly, loom banging off, too much warpwise play in reed, damaged or defective reed, etc. improper letoff,

FIG.

19

CRACK 56 mm dia and drilling cable

rope usually Crackers - Manila or man-made fibre above, used in well drilling in conjunction with rendering spring or elasticity to the wire line. Crammed Pick - b 'Pick, Dead'.

Crape Cord - A cord consisting of from one to four strands, each strand comprising a core covered by severeral fine threads in a spiral in a reversed long spiral, over wrapped in a 'shorter direction by a strong thread, giving a soft crepe or spiral effect. When two or more strands are used each strand is over twisted and laid together and reverse twisted. these are Crash - A fabric, originally made of linen, which has an irregular appearance, due to the use of thick, uneven yarn, particularly in of linen, the weft. Woven in plain or fancy crepe weaves, cloths of these are now made. Typical cotton, spun rayon and unions linen crash fabrics for towels are plain woven from 16 to 25 lea (66 to 103 tex) flax tow yarns. Cratch (Narrow Fabrics) .- A type of frame or creel for carrying the warps and their tensioning devices. It is sit.uated behind the loom in an upright position and occupies the full width of the loom frame. It is usually divided into vertical section by wood of sections as struts so as to or metal give the same number there are in the loom. The warps are placed in the reed spaces cratch and rotate on spindles. in a fabric that may be - An unitentional fold Crease (Defect) Mark', 'Rope introduced at some stage in processing (see 'Crease 66

SP:45-1988

Marks'). Crease (Printing) - A, break in design caused due to crease or wrinkles in the body or the selvedge of the cloth during printing.

Crease Mark removed.

- A

mark left

in a

fabric after a crease has been

Pincipal Causes - Mechanical damage to the fibres at the fold, by variation in treatment due to the construction along the fold, or by disturbance of the fabric structure. Crease Recovery - The measure of crease-resistance, specified quantitatively in terms of crease-recovery angle.

Crease Resistance - A term used to indicte the capacity of a textile material to resist and/or recover from, creases incidental to its usage.
Crease Streak - A dyed-in mark of a crease, usually along the warp direction, of a lighter colour within the crease area and often with edges darker tnan the adjacent normal fabric. Principal Cause - This defect is often caused by the fabric being pad-dyed whilst creased. Crease-Resist Finish (or Easy-Care Finish) - A finishing process, mainly for cellulosic fabrics, that confers the characteristic of increased recovery from creasing, a property not inherent. Creel Mats ti

(d)

under 'Mats'.

Creep - Deformation which is time dependent and exhibited by a textile material subjected to continuing load. Creep is recoverable or non-recoverable following removal of the applied load. Creep, Primary time.
Creep, Secondary - The

recoverable component The non-recoverable

of creep after some of creep.

-

component

Crepe - A fabric, characterized by a crinkled, puckered or pebbly surface, with highly twisted yarns in the warp r weft or both. Similar effect is also obtained by using normal CI twisted yarn and crepe weave.
Crepe De Chine - A finely crinkled plain weave fabric with a smooth and lustrous surface exceptionally sof , light-weight and well-draping. Crepe effect is obtained by a4ternating two weft yarns twisted in one direction with the nexttwo yarns twisted in the opposite direction.

Crepe Embossing - The embossing of a fabric with a pattern resembling a true crepe. The effect may be either permanent or not, according to:
67

SP:45-1988

(a) the nature (b) the

of the fibre; of embossing ; or treatment.

conditions

(c) the post finishing
Crepe

Fabric

(Knitted) fabric made wholly or partly

(a) Any warp or weft-knitted from crepe yarn.

(b) A double-faced warp-knitted fabric cleared stitches per unit of length the other.

with more rows of on one side than on

(cl

fabric of irregular surface A weft-knitted made by random tucking on one set of needles. or may not be (c) above. of plain

structure

Note A crepe yarn may fabrics referred to in (b) and

used to produce

Crepe Flannel - An all wool fabric soft handle and crepe effect.

or twill weave

with

a

Crepe Georgette - A light-wight, semi-shear, dull in appearance, woven with highly twisted 'S' and 'Z' twists in both warp and weft.

plain-woven crepe, yarns,alternating in

Crepe Marocain - Heavy dress-weight 'canton crepe'. The weft coarser than the warp and gives a cross-ribbed effect.

is

Crepe Yarn - A twisted single yarn which, when woven into a cloth of suitable cnstruction and given the appropriate finishing treatment, is capable of producing a pebbled surface effect. Note 1 - Originally, 3/13/15 highly twisted twist natural either silk yarn.

ExamPle:
Note 2 from other

denier,

S or Z, 2200 tpm. construction

- Crepe yarns are produced in a similar natural and man/made fibres.

Crepe-Back Satin - A fabric characterized by a satin weave on the face and a crepe on the back. The weft is generally of crepe on the twist. The fabric appedrs dull on one side and lustrous other. It is also called 'Satin-Back Crepe'. usually with Crepe-de-Chine (French) Yarn - Hard twisted yarn, 1600 to 2800 tpm, generally made from 3 to 5 raw silk threads.It is used as weft in Crepe-de-Chine. Crepe-Georgette tpm, generally Crepillage Twisted yarn usually with Yarn made of two threads of raw silk. Undesirable pebbly appearance in 2000 to 3600 a fabric.

sp:45-1988

Principal Creping

C&EV~

-

Insufficient

or

uneven

weft tension.

(a) A suitable wet treatment that allows the relaxation of the strain of highly twisted crepe yarns and so produces the characteristic crepe effect in the fabric. (b) A chemical treatment similar to (a). designed to produce an effect

dress fabric from lustre wools, woven in Crepoline - A worsted various modification of Z-and-2 warp rib weave which give a greater proportion of warp on the surface and produce an irregular effect of a crepe character. heavier, characterized by pucker effect in stripes or figures formed by thick, blister or alternately twisted warp yarns.
Crepon Crew Neck -- A term applied to neck-opening finished in slightly curved form. - A fabric similar to crepe but

designed,

cut or

FIG. 20
Crimp (Fibre) -

CREW NECK of fibre.

The waviness

The fibre characteristic may be expressed numerically Note by reference to the number of waves or crimps per unit length or, by the difference in distance between points on the fibre as it lies in an unstretched condition and the same two points when the fibre'is straightened under suitable tension, expressed as a percentage of the unstretched length.
Crimp (Yarn) - The waviness or distortion of a yarn due to interlacing in the fabric.
NOTE 1 In woven fabrics, the crimp i6 measured by the relation between cloth length and the corresponding length of yarn when it has been removed from the cloth and straightened under suitable tension.

Note 2 - Crimp may be expressed numerically as (a) perc$nta-ge crimp, which is 100 x difference between yarn and,cloth length divided by cloth length; or (b) crimp ratio, which the ratio of yarn length to cloth length. Note 3 - This definition could logically be applied to knitted fabrics or fabrics of pile construction, but it is preferable to employ special terms, such as, 'stitch length', 'take-up' and 'terry ratio'.
69

SP:45-1988

Crimping/Texturieing - Processes usually or containing filament yarns made from impart high stretch character.

applied to continuous thermoplastic fibres to

- A stretch yarn in which the deformation is wave Crinkled Yarn like.The crimp is obtained by knitting a yarn into a fabric, heat setting the fabric and then back winding the yarn from the fabric. Crisped - A term used in describing an aspect fabric. folded fabric; i,t describes a jute selvedge to selvedge. middle from Crocheting - An operation crochet hooks. Cracking - The rubbing of producing fabric of make-up lengthwise of jute at the

with

the help

of

off of the dye

from wet

or dry

fabric.

Crofting - The oldest process of bleaching linen by soaking in an alkaline solution and drying in presence of sun on grass until it becomes white. in the Croisure - A technique of twisting raw silk over itself process of reeling with the object of consolidating the different filaments constituting raw silk, rounding off the angularities of off the extra moisture and gum. the thread and squeezing Cross Dyeing - A dyeing of one component of a mixture of fibres after at least one of the others has been dyed already. Crop--End (Fibre) a under 'Jute Fibre Characteristics'.

Cropping - A process of shearing the protruding fibres from the the cloth an improved surface of the cloth in order to give appearance. of the yarn a reversal Cross Plating -' In rib-plated fabrics, stitches contained in certain courses. posit:ions within all the Note A plated rib fabric shows one colour on the plain reversal of wales and the other colour on the rib wales and the yarn positions for a number of courses, as in 'Cross Plating' plXdUCeS a check effect in two colours. In the case of Cross Pocket - A pocket which lies horizontally. trousers the ptlcket mouth can run from the waistband on the front, 10 cm down the side seam from the to a point approximately waistband. Cross Seam -- The seam joining two adjacent panels in a gore.

- A hand stitch formed by passing the needle Cross Stitch alternatively on and off the edge slightly through the material and in advance of the last stitch. Used as a substitute for felling or for ornamentation of raw edges. Ckoss-Bred The term used to denote 70 sheep and the wool.

:45-1988

(a> Sheep

- Progeny of two different breeds of sheep in the broad sense of the term, though this t,erm is often applied to indicate a cross between merino and other sheep, such as Lincoln. Wools - Wool produced generally, though not necessarily, by the cross-bred sheep. This is of three types, namely, i) Fine cross bred wool - of 56 to 58s fineness (26-29 microns). - of 48 to 54s fineness (30-35 microns). grade

(b)

ii) Medium

cross-bred

wool.

grade

iii) Coarse

cross-bred

wool

- below 48s fineness grade (above 36 microns). wool.

Cross-Bred

Yarn

- Yarn

made

from

cross-bred

Cross- Joining - An operation in which two lengths of carpet are other than the selvedges. joined by seaming in locations Crotch (Crutch, Fork) - The region of the garment corresponding to the fork of the human body; commonly the place at which inside leg seams join. Crowfoot, Narrowings Crown The u;pper - A term used to denote portion of the canopy. two-needle narrowings.

or toe of Crows' Feet -- A puckering effect, usually in 'the heel hosiery and generally associated with the suture circular-knitted line. Crows' Feet (Defect) - Cloth breaks or wrinkles of varying intensity and degrees of size, resembling bird's foot prints in shape, and occuring during the wet processing of fabrics. - A piece of fabric used at the bottom Crutch Piece of drawers to join the two-leg portions. Crutchings - Wool removed from the back portion shearing. the sheep a month or two before final of the seat

of the thigh

of

Bags made from 2/l twill weave sacking Cuban Sugar Bag (Cubans)cloth measuring about 122 x 73.5 cm weighing approximately normally having 102 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm. 1135 g; the cloth Cuff - The lower part of the sleeve -'or leg of a garment which a plain turned in edge. A turned up sleeve may be usually has described as a gauntlet cuff. Cummer BundWaist band, top of trousers. Cup Seaming .- Joining either folded or pleated, fabric worn over the on a selvedge-

two pieces 71

of knitted

SP:45-1988

to-selvedge basis by means of a chain stitch production machine in which the fabrics are moved forward between feed cups (compare linking). Cupro Constitution: Example: Cellulose II.
cellulose

on a sewing revolving

Regenerated process.

obtained

by

cuprammonium

(fibres, yarns, and of textiles Curing - The heat-treatment fabrics but mainly fabrics) designed to complete the polymerization of condensation of added substances. reaction Curled Curled Pile - & (b) under & (b) 'Pile'. under 'Defective Selvedge'. introduced by them and then

Selvedge

Curled Yarn - Worsted yarn in which the curls are number of yarns, setting over-twisting a large untwisting into individual yarns.

Pieces of material. (usually lining) put Curtains - Of trousers. under the waistband from side across the top of the undersides seat seam. seam to Cushion knitted - The Sole footwear. reinforced sole with terry loop surface in -.

Cut (Yarn) (a) A length (b) In Cut Cloth of warp required to weave a piece of cloth;or 274 m.

the jute

and flax trade, length

a skein measuring

- A continuous

of cloth. Sacking 73 m or more 37 m or more but less than 73 m 14 m or more but less than 37 m

Cut

(or full cut) cut

Hessian 82 m or more 37 m or more but less than 82 m 18 m or more but less than 37 m

Medium

Short piece Cut Glove Cut Hose - & - See

'Cut Hosiery'. 'Cut Hosiery'. made to fabric. shape by cutting out and seaming

Cut Hosiery - Hosiery flat or tubular knitted

(or Keel) - Marks made Cut Marks on warp during sizing. 72

at intervals

of definite

length

SP:45- 1988'

Cut Pile

- Gee - &

(c) under
(I:)

'Pile'. 'Defective Selvedge'.

Cut Selvedge Cut Stocking Cut Underwear

under

- See

'Cut Hosiery'.

- I;ee 'Cut Hosiery'. weft with fabric. a strong

- A defect caused by the use of weak Cut Weft as pin holes in the finished warp, showing

Cut, Make and Trim - A section of the industry in which a contractor is supplied with materials and designs in order produce garments for a principal.

to

Cut/Loop Pile - Pile of a carpet formed, during manufacture,by and lGGp.5 tufts of different lengths or of the same length .

1. Tuft 2. Loop 3. Substrate

FIG. Cuticle Cuttings the root Cuttle - 3ee

21

CUT/LOOP

PILE

(LONGITUDINAL

SECTION)

'Epidermis'. cut off from

- Hard and barky portions of jute strand end or crop end of the raw jute strands.

(a) To place width.

cloth

in loose

transverse

folds,

usually

in open

(b) To fold finished transverse folds

cloth down the middle and place of predetermined length. down the. middle

it in

Note - Folding finished cloth 'rigging' in the wool trade. 73

is termed

sp:45-1988

Dags (Daggings) - Staple5 or locks of wool from the breech area heavily coated with dung. Such wools should not be classified as crutchings. DAISEE Jute See 'Jute'. to hold the

DALA or Tray silkworms during Damask ground Damping forcing

Local term to denote the receptacles the period of rearing.

- A firm, lustrous reversible fabric with a satin or twill and somewhat similar in appearance to brocade but more flat. - Applying moisture to fabric, the mist through the fabric. - See 'Coloured Blotches'. prior to pressing, by

Dark Patches Darning fabrics Dart garment to the

- Correction of defects, imperfections and damages in and garments by thread and needle. Also known as 'Mending'. A wedge or diamond shape removed from the surface of a part by stitching or by cutting and stitching to contribute shape of the garment. Dart - A dart cut at the waist to give a closer fit.

(a) Fish

(b) V-Dart DASTANA -

- A dart provided term for

to give a better (see

fit at the seat.

An Indian Acetate

glove

'Glove').

Deacetylated

Constitution: Example: complete Dead fibre

Cellulose

II. cellulose obtained by approximately of a cellulose acetate.

Regenerated deacetylation

(a) Textile Floor Covering - That part of fibre in a needled pile textile floor covering, which forms or is incorporated in the substrate and which does not form part of the effective pile. (b) Cotton
(c)

- Immature

cotton

fibres. applied to denote kemps in wool

Wool - A term commonly or wool materials.

Dead Frame Yarn (Carpet) - Pile type yarn embedded totally in the . _ substrate. It may be of various types and colours and may replace pile-forming yarn in one or more frames, thus avoiding variations of the thic ness of the substrate. Alternately, it may also be included as "1 complete frames to give extra filling and cushioning to the substrate. In this case it may be substituted for stuffer warp yarns. 74

SP:45-1988

Dead Weight Volume (Bale) - The volume calculated from the contract weight of a bale on the basis of 1.3935 m3 to a tonne or 50 ft3 to a ton. Dead Wool causes.It - Wool taken from sheep that have died from natural dead fibre. should not be confused. with

Dead Yarn (Carpet) - The pile yarn in a multiframe Wilton carpet which lies completely flat in the substrate and is not being raised by the jacquard mechanism. It excludes all yarn forming the effective pile and the pile root. (a Fig.87). Decatizing - A finishing process, chiefly to improve the handle wound in open and appearance of fabric, in which the fabric, width tightly on a perforated roller, is either immersed in hot or boiling water, which may be circulated through the fabric (wet decatizing ), or has steam with or without pressure blown through Dry decatizing with steam under pressure is it (dry decatizing). called kier decatizing (K.D.). Note - The process fabrics containing wool. Decitex One tenth of a is used mainly for f inishing worsted

tex unit

(m

'Tex').

Decortication - A process of separating fibres from other vegetable in the case of leaf fibres and coconut husk. material especially DEDSUTI - An Indian term for matt fabric with two threads working as one in warp direction and single weft thread (see also 'Oxford'). Deformation, Immediate Elastic - Recoverable deformation which is essentially independent of time, i.e., deformation occuring in a time approaching zero time and recoverable in a time approaching zero time after removal of the applied load. Defective Selvedge defects as under: - A general term covering a number of specif&c

(a> Bad Dyeing
Principal or printing.

or PrintinP Cause

of the Selvedge

- Self descriptive. during dyeing

- Crease

on the selvedge

(b)

Curled

selvedae

(Rolled

Selvedne)

- Turned

over selvedge.

Principal Causes - Incorrect balance of cloth structure between body and selvedge, tension diffrence between body and selvedge yarns, differential shrinkage between selvedge and body of the cloth, excessive weft tension, etc.

(cl

Cut Selvedae (Burst and Torn cuts and tears. Principal Causes

Selvedrce) -

Selvedge

with

- Selvedge
75

sticking

to the take-up

SP:45-1988

roller at the time of doffing, damage caused ing, cropping or other processes; etc.

during

shear-

FIG.

22

TORN SELVEDGE which does not vary in

(d) Distorted SelvedPe - A selvedge width but which is not straight. Principal Cause - Uneven

stretching with

during

processing. loops

(e) LOOPY Selvedaa -- Selvedge extending beyond it.

irr-egular weft

Principal Causes -- Inadequate tensiun of weft yarn, wrong loom timing, catching of weft on race board and shuttle box etc.

FIG. (f) Pulled-in-Selvedge Principal

23

LOOPY

SELVEDGE with edges pulled-in

.-Selvedgc

cause

-- Iscslated 76

tight, picks.

SP: 45

1998

(g) Rugaed or Ragged indentations or Principal ends .
(II)

selvedge SelvedPe ..- A wavy corrugation at the edge;;_
-

showing

Cause

Variation

in the tension

of selvedge

Scalloped Selvedgg ~'An abrzyz garrow fv . selvadge of the finished Principal Cause .-Clip to gri.p the selvedge. of stentering

place

in the

machine

failing

Cjl

i.e. s."'_acker than the Slack Selvedae -- .A selvedge cause cut, torn or burst body of the fabric. This may aelvedges during subsequent processing. Principal Causes -- Incorrect balance of cloth structure selvedge yarns woven between the body and the selvedge, at low tension, etc

FIG. (k)

24

SLACK

SELVEDGE than the or burst

Tight Selvedae - A selvedge i.e. tighter cause cut, torn This may body of the fabric. selvedges during subsequent processing.

Principal Causes - Incorrect balance cf cloth structure between the body and the selvedge, selvedge yarns woven at high tension, etc. (m) Uneven Selvedne - Selvedge which varies in width.

Principal Causes - Varia,tion in weft tension, lack of ends or the tension control on the number of selvedge thereof, etc. Deep Dyeing - Descriptive greater up-take of selected are dyed together. of fibres modified so as dyes than normal fibres, when to have the two

77

sP:45-1988

Deep Pinning - Conspicuous pin stenter marks appearing in the body of the fabric and so reducing the usable width of the fabric. Principal Cause

feed on hemp line
Deformation

to a

- This defect is pin stenter.. - Plain

often caused

by incorrect

Deep Sea Lead Line

of about

12 mm

or cable-laid diameter.

untarred good quality

- A change' in the shape of a specimen, e.g. an increase in length produced as a result of the application of a load. Deformation may be immediate or delayed, and the latter may be recoverable or non-recoverable.

Deep-Dye - Descriptive of a process for dyeing or printing carpets characterized by complete penetration of the dye into the pile. Deformation, Delayed
Degreasing

- m

'Creep'.

(a> The

removal of grease, suint, and extrneous matter from wool by an aqueous or solvent process; and from the textile materials by extraction with an organic solvent.

(b) The removal of natural fats, waxes, grease, oil and dirt

-Degumming

-

&

'Boiling-Off'. worsted dress

Delaine

- A plain woven, elaborately printed, fine

material. Delustering - A process to subdue the lusture of textile fibres, yarns or fabrics by chemical or physical methods.
Denaturation - The conversion of the

protein of

silk gland into

insoluble silk
Denier

filament.

- The unit for expressing the linear density of man-made fibres and silk filaments, yarns and cords which is equal to the mass in grams per 9000 m of material. Denim - A warp-faced twill cloth made from yarn-dyed warp (usually blue or brown) and grey weft yarn. Typical cotton construction is 3/l twill weave and .used for making apparel.

Dense - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate a compact fleece due to a high follicle density. De&ty
Dent -

(Fibre) -

See

unc&g

'Jute

Fibre

Characteristics'.

The unit of a reed comprising a reed wire and the space between the adjacent wires. 78

SP:4571988

Depilatory Process - A process for using sodium sulphide. The pulled called 'Tannery Woolf in India.

removing wool from the pelt wool so obtained is also

Depth - That colour quality an increase in which is associated with an increase in the quantity of colourant present, all other conditions (viewing, etc) remaining the same.

Derby Rib

- A

term applied

to 6

x 3

rib. dermatitis.

Dermatitis - Wool affected

by mycotic

Desized Fabric - A fabric from initial size has been removed.
Desizing

which minimum 80 percent of the

- A process for removing size from grey goods in preparation for bleaching, dyeing, etc, by means of an acid or enzyme or by any other means.

Developing - A stage in dyeing or printing during which a leuco compound or dye in an intermediate stage is converted by chemical reaction into a stable dye within the fibre.
Devil See

'Willey,

Wool'.

DHOTI - An Indian term for a piece of cotton cloth, white,3.5 metres and above long with narrow coloured border and heading. Yarns used cover's wide range of counts but the construction is more or less square, generally used by men. Diamond Hose - Hose with solid diamond designs. Diaphragm - A fabric partition within a lighter-than-air aircraft, which may be gastight to provide separate compartments (e.g.ballonnet diaphragm) or non-gastight to maintain shape (e.g. stabilizer diaphragm). Diazotisation - A chemical reaction to convert an aromatic amine into a diazonium compound. Die Cutting (Die-Pressing) - Cutting one or more layers of material using cutting tools (dies) or a composite cutting tool in conjunction with a machine press (Clicker press). Differential Dyeing - Usually descriptive of fibres of the same generic class, but having potentially different dyeing properties from the standard fibre. Diffusion - A movement of molecules or ions through a solution or fibre.due to the existence of a concentration gradient. Dimensional Change - The decrease or increase in dimensions (i.e. in length or width or both) after subjecting the fabric or garment to the prescribed test, expressed as-a percentage of the corresponding dimensions before such test. 79

5F:45-.1988

Dimensional Restorability -. The ability of a fabric to return to its original dimensions expressed as a percentage of the original dimensions. Dingy --. A trade term adopted by the Australian indicate wool having a dull inferior colour. Dip - An immersion a liquid. for relatively short duration, Wool Board to

of a textile

in

Dip Pick Up -- The amount of dipping material present in the specimen.It is expressed as the percentage of the mass of oven-dry dip-free specimen. Dipped Rope - A rope of which all the components (yarns, groups of yarns, strands) have been treated with a so-called impregnating product intended to confer special characteristics on the rope. Dipping (a) (Verb) - The process of or cord fabrics tyre ,adhesion to rubber. (b) (Noun) - The material impregnating tyre yarns, cords with a compound to improve its

itself.

Direct Cotton Dye, Direct Dye -- An anionic dye having relatively hi& substantivity for cellulosic fibres when applied from an aqueous dyebath containing an electrolyte. Direction in Netting - The directions in netting are designated in relation to the general course of the netting yarn as follows: (a) N-direction the general (b) - The direction at right angles course of the netting yarn. (normal) to

The di:--ection parallel T-direction course of the netting yarn, twine wise.

to the general

(c) BB-directiork -The direction parallel to the bars, when the netting is stretched so as to form square meshes. &RALcouRsEof r~ WElTrrci UAN
z A

t !A) (8`

FIG.

25

DIRECTION

IN NETTING

- The direction in which Direction of Lay (Direction of Twist) the strands are laid to form a rope. Strands are laid either in When the the right-hand direction or in the left-hand direction. 80

SP:45-1988

strands are laid in the right-hand direction, the lay of rope is called Z-lay. When the strands are laid in the left-hand direction, the lay of rope is called S-lay.

Z-Lay or Right-Hand-Lay

S-Lay or Left-Hand-Lay

FIG.

26

DIRECTION

OF LAY one or several colours fabric and then fixed by fabric is usually white

Direct Style - A style of printing in the dyes are applied to where the means. The ageing or other appropriate sometimes be previously dyed. but may

Discharge Style - Style of printing in which dyed fabric is with a chemical composition which destroys the dye printed locally to give a white pattern or in which a second dye, applied simultaneously with the discharge, produces a pattern of contrasting colours. Discharging - The destruction by chemical means of a dye or mordant already present on a material to leave a white or differently colour pattern. Discolouration - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate any departure from the natural colour of wool except scourable discolouration. Disease-Free Seed (Silk) - Silkworm seed which has been certified as disease-free after microscopic examination of the mother-moths. Disperse Dye - A class of water-insoluble dyes suitable for dyeing cellulose acetate and hydrophobic fibres usually applied from the aqueous suspensions. Distorted Disturbed but where Dobby yarn, Doctor Cord used Selvedge See (d) under 'Defective has been Selvedge'. disarranged, or cotton

Place - An area where the weave the yarns are undamaged. - Cord manufactured in dobby looms by (Streak) - a\(b)

from flax,sunn hemp the textile mills. under 'Stains'.

Stain

Doeskin- A twill-woven fabric finished with made from 5-end are Some of these fabrics Doffing - An operation of removing
81

a nap on one side. satin weave. from a machine

filled

packages

SP:45-1988

and usually followed by empties.

the a

operation

of

replacing

them with

=amY

- Wooi showing found in old sheep.
A group

distinct loss of crimp atid is usually skeins twisted into a roll.

Dole Dollop

of 'Rayon'

- A specified weight of jute fibres to be spread on the feed cloth of a breaker card or a hackling machine, as the case may be, in a given time usually indicated by the revolution of a clock hand of the machine. Donegal - A plain-weave fabric woven from woollen-spun yarns characterized by a random distribution of brightly coloured flecks or slubs. It was originally produced as a coarse woollen fabric (tweed) in Irish county Donegal. Dolly (Washer)

(a)

A term used for a woollen or worsted piece-scouring machine having two bowls rotating above the surface of the liquor to squeeze the fabric and usually a suds-box beneath the bowls to carry away the liquor squeezed out from the fabric; and A term applied to a hosiery-scouring machine of the tom-tom type,i.e., free-falling beaters dropping on to goods immersed in the scouring liquor in rectangular troughs, which are moved forwards and backwards.

(b)

I

Note - This term, has, by' association, tended to be used loosely'for any type of rope-scouriing machine by processors of woollenp.or worsted. It is never used for a milling machine of the usual rotary type, or for the fulling stocks. Tweed - A rough woollen .fabric made from thick yarn in plain or 2 and 2 twill and finished with little or no milling_-named after an Irish county. ' Donegal
Dope A solution of a fibre forming polymer as prepared for extrusion through a spinning jet.

Dope-Dyed Fibre or Filament - Yarn or tow produced by dope-dyeing.
Dope-Dyeing - Production of coloured yarn'or tow by incorporation

of coloured

pigments in

the spinning solution. for making tents and other

DORI - 'An Indian term for cords used general purposes.
DORIA

(DORIAH) - Plain weave cotton cloth grey, bleached or dyed, finished hard or soft with corded effects produced by cramming the warp ends. DOSUTI -

An Indian term for a matt fabric where two warp threads 82

SP:45-1988

are working in-pairs and two weft threads are placed shed.
Double Double Atlas - &g

in'the same

(b) under waveform for

'Atlas'. more than three quarters of the

Bow, Weft

- Weft yarns in a fabric which exhibit an approx-

imately sinusoidal wavelength.

- This deect is caused by a lack of control Principal Cuase in fabric manufacture or processing. Warp - Warp yarns in a fabric which exhibit an Bow, approximately sinusoidal waveform for more than three quarters ofwavelength. Double Principal Cause - This warping.

defect is

often caused

by lack of

control during

Double Breasted (D-B.) - A coat or any other upper garment with wrap over fronts having buttons and buttonholes on each forepart. Double Double Chain Stitch See

(b)

under "Chain

Stitch'

Cloth - A compound fabric in which a face cloth and a back cloth each with its own warp and weft are combined during weaving. It is used for coatings, blankets, upholstery cloths, beltings, etc.

Cocoon - A cocoon jointly built by two silkworms; it serves as protective shell for both the worms during their pupal stage of existence. Such cocoons are readily distinguished by their size and toughness. Double Double Ends - Two ends found where only one is called for the fabric.

by the

design of

FIG. 27

DOUBLE ENDS
83

SF:45--1988

Double

Hessian

Bag - A bag having

two layers

of cloth

on each face.

Double Jersey - A fabric with fine rib structures made on a two beds of needles, each part knitting independmachine having ently of the other. The resultant fabric has two interconnected layers which are back to back; having the appearance at front and the two sides of the of jersey fabric; i.e., back of the face cloth are interlocked or inter-knitted to create the impression of a doubly-knitted plain-jersey material. Double Jersey Jacquard Fabric knitting machine with jacquard Double Double marls. Layer Bag a 'Double - A thick fabric made on a rib design intended for outerwear. Hessian Bag'. single

Marl Yarn

- A two-fold

yarn made from two identical

Double Pick - Two picks in a single shed where only one is called for by the design of the fabric. This fault may appear as a line across the width of the cloth. Principal cause --Restarting shed when weft breaks. Double Double similar Pique Satin weave Fabric See (b) of loom without finding correct

under

'Pique

(Weft knitting)'.

Ribbon - A double warp ribbon with a satin or on each face, the two faces being equally lustrous. - The sole of a knitted footwear reinforced with an

Double Sole extra yarn.

Double Top Stocking - A stocking by turning over the upper portion sewing it down. Double Double Tricot Vandyke Fabric - & See

with a welt (at the top) formed of the stocking and knitting or

'Double-Faced 'Atlas'.

Fabric'.

(b) under

Double, On The - Any material which has been folded along the side inwards, so middle of its length, normally with the face that the selvedges are together. Cutting on the double is performec by cutting through two thicknesses so as to obtain two pieces, e.g. a right and left hand section. Double-Faced Fabric Also known as 'Double Tricot Fabric'.

(a) Simplex fabric - A double-faced usually made on two needle-bars of a bearded-needle warp knitting machine, the two sets of warp threads are meshed together successively on each needle bar to produce a fabric that , normqlly has the same appearance on both sides. (b) Duplex fabric -.A double-faced a4 fabric composed of two fab-

SP:45-1988

rics pasted together, face sides outward, each having been produced-on one needle bar of a warp knitting machine. These fabrics are often identical, in which case the duplex fabric resembles simplex fabric in appearance. Double-Knit Fabric - h Double-Warp (DW) Cloth woven in pairs. Doubling
(a

'Double Jersey'. A jute cloth in which warp yarns are

A number of slivers, slubbings, rovings or laps fed simultaneously into a machine for drafting into a single end. A process of combing several ends of sliver during drawing with a view to reducing irregularity along and across the sliver; and

(b

Cc) Twisting two or more yarns together. Down Wools - Wools of medium qualities produced by selectively bred dual purpose sheep (i.e., meat and wool) in Britain.Some of these sheep are South down, Dorset down, Oxford down, etc. Draft - Ratio of speed between Draft (Garment) (a) A constructed plan of a garment. (b) The application flat plane. of body or garment measurements of a threads through the eyes delivery roller and feed roller.
*

Draft Plan - The order of drawing warp of healds or cambs. Drafting
,

(a) The process of attenuating laps, slubbings and rovings to decrease the mass per unit length (m 'Drawing'); and (b) The order in which threads are drawn through the heald eyes before weaving (B 'Drawing-In'). Drape - The manner in which a fabric falls when worn on or placed on a form frame or manikin. the body

Draw Back; Tie Back; Warp Bolding Place - A warp-faced area of a fabric where the weft yarns are predominant. Principal Cause - This defect is caused by entanglement behind the shaft or harness putting tension on several adjacent warp threads. Draw Cord - A cord which passes through a channel 85 and allows the

SP:45-1988

garment to

be .gathered.

Draw Thread - A thread introduced in the form of one.row of loops during knitting which, on removal, permits the separation of articles that are knitted in a.succession of units connected together.
Drawers - Knitted underwear with leg portions made to cover from the waist to the knees or ankles as under:

(a> Short Drawerg - With short legs reaching well above the knees, (b) (cl
Drawing (a) Operations by which slivers are

&.lf

Drawers -

With legs reaching up to the knees, and Under Pant% - With legs

Full Drawers. Long Drawers or reaching up to the ankles.

blended (or doubled), levelled, and by drafting reduced to the stage of roving. In the cotton textile industry the term is applied exclusively to processing by the draw frame. increase molecular orientation. (See ala IS:11206-1984).

(b) A process of hot or cold stretching of man-made fibres to Drawing In - Forming a running stitch drawn to achieve gathering or gauging of the material, holding folds in various forms on garments, as in the gowns of barristers. Drawing-In - An operation of drawing warp threads through the eyes of the healds or cambs and the dents or slits of the reed, in the order as indicated by the draft plan.

Note - In automatic weaving, this operation includes the drawing of warp threads through the eyes of the closed-end drop wires whenever used.
Drawn Pile Finish - A finish given to textile fabric to produce a surface nap or pile i.e. laid in one direction. The effect is usually produced by raising the wet or damp cloth on a teasle gig.

Dress Dress

Clothing, particularly

outerwear.

Face Finished Fabrics - Heavily felted and raised woollen fabrics wherein the nap of short fibres is laid along the length of the.fabrics so as to conceal the weave, such fabrics include doeskins, beavers, box cloths, billiard cloths, pilots, etc. Diess Maiterials/Goods - A comprenensive term

variety

of

fabrics

of

all

applied to a great kinds intended for use as dresses. characterized by a

Dress-Face Finish (On Wool Fabric) - A finish surface and high lustre. close cropped

SP:45-1988

Dressing

(a) Sizing applied to yarn or cloth to add weight,smoothness, strength or firmness. (b3
Dressing

The operation of assembling on a beam, yarns from ball-warp beam of chain, immediately before weaving.
(Garment) - A type of improve fit.

adjustment made

to one

side of

trousers to
Dressing

(Silk) L iin the spun silk industry, the process of sorting out fibres into groups of different lengths. Neps and noils are also removed during the process -

Drill

weave (B

.A warp-faced * twill IS:177-1977).

fabric

commonly 3/l or 2/l twill

Drilling - Marking key positions such as pockets and darts through all thicknesses of a lay by use of a drilling machine, or similar machine with a hollow needle. Drip Dry - A term applied to fabrics and garments

drying after during use.

washing,

shed

which, on line the wrinkles and creases developed

Drip Flap - A strip of fabri.c secured by one edge to ~the,envelope or outer cover to deflect rain from the surface below it. - A method of lowering the belt loop below the top of Drop Loop the trouser waist band (usually 1 cm to 2 cm). This method prevents the belt from riding above the waist. Drop Stitch, Dropped Stitch - A defect in a knitted fabric which may result from a defective needle, improper feeder setting, or other causes. It occurs when a needle (or needles) misses to receive the yarn'but casts off its old loop at the same course. Also known as 'Missed Stitch'. Droppings - Caddies, short fibres and dust particles which come out of jute fibres during the process of manufacture. Drugget - A coarse heavy-weight material used as floor covering woven with cotton, spun silk, sunhemp, or jute yarn in warp and woollen, sunhemp, spun silk or jute yarn in weft. - To remove grease, oil and dirt from garments or fabrics by treating them in an organic solvent, as distinct from aqueous liquors. Examples of suitable solvents are white spirit, trichloroethylene, perchloroethylene. Dry-Clean Dry-C-bed

system of

Top - A top made principally for the continental worsted spinning without the addition of oil.

Note - A top combed in oil and backwashed to reduce oil and .fatty &tter not more than one prcent may also be described

87

-$P:45-1988

as a dry-combed top.
Dry Decatizing Dry Sewn Dry - &

'Decatizing'. or twine.

- Sewing done with plain yarn

Spinning - A method of spinning used for flax tow, hemp, jute, etc. The essential feature is that the 'reach' must be quite long to prevent breaking of fibres. Usually the dry spinning frames are of flyer type.

Dry-Spun (a> Descriptive of a worsted yarn produced from dry-combed

top; and
(b)

Descriptive of man-made filaments, the coagulation of which is effected by evaporation of the solvent from the spinning solution.
Top - &

Dry-Spun

'Dry-Combed Top'.

Drying CVlinder, Drying Can - A heated hollow cylinder over which textile material is passed as a means of drying. Duchesse - A silk-fabric made with a dense warp, very lustrous, smooth in hand and popular for women's wear.

- A closely woven, plain-weave cloth, usually made from cotton or linen yarns, similar to canvs. The terms canvas and duck have become alomost generic and are usually qualified by terms that indicte the use of the cloth, e.g. royal navy canvas, artists canvas, d&k suiting, belting duck. Duck - Yarn which has a very subdued lustre usually produced by incorporating finely divided particles of titanium dioxide in the spinning solution. Dull Yarn Dull, Matt

of which

- Term applied to textile materials, the normal lustre has been reduced by physical or chemical means.

Dullness - The colour quality, an increase in which may be compared with the effect of the addition of a small quantity of neutral grey dye .to the dyestuff, whereby a match cannot be made by adjusting the strength. Dumped
to

Wool -- A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board indicate conventional wool bales compressed tightly for shipment and held by bands or wire. Mats

Dumping

- m

(e) under

'Mats'. fabric used for overalls; some qualities are made-from dyed warp

D8mgaree - A 3/l or 2/l twill cloths are piece-dyed; better and weft yarns (a 'Denim').

88

SP:45-1988

DUPATTA -

cotton,
Dupion

An Indian term for a kind of open fine scarf made silk or man-made fibre, worn by ladi.es.

from

Silk - Silk thread spun by two silk worms. irregular slub yarn. Also Duplex Fabric - &

reeled from double cocoons which are The yarn is uneven and resembling known as 'Duppione (Italian)'. 'Double-Faced Fabric'.

(b) under

Duplex Printing - A method for face and back of cloth, done in

printing the same design on the two distinct operations. floor covering to maintain

Durability - The ability of a textile its characteristics in use.

(a)

Appearance Retention oarance in the structure, textile floor covering.

The maintenance of the apppattern and colour of a

Crushing or Flattening - Loss of thickness in a textile floor covering under the action of a static or dynamic load. Pilamentation - Unbroken filaments pulling out from the main body of the continuous filament yarn, not readily removed by brushing suction.

Cd) Fluffing

or Shedding - The appearance of fibres of short length (flock), not fixed during the manufacture of the textile floor covering, which come from the use-surface during early use of the textile floor covering, and which can be removed by brushing or suction. poorly floor form a

(e)

Hairiness - The appearance of fibres which were fixed during the manufacture of the textile covering, which come from the use-surface and fuzzy surface. Pilling - The generally drawn covering which suction.

(fl

formation of small aggregates of fibres from the use-surface of a textile floor are not readily removed by brushing or '

(g)

Resistance to Soiling - The ability of a textile floor covering to resist change of appearance due to soiling during use. Shadinq - Irreversible localized change of appearance of the pile of a carpet due to irregular changes in directiol (lie) of the tufts, loops or fibres in the pile. Wear by Abrasion - Progressive loss of surface material from the use-surface, caused by mechanical a&ion. Finish Any type of 89 finish reasonably resistant to

(h)

(3)
Durable

SP:45-$988

normal usage (washing, and/or dry-cleaning).
Durable Press - A textile finishing treatment designed to impart to a textile material or garment the retention of specific contours including creases and pleats resistant to normal usage, washing and/or dry-cleaning. hrration of After Glow (After Glow Time) - The time for which a material continues to glow, under specified test conditions, after cessation of flaming, or after removal of the ignition source. Duration of Flame (After Flame Time) - The length of time for which a material continues to flame, under spec$fied test conditions, after the ignition source has been removed. DURBIE (or DURRY) - An Indian term for a coarse plain weave weft faced fabric generally used as a floor covering. While most of the durries are made from cotton, some are made from coarse wools and are often referred to as druggets.

WSSA - A woollen fabric having fine texture and coloured selvedges having a length of 5.5 metres and weighing 1 to 1.5 kg and manufactured out of merino or pashmina wool. It is used as shawls in colder climates by men.
Duster - h

'JHARAN'.

Dutch Twine - A Z-ply twine made from European hemp and mainly used for book-binding (cotton and flax twines are also used);

Duvetyn - A twill-woven fabric with a very soft, velvet-like appearnce produced by raising, cropping and brushing the face of the fabric.
DW(Double-Warp) I)IR(Double-Warp) DW(Double-Warp) DW(Double-Warp) Flour Heavy Raisin Salt Bag - $& Cee Bag

'Flour
b

Bag'. 'Heavy Cee Bag'.

Bag - & Bag w

'Raisin Bag'. 'Salt Bag'. a substrate, either

We - A colorant that has
inherent'

or

induced by

substantivity for reactants.

Dye Bar - &
Dye-Fixing

(3) under 'Bar'
Agent - A to give

dye on a fibre

product i.e. capable of reacting with a improved fastness to water or washing.

Note - Dye-fixing agents are normally applied as aftertreatments to dyes that already have some affinity for the textile substrate and are so'distinguished from mordants.
Dyed Fabric

applied and

- Fabric on_which a dye or pigment has been uniformly fixed.
90

SP:45-1988

Dyeing - The process of colouring textiles or other materials in such a way that the colour appears to be a property of the dyed as that such not give superficial effect material and does produced by painting. Dyestuff Stain - See (a) under 'Stains'.

weave sacking bag measuring E-Bag - A double-warp hemmed plain about 101.5 X 71 cm (normally with 42 5 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), approximately 759 g. The bag is usually without any weighing stripe. E---Nitrate --See Ears See 'Nitrate DW Bag'.

'Lugs'. of Thickness After CompressionSelf-explanatory

Ease of Recovery term.

Easing-In - The manipulation of an additional amount of one of the materials into a seam in order to create fullness, shape or contour. Easy Care Finish .-See 'Crease-Resist Finish'. in tepid soap being retained.

Ecru Silk - Thrown solution to remove

silk that has been washed dirt, the original gum content

Edging - A narrow strip of knitted another fabric or made-up article decorative purposes. Easy Care Finish Ecru Silk to remove - [;ee 'Crease-Resist

fabric or lace attached to by one edge, usually for

Finish'.

- Thrown silk that has been washed in tepid soap solution dirt, the original gum content being retained. fabric or lace attached to by one edge, usually for

Edgihg -- A narrow strip of knitted another fabric of made-up article decorative purposes. Effective Pile (Carpet) - a

'Pile, Effective

(Carpet)'.

Effective Pile Thickness - The difference in the thickness of the carpet before and after the pile above the substrate has been shorn away, measured under the standard pressure. Effective stics'. Reed Length (Fibre) - & under 'Jute Fibre Characteri-

Egyptian Grainsack - A double--warp hemmed twill sacking bag measuring about 152.5 x 76 cm (normally with 76 ends/dm and 31 plicks/dm), weighing approximately 2270 g or 1475 g with 5 cm wide magenta stripes, and tar sewn. $gyptian Sugar Bag -.A double-warp 91 hemmed twill sacking bag

SP:45-1988

measuring about 152.5 X 78 cm (normally with 78 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 2270 g or 1475 g with 5 cm wide magenta stripes, and tar sewn. EgyptianSugar Bag - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking bag measur ing about 122 x 71 cm (normally with 78 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 1135 g with 5 cm wide blue or magenta stripes, and tar sewn. Eight Lock - A double crossed sinker wales. Eight Strands
El. Lenne Elastane constitution ; Elastomer composed of at least 85 percent (by mass) of a segmented polyurethane.
: Fibre which, when stretched to three times its original length and released, recovers rapidly and substantially to its initial length.

faced
- &

2

x 2 or broad-rib fabric with 'Square Rope'.

Plaited

Rope

- &

'Aeolian'.

Characteristic

Ela8tic

- A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate the condition of wool fibres able to return to their original form after being deformed by either stretching or compression. Elastic.Fabric

alone

or

in

- A textile fabric made from an elastomer either combination with other textile materials.

Elastic Fabric, Wide : A knitted or woven fabric constructed with elastomeric yarns either alone or in combination with other textile fibres, that is 152 mm in width or wider. Elastic Narrow Fabric - A narrow fabr,ic incorporating natural or synthetic rubber threads with the object of permitting stretch warp-way and/or weft-way with virtually complete recovery on removal of the stretching force. Note The definition excludes crepe. elastic or

Elastic Top - Top (of socks or stockings) in which rubber threads have been laid-in during knitting.

Elasticity - The property of a material by virtue of which it tends to deform on application of stress and to recover its original size and shape immediately after removal of the stress causing deformation.
Elastodiene
: Elastomer composed of natural or synthetic constitution polyisoprene, or composed of one or more dienes polymerized

92

SP:45-1988

with or without one or more vinyl monomers.
Characteristic

Fibre which, when stretched to three times its original length and released, recovers rapidly and substantially to its initial length.
:

Elastomeric

Thread - The component conferring the elastic properties in the fabric. Generally it is either natural or synthetic rubber or polyurethane. Cap - A tubular band knitted on round machines with elastic threads laid-in; used by sportsmen for support and protection to the elbow.

Elbow

FIG

28

ELBOW CAP

*_Electrostatic Propensity - The extent to which a textile floor covering develops and accumulates an electrostatic charge on a person or object moving across its surface.
Elongation - The difference between the length of a st,retched specimen and its inital length (under pre-tension) in a tensile test usually expressed as a percentage of the latter.

Elongation at Break - In a tensile test, the difference between the length of a stretched specimen at breaking load and its initial length, usually expressed as a percentage of the latter.

Elongation Under a Given Load - The increase in length of a yarn or cord which results from subjecting it to a certain desired load and generally expressed as a percentage of the initial length of the specimen.
Embossed Backing - Foam or other material applied to the back of a textile floor covering, the outer part of which is impressed to form a regular embossed structure. Cloth/Crepe - A pebbly effect in imitation of a true crepe, produced by subjecting a cloth-commonly cotton print-to the action of a suitable engraved roll in an embossing calender. The effect will not stand laundering in case of cotton fabrics. - A process to produce a pattern

Embossed

Embossing

by pressure
Embroidered

with the
Eosiery

use of

in relief engraved rollers.

on fabrics

- Hosiery with ornamental

produced by

hand or

machine with
93

motifs or patterns the help of threads after the

SP:45-1988

article has been knitted. This is distinguished from the hosiery where pa,tterns are produced during the process of knitting itself. Emery Cloth - A plain or twill weave side with powdered emery. strong fabric coated on one

Empress Gauze - A fine flower figured fabric originally woven with raw-silk and linen. The raw silk is employed for the ground is used for the designs in satin weave. weave while the linen &ulsion - A water in oil. finely divided suspension of an oil in water or

cotton cloth, such as drill or warp Enameled Cloth -~_~A heavy giveri a glazed etc. and sateen, treated with oil, pyroxylin finish to resemble patent leather. ENDI (Silk) - Silk of white or brick red colour obtained from a species of domesticated lepidopteran insect (Attacus Ricini) belonging to the family Saturniidae. It feeds on castor leaves and is mostly a habitant of Assam, Bihar, Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. Ending, - Uneven dyeing consisting in a continuous change in ,lcolour from one end of a length of fabric to the other, or a difference in colour between,' the bulk and the end of a length of fabric. It is also known as 'Tailing' Ends (a) Spinning (b) mvi.ng Yarn)]; (c) Eabris: unit; :d) Pieca (e) - An individual - An individual strand; warp thread*[see 'Warp' (Warp

- A length

of finished

fabric

less than a customary

- Length

(in certain

districts

a

half-piece'); and

(1) Each passage through a machine,

of a length of fabric e.g. in Jig-dyeing; and

(2) A joint between pieces of cloth due, e.g. to damage or short lengths in weaving or damage in bleaching, dyeing and finishing. English Bran - A hemmed hessian bag measuring weighing approximately 510 g, without stripes. English Envelope Welt - 'See
.

124.5 X 68.5 cm,

'Ml1

Welt'.

(Aerospace) unit of a balloon or non-rigid or

(a) The gas-containing semi-rigid airship

94

SP:45-1988

(b) The outer cover of an airship in which the gas 'containing units are surrounded by a layer of Qir or inert gas. mulet (Epaulette) - Strap on shoulder or jacket, military in origin. of coat, sport shirt,

Epidermis - The outer layer of wool and hair fibres. The cuticular
structure is made up of a series of overlapping scales whose free margins point towards the tip of the fibre. By virtue of their alignment these scales impart to wool fibres a directional or differential frictional effect (D.F.E.) with friction always higher in the direction of tip to root in comparison with that in the direction of root to tip. Epingline - A warp rib dress worsted weft. The cloth has crepe. material made of silk warp and pebbled effect and feel similar to

rpOum - A French

term for 'sponge cloth' or 'ratine' woven from a hard twist warp and soft spun weft, usually with a fancy yarn to give a soft and loose-woven fabric. - ti 'END1 (Silk)'.

EEtI(Silk)
Estamene

- A milled cross-bred worsted cloth, piece-dyed, and finished with a rough fibrous surface, usually woven in 2-and-2 or 3-and-3 twill. fan-shaped patch of fabric and webbing secured to

Eta Patch - A the envelope.

Etching - A process for producing the design on metallic roller used in a printing machine by chemical dissolution of the metallic surface. Etching Silk - A hard-twisted silk sewing thread used for outlining embroidery. Etoile (a) A lustrous satin cloth used as dress material. (b) A star design foundation. made by weft in the meshes of the net

Europe Twine - Twine made of 4-ply flax yarn used for sealing milk cans in the dairy farms and also for hand stitching for palliasses. This term is popular in the military dairy farms.
Evenness

(a) ,b)

The uniformity of any textile material in terms of thickness or diameter or mass per unit length, and
(SGe

also 'Unevenness'). 95

SP:45-lY88

Examined

Silkworm

Seed

-- See

'Disease-Free

Seed

(Silk)'. the amount of and the amount

Exhaustion - The ratio at any stated stage between dye or other substance taken up by the substrate originally available.

Expression (Percent) - The mass of the liquid retained by textile material after mangling. This term is also known as retention and is calculated as percentage usually of the air-dry mass of the goods. (If the dry mass is . used, this should be indicated). Extensibility - The ability of a textile material to undergo extension or elongation following the application of sufficient force. Extension, Percent - In 'a tensile as a percentage of initial length. test, the elongation expressed

Extent of After Glow - The area of specimen in which glow spreads beyond the area damaged by flaming. Extract -- Wet carbonized rag fibre.

the after

Eye of Buttonhole - The rounded end of the shank or neck of the button will fastened.

a buttonhole into which pull when the button is

Eyelet - An openwork effect produced by transferring loops to two adjacent needles. Usually two consecutive loops are collected and transferred.

sinker. sinker

Fabric - A manufactured assembly of fibres and/or yarns which has substantial surface area in relation to its thickness and sufficient mechanical strength to give assembly inherent cohesion. Note - Fabrics are most commonly woven or knitted, but the term includes assemblies produced 'by lace making, tufting, felting, knot making and the so-called non-woven processes. Fabric Dip - Aschemical composition which is applied to a textile cord or fabric to improve its adhesion to rubber or other elastomer. Fabric Fabric Glove Hose - Same .- Same as as 'Cut Glove'.

'Cut Bose'. The warp yarns are

Fabric Laid - A fabric made without weft yarns. held together by a binding material.

Fabric, Airplane - A plain-weave fabric, well woven practically without imperfection, of mercerized two-ply yarns, width 90 to 140 cm, maximum mass 142.5 g/m2 and yarns per dm warp and filling 315 to 330. Fabric, Bonded shell fabric - A layered fabric structure wherein a face or is joined to a backing,fabric, such as tricot, 96

SP:45-1988

with an adhesive that does not significantly add to the thickness of the combined fabrics (see also 'Fabric, Laminated').
Braided - A structure produced by interlacing several ends of yarns in a manner such that the paths of the yarns are not parallel to the fabric axis. Fabric, Fabric, Combustible

to burn
Fabric,

at a

- A fabric which after ignition will continue moderate to fast rate.

Impregnated

the yarns throughout sized or completely
Fabric,

- A fabric in which the interstices between are completely filled with the impregnating compound the thickness of the material, as distinguished from coated materials, where these interstices are not filled.

- A layered fabric structure wherein a face or Laminated outer fabric is joined to a continuous sheet material, such as polyurethane foam, in such a way that the identity of the continuous sheet material is retained, either by the flame method or by an adhesive, and this is in turn normally, but not always, is joined on the back with a backing fabric such as tricot (see alsg 'Fabric, Bonded'). Fabric, Noncombustible - A fabric that will neither ignite nor give off vapours that will ignite when subjected to external sources of ignition.

Fabric, Stable - A textile fabric, the dimensions of which do not change significantly with multiple passes through measuring devices.
Note - A stable fabric as defined above may not be dimensionally stable if subjected to a series of laundering or drycleaning operations. Treated - A fabric to which a finish has been applied in order to change the original level of a specific property or properties, e.g. property for water repellency, crease resistance, soil resistance. Fabric,

Face-Finished (Fabric) - Descriptive of a. finish given, e.g. to wool fabrics, in which the face side is treated selectively, as in raising.
Face Side - The side of a material intended to be shown whilst in

we&r. Faced Cloths - Cloths which have pile or nap on front and back. a different as surface texture, a covering on

Facing - A separate piece of material used specific areas of a garment, e.g. a lapel. Face-to-Face Carpet - Carpet simultaneously, face to face,

made on a loom which produces two substrates joined by the pile 97

SP:45-1988

yarn. Two cut-pile carpets are made by cutting the pile yarns between the two substrates. An example is given in Fig.29

Substrate

Substrate

1. Pile warp 2. Chain warp

3. Shot 4. Stuffer

FIG. 29

FACE-TO-FACE CARPET (WABPWAY SECTION)

Face-ko-Face Bonded-Pile Carpet, - Pile carpet manufactured on a machine which produces face-to-face textile floor coverings, with the pile-forming material passing alternately from one substrate to another, where it is fixed by adhesive. Two cutrpile carpets are made by cutting the pile-forming material between the two substrates.

1. 2. 3. 4.

Use-surface Atm Substrate Cutter

pile

FIG. 30
Facing

FACE-TO-FACE BONDED-PILE CARPET (LONGITUDINAL SECTION)
- Yarn used on the face of fabric for plated hosiery.

Yarn

98

SP:45-1988

Factor

of Safety - The value by which the breaking load of new rope is divided to determine its safe working load. - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate wool pack partly filled or several bags sewn together.

Fadge

Fadging

- A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate the replacement of shorn wool in its original bales.

Fag-End -

Untwisted end

of a

cordage.

Fagot Stitch - A form of lock stitch, using a modified zig-zag machine, for joining materials, allowing a narrow gap between the two edges. Failetine Ribbon more open texture. A ribbon with faille characteristic but of

FaPPle - A soft, flat-ribbed plain-woven fabric with body and drape in which the ends per decimetre are more than the picks per decimetre. The ribs are wider and flatter than those in 'grosgrain'. Faille Ribbon - A fabric of silk or of rayon or other man-made fibre continuous filament yarn; it is usually of plain weave with a definite rib effect to give brightness, and with a selvedgs woven in a manner to add a lussrous effect. Faille Taffeta - A 'taffeta' with pronounced ribs running crosswise.
Fall - Of collar. and leaf edge.

The section

of the collar between the crease

Fall Plate Fabric - A fabric of a tuck-like structure which is made on one needle bar on a Raschel warp knitting machine, involving the use of a solid metal plate (fall plate or chopper bar) to push down the newly formed laps below the spoons of the open latches to be cast off with the ground laps of the previous course.

Note - Often a yarn is used which could not incorporated in the particular fabric. Failers (a) Straight, pinned metal bars employed fibres between drafting rollers; in the

otherwise be

control of'

(b) Curved, pinned metal bars employed in the feed mechanism of Lister and square-motion (Holden) combs; and (c) Curved arms fixed to two shafts -on. a mule carrying the faller wires. carriage and

False Twist - Turns inserted in opposite directions and in equal numbers in adjacent elements of yarn, sliver; or similar aggrega99

SP:45-1988

tions of nature.

fibres or

filaments, characterized

by their temporary

Note 1 - The extreme ends of the yarn or sliver are prevented from rotating, and the false-twisting element, through which the yarn or sliver passes, is situated between these ends. Note 2 - At the start of the operation, turns of twist are inserted by the revolution of the twisting element (one turn in each direction on either side of the twisting element) but, as the yarn or sliver passes through the twisting element, each turn of twist carried through from one side cancels a turn present on the other side.
Note 3 - The amount of twist actually inserted depends not only on the relative speeds of the twisting element (rev/min) and yarn or sliver (m/s), but also on the effectiveness of the means adopted in the twisting element to resist rotation, and on the restoring torque exerted by the twisted yarn or sliver.

Note 4 - False twist may be used: (a) To produce effects, e.g.(l) the entanglement of fibres while false-twisted, (2) a measure of permanence to the twisted form, by heat-setting the false-twisted yarns; (b) To assist processing e.g.(l) the passage of sliver from Noble comb to can, (2) the attenuation of rovings on a condenser ringframe.
False Twisting - A process by which equal amounts of a twist are inserted and removed from successive sections of a textile strand 'Bulked Yarn'). (LG!LLl@ Line - Braided

Fancy

cord

used

for

decorative

purposes.

Fancy Yarn - A yarn that differs significantly from the normal appearance of single or plied yarn due to the presence of irregularities deliberately produced during its formation. In single yarns, the irregularities may be due to the inclusion of knots, loops, curls, slubs and the like. In plied yarns, the irregularities may be due to a -variable delivery of one or more of its component3 or to twisting together dissmilar single yarns.
Fascinator -

Decorative headwear

worn by

ladies.

Fashion P%arks - Stitch marks, arising during narrowing and widening through transference of loops to adjacent needles during the course of shaping in fully-fashioned hosiery.
Fashioned Fashioning Hosiery - m

'Fully-fashioned Hosiery'.

- Decreasing or increasing the width of a knitted fabric during the knitting operation so that it conforms to a definite shape when the fabric is made into a garment.

100

SP:45-1988

Fast Base - An aromatic with naphthol to form

amine which on diazotization an azoic pigment.

will combine

Fast Colour Salt - A stabilized diazo compound, active or passive, stabilized as sulphate or chloride or aromatic sulphonate or as complex salt of diazo compound used as a component of the rapid fast or rapidazol or rapidogen dye and applied by dissolving in cold water and subsequently coupled with the azoic coupling component (naphthol). Fastness (Colour) - Resistance of the colour to different processes and agencies to which during manufacture and subsequent use. of textile materials they may be subjected

Note - On the standard scale, five grades are ususally recognized from No. 5 signifying unaffected to No. 1 grossly changed. For light-fastness, eight grades are used, No. 8 representjfilg the highest degree of fastness. Fathom A unit of linear measurement as 'fm'. Fault - A trade term indicate vegetable matter equal to 6 ft and abbreviated

adopted by the Australian in wool.

Wool Board

to

Faulty Texturing - Portions of a bulked yarn that differ from the normal yarn in respect of degree of crimp and similar distortions of the filaments. Principal Cause - This defect during texturing processes. is caused by a lack of control

Fearnought - A stout, thick woollen cloth with a heavy appearance, used chiefly as a covering for port-holes and the doors of powder magazines and also for scarves and coats. Fearnought Feather but in Blending Willey & 'Wtifley, Tenterhook'. stitch

Stitch - A decorative stitch, similar to the fagot which the joining of two edges is not involved. 'Handle'. by stitching

Feel - See

Felling - The flattening of an overseam usual$y.with a single chain stitch.

it down,

Felling Marks - Marks in the form of a few pieces coloured, woven into fabrics at certain intervals one piece finishes and another starts.

of yarn usually to indicate where

101

SP:45-1988

Fellmongering - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate the process of removing wool from pelts by becterial 'Skin Wool, Slipe' action or by treatment with chemicals. (See ala and 'Pulled Wool'). - A textil,e material Felt condition of most or all the Note 1 - Three broad characterised by the densely matted fibres of which it is composed. of felt can be distinguished or knitted fabric as:

classes

(a) Materials

having

a woven

structure;

(b) Materials relying for their construction upon the ability of the constituent fibres, such as wool and fur, to mat together to form a composite body with neither warp nor weft; and (c) Needle-felts. Note 2 - The felts that clothe the press sections of papermaking machines conform to the above definition. In the case of the so-called dryer felts, which clothe the drying sections, the term ,'felt' is a misnomer because the great majority of dryer felts have a woven structure and are not subjected to any wet-finishing. Felt (Floor Covering) - A non-woven felt highly matted by heavy milling generally embroidered and primarily used as a floor covering (gee ala 'NAMDA'). Felt Calendered Fabric felt calender (see also A fabric which is processed 'Calendered Fabric') of fibres during through a

Felting - The matting together wear (see 'Milling').

processing

or

Felting Shrinkage - The decrease in dimensions of a fabric or garment after mil,ling, expres.sed,as a percentage of the corresponding original relaxed dimention. Felts, Woollen - All wool fabric produced by milling of carded web of soft, medium, hard and extra hard varieties depending on the degree of felting induced. .' Fender Lanyard' - A 3-strand manila or sisal rope, usually of 78 to 90 mm circumference used for lashing fenders (a protection for a ship's side against piers, etc. consisting of a bundle of to the rail. rope, etc.) &nts - Cut pieces of cloth, arising during the normal course of manufacture and packing, having lengths ranging from 45-90 cm for widths 1 m or more and 85-135 cm for widths less then 1 m. This excludes cut pieces of towels. Note - The term remnants has been used as a synonym for fents. These are usually short lengths of fabric that accumulate 102

SP:45-1988

in the
Pibre

marketing of ratio of
- & - &

textile material. flexibility, fineness, thickness.

- A unit of matter characterized by

and high
Bibre Fibre

length to

Boards Fineness

'Jute Fibre Board' 'Fineness'

Flbre Length
(a) Crimped Len,&& - The extent [M

(b)l of a crimped fibre substantially freed from external restraint, measured with respect to its general axis of orientation; and

b) Fibre Extent - The distance in a given direction between two planes (each perpendicular to the given direction) that just enclose the fibre without intersecting it.
Note 1 - If the fibre is in a sliver (-oryarn, roving, etc) and the direction of the extent is not to be taken as specified, the 'given direction' is the axis of the sliver.

should be noted that the extent of a Note 2 - It fibre is a variable quantity which differs from the straightened length of the fibre according to circumstances; thus, in a card web e.g. where the fibres are in a state of considerable same disarry, the extent of a fibre is markedly different from the extent of same fibre after it has been passed through one or more drawing processes. If, for any reason, a fibre is subject to a stretching force, its extent in the direction of the force may be greater than its straightened length. (c) Staple Le&& - A quantity by which a sample of fibrous raw material is characterized as regards its technically most important fibre length. Note - The staple length of wool is usually taken as the length of the longer fibres in a hand-prepared tuft or 'staple' in its naturally crimped and wavy cotton, on the condition [B 'Crimp (Fibre)']. With other hand, the staple length corresponds very ,closely to the modal or most frequent length of the fibres when measured in a straightened condition. (d) Straightened Length - The length of a fibre when tensioned sufficiently to remove crimp or other axial deformation. Note - Ideally, this dimension should be the length of the curving axis of the fibre when free from all restraint, but in practice it can be measured conveniently only after a small load has been applied. The application of a load sufficient to remove all crimp may in some cases result in an elongation of the fibre axis. Hence 103

SP:45-1988

the most appropriate load to use will vary according to the form and properties of the fibre under examination. Fibre Mats - See (f) under 'Mats'

Fibre Strand - The bast fibre in the jute plant, situated between the whole the outer bark and the central woody core, and running as a lace-work sheath usually several layers length of the stem thick. Fibre Strength 'Strength'). Fibre Tenacity - Average breaking load of a single fibre (a

- See

'Tenacity'

Fibril (C&ton) - Thread-like aggregate of cellulose molecules The fibril in cotton fibre. constituting a morphological unit has a thickness of about 1 micron and is visible under a light microscope when the fibre is swollen in certain chemical reagents. - Fibrils are globules of fibroin formed in silk Fibril (Silk) gland, but which subsequently did not fuse into the fibroin core during spinning of the filament by the worm and as such appear as tiny specks on the surface of the filaments. - The process of separation Fibrillation (Cotton) fibrils by chemical cum mechanical treatment. of fibres into

on the silk fibrils Fibrillation (Silk) - The formation of filament. It is responsible for the defect known as 'Lousiness' in dyed silk yarn. Fibroin protein (Silk) - The fibre material of raw silk thread soluble in boiling water. not which is a

Fiji Bag - A hemmed hessian bag measuring about 91.5 X 56 cm (normally with'47 ends/dm and 59 picks/dm), weighing approximately 455 g, without stripes, and dry sewn. Filament A fibre of indefinite length.

Filament or Yarn Number - The linear density of a filament or yarn expressed in suitable units as tex, denier, millitex, etc. Filature - An establishment for the production of raw silk from modern techniques, such as, steam for heating cocoons, employing and power for driving the reels. Filling (a) Non-substantive and generally insoluble material, such as china-clay and gypsum, added to fabrics together with starches or gums &ring finishing to add weight or to modify the appearance and handle of fabric. (b) A synonym for weft yarn. 104

SP:45-1988

Filter Cloth - A plain, leno or.twill weave fabric varying much in yarn count, texture and weight. It is used for filtering purposes in the sugar, chemical, food, paint, petroleum and similar industries. There are various types of fabrics known by this name and made from natural or man-made fibres.
Fine - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate wool of small fibre diameter.

Fine Darning - The hand operation of repairing faults in fabrics by sewing or closing up the places where threads or yarns are missing. It is a form of invisible mending.

because all of the filaments supposed to make up the full ply are not present; mainly caused by laxity on the part of the reeler.
Fine Bessian - A term used to describe from fine counts of jute yarn.

Fine End -. A silk warp thread that is thin in places

hessian generally made

Fine

- A yarn whose thickness is Thin Pick Thin End; Yarn; unacceptably less than that of the adjacent yarns.

Principal Cause - This defect is caused by linear density of the yarn.
Fineness

variation in the

- A general term used for textile fibres, yarns and with special reference to their transverse dimensions fabrics and measured in a variety of units, such as mass per unit length, or length per unit mass, cross-sectional area and diameter.

Fineness Grades - Classification of wool fibres, before or after combing, according to average fibre fineness. This is only one of the attributes of wool quality.
- An irregular spot Finger Hark unit length for a limited width. Principal Causes - Spreading

showing variation in picks per

of warp ends while loom is in motion, pressure upon cloth between reed and take-up roller, etc. Fingering Yarn - Piled yarn specially produced for hand-knitting.
Finish (a) A term used to impart the desired characteristics to

textile materials. (b) The substance used for finishing.

Finisher Gilling - Subjecting combed slivers to a series of gilling operations with a view to aligning the fibres parallel, bringing about uniformity in sliver weight and packing the slivers in the form of balls if necessary to facilitate transportation.
PlIhiShbg -

AZ1

operations

physical 105

or

chemical,

to impart

SP:45--1988

desired characteristics

to textile

materials. not be considered

ste - The yarn sizing for weaving should as finishing.

Finishing

(~~~~~~~~~ - The term 'Finishing' usually includes in addition to bleaching and dyeing processes, the cutting out, sewing together, shaping of the garment and pressing etc. Bar - & (1) under 'Bar'.

Finishing

First Printed Resist - A process where the resisting agent is printed on the fabric, which is then dried and padded with the dye solution followed by drying and developing. Cord - Manila or man-made fibre cord, g-strand cablelaid or 8-strand plaited, tarred or untarred used mainly in large diameter as anchor lines, especially in fishing of the grand banks. Fisherman's Fisheye Fishing - ljee 'Bin Holes'.

Line - Tightly laid hemp, cotton S-strand line used for commercial fishing.

or man-made fibre

- A flost plated structure wherein the missed yarn is usually thicker than the ground yarn. The missed thread will occur fn odd wales for 1 to 4 courses and then in even wales for the same number of courses. Fishnet

Note - The term 'fishnet" is other open-knitted structures.

now loosely

applied to many

Fixfng Agent - Any chemical used in dyeing, printing or finishing which combines with a soluble compound to form an insoluble compound upon the fibre.

Flagging - The rising and falling of material needle movement on the sewing machine.
Flaggings Flame - h

caused

by the

'Strings'.

- As related to textile flammability, a hot, luminous zone of gas or matter in gaseous suspension, or both, that is undergoing combustion, -which is relatively constant in size and shape and which produces a relatively low heat flux.

Flame Resistance - The property of a material whereby flaming combustion is prevented, terminated or inhibited following application of a flaming or non-flaming source of ignition, with or without subsequent removal of the ignition source. The degree of flame resistance exhibited by a specific material during testing may vary with different test conditions.
Blame-ProoflFabric - A fabric which does not propagate flame, i.e. any flame goes out quickly when the igniting flame is withdrawn.

SP:45-1988

Flame-Resistant

-

The

material

having

flame

resistance.

Note - "Flame Resistant" is a mandatory description for a product that meets established conformance standard when the product is tested by a specific method. Where no conformance standard exists, "Flame Resistant" is a relative term and is used to compare one material with another. Flame-Retardant
Flame-Retardant

-

A

chemical
- A

used to impart flame resistance.

Finish

flame retardant(s)
Flammability

to a of

process for incorporating or adding material or product.

- The characteristics of a material which pertain to

its relative combustion.
Flannel

ease

ignition and relative ability to sustain

- A fabric, originally all wool and now usually containing some wool, of plain or twill weave with a soft handle and of 200 g/m2 or more. It may be slightly milled and raised. Hospital,
Gray - Plain weave hospital clothing made from merino wool or wool-nylon blend.

Flannel,

woollen-spun strong
Flannelette

- A fabric originally made from cotton warp and soft-spun cotton weft, the fabric being subsequently raised on both sides to give an imitation of wool flannel. The weave may be plain or twill with two warp threads woven as one. Flap - A shaped piece of material which provides a covering for a pocket mouth, or is for ornamentation. Flat Crepe - A smooth3 soft fabric in plain weave,

in texture

less crinkled It is often called 'French Crepe'. than other crepes.

- A relatively narrow continuous strip, obtained Flat Filament by cutting or splitting of a material suitable for textile use, the thickness,of which is slight in relation to the width. In rope making, the filament can be used flat or twisted.

Flat Knit - A term used to describe fabrics knitted on a flat machine in contrast to those knitted on a circular machine.
Flat Packed - Describes bales or trusses packed in a flat condit-

ion.
Flatlock Seam - A butt seam formed using a flatlock stitch. The edges of the materi,al are trimmed during sewing.

Blatlock

- A stitch formed by the 'Flatlock' machine with Stitch four needles, four loopers and a covering thread which makes the sewn portion to lie flat and not rise above the surface of the fabric. Flax Fibre Bundles

from the

base of

- The aggregates of ultimate fibre that run the stem up to the top of the branchgs of the 107

SP : 45-1988

flax straw. They are each composed of large numbers of ultltimate fibres overlapping each other.
Flax Pibre Strands -. Flax fibres after removal from the plant, consisting in the cross-section more than one ultimate fibres. Natural Flax

Flax Green:

straw
Flecked

without

any

- Scutched flax produced from deseeded intermediate treatment such as retting.

- Yarn or cloth with a flaw caused by spots or off-colour

dots.
Fleece - Carded jute fibre mat before being condensed into sliver

form.
Finish - Very bulky woollen fabrics with a relatively long, tangled, raised pile. The pile fibres lie loosely and are of fairly uneven length. The fabrics are soft and full (fleece). The reason for having such a long, tangled pile is to trap as much air as possible, thus increasing the insulating properties of these fabrics. The intensive raising process loosens the fabric considerably. A high level of insulation is thus achieved in cold but not, draughty conditions. Fleece

Fleece Wool - The entire fibrous crop shorn from a living sheep at onetime in one piece.
Fleecy - Resembling a descriptive of fabrics structure. Fleecy Fabric -

wool fleece in appearance and handle, or having a fine, soft, open and raised

knitted fabrics give smoothness
Flexibility

In a generic sense, it denotes all types of which are brushed or raised on the surface to and possible warmth.
*

(a) The ease of bending of (high) to stiff (low).

a fabric

ranging from pliable

(b) In the case of a fibre it is the-ability to be deformed without rupture or fracture.
Flexural Fatigue - A physical property expressed in terms of the number of times a material can be bent on itself through a prescribed angle, before it ruptures or losses the ability to recover.' Flo&t Plating - An effect in a plain-knitted plated fabric which is produced when the face yarn is missed by certain needles to allow the othe,ryarn to appear on the face.

Stitch - A stitch in a plain-knitted fabric where a length of 'yarn is not received by the needle (or needles) and the yarn connects two loops of the same course that are not in adjacent wales. This portion of yarn floats at the back of the fabric. Float

108

SP:45-1988

Also known as 'Missed Stitch' or 'Press-Off Stitch'.

FIG.31
Float

FLOAT STITCH (BACK SIDE OF FABRIC)

place in the fabric where warp and weft yarns escape - A the required interlacement.
Note - Floats are not flaws if introduced feature of design.

purposefully as a

Principal Causes - Matting up broken ends, large knot or waste in warp threads, defective warp tension. defective shuttle flight
etc.

Flock

- A material obtained by reducing te_xtile fibres to fragments as by cutting, tearing, grinding, milling, raising, etc; Flock Printing - A method of cloth ornamentation in which adhesive is printed on the fabric and finely chopped fibres are applied all over by means of dusting-on, an air-blast, or electrostatic attraction. The fibres adhere only to the printed areas and are removed from the unprinted areas by mechanical action. Floor Rug - h

Flocking,

'Rug, Floor'.
Floor

Flocked

Pile

Textile

obtained by

projecting the

Covering; fibres on
109

Flocked

to a

Carpet - Carpet support coated with

SP: 45-1988

adhesive.

An

example

is

given

in Fig.

33

Suijistrate

I
FIG.33

1. Pile 2. Primary support fabric 3. Layer of adherive

FLOCKED

PILE CARPET fabric wherein cotton warp

Florentine and lustre

-. A type of Bradford is used. woisl weft

lustre

Floss Silk -- Silk from grade and is available 'Blaze (French)'. The singles without twist, ion of wires.

the outer part of the cocoon; it is of low only in small amounts. It is also known as term is also applied to soft silk yarn or used in embroidery and electrical insulat-

Flour Bag - Bags made from DW flour jute cloth. The standard approximately 1135 g, and weighing dimension being 142 x 71 cm, (ZZ&__BJZ_Q .IS:3964-1967). Flour Bag Cloth - A double warp plain weave sacking jute cloth having 65 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm and weighing 539 g/m2 (see also IS:3966-1967). Fluff (or Fly) - Loose fibres which fly out into the atmosphere spinning and weaving. during processes such as carding, drawing, The reciprocal = lmPa s). of the viscosity expressed in poises

Fluorescent Bri ener - A substance i.e. applied to an uncoloured or a coloured textile material to increase the apparent reflectance radiation by conversion of ultra-violet in the visible region apparent whiteness or increase the into visible light and so to brightness of the textile material. Fluorofibre Constitution : Linear aliphatie monomers. Examples: macromolecules made from fluorocarbon

Polytetrafluoroethylene: -( CFr-CF&Polyhexafluoropropylene, Polychlorotrifluoroethylene. and

110

SP:45-1988

Flushing Holland.

-

A

heavy

woollen

coating

cloth

originally

made

in

Fly (Garment) - A material covered opening to conceal a f.astening, e.g. buttons, zip etc. A blind fly is fastened instead of left open along the finished edge. Fly Fpont for extra - A flap of material coverage. attached by one edge to underwear

Flyline - The line of the fly fastening from the centre fork to the top of the waistband on a pair of trousers.

of the

Foam Backing - Mechanically or chemically foamed polymer compound, covering. The ,outer part applied to the back of a textile floor of the layer of foam is usually produced so as to be compact and uniform. Foggy Yarn - Yarn the atmosphere. soiled during processing by dirt suspended in

Fogmarking -- Localized edges and folds, though

soiling of the fabric usually sometime apparent as bars.

confined

to

Principal Cause - This defect is often caused by deposition of atmospheric dirt during waiting periods in processing or when stored in plated aggravated by static form and is often charge attraction. Fold '- That part of a textile floor covering which is turned cases, fraying when fixed to_ the under to avoid, in certain edge of the room by pinning (m (d) under 'Method of Laying of Textile Floor Covering'). Folded Yarn - Yarn composed together in one opertion. of two or more single;: yarns twisted

Follicle - Skin structure which is or "outer skin' and in which

is differentiated the animal fibres

from the epidermdevelop and grow stocking without

seamless Footless Stocking - A turn-over top foot portion; generally worn. by sportsmen.

Footwear (Knitted) - Knitwear used as covering for the leg or foot or both, e.g. socks, stockings, hose tops, anklets, etc. Fore Hand Line - A 3-strand hemp or man-made fibre rope used in the fore line to the whale line. whale catching for connecting Fore Line - A short length of 3-strand hemp or man-made fibre rope used in whale catching. It connects the harpoons to the fore hand line. Foregoer Foreign Body See 'Fore Line'. of non-textile 111 matter.

- An inclusion

SP:45-1988 Principal Cause - This defect is often caused by insufficient attention to the cleanliness of looms and of the weaving shed. Foreign Fibres - Fibres of a different the other fibres in the fabric. type and/or colour from

Principal Cause - This defect is caused by the contamination extraneous fibre which is either included in of'the fabric by the yarn or woven into the fabric. Forelooper Foreparts Forerunner &a 'Fore Line'. of upper garments.

- The front parts m `Fore

Line'.

Fork Quantity - The allowance of material in bifurcated garments through the trunk from front to back the thickness provided for at the crotch. Foulard draping. A light-weight fabric, in twill weave; soft and well

Frame (Wilton or Gripper-Axminster Carpets) - The yarns comprising in a woven carpet. The all or a portion of the pile-warp yarns frames corresponds to the number of pile-warp ends per number of dent and from which the tuft or loop is selected by the jacquard mechanism. The bobbins or cheeses for any frame may be all of one colour or of a variety of colours. Frameage (Number of Frames) - In carpets woven over wires and in face-to-face carpets, the number of separate sheets of yarn of colours from which the jacquard mechanism or different the same selects the pattern. Single-colour carpets can be produced from a single frame. Free Balloon Net - A net over the envelope from which the basket is suspended. Free Laying the textile of fixing. of a free balloon,

Method, Loose Laying - A method of laying floor covering is laid on the floor without

in which any kind

French (or Dry-Spun)-Worsted Yarn - Yarn made from wool fibres combed on rectilinear combs and containing less than one percent oil. French French Combing Crepe - & - & 'Rectilinear 'Flat Crepe'. back or has double Combing'.

either folds - Cuff on shirts, French Cuff thickness usually closed with cuff links. French Foot - The foot of a fully-fashioned down the centre continuation of the seam fashion marks near heel and toe. 112

stocking with a of the sole and with

SP:45-1988

French

Merino of sheep known as Rambouillet, and

(a) A breed

(b) A fabric similar to merino warp cashmere, but in Z-and-2 angle with weft at a very flat twill. The twill runs predominating on the surface. French Seam - A seam in which two pieces of material are superimtogether and then folded over and stitched again posed, stitched to conceal the edges thus producing a flat folded seam with only visible. of stitching one row French
Fresco

Welt

- a.'Tubular

Welt'.

Generic name for worsted or woollen fabrics made from tightly twisted ply yarns in plain weave (original fresco: S-fold twist in 2 movements).

Fribby Wool cuts during

- Short tufts of wool obtained one shearing.

as a

result

of second

Fribs -'A trade term adopted by the Australian adhering to the fleece, wools indicate shorter

Wool Board to often sweaty

Friction Calendering - The process of passing fabric through a a highly polished heated steel bowl rotates calender in which at a higher surface speed than the softer (e.g. cotton or paper bowl against which it works, thus filled or rubber coated) of the fabric that is in contact producing a glaze on the face with the steel bowl. The friction ratio is the ratio of the peripheral speed of the faster steel bowl to that of the slower in the range 1.5:l or 2:l. bowl and is normally It usually napped fabric. Frieze - A heavy, coarse twill-woven, warp than weft and is made to produce a mixed colour has coarser effect by double cloth weave. Frill Yarn - Yarn with a novelty yarn. Frise A pile fabric spiral or corkscrew effect usually made as

of

uncut

loops. layers of as Strusa

Frison (French) - The silk waste brushed from the outer waste is also described cocoons prior to reeling.Such (Italian), Knubs (English) and JOOTH (Hindi).
Frog -

holes.

Design Usually

loops and made of braid, on pyjamas or robes. from the crotch

stitched

around

button

Front Rise - The distance the waistline. Fud fibres

to the

centre

front

of

Droppings from the woollen card consisting that are heavily charged with oil.

of very

sort

113

SP:45-1988
Full Cardigan Stitch - A stitch produced by tucking on 1 x

1 rib

basis as under: mst Course - Tuck all rib needles, and knit all plain needles; and

Second Course - knit all rib needles, and tuck all plain needles. Also known as 'Polka Rib'.

FIG. 34
Full Drawers - &

FULL CARDIGAN STITCH 'Drawers'. 'Fully-Fashioned Hosiery'.

(c) under &

Full-Fashioned Fulling Fullness &

Eosiery

'Milling'.

- The additional amount of one of the materials joined at a seam which is allowed in order to create the desired shape in a part of a finished garment. e.g. a sleeve head (see also
`Easing-In').

Fully-Fashioned Hosiery - Hosiery which is shaped wholly or in part by widening or narrowing or by both by loop transference to increase or decrease the number of wales knitted on a flat bed weft-knitting machine without alteration of the character of the stitch. Also known as 'Fashioned Hosiery', 'Full-Fashioned Hosiery' and 'Selvedged Hosiery'. Fulpat -,A term used for weak, gummy and immature jute fibres.

Fur - Hair from domesticated animals other than goat or sheep. The important fur bearing animals include badger, mink, otter, angora rabbit, beaver, musk-rats, etc. Fur Fabric - A wide range of pile fabrics made to imitate various furs. In most cases the pile is comparatively long and the fabric is subject to special finishing processes to imitate a particular fur. Fusible Interlinings - An interlining which has been treated so that it adheres to other materials by the application of heat and pressure. Fusing - The action of bonding a fusible interlining to a garment piece by the action of heat and pressure. 114

SP:45-1988
Fuzzy

(Elairy, Broken aggravate This might Principal Cause-

- Fibrous appearance Filament) cloudiness of the cloth. the Presence of abraded yarns..

of a cloth.

Fuzzy Motes

- &

'Motes'. clear finished, warp faced cloth in picks per exceed the considerably twill line at a steep angle. Usually for raincoats, It is largely used

Gaberdine - A firmly woven, which the ends per centimetre centimetre thus producing the woven in 2/l and 2/2 twills. sportswear. suitings and

GADA - A term commonly used in South India to denote cotton fabrics produced from yarns in the count range 18s-30s and square in construction. Gada is mostly sold in the grey state and used as apparel and household textile. GADLAPET - An Indian term given to cloth used for making silk from the .inner part of cocoons bedding.

Galettame - Waste 'Bassinas').

(see also

- A ribbon with transverse ribs, each composed of Galloon Ribbon or pronounced effect. The a uniform to give two or more picks, ribbon has a special selvedge, which is normally of tubular weave. GANJI An Indian term denoting manila or all types sisal of vests rope used (see 'Vest'). for general

Gantline - A 3-strand purposes.

Line - A cord treated with preservative Garden Reel in reei form for use in horticulture. Garden Twine - Twine treated horticulture . Garment An individual with preservative

and supplied

mainly

for use in

piece

of

clothing.

Garnetting - A process of recovering the fibres from hard-twisted thread wastes, rags, clippings, etc, especially of wool. The object is to thoroughly break up the material and return it to a fluffy condition so that it may be reused in blends, or in some fibrous cases, alone. _ Garnishing Scrim - Net like structure with strips usually in the form of sizes and used for camouflage purposes. Garter J3and - & 'After-WeLt'. 'Atmospheric fabric hose branches to Fading'. square mesh of various dyed or pigmented and

Gas Fading

- h'

- A Gas Main airship having

running through the length of a rigid the gas bags for inflation.
115

SP:45-1988 - A dome-shaped knitted article made of ramie, rayon Gas Mantle for heating chemicals; used or cotton and treated with suitable 'to,incapdescenc.e ain pressure lanterns to give the rated luminosity. Gas-Bag-Net position. - A net of cordage or wire to retain a gas bag in

jute or hard fibre twisted of hemp, Gasketting - Several yarns used for legging of steam tarred or untarred together either also (a) under 'Yarn']. pipes. [a been passed through a gasflame to Gassed Yarn - A yarn that has remove protruding fibres and improve the yarn by making it smoother Also known as 'Signed Yarn'. and brighter in appearance. Gassing - A process surface of yarn or as 'Singeing'. of burning off protruding fibres from the cloth to obtain a smooth surface. Also known

- The shortening of the material length by Gathering (Gauging) drawing together and holding a succession of small folds of stitching. Machine gathering or gauging is achieved materials by by the use of a special pressor foot or attatchment. Gauge 'Knitting (a) specifying the spacing of the loop-forming A term elements in knitting and ancillary machines and expressed as the number of elements per unit of length; and A term specifying the thickness, of loop-forming Nominal physical elements. dimensions, usually

(b)

Gauge

Length,

(a)

The length of a specimen under specified pre-tension measured from nip to nip of the jaws of the holding clamps at the beginning of the test; and The distance between points attached to tabs, measured specified tension. at which the specimen is while the specimen is under

(b)

Gauze - A light, open mesh, loosely woven fabric or mock leno weave. It finds use in bandages, surgical dressings, etc. Gaw A gap in the jute cloth caused by

in plain, leno sanitary goods,

missing

weft.

Geelong Convertor - Apparatus consisting of three intersector gill boxes arranged in tandem with intermediate feed and transfer mechanism. This is used as a substitute for carding. - A smooth worsted thread Genappe Yarn fibres have been removed from the surface (e.g. Singeing). in which all the loose by gassing

116

SP:45-1988

Genoa Velvet - A heavy type of velvet with three picks to a wire and a special ground weave, the repeat of which is on four ends picks. and SiX It is commonly a figured velvet with a smooth ground and a pile figure d-eveloped in various colours. Georgette Crepe - A fine lightweight, open texture Georgette, fabric, usually in a plain weave, made from crepe yarns, usually in both warp and weft. and two S-twisted yarns two Z-twisted GHICHA - The yarn drawn by hand twisting. GICHA-GICHA GICHA-Noil mostly on - Fabric - A fabric handloom. made out of tasar cocoons without any

out of gicha yarn both by using gicha

in warp and

and weft. noil yarn

produced

in - A drafting machine, used in worsted processing, Gill Box fibres is in part controlled by pins which the motion of the fixed,on moving bars (pinned failers). - A method of attenuation of fibres in which the Gill Drafting fixed on controlled by pins motion of the fibres is in part moving bars (pinned failers). Gilling - An operation, preparatory to spinning, flax or spun-silk fibres through jute gzxes in ozger to improve fibre parallelization. Gimp - A special stitching. thread used to support of passing wool one or more gill

and raise the buttonhole

medium-weight cotton fabric in plain weave Ginghem - A light-to made from dyed yarns and normally in checks. It is used as dress material. and curtain Ginned Wool - Short wool fibres a ginning machine. them through Ginning - A process of retrived from burrs by passing

separating

lint

from

seed-cotton.

- A ginning process in which the fibres on seed Ginning (Roller) cotton are made to adhere to the roughened surface of a rotating out from the seed by the leather coated roller and are pulled action of one or more knives. in which the fibres on seed - A ginning process Ginniqg (Saw) saw teeth bordering a number of parallel cotton are gripped by shaft. A suitably placed grid prevents the discs on a rotating the latter get and thus fibres seeds from advancing with the wrenched from the seeds. Ginning Percentage - The ratio of the mass of lint to the mass cotton (KAPAS) expressed as a percentage. seed Glace - A type of lustre dress fabric (M 'Bradford of

Lustre

117

SP:45-1988

Fabrics'). Glass constitution Examples Glass (Textile)
: :

Mixed

silicates calcium and magnesium borosilicates. or weaving of cr

Aluminium, - Glass

in a form suitable

for spinning

Glaze - The smooth, glossy and plain appearance of the surface a fabric produced by the applications of heat, heavy pressure friction. Glove - A covering for the hand and wrist the four fingers and the thumb. Also

with a sheath each for 'DASTANA' . known as

of genus mj. Goat Hair -- Hair from a domesticated ruminant However, the most important ones are Angora goat (Canra hirucus geuamug) and Cashmere goat (Capra hircus lanim). Gag Rope - A 3-strand manila, sisal or man-made fibre rope used as a secondary rope for towing in harbours and narrow waters. It braces the tow rope to the centre line of the tug at the after-end when being pulled stern first by the vessel it is assisting. - Heavy Golf Hose wool stockings turn-over tops. designs and Gore - Ji wedge-shaped part to obtain width Gore (Aerostat) of fabric. for sportsmen, made in fancy

piece of material inserted at a specific place. section of an envelope

into a garment or gas bag made

- A shaped

Gore (Parachute) -- A shaped section bounded by two adjacent rigging lines.

of

the

canopy

normally

Gore Line (Heel) - The line on either side of the heel of socks or stockings made on circular machine, formed while shaping the heel (a Fig.100). Gore Line (Toe) - The line on either side of the toe of socks or stockings made on circular machine, formed while shaping the toe (a Fig.100). Gorge - The edge of the neck band is joined. forepart to which the collar stand
or

Grab Line -.A line becketted below the gunwale, forming cling on. Grade (Cotton) foreign matter

round the outside of life boats just loops, to which men in the water can

-- Classification of cotton and ginning percentage.

according

to colour,

118

SP:45-1988 of raw silk on the basis of tests - Classification (Silk) carried out according to standard methods in silk conditioning houses. The qualities taken into consideration are winding, size, tenacity, elongation, evenness, cleanness and neatness (see IS:2938-1964).
Grade Grade (Wool) - Classification of wool according to their fineness, length and yield.

Gout

- Foreign matter, usually lint or waste, accidentally woven into a fabric.

FIG. 35
Grading

GOUT

- The process of producing a range of patterns of different sizes from a master pattern.

Grading

of jute fibres into various grades of Jute - Sorting according to the fibre characteristics such as Wi, Wz, etc, for white raw jute and TD1, TDz, etc, for TOSSA daisee raw jute (m IS:271-1975).
Grain - The direction of straight grain means cutting - An institution sold to rearers.

the warp of a fabric. Hence cutting with the grain, that is warp. where silkworm seed is produced and

Grainage

Graineur

- The person engaged in the production of silkworm seed. yarns which

Grandrelle Yarn - A 2-ply yarn composed of single differ from one another in colour or lustre. Greasy

Blowing - Dry decatizing of greasy wool fabric i.e.unscoured woollen or worsted fabric, in open width. Greasy Cloth (Greasy Fabric, Greasy Piece) - Same as grey cloth for all-wool or wool blended

but the term is generally reserved woollen or worsted fabrics.

SIT:45 ..1988

yr;sy Milling s scoured.

(Wool)

-.- Th e pro-zess of milling which

the cloth

before

.Greasy Wool -- Wool also 'Raw Wool' ). Greasy Yarn (Wool) -

has not been washed

or scoured

(m

y-. drn which

has not been washed

or scoured.

Great Coat Cloth: Woollen Dyed - A heavy weight dyed overcoating used by armed force personnel as winter uniform, made from cross-bred wool, woollen-spun yarns in 2-and-.2 twill weave. GreemCotton condition: Grege Grenada - Cott.on lint obtained from balls picked in immature

(French) - A.typc

- Raw

silk produced lustre

by filatures. fabric.

of Bradford

Grenadine Twist - Hard-twisted plied silk yarn with 800 to 2400 composed of singles, which have been first twisted in the tPnl, same direction and have then been twisted together in the reverse direction. Note - It is used in the warp withstand severe friction. Grey Cloth - Cloth bleached or dyed. in the loom of grenadines which have to

state

before

it

is scoured,

Grey Goods, Greige Goods -~ Woven or knit-ted farics as they leave the loom or knitting machine, i.e. before any bleaching, dyeing, or finishing treatment has been given to them. Note 1 -- In some countries, particularly in the North American continent, term the (alternative spelling, greige griage) is used. Note 2 - For woven used as an alternative. brown goods is used. Grey Hosiery - Hosiery goods, the term loomstate is frequently In the linen and lace trades, the term

which

is not scoured,

bleaphed

or dyed.

Grey Scale - A series of pairs of neutrally coloured chips showing increasing contrast within pairs, used visually to assess contrast between other pairs of patterns; e.g. the IS0 (International Organization for Standardization) grey scales comprise two series of chips against which the magnitude of the change in colour of a specimen submitted to fastness test and of staining of adjacent uncoloured material can be visually assessed and rated on a l--5 scale. Gripper Axminster Carpet &g 120 &e under 'Axminster Carpet'. Carpet'.

GripperSpool

Axmimster

Carpet

under

'Axminster

SP:45-1988

of bast fibre yarns spun on jute Grist - The linear density system expressed in terms of weight in pounds of one spindle (14400 yd) of yarn (see 'Count of Yarn'). Gros de Londres - A cross-ribbed fabric in plain weave or its heavy and fine ribs alternating; or with ribs derivative, with of different colours. - A hard finished, closely woven, ribbed fabric, in Grosgrain having the ribs running plain or derivative of plain weave crosswise. The ribs are heavier than those in 'poplin' and are rounder than those in 'faille'. - The total mass of a consignment, case, Gross Mass (Weight) mass of packing materials, including the bale, roll or sample; of supports, such as cones, bobbins. containers and Grown-On material Facing edge. - The formation of a facing by folding back the

family (Llama Guanaco (Euanaca) - Ruminant of the small ungulate guanicoe) in South America and believed to be the common ancestor of llama and alpaca producing soft brown fur. coarse outer-coat fibres which often Guard Fibres - Relatively in the coats of fur-bearing project above the inner coat e.g. mammals. They may have a shield-like apical portion, when they are named shield fibres. GULUBAND - An Indian term for muffler (see 'Muffler'). the filaments

- A sticky protein material that coats Gum (Silk) of raw silk. This is otherwise known as 'Sericin'.

Note - The gum serves to cement together the two filaments of the cocoon; in silk of silk bave and aids in the formation the gum is useful as a natural-size in weaving and manufacture, in the construction of fabrics such as bolting cloth. Gum Silk removed.
Gum Spots

- Thrown

silk from

which

gum

or sericin

has not been

- Hardened places in skeins of raw silk caused, when, at some stage of production excessive moisture softens the gum in raw silk and the gum later hardens to form an aggregated mass of filaments and gum.

- Bits of silk collected as waste in the re-reeling of Gum Waste It is raw silk at the filatures or during throwing and weaving. also called 'Strazza' (Italian) or 'Bourre' (French). of gummy matter - The pectin type Gummy Matter fibres due to insufficient retting. present in jute

Gun Cotton - Raw cotton treated with a mixture of nitric sulphuric acid and having powerful explosive properties.

acid and

121

SP:43--1983

Gun Flap .-. Style detail on cloth across the shoulder. - A general Gunny especially saizking. Gusset .-' 'An extra
. rei.nforcement

a French

coat,

the

extra

layer of

term

applied

to

manufactured

jute goods, for

piece

of material

sewn to a garment

Gut Thread - A braided Structure, extensibiiity.

thread incorporated primarily for the

in a woven, knitted, or limiting its purpose of

short fibres and dust taken out of cotton Gutter Fly --. Very through the du::7t extracting cages during the blow room treatment; as a part of invisible loss. generally this is treated Guy Line .-A plaited cord made from hemp or polyester fihre, by fire brigades in conjunction with lowering line. Guy Rope 3--stra:ld rope used to sisal or man-made fibre (a,) Manila, r steady some object such as a po:Le or mast. h (:I Id (:.I
tb) H Z-strand manila rope used with dex*ricks guy tackle. Hose

used

in the shipping

industry

Gymnasium Hose w0rI-l by gymnasts.

extending

beyond

the

knees;

generally

Gypsum -- Hydrous su.!phate of calcium of cotton and dressing goods. HABI JABI - Tangled !?I t ii: k.5 . hunk2 and and ravelled

which

i:; used for weighting free of

Jute of any JescriptirJn

made woo 11 en costume clo,h generally Habit Cloth - A fine S-thread warp satin weave and finished with a dress face.

in

c1osel.y woven Japanese HABUTAI (or HABUTAYE) - A soft, light but woven from raw silk filature yarn with very little silk fabrics, to t.hc weight, used according twist. Various types of weave are from 2.5 to 6 .0 mottlme , which varies Hair
t,han
nr:ss

(Hair Fibrcs)
Sh(`JGp. Shcr:p

Fibrous growth on the body of mammals other hair is called wool irrespective of its coarse-

Hair Carpet
`IYltC pUIp3S8

- I:arpet with a surface made entirely of hair and wool. 0 f t h c? wool when used is to facilitate spinning and

:.lyeing

.LiairNet,

A

r;ct,covering

to

retain the

hair

in

order.

122

: $fi--1988

Haircord wires.

Carpet

-- A hair

carpet

produced

by weaving

over

Note - The use of the term haircord is deprecated for carpets made from other than lc39 percent hair. Other carpets having simishould be referred to simply>as cord carpets. lar construction - The condition of a textile material with numerous Hairiness loops or both, projecting from its surface. loose fibre ends or Hairy Hairy -w 'Fu~:y'. - Completely medullated produced fibre=i (ee also
`Kemp'

Fibres

).

Half Cardigan Stitch basis as under:

- A stitch

by tucking and knit

on I x all plain

1 rib

First course - Tuck needles; and Second course,needles. Also known as

all rib needles,

Knit

all

rib

needles,

and knit

all plain

'Royal Rib'.

FIG. Half Half Drawers Hose - See

36

HALF CARDIGAN

STITCH

(b) under

'Drawers'.

- See

'Sock, Socks'. yarn made from a solid single yarn and

Half Marl - A two-fold single marl yarn.

Halo - An area of light colour portion of the fabric after dyeing.

surrounding

a localized

thick

Principal Causes - This defect is often caused by migration of dye during dyeing or by less dye reaching the area around the thickening (e.g. knot, slub, gout) during pad dyeing. Halo-Length - A measure out on a cotton seed. Halter Rope - see of fibre length made on a halo combed

'Cattle

Rope'.

Halyard - A small lower flags or

size rope or cord used with a block to hoist or 5maPP sails. These are usually of unkinkable 123

SP:45-1988

construction. braided. Hambro Line seizings.

Manila,

sisal,

hemp

are 3-strand

and cotton

usually

- Hemp,

manila,

or sisal

line

used

for

lashings'and

Hammer Line - Hope made strands, hard laid with mm, used for pile driver Hand Hand Knitting Lead Line Yarn - See -

out of finest grade manila fibre, 4 a graphited core and having dia 48 to 62 hammer.

Yarn

intended

for hand-knitting.

'Pilot Lead Line'. to knitting done by hands with

Hand--Knitting -- A term applied the help of knitting pins, Hand-Knotted Carpet - A into the surface by hand. Note - The two most Sehnaf and the Turkish

carpet

obtained

by knotting

the tufts

common types of knot (or Ghiordes). A carpet

are the Persian

(or

Hand Knotted Pile Carpet pile-forming yarns by hand.

obtained

by knotting

the

(i) Method I - This is a typical example of single Persian or Senneh knots. According to this method, the weaver: Makes knots by: (1) looping a strand of pile yarn around a (the first) warp thread, (2) passing the strand under the adjacent (the second) warp thread to the left of the first warp thread, and (3) pulling up the strand and cutting it, and

(bl

Weaves the backing between two adjacent rows of knots by laying two (or more) weft threads, interla-cing each with warp threads as in a plain weave (a weave repeating on two warp threads and two weft threads).
/-SECOND FIRST WARP THREAD

lr
STRAND OF PILE YARN

WARP THREAD

WEFT HREADS

FIG. (ii)

37

EXAMPLE

OF KNOTTING

AND WEAVING,

METHOD

I

- This is a method adopted for producing fylet&S3_II carpets having very few, say 6000 knots/mz. This. 124

SP:45-1988

method is used to increase the strength of the fabric warpwise or in place of coarse warp yarn of twice the thickness, i.e., coarseness. According to this method, the weaver; (a) Makes knots by: (1) looping a strand of pile yarr around a (the first) paiz of warp threads, (2) passing the strand under the adjacent (the second) pair of warp threads to the left of the first pair of warp threads, and (3) pulling up the strand and cutting it; and (b) Weaves the backing between two adjacent rows of knots by laying two (or more) weft threads, intelrlacing each with pairs of warp threads as in a Basket weave (a weave repeating on two pairs of warp threads and two weft threads).
ECOND PAIR OF WARP THREAOS FIRST PAIR OF WARP THREADS

FIG. 38

EXAMPLE OF KNOTTING AND WEAVING, METHOD II

(iii) Method III - This is a typical example of double knots. This method saves labour and allows the production of carpets with intricate designs. The designs show the same fineness as that produced with single knots. The pile density is maintained by using the pile yarn of adequate thickness. This method is used for fine carpets only. According to this method, the weaver makes knots as in method II and weaves the backing as in Method I.
SECOND PAIR OF WARP THREADS> FIRST i WARP PAIR OF THREADS

STRANICI OF flLE YARN-

FIG. 39

EXAMPLE OF KNOTTING AND WEAVING, METHOD III

(iv) Method IV - This method gives combination of single knots according to method I and double knots according to method III. The proportion of single knots to double knots depends upon the design but is approximately 2:l. According to this method, the weaver: (a) Makes some knots as in method I and the remaining as 125

SP:45-1988

in method

11,and
,

(b) Weaves the backing as in method I
Note
-

Method IV is used only in figured carpets.
COND PAIR OF WARP THREADS

i

bRST SECOND

WARP WARP

THREAD THREAD

FIG. 40

EXAMPLE OF KNOTTING AND WEAVING, METHOD IV

(iv) Method V - This method is a variation of method III used in such carpets which are not very fine. According to this method, the weaver:
(a) Makes

a knot by: (1) Looping a strand of pile yarn around a (the first) warp thread, (2) passing the strand above the adjacent (the second) warp thread to the left of the first warp thread, (3) passing the strand behind the adjacent (the third) warp thread, to the left of the second warp thread, and (4) pulling up the strand and cutting it;

(b) makes the second knot as in (a) above after leaving the adjacent (the fourth) warp thread to the left of the third warp thread; and (c) weaves the backing acording to method I.
FOURTH PAIR OF WARP"THREADS PAIR OF WARP SECOND r [FIRST ;=k",f;sWARP THREADS THIRD

PAIR OF WARP THREADS

STRAND OF PILE YARN-WEFT THREADS

FIG. 41

EXAMPLE OF KNOTTING AND WEAVING, METHOD V

Hand-Printed Fabric - A fabric printed by hand, (a) by block, (b) by screen, (c) by stencil, or (d) by a combination of these methods. Hand-Tufted Carpets - Carpets, wherein the pile is inserted with the aid of a hand operated tufting gun and then the tufts fixed by coating the underside of the carpet with rubber latex or

SP:45-1988

similar polymers.
Bandle - The subjective assessment of a textile material obtained

from the

sense of

touch.

Note - It is concerned with the subjective judgement of roughness, smoothness, harshness, pliability, thickness, etc.
Handloom Woollen Blanket, Scarlet -

blanket from woollen-spun cross-bred wool.

yarn

made

Hand woven Z-and-Z twill from scarlet stock-dyed

Handwear (Knitted)' - Knitwear used as covering for hand or wrist or both, e.g. gloves, mittens, wristlets, etc. Hang Pick (Pick Hang)

distance, producing
Principal Cause

- A pick which is out of line for a short a triangular hole in the fabric. - Incorrectly tied knots.

Hanger Hanging

A loop

or loops fixed on a garment for hanging it up.
(Printing)

Threads

fabric causing
Hangman

break

of

- Loose threads on the face of a printed pattern (see also 'Loose Threads').

- A 4-strand rope of special construction used for Rope execution of death sentence. The rope is made from sisal, manila or hemp yarn.

Hanh (a) A synonym for skein;

(b) A yarn or twine in coiled form; (c) A definite length of sliver, slubbing, roving, or yarn, for worsted e.g., 840 yards of cotton yarn; 560 yards yarn;300 yards for jute yarn, etc. (d) A synonym for count as applied to roving; and roving, e.g. 2-hank (e) The skein of a reeled skein.
Hank Sizing (or Skein Sizing) - The application of size to yarn

sliver, slubbing, or

in hank form.
Hard Fibres - Fibres obtained from the leaves or leaf-stalks of various monocotyledonous plants, e.g. sisal and abaca. Hard Finish - A finish usually without a nap of any kind. Hard Size - Hard

for woollen and worsted fabrics

gummed specks visible on the surface of cloth.

Principal Cause - Use of cold or old size. 127

Hard

Tni:;tcd

Yarn
te

Yarn

havi. [I g

more

twist than rlormal.

produced during spinning, preparatory and

Harness

-. An sssrzmbly of straps or cords worn by parachlltist or employed to suspend an inanimate load to which the parachute is attached. Skip (Warp Skip) -- Warp yarn(s) appearing more or less surface of the fabric due to non-interla-

Harness

continuously on the cement with weft.

Principal Causes -- Heald or harness eye broken, irregular height of harness, improper timing of healds, broken dobby peg or defect in the jacquard, etc. Harpoon Line - A line attached to the harpoon used big fish. (E%?X?also 'Whale Line' ).

for catching

whales or
Harris

Tweed - Patented name for hand-made tweeds originally #!10yrm the island of Harris off the north coast of Scotland. Harris tweed is made.from fairly coarse and k@npy WCJi311en yarns and from stock dyeings.

Ha&da -'Wool lacking in softness to the touch.
Harvesting Ham& Twine - $ee

'Agricultural Twine'.

(a)

A 3-strand rope generally over 4Q mm diameter flexible construction used for marine purposes, such as towing, mooring, warping and securing; or A rope used for tying an oil bag to the sea anchor for dampening ths waves in the sea.

(b)
Hawser

Twist - A cabled yarn, cord or rope construction in which the single and first ply twfst are in the same direction and -tube second plytwist in the opposite direction, S/S/Z or Z/Z/S constr u&ion. Hawser-Laid Rope.
a

Centfal

A

rope
COre.

together

WithJUt

in which three strands are twisted It iS generally of Z-lay.

FIG. 42

HAWSER"LAOD

(3-STRAND)

ROPE

128

SP:45-1988

Hay %lor

Twine

'. See

'Agricultural

Twine '

Head - Bundle of jute in a bale of raw jute usually weighing from 4.50 kg. Each head is given a twist and folded prior to 2.25 to packing in the bale. Header 5~2 'Tab'.

headgear (Knitted), Headwear (Knittea) - Kitwear used as covering for'hcad, e.g., balaclava cap, beret, TOPA, etc. HeaLd Cord - See 'Debby Cord'

Heat Degradation _- The loss in strengtLi::of tyrc yarn4 or cords on exposure to an elevated'temperature for a pre-determi b ed time. It strength of the a$ 'the percentage of the initial is expressed 'specimen. Heat Shrinkage -- The maximum shrinkage in length of yarn 'or cord to an elevated temperature under a pre-tension; when exposed it length of the is expressed as .a percentage of the; .original specimen. Heat Shrinkage Force -'The maximum fo_rce d&$ioped in the yarn or cord of fi.Aed length when exposed to mari elevated *temperature. It is expressed as forc'e per unit linear-density (gI-ams per tex or grams per *denier) beat-%&cation -.- The process of exposing the fabric to moist dry'he&%aallowing complete freedom for the yarn or\ fabric shrink. ' or to

- The process of stabilisation Heat-Setting, cSetting of fibres, yarns or fabrics to qny shape 'by the action af moist or dry heat. The process cinsists essentially in exposing the material while under dimensional control and shape to a temperature higher than any tempertiture 1Zkely to be met with in its subsequent use. Heather Mix Carpet - Carpet in which 'the pile yarns of blends of different coloured fibres. are composed

Heaving Line - A 3-strand manila, sisal or man-made fibre rope of small size for throwing across an open space to haul in a larger rope. Heavy Cee - A double warp plain weave 68 ends/dm and 35 picks/dm. and weighing (See IS: 3751-1966). sacking jute cloth having 673 g/mz.

Heavy Cee Bag -. Bags made from heavy tee cloth measuring 101.5 X 71 cm and weighing 1020 g. (a IS: 2874-1964) Heavy Colour, band. Machine Stop - Excess colour smudged

normally

in a weftways

129

SP:45-1988

Beavy

Conditioned

Wool

- Wool containing

a large goods are

amount of yolk denoted (w

and foreign
Beavy Goods

matter.
- A term by

which

sacking

'Sacking'). Heel Gore Line - & 'Gore Line (Heel)'.

Eeld Loop - A loop which, having been pulled through the loop of the previous course, is retained by the needle during the knitting of one or more additional courses (see Fig. 32 and Fig. 115). Held-Loop Fabric - m

'Relief Fabric'.

Hem - The folded part, without pile, of a textile floor covering,

held to the substrate by stitchiing.
Hemmed - A bag Bag folded and stitched.

with

raw edges of the cloth at the mouth

Hemp - A soft fibre obtained from the inner bark of the hemp plant, Cannabis Sativa. The fibres are steel grey to creamy white in colour usually occuring in narrow flat ribbons of 1 to 2.5 m in length. It is used in the manufacture of ropes, twines and rugs.

Note - the term 'hemp' is indiscriminately applied to a great many fibres, e.g. Manila hemp, Sisal hemp, Bombay hemp and Madras hemp.
Eenequen - Henequen is the leaf fibre obtained from the plant &gave Fourcrw and is cultivated mainly in the Yucatan peninsula of Mexico.

Benrietta - Similar to cashmere fabric but warp is of

pure silk.

Hessian - A single-warp plain weave jute fabric manufactured in varying weights and widths, weighing up to 500 g/m2 [see al= IS:2818 (Part l)-19711.
Hessian Bag - Hag

made from

hessian.
Fibres - Fibres showing discontinuous

Eeterotype

(or Heterotypical)

medulla. Such fibres are very useful the carpet pile.

in imparting

resiliency to

High Bulk Yam - Spun synthetic yarns which owe their bulk to the blending of pre-shrunk and unshrunk fibres in which the different degree of shrinkage in the fibres in wet finishing produces a bulking out of the yarn. High Draft - A draft which is higher than that normally possible with the ponventional three roller system at the fly frames or spinning frames. Eigh Neck -

A

or

finished

term applied to neck of a knitted outerwear, designed in tubular high shape to cover the neck fully or 130

SP:45-1988

partly. It may be single or turn-over type.

FIG. 43
Bigh-Spliced Bee1 A

HIGH NECK where splicing is introduced high

heel

above the shoe line.
Eigh-Temperature Dyeing - Dyeing under super atmospheric pressure with the object of raising the temperature of the dye liquor above its normal boiling point. Hill (Pahari) Wool (Clipped) -

body of
Bill

sheep from

the hill

Clipped wool obtained from the districts in the Himalayan region.

(Pahari) Wool (Pulled) - Pulled wool obtained from the pelts of slaughtered sheep (in the same manner as in pulled wool) from the hill districts in the -Himalayan region.

HO8 (see
Hogget

&

'Hog

Wool'. from a sheep not shorn as a lamb

Hog Wool

- The first clip

'Hogget Wool').

Wool - A trade term adopted by .the Australian Wool Board to indicate wool from a young sheep of either sex from about nine and ten months until it is a two-tooth.

Boles - A break are severed.

down in fabric where two or more adjacent yarns

Principal Causes - Careless handling of cloth roll at doffing, rough take-up roller, defective temples, improper singeing, adverse effect of chemicals during finishing, insect damage, some warp and weft floats or slubs which get milled up in scouring and form a thick place on the cloth getting cut on shearing machine, removal of foreign matter sticking or entangled in a fabric, etc.
Bolland Finish - A glazed or unglazed finish applied to certain cotton fabricsby applying an oil and filling material followed by a thorough calendering to make them more or less opaque. Hollow Yarn Bomespun or Filament - See

'Aerated Yarn'.

- Term applied to woollen cloths composed of yarns spun from local wools and woven on handlooms-generally a tweed `in 'Z-and 2-twill. This term is applied generally to various -woollen fabrics made in Scotland, Ireland and England. The Appropriate Indian term for home-spun is 'KHADI'.

Eonan- A silk pongee cloth made from wild silk worms raised in the Honan area in China. The fabric is noted for its uniformity 131

SP:45.1988

of colour.
Honeycomb -. A rough textured fabric with marked ridges and hollows produced by floating warp and weft yarns. The appearance of the fabric resembles the cellular comb of the honey bee. It is also called 'Waffle Cloth'. Honeycomb Design - A design characterized by cell-shaped the face of a weft-knitted fabric made on tuck stitch typical honeycomb design fabric is produced as follows: Courses 1 and 2 3 4 and 5 6 Hoops --&g Tuck Knit Tuck Knit
`Bands'

0x1

cavities basis, A Needles

Rib Needles on odd and non-knit on even all on even and non-knit on odd all

Plain Knit all Knit all Knit all Knit all

HOP Cloth -- A very coarse making bags.

double-warp

plain weave

fabric

used

for

Hose -.Knitted knee.

footwear

where

the

leg length

extends

beyond

the

Bose Top - A tube-like leg portion from ankle Hosiery

seamless rib fabric used for covering the to knee. It is worn over the socks.

(a)

the generic sense, all types In goods made up there-from. sense, yarn knitted

of knitted

fabrics

and

(b) In the restricted and legs. Hosiery yarns. Marl
.-

coverings

for

the feet marl

A

multiply

made from

identical

single

Hosiery Yarn - Soft twisted yarn for use in knitting. It can be made from natural or man-made fibres or their blends. Hosiery yarns are of many differer 'Alpaca and Camel Hair types (se mo Yarns, Berlin Wool Yarn, Cashmere Yarn, Fingering Yarn,. Lamb's Wool Yarn, Shetland Yarn, Wheeling Yarn, Worsted Yarn'). Hospital 'Blankets, Woollen, piece-dyed blankets woven in spun yarn from wool or wool Houseline - A soft laid 3--ply for seizings (binding). Huarizo (a) A cross-breed of Llama (mnlama 132 father and Dyed - Milled Z-and-2 twill nylon blend. twine, s-lay, and raised stock-or weave from woollen-

usually

tarred

used

SP:45-1988

Alpaca (Llama

pacog) mother.

(b) Fur produced by this cross-breed.
- A fabric with pebbly or irregular surface produced by short floats of warp and weft on .a plain ground. Huckaback
. . ...

Hue -

That attribute of colour whereby it is recognized as being predominantly red, green, blue, yellow, etc.
(COttOA) -

Hulls

The

outer, hard

shells of cotton seeds.

HUNKA- Very hard jute strands running &m the lower end up to practically the tip of the fibre. This is due. to insufficient or no retting.(See aa under 'Jute Fibre '.CharacterTstics').
Hydra Extraction - An operation for squeezing out ex$ess liquid generally water from a textile material. It neither brings about any change in the basic character of the textile material, nor involves any chemical treatment.

Ice Colours - A term applied to azoic dyes because the diazotised base solution has to be kept at low temperature by adding ice to prevent its premature decomposition. IdeAtifiCatioA Yarn

of quality

of the

- Usually coloured yarn used for identification rope.

-Imitation Rib

- AA effect resembling ribbed texture produced on a plain-knitted fabric either by systematically removing the needles or closing the beard of needles during knitting. Also known as 'Mock Rib'. Immersion Suit - A suit designed to protect the body immersion in cold water.

against the

effects of
Imperial

Cloth

2-and-2 twill

- A fine piece dyed merino wool worsted coating in weave.\

Impregnated Fabric - A fabric in which the interstices between the yarn are completely filled with the impregnating compound throughout the thickness of the material, as distinguished from sized or coated materials, where these interstices are not completely filled. Impregaatibn - The --operation of depositing a bonding and/or finishing agent by tot@ immersion of the textile floor covering, then extracting the surplus. - Of pressing. Surface unevenness after pressing, Impression usually around areas of extra thickness, such as pockets and seams. IA-Laid fabric - _$& - h

`Laid-In Fabric'.

India Heap

'Sunn Hemp'. 133

Indian Carpets - A term applied to all-wool hand-knotted pile carpets made in India in a variety of Indian, Persian, European or Tibetian designs. They are produced from worsted (2 or 3 ply) 2-5 Nm or w8>ollen yarns of and the density of resultant count knots varies fr0m 6 to 6QJ/cm2. Indian Wool --Wool obtained often ally a mixed fleece
blarlkets.

from indigenous sheep. It is essentikempy and is suitable for carpets and

Indicator indicator

Line ..A 3-strand Italian hemp or flax line used apparatus reciprocating engines. when testing

on the

blue colour rich permanent Indigo Dye -. A.dye capable of giving applied on textile after oxidation in air of the yellow juice material and obtained from _Indiaoferae plant leaves. Indigosol,Dye Indo-Persian design (see Industrial
p:XrpOSCS

- a_

'Soluhilized

Vat

Dye'. with well known Persian

Carpets - Indian carpets _&& 'Persian Carpets'). Fabrics - A industry. - A baby variety of

fabrics

used

for non-apparel

in Suit

Infant

suit for h

infants
'Eootee'.

(see

'Baby

Suit').

Infantee, Inflation
during

Infant'

Socks

Net -- A net of

cordage

used

to hold

down an envelope

i.nflakicJn.

Ingrain CarPet A reversible coarse carpetting woven on a six coloured weft threads, jacquard loom accommodating up to or three-ply (Scotch which may be two-ply (Kidderminster Carpet) Carpet). Ingrain Ingrain Cotours Yarn - Dyes which are developed in situ on the fibre.

.-a.~

'Top--Dyed Yarn' . the usual seam allowance besides out if required or for strength at

extra - An Inlay allowance inside the garment for letting 8 given position. Inner Coat Inserted material complete - m 'Undercoat'.

Seam -- A seam in which a single or number of plies of is inserted between two others which are turned in. The assembly is sewn in one operation. (Filaments) or insoluble part of the - The process of rendering in, hot acid baths. foot of socks -or the filaments

Insolubilizing resistant to Irlstep -- Upper

stockings.

134

SP:45-1988

Insulating Tape - A narrow strip of fabric impregnated with a resin having a high dielectic constant, which is further coated with an adhesive on one- side used for insulation. Tapes and polymer films coated with adhesive on one side can also be used. Coloured yarns are frequently used for the purpose of identifying specific electrical circuits. Insulation Ratio, Effective - In thermal transmittance of textile, an indication of the increase in insulation afforded by the fabric in comparison to the uncovered test plate under specified condit/' ions of test. Intarsia Design - A design in weft-knitted fabrics in two or more colours which are solid from front to back. Each area of colour is knitted from a separate yarn which is contained within that area. Generally a detached motif is made in colour on different coloured ground. Also known as 'Solid Design'. $x&m-Lining Cloth - A fabric, woven or non-woven, used as a layer between the outer cloth and inner lining of garments or between two layers of the same cloth, e.g. in collars, to give better quality interlining stiffness, shape and/or warmth; cloth is often chemically treated andior impregnated with suitable polymers to obtain permanent stiffness. Interlacing - The passing of a thread over or around another thread or loop of another thread. Interlining - A layer of material inserted in between the inner and outer fabric for shape retention, strength, warmth or bulk. Interlock Fabric - A double 1 x 1 rib-knitted fabric with crossed sinker wales. The wales on one side of the fabric are immediately behind the wales of the other side of the fabric. The appearance of 'the fabric is same on both sides. Intralooping - The passing of a loop formed by the same thread. loop of thread through another

Intrinsic Strength - The value obtained by dividing the mean single fibre strength by the mean fibre weight per unit length. (Synonemous with tenacity). Inturned Top top. Stockings A stocking with inturned welt at the

Inturued Welt - A welt made by folding a plain fabric backward and then joining the starting end with the main body of the 'fabric during the process of knitting: Also known as 'Turned Welt'. Invoiced Mass (Weight) invoice. The mass indicated on the seller's

Italian Cloth - Dyed cotton warp and undyed woollen weft fabric woven in 5-thread weft sateen in which the wool portion is piece 135

SP: 45-1988

dyed. This
J-box

cloth is

lustre finished and used as a lining cloth.

(a) A J-shaped trough or vessel for the processing of textiles from one process to another. The long limb of the J-box forms an inclined plane on which the material accumulates during the dwell period, being withdrawn from the radial portion. (b) An upright J-shaped vessel for continuous wet processing of textiles.
Jacket - A short outergarment generally of hip sleeves and tight-fitting border.

length, with full

(Machine Covering) - A textile product, woven or felted into tubular or sleeve form ready for covering and shrinking on a machine roll. Jackets Jacquard Fabric (Knitted) - A knitted fabric with designs generally in colour made on the basis of needle selection.

JAMAWAR (or JAMAVAR) SHAWL - Fine worsted or cotton warp, and worsted weft jacquard shawl woven with intricate design border as shoulder wear for ladies.

JAMDANIAn Indian term used for superfine handlooms with characteristic designs.
JANGBIA - An Indian

cloth produced on

term for

briefs (B

'Briefs').

Jacquard Weave Carpet - Pile carpet produced on a jacquard loom and having a design obtained by the use of creels (frames) each supporting the bobbins of pile yarn of diffferent colours. The successive selection of the appropriate frames during weaving forms the required design.
Uu?WfrC

substrate

1. Cut pile 2. Chain warp `3. Top shot

4. Stuff& 5. Bottom shot 6. Dead yarn

FIG. 44

JACQUARD WEAVE CARPET, TWO-SHOT (WARPWAYS SECTION) 136

Substrate

1. Cut pile 2. Chain warp 3. Top shot

4. Stuffer 5. Bottom shot 6. Dead yarn

Fir;. 45

,JACQWdX!

WfjS.VE

r:ARPE'~

7

THE BACK JANGLI .- This is ,an some Bihar districts. cleaned. retted or

(WARPWAYS

THREE-~-SHOT THROUGH SECTION)

TO

inferior variety of jute coming T'his variety of jute is usually

mainly from not. properly

Jaspe Carpet -. Carpet having a flamelike regular pattern, traditdip-dyed in hank form irlto ionally produced by using piie yarn or two different 12olours in fixed two tones of the same colour in any one lot , the hanks length of proportion of Jaspe Yarn - Jaspe yarn may bc woollen-spun space dyed yarns. folding two produced by in carpets called jaspe carpets. or worsted-spun They ace usually yarn used

Jean -' A 2/l warp faced twill fabric used chicfly for overalls. Typical cotton particulars are 10s warpx 28s weft with 9fl ends/dm and 6Q picks/dm. Note- - The term jeanette is sometimes used to describe lighter weights and these may be used for linings. Jerk-In Jersey Weft - &s 'Weft Trail'. with a hem at the bottom. one. the

-- Pullover

fabric as opposed to rib-knit Jersey Fabric - A plain-knit It may be circular knit, flat knit or warp knit. -. A process for dyeing Jet-Dyeing through the fabric is carried circulated at a high velocity.

fabric in rope form in which a narrow opening by dye-liquor on which the edges are

a mouth - A pocket having Jetted Pocket the application of jettings. finished by Jetting

of fabric, usually strip -A narrow the pocket opening and turned parallel to mouth edge.

cut warpwise,

sewn

over

the

pocket

137

SP:45-1988

JHAFUN - An Indian term for harfdloom, coarse cloth made with or without borders on all sides and sometimes with check designs. It is used as duster cloth. JHOOT Silk Coating - It is a plain weave thick coating fabric produced on handlooms in West Bengal. 2 Ply degummed jhoot warp yarn is produced from and 2 or 3 ply jhoot weft is used. Jhoot reeling silk waste. JBURI (Silk) - Yarn spun out it to opening processes. of tasar w&&e without subjecting

JHURI-JHURX - A plain-woven thick fabric produced on handloom mostly in Bihar out of reeled tussar silk waste hand-spun yarn. It is used for dress material, furnishing, etc. Jig, Jigger - A dyeing machine in which fabric in open width is transferred repeatedly from one roller to another and passes each time through a dye-bath of relatively small volume. Jigs are also frequently used,for scouring, bleaching dyeing and finishing. -The button Jigger (Garment) on the inside coat (usually sewn with a long shank). Joined JOOTH Bag - See - A bag fabricated (French)'. term for blouse (w 'Blouse'). and above. (w 'Sock, Socks' of a double breasted

out of two pieces

of jute cloth.

'Frison

JUMPERJunk

An Indian

- Condemned

cordage

of sizes

102 mm

JURAB - An Indian term for socks and stockings and 'Stockings').

Jute - A multicellular fibre obtafrned from the species of Corchorus, of which the round pod capsularis or White jute) and the long pod ossa or Daisee jute) most are the are long, varying from usually length. Jute Blanket - A.type with-jute mixed with

bast of various jute (Corchorus jute (Corchorus important. The 1.5 to 3.5 m in

of blanket made out of woollenized low grade wool or cotton.

jute or

by impregnating jute fibre with Jute Fibre Boards - Boards made adhesives and the fibres under other chemicals and consolidating boards. Fibre heat and pressure. These are used as insulation board drums, packing materials, etc. Jute Fibre Characteristics fibre characteristics: - The following are the principal jute

(1)

Centre Root (Book CU - The hard barky region in the middle part of the reed which requires adtiitional softening treatment. 138

SP:45-1988

Colour - The property of a fibre which distinguishes its appearance, such as redness, yellowness, greyness, etc. Crop End - The hard gummy top end of the reed. Fibre (4) Crappy (but not barky). Fibre (sometimes barky) fibre at the

with

apical

ends

rough

and hard

has. become which (5) Weak Crappy Fibre - Fibre weak over a length of 30 cm at the top end. (6) Dazed Fibre - Fibre which

unusually

is weak and dull in appearance.

per unit Mass volume of the fibre including (7) Bensitvr air-spaces. Higher density (heavy body) is a characteristic of better quality of fibre. (8) Effective defective Heed Length - The length of the reed after basal and apical ends have been removed.

(9) Fibre Fineness- A measure of diameter or weight per unit length or both. The finer the fibre the better the spinning quality. (10) FULPAT fibre. - A term used for weak, gummy and immature jute

(11) !&,mmy Fibre. - Closely separable.

adhering

fibre

strands

not easily

running continuously (12) HUNKA - The very hard barky fibre from the basal end to almost the apex of the reed. (13) Knots break - Stiff barky spots in the body of the reed which the continuity of the fibres when opened.

and Loose Leaf - Leaf is the dark grey leafy or (14) Leaf paper like substance (remnant of the skin of the plant) appearing on the strand. Loose leaves are those that lie loosely on the fibre and are easily removable. -- It depends on the display of light reflected (15) Lustre from the fibre exposed to normal light. Higher lustre in jute is generally a characteristic of better'quality fibre. (16) - The intertwining of fibre strands forming genetically inherent in the species from which
MOSSY FaBsr: - A type

attached (18) Moss

of vegetation to the plant. of dead adventitious

which

sometimes

gets

- Presence

roots

at the lower

139

SP:45-1988

or middle

part of

the reed. - Fibre which has lost its strength

Over-Ketted Fibre and brightness.
(20)

Pliability the fibre

- The property which determines can be bent or twisted.

how easily

(21?

Peed - The fibre system from the stem of one individual jute plant (see also under 'Porter'). length of the reed including

(22) Reed LL&ng',B- The entire the base and apex.

(23) Reed Tapering - The rate of thinning of the reed from the base to the apex. %. (24 j .&ed Tickness - The average thickness of the reed.
(255

Root - The hard barky region which additional requires known as 'Cuttings'.

at the basal end of a reed softening treatment. Also

(26)

Runnor - The hard barky fibres running from the lower end to the middle region, more or less continuously.
-

(2'7) Speck strand

The bark with a knotty core in the body which breaks the continuity of fibre. of wood

of the

(28) Sticks - presence of small pieces over the body of the reed.

of jute plant

stress at which a (29) %nsile streng.&h - The longitudinal fibre specimen of a specified length ruptures. It is usually expressed in gram force per tex.
Jute Matting - See

'Matting'.

Jute Mesh - An open weave jute cloth used for soil conservation of strengthened paper and in lighter weights,for the manufacture and underfelt (a `Sorim'). Jute Nettings provided and - Nets manufactured with tying lines with used meshes of various sizes for camouflage purposes. cut, printed,

Jute Rugs -- Jute fabrics hemmed and fringed for Jute Stick -. Woody centre

of various sizes sometimes use as floor coverings. stem of a jute plant.

Jute Stick used are

Boards -- Boards insulation for

made from jute stick particles. oases, packing partitioning, together

These
etc.

Jute Twine -- A plied strands of yarn.

yarn made by twisting

two or more

140

SP:45-1988

Jutlac - Laminated sheet made
capable
K-Bag

of

being

made

of jute and shellac combination into drums, boxes and similar articles.

- A double-warp hemmed plain weave sacking bag measuring about 101.5 X 71 cm (normally with 51 ends/dm, 31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 850 g, plain (without stripes),and dry sewn. K.D. (Kier Decatieing) -

A finishing
wool

stabilizing and flat
KAMBLEE

setting

process for dimensionally fabrics (w 'Decatizing').

~CUMBLEX, KAMBLI, KUMBAL) - An Indian term for fibrous coarse blanket made out of wbol or a mixture of wool and other animal fibres, which are not milled. - An Indian term for fine fabric

KAMDANI

with gold

and silver

threads (m

with ornamentation made 'ADHI').

KAPAS - A term used for seed cotton.
Kapok - A unicellular fibre obtained from the seed pods of the kapok tree, Ceiba pen(&iodwon anfractuosum) and m micum. The fibres are about 2.5 cm in length, white or twany in colour and have silky lustre. It cannot be spun into yarn. It is very li-ghtand is used mainly for stuffing purposes. Kashmere Silk

that g$ves
Kashmere Kashmir Katan

- Silk fabric made with 2/l a soft finish.

right-hand twill weave

Worsted - &Q
Shawls - Shawls

'LOHI'. made in Kashmir, usually embroidered.

- A plain weave mulberry silk`.fabric in which double Cloth and twisted yarn is employed both in warp and weft

Katia

Fabric

- s,ss 'JHURI-JHURI'.
tasar waste after opening and

Katia Yarn - The yarn spun out of
cleaning.

KD Finish - Treatments given to woollen fabrics to improve handle, appearance and shrinkage resistance by passing through heated perforated cylinders. Keel h

'Cut

Marks'. webbing metal, forming the rigging

Keeper

- A ring,

lines into

usually of a riser.

Kemp - A coarse .animal fibre with a wide lattice-type medulla, which is shed from the skin at least once a year; it iypozf;; , shorter than fibres of the fleece, has a long tapering when completely shed, tapers sharply towards the root end. Note 1 - Kemp fibres are usually chalky white in appearance,

141

SP:45-1888

but may be coloured either very dark brown to black or reddish. Kemps are usually very strongly inherited.When dyed, because the cortex is relatively thin, 'they appear much lighter in colour than normal fibres.
Note 2 - The use of to wool fibres. Kenaf -

this term from

is not

necessarily confined

The

fibre - Kenaf

obtained

the bast layer of the plant

Hibiscus Note 1
Note

is commonly known as Mesta in India.

2 - Being similar to

kenaf is jute.
Keratin

jute in many of its properties, used either as an alternative to or in admixture with of all horny tissues and wool, hair sulphur containing protein.

- Basic ingredient

and fur

fibres. It

is a

Kerial - It is a handloom silk sari generally woven in West Bengal, with twisted degummed silk yarn. It is woven in plain weave withdesign or plain border and pallu, brought out by throw shuttle loom. Kersey - A compact, lustrous woollen fabric, diagonally ribbed or twilled, which is heavily milled and finished with a short nap. It is similar to Melton. KETE KHADI (Silk) - A

term used

for handspun

tasar thread.

(or KEADDAR) - An Indian term for fabric woven on handlooms from handspun yarns of natural or man-made fibrres or blend of two or more of such fibres. IKEANDY'KEESM

'Candy'.

An indian term for denoting plain, twill, striped, check or double cloth with woven all-over designs commonly used as bed sheets or bed covers in some parts of India.
Kickling - Winding an old rope around a heavy rope from chaffing. Carpet - scta 'Ingrain Carpet.

to protect it

Kidderminster Kidney

Cotton - A type of Brazilian cotton in which the seeds adhere.together in clusters, making ginning difficult.

Kier Boil

(Kiering) - The process of prolonged boiling of cellulose and their blends with alkaline liquors in a suitable large container known as a kier, either at or above atmospheric pressure..

Kier Decatizlng - h
Kinccb OP Kinkhab -

'Decatizing' and
h

'K.D. (Kier Decatizing)'.

*Brocade'. 142

S':

45-1988

Kfnk

(a) A definite deflection of a portion of the length of a fibre, yarn or cordage from the general direction of the remainder. (bi A place in a yarn where it has doubled back on itself and twisted in the manner of a plied yarn.
Kinky Weft; Laoped Yarn; Weft'Kinks - Exposed loops of weft yarn.

Principal Causes - This defect is often caused by over twisted poorly set weft yarns or inadequate tension control of weft yarns during winding, unwinding or insertion. Kinky Yarn or Thread - &

'Snarl Yarn, Snarly Yarn'. of trash motes or leaf bits visible

Kitties

- Small particles on the surface of cloth.

Note - These are invariably found in 'Grey Cloth'. Basically this is a yarn defect.
. Knee

Cap

-- A tubular band knitted on round machines with elastic

threads laid-in; used by sportsmen for support and the knee.

protection to

FIG. 46
Knee Kicker

KNEE CAP

- A device used in the laying of textile floor coverings to achieve a suitable tension; this tension is brought about by the pressure of the knee on one end of the device, the other end being held in the backing by pins. Knicker E3oker Yarn

spots due

- A to unopened

fancy woollen spun tufts.of fibre. the folds

yarn

with coloured and facing
in

Knife Pleat - A -pleat with one direction.
Knit-D&nit

lying flat

fibres for Finish - A finish used for thermoplastic introducing a very high degree of curliness or crimp which gives extremely high stretch and bulk and hence adds greatly to the appeal of fabric, by first knitting the filament yarns into a tubular fabric and then setting permanently by steaming at 0.17 M Pa (25 psi) pressure. 143

SP:45-1988

Knitted Backing - Carpet backing produced by knitting, either ,before manufacture, or in the course of production. Knitted Fabric - Fabric produced by the process of knitting. Knitted Garments - Garments fabrics. made by knitting or out of knitted

Knitted Goods - Goods made by knitting or out of knitted fabrics. Knitted Textile Floor Covering with Pile; Knitted Pile Carpet Knitted textile floor covering with pile, knitted carpet made on either warp knitting machines (Raschel type), or weft knitting machines (Wildman type). An example is given in Fig. 47.

1; Loop pile

FIG. 47

WARP KNITTED PILE CARPET (RASCRAL TYPE) LONGITUDINAL SECTION

Knitted Textile Floor Covering Without Pile - Textile floor covering without pile, made on a knitting machine.
Knitting -

needies by Knittles Knitwear
Knop

The process of producing a fabric with the the interlooping of one or more yarns. The strands of two ropes twisted Knitted goods together.

aid of

or

Knitted-Wear

used as apparel.

Design - Designs produced by consecutive tucking and knitting basis on plain fabrics and consecutive tucking, knitting and missing basis on rib fabrics. This gives an effect of raised spots.

Fig, I PA

Fig. I9B

FIG. 48
Knop Yarn

KNOP DESIGN of one

or more

or Thread - A fancy yarn with knops or lumps components at regular or irregular intervals.

144

SP:45-1988

Knot (a) A joining by tying together; (b) A tuft of yarn inserted in hand-made pile carpets, or (c) A package made up of a number of skeins. Knot Rope - A rope or cable generally consisting of long fibred hemp (with the exclusion of'two)and having along its whole length a succession of single knots regularly spaced.
- The breaking load required to rupture a single strand having an overhead knot in the portion of the specimen between the clamps. It is used as an approximate measure for brittleness of yarn. Knot Strength

Knots Kolinsky

Big knot

of warp

or weft

yarns present

in the cloth.

- Kolinsky [&&&.a (Lutreola) s-1 is the finest species of Asiatic mink. Fur fibres are usually reddish brown, 20 mm in diameter and generally exhibit ladder type medulla.

KORA Cloth - Printed saries, scarf and printed dress materials for ladies are made from kora cloth or fabric. KORA cloth is a silk fabric mainly of mulberry silk used both in warp and weft in undeggummed and untwisted condition. KORA cloth is classified in two varieties: (a) Sina;le - Where the warp is of single yarn and weft is of 2 ply, and (b) Double - Where the warp is of 2 ply and weft is 3 ply or more.
KOSA -

A light-weight fabric handwoven from tussar yarn in warp and weft, and is generally printed. An Indian term for COATEE (m 'COATEE').

KOTI -

L-Twill_Bag - Bags made from L-Twill cloth normally measuring 112 x 87.5 cm and weighing approx. 1135 g (see IS: 3794-1966). Label Cloth+- A heavily sized plain weave cotton fabric, used for tags and labels.
Lace - A fine open work fabric with a ground of mesh or net on which patterns may be worked at the same time as the ground or applied later, and which is made of yarn, by looping, twisting, or knitting, either by hand with a needle or bobbin, or by machinery; also a similar fabric made by crocheting, tatting, darning, embroidering, weaving or knitting. Lace Stitch (Knitting) - A stitch produced on one set of needles in weft-knitted fabrics by transferring either partially or wholly a loop from one needle to another.

145

SP:45-1988

- An extremely smooth, highly glazed finish Lacquer Finish forming a thin film on the surface of the fabric produced by means of nitrate cellulose derivatives, synthetic resins etc.
Lacquer

Printing

- SBB

'Figment Printing'.

Ladder - A sequence of drop stitches in a single wale. It appears like a ladder. Ladder Stop
- m

'After-Welt'.

Ladder Web - A four ply woven narrow fabric consisting of two outer or body webs between which are woven two narrower webs, with staggered relationship with each other,, each being woven alternatively into one and then the other outer or body web so as to form when opened up, supports for the slats of Venetian blind. Ladies' Hose, Ladies' Stocking - A fine-knitted ladies' footwear where the length of the leg portion extends well above the knee. It has generally a broad welt at the top.

FIG. 49
Laid-In Fabric - A which are held in 'In-Laid Fabric'.

LADIES' STOCKING

knitted fabric containing non-knitted yarns, position by the knitted yarns. Also known as

NON-KNITTED YARNS

FIG. 50 Laid Cordage Cordage

LAID-IN FABRIC by twisting three or more

constructed 148

sl?:45-1988

-strand:_; about Lamb'n Wual

each other - Weal

to form

a helix

round a central to six months

axis.

from young

sheep up

of age. short

-- Woollen-spun knitting yarn made from Lzunbs' Wool. Yarn necessarily be lamb's wool. and fine wools, which may not using metal -. Any fabric in any weave Lame threads in warp or weft for decoration. Laminates - Jute fabric,usually hessian with kraft paper, or plastic sheets. threads

or JAR1

and DW tarpaulin,

laminated

Lamp Wick - A narrow flat or tubular cotton fabric made with coarse soft spun yarns. It is used for wick in lamps, stoves, etc. Lanyard - Braided or cable-laid cord of sizes varying from 13 to 19 mm used for holding knife, whistle, pistol, etc. The cord.is made from cotton or worsted yarn, but mainly from cotton yarn. Lap (Cloth) - The length of cloth between the sucessive folds when pieces are plaited down or folded. transverse

Lap (Flax) - An arrangement of the fibre strands in scutched flax pieced out of hacking or in pieces of hackled flax to facilitate their removal as separate units from built-up bundles.
Note - In one method, a small bunch of fibres is separted from one side of the root laid across the centre of the pieces; the end is then folded round on to the under--side. In another method a half twist is inserted at the centre of the piece and compressed between thumb and first finger until the piece is placed in position in the bundle.

Lap (General) -- A sheet of fibres or cloth wrapped round a core with specific applications in different sections of the industry, e.g. sheets of fibre wound on rollers or round endless aprons to facilitate transfer from one process to the next. Note .- In cotton spinning, the sheets of fibre from openers and scutchers, sliver lap machines, and ribbon lap machines are wound on the cores; in worsted preparing, the gilled fibres from the sheeter box are wrapped round a wide aprbn. Lap Waste (Wool) - A sheet of fibres rollers or aprons. It is substantially be carded without further processing. accidentally wound round without twist and can

Lap-Eelled Seam - A seam formed with the edges of both plies of material concealed by interlapping. Two or more rows of stitches secure the turned pieces of material. Lapel - The upper forepart of the front edge of a jacket or coat which folds bac`k. The length of the lapel'extends from the-gorge seam to the break.

147

SP:45-1988

- The fall and curl of the lapel downwards from the Lapel Roll break seam of the collar to the first button. The term 'Roll' not one which is pressed applies chiefly to a soft finish almost flat on the crease line.
lapel'

Lapped - A term used in describing an aspect of make-up of jute fabric; it describes a jute fabric continuously folded backwards and forwards in predetermined lengths. - It Cloth coarse extra warp horizontally and point. Each figure Lappet

is a lightweight muslin like cotton cloth with figuring threads. The figuring ends traverse are bound by means of weft at the reversing is made from one thread only.

- A compact machinery fabric made of wool or its Lapping Cloth blends with natural or man-made fibres, spun into yarns on woollen or semiworsted system and woven in twill weave. Lashed-In Weft - B

*Weft Trail'. rope, used for securing cargo securing any object. The rope cotton or man-made fibre yarn.

Lashing - A 3-strand, soft laid in transit or for tying up or for is made from sisal, hemp, jute,

- The fastening of the inside seams of coat Lashing (Garment) edgings or facings to the outer material or interlining, in order to hold them in position. Usually sewn by a blind stitch machine. Lasting -

yarns. A used for

A very closely woven fabric made from hard-twisted 'Worsted Lasting', usually a seven-shaft weave, is protective clothing in munition works.

Lawn - A fine, plain-woven cloth of linen or cotton, made in various quality to produce fine. sheer fabrics. Various finishes may be applied to a fabric of this type, in which case the cloth is known by the name of the finish used, e.g., organdie.

Lawn Finish - A medium starch finish applied to lawns and other fine yarn plain cloths to give a crisp finished fabric. Lay (Rope) - m 'Pitch (of Rope)'. placed one on top of another

- An assembly of materials Lw in preparation for cutting.

Lay Planning (Layout Planning) - The arranging of patterns of the component parts of a garment within given width of material in order to obtain the most economical use of the material. Laying - Twisting of strands to form a rope. (See also 'Direction of Lay'). Laying (Silk) - The entire quantity moth.
Laying Up (Spreading)

of

eggs

laid

by

a single

- The process of spreading material to form

148

SF:45-1388

Laying Up (Spreading) a lay.

- The process

of spreading

material

to form

Laying with Full Adhesion -- A method of laying in which the textile floor covering is stuck to be covered. to the whole of the floor laying in which the Laying with Partial Adhesion - A method of covering textile floor is stuck to part of the floor to be spaced 'areas. covered, e.g. round the edges or in irregularly to withdraw certain items of an intended Lazy Leg ~-- A cord or static assembly in correct sequence after the main withdrawal been.released ilr fractured. line has Lea (aj The .unit of count system used mainly for flax. used for manila and sisal also (lb/XX3 yd), of cotton Length in 8~3 rounds with
circumferenc;e

Sometimes

(b)

yarn measuring a warp reel

19J9.6 m (121il yd) wound of 1.3'7(1 m (1.5 yd)

.

Lea Strength (Lea Breaking of yarn (.sec alsq 'Breaking

Strength) Load' 1.

-. Breaking

load

of a lea

faster surface speed of a roller or a set Lead - The slightly just behind it is that of another roller of sliding bars than called Lead and is usually expressed as a percentage of the speed of the slower roller. -- A dressed hemp Lead Line taking depth soundings . Leaf Edge -- The outer or (cable-laid) line of .-;--lay used for

fall edge

of the

collar.

Leasing - The operation of inserting a crossed traverse lease-cord in wraps of yarn on a reel for the purpose either of separating 129, or to prevent wraps into groups of specific numbers,e.g. hank dyeing, ei'itangling of wraps of yarn during processing, o.g. subsequent winding on a yarn package from hank facilitate t, 0 supply after removal of the lease-cords. Leather Cloth -. A cloth having a woven or knitted ground structure coated on one side with an oil or rubber compound, cellulose derivat ivc ) or synthetic, polymer material, which is embossed to give a leather-like appearance, the other side sometimes being raised. cases, both sides of the fabric are coated and emboscd. In other of a Length of Effective Pile - The length of fibre of one leg where it emerges from the substrate to its tuft from the place farthest extremity, or half the length of a loop measured between from the substrate points where i.t emerges the two Len&h of Lay --& 'Pitch (of Rope j' 149

SP:45-1988

Length of Mesh (Knotless Netting) - Distance between the centres of two opposite joints in the same mesh when fully extended as in knotted netting. Length of Mesh (Knotted Nettiing) - Distance between the centres of two opposite knots in the same mesh when fully extended in N-direction. (& 'Direction in Netting').
_

A!00

i --o-

v
A

In

FIG. 51

LENGTH OF MESH

Len0 - A fabric in which warp threads are made to cross one another< between the picks, during leno weaving. The crossing of the warp threads may be a general feature of plain leno fabrics (as in ,marquisette and some gauzes and muslins) or may be used in combination with other weave (as in some cellular fabrics). A reduced form of dye from which the original dye may be regenerated by an oxidation process. Levelling - Migration leading to uniform distribution of dye in a dyed material. Levelling Acid Dyes - Acid dyes having good levelling properties. Life Line (a) A high quality 3-strand hawser-laid rope used for supporting breaches buoy in rescue operations; or the devit span for holding by during lowering and hoisting
Leuco
Dye -

(b) A manila rope fitted on the crew of the life boat of the boat. Lift Web lines That part

of the harness connected to the rigging

Light Cee Bag - A double-warp hemmed plain weave sacking bag measuring about 101.5 X 71 cm (normally with 88 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), and weighing approximately 910 g, striped or plain, and dry sewn. Light Conditioned Wool and foreign matter. Wool containing a small amount of yolk

Ligne - A standard measure, equal to 0.835 mm (i.e. l/40 in.) by which buttons and ribbons are measured. 150

to medium weight, closely woven, plain weave, Limbric -- A light cotton cloth made from good quality yarns. The weft is coarser and spaced and has a lower twist factor than the warp, more closely thus giving a soft cloth in which the weft predominates on both sides. Limed Wool (Tannery Wool)'- Wool removed from the pelts of slaughtered sheep with the aid of slaked lime paste as a depilatory. Lincoln - Name of a British long lustre wool producing sheep. Wool Many medium wool Lincoln wool. produced by this sheep is called producing sheep have been based on Lincoln and merino crossbreeds. Line - A cordage also 'Rope' ). with a circumference of less than 25 mm. (&2S

per unit length (the quotient obtained by Linear Density - Mass It is usually dividing the mass of yarn or cord by its length). expressed in denier or tex. Linen ('a) Descrptive (b) Descreptive of yarns spun entirely woven from from flax fibres. linen yarns. adornments, are

of fabrics

(c) Descriptive articles made of yarns spun

which, apart from from flax fibres.

Note -- Despite some usage of the term in non-technical circles as a generic one, e.g., linen department, baby linen, to aphly it to individual household linen, it is incorrect articles that do not comply with the definition. Linen Count - The expressed as number linear density of linen yarn (wet spun), of 300 yd hanks/lb. (a 'Count of Yarn'). and similar garments of

Ladies' underwear, slumberwear Lingerie .-fine texture and aesthetic appeal. Lingerrie Ribbon - Any type of washable ladies' and children' underwear. Note - It should have a soft, constructed with strong selvedges. Lininess - Longitudinal in knitted fabric. defect(s)

ribbon smooth

suitable finish

for use on

and be firmly

caused

by sructural

distortion

- A separate entity used in making-up garments and Lining Cloth other articles, consisting of a single, layer or multiple layers loosely held in place along one or more edges. It of material does not modify the properties of the main fabric with which it is associated but can impart certain performance characteristics to the article. 151

- The process' of joining knitted garment parts on a linking machine, in which individual loops from two. fabrics are run on to a series of regularly spaced points and then joined by chain stitches. Linking Links, Links Fabric h

`Purl

Fabric'.

Linseys - Woven with a linen warp and worsted weft in white and blue stripes, resulting in a coarse, strong and durable fabric which is used as a hard wearing apparel. Lint

(a) The main fibres separated from the cotton ing; or

seed by ginn-

(b) A plain-weave sterilized material with a raised fleecy surface, being highly absorbent and.of a type made for surgical purposes made from cotton.
Linter - Very short fibres removed cotton seed already ginned.

by

delinting

process from

Lip - A partial extension of the periphery of the canopy to faci-

litate inflation. Liquor Ratio - The ratio of the mass of liquor employed in any treatment to the mass of fibrous material treated. Lisle Yarn (Thread) - A highly-twisted, plied (usually two-ply), good quality cotton hosiery yarn, spun generally in fine counts. All lisle threads are gassed and some may be even mercerized (mercerized lisle). List; Listing - & 'Selvedges'.

Listing (Shading) - A gradual variation in tone or depth of shade. Listings - h 'Spindle Tape'.

Liverpool Twill (L-Twill) Cloth - A double warp twill weave sacking cloth approximately 716 g/m2. (& IS: 3668-1966). Lizard Llama A rope Hair of with several ring on thimbles spl9/ced into it. the South American llama yarns. twine usually tarred used for (see also 'Alpaca').

Llama Yarns

- Same

as angola

Lobster Mar Line - Z-ply manila making lobster creels.

Lock stitch - The 'plain stitch' in which two separate threads are used. In formation, one thread is passed through_the material, forming a loop, while the second is passed through the loop on the underside of the material. This loop is pulled into the

152

sJ?:45-1988

material

bringing

with

it

the locking

thread.

FIG. 52

LOCK STITCH
machine with the guide bar

Locknit fabric - A fabric made on a warp knitting bar and one needle two full-set guide bars, where movements are controlled as follows: (,a) Front guide bar (b) Back guide bar 2-3, 1-0,

l-0 and repeat;'and l-2 and repeat.

FIG. 53
Locks (Wool)

LOCKNIT FABRIC

(a) Second cuts and small portions parts of the legs and edges fribs and sweaty ends. (b) Bunch of wool

of wool from the lower of the fleece containing

f ibres of which the

fleece

is

composed.

Lofty - Describes fibres or yarns which are open, lively, highly elastic and springy, resuming normal position after pressing in hand. LOHI - An Indian term for a heavy, rough woollen fabric in twill weave with two picks in shed, made in Kashmir from wool of the local sheep. Its length is about 2 m and weighs from 600 to 900g. It is used as shawl in solder climates by men. London Finish - A finishing process applied to fabrics in which the fabric is thoroughly moistened and then allowed to dry naturally in the absence of tension, steamed and pressed. London Shrinkage - Removing strains in the fabric in the final stages of woollen and worsted finishing by wetting the fabric and then drying it tensionless in open width. 153

SP:45-1988

Long Cloth - A cotton fabric in plain weave of nearly balanced construction and somewhat heavier than cambric and lawn. Long Drawers - &
Long

(c) under 'Drawers'.

End '- A term used to refer to the extended bottom layer of cloth of a lapped cut which is turned and placed on top of the lap-before folding.

Long Line - A plaited (or twisted) hemp line mainly used on ships to tow a rotary log, for recording the speed. Looming - A terms covering the processes involved in preparing, the weaver's beam for the loom, e.g. drawing-in, dropper-pinning, sleying, knotting, tying, etc. fibres between the two L-P - The continuous length of yarn or successive lowest points of bindings of the pile in the substrate. An example is given in'Fig. 54.

FIG. 54

TWO SUCCESSIVE LOOPS OF A PILE (LONGITUDINAL SECTION)

Locp (bitting) - The fundamental unit formed by bending of the yarn. In a knitted structure this is supported by and intermeshed with other units . (a) hdle (b) Sinker
100~ loop -

The upper curved portion of the loop. The lower curved portion of the loop.
A- NEEDLE LOOP

y LOOP

L SINKER

LOOP

FIG. 55

LOOPS (KNITTING;

Loop Length (Bile Structurerr) - The continuous length of yarn or fibres between the two successive lowest points of bindings of the pile in the substrate.

SP: 45-.1988

Loop Pile Loop Stitch

-. Pile

of a

carpet consisting

of loops.

a5 not

.- A type of hand stitch used for oversewing edges so to increase their thickness by having an edge turned in.

.Loopy Pile - Loops in a terry fabric that are longer than adjacent normal loops. Loopy Loose Selvedge - &g (e) under

'Defective Selvedge'.

Course - A course where the loops are kept looser or longer than the loops of the other courses of the fabric or garment. Loose Threads - Threads loose on the face of the,fabric (see also 'Hanging Threads'). Principal Cause - Long

and short

ends of

warp not removed

after piecing up.
Lorraine Lustres - A

type of Bradford lustre fabric with cotton

warp.
Lot -~ A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate any parcel of wool catalogued and offered for sale as one line. Lousiness - A defect in silk due to fibrillation of silk (Silk) filaments. The filament splits up into fine fibrils, which form small neps and which in dyed fabric, are evident as .white specks Csee also 'Fibrillation (Silk)']. Lovers-Knot Mat - See (g) under

'Mats'.

Lugs (Ears) - Strips of cloth stitched or tied to the corners of bags or packages generally in a loop form to facilitate easy handling. Also may be made by stitching the bottom corners of the bags diagonally. Lumen Lump - A canal or central cavity in the fibre.

A length of unfinished fabric usually longer than the customary piece length.

LUNG1 - An Indian term for fabrics of varying texture and quality used as loin cloth. It generally comes in dyed, printed or in checks. Lustre - The display'of different intensities of light reflected both specularly and diffusely from different parts of a surface exposed to the same incident light. Due to this reflection of light,the surface of textiles (fibre, yarn or fabric) looks glossy or shining. Lustre Lustre Linings Woollen - A type of Bradford lustre fabric with cotton warp. . Yarn - Similar to cheviot yarn but made from lust-

rous

medium

wools

and

used

for 155

rugs

and

pile fabrics.

SP:45-1988

Lustre Wools - Long lustrous wools, usually produced by sheep such as Lincoln, Leicester, Romney Marsh, Devon, Wensleydale, etc., in Britain, New ZeiLkandand South America. Lustre Worsted Yarn -

Worsted

yarn

made

from long lustrous

wools, mohair and alpaca.
Lustres (Lustre Fabrics) - Term applied to Bradford lustre fabrics

Lyons Velvet

- A stiff twill back.

'velvet' having a rich, full pile and a fairly 'Aerated Yarn'
Carpet -

Macaroni Yarn Machine-Knotted knotting.

- m Pile

Carpet

obtained

by

automatic

Mackerel Line - A 3-strand used for mackerel fishing.

hemp line with soft lay primarily

Madder Bleach - A very thorough bleach given to cotton goods by several long alkali boils and bleaching with bleaching powder to give.full white and is generally used for goods to be printed. Madras Magyar Hemp - &e - A

'Bombay Hemp'. sleeve which two is cut in one gores piece with the in a canopy.

Sleeve

bodice.
Main Seam Make - The seam joining

adjacent

Through - The traditional method of garment manufacture, in which one operator completely assembles one garment at a time.

- An Indian term for cotton or rayon or silk velvet sometimes embroidered with gold threads. It is used as dress material, in canopies, etc. MAKHMAL Making MALIDA Up - Converting

material into

garments.

- An Indian term for an all wool embroidered fabric of fine and soft construction made from pashmina wool and slightly felted, used for coating, jackets, etc.

MALMALAn Indian term generally applied to fine cotton fabric slightly heavier than muslin.
Man Alignment Drogue - A small stabilizing parachute attached to the parachutist so that, when it opens, his feet are directed towards the airflow.

'MANGADAN Yarn - %

(h) under 'Coir Yarn'.

Mangle - A machine whose purpose is to express liquid from moving textiles by passage through a nip. The textile may be in rope form or in open width, and the mangle may consist of two or
: -.

156

SP:45-1988

more rollers (bowls) running in contact. Mangling -.The process of extracting liquid by passing the wet textile material in rope form or open width form through one or more nips of the mangle. Mangling (Jute) - A finishing process in which the cloth that has been calendered is rolled on a steel pin and rotated backwards and forwards under pressure, a number of times between two steel bowls. Mangling closes the interstices between threads more effectively than chesting. When the process has beeen done once, the cloth is described as mangled and if done twice, the cloth is described as double-mangled. The machine in which the process takes place is known as 'Mangle'.
Manila Hemp - A hard fibre obtained from the leaf stems forming 'the trunk of the Abaca plant Musa textiles. The fibres are long (1 to 3 m), rather coarse, creamy white to brown in colour, quite strong and durable. It is extensively used for the manufacture of ropes and cordages. Maquay m

'Cantala'.

Marabout

- I-lard-twisted, stiff silk yarn dyed in the gum Silk state, consisting of 2 or 3 untwisted or slightly twisted singles. It is used for crepes.

Marble Silk - A light-weight silk or wool dress material which has mottled appearance caused by the use of multi-coloured weft yarns or by warp printing prior to weaving of the cloth to simu,latethe veining of marble. Marbled Cloth - A dress fabric of silk and wool face, produced by using multi-coloured weft. Market

with a mottled

Bleach - The bleach given to cotton fabrics that are sold in this state and not later dyed or printed.

In - Marking around the component garment patterns with chalk or other means to indicate where material is to be cut. The making paper term can also apply to marking with pencil when markers. Marking Marl (Local, Mottle) - To run together and draft into one, two slubbings or rovings of different colour or lustre. Marl

running together and drafting into Yarn - Yarn made by one, two slubbings or rovings of different colour or lustre.

Marline - A soft laid 2-ply cord generally used for binding fibre rope ends. It is usually tarred.
Marling - &

'Marline'.

Marquisettee - A light, open-textured, fin&-quality gauze, in which slipping is reduced by crossing the warp threads by means 157

of the leno prinoiplc used as curtain and dress materials (h
'Lenol ). Married Yarn; Double End - Two ends inadvertently running on to one spindle during spinning operations. This is usually caused by one end breaking and combining with an adjacent end and continuing to run in marriec` form. Line - h Yarn

Mason's

'Bricklayer Line'.
- Yarn produced by the extrusion of the finely divided dye or pigment particles.

Mass Pigmented

dope containing
Matching

(a) General --A process in which the proportions of the dy-

es present in a material are adjusted so that the final colour resembles that of a given sample as closely as possible;and (b) A process in wool sorting which consists of putting wooltogether those portions of different fleeces which correspond in quality.

Matching

Carpet - A textile floor covering with a design that matches ,in both directions indefinitely (transverse and longitudI inal). Matching Waste - Waste created when the length required in a made-up textile floor covering does not equal a whole number of pattern repeats.

Matelasse

- A double woven 'fabric surface that has a quilted appearance.

with a raised or puckered

Matinee Coat (Knitted) - Ladies' light-weight coat with open front and without any closing device.
MATKA - Yarn spun by hand appliances out and unreelable cocoons after degumming. MMKA-MAT!tA as follows: - _S_gg 'MATKA'.

of

mulberry pierced

Mats (Coir) - These are charcterized by their method of production (a) (b) at - The pile is produced by insertion of bits of a,Sn .in place of the fibre or the PUNJA yarn. Brush Matg -,The pile is obtained by cutting topping cr PUNJA yarns wound on a flat iron rod with grcved rod interlacing the base fabric. Also called 'Rod Mats'. Mats - The yarns forming the face of the mat are taken alternatively over meta. rods in a series to make the required length. When the fabric is formed, the 158

cc> Corridor ,

SP:45-1988

metal rods are removed and thick coir yarn is inserted to obtain'the consolidated mat. Cd) Creel Mats - The pile is produced by cutting the loops made from an Ldditional set of warp yarn. The base fabric of a creel mat may be either of coir or jute or a mixture of the'two depending on the quality. wng Mats - Pillow like structures with straight sides from heavy grade matting made from ANJENGO or ARATORY yarns. It is tightly filled with cut coir fibres or coir yarn to give sufficient resiliency. The sides are sewn thoroughly with high-twist coir yarn. These mats act as shock absorbers when materials are unloaded from a lorry or a truck, thus preventing the material unloaded being damaged. Two loops of coir rope are provided at the two ends for lifting the mats. (f) Fibre Mats - The pile is produced by insertion of fibre around alternate warps. The fibre is held in place by weft yarn.

(hit) Lovers-Knot Mat -,Obtained in similar manner to the sinnet mat but _ _.instead of the braided-yarn, ropes are used. A set of five ropes are used to form the mat in which neither the beginning nor the end of the rope can be detected. (h) (3) (k)

Mattina &&
Rod

- Obtained frm cut-lengths of matting and suitably finished.
Mats & 'Brush Mats' (b) above.

Sinnet Mat - Produced by suitable arrangement of braided coir yarn.

Matt Yarn - Dull-lusterd yarn. Hatted Wool Hatting Coir floor covering fabric woven on handlooms in (a) Coirplain, dobby and jacquard designs. Mattings are sold in standard length of 45 m but in different widths ranging from 30 to 275 cm. One individual piece of mabting is called a unit. (b) Jute '- Jute floor covering fabric striped, dobby or jacquard designs. woven in plain, 'during the in the - & 'Cotted Wool'.

Mattress Fibre (Coir) - The waste fibre obtained extraction of bristle fibre along with pith. Mattress Twine - An Italian manufacture of mattresses. hemp
159

or

flax

twine

used

SP:45-1988

Katty

- &

'Cellular'.

- The degree to which the lumen (or canal) of cotton fibre has been obliterated by the cellulose laid down in the walls of the fibre. Maturity

Kaud - A woollen cloth in check design, used as plaid or as a travelling rug, in which different tones of grey yarns are used in forming the pattern.
KkRI - A coarse cotton fabric produced from a blend of grey and black dyed cottons. The fabric is usually woven in plain construction in a relatively open reed and pick.

Kean Fibre Length
Mean

- The

average

measure

of

the

fibre length.

Fibre Mass per Unit Length - The quantity obtained by dividing the mean fibre mass by the mean fibre length. Cutting - The cutting of a garment to individual measure-

Measure

ments.
Measured Surface

the pile *

Pile Density - The ratio of mass to volume of above the backing measured under the standard pressure.

Mechanical Fabrics - A class of heavy fabrics used in various industries, such as sheeting for the laundry trade, drill for oil and chemical filters, duck for tent, etc.
Medium Cross-Bred Wool - Wools lying in the fibre diameter range of about 29 to 34 micrometres.

Medulla - The central hollow portion of wool or hair fibres due to open meshwork of cell walls. Medulla can be continuous as in hairy fibres, dis-continuous as in heterotype fibres or ladder type as in case of Angora rabbit hair fibres. Medullated Fibres - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate fibres possessing a hollow core and, consequently, a tendency to uneven dyeing.
Kelange Lustre - A type of Bradford lustre fabric wherein printed

tops are

used.

Kelange Printing (Vigoureux Printing) - A printing process in which bands of thickened dye paste, with intervening blank areas are applied across slubbings of wool or other fibres. The slubbing is subsequently steamed, washed, and then combed to produce a very even mixture of dyed and undyed lengths of fibre.

Kelange Yarn - A yarn produced from coloured printed tops or slivers, being distinguished from a mixture yarn, in that the fibres have more than one colour upon them.
Melton - A heavy-weight fabric, all-wool, or with cotton warp and woollen weft, which is finished.by heavy milling-and cropping.

180

The fibres in the cloth are tightly matted together by the milling and this the fabric a.felted appearance. It is gives process usually made in a 2/2 twill, especially if all-wool, but it is made in other weaves sometimes to facilitate milling and the covering of the cotton warp. Mending - h 'Darning'.

Mercerization - The treatment of cellulosic textiles and blends in yarn or fabric form with caustic soda solution of desired strength whereby the yarns or fabrics are swollen, dye affinity and lustre of the materials are increased. Mercerized treatment, Merino Fabric A fabric which has undergone mercerization

(a> A

breed of finest wool producing sheep originating in in Spain but during the past two centuries, extensively developed in Australia. Australian merino sheep are of three types, namely, superfine, fine and strong merino. Wool from merino sheep.Superfine merino wool is finer than 19 microns; fine merino wool is 19.1-22.5 microns and strong. merino wool is 22.6-24 microns in average diameter. Length varies from 60 mm up to 120 mm. Meddulation is absent. - Yarn made from opening, merino quality by the wool. netting material.

(b)

Merino Mesh

Yarn

- A designed

surrounded

Mesh (Fabric) - A fabric having appreciable between the threads. (See also 'Net'). Meshiness Messaline (Fibre) See under 'Jute Fibre woven

openings/spaces

Characteristics'. with fine yarns.

- A light-weight

'Satin' fabric,

Messenger - A 3-strand manila, cotton, sisal or man-made fibre light rope secured to a larger rope for hauling purposes. (When a heavy rope or wire which will not go round the winch barels to be hove in, smaller rope known as 'Messenger' is connected to one which is heaved in slowly). the large MESTA - This fibre which is a substitute of jute is obtained from the bast of flibiscus cannabinus (kenaf). Chemically, it is different from jute in its low lignin content and is, in general, inferior and jute. coarser than Metachrome or Chromate Process - A method of dyeing in which the dye and the mordant (in the form of chromate, which does not form the lake with the dye and which is gradually converted into dichromate) are applied to the fibre from the same bath-when present simultaneously. 161

SF:45-1988

Metal Complex Dye -' A water soluble pre-metallised dye in which one metal atom (either chromium or cobalt) is complexed with dyestuff molecule(s) which is applied 'from neutral or acidic dyebath and has very good all round properties. Metameric -- Descriptive of objects that exhibit metanerism.

Metameric Match - A match i.e. judged to a particular illuminant but not under different spectral composition. Metamcrism -- A marked change in the spectral viewed. change in composition

be satisfactory under other illuminants of with a it is

the colour c,f an object of the light by which

Note Metamerism can be judged only with reference tc. the changes occurring in other objects in the fields of view as the illumi.nation is changed. Method of Laying of Textile Floor Covering - A method of layi.ng a textile f1ou.r covering under tension with attachment to the floor &long its periphery by various means. The following are common methods.
(a)

,,-. 'p r.c dh ,t - A method of laying in whic?i attachment Pin--snd_$ is achieved by pins passing through the textile floor covering. These pins are secured in sockets placed in the floor. Ring--and-Pin - A method of laying in which attachment is achieved by rings stitched to the textile floor covering; these rings are held by pins fixed in the floor or at the base of the walls. Tackless Installation .- A method of laying in which the textile floor covering is secured to slats of wood or metal,, bearing rows of pointed pins, and which are attached to the floor at the base of the walls. Turn-and-Tack A method of laying in which a fold'is made along each edge of the textile floor covering which is directly fixed to the floor along each edge by pins. expressed as number

(5)

Cc)

Cd)

Metric Count - The linear density of yarns, of 1000 m hanks/kg (a 'Count of Yarn'].

Micron - A unit of measurement equivalent to one-millionth of a meter. Properly known as micrometre. unit is used.to This indicate average fibre fineness (diameter) of wool. Middle Hildew fungi. -. Indicates A a quality of raw jute (a 'Grading by certain of Jute'). species of

superficial

growth

produced

162

SP:45-1988

Note - On textile materials, this may lead to discolouration, tendering, and variation in dyeing properties. Milanese Fabric (Circular Warp-Knitting) - A tubular warp-knitted

fabric made with two full sets of warp threads traversing continuously in opposite directions . Note lap. The manner of traversing the thread is always cotton

FIG. 56
Mlanese

MILANESE FABRIC (CIRCULAR WARP-KNITTING)

Fabric (Warp-Knitting) - A warp-knitted fabric normally made with a full set of warp threads (i.e. containing twice as many threads as there are wales in the fabric). The threads are continuously divided into two equal warp sheets, one set of which traverses to the right continuously and the other set to the left, such that any particular thread traverses the full width of the fabric, and on reaching the selvedge is transferred to the other set .

Note - The manner of traversing silk lap or cotton lap.

the threads may be either

FIG. 57

MILANESE FABRIC (WARP-KNITTING) WITH SILK LAP 163

SP:45-1988

hldew

Proofing - Imparting, usually by chemical treatments, resistance to textiles from attack by mildew.

Mildew Resistant mildew or mould. Milani Rib - A as follows: Course 1 Course 2 Course 3 -

Fabric - Fabric treated to resist the growth of three course weft-knitted rib structure, knitted 1 x 1 rib knitting; Plain needles knitting, rib needles non-knitting; Rib needles knitting, plain needles non-knitting. short lengths of finished fabric.

Mill Ends - Remnants or Mill Rigs - Creases

produced in

milling.

Mill Run - Yarns, fabrics or other textile products which are not inspected or which do not come up to the standard quality. Milling - A process of consolidating or compacting fabric, which though not exclusively, contains wool to obtain the usudlly, required cover and firmness of texture. Milling Dyes, Acid Milling Dyes - Acid dyes having high fastness to wet processes on wool (particularly to milling) and normally applied to protein fibres from weak acid or 'neutral dyebaths.
Mineral Dyes - A precipitated more

class of dyes consisting of mineral pigments or less mechanically in the fibre.

Mineral Khaki: - A mixture of hydrated ferric hydroxide and chromium hydroxide giving khaki colour by padding the cotton fabric in solution containing ferrous sulphate and chrome alum and then treating with alkali to form metal hydroxides. Mingled Pile - Terry loops of the wrong side of the fabric. contrasting colour appearing on

Principal Causes - This defect is commonly caused by interferenc"ewith the formation of individual pile loops, as the result of incorrect shedding, drawing-in, etc.
Mispick - A pick placed in the wrong shed of 'Broken Pattern')

the warp

(see ala

Misregister; Out of Register - In a printed fabric, colours not correctly positioned with respect to each other. Principal Causes - This defect is often caused by printing rollers or screens not being synchronized. Missed Stitch - & 'Drop Stitch' 164 and 'Float Stitch'

SP:45--1988

Hissing Hissing

End - $ee Pick - A

'Broken End'. bar across
-

the fabric

where no weft has been

inserted.
Principal Causes

interruption of the weft drawing through.
Hiati

This defect is often caused by an supply, a faulty weft stop motion,or

(a) A c&-G-breed of alpaca (Llama alllama (Llama nJ_ gl~) mother. (b) Fur produced by this cross-breed.

pacog),

father and

Nitten - A covering for the hand and wrist. The difference between a glove and a mitten is that the former has a sheath for each of the four fingers and the thumb, while the mitten has either one sheath for the entire four fingers and one for the thumb or it has no sheath for the fingers and thumb at all. Mixed -

Describes a fabric or of fibres have been combined.
- h

yarn in

which two or more types

Mixed End

'Wrong End'.

Mixed Fleece - Fleece which contains mixture of two coats namely undercoat of short fine true wool fibre and outercoat of long coarse medullated fibres. Mixed fleece is a sign of lack of domestication of the sheep. Mixed Weft

types or
Note Mixture Hixture -

- An unintentional mixing both of weft yarns.

of

two

or

more

lots or

- This may lead to the formation of weft bars. &

'Blending'.

Fabric - Cloth made of mixture yarns or of yarns made of different types of fibres, e.g., wool and cotton, or wool and man-made fibres. - Yarns or fabrics in which the individual fibres Shades have been dyed differently either in loose form or by melange printing, and then mixed together and spun. Both worsted and woollen yarns can be produced in this fashion. These effects can also be produced by mixing different fibres (e.g. natural with man-made) and then dyeing in piece form. Mixture Yarn - Yarn made by mixing together of fibres of different characteristics, such as, colour, lustre, etc. Mixture Mob -

A group of sheep of the same breeding run together as a whose wool may be significantly unit of flock during a season, different from that of other mobs in the flock. Mobs may differ
165

SP:45-1988

from one to another in respect of age (e.g. hoggets), sex, breed or strain, husbandry practice and pasture. Hock Grandelle Yarn - Yarn produced to imitate grandrelle yarn by drafting and twisting two rovings of different colours together.
Mock Marl - Hosiery yarns composed of different coloured solid or mixture of single yarns giving an imitation marl effect.

Ho&k Bib - &Q

'Imitation Rib'.

Hock Romaine Crepe - A fabric similar to 'romaine crepe' in texture and appearance but made with combination twist yarns only in the warp. Hock Safety Stitch - A .type of overedge stitch which has an appearance similar to that of a safety stitch on the top surface of the material but has a common looper thread joining the two row5 of stitching which can be seen underneath the fabric. Hodacrylic Constitution: Linear macromolecules having in the chain more than 50 percent and less than 85 percent (by mass) of the recurring unit:
-CHz-CH-

Example: Acrylic

copolymer:

Constitution: Cellulose II Characteristics: Regenerated cellulose obtained by processes giving a high wet modulus. These fibres or filaments should be able to resist in the wet state a load per unit linear density of 22.0 cN/tex. Under this load the elongation in the wet state should not be greater than 15 percent. Hodal~ngth - The central length of the-group which in a fibre length frequency distribution contains the largest number of fibres. Model (a) The original samplexgarment. 166

SP : 45-1988

(b) The
Modified

original garment

made up from'a design.

Rayon - Rayon composed principally of regenerated cellulbse and containing amounts of non-regenerated cellulose fibre-' forming material; e.g., a fibre spun from viscose containing casein or other proteinous fibre. of Elasticity

Modulus

force per unit elongation).
Mohair

- The ratio of the stress expressed in linear density (denier) to the strain (percent

(a) The'hair of the`angora goat. (b) Descriptive of yarns spun from mohair.
Mohair Mohair Braid -

Any

type

of

braid made from mohair yarns. mat that has a surface pile,

Floor Rug - A floor rug or

cut or

uncut, entirely

of mohair.

Moire - A ribbed or corded fabric that has been subjected to -heat and heavy pressure by rollers after weaving so as to present a rippled appearance. The effect arises from differences in reflection of the flattened and the unaffected parts. This type of fabric is also correctly described as 'watered'. Moire Effect - A defect in dyeing arising from non-uniform dyeing and differences in reflection of different parts of the fabric which gives it a rippled appearance. - A finish to produce wavy effect by passing two superimposed layers of cloth through a calender under heat and heavy pressure. Content - The mass of moisture in a textile material, expressed as a ,percentage of the total mass. Example:

Moire Finish

Moisture

If 100 parts by mass of material contains 20 parts by mass of moisture, the moisture content is 100 x 20/100 = 20 percent.

Equilibrium - The condition reached by a sample or specimen in a controlled atmosphere when the net difference between the amount of moisture absorbed and the amount desorbed, as shown by a change in mass, shows no trend and becomes insignificant. For test purpose, moisture equillibrium shall be reached by absorption, starting from a relatively low mcisture content. Moisture Moisture Regain - The mass of moisture preser,t in a textile material expressed as a percentage of the oven-ify mass.

Example: If 100 parts by mass of material contains 20 parts by mass of moisture, the regain is 100 x 20/80 = 25 percent. 167

SP:45-1988

- A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate vegetable material other than burr and seed namely, fern, 'twigs, bark and straw. Moit

Moleskin Fabric - A thick and heavy cotton Pabrie, heavily wefted and with a smooth face, used chiefly for workmen's clothing. Only one warp is used, but the picks are arranged two face and one back. It is slightly raised on the back and piece-dyed. Molleton - A heavy reversible cloth with a nap on both sides. It was originally made of wool. Now it is made of cotton and used as a blowing wrapper for delicate fabric. r(cblleton Flannel - A high quality 2-and-2 twill woollen flannel, heavily milled, raised and finished with a dense fibrous nap, dyed in delicate colours and used for making dressing gowns and jackets.
Monkey Cap - A knitted cone shaped cap that covers the head; usually, has a pompon at the - ---apex. known as 'TOPA'. ..__".. .Also . -w

FIG. 58

MONKEY CAP

NonofilaBPent - A single filament of sufficient size to function as a yarn in normal textile operations. Monofilament Thread - A thread comprising one continuous filament. Mooring Hope _-A synthetic or hard fibre rope used vessels to the moorings. Mop Twine - A heads. 5-ply hemp twine used in the for tying the

manufacture of mop

Moquettes - Wool loop-pile fabrics with a ground warp of cotton worked two end together. Loop-pile is produced in the same manner as for Brussels and other carpets, but the pile may be left looped, cut or partly looped and partly cut. MORAEIh 'Head'. i.e. applied to a fibre for the purpose with a mordant dye within or on the fibre.

Mordant - A substance of forming a complex

krdant Dyes - Dyes capable of forming a complex with a mordant on a ffbre; the dyes may or may not have an intrinsic affinity for the fibre.
Mosquito

Netting

- A

mesh fabric, woven or knitted and used for 188

EP:15-1988

.I

protection

from

mosquitoes. other than jutz adhering to the 'Jute Fibre Charscteristics').

Moss (Jute) -. The vegetable matter jute fibre strands (see also under Moss Finished Cloth which is heavily obs\=ures the face which A

CCJlOUX-5

soft woollen fabric mostly in fancy milled and finished with a fibrous weave and structure.

characterized by Mossy Crepe - A fabric with a fancy crept weave rough surface. It is also called 'sand crepe' because a pebbly, it presents a sandy effect on its face. Motes - Small pieces of broken or crushed seeds or small seeds found in ginned cotton. For example: Motes - A piece Bearded lint fibres attached. immature

of seed coat with fairly

long

(b)

FUZZY Motes I- The largest of this type of mote consists of whvsle aborted or immature seeds covered with fuzz fibres and possibly also with very short lint fibres,the development of which ceased at a very early stage. Small fuzzy motes originate as either undeveloped or fully grown seeds, which ale broken in ginning and disintegrate still further in the opening, cleaning, and carding processes.

Moth-Proafing - Imparting resistance to wool, hair or fur fibree from attack by insect such as moth and beetles, Mottle ~- ti 'Marl'. by twisting together two yarns

Mottle Yarn -. Folded yarn produced of different col~~~.r-s.

Mottled Appearance -- C~olour variation, localized or general, is not specificalLy orir;nt+=d in the warp or weft directions. Principal Cause -.This defect is application or per1e"vi-a-t,i..:ln of dye . often caused

which

by uneven

Mottled Carpet (Twisted or Flecked) -. Carpet having the type of patterned effect produced by using pile yarn composed of two or* more single yarns of different colours twisted together. Note - A type of . mottled effect on fibre-bonded textile floor coverings may be obtained using a blend of fibres of two or more colours. Motty - A Z-ply low quality hemp cord/tarred, tokens to trucks in coal miries. used for attaching to material on

Moulding - The application of heat and/or pressure a mo>uld, to shape the garment or garment parts. 169

SP:45-1988

Houline

- Moulines are folded yarns of two or more yarns of different colours or twist levels. Fabrics made from such yarns have a lively appearance and a smooth springy handle when the constituent yarns have different twist factors.

Houlting - Shedding of skin by silkworm during its larvae stage. The silkworm normally sheds its skin four times during its development.
Wools - Coarse wools produced by sheep in the hilly regions of Britain. Typical breeds include Scotish Blackface, Welsh. mountain, Cheviot, etc. Mountain Mountaineering Rope - A hawser-laid rope made from the highest grade of-natural fibres or man-made fibre or a braided rope made from man-made fibre (such ropes are used by mountaineers). (See also 'Climbing Rope' and 'Rappelling Rope').

- A floor covering produced on special looms, the surface and pattern of which is formed by the weft yarn and not by warp yarn as in coir matting; the warp threads are drawn back into the fabric after weaving (see also 'Carpets'). Mourzouks Mousseline de Soie - A crisp, plain weave, closely woven than 'chiffon' and not as soft

sheer fabric, more as voile.

HUFFLER - A long narrow knitted or woven piece of fabric, normally made of wool, and worn as a protection for the neck or head against cold. Usually it is less than 1 m long and 30 cm wide.

FIG. 59
Muga Cloth

MUFFLER

- A fabric woven by using Muga silk in warp and weft.

The Muga is a species.
Muga Silk

semi-domesticated silkworm from the

of Antherea

- Silk

cocoons built by partly domesticated

moth btherea

Am.

Mulberry - An urticaceous, hardy and perrenial tree of the genus morus; silkworms (Bombayx Mori) feed on its leaves. Mulberry Silk - Silk mainly of yellow, white or greenish yellow colour obtained from domesticated silkworm Bombayx Mori belonging to the family Bombycidae which feed on mulberry leaves. Spinning - A system of spinnjing on a mule frame,in which the drafting of the roving, twisting of the yarn and winding it on the bobbin, takes place intermittently and not continuously (a also 'Ring Spinning'). Twine - A 2 or 3-ply flax, hemp, cotton or synthetic twine

Mule

Mullet

170

used for

making mullet

nets.

Mulls - A soft, sheer, lustrous fabric in plain weave of relatively open texture made from fine yarn and used for dress and other purposes. The cloth is soft finished and usually bleached.
Multifilament Yarn (Thread) - Yarn with many continuous filaments

or strands.
Multiply Fabric - Fabric

formed of

more than

one ply.

Multivoltine

than two
MUIlg0

Cocoons - Cocoons built by a silkworm race with more generations (life cycles) in a year.

- The fibrous material made in the woollen trade by pulling down new or old hard woven or milled cloth or felt in rag form (see also 'Shoddy').

Mushy

Wool - Wool without any regularity of staple, obtained usually from old sheep in bad seasons. It is usually not combed as its yield of top is poor and the quantity of noil is large.

Muslin

- A generic term for a light-weight open cloth of plain or plain gauze weave. Normally muslins do not exceed 68 g/ma. Some of these cloths are used in the grey (butter muslin and cheese cloth), whereas other (dress muslin) are bleached and dyed. Cloth - ti

Hutton

'Stockinette'. light, plain-woven, cotton cloth with a soft

Nainsook

A fine,

finish. NAMBALI - An Indian term for handloom cotton and silk fabrics printed with religious names worn as outer covering on ceremonial occasions by Hindus.
NAMAVALI - &g

'NAMBALI'.

NAMDAS - An Indian term for handmade, felted rug made of all wool or blends of wool with cotton and man-made fibres,with embroidery work done with woollen yarn and used mainly as floor covering.

Nap - A fibrous surface produced on a fabric or felt in which part of the fibre is raised from the basic structure. Such surfaces often show directional effects.
Nap Finish - A process wherein the fibres are raised and made to stand vertically from the foundation of a woollen fabric and then rubbed to form curls or nubs.

Napkins - A piece of fabric, generally of patterned) and used for wiping hands, etc.

cotton

(plain or nap on the

Nappim - A finishing process used for surface of cloth. (See a_&~ 'Brwhing'). 171

obtaining

SP:45-1988

Naps

(Cotton) -. Small aggregates of loosely entangled cotton fibres. They are comparatively easy to remove from cotton and generally their individual fibres can be easily separated. They are larger than neps. Narrow Fabric

(a) Any woven fabric not exceeding 45 cm (18 in.) in width. (b) Any braid and trimming. by the

Note - The upper limit of width recgnized Brussels nomenclature is 30 cm (12 in.,).

Narrowing - The act of reducing the width of the fabric or garments by deoreasing the number of wales by stitch transferring during knitting to get the desired shape.
Neatening - Finishing a cut edge to prevent fraying. Various methods include: Turning in the edge, pinking, overedging and taping. Neck Bahd' Necks
-

A band which goes around the neck part of a garment.

- Wool removed from the neck region of the fleece. Should only be removed if distinctly different from the rest of fleece because it contains heavy burr, dust/or seed.

Neckwear (Knitted) - Knitwear used as covering for neck, e.g. mufflers, scarves, ?ties, etc. Needle Damage sewing.
- Damage

caused to

material by

the needle during

Needle Lines - Longitudinal lines in fabric or garment produced due to defective functioning of the needle(s).

Needle Loop

- &

(a) under

'Loop (Knitting)'.

Needled Felt - A felt produced on a hessian or scrim base by pricking into it with needles on a lap or sheet or intertwined fibrous material usually obtained from jute caddis or. shredded fibre waste. The felt may be needled on one or both sides of the fabric base, i.e., can be either single-sided or double-sided. Sometimes needled felt is produced without a hessian or scrim base It is used as padding material for automobile seats. A small knot-like aggregate of tightly entangled fibres, usually not larger than a common pin head (about 2 mm in diameter).
Nep -

Nep Count - The number of neps per unit weight of material, usually expressed in terms of number of neps per gram.
Neppy Fabric - A fabric having neps on the surface due to neppy warp or weft yarns or both.

172

SP:45-1988

Needling; Needle-Bonding - The consolidation of a batt of fibres through entanglement by multiple penetration of barbed needles. An example is given in Fig. 60.

d
4 1. Sheet of ruperimpored fibns 2. Barbed needles 3. &tanglod fibres 4. Primary support fabric 5. Fibrcs thrust through support fabric by needling

FIG. 60

MANUFACTURING PRINCIPLE OF NEEDLED TEXTILE FLOOR COVERING WITH PRIMARY SUPPORT FABRIC

NeppJr Yam - A faulty yarn in which the incidence of 'nep occurs at a relatively high level to constitute a fault. Note Neppy yarns are sometimes used purposely as decoration, e.g. &,$ckerbockar yarn.

Net - An open mesh fabric in which a firm structure is ensured by some form of twist, interlocking, or knitting of the yarn, It may be produced by gauze weaving, knitting, or knotting, or on a lace machine.
Net Mass (Weight) - The difference between the gross mass and the tare mass determined at the same time. Nett Silk - Raw silk filaments or strands which have been processed into yarns by twisting or folding or both.

Netting

structure of indefinite shape and size which - A meshed comprises a product either: (a) Composed of one yarn or of one or more systems of yarns, interlaced or joined; or (b) Obtained by other means, e.g. by stamping or cutting from sheet material or by extrusion. 173

SP:45-1988

Netting Twine - A flax, hemp, cotton, manila or man-made fibre twine used for making fishing nets, sports nets,.and garden nets. Netting Yarn - A yarn (a general term which embraces single yarn including monofilament, multiple folded yarn and cabled yarn) which is suitable for the manufacture of netting. Note - The principal types of netting yarns are monofilaments and twines. The latter are defined below: (a) Braided Twine - The.product of applying the braiding or plaiting operation to netting yarns or twines or both. (b) (cl Cabled Netting Twine - The product of operations using' two or more netting further twisting twines.

Netting Twine - The product of one twisting operation using two or more single netting yarns or monofilaments. in the Navy for making hammock

Nettlestuff - A hemp twine used clews.

Neutral-Dyeing Acid Dye - An acid dye that has relatively high substantivity for wool from a neutral dyebath. New Jute Woolpack - A double warp hemmed twill sacking pack '(without stripes) with attached top, measuring about 137 x 69 x 69 cm (normally with 102 ends/dm and 35 picks/dm), weighing approximately 5100 g.
New Zealand Cornsack -' A hemmed twill sacking bag measuring about 117 x 58.5 cm (without stripes) (normally with 102 ends/dm and 35 picks/dm), ,weighing approximately 1145 g and dry sewn (gee also IS:2875-1964). Flax Hemp --& &

New Zealand New Zealand

'Phormium". 'Phormium'

Ned Zealand Woolpack - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking pack with 1.5 cm wide red or blue stripes measuring 137 x 69 x 69 cm (normally with 102 ends/dm and.31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 5445 g, and dry sewn. (See also 'New Jute Woolpack').

NEWAR -- A heavy jute or cotton strip manufactured in a tape loom in narrow widths and used for cots, chairs, etc. Niantic Foot - A fully-fashioned hose foot, made in two parts with the seams on either side of the foot and' with seamless heel and toe pouches. The complete hose with niantic foot is made on two machines known as 'Legger' and 'Footer'.
Ninon - A very thin, smooth rather crisp fabric in plain weave, ,henvier than 'chiffon'.

Nitrate DW

Bag -

A double-warp

hemmed plain

weave sacking bag

174

SP:45-1988

measuring approximately 84 x 41 cm (normally with 68 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 710 g either without stripes or with 1.3 cm coloured stripes. Noble Combing - A circular combing machine for worsted slivers, wherein the combing and the removal of tufts is combined into a continuous process. Percentage - It is the ratio of weight of noil to the combined weight of noil and comb sliver expressed as percentage. It differs from the term 'tear' which is simply the ratio of weight of comb sliver to the weight of noil.
Noil

Noil Yarn Noils

(Silk) -

Yarn spun

from silk

nails.

(a) &&wz.uL - Shorter fibres separated during the process of combing; or (b)

from longer fibres

Silk - Short stapled residue from the dressing operations in silk spinning.

Non-Felting - A process for modifying, mainly the scaly surface structure of wool or hair fibres so as to reduce their tendency to felt. Non-Ionic Dye - A (water-soluble) dye electrolytically in aqueous solution. that does not dissociate

Non-Textile Backing - Carpet backing composed of material other than textile material and consisting generally of plastics material or of rubber. Non-Woven - A non--woven is manufactured sheet, web or batt or directionally 'or randomly orientated fibres, bonded by friction, and/or cohesion and/or adhesion, excluding paper and products which are woven, knitted, tufted, stitch-bonded incorporting binding yarns or filaments or felted by wet-milling whether additinally needled or not. The fibres may be'of natural or' man-made origin. They may be staple or continuous filaments or be formed a.
Non-Woven Backing - Backing for textile_floor coverings produced

by a

technique other

than weaving

or knitting.

Silk - Two or more untwisted singles, which are doubled together with no more twist than is necessary to,bind together the filaments of silk. Northrow Note - The treatment given eliminates formation of loops. Nosing

makes

a

very stair.

soft

yarn and

- The front edge of the tread of a

Note -

This term

is also used to describe reinforcement of 175

SP:45-1986

textiles, synthetic e,lastomers, plastics or metallic materials, placed on the nosing of a tread to protect it from excessive wear. Notched Lapel collar seam. - Lapel on which top line slants down in line with

Notches - Small cuts made in the edges of garment parts which are used as guides during garment assembly (see also 'Balance Marks'). Novelty Yam - Yarns produced for special effects; usually uneven in size or colour. Flakes, nubs and slubs are typical of novelty yarn. Nylon or Polyamide Constitution: A generic term for man-made the fibre forming substance is any long polyamide having recurring amide group:
-CO-NH-

fibres in which chain synthetic

as an integral part of Examples:

the polymer chain. adipamide (polyamide 6.6):

polyhexamethylene
-[NH-(CH&-NH-CO(CH&CO]p-

Polycaproamide

(polyamide 6): -[NH-(CH+COl&

and polyundecanamide

(polyamide 11 1:
9- COliiI

-[NH-(CH&a

Off Pressing (Pressing Off) - The final pressing garment after assembly. Off-Square - A fabric appreciably. Off-Side Printing Oil Cloth pigments. Oil or Fabric where ends & or picks

operations on a

per decimetre differ

Stain coated - h

(c) with a

under 'Stains'. resin-forming 'Stains'. that contain added oil. material and

Grease Stain

(d) under hair tops

Oil-Combed Tops - .Wool or

Oiled Fabric - Thin fabric soaked in boiled linseed oil and dried to make it waterproof. Oiled Wool - Unscoured or undyed knitting wool or wool dyed before spinning and containing added oil not subsequently removed 176

oilr

W-P

- b

(0)

under

'Stains'.

Oily Weft - &

(f) under 'Stains'.

Olefin - A man-made fibre in which the fibre forming substance is any long chain synthetic polymer composed of at least 85 percent by weight of ethylene, propylene or other olefin units. having small number of monomerio units combined, the number of monomeric unnits of which it is composed, may be known. Omatt Fibre (Coir) -. The shorter fibrss obtained while combing the bristle fibre. One-Piece Beret - Beret knitted in one-piece [m (Knitted)']. 'Beret
Oligomer - A simple polymer

One-Piece Garment - A knitted garment made from one piece of material without any joining at the shoulders and of the sleeves to the body.

.

FIG. 61
Onion

ONE-PIECE PULLOVER

P&et - A hemmed hessian bag measuring about 101.5 X 57 am (normally with 38 ends/dm and 39 picks/dm), weighing approximately 340 8, with 3 blue stripes, and tar sewn. Dye - A cationic dye i.e. solubilised by a liable ammonium,,

Onium

sulphonium, phosphonium, or oxonium substituent, which splits off during fixation to leave an insoluble colourant in the fibre.

open Boil

- Scouring of cellulosic or their blended textiles with alkaline liquors inopen vessels at or near to boiling point (LLM 'Scouring'). Note - Scours at temperatures lower than usually referred to as 'Steeps'.

the

boil are

@en-End Spinnina - The production of spun yarns by a process in which the sliver or roving is opened or separated to its individua: fibres or tufts and is subsequently reassembled in the spinning element into a yarn.

owi
(a) A general term covering several processes in the prelim177

SP:45-1988

inary treatment of raw cotton. The primary objects of which are to separate the compressed and mated masses of cotton into loose tufts and to remove the heavier and bulkier impurities. (b) A general term for opening of cloth from rope form to open _ width form through scutcher or opener machine. Openness seams. Opera opera - The provision for leg stance in the angle of the leg

- A Hose artists.

hose extending

up to the hip,

generally

used by

Optical Bleach - A process for imparting improved whiteness to an uncoloured textile material in the form of fibres, filaments, by application of colourless compounds which yarns or fabrics flouresce under ultra violet light.The apparent whiteness of the textile material is incresed due to increase in the apparent reflectance in the visible region by conversion of ultra violet radiation into visible light. Optical Bleaching, Brightening, or Whitening referred to as flourescent brinhtner. Agent - Preferrably

Ore Pocket - A double warp twill sacking selvedged bag measuring about 76 x 51 cm (normally with 102 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 680 g, without stripes,and dry tar sewn. Organdie - A plain-weave translucent a permanently stiff finish. fabric of light weight with

Organdie Finishing - A finishing treatment given to cotton fabrics comprising a short contact of fabric with sulphuric acid of high concentration, to produce a stiff and transparent effect. Organzine - Silk yarn used as warp for weaving, or for knitting, comprising single threads that are first twis"ed and then folded together two, three or four fold, and then twisted in the direction opposite to that of the single twist. Orleans - A plain Bradford lustre fabric mostly used as lining.

Oslo Twill - A twill width weighing about picks/dm). Otter - Fur fibre

sacking cloth for bag making of about 108 cm 534 g/ma (normally with 115 ends/dm and 39

(from genus: V).

Ottoman - Ottoman is made out of silk, acetate, rayon and cotton. It has a larger and heavier diagonal rib. The original weave was a 12 harness 75~ left hand twill (see also 'Relief Fabric'). Ottoman Rib Fabric - & 'Relief Fabric'. - Long, hairy 178 and coarse fibres projecting

Outercoat

(Guard Fibres)

SP:45-1968

above the undercoat of fur bearing animals and undomesticated sheep and goat.
Outerwear (Knitted) - Knitwear worn as outergarment; e.g. cardigan, pullover, shirt, slipover, etc. Mass (Weight) - The mass of a sample of textile material (after.removal of normal finish) dried to substantially constant mass in an oven maintained at 105 to 1lIdoCand supplied with air at the standard atmospheric conditions (65 -+ 2 percent RH and 270 + 2OC). Oven-Dry Note - In case of dipped tyre cord yarns, the oven-dry weight does not include the dipping material, the mass of dipping material shall, therefore, be deducted. Over-Raised - Excessive surface nap, that may accompanied by damage to the ground structure.

or

may

not be

Principal Cause - This defect is caused by the incorrect setting of the raising machine or irregular feed of the fabric. Overall - Loose work garment usually everyday clothes to give protection to An undesirable

designded to 3e worn over clothes.

Overboarding

practice of boarding the garments

to 'oversize.
Overcoatings - A term embracing a large and greatly varying range of fabrics for overcoats.

Overedge

Stitch - A type of chain stitch, in which the needle thread loop is carried from the underside of the fabric over the edge and returned to the line of stitching to be secured by the needle on its next downward stroke. Varying'amounts of edge cover can be obtained by using machines employing more threads. Overedging (Overlocking, Serging) - The use of overedge stitching either by hand or machine to bind the edge to avoid fraying. It is sometimes used as a decoration and often described as,overlocking or serging if done by machine. Overknit'Fabric Overlock - h

(b)

under

'Pique

(Weft

Knitting)'

Seam -.A seam in which two or more edges of material are joined together, oversewn and edge-trimmed in one operation, with overedge stitches having two or more threads. Whipping - Finishing a textile floor covering with separate yarn covering the edge, thus binding the tufts and backing and preventing edge fray. Overlocking, Overlock Stitch

(a) Two-thread

overlock stit& - A sewing stitch made from two threads used for hemming purposes. The edge of the 179

SP:45-1988

fabric is first cut by knives incorporated in the machines and then the stitch is made over the cut edge of the fabric to join it with the main-fabric.
6mECtlON d'%lCCESSlVE StllCli fORMAlION

FIG. 62

TWO-THREAD

OVERLOOCK

STITCH

(b) Three-Thread Overlock Stitch - A sewing stitch made from three threads used for joining two or more pieces of fabric. The edges of the fabris are'first cut by knives incorporated in the machine and then the stitch is made over the cut edges of the fabrics to join them together.
D,REC,,l,N

of

SUCCESSIVE

5lIlC"

fORM*"ON

FIG. 63
Overlapping Overprinted Pattern

THREE-THREAD OVERLOCK STITCH
(Printing) -- Self descriptive.

Resist - The treatment in which the fabric is impregnated with the dye solution, dried and printed with the resisting agent followed by development.

Ovule -.Small undeveloped seed present
Oxford

in cotton.

.- A woven fabric which has two warp ends working as one. Fancy weave effects can be incorporated, and dyed yarns, are used to form stripes (See also 'DEDSUTI',).

Oxidation Colour - Colour obtained by the oxidation of aromatic amines (used as their salts with inorganic acids like hydrochloric acid to make them soluble in water) in the fibre substance in an acidic .-medium. e.g. aniline black, diphenyl black, solaniline black, -paramine brown and fuscamine brown, etc.
Oxidized Oil Staining, Gilding - Staining of textiles caused by oxidation of oil acquired or applied during processing.

Pack

(Outer) --A fabric envelope in which parachute system are stowed when the separate inner pack.
(Pack Cover, Inner Pack)

other components of a canopy is packed in a

Pack

- A fabric bag or envelope in which

a parachute' is packed. 180

SP:45-1988

Pack (Wool)

- A

traditional unit weight 108.88 kg (i.e. 240 lb)

of wool.
Pack Sheet - Jute fabric used as a protective covering for bales

or trusses of
Pack-Elastics

jute

fabrics

or

bags

(see

al=

IS:2873-1969).

- Elastic cords, with a means of fastening at either end, fixed under tension to pack flaps to ensure their quick opening. Package - The units.. from which the yarn is to be unwound, and which together consitute the consignment. The packages may be of various sizes, shapes and winding appearance; e.g., bobbins, cones, copes, cakes, tubes, hanks, pirns and cheeses. - The forced. circulation of dye liquor through packages of fibre, yarn, or cloth without limitation of temperature. The use of the term pressure dyeing in this connection is deprecated (see- alsQ 'High Temperature Dyeing'). Package Dyeing Packing Allowance

of a

- T_he.percentage allowa;~;,~; which bale may 'exceed,the dead weight

the volume

Packing Twine

- A sisal, *hemp, cotton or jute twine used in pack-

aging.
Pad -

Any form of wadding, felt,,foam.or rubber inserted into a garment for the purpose of shape'or f`it.
(Paddihg) - The operation of,.imparting shape by su-

Pad Stitching

ccessive rows of
Pad-Steam

sewing,

noria1l.y 'at' '.the lapels

and collar.

Process - A process of continuous dyeing. in which fabric in open width is padded with dyestuff and, if necessary, with a reducing agent, and is then steamed (m 'Padding').

Padding - The application of a liquor or paste-to textiles; either by passing the material through a bath and subsequently through squeeze rollers, or by passing it between squeeze rollers, the bottom one of which carries the liquor or paste.
Padding Double-War@.(or Padding DW) -

fabric in

plain weave

used as

A double-warp cheap padding.

single weft

- A form of mangle for impregnation'of textiles in open width in which the textile is-passed through one or more nips. The textile may be saturated before passing through the nip, as in slop padding, or the impregnating liquid may be carried as a film on the surfaceeof one of the bowls forming the nip and transferred to the textile as it passes through the nip, as in nip padding. In case of textile dip padding,.the textile is passed through a trough containing 'impregnatingliquid. Padding Mangle PAGREE or PAGRI - An Indian term for a head dress fabric in plain

weave produced

in white,

dyed, checks or printed designs. 181

SP:45-1988

Painter

- A mooring

or towing

rope for

small boats. in pairs, apparent as we-

Paired Weft ftway ribs.

- Regroupment

of weft yarns

Note - It is a defect if it only occurs design does not desire this effect. Pairfng - Putting together gloves of the same type, Paisley Paisley two complementary size and shape.

in a fabric where

the

units

of footwear

or

Shawl - Hand-woven shawl made in the nineteenth century in (UK) with a view to imitating Pashmina shawls from Kashmir. Suiting - A mohair cloth used for the tropical Calender suiting.

Palm Beach

Palmering - A finishing process done on Palmer a soft mellow handle to fabrics.

to impart

Panama - A piece-dyed, light-weight, and smooth-finished worsted dress fabric in plain weave made from hard-twisted yarns used for tropical suitings. - A cross-bred American sheep, from Rambouillet Panama (Sheep) rams and Lincoln ewes, yielding 56-60s fineness (French merino), grade wool. Panel Panne (Aerostat) Satin - A - A highly sub-division lustrous of a gore. stiff satin fabric. flat

rather

Panne Velvet - A light-weight in one direction

'velvet' with the pile pressed

Paper Finish - Treatment given to woollen/worsted ssing between layers of papers under pressure to appearance and lustre of the fabrics.

fabrics improve

by prehandle,

Paper Pressing - A part of the worsted finishing sequence, particularly for imparting a pressed finish to all wool worsted suitirigs, wherein a damped fabric is sandwhiched between glazed electrically heated cardboard sheets and pressed for several hours at high pressure with the aid of a hydraulic press in a discontinuous operation. Paper-Lined Bag - Bag made of jute cloth in paper by means of bitumen or other Paper-Lined Bessian for any particular - Hessian end use. laminated lined with adhesive. or crepe or plawith paper

reinforced

Par Weighting - A degree of weighting that results in degummed silk returning to its original weight. Thus it is considered that 100 lb of raw silk yields 75 lb of degummed silk and from this will be produced 100 lb of par-weighted silk. Par weighted silk is also known as 18 02, weighted silk. Thus weighted silk of which 150 lb 182

SP:45-1988

is produced

from

100

lb of raw silk is silk of 24 oz weighting. aerodynamic device to produce the velocity of a moving body. to an aircraft to

Parachute - An drag, commonly

umbrella-shaped, used to reduce

Parachute (Antispin) - A parachute attached from a spin. assist in its recovery Parachute (Approached) steepen the approach. - A parachute deployed

from an aircraft

to

to deploy at Parachute (Automatic) - A parachute which is caused a predetermined height by a barometric or other time delay device. attached to the - A subsidiary parachute Parachute (Auxiliary) pack or to the main parachute to assist in the deployment sequence. Parachute (Black Gore) - A parachute in which of one or more gores is cut out. The peripheral retained. Parachute (Conical) form gores which a A parachute multi-sided the whole or part and vent hems are

constructed from triangular pyramid or approximate cone.

- A relatively small parachute or parasheet Parachute (Drogue) stabilization or for the initial stage commonly used to provide of a compound parachute system. Parachute (Emergency) - A parachute aircraftfor an emergency descent. - A Parachute (Extractor) from an aircraft in light. parachute used by an occupant of an a load

designed

to withdraw

- A parachute, the canopy of which consists of Parachute (Flat) triangular gores forming a regular polygon when laid out flat. Parachute (Guide Surface) - A parachute in which the canopy,is close to the periphery, shaped in such a manner as to produce, a re-entrant surface which acts as a guide or stabilizing member. Parachute (Hem Rigged) - A parachute, the rigging are attached. at the peripheral hem and do not pass Parachute to reduce (Landing Brake) - A parachute its landing run. deployed lines of which over the canopy.

from an aircraft

- A second parachute -Parachute (Research) parachutist for use in emergencies when to function. used fails Parachute (Retarder) - An extractor main load-carrying parachute.

sometimes carried by a the parachute normally

parachute

used to

deploy

the

Parachute (Ribbon) - A parachute, the gor;zb;fcwhich . . ribbons instead of continuous cted of 183

are constru-

SP:45-1988

Parachute (Ring Slot) - A parachute, the canopy of which is made up of concentric rings of fabric separated from each other by fixed distances and joined at regular intervals by radial tapes. Parachute (Shaped) - A parachute, the canopy of which is constructed of gores that are not straight-sided. Parachute (Square) - A parachute, the canopy of which when laid out flat, is approximately square. Parachute (Stabiliaing) - A parachute used to stabilize an otherwise unstable load. Parachute (Triangular) - A parachute which is approximately triangular when laid out flat. Parachute Cord - A braided cord with or without central core made from nylon or cotton used as rigging lines in parachutes. Parachute Fabric - Fabric used for making parachutes which are used in man or supply dropping purposes. Parallel Fabric - A multiply fabric with the warp threads of all the plies parallel. Paramattas - Type of cashmere fabrics woven in 2-and-l weft twill weave. Parasbeet - A parachute constructed from a piece (or pieces with parallel warp) of fabric in the form of a regular polygon, with the rigging lines attached to apices of the polygon. Parasheet (Gathered) - A parasheet, the periphery of which is constrained by a hem cord. Parasheet (Wngathewd) not constrained by a - A parasheet, the hem cord. periphery of which is

Parcelliw - The practice of binding a wire rope with strips of tarred canvas or.hessian, each turn of the strip overlapping that preceding it by half the width of the strip.(h Fig. 90). Part Wool - The textile material should be marked 'part wool' if it contains not less than 20 percent wool fibres. However, a manufacturing tolerance upto 3 percent on wool contents shall be permitted. (a Notes 1 and 2 under `All Wool'). Pashmina Goafr - A goat of genus mphircus lu (a) ma found in Ladakh region of Kashmir and in Tibet.Also known as Cashmere goat. Wool - Superfine fleece of pashmina goat-par(b) m ticularly the undercoat separated from the fleece by manual separation of hairy outercoat. 184

SP:45-1988

(cl

w blend

Yarn - Yarn made with wool. Sh& - Shawls with wool.

from pashmina

wool or their

Cd) ma
blend Note Note PAT -

made from pashmina

wool

or their

1 - Pashmina 2 - See also

is an Indian term for cashmere. 'Cashmere names of a and Cashmeres'. for raw jute. of a piece of

The local

Bengali

Patch Pocket - A pocket formed by the
material to the surface

application garment.

within the width of Patent Selvedge - A type of selvedge formed selvedges of the cloth. This enables the cloth between the real and prevents cut into narrower widths cloth to be subsequently the cut edges so formed from fraying; it is also called 'split selvedge' . When the selvedge is at the centre of the width of the 'centre selvedge'. fabric it is called PATKA - & 'PAGREE or PAGRI'.

Pattern (a) A shape or an assembly of shapes in card or other sheet that are material cut to the outline of garment parts to be joined together to make the'garment. used for marking out the parts (b) Template.(s) ent on material prior to cutting. of the garm-

consists of yarn or Patterned Carpet - Carpet in which the pile fibres of two or more colours, or a single colour but used either In areas of different height, or areas of tufts with areas of loops. Peaked Lapel horizontal. Pearl Fabric - Lapel on which the top line slants up from the

- j&s

'Purl Fabric'. or rough surface texture of a fabric. in open

Pebble - The irregular
Perching* width, drawn

A process over roller

of examining cloth for defects or perch against good light.

- A finishing treatment predominantly given to Perchmentixing cellulosic fabrics comprising a short contact with, e.g., sulphuric a variety of effects to produce acid of high `concentration, conditions used, varying depending on the type of fabric and the from a linen-like handle to a translucent organdie effect (applied mainly to cotton fabrics). Reagents other than sulphuric acid can also produce the effect. 185

'SP:45-1988

Pelerine

- A cellular effect produced on kni-tted fabric by transferring formed sinker loops.

FIG. 64
Perkin

PELERINE Fabrics'.

Stripes

- &

'Bradford Lustre

Permanent Set - Permanent dimension stabilization of fabric, yarn or fibre either chemically or with the aid of steam (or hot air). Permeability - The rate of flow of fluid, vapour or differential pressure. thr0ugh.a material. gas under a

Pershia - A lightweight piece dyed woollen fabric, usually woven from -worsted yarns'. It- is generally used for making ladies dresses.
Carpets - Name of world famous all-wool hand-knotted carpets made in Persia (Iran) in a variety of designs originating in different parts of Persia. Famous Persian designs now used carpets .all over the world include Afschar, Ahar, Ardebil, izkhtiar, Bokhara, Gharadji, Ghiordes, Ghoum .Heriz, Hereke, Hamadan, Kaimuri; Kashan, Kerman, Kardy, Lichi, %leshad, Mahal, Sarab, Sarabend, Tabriz, etc.' Persian Persian Print.- A low grade, plain woven cotton fabric printed in large patterns and bl;illiant colours.

Petersham Ribbon (Millinery) - A ribbon usually with silk or rayon warp and *having single picks of relatively coarse weft, usually cotton to form a rib with'the. return of the weft making a gimp like edge and traditionally with 10 ribs/cm (25.4 ribs/in.). Petersham Ribbon (skirt) T A narrow' fabric having a pronnounced rib weftway,' tiompose'd of one or more picks per rib and having produced either by closeness of the weave or lateral stiffness by a finishing process. It is woven with or without pockets in which to insert supports. The selvedges are formed by the return of the weft so as to .pro.duce gimp-like edges or they are woven in a contrasting manner.
Petticoat - A sleeve so pleated as to leave a

clear passage when

collapsed. 186

pH Value - The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in an aqueous solution. It is a convenient method of expressing small differences in the acidity or alkalinity of nearly neutral solutions. For solutions on acid side the pH value is less than 7 and on the alkaline side it is more than 7. yrmium - A fibre obtained Phormium tenax forst). from the leaves of the phormium plant

Photo Degradation - Degradation caused in the ultra-voilet, visible, and

by electromagnetic radiation near infra-red wave-bands.

-Note 1 - Photo degradation occurs only when electromagnetic radiation falls'on the textile, but the resulting total degrad-. atiori may depend on other factors. Note 2 - The limits of the visible spectrum are ill--defined, but for most practical purposes the lower limit is 380 nm and the upper 780 nm. In daylight, the photo chemically active radiations are principally in the wavelength range 296-800 nm. Photoengraving -. A method used for preparing printing by photographic techniques.
!

designs

for textile

Pi&

and Pick (i) Descriptive of a woven fabric in which the alternate picks are of different colours or yarns. Note - If the weft is inserted by shuttles, fabric must be produced on a pick at will loom. (ii) Descriptive from opposite of a sides. shuttle loom that picks this

alternately

Pick Bar .-& Pick Hang - &

(2) under

'Bar'.

'Hang Pick'. Pick - A pick on which the take--up motion is

Pick, Dead; Crammed put out of action. Picking

(a) The operation of passing the weft through (a shed) during weaving.

the warp

shed

(b) The rectification of the face and back of a carpet after manufacture including inserting missing tufts, replacing incorrect and repairing broken yarns in the ones, backing (local mending). (c)

A process carried out before the final stage of cloth finishing to remove by .hand any contamination (such as %I.bre, coloured hair, etc.) which has not kemp, wrong 187

SP:45-i988

been removed by previous processing. This process is carried out particularly during the finishing of suitings face-finished cloths, and oream.or off-white cloths. (d) Removal by picking during skirting. locks and bellies from the fleece

Picking-Out

Mark - A weft-wise band or bar characterized by fuzzy appearance due to the pulling out of the faulty picks and inserting fresh picks. - The weft or filling yarn which lies across a fabric.

Picks

the length of

- A length of fabric of customarily accepted unit length. In the woollen and worsted fabric trade, it is usually above 40.m but generally less than 75 m in length. Piece Dyed - Term applied to cloth woven with.the yarn in grey condition'(i.e. undyed), scoured and then dyed; this being the most convenient and economical method of applying colour to a fabric. Piece Piece Dyeing -

--The

dyeing of by or

fabrics in from the

the piece piece.

form.

Piece-Goods

Cloth sold

- Skirting from the edge of the fleece containing shorter wool, fribs, clumpy burr or seed. Should not contain bellies, stains, or locks or'second cuts or skin pieces.
P-ieces (Wool) Pierced Cocoon - Cocoon from which the moth has emerged after softening the end of the cocoon and forcing its way out.

Note Pierced cocoons spun silk manufacture.
Pigment

are not reelable and are used in

- A substance in particulate form, whicn is subtantially insoluble in a medium, but which can be mechanically dispersed in this medium to modify its colour and light-scattering properties. Pigment Pigment Padding

by padding

- The application of dyes or through an aqueous dispersion.

pigments to fabric

Printing

pigment along pigment.
Pigment Taffeta

- Printing of textile fabric with an emulsion of with a binder and curing the binder to fix the - A

dull 'taffeta',

made of

dull or pigmented

yarns.
Pigmented Yarn .- A dull or coloured yarn spun from a solution to which .apigment has been added. Pile - That part of yarns or fibres, cut or

a fabric or carpet consisting of textile looped, projecting from the substrate
188

SP:45-1988

and acting as a use-surface. [See au 'Effective Pile (Carpet)', 'Measured Surface Pile Density', and "Total Pile Fibre Content']. (a) Carved Pila - The pile of a carpet i.e. subjected, after manufacture, to a shearing operation with the.object of creating different levels of pile, often on the periphery of certain elements of design formed by the pile. C rled Pile - The pile of a carpet in which the curl has bien induced in the pile yarn by over-twist or by other means. Cut Pile - A pile surface that consists entirely of severed ends of fibres or yarns.
1 op Pile. Uncut Pm - A pile, the fibres or yarns of which are caused to form loops during manufacture of the fabric.

(b)

(cl (d)

W

(f)

wptured Pm - A pile in which a pattern is created by having areas of different height or by omitting pile in certain areas. \ Textured Pila - A pile in which the surface character is varied, e.g., by having areas of different characteristics, by combinations of loop and cut pile, etc. may be cut or

Pile Fabric - A fabric with a pile surface, which uncut (loop). (a)

Warp r>iJ,e fabric - A pile fabric with loop or cut pile formed by the warp yarn such as terry towels, warp plushes, velvets, etc. (See ti 'Velvet'). warpway (weft rib) or weftway (warp rib) raised lines or ridges (M 'Rib Fabric') (gee alwq 'Velveteen').

(b) Weft pile fabric - A fabric whose surface consists of

Pile Carpet Woven Over Wires --Pile carpet produced in a single operation on a loom in which steel rods are used to form the pile and to determine its length. Examples are given below.

4. Stufrrr 5. Bottom shot

FIG. 65

CUT-PILE, PLAIN-WOVEN CARPET, TWO-SHOT (WARPWAYS SECTION) 189

Substrrte

1.Looppile 2.Chainwarp 3.Topshot

4.Stuffer 5.Bottom shot

FIG. 66

LOOP-PILE, PLAIN-WOVEN CARPET, TWO-SHOT (WARPWAYS SECTION)
c:~fcut pile of a carpet achieved apparently greater than a volume the application of t+his prr~ces5.

-- The appearance Pile Bursting by different; processes producing that which Was xcupied before Pile Root (Carpet)

d.cad yarns,

_. That pur,t of tufts and/or _locrps , exclu4in;. which is in the substrate.

0 2 0 3 0
1

EHectwcpile
Pile root Dead yarn5

E'IG.67
Pile Height, Effective

PILE ROOT (LONGITUDINAL SECTION)
(Carpet) - The difference in t and after shearing away the pile

of a carpet before backing.
Pile

'I of a Yarn - The yarn forming the loops or tufts (cut loc\ps pile fabric.

SP:45-1988

Pile, Effective (-Carpet) - That part of the pile which is above the substrate and which can be separated from it by shearing [see 'Pile Height', 'Effective Pile (Carpet)']. (See Fig. 67). Pilling -- Small accumu,lations of fibres on the surface of a fabric and held to the surface by an entanglement with the surface fibres and composed of the same fibres as those from which the fabric is made. Pilot Cloth - A heavily milled blue with nappy finish and 2-and-2 twill woollen cloth dyed used for overcoats and jackets.

Pilot Lead line - A line used by the river survey department for taking depth line is made from jute or flax yarn soundings. The (see also 'Lead Line'). Pin Drafter -.A high-speed American system of worsted gill box without drawing. back rollers, used in

Pin Drafting - Any system of drafting (e.g., gill drafting) which the oriented position of fibres relative to one another in a sliver is controlled by pins. Pin EIoles - Very small holes wn as 'Fisheye'. caused by loop distortion.

in

Also kno-

Pin Marks - A series of small apertures parallel to and near the fabric edges. Principal Causes - This defect or poorly adjusted stenter pins. Pin Tack - A small sewn pleat. either

or severed

yarns

running

is caused by hooked,blunted

Pinking - Serrating of a material decorate a raw edge.

to prevent

fraying

or to

Pinstripe - Used in worsted suitings. The pattern is formed by using alternate pale and dark yarns in the warp giving a very fine stripe design. Woven in twill or Panama. Piping (a) A strip of material with or without a filling; folded, normally to the edge of a garment. (b) A narrow fabric having a cord on one edge. piping. applied

(c) The operation

of applying

Pique - A cloth showing rounded cords in the weft direction, with pronounced sunken lines between them, which are produced :by the nature of the weave. The weave on the face of the cords is plain. There are warp floats on the width of the cords on'the back.'Wgdding picks are used to-accentuate the prominance of the cords.

191

SP:45-1988

Note - For many years, the term pique has been applied on a much less expensive white cloth made in a light weight Bedford cord weave. Pique (Warp-Knitting) - A fabric, normally made with two guide bars, showing pronounced cord effect in the wales direction. The portions between the cords are made by omitting one or more threads from the guide bar i.e. making the smaller underlap. Pitch (CarpeA) - The average number of tufts or knots in carpet per unit area. Traditionally number of knots/in.z. Pitch (Garment) - The balance insertion of the sleeve into the garment, controlled by balance marks in the' scyeline. Pique (Weft-Knitting) (a) $ip@le Piaue Fab& - A six-course interlock fabric which differs from ordinary interlock at the third and sixth courses by tucking on one bed. For circular follows: knitting machines, the sequence is as

Feeder No.
: 3 4 : (b) Knit Knit Tuck Knit Knit Tuck odd needles even needles odd needles even needles odd needles even needles Knit Knit Knit Knit Knit Knit even needles odd needles even needles odd needles even needles odd needles

D,oa;b,lzfPiaue FW - A special type of knitt:d fabric circular rib machines by knitting successively with odd number dial needles at Feeder No.1 and 2 and even number of dial needles at Feeder No. 3 and 4 and on cylinder needles knitting and missing on alternate feeder. For circular as follows: knittihg machines, the repeat sequence is

: 3 4

Knit Knit Knit Knit

odd needles odd needles even needles even needles

Knit None Knit None

all knit all knit

Also known as 'Overknit Fabric'. (cl mniaue Fw - A six-course interlock fabric which differ's from ordinary interlock at the third and sixth courses by tucking on both beds.

192

SP:45-1988

For circular as follows: Feeder No. 1 2 3 4 5 6
Pitch (Of Rope)

knitting machines,

the repeat sequence is Cylinder Knit Knit Tuck Knit Knit Tuck odd needles even needles odd needles even needles odd needles even needles

Dial

Knit Knit Tuck Knit Knit Tuck

even needles odd needles even needles odd needles even needles odd needles

same strand

-- Distance between two successive spirals of the of a rope measured parallel to the axis of the rope.

FIG. 68A
Placket

PITCH OF ROPE

FIG. 68l3 LENGTH OF LAY FOR 8--STRAND ROPE (PLAITED)

- An opening provided in a garment or an extra piece of material applied to that opening for reinforcement or as a style feature, which may incorporate fastenings. - A full sleeved shirt with two or three buttons Placket Shirt underneath the collar. Very often, the colour of the placket and collar contrast with the colour of the body of the shirt. Plaid (a) A pattern consisting of coloured stripes or

bars crossing each. other at right angles. Plaid usually infers a multi-Coloured pattern of comparatively large repeat, while the word check usually is applied to similar patterns on a smaller scale and of fewer colours.

(b) The rectangular garment or piece of cloth, usually worn by both sexes in Scotland in place of an original cloak. (c) The woollen fabric from which plaids are made; now, any fabric with a cross-barred woven or printed design.
Flannels - Plain or twil&:woven flannels of cotton or wool made with colourful, yarn-dyed, plaid patterns. Finished with a soft nap and used for shirting; also, for rubberizing; linings, etc. Plaid Plaid-Pack An overcoating

made on the double cloth principle. 193

SP:45-198 8

The face warp and weft are of dark, conservative colours; the back warp and weft are of lighter colours arranged to form a plaid pat tern which will be on the inside of the garment and often takes the place of the lining.
Plaiding Cloth - A heavy machinery fabric in twill weave from woollen spun yarns made of wool fibres or their blends with man-made fibres. The cloth is made with or without a soft finish on one side of the fabric to impart a smooth feel. Plain Plain DW Flour Bag - See

'Flour Bag'.

DWE - &

'E-Bag'.

Plain Fabric (Knitted) - The simplest weft-knitted fabric made on one set of needles in which all the loops are intermeshed in one direction. Also known as 'Jersey Fabric' .

FIG. 89
Plain Plain Knit Seam

PLAIN FABRIC (KNITTED)

- Describes simplest knit structure as in hose. - A seam formed by a row or

two pieces
Plain Stitch

of material
(bitting)
(a

together face Fig. 104).

rows of stitches joining to face. made on
,

- A primary weft-knitting stitch

one set
Plain

of needles.

Weave Carpet Woven pile carpet with containing genrally a single colour.
Use-surface

uniform pile leng+

Substrate

1. Cut pile 2. Chain

warp

4. Stuffer 5. Bottom

shot

3. Top shot

FIG. 70

PLAIN WOVEN CARPET, THREE-SHOT (WARPWAYS SECTION)

Plain Surface Fabric - A fabric which does not have an intentionally raised fibre or yarn surface, such as pile, napped, or tufted surface.
194

SP:45-1988

Note fancy woven

fabrics Plain surface or knitted patterns.

also include

fabrics

having

Plain Weave - The type of weave threads thread or a pair of warp under each weft thread. Plaited Plaiting Cord - ti ti 'Braided Cord'.

in a cloth in which passes alternately

each warp over and

'Braiding'. for hat Shellac

Plaiting Cloth - The felting of wool and fur fibres bodies, by means of heat, steam, moisture and pressure. is sometimes used when stiff finishes are required.

Plated Fabric L A fabric i.e. produced from two yarns of diffof one of erent qualities of colours, characters or qualities which appear on the face and of the other on the back. A yarn may be plated by being covered by another yarn. Plated fabric is extensively used in making heavy sweater and other bulky materials. Plating (Knitting) - The controlled knitting of two different yarns in the same stitch such that each yarn takes up a definite position within the stitch. Plating usually involves the knitting of two yarns of different colour, lustre or composition, so that stitch. only one of these yarns is visible on the face of the Pleats - Material folds introduced to allow for expansion or to provide style features. Examples include: accordion pleats, box pleats, knife pleats and sunray pleats. Pliability Plied Yarn (Fibre) - & - See under 'Jute Fibre Characteristics'.

'Folded Yarn'. term meaning or crinkled 'Pulled Wool'. a plug through the eyes pleated effect i.e. (a applied to fabrics 'Seersucker').

Plisse - A French with a puckered Plucked Wool - &

Plugging - Fastening buttons by inserting of the shanks on the inside of a garment. Plumb Line - m 'Bricklayer Line'.

Plush - A cut pile fabric in derivative of plain 'velvet'. of greater depth than that in

weave

with pile

Plush Fabric (Knitted) - A fabric made with uncut elongated loops of yarn projecting on the reverse side of some or all stitches. Also known as 'Terry Fabric (Knitted)'. PlY (a) Of fm - A single thickness of material in a lay or seam. The number of plies in an assembly is the number of 195

SP:45-1988

material thickness. (b) Of thread - An individual yarn in a thread. The number of plies in a thread is the number of yarns which are twisted together to form the thread. the same of twisting together two or more single length maintained under the same tension.

Plying Pocket

- The-operation

yarns of

or decorative use formed by the - A bag for practical inserting or attachment of material to a garment. Pockets may have flaps, jettings or welts.
Pocketing Cloth - A stout cotton cloth used for making the pockets in men's wear. A softer material is used for the same purpose in women's and children's wear. Pocketing materials include drill, satin etc. Point Line - A small size 3-strand manila or sisal line used for seizings, lashings, etc. Seaming Splicing

Point Point

-See

'Linking'.

Also known

- High splicing above heel diverging from a point. as 'Taper Splicing'.
Seaming - &

Point-to-Point Polka Polo Rib - a

'Linking'. Stitch'.

`Full Cardigan

Shirt - A type of sports shirt with crew neck and short sleeves, usually of solid colour with rib trimmings of contrasting colour around the neckline and at the sleeve ends; generally worn by polo players. Polyaarbamide Constitution: Linear macromolecules having in the chain, the recurring functional group: -NH-CO-NHExample:

Polymethylene

urea:

-[ (CHz)m-NH-CO-NH
Polyester

IP

Constitution : Linear macromolecules comprising at least 85 percent (by mass) in the chain of an ester of a diol and terephthalic acid. Example:

Polyethylene terephthalate:
-[OCoCOO-CHrCHr0 L-

196

SP:45-1988

Polyethylene

Unsubstituted aliphatic saturated hydrocarbon linear macromolecule. It forms part of the class of polyolefins.
Constitution: Example:

Polyethylene:
-( CHz-CHA-

Polyethylene Extrusion Coated Fabric - Jute fabric extrusion coated with polyethylene to a thickness of 250 to 300 gauge used for packing industrial raw materials, hygroscopic fertilizers, etc. Polyethylene-Lined Hessian - Hessian laminated or reinforced with . any particular end use.

polyethylene for
Polypropylene

Aliphatic saturated hydrocarbon linear macromolecule, where one carbon atom in two carries a methyl side chain, generally in an isotactic disposition and without further substitution.
Constitution:

Note - It forms part of the class of polyolefins.
Example:

Polypropylene:
-( CHrCHz)pLH3

a,

Polyurethane Constitution: Linear macromolecules composed the recurring functional group: -O-CO-NHExample:

of chains with

Polymethylene

dicarbamate:
Olr-

-NH[(CH&i-NH-CO-O(CHz)r

- Originally a Chinese silk cloth, tan or ecru in colour and very light in wieght. Tussah silk is used and the fabric is woven on hand-looms. The term 'Pongee' is stated to have been derived from, the Chinese word 'Punki' which means woven at home on one's own handloom. Pongee - A plain weave fabric with high warp sett, with characteristic series of fine ribs running across the cloth from selvedge to selvedge; generally used as shirting and dress goods. Poplin Porosity material - The ratio of plus

within the

the volume of air or void contained boundaries of a material to the total volume (solid
air or void) expressed as a percentage.

197

SP:45-1988

-Porosity, Geometric - The percentage of aperture to total canopy area in a ribbon, ring slot or similar design of parachute. Porter (a) Fabric - The value obtained by counting in a jute fabric or jute product as marketed, the number of warp threads per full gauge length of 47 mm (or 37/20 in.) and dividing it by the number of threads per split. (2 For hessian, 4 for double warp plain fabric and 6 for double warp twill cloth). (b) Reed Post-Boarding - Number of groups after of 20 splits over dyei.ng 94 cm (37 in.). durable set.

.. Boarding

to confer

Potato Bag A double-warp hemmed plain weave sacking bag measuring aF.rlut91. 5 X 81 cm (normally with 25. 5 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm) i.nd weighing approximately 454 g. Potting - A finishing process applied mainly tCJ wooilen fabrics. The dyed fabric (which may have been crabbed) is batched on a roller which is then ~immersed in water. The temperature of the liquor and the duration of treatment depend on the effect desired. The fabric is cooled on the roller and rebatched end for end, and ,the process is repeated. The fabric is wound off the roller and dried, Power Stretcher - A device used in the laying of textile floor coverings to achieve a suitable tension; this tension is brought about by a lever placed between the two ends of the device, one taking the stress from a fixed point, the other being held in the backing by pins. Power Transmission Rope - A 3 or 4strand rope, usually cotton and sometimes of manila or sisal yWXi, used on attached to shafts for transmission of power. Pre-Shrunk - & 'Antishrink Fabric'. made of pulleys

Pre-.-Beaming - The primary withdrawn from warp creel, on a warper's beam.

operation of warp making in which ends evenly spread in sher3t form are wound

Pre-Boarding, Pre-Setting -- The operation of boarding carried out on garments or stockings usually before they are scoured and dyed. Note - Woven or warp-knitted articles are usually made from fabric that has been pre-set by either moist steam or dry heat according to established methods for stabilizing the fabric,and finished goods made from set fabric do not need to be pre-boar-ded. On th other k&arid,hosiery made from knitted fabric which has not bee.1 P stabilized or fashioned depends to great extent on the pre-boarding operation for conferring on them their final shape and ability to resist permanent creasing in' such treatments as dyeing.

!%:45-1988

Pre-boarding is confined mainly-to fabrics or articles made from synthetic-polymer yarns (e.g., nylon) and is done by submitting them to the action of steam under pressure or dry heat so that they acquire the desired shape. In addition to removing the stretch imposed,on the yarns during manufacture, the treatment stabilizes the dimensions of the articles so that they undergo no further change of shape during subsequent scouring and provided that. dyeing, these processes are carried out under conditions less severe than those used during the pre-boarding. In general practice, stockings are drawn over stainless steel..formers and subjected ~to wet steam at 1.75 kg/cm2 (or 25 lb/in.z) pressure for a pre-determined time. The lengthwise shrinkage of the stocking thereby produced is usually about 50 mm (or2 in.). Pre-Tension - The relatively low tension used to remove kinks and crimp when mounting a specimen preparatory to making a test and used to establiih the nominal gauge length.
~ ., s

Preconditioning - To bring a.sample or specimen to a relatively low moisture content [equilibrium in an atmosphere between 10 and 25 percent RH and not exceeding 50oC (a Note)] prior to conditioning in a controlled atmosphere for testing. (While preconditioning is frequently translated as predrying, specimens should not, in fact, be brought to the oven-dry state.) Note - These conditions may be obtained by heating air ht 65 percent RH and 27*C (the standard atmosphere) to a temperature up to 5ooc. Precrepfng (a) The embossing of a fabric containing crepe yarns with a design to influence the uniformity and fineness of the resultant crepe effect produced in subsequent treatment.
i

(b) See

'Crepe Embossing'. to slpinning, from carding to

Preparing the final

- The operations, prior drawing or roving stage. used to

Preservative - A compound mildew, bacteria etc.

inhib,it the growth'of.mould,

Presidents - A cotton warp and wool weft fabric in 5--thread satin weave on' the double cloth principle. Lower qualities with shoddy or mung0 in their composition are also.made and nap finished. Press-Off (Knitting) - The casting-off of the fabric from the needles by virtue of the fact that the supply of yarn has failed. Press-Off Stitch - & 'Float Stitch'.

Pressing - The removing or creating of creases or shape in materials by heat and/or steam and/or vacuum, or a combination of these 199

SP:4'5-1988

with pressure Pressure Boil with alkaline Pressure Mark fabric caused process. Pressure the body lungs. - Scouring liquors in of cellulose or their blended textiles closed vessels under pressure. lustre in finishing

- An impression or an area of greater during irregularties of pressure by

- A suit which is capable of exerting pressure on Suit in the an increase of pressure in order to counteract does not exert therefore in, pressure on

suit which Partial -. A pressure Pressure Suit, is limited, pressure on the whole of the body and the altitude/time protection it affords. Pressure Suit, Full - A pressure the whole of the body. suit which

exerts

Prick Stitch - A stitch made by passing the needle straight through the material at right angles to the surface, alternately from one side to the other. - Any one of the 3 hawser-laid (3-strand) Primary Rope the three of which, when twisted together, form a cable Primary Strand - A strand of the primary rope. rope, all laid rope.

Prince of Wales - Characteristic black check pattern, obtained by using a specific colour sequence in warp and weft. Woven in twill, Panama and plain. Worsted yarns are mainly used but woollen yarn may also be used for special articles. Printed Fabric - Fabric on which a colour with or without a definite repeat. pattern has been produced

Printing - The process of localized dyeing, producing designs of one or more clours on a fabric by meanns of roller, block, screen etc., using any of the printing styles such as direct, discharge, resist, transfer and spray. Profile Stitching - Sewing m 'Contour Stitching'). along a pre-determined profile (a

Progressive Bundle System - A production system in which bundles pass from one operator to the next with some work in hand at each operation. The operations are laid out in sequence with the required number of machines for approximate balance allocated to each. Progressive Line System - A production system in which single garments or parts are assembled. During assembly the parts are passed from one operator to the next resulting in some work in hand. Proof - Resistant to a specified agency, either by reason of physical structure or inherent chemical non-reactivity or arising from 200

SP:45-1988

a

treatment

designed

to

impart

the

desired

characteristics. to render

Proofed - Descriptive of material that has been treated to a specified agency. it resistant Proofed Fabric to rapid combustion.

(a) Fire - A fabric resistant (b)

Flame - A fabric resistant to the propagation of a flame the ,edges of the charred area produced by the beyond application of a test flame. Shower/Water Repellant - A fabric resistant to the abstime retaorption and penetration of water at the same ining a degree of permeability to air. .'A fabric resistant (glowing or smouldering) after of a test flame. to fl.ameless combustion withdrawal or extincticn

(cl

Cd) Smoulder

- A fabric highly resistant to absorption and Water penetration of water possessing a low dogree of permeability to air.

(f) (g)

Moth moth
&&

- A fabri.c resistant larvae. fabric resistant in soil or water. resistant

to the degradative degradative

action action

of of

- A bacteria

to the

(h;I) Mildew

- A fabric organisms.

to the action to make

of fungal

microto

Proofing .- A chemical water, fire, insects, Protein

treatment of fabric rot, moth, etc.

it resistant

consisting Constitution: A polymer, together by the peptide group:

of amino

acids

linked

Examples: Silk, wool and other arachin and zein etc.

animal

hair fibres,

casien,

'V' cut at Puff - A small -wedge of the same material sewn on to various positions in canvas or lining-making to accommodate a prominence, such as the shoulder bones. - The act of manually abstracting a sample of Pull (Sampling) fibres from a bulk lot of raw material or sliver with a view to length of fibre assessing the length and/or distributionof within the sample.. 201

SP:45-1988

Pull

Through

used for

Cord - A 6-strand flax, jute or man-made cleaning the bores of rifles.

fibre cord

Pulled Wool - Wool plucked from the pelts of slaughtered sheep with the aid of bacterial action (sweated wool) or by treatment with lime (lime wool) or with sodium sulphide (tannery wool). Also called plucked wool or fellmongered wool. All pulled wools show skin portions and root ends under microscope. (S_!z3&% 'Skin Wool', and 'Skin Pteces').
Pulled-Down Yarn - A yarn specially prepared in the spinning process so that the tufts it produces in a carpet contract in finishing to produce a relief pattern. Pulled-In Selvedge See

(f)

under

'Defective Selvedge'.

Pulled-In Weft - See 'Weft-Trail'.
Pulling (Rag) - The to a fibrous state.,

operation of reducing rags and thread waste removal of wool from skins.

Pulling, (Wool)
Pulling-Back Pullover

- The
-.&

Places

(2) under 'Bar'.

- A knitted outergarment with full sleeves, tight-fitty ing border at the bottom and without complete front-opening (M Fig. 61).

Punching (Wool Industry) - A winding operation to prepare four-end balls of sliver for the noble comb.
Puppa (Silk) - The resting stage in the life cycle of a lepidopteran insect (it is also called Chrysalis Stage).During this stage, replacement of larval organs by that of the adult is realized.
Pure Dye

Silk

-

Silk dyed but neither weighted nor adulterated.

Purl Fabric - A weft-knitted fabric in which some loops contained within the same wale are intermeshed in one direction and the other loops in the opposite direction. Also known as 'Pearl Fabric' or 'Links-Links Fabric'

FIG. 71

PURL FABRIC (1 X 1) 202

SP:45-1988

.

PUTTEE - An Indian, term for a narrow., woollen or cotton webbing with tapes attached to one ,'or %oth ends and used as a kind of gaiter wrapped around the calf. Quality fineness - Various attributes of wools which include primarily colour and soundness. and also uniformity, length,

term adopted by the Australian Wool Quality Number - A trade Board to indicate a series of numbers related to spinning ability wool principally by fibre fineness. of greasy and determined Queen's Cord (Knitting) - A two-bar warp-knitted construction made with full-set threading in both guide bars. The lapping movement of the back guide bar involves underlapping of 2,3 and 4 needle spaces while the front guide bar chains continuously on the same needle. Quilting - The production of a raised or padded effect by stitching or other means in two layers of material lined or interlined with wadding material. The stitching, etc. May be in or similar parallel rows or to a pattern. Quilting Twine - A 2-or 3-ply flax, cotton upholstery and bedding purposes. or hemp twine used for

Rabbit Eair - Fur removed from common rabbit, angora rabbit(Lepug . * caniculus), and the hair (Lepus europaeus and Ler, s timidu s). The fine fur fibres (undercoat) exhibit a typical 1adUder type medulla (see also 'Angora'). Rack (Racking) -& 'Shag (Shogging)'.

Radium - A firm, smooth, soft, closely woven fabric in plain weave. Usually it is tightly woven under high tension and is finished to produce a high lustre. Rag Pulling yield shoddy Ragged - Breaking or mungo. See up a (g) garment under into individual fibres to

Selvedge

'Defective

Selvedge'.

Raglan Sleeve - A sleeve with the armhole line extending from the front and back scye to the neck point so that the shoulder section is joined to the sleeve crown, eliminating the conventional shoulder and sleeve head seams. Rags - Cut pieces of cloth, arising during manufacture and packing, having length: (a) cm but less than 45 cm where 23 is one meter or more, and the normal course of

the width

of the fabric

(b) More than 23 cm but less than 65 cm the fabric is less than one metre.

where

the

width

of

Rass

(New)

-

The

waste

cloth, 203

whether

woven

or knitted,

i.e.

SP:45-1988

left after a garment has been cut out. The term also covers ends and discarded pattern bunches. Rags (Old) - Worn garments that have been raised, discarded. or napped

piece

Raised Fabric - A fabric with or with cut or uncut pile. Raised-Design Fabric - w

brushed

surface

'Relief Fabric'. bag measuring about and 31 picks/dm), and

Raisin Bag - A double-warp hemmed sacking 86 x 56` cm (normally with 25.5 ends/dm weighing approximately 454 g.

Raising - The production of a layer of protruding fibres on the surface of woven, knitted or felt fabrics,by brushing, teasing or rubbing.(& 'Napping' and 'Brushing'). Rambouillet - French merino sheep and its wool.

Ramie - A soft fibre obtained from the bark of the ramie plant, Boehmeria nivea and B.Tenacisslma belonging to the nettle family. The fibres are from 10 to 100 cm in length, white in colour, very strong and durable and have silky lustre. It is still being used in the manufacture of fabrics for dress goods, sports clothes, table cloths, etc.
Rams -

Wool

from - A

rams. Often form of

contains

a

strong

odour.

Random

Dyeing

space dyeing. because it can be final fabric. used to produce

It is so called Note random colouration in the

Rapid Fast Dye - A suitable mixture of selected stabilised antidiazotate and selected azoic coupling component (naphthol). Rapidazole Dye - A suitable mixture of inactive stabilised diazo compound such as diazosulphonate or diazosulphonic acid or diazosulphite, and a suitable azoic coupling component (naphthol) applied by dissolving in an aqueous solution. Rapidogen Dye - A suitable mixture of stabilised diazoamino or diazoimino and a selected azoic coupling compound (fast salt) component (naphthol) applied by dissolving in an aqueous solution. Rappelling Rope climbers to come Ratch (a) The distance between the nips of the front and back rs in a roller drafting system. (Synonym of Reach). (b) A slight additional drafting of the yarn, which place towards the end of the mule draw. 204 rolletakes - A mountaineering rope used by (Mountaineering) down from steep and vertical pitches.

SP:45-1988

Rate of Dyeing - The rate at which a standard mass of dye is absorbed by a standard mass of substrate under specified conditions. It may be expre ssed quantitatively in several ways, such as the mass of dye absorbed in unit time,. the percentage absorbed in of dye unit time, or the time taken for the substrate to absorb a given fraction of the amount of dye that it will absorb at eqilibrium. Ratine - Originally a thick woollen cloth with a curled nap. This term or 'ratine' the past participle of the French verb ratinel; (meaning to cover with a curled nap), is also applied to a cloth, made from a variety of fibres, with a rough surface produced either by using a fancy yarn in a cloth to which a special finishing techique may or may not be applied or by using ordinary yarns in a cloth to which the special finish is applied. (See also 'Eponge'). Ratline - A~3-strand tarred hemp line used in ship rigging.

Raw silk - The silk reeled by drawing together the required number of filaments from cocoons; it contains its original gum or sericin. Raw Wool - Wool as shorn from the sheep or wool which is pulled, limed or ginned.and carded, contains varying amount of impurities like sand, grease, suint, vegetable matter, tags and dung. It is, therefore, purchased on the basis of either laboratory scoured yield or clean wool fibre content. Rawkiness - Unevenness in the piece gives the effect of streakiness. caused by uneven yarn, which

- A generic term for man-made fibres, monofilaments and -on continuous filaments composed of regenerated cellulose with less amounts of non-fibre forming material or without it. Rayon Spun Yarn - Yarn spun from rayon staple or cut rayon waste.

Rayon Staple directly or waste. Rayon rayon Rayon,
Rayon s

- Rayon fibres of spinnable length manufactured by cutting rayon tow. not include rayon This does

Tow - A multifilament strand suitable for staple or spinning directly into spun rayon Modified - ti 'Modified or Rayon'. u

cutting yarn.

into

Solution-Dyed

Spun-Dyed

'Pigmented

Yarn' .

Reach (a) a (a) under 'Ratch', and rest or

(b) The distance from the back heald to the back back roller of a loom (locally Ratch or Perry).

Reactive Dye - A dye that, under suitable conditions, is capable a covalent dyeto form of reacting chemically with a substrate substrate linkage. 205

SP:45-1988

Real Selvedge

- See

'Patent Selvedge'

and

'Selvedges'.

Realization Factor - A factor used for the calculation of breaking strength of ropes from the breaking strength of its component yarns. The realization factor varies with the construction and size of the rope. it is used when suitable testing Usually machine is not available. Rearing hatching Reclaimed 'mungo'. House - The house of eggs to formation Wool - Wool wherein silkworms of cocoons. from rags, known are reared from

recovered

as 'shoddy'

or

Recomber'i Noil - The (i.e., in recombing).

shorter

fibres

separated

in combing

tops

Recommended Allowance - The percentage that, in the calculation of commercial weight and of yarn linear density is added to the oven-dry weight with or without previous washing to remove natural or added oils and dressings. For such materials, the recommended allowance is arbitrarily chosen according to commercial practice and includes the moisture regain.It may also include the normal finish i.e. added to impart satisfactory textile qualities to the material. Recovered Wool - A vague term the usage of which is not recommended. It is used synonymously with reclaimed wool. Rectilinear Combing - Combing of worsted sliver by the use of straight combs wherein the tufts are presented to the combs intermittently by movements of the slivers into nipper jaws, which grip them firmly and release them after combing onto a pair of rollers. These rollers draw the tufts which are subsequently recombined automatically by overlapping them, the resultant combed sliver being continuous but uneven. Reduced Heel - A defective heel active needles forming the heel. made by reducing the number of

Reduced Vat Process or Leuco Vat Process - A method of dyeing in which the vat dye is first converted into soluble and substantive leuco form by reduction and then applied to textile material. Reduction Reed (a) A device consisting of a between two slats or baulks following purposes: (i) Separating (ii) Determining number of wires closely set which may serve any or all the Clearing - m 'Clearing'.

the warp threads, the spacing 206 of the warp threads,

(iii) Guiding the shuttle, and (iv) Beating up the ~weft. (b) Jute - The fibre coming from one jute plant, held together as a unit by the,meshy structure of the fibre system;and (c) To draw ends through a reed.
Reed Reed (Fibre) Length &

under

'Jute

Fibre Characteristics'.

- The average length of jute fibre strands. (See al,cso

under 'Jute
Reed Mark

Fibre Characteristics').

by

a

- A pronounced warp-way crack in a woven fabric caused damage or defective reed (see also 'Crack').

FIG. 72
Reed Number

REED MARK

have been dents/cm.

- The number of dents per unit width of reed. There many units in common use. The recommended SI unit is

Reed Tapering *Reed Thickness Reeling Regain -

(Fibre)

-

See under - &

'Jute Fibre Characteristics'.

(Fibre)

under 'Jute Fibre Characteristics'. silk filament from the cocoon.

- The process of winding See

'Moisture

Regain'. wool. The use

Regenerated

Wool

- A vague term

of this

term is

indicating reused not recommended,

Reinforcement

- Strengthen&g of any portion of the knitted garment which is subjected to harsher wear either by splicing or by sewing or affixing other material. -

Reediness

Fine

cracks

between groups of warp ends'appearing 207

X=:45-1988

Iniformly across the cloth. Principal Causes L Faulty timing and- setting of the loom, faulty denting in the reed, unevenly manufactured reed, etc.
`1

FIG. 73

REEDINESS

Relative Humidity - The ratio of the actual pressure of the'water vapour in the atmosphere to the saturation vapour pressure at the The ratio is usually expressed as a percentage same temperature. (see also 'Absolute Humidity' Relaxation materials. The releasing of strains and stresses in textile

Relief Fabric - A compound or double fabric with a figured blistbr raised effect; usually produced on a rib jacquard machine. The ground yarn is knitted on all or alternate needles in one set and on selected needles in the other set. This takes place not more frequently than every third course. The patterning yarn (or ybrns) is knitted on selected needles of the second set to give a preponderance of loops of the patterning yarn on the face side of the fabric. Also known as 'Blister Fabric', 'Bourrelet Fabric', 'Ottoman Rib Fabric', 'Held-Loop Fabric', 'Cloque Fabric', 'Ripple Fabric' and 'Roll--WeltFabric'. 'Raised-Design Fabric', Remanufactured Wool - Reused wool. However, the use of this term is not recommended as it is vague and is often confused with reprocessed'wool.
Remnants -

Fents

Renditta -.The number of kgs of cocoons required to yield 1 kg of raw silk. The co'coons yield is expressed in terms of renditta. Example: If 18 kg of cocoons give 1 yield is said to be 18 renditta. kg of raw silk, the

208

SP:45-1988

or Repp - A plain-weave fabric with a prominently weftway-rib effect, made from two warps and two wefts. Both the warp and the weft threads are arranged alternately coarse and fine. Coarse ends are raised above coarse picks and fine ends above fine picks, the rib effect being accentuated by different tensions in the warps. Rep

Note - Less expensive fabrics are now warp and one weft but with the general
Repco
&PPing

often made with one ribbed effect.

- &

'Self-Twisted Yarn Production'. in a fabric in which a prominent weftways rib

A bar is evident.

Reprocessed Wool - Wool recovered from processed but unused materials e.g., remnants, tailors' clipping waste, soft waste and hard waste. Note 1 - This term should not be confused with 'reused wool' or 'remanufactured wool'.
No*e 2 - Pulled wool is also reffered to as reprocessed wool. This usage is not recommended.

Reresling - The process of winding yarn reeled on small reels on to standard reel (150 cm) to make hanks for marketing. &rrcue Line - A 3-strand hawser-laid rope used for rescue work.
NESHAM -

hemp

or ala

man-made fibre 'Raw Silk').

Indian name

for natural

silk (gee

Residual Shrinkage - The potential shrinkage remaining in a fibre, yarn or fabric after treatment designed to reduce or ,eliminate that shrinkage. Residuals - Small amounts of dirt and fatty matter remaining in washed samples, and measured as part of the standard method for determining yield or wool base. Resili&ce - The property of a material by virtue of which it is able to return to the original state from its deformed state. Resist Dyeing -or Printing - A substance applied to a substrate to prevent the uptake or fixation of dye during a subsequent operation. Resist Style - Style of printing in which undyed material is printed with suitable compounds to give on subsequent dyeing a white pattern on a coloured ground, or a pattern of contrasting colours to the ground by incorporating suitable dyes of colour-preducing substances in the resist print paste.
Resist

Yarn

- Yarn, that has been treated to resist the action of

dyestuffs. 209

SP:45-1988

Restraining
-

Agent

- A

reduces the
Retarding

rate of

product which, when added equilibrium exhaustion.

to a dyebath,

Agent - A product which, when added to a dyebath, reduces the rate of dyeing but does not affect the final exhaustion.

Retting

- The treatment on the crop to make the bast fibre strands more easily separable from the woody part(stick) of the stem by immersing the plants in water which sets up certain chemical and biological changes to help the process.

Reused Wool - Wool reclaimed from used garments, e.g., shoddy and mungo extract. This term excludes soft waste and,hard wastes. Reverse-Plating - In plain-plated fabrics, reversal of the yarn positions within certain stitches so that the opposite yarn appears on the face of the fabric.

Reversed Weave Fabric - A type of fabric where double weft and single warp is used, the warp is usually heavier than the weft.
Rib Fabric - A fabric whose surface consists of warpway (weft rib) or weftway (warp rib) raised lines or ridges.

(a)

&rr, rib - A fabric with ribs running in the direction of weft due to the weft being coarser than the warp or due to two or more picks being put in the same shed. In warp rib, there are usually three to four times as many ends as picks per unit length so that the weft is completely covered. Weft'rib - An effect produced by the use of a weft cover approximately twice the warp cover, the weft being made to bend around the warp, which remains substantially straight. This leads to the formation of rounded weftfaced cords running down the cloth. The prominence of the cords can be accentuated (i) by using a coarser warp than weft; and (ii) by weaving two or more ends at once.

(b)

Rib Fabric

(Knitted) (1 x 1) - A weft-knitted fabric made on two sets of needles in which all the loops of alternate wales are intermeshed in one direction and all the loops of the other wales knitted at the same courses are intermeshed in the other direction.

FIh. 74

RIB FABRIC (KNITTED) 210

SP:45-1988

Rib Fabric (Knitted) (2 x 2) - A weft-knitted fabric made on two sets of needles in which all the loops of alternate pairs of wales are intermeshed in one direction and all the loops of the other pairs of wales knitted at the same courses are intermeshed in the other direction . Also known as 'Corduroy (Knitted)' and 'Swiss Rib".

FIG. 75

RIB FABRIC (KNITTED) (2 x 2)

Reversibles - Fabrics on which the pattern appears on both sides of the cloth, so that either side can be used. Examples include reversible shawls, blankets or hosiery. Rib Stitch - A primary weft-knitting stitch made on two sets of needles (gee alga 'Rib Fabric (Knitted) (1 x 1)' and 'Rib Fabric (Knitted) (2 x 2)'). Rib Top rib. (Ribbed Top) - Top (of socks or stockings) made in 1 x 1

Ribbed Satin - A ribbed fabric, such as 'bengaline' or 'faille' woven with a satin face, the ribs giving a broken, lustrous surface to the face of the fabric. This fabric may be given a moire finish. Ribbon (Cut or Slit) - A fabric 30 cm or less in width made by cutting wider fabrics to a desired width. Ribbon, Textile - A fine-textured, narrow fabric which weighs less than 5.25 kg/100 metres per dm of width approximately 510 g/m2 and which is used primarily for trimming or decorative purposes. Note wide. Usually ribbons are woven fabric less than 100 mm

Ribbon Width (Cotton) - The width of the broadest part of a fibre between two successive convolutions:

Uu3ing

-

j&

'Cuttle'.

211

SP:45-1988

Rigging

Line - Any cord attached to the canopy which transmits the drag of the parachute to the load. -

'Rigolette

A

light-weight

knitted

scarf

worn

by ladies as

head-covering. Ring (Knitting) - A fault in a circular-knitted fabric appearing as a light or dark stripe and arising from differences in (a) lustre, (b) dyeing affinity (or unlevel dyeing), (c) yarn spacing or loop length, or (d) yarn count; or from defective plating.
Ring - A system of spinning on a ring frame in which Spinning drafting of the roving, twisting of the yarn and winding it on the bobbins takes place simultaneously and continuously (see alscz 'Mule Spinning').

Rings (Raw Silk) - Places where a length of raw silk thread has, in reeling, been inadvertently'wound in the form of ring instead of in its usual cross form, due to thread having escaped from the traversing guide of the reeling machine. Rings increase waste in winding.
- A braid having zig zig appearBraid, Vandyke Braid ance 'with the almost serrated effect on both edges. This effect is produced by applying different tension to the individual threads in the prociess of manufacture. Ric-Rat Rip ,Cord (Aerostat) -

A

cord for tearing open the rip panel.

Rip Cord (Parachute) - A cord or flexible cable on a parachute which, when pulled, opens the pack and allows the parac'hute to deploy. Ripple Fabric - A fabric made from coarse woollen yarns. The face is raised and finished so as to give the fabric a rippled or wavy appearance usually used for dressing gowns.(See also 'Relief Fabric'). - An extension of the rigging lines into strop.

Riser

of a

parachute formed Also known

RN Vest

- Vest with round as 'Sandow'

neck and

without sleeves.

Note - These vests are made either with narrow shoulder straps (cross-cut) or with broad shoulder straps (shape-cut).

FIG. 76

-____llIYf!l
RN VEST 212

SP:45-1988

Rod Hats

-&

(j)

under 'Mats'. neck and with short sleeves.

RNS Vest

- Vest

with round

FIG. 77
Robust -

RNS VEST

A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate thick well-grown sound staples of wool.

Rocket Line - A buoyant hemp or man-made fibre rope used for attachment to a rocket for sea rescue work. Roll Welt - A welt produced on rib machine by'knitting on one set of needles for a, few courses (generally not exceeding 4) and non-knitting on the other set of the needles while they retain their old loops. This is followed by knitting on both sets of needles together on rib basis. This gives a roll effect on one side of the fabric. Also known as 'English Welt'. Boll Welt Fabric h 'Relief Fabric'.

Rolled - A term used the jute fabric; it
Rolled Seam

for describing an aspect of make-up of describes a jute.fabric made into a roll. to be

- A seam where the two edges of the material joined are rolled together ,and secured by a single row of stitching.

Eolled
I$&ed

Selvedge
Threads

-

&

(b)

under

'Defective Selvedge'.

'fabrics where in 'DOSUTI'.

- Oveririding of contiguous threads in case of double drawn ends 'or double picks are used; e.g.,

Boiler Printing - This is a fast and continuous method of registration of variety of colours using engraved copper rollers. Bolls (Sliver) - Sliver wound into form of a roll at the delivery of a carding or a drawing machine by roll formers.
Romaine Crepe - A

having slightly

light-weight, plain-woven, dull lustre.
- &

heavy sheer fabric

Roofing Felt (Jute-Based)
hots (Jute)

'Bitumen

Felt'.

strand. -(&

- The hard, barky portions at the lower end of jute under 'Jute Fibre Characteristics'). 213

SP:45-1988

yarn twisted from fibres and f_ormed Rope -. A flexible, continuous into strands and thereafter these strands are laid into rope balanced to 4 mm diameter, structurally greater than usually maintain compacted form. Rope Gauge -- An instrument used rope and diameter of the
_ .

for measuring

the circumference

FIG.

70

ROPE GAUGE

Rope Marks (Running Marks) - Long crease, marks :in dyed or finished goods running approximately in the warp direction. They are caused during wet processing in the rope form and may be the result of (a! the formation of creases along which abrasion or felting may occur, penetrati&i or circulation of the processing imperfect or (b) liquors. Roping Twine - A 3--ply hemp, jute or flax twine used and for sewing rope to canvas. the fibre r(Jpe ends Roping Yarn - .Ses (j) under 'Coir Yarn'. for whipping

pressing medium of heavy woollen Rotary Pressing -- Continuously or worsted fabrics between a steam heated rotating metal roller and concave static metal bed at a high pre ssure and temperature. Rotary rotary Screen metal Printing -- A continuous method of printing s c r e c ri s generally made from nickel. 'Sand Bag'. applied to neck--opening designed, cut
Or

using

Rotproofed

Hessi.an -- Sa

Round Neck '- A term finished in round shape. Rounding Rove

- C~>nctemned cordage

of size

less

than

102

mm.

(or Roving)
f al

.- A continuous) slightly twisted strand G.er:neral yarn produced on a roving frame and from which or

of fibres is spun;

(b) Wool from

--A continuous strand of fihres with no twist, made the web produced on condenser card 'by splitting the 214

SP:45-1988

web into a number by rubbing.

of parts

and then condensing

each part

used either Roving Courses - Additional courses as protective courses or to facilitate handling in subsequent operations in the manufacture of knitted articles. These courses are afterwards removed. Royal Rib - & 'Half Cardigan Stitch'.

Rubberized Fabric/Cloth - Cotton, silk or man-made fibre fabric which has been given a waterproof treatment to be used for some definite purpose, such as table covering or sheeting. Generally one side of the cloth is coated. Much of the cloth is used in raincoat fabric. Ruffling A form of gathering. heavy fabric used for floor coverings

Rug - A piece and blankets.

of thick,

Rug Blankets - Either all wool, woollen spun warp and weft, type of travelling rugs or cotton warp and woollen weft type of The wool blankets generally in twill weaves and bold checks. fibre used is cheviot and coarse cross-bred type. These rugs may also be made from shoddy. Rug Wool - A wool yarn, generally woollen--spun, the single thread before plying being not finer Corridor Rug, in any required Floor Rug, small size. - Carpetting length greater A collective traditionally than 2 m. term for twisted six-fold, than 350 tex. and of

0.7 to 1 m wide

pile floor coverings

Rug, Sofa - Carpetting lengths. Rugged Selvedge - See

traditionally

1

to 2

m wide,

in varying

(g) under

'Defective

Selvedge'. as number

Runnage -- Unit of linear density for coir yarn expressed of metres per kilogram or yards per pound.

Runner (Floor Covering) - A textile floor covering used for covering, along the length and part of width, floors of corridors and stairs. Runners (Jute) - The hard barky jute strand running from its to the middle or sometimes up to the tip of the fibre. lower end This is due to incomplete retting. Running Running through Mark - m 'Rope Mark'

Stitch - A continuous stitch formed by passing the thread from top to underside and vice material alternately the 215

SP:45-1988

versa.
Running-on - The operation of 'placing a series of loops into points or needles preparatory to further knitting or to joining fabrics together by linking.

Rust Stain S-Lay - & &

- &

(g) under

'Stains'.

'Direction of Lay'. 'Twist'

S-Twist

s/P Ratio - The ratio of the number of secondary follicles in skin to the number of primary follicles. The latter are formed early in the embryonic life of the lamb and produce fibres 10-20 percent coarser than those produced by the-secondary folBicles of the sheep. Sacking - A general term applied to double warp coarse fabrics either in plain or twill weave used chiefly for the making of bags or sacks. They are often made of jute or hemp, with coarse yarns having count from 240 tex upwards and the threads per centimetre may very from 2 to over 12. Sacking Bag - A sack tailored from coarse jute fabric with either one side opening or a valve. device fitted at one corner for filling, storing and conveying the goods. Safe Working Load - The maximum working load which can be applied to rope consistent with the factor of safety recommended for the conditions under which the rope is to be used. Safety Factor - The factor by which the breaking load of the rope must be divided in order to determine its safe working load. Safety Line - A high quality 3-strand hawser-laid rope used for safety purposes by personnel engaged in dangerous work.
Safety Net - A net made from high quality natural or man-made fibre cords used for safety purposes by personnel engaged in dangerous work.

Safety Stitch - A stitch formed by an overedge stitch reinforced by a chain stitch (or sometimes lock stitch) further in from the material edge.
Safety Thread

to make

- A breakable a safety tie.

thread

of

specified

strength used parts of a

Safety Tie - A breakable tie connecting any two parachute system to prevent accidental release. Sagathies - A worsted weft, usually with a Salt Bag - A

fabric made from undyed 2- and- 2 twill weave. weave bag 216

warp

and dyed X 66

double-warp plain

measuring 114.5

SP:45-1988

and weighing approximately 795 CItl normally 51 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm.
Salt Sensitivity

g,

the

sacking cloth has

(a) JJI Dyeing - The extent to which the dyeing properties of dye are affected by the addition of a neutral electrolyte.
(b) Of Dyed Fabric - The susceptibility to colour change of a dyed material when it is spotted with aqueous solutions electrolytes. of neutral Sand Bag - A bag made from hessian fabric measuring about 84 x 36 cm and weighing approximately 170 g (unproofed) and 190 g (proofed) (m IS:9685-1981). Sand Bag Cloth - Hessian fabric having 38 ends/dm and weighing approximately 245 g/m2 [ M IS:2818 Sandow - & 'RN Vest'. from the perennial plant Ceylon and Africa. India, of grease; Sansevieria consequently and 39 picks/dm (Part 6)-19771.

'

Sansevieria - Leaf fibre and is grown in Arabia, Sappy Wool --Wool the yield of such

containing abundance wool is low. composed of

Saran - A man-made fibre chloride. and vinyl

copolymers

of vinylidene

fibre or blends SAREE (or SARI) - Cotton, silk, wool, man-made ladies popular in India. It is woven or thereof, dress wear.for (PALLU) in 4.5, knitted, generally characterized by cross border 5.5, 6.5 and 8.5 m lengths. Gold and silver threads are also used for borders or for designs in the body of material. The sarees are according to the place of distinguished by different names production, design, etc. - A ribbon constructed entirely in plain weave of Sarsnet Ribbon very fine warp and weft and with higher density, the weft density being higher than that of the warp. Note Sase (or --A true sarsnet Sases) Yarn is made wholly of silk warp.

- Spun

rayon yarn

made of viscose staple

of different count. Sash Cord - A braided cotton sash windows in buildings. or man-made fibre cord used on

Sateen - A fabric with a lustrous surface, obtained by a sateen weave with lower warp sett and higher weft sett.
"Sateen, Duck - A weft-face heavy fabric with sateen weave, mainly used for suitings.

217

SP:45-1988

obtained Satin - A fabric with a lustrous surface, weave with higher warp sett and lower weft sett.

by a satin

-- A two-guide bar Satin (Knitted) warp-knitted fabric in which the frontbar underlaps are arranged with a view to produce a smooth surface. Typical front-bar laps are /l-0/3-4/or/i-0/4-5/ and back-bar laps are /l-0/1-2/ Satin Damask - See 'Damask'.

Satin, Double Faced - A silk fabric employing two sets of warp face on both yarn and one set of weft' so as to present a satin sides. Both warps interlace with the weft. Satin--Back Crepe Satin--Backed __. s.cs 'Crepe-Back A Satin'. 'velvet' with satin weave.

Velvet

lustrous

covering woven size floor SATRANJI -- An Indian term for a large yarn with or without designs [See also from coarse, dyed cotton 'DURRIE (or DURRY)']. Saturat%on/Purity/Intensity/Chroma of a Colour - That attribute of chromatic colours which determines its degree of difference from a grey of the same brilliance. Saxony Cloth - Woollen wool, with of fine structure. Saxony merino Woollen wool. Yarn textures, made from Saxony or merino quality a smooth surface,soft handle and compact

--A typical

woollen

spun yarn made

from fine

Scalloped

Selvedge

-

$se

(h)

under

'Defective

Selvedge'.

Scarf .-A square, rectangular or a triangular piece of woven or knitted fabric made generally from wool,silk or man-made fibres. It is generally worn by children, ladies and men on the neck or head. Schappe stock which process. Spun silk yarn,particularly that which is made from has been partly degummed by the schapping or maceration

Note - Such a fermentation process entirely and hence schappe contains gum. Scotch Finish fabrics. - A closeiy shorn nep

does not remove the gum up to 10 to 12 percent of

finish

on

heavy

woollen

; Storage of Yarn (Coir) - A number indicating the fineness or the coir coarseness of yarn which is obtained by dividing the number of strands that could be laid very close to each other without overlapping in a length of 0.914 m (or 1 yd) by 20.

218

SP:45-1988

Scoured proteins

Fabric and added

from natural waxes, E'abric which is freed sizing materials by chemical treatments.

- Treatment of textile materials in aqueous or other Scouring proteins and fats, waxes, solutions in order to remove natural oil and other impurities. as dirt, as well other consituents, fibrs used or man-made Scrambling Net - A net made from natural to assist in rescue work and boarding of a ship side on the operations. Screen Printing - The production of a coloured design on a of a colourant by forcing printing substrate by the application paste or ink through the unblocked areas of a thin gauge screen in the substrate during printing. contact with Scrim - A plain weave open mesh, light-weight fabric weighing less than 240 g/m2. It is used in the manufacture of bags for large to make to tarred brown payer size light articles. It is fixed and used as tobacco shade cloth. The lighter waterproof packing; varieties are also used for the manufacture of underfelt. - It is a 50 mm or 75 mm hessian strip stitched Scrim Garnishing on both the sides with sewing thread made from plain weave medium weight hessian fabric weighing not less than 305 g/mx. It is used for camouflaging purposes by defence. The hessian is also dyed or grass green shade or light green either in mild-bronze shade shade or dark brown shade (see also 'Camouflage Garnishing Strips' and 'Camouflage Scrim Kessian') usually associated with Scroop, Stropping - A finishing process to cellulosic ,fibres, yarns or fabrics to silk but also given relative to dynamic friction give high.coefficient of static in a high-pitched sound when the material coefficient which results chain fatty is compressed normally due to the presence of a long component and a crystalline organic acid, (e.g. soap and tartaric acid). Sculptured Scutching (a) %z:onhasAn operation in preparing cotton for spinning three objects, namely, to reduce the cotton condition by beating it, removal of to loose open remaining in impurities the cotton after opening, and the formation of a continuous lap or web of cotton wound on to a rod for use on carding machine. Pile - $s_s (e) under 'Pile'.

(b) A cleaning operation given to bast fibres like flax and they have been retted, to separate the hemp, after fibres from the woody portion of the stalk. Seam - A sea4 is a joint consisting of a sequence of sewing stitches uniting two or more pieces of material and used for assembling parts in production of sewn items. 219

SP: 45-1888

(a)

Counterlaid Seam - A seam in jute bag formed by the dait; edges of cloth turned outwards and sewn through four thicknesses of cloth. The bag is turned after sewing.

FIG. 79 (b) Flat Sm ti

COUNTERLAID SEAM `Seam, Splag Seam'.

-- A se.am in jute bag formed by the two (c 1 &ld-owx_Ssam edges of cloth folded. over and then sewn through four thicknesses of cloth. The bag ,is used,without turning after sewing.

FIG. 80 (d)

FOLD-OVER SEAM

&W&JU - A seam in jute bag formed by turning over the selcedges of cloth once and sewn through two thfcknesses of cloth while the raw edges may be turned'.twice and sewn (union stitch) through three or six thicknesses so form&J.

A ( :?n Sehkdges )

B ( On Raw

Edgw

)

FIG. 81 (e)

HEMMING

em - A seam in jute bag formed by the cloth edges turned in and the sewing (lock stitch or un%on stitch) is done through four thicknesses of cloth.

FIG. 82 (f)
on

LAID IN OR `M' SEAM

Ce&,, R er-Edae ti Ed= - A seam in jute bags formed by turning in the raw edges and sewn with overhead Or Herakle machines, using heavy twines through four thicknesses of cloth. The bag is used without

220

turning.

FIG.

83

OVER-EDGE

SEAM ON RAW EDGES

(g) Over-Edge Seam on Selvew - A seam in jute bag formed heavy twine and with overhead or Herakle machines using sewn through two thicknesses of cloth with selvedges. The bag is used without turning after sewing.

FIG. (h) gveria?p

84 Seau

OVER-EDGE &

SEAM ON SELVEDGES (Fold-over Seam)'.

'Seam

(j) Plain Seam - A seam in jute bag formed by sewing (union of cloth. The bag is stitch) through ,two thicknesses turned after sewing,

FIG.

85

PLAIN

SEAM

(k) afety Seam .- A seam with a second inner line of stitching (union or lock stitch) over and above the outer overhead or herakle sewing,

FIG.

86

SAFETY

SEAM

(1)

S&w

Smm

'(i) On Selvw - The'two selvedges are laid together, one edge projecting about 1.5 cm more than the other and then lock stitched through two folds of cloth. The protruding cloth is then turned over and stitched cloth. The bag is then through two thicknesses of 221

SP: 4!5-1988

turned after sewing. the heavy bags.

This

type

of

seam

is used

in

* FIG. 87 SPLAY SEAM ON SELVEDGES

(ii) On Edges - Similar to splay seam on selvedges but the cloth is sewn (lock stitch) at first through two or three folds and then folds. The bag through three sewing. is then turned after

*

FIG. (m) Turn-Over Scye - The armhole.

88

SPLAY - See

SEAM ON RAW EDGES 'Seam (Fold-Over Seam)'

SCM

Sealing Twine - A Z-ply hemp, cotton or flax twine nction with lead seals for security purposes.

used

in conju-

amount of material Seam Allowance (Seam Margin) - A'pre-determined between the edge of component parts of the garment and. the seam line. fine texture, usually Seam Binding - A woven narrow fabric of .of cotton or rayon, in plain weave and with cross grain selvedges, seams or edges and intended for use in covering or strengthening lea to 211 cm. in clothing. The widths range from Seam out Bursting as an Pressure open seams, often carried (Seam Opening) operation during garment assembly. intermediate stress usually due to

Seam Grin (Gr;inning) .- Gaping of seam under sewing. inadequate,,+thread tension at

mark in the cloth, Seam Mark - A particular form of pressure produced by the thickness' of a seam during bleaching, dyeing, printing or finshing process. Seam Pucker (Pucker) - Generally the line of stitching. Seam seam unwanted material waviness along

Slippage - The movement of warp line under transverse stress.

and weft

threads

away

from

a

Seamcovering - A process where the seams already produced are reinforced by sewing to give them a good cover, flatten them, and provide a good appearance. There are two rows of needle stitches and on the parallel to the seam on the outside of the garment 222

SP:45-1988

inside there is a soft heavy looper thread which crosses the seam connecting the two lines of needle stitches .

1

J,l_l

4

FIG. 89 Seamed Welt - &
Seaming Seaming -

SEAMCOVERING

'Hem'. together the component parts of a garment.

Joining

Twine

- A Z- or 3-ply hemp,

used for
Seamless Seamless

sewing canvas
Fabric Hosiery

and other

flax, or jute twine chiefly heavy fabrics. without seams.

- Tubular

knit fabric

- Hosiery-knitted in tubular form on a circular

machine.
Searing - A damage to rigging lines or fabric due to heat generated by friction. Seat - Part of trousers or similar garments covering the buttocks. SeatAngle - The quantity of material (6 cm to 8 cm) on the underside for better fitting.

allowed at

the seat
Sechoiring

- The technique of kill(Conditioning or Hot-airing) ing and drying the pupae in the cocoons by subjecting the cocoons to hot air of specific temperature in an enclosed chamber for required titie without damaging the quality of silk in the cocoons. Seconds - Textile products which owing to some fault or imperfec-

tion do
Section

not meet

an agreed

standard of

quality.

Hark - Bands or bars running lengthwise in a fabric at regular intervals in a part or full width of the fabric.

Principal

Cause

- Difference

in tension race of

of sections during

sectional warping.
Seed Cocoons - Cocoons for propagation. Seed Cotton

of pure

selected quality chosen

It is

- Raw cotton (including seeds) as removed from balls. also called 'KAPAS'.

Seed Hair

- Fibres growing from the surface of seeds or from the inner surfaces of fruit cases or pods. Such fibres (seed hairs)

223

SP:45-1988

are

formed

by

the

marked

elongation

of epidermal cells.

Note- - From a botanical aspect, cotton is a seed hair, since it is an outgrowth in the form of single cells from the epidermis or outer skin of cotton seeds. In this respect, cotton differs from fine vegetable fibres, which are composed of a number of plant cells, usually joined and cemented together to form a bundle and often occurring in the stems (e.g., flax) or leaves (e.g., sisal) of plants of shrubs. Nevertheless, in commerce and industry, it is customary to refer to cotton as a vegetable fibre. Calotropis (Akund) and Asclepias (Milkweed) are other examples of hairs growing on seeds, whereas Eriodendron '(Java Kapok) grows i3nthe inner surface and the placenta of seed pods. Seedy Wool
,

- Wool

containing a variety of grass seeds difficult
,

to remove.

Seersucker - A fabric characterised by the presence of puckered and relatively flat sections, particularly in stripes, but also in checks. ' Note - The effect may be produced in a variety of ways, e.g. (a) by weaving from two beams, with the ground ends tensioned and the ends for the puckered stripes woven at lower tension (b) by treatment of cellulosic fabrics, particularly linen and cotton, with caustic soda solution, which causes the treated parts to contract. Seine Net Rope

for securing

- A 3-strand manila, sisal or man-made and towing seine nets.

fibre rope

Seine Twine - A 3-ply soft hemp,cotton, flax or man-made fibre twine used in the construction of seine fishing nets. Self-acting Teaser
Self-Twist - &

'Willey, Wool'.

Yarn Production - A method of making a yarn from rovings fed to a drafting unit. The emerging strand of fibres is subjected to a false-twisting action, which can be imparted in a number of.ways. Two adjacent strands delivered from the false-twist spstem are brought together through a guiding means, and the twist energy in the two strands causes them to wrap around each other. This wrapping action is defined as self-twist and produces a self-twist pattern'of S-zero-Z-zero, stc, in the yarn produced. The self-twist yarn is then taken up on a package in cheese form. Self-twist yarn is also referred to as ST yarn or as Repco yarn. ( a')

Self-Twis% - The number of turns of self-twist in one twist zone of a self-twist yarn divided by the' length of that zone.

The length of two consecutive zones of (b) CYcleopposite twist in a self-twist yarn, Cc) Twirgf; --The minimum quantity in turns per metre

SP:45-1988

of unidirectional twist to produce required configuration in which the ply twist has become zero or unidirectional throughout.

a yarn either

Cd) Phasing

- A method of describing the relative positions (with reference to the twist zones) strands in a self-twist yarn.

linear of the

(e)

Strand Twist per Half Cycle - The number of turns of twist in the strand between two changeovers after the removal of self-twist. Self-Twist Twisted tSTT1 Yarn - A self-twist yarn to which unidirecctional twist has been added in a separate operation.

(f)

Selvage Doubling; Selvedge Turndown - A lengthways streak immediately adjacent to the selvedge characterized by a difference in colour from that of the body of the fabric, by surface disturbance, or both. Principal Cause - This defect is caused by the selvedge having folded over thus shielding the edge of the usable fabric during processing. Selvagee Selvd - Skein of Short form rope with another rope wound around it.

of 'selvedged'.

Selvedges - The longitudinal edges of a textile fabric formed in the component threads are interlaced to prevent such a way that them from unravelling or fraying Note - In jute industry, a selvedge is sometimes called 'RS' or 'Real Selvedge' to distinguish it from 'PS' or 'Patent 'Selvedge'. Selvedge Marks - More or less regular pressure body of the finished cloth along the selvedge. rrincipal Cause finishing operations. Selvedge Selvedged Selvedged Seaming - See Rolling or folding marks in the

of selvedges

during

'Cup Seaming'. forming the mouth Hosiery' of the bag.

Bag - A bag with selvedge Hosiery - &

'Fully-Fashioned Hessian treated

Semibr,ite Bessian fibres or chemically

made from fairly light coloured fibres so as to improve its colour.

Wiworsted-Spun - A term applied to yarn spun from sliver produced by carding and gilling in which the fibres are substantially or combed. parallel, the carded sliver not having been condensed Alternatively, a roving produced from such a sliver may be used. 225

SP:45-1988

Sennit

-

Braid formed

by plaiting strands of the rope together.

Course -'A slack course of knitted loops separating one garment or garment part from another which on removal permits the separation of articles that are knitted in a sucGession of units connected together. Separating courses may be cut, ravelled, or dissolved, and several such courses may be made consecutively. Separating Serge - A medium-coarse, textured twill weave fabric made from worsted or woollen-spun yarns, usually spun from merino or cross-bred wools or their blends with other fibres and given a clear fiinish, Serge Battle Dress - A water-repellant, heavy cross-bred wool 2-and-2 twill fabric made from worsted warp and woollen weft in khaki drab mixture shade in clear finish. Blue for Naval Ratings - All wool fabric, woven in 2/2

Serge

twill weave with worsted spun warp
Serg&

and woollen

spun weft.

Blue Grey No. 2 - Cross-bred wool fabric woven in 2/2 twill weave with worsted spun warp and woollen spun weft. It is used,mainly for the manufacture of uniforms for airmen. Serge Blue No.1 - A 2-and-2 twill weave merino wool serge dyed in and woven from fine worsted-spun yarns.

blue shade
.Serge,

White, Lining - Cross-bred wool or wool blended undyed fabric, woven in 2-and-2 twill weave from worsted spun yarns and given a milled and raised finish.

- 64s quality all wool fabric Worsted, Dyed (Superior) spun on the worsted system into fine counts woven in 2/2 twill weave and given a clear cut finish. Serge, Sericin - &

Gum (Silk)'. and science of raising silkworms for the

Sericulture - The art production of cocoons.

Serving - Binding a splice or a length of rope with close turns of spun yarn. Each turn is hove taut with a special serving mallet. The rope,is usually wormed and parcelled before serving.
,-SERVING MALLET

--PARCELLING

FIG. 90
Serving Mallet

SERVING, PARCELLING AND WORMING used for serving a rope. It

- A wooden implement

226

SP:45-1988

has a score in its head long. (a Fig. 90) Serrations finer wools. The scales

to fit and a wooden

handle

about

38 mm

of wool

fibre; more

in evidence

on the

Serviette - A napkin made of ootton produced on dobby or jacquared. Set or Sett

or linen with figured

effect

(a) A term used to indicate the s,pacing of ends or picks,-or both per unit length, it is usually expressed as ends or picks per decimetre or centimetre, or (b) A synonym Set-In Setting Sleeve - A - & for 'count of reed'. is set 'Bar'. footwear closed by overlocking together with the raw into the scye.

sleeve which 2(a) under

on Place

- The toe of a knitted 'Sewed Toe rather than by linking. Sewing Cut edges turned - Sewing in. parts

of a garment

Sewing Round outer material

edges of a coat to join the - Sewing round the to the facing or,the facing and lining.

Sewing Thread - A variety of yarn, normally plied, character09 twisting and finishing with solid or ized by a combination semi-solid, wax-like materials to sequre a smooth, compact strand which is quite flexible but presents no loose fibres. Shade (n) - A common term loosely employed to describe broadly a shade, 2 percent shade, particular colour of depth, e.g., pale fashion shade. modifications in the Shade (v') - To bring about relatively small a further small amount colour of a substrate in dyeing by adding the object of matching- more accurately of dye, especially with with a given pattern. Shade Bar - h Shading - .%& (3) under *Listing' 'Bar'.

Shading (Carpet) - A permanent and localized change of appearance pile of a carpet due to changes in the direction (lie) of of the the pile. Shadow Welt Shaft Hold - % A 'After-welt'. band of floats across the full width of cloth.

227

SP:45-1988

Principal

Cause - Heald shafts held up or down due to defect
_

in shedding

motion.

Shafty - A trade term adopted by the Austrlian Wool Board to indicate wool well-grown, bold-stapled, and essentially of good length.
Shahtosh (Shahtush) - The finest animal hair of textile use having average fibre fineness of 10-12 micron (undercoat), derived from Ibex goat in Ladakh and Tibet. Used almost exclusively for production of the lightest, softest and expensive luxury shawls.

Shake Uilley
Shaker &g

- m"Willey,

Dust'. V, 'Willey, Dust'.

Shalloon - A Z/2 twill-weave cloth made from cross-bred worsted yarns, used as a lining for coats, liveries, etc. Sham Hole - An

inserted in

imitation buttonhole. A double row of stitching the fabric to simulate a buttonhole.

shantung - A plain weave fabric with a slubbed or rubbed texture originally made from yarns of tussah silkcin which the natural yarn irregularities have been retained. Shaped'iosiery - Hosiery which is shaped wholly or in part by varying the type or length of stitch on weft knitting machines without increasing or decreasing the number of wales. Sharkskin - A firm, heavy, acetate rayon fabric made with delustered filament yarn. in twill weave

Sharkskin Fabric (Knitted) - A warp-knitted fabric, the characteristic of which is a firm construction and a rather stiffy handle. The usual warp-knitted sharkskin is a two-bar construction made with full-set threading in -both guide bars. The lapping movement of the back guide bar involves underlapping of 3 or 4 needle spaces, and that of the front guide bar af one needle space in the opposite direction. Shawl - An Indian term for a usually oblong piece of fabric,woven or knitted, worn as a loose covering for the shoulders, made in a wide range of sizes and from many different materials.
Shearing

- Shearing indicates:

(d> Cutting fleece from live sheep, (b) Trimming nap or pile to the required uniform height, and (c) Removing

all protruding fabric i.e. cropping.

fibres from the surface of the

Sheepskin - Pelt of sheep with wool. This should not be confused with lamb skin which is all cotton fabric with fleece finish.

228

SP:45-1988

'

Sheer

-

A class

as

'sheer

of thin, light-weight, diaphanous fabrics, such crepe', 'sheer velvet', 'georgette','chiffon', etc.

Sheeting - A medium-weight, closely woven, plain weave or Z/2 twill weave cloth, made from yarns of medium linear density and used primarily for bed coverings. Condenser-spun weft may be used. Examples of high quality cotton sheetings are: (a) plain weave, 17s x 18s,84 x 58. (b) 2/2 twill weave, 28s x 16s, 60 x 72. Shell-Stitch Fabric - A warp-knitted fabric, having a raised shell-like surface produced by holding loops on certain needles while knitting on others at each course. The arrangement of the held-loops in pattern formation gives the shell-like effect.
Shepherd's-Check Effect - Small check effect developed in black and white, or in contrasting colours, generally by groups of four, six or eight threads of the two colours and in twill weaves, commonly the 2/2 twill. The description applied to the effects probably originates from the traditional plaids worn at one time by shepherds in the hills of the Scottish borders. - Takes its name from the wool produced ia -the Shetland Isles. Collective name for fabric produced from coarse woollen yarn with a pleasant handle, woven in twill, or more generally knitted, for men's and women's outerwear. Shetland Shetland

north of

Wool - Fine and soft wool from Shetland-British Isles, Scotland. Mostly used in hosiery, shawls and scarves.

Shetland Yarn - Yarn made from soft natural-coloured wool alone or in mixture with white wool. This is a hosiery yarn made in imitation of Shetland wool.
Shield Fibres - A special

with a

flat ended

kind of guard fibre (m shield-like apical portion.

'Guard Fibres')

Shirt (Gents) - An outergarment with buttoned front-opening, designed to cover the trunk of the body, having half or full sleeves and with collared neck.

FIG. 91

$BIRT (GENTS) of shirts. May

Shirting - Any fabric used in the manufacture be plain or faGcy woven; ,dyed or printed.

Shiner (Fabrics Hade From Man-made Fibres) L A warp or weft thread, usually of a continuous filament yarn, i.e. more lustrous

SP:45-1988

(and generally tighter) End' and JTight pick'). Principal processing. Cause

than

its

neighbours

_

(see a&

'Tight

- Excessive

tension

applied

to yarn during

Shirring - A type of gathering which'i,s usually done with multineedle chain stitch machines using elastic thread in the looper.
shives

(a)

A

vegetable

matte;? other than burr found of woody waste beaten small particles

in fleece,

and

(b) The short pieces during scutching.

from the straw of vegetable

Shivy Wool - Wool that contains matter other than burrs.

Shoddy - The 'fibrous material made in the woollen trade by pulling down new or old knitted or loosely woven fabrics in rag form (see also 'Mungo'). Shoddy Shaker (Local Issit's Shaker) fud rec.laimed from under the carding Shoddy wool. Yarn - The cheaper - A machine engines. used for shaking

class of woollen

yarn made from reused

Shog (Shogging) -. Lateral movement of needlebed on a flat-knitting machine or angular displacement of dial relative to cylinder on a circular-knitting machine or a lateral movement of yarn guide bars on a warp-knitting machine. Also known as 'Rack (Racking)'. Shopping Twine - & 'Packing obtained (a) under under 'Cut Twine'. by shearing live sheep.

Shoti Wool

- Wool - b - m

Short Drawers _Short Piece

'Drawers'. Cloth'.

Short Bib Fabric - Full cardigan fabric made by using one colour at the first feeder and the second colour at the second feeder (successively), so that one colour appears on the face and the other on the back of the fabric when contracted. Shot - & Shotting cloth. Note 'Picks' The number Shots/in. of weft threads per inch of the finished

= picks/dm

x 0.254.

Showerptioaf Fabric - Water-repellent fabric which retains porosity and allows air cirulcation. Such fabrics are treated with chemicals 230

SP:45-%488

which impart water repellency in sharp contrast to waterproofed fabrics generally produced by surface coating with rubber or wax rendering them impetrvious to air and water.
Shrink-Resist
i&rink-Resistant

-

&g

'Shrink-Resistant'

and 'Non-Felting'

that exhibit - Descriptive of textile materials dimensional stability conforming to specified standard based on tests designed to simulate normal conditions of usage.
Shrink-Resistant Shrink-Resistant Fabric - See

'Anti-Shrink Fabric'.

Finish - A treatment applied to a textile material to make it shrink-resistant. In case of wool material, this term generally implies non-felting. Shrink-Resisting Shroud-laid See

'Shrink-Resistant'

and 'Non-Felting'.

rope in which the strands are Rope . \A 4-strand twisted together with a central core of-..the basic yarns of which the strands are made.

FIG. 92

SHROUD-LAID (4-STRAND) ROPE

Shuttle Fly - A portion of'the weft thread not properly interlaced with the warp. (See alsQ 'Float'). - Shuttle flying over some,of the warp ends Principal.Cause of the top layer of the the shed.

FIG. 93

SHUTTLE FLY 231

BP:45-1988

Shrinkage - The reduction -in length (or width) of a fibre, yarn or fabric. It may be induced by, e.g., wetting, steaming, alkali treatment, wet processing, laundering or dry heat. Shuttle Harks the shuttle. Principal Sicilian - Width-wise Causes marks due to abrasion of warp yarns by

- Faulty

shedding lustre

or picking

motion.

- A type of Bradford

fabric.

Sighting - Temporary coiouration of textile materials either for visual identification of a particular fibre or quality or to enable the printer to see the pattern when applying colourless substances. Note Signal sails. The term tinting rope is also used for in this context. flags and

Halyard

- A 3-strand

used

hoisting

,Silesia - A lining cloth with a smooth face. Originally, a plain-weave cloth, but now chiefly in a 2/l or 2/2 twill weave. The cloth may be piece-dyed, colour woven in stripes, or printed. .Silk - A protein substance which is secreted in the fluid state by silk worm (Caterpillar stage of several silk moths) and which on exposure to air hardens in the form of a thread. It is composed mainly of fibroin and partly of sericin and other substances. (See also 'Mulberry Silk, ENDI, Muga silk and Tasar silk'). The term is also used to denote a fabric or a yarn made from silk or waste silk. 811 Silk - A term which may be applied to fabrics where no textile fibre other than ,silk is present, irrespective of the amount of weighting. re S&l& - A term which may be used only where there is no metallic or other weighting of any kind, except that which is an essential part of dyeing. Raw Silk - & Silk Spun - h 'Raw Silk'. 'Spun-Silk Yarn'.

Silk (Warp Knitting) - A traversing motion in the form of in open laps _ which the warp threads progress by two needle . spaces, making an overlap and an underlap at each course. Simplex Singed Fabric! - & Yarn - h (a> under 'Double-Faced Fabric'.

'Gassed Yarn'.

Singeing Singeing

'Gassing'. 7-= Marl - A single yarn

SW

from

a roving

produced

from

SP:45-1988

two differently
Single Single Atlas - m

coloured reducers

(i.e. reduced slivers).

(a) under 'Atlas'.
- A style of coat or any other upper garment with

Breasted

minimum overlap
Single Single Chain Filament

and a
-

centre front
h

fastening. Stitch'.

Stitch

(a)

under 'Chain

(Bast Fibre)

appears single to the a small fibre strand.

- The finest fibre strand which naked eye. It tends to be identical with

- A single yarn made from two half weight Single Mottle Yarn rovings of different colours spun together. Single Single Pique Fabric I2.x

(a) under 'Pique (Weft Knitting)'.

Satin Ribbon - A ribbon of silk or rayon warp and silk, rayon or cotton weft, with a warp satin weave to give a lustrous effect on one face, and with plain tubular or cross grain selvedges. Single Single Vandyke Yarn - See

(a) under

'Atlas'.

- A yarn which is either twistless or can be rendered

twistless in

a single

untwisting operation. when its single threads

Singles - A term applied to thrown silk have been twisted; used for chiffon.
Singlet

with

round neck and wide shoulders; - A sleeveless vest with welting around the neck-opening and armholes.

FIG. 94

.____ _..__. __.. Ill
I

SINGLET

Singling - In yarn manufacturing, a condition caused by the breaking of one or more of the ends in doubling process and thus causing unevenness in the final product. Sinkage

(a) Loss of weight in wool cleaning, usually expressed as a percentage.
(b)

Unaccounted or 'invisible' loss of weight in processing, usually expressed as a percentage. 233

SF':45-1988

Note - It is incorrect for sinkage: Sinker Sinnet Loop Mat -. 2&g

to use the word

shrinkage

as a synonym

(bj under

'Loop

(Knitting)'.

--s5.g (k) under

'Mats'.

Sir0 Spun Yarn - Two ply worsted yarn produced directly on the ring frame by combining fibre strands from two different rovings after drafting ,them separately. The yarn resembles a twist on twist two-ply yarn. Sisal -- A hard fibre obtained from the sword like leaves of the sisal plant, Agava sisalana and other Agava species, The fibres are long (60 to 180 cm), white or creamy white in colour, and are strong and durable. It is psed extensively for the manufacture of binder twine, summer rugs, brushes, etc. Also known as 'Sisal Hemp'. Size - A colloidal solution of materials, such as starch and glue, which is generally applied when hot before weaving and which when cold forms a film. It strengthens and stiffens the warp. Note -. T'he main type of substances used are carbohydrates and their derivatives, gelatin, and animal glues, although other substances, such'as linseed oil, polyacrylic acid, and polyvinyl alcohol are also used: Size (Raw Silk) -. Term used in respect of raw silk synonymous to count in respect of cotton, woollen and jute yarns. The size of raw silk is expressed in deniers (see also 'Denier 1. Size Code .- A system of symbols, numerals, alphabetical letters, signs or a combination of these size which used to represent in use indicates size suitability to an intended wearer. Sized light Size Backing coating of Mesh Length of Mesh Si& - The distance between two sequential knots or joints measured from centre to centre when the yarn between those points is fully extended in the AU-..direction [see (c) under 'Direction in Netting']. - Backing CJf Size of a carpet which has been submitted to a in order to give a measure of rigidity.

FIG.

95

LENGTH 234

OF MESH

SIDE

SP:45-1988

FIG. 96 W

LENGTH OF MESH

otted Netting - Distance between the centres of two opposite knots in the same mesh when fully extended in N-direction [see (a) under 'Direction in Netting'].
/

(ii)

Knotless Netting - Distance between the centres of two opposite joints in the same mesh when fully extended as in knotted netting.

:c)

w

5'IG. 97 (i)

OPENING-OF MESH

Knotted Netting - The inside distance between two opposite knots in the same mesh when extended in the N-direction [M (a) under 'Direction in Netting']. hotless Nettiag - The inside distance between two opposite joints in the same mesh when extended as in knotted netting.
- The size of netting is indicated

(ii)

Sizrt of Netting

by the number

of meshes: (a) in T-direction, and (b) in N-direction.

1000-T x 200-N means netting comprising 1000 meshes in the T-direction and 200 in the N-direction. A complete description also necessitates stating the length of mesh. Siae of Netting Yarn - The size of netting yarn is indicated by its linear density expressed in the tex system. The size of the final product ,is expressed by the 'resultant linear density'. 235

SP:45-1968

Note The resultant linear density is the reciprocal of _ 'runnage' which expresses the length per unit mass, for instance, metres per gram or per kilogram. Size of Rope Sizing - Circumference of rope (mm or in.).

A process

of applying

size to

the warp.

Sizing Dry - The application to textile yarns of suitably compounded sizing materials in solid form which melt at elevated temperatures.
Sizing Flannels - Fabrics,used for wrapping the rollers of sizing machines. They are usually all wool fabrics, made from cross-bred wools. The fabrics usually have their face side raised to provide a spongy surface for absorbing the sizing solution and are finished in natural white or bleached condition. Sizing flannels may also be made with linen or synthetic fibre warps for increased strength and life.

during skein

Sising, Single End - Application of size to individual yarns winding from one yarn package to another.
- A definite length of yarn in the form of a coil made on a of a specified girth. A --synonym for hank (w' Hank').

reel
Skein

Breaking Tenacity - The maximum tensile stress developed in a test skein before rupture, expressed in force per unit linear density of the yarn constituting the skein. This is expressed in grams per tex.

Therefore, Skein Breaking Tenacity, grams per tex

=

Rre&&nn load in ms of skein 2 x (number of wraps in test skein) x (linear density of unstrained yarn in tex).
i

A cloth 'condition in which the warp and weft yarns, although straight, are not at right angles to each other. The effect is due to the cloth structure and is not a distortion imposed during processes subsequent to weaving (See alga 'Bias'.).
skew -

Ske&ness - W
Skiers,

'Bias' and 'Skew'. sweater with full

Sweater High-necked heavy-weight sleeves; generally used by skiers.

Skin Pieces -'A trade term used in Australia to denote wool that has skin attached.

-0

Wool - Wool obtained from the skins of dead or slaughtered sheep, also known as pulled wool.

Skipped Stitch - A stitch which appears twice as long as the other stitches in a line of stitches. It is caused by failure in the stitch formation allowing the needle thread to return to .

236

SP:45-1988

the surface without being held by the bobbins

(lower) thread.

Skirt - Garment covering the body below the waistline and extend-

ing from the waist to nearly any length depending upon the fashion. The lower end of the skirt must enclose both the legs in a single opening.
Skirt Skirt, (Parachute) - The

lower portion

of the

canopy.

Hesitator - A weak tie around a folded canopy enclosing a bight of rigging lines to ensure their correct deployment before the canopy begins to inflate. Skirting - Portion of the fleece obtained from head, face, legs and britch of sheep, usually removed from the fleece to make it uniform. Skitteriness - An undesired speckled effect in a yarn or fabric arising:from differences in depth of dyeing between adjacent fibres or portions of the same fibre. Slack Course - A course of knitting made with loops longer than normal for a special purpose, e.g., linking, running-on, separating garments, etc. Slack End - A warp thread or a under insufficient tension. Slack Pick

part of

it woven

in the cloth

- A pick woven in the cloth under insufficient tension. - ti

Slack Selvedge Slashing Slats Sleeve - See &g

(j) under

'Defective Selvedge'.

'Sizing'.

'Battens'.

- That part of a garment which covers all or part of the arm. Examples include: Magyar sleeve, Reglan sleeve and Set-in sleeve.

- A long fabric container for a Sleeve (Sock, Deployment Bag) canopy,to control its deployment from a parachute pack or stowage. Sleeve Crown

on either
Sleeve Head

- The top section of the sleeve head side of the shoulder seam. - That

which extends joined to the

part of

the sleeve

which is

scye.
Sleeving - Braided, knitted or woven fabric of cylindrical form having a width.less than 10 cm (circumference less than 20 cm). - A fastening device consisting of Slide Fasnter (Zip Fastner) two flexible, interlocking stringers (with or without end stops) and a slider so arranged that by moving the slider along the

237

SP:45-1988

Stringers in CJIIe direction, an opening is formed and by moving it in the other, the opening is closed. The end which is adjacent to ,the slider when the device is fully opened is designated the bottom end. The other end is designated the top end. -'
Sling Slipe Rope - Spliced

to form

an endless

loop.

(a) A trade term ado ted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate fellmongere unscoured wool; and [b) Lime Steeped skin wool.
Slipe Wool - 2&z

'Skin Wool'.

Slipon - A ladies' knitted outergarment without front-opening with three-quarters, half, short or batwing sleeves and tight-fitting border at the bottom. Slipover - A knitted outergarment without sleeves, with tightfitting border at the bottom and without front-opening.

FIG. 98
Sliver - A condensed width without .twist.

SLIPOVER processed fibres of uniform which slips off the pirn and on to the weft

assemblage of yarn

Slough-Off - Bulk of weft gets entangled in the fabric. Principal cause

- Loose winding of the yarn

pirn.
Slub - In a yarn, a thickened place having tapering ends and a diameter several times that of the adjacent normal yarn. Principal Cause - This defect is often caused by the presence in the yarn of fragments of undrafted roving or slubbing that have not been cleared during winding. Slub Yarn - It is a type of fancy yarn having siubs at intervals.

Slubbixig - A slightly twisted continuous strand of.fibres.produced on a slubbing machine Slubbing Dyed Yarn -

Yarn spun from wool which has been dyed in 238

SP:45-1988

top or
Slubby Slug -

sliver form.
Yarn - A yarn that

contains

unintentional

slubs.

A defect consisting of an abruptly thickened place in a yarn usually caused by the inclusion of fly or clearer waste along with the regular yarn.
Slumberwear Slurgalling - An underwear

used

by

ladies

while

sleeping.

- A term applied to variation in loop length along a single course or between courses. Stuff - All

Small

cordage of

sizes less

than 13 by

mm. many broken

Smash - Ruptured cloth structure warp ends and floating picks. Principal Causes - Shuttle hea%ds heald straps causing the defective picking motion, etc.

characterized

breakage of one or both trap, to drop and damage the warp,

FIG.

99

MASH

(a) A yarrx, or fibres or filaments from a yarn, standing out

from the fabric as a long loop. (b) A defect in a knitted fabric caused by thread or threads which have been accidentally caught and pulled out of position,
is caused by a yarn, Principal Causes - This defect fibres or filaments from a yarn, catching on,a sharp projection and being drawn out from the structure.

Snag-Resistance

- The ability of a hosiery fabric, held under a pre-determined and uniform tension, to resist a downward penetra239

SP :45-1988

tion and
Snap

pull of

an adjustable

snagging needle.

- This occurs/happens when a hard particle is lodged under the doctor blade of a roller printing machine and holds the blade away from the engraved roll, thus allowing colour to escape on either side of the particle.

Snarl Yarn, Snarly Yarn - A to twist round itself if is also known as kinky yarn.
Snarls Snow -

yarn that shows excessive tendency held with insufficient tension. It a yarn with twist.

Small curly

portions in

C&p - A type of balaclava cap made of two folds of knitted fabrics one of which is white and the other dyed; used at high altitudes (m 'Balaclava Cap'). Soaking - Treatment applied preparatory to throwing.

to

skein

or

cake of rayon yarn

Soaking (Silk) - A process of treating raw silk with oil-in-water type of emulsion to soften the gum and render the threads pliable for winding, throwing and knitting. Soaping - A process of removing unfixed dyestuffs from the substrate by using soap/detergent solutions and of obtaining true shade.

footwear where the length of the leg Sock, Socks - Knitted portion extends to about mid-way between the ankle and the knee. It has either a rib top or elastic top. Also known as 'Half Hose', 'JURAB' and "Sax'.

GORF LINE
(HEEL)

FIG.

100

SOCK

Soft Fibre - Fibres obtained from the outer part of the stems of various dicotyledonous plants /namely, jute, flax, hemp, etc. Soft Silk - Thrown silk yarn, undyed or dyed, from has been removed. Soft Twist Yarn

which the gum

- A yarn with twist!less than normal.

240

SP:45-1988

Soft Waste

- Waste which is soft in nature and which has a little or no twist produced during the spinning process; obtained mostly in machines such as scutchers and cards; also includes clearer laps, sweepings, fly, etc.

Soiled yarn - An individual yarn, in either warp or weft, i.e. discoloured by dirt, oil or other contaminants,
Principal Cause - This defect is caused by the contamination

of the yarn prior to
Solid Design. Solid Yarb
&gg

or

occasionally

during

weaving.

'Intarsia Design'.

- Yarn in which all the fibres are of the same colour.

Solubilised'Vat Dye - A water soluble dye obtained by treating vat dye with suitable chemicals to make it in soluble and substantive form and is generally a sodium salt of sulphuric ester of leuco vat dye which is applied on textile material in presence of sulphuric acid and sodium nitrite or potassium dichromate.

Solution Dyeing - m Solution-Dyed S&vent phase. Yarn -

'Dope-Dyeing'. & 'Dope-Dyed Fibre or Filament'.

Dyeing - Dyeing carried out from a continuous non-aqueous
-

Note

Water may

be added to assist the dyeing process.

Solvent-Asisted Dyeing - Dyeing carried out from an aqueous dyebath containing a small proportion of an organic solvent in solution/emulsion which normally acts to accelerate dyeing. Sorting (Wool) - Classification and separation of a fleece into parts on the basis of quality of the fibre.
- A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate the condition of wool with the necessary tensile strength to undergo processing economically. Sound Sounding Line - &

'Lead Line'. wool to withstand tension.

Soundness Souple Silk

Capacity of

of the

- Silk which has been dyed and from which only a part gum has been removed.

softening process applied to continuous-filament silk yarns that are to be dyed in the gum. The yarns are treated in warm soap solution, and softened &h an acid tartrate bath. Such treatments normally remove some of the gum, leaving 10 percent to 13 percent of gum on the fibre.
Souring - A process of dilute acid.

Sotipling - A

of treatmiant of textile materials in a bath 241

SP:45-1988

sax -

h

'Sock,
-

Socks'.

The production of multicolour yarns by the application of various colourants at intervals along a yarn by printing or other methods.
Space Dyeing Space-Dyed Carpet - Carpet in which the pile yarns have been previously dyed or printed at irregularly spaced intervals along their .length with one or several colours to produce a multicolour pile effect.~

spanc& - A man-made fibre in which the fibre forming substance is a long chain synthetic polymer comprising of at least 85 percent of segmented polyurethane.
Special Middle - Indicates

a quality

of raw jute (a

'Grading 'Grading

of-Jute').
PiQecial Top - Indicates the best quality of raw jute (M

of Jute'). Speciality Hair Fibres - Term applied to all commercially useful textile fibres from domesticated animals other than sheep but usually implies to Angora goat hair, Pashmina and fur fibres.
Specific Specific Strerqth - A synonym for tenacity.

Stress - The ratio of force to mass per unit length (this ratio is equal to the stress per unit linear density). It is expressed as mN/tex or N/tex.

SpdBciaen - A specific portion of material or laboratory sample upon which a single test is performed or which is selected for that purpose.
Speckle Printing - Printing of an encapsulated dye where the capsule breaks during the process of development.

rppecbds and Leweu (Jute) - Spots of dry leaves and bark which appear above the root portion of the-jute fibre and affect the appearance of the fabric. This is due to defective retting. Specky Fabric - Dyed fabric which has small specks colour or of lighter shade appearing on the cloth.
Principal Causes - Presence

of white

matter, fibrillation
Spider

of silk

of oil spots,neps or vegetable filaments, etc.

scariensi . One Silk - The product mainly of Nephuadaq characteristic of spider silk is its fineness; the diameter of ,the filament of &peira diadema is about one-twentieth of that of silk filaments, spider silk can be spun and woven but with great difficulty.
Spiked Willey - &g

'Willey, Double 242

or Single

Cylinder'.

SP:45-1988

Spiking

- The use of spikes fixed to one edge of a hinged table to facilitate the even laying up of fine materials. The table top is tilted vertical.ly for hanging the material, and back to the horizontal for cutting. Spindle Tape - A greater than 50 designed for the diameter, e.g, as

woven narrow fabric of width normally not mm (2 in.) usually of high warp density, and transmission of power to pulleys of small on textile spinning and twisting machinery.

Note - In some sections of the textile industry, similar or somewhat similar tapes up to 100 mm (4 in.) in width are known as listings.
Spinner's Waste - All types of waste produced during the conversion of fibres into yarn.

Spinning (a) The
or

process of making yarns or cordage froz&fibres, tow liquid materials.

(b)

The formation of a yarn by a c~&iautisn drawing or drafting and twisting operation applfad ti prepared fibre masses, such as rovings. The extrusion by pressure through a apinnerett of a liqid or solution into a coagulation medium which produces a solid filament or filaments.

(c)

(d) The formation of a yarn from filaments by the combination of cutting and breaking, together with drafting and twisting in a single series of operations. Spiral 'Iar~ - A yarn made by twisting a thick, rrofttwist thread with a fine hard twist thread. spirali'tp- Distortion of a circular-knitted fabric in which wales follow a spiral path around the axis of the tuk. It is caused by usin@ y&_lm i.e. twist-lively, the dire&ion Ma 4+grUe of spirality being influenced by the direction and degree of twist-liveliness. biote - Fabrics made on circular knitting ~l~kirtes have an inherent inclination of the courses to the tier. This should >. not be confused with sfisa3ity. Splash Yarn - Yarn spun from printed roving prepared from bleached
1

top.

: 8@li4?e (a)

&&led SD- The term used for tying knot in two single threads or cords. TW singls.yawns of each of cords to be spliced are pulled apart &+a held tight. Knots are tied in single yarn of 0* *rarlWith single yarn of the other in such a way t#+ tws hats in <i43

sP:45-1988

singles

have

at

least

8

cm

distance

between them.

(b) Sewn Snlic~ - The term used for sewn joints in tyre cord trade. This is made by applying a zig-zag stitch on two cord ends lying side by side.

FIG. 101 Splicing

SEWN SPLICE

(a) The joining of two rope ends by interlacing the strand'of hosiery by knitting extra yarn(s) alongwith the main yarn. (b) A term applied to reinforcement of any portion of hosiery by knitting extra yarn(s) along with the main yarn. Split - The space between two adjacent wires of a loom reed. The term.is also used for a wire of the loom reed. Split Foot - The foot of a knitted footwear where the sole is. knit.ted from a different yarn than that used in knitting the instep. Split Selvedge`
&

'Patent Selvedge'.

Split Sole. - The sole of the split foot. Split Yarn - A yarn ~Ucl'i`appears in the fabric as a thin yarn.

Principal Cause - This deffect is often caused by abrasion or excessive tension during wi'nding or weaving which breaks a part of the yarn (e.g. a filament of a continuous filament yarn or a ply of a two-fold yarn) i.e. subsequently held back during weaving. Splits Fabrics woven with split selvedges.

Sponge Cloth - &

'Eponge'. piece goods on a perforated

Sponging - The process of steaming steel steam bo:x to obtain shrinkage. Spool & 'Cheese'.

Spool &minster and Gripper-Spool) - A double-flanged bobbin in which a number of threads of pile yarn are wound in a predetermined order for use in spool Axminster and gripper-spool looms. Spo01 Axminster - m 'Axminster Carpet'.

Spool Bobbin - A term used in worsted spinning for a single-flanges bobbins on which weft yarn is spun. 244

SP:45-1988

Spool Gripper

Axminster

-

h

'Gripper-Spool or sliver

Axminster' under

'AxininsterCarpet'.
Spooling Sports - The winding of yarn

on spools.

Pullover - A V-necked pullover with coloured stripes at the neck, cuffs and the border; generally used by sportsmen. Shirt (Knitted) -

Sports

length and

with collar;

A half or short-sleeved shirt of short generally used by sportsmen.

FIG. 102

SPORTS SHIRT

Spotting - A process of removing by special solvents or agents the spots or stains on a textile material. Spray Dyeing - The application of colourant to a substrate by using a spray gun with the object of producing ombre effects. Spray Marking - A method of outlining patterns prior to cutting by spraying over the lay, leaving the pattern area as a silhouette which can then be cut out. Spray Printing - A form of stencil printing done by spraying only (w

colourant
Spread Loop

is

where appiication of 'Stencil Printing'). two or more wales.

- A needle loop

expanded

over

Note - Applied to stockings, the term refers to expansion over two wales and the stockings are described as 'mesh' or (technically) 'half-point transfer'. The stitch has ladderresistant properties.
Spring-Lay Rope

rope

having

- A combined rope which is constructed as alternate strands of hemp and .wire.

a wire 192 mm

Springs - Rope made out of coir or man-made fibre diameter used for towing purposes.

up to

Springy - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate the ability of wool to recover readily from compression. Spun-DyedYarn -h

'Dope-Dyed Fibre 'Dope-Dyeing'.

or Filament'.

Spun-Dyeing -

&

Spun-Silk (Yarn) - Yarn made from waste silk 'and pierced cocoons,
245

SP:45-1988

by dressing and spinning; it is composed of short lengths of filaments ranging from 2.5 to 20 cm. Spyndle - A unit of length used in the determination of count or grist of jute yarn; it is equal to 14400 yd (or 13167 m). Square Fabric - & 'Balanced Cloth'.

square Rope - It is made up of 8 strands, being laid 2 over and 2 under with 4-strands of right-hand and cl-strands of left-hand twist. The rope is highly flexible and practically unkinkable and is normally made of manila, sisal or man-made fibres.

FIG. 103 St Eelema Herp &

SQUARE ROPE

'Phormium'. 'Anti-Shrink Fabric'.

Stabilized 1Pabrio - a

Stabilized Finish - Treatment applied to a textile material to increase its resistance to dimensional changes during washing and use. Stagger - In rayon sizing, the placing of .bundles of yarn in the basket in rows alternating in the order of bricks in a wall. Staining (a) Any adventitious (undesirable) colour, e.g., dye, dirt, oil and metallic contaminination on textile material.
(b) The fugitive or

in histology Stain Pelun
release

permanent colouring for identification.

of materiai, e.g.,

ability of a textile floor covering to readily, and without damage to the fibres and colour, on application of the appropriate processes. stains rapidly,

The

Stains - It is a general mark on fabrics. (a) (b)

term covering discolouration, spot or St&,& An unwanted coloured

Stra&s (Dywf mark on a fabric.

('Streak) (PzWr.&ag) - A wavy white or colourd streak in the warp direction on printed cloth. This ir caused by damaged or incorrectly set doctor
blades on the printing machine, presence or impuritise in the .emulsion etc. of dried colours

246

SP:45-1988

(cl

back
.

- Colour stain on the Off Side Printtin Stain (Print-) of the fabric due to excessive penetration of dyestuff during printing.
r Grease

Cd) (d (f)

spot on
.

Stain - Conspicuous yellow, black or brown cloth due to the presence of oil or grease.

in a

Warp - Oil or grease stains appearing in warp yarns fabric.

Qilv Weft - Oil or grease stains appearing in weft yarns in a fabric. - Brown or black stain on fabric due to rust.

(43) Rust Sa

Principal Caurres - Use of rusty reed, water dropping on fabric from rusty pipe, careless piling of damp cloth on stillages with rusted nails, etc.

Stains (Wool) - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate wools, discoloured by urine, sweat, rain, brands, bacterial or fungal attack,. which are unscourable. Standard Atmosphere
- &

'Atmospheric Conditions for Testing'.

Standard Condition - The condition of a textile material when it and temperature equilibrium with standard reaches ,moisture atmosphere for testing.

Standard Moisture Regain - Commercial moisture regain accepted as standard (see alsq -'Commercial Moisture Regain'). n
Standing Bath

up by the chemicals.

- A bath i.e. preserved for further use and freshened addition of necesssary amount of dyestuff and/or - h Z(a) under

StandilngPlace
Staple

'Bar'.

- A lock or tuft of fibres of similar properties. Hence a lock or tuft prepared to demonstrate fibre length. In bulk, a mass of fibres having a certain homogeneity of properties, usually length

Staple Length - A measure of fibre \length representative.#mple from a bulk.

of

a

typical and

Starch - A carbohydrate component of plagts used in sizing '(M 'Size') anti finishing. Its use in these operations depends-on its adhesive or film-forming power. Starting Place - h 2(a) under 'Bar'.

Static - Accumulation of electrostatic charge,~on fibres, yarns or fabrics when they rub against each other or against the insulated parts of the processing machinery. 247

SP:45-1988

Stay Tape - A narrow stri of firmly woven fabric, pl&n weave and non-stretch, usually wi, h linen warp and cotton weft, used ;tp for strengthening or co&rolling various parts of a garment. steely - Wool lacking character, with a glassy sheen. Produced on pastures deficient in certain trace elements.

(a) General - The treatment of textile materials in a bath of liquid, usually, though not necessarily, without continuous or intermittent agitation. The term' is also applied to processes whereby the materials are impregnated with a liquor, highly squeezed, and then allowed to lie. (b) Flax - The process of retting flax straw by immersion in an aqueous liquor. Stencil Printing - The application of colourant to a substrate by brushing on or spraying through a stencil usually cut in thin sheet metal or water-proofed paper. Stenter;, Tenter - An open-width fabric-finishing machine in which the selvedges of a textile fabric are held by a pair of endless travelling chains maintaining weft tension. Note 1 - Attachment (clip stenter). may be by pins (pin stenter) or clips

Note 2 - Such machines are mainly used for: (a> drying, (b) heat-setting of thermoplastic materials, and (c) fixation of chemical finish. @&@rtering - The stretching to required width and drying of cloth.
stickt3x A distortion in the weave characterized by tight and slack places in the same warp yarn of a fabric.

Principal Causes - Movement of warp yarns restricted due to some knot or slub catching lease-rods, drop wires, healds, reeds; or due to rolled ends; etc.
sticks -

$&J under 'Jute Fibre $&Q 'Sechoiring'.

Characteristics'.

Stifling -

Stitch - Generally, the fundamental repeating unit produced by sewing material with one or more sr2wingthreads. Stitch Bonding - The conversion of a batt of fibres into a fabric by closely arranged parallel rows of stitches, using externally supplied threads. 248

SP:45-1988

Stitch

(Knitting)

- An

intermeshed loop

or loops,

,

FIG. 104

STITCH, (KNITTING) (PLAIN) of the weave. warp and

Stitched Place - An area where the interlacing weft threads does not conform to the planned

Principal Causes - This defect is frequently caused by one or more ends being lifted out of sequence by an adjacent end of

heddle.
Stitches (Jute Bags)

. Stit& (a) Herahle

- It is a more complex form of stitch than the other types and the stitching rate is fairly high.

FIG. 105
(b) Lock Stitch - It is

HERAKLES STITCH very strong and does not pull out is broken somewhere. But the'stitch the chain stitch and the production lock stitch is often applied as a is a second line of stitching close the seam.

easily if the twine is not as elastic as rate is low. Jute safety stitch, which to another stitch at

FIG. 106
(c) Overhead

LOCK STITCH

Stitch - It is most commonly used for heavy duty sacks. Correct lengths of twines are doubled and allowed to pass through the fabric and then round the edge of the fabric. The seam obtained is very strong, but the production rate is rather low

FIG. 107

OVERHEAD STITCH
249

WI

-1 Stitch - It has sufficient to stand stretching under impact loading. Union machine is used and'the stitching rate is high. ButliP there is a fracture anywhere in the stitching twine, it tends to pull out more easily in this stitch compared with other types of stitches. Chain stitch is also used as a safety stitch which is a second'line of atitchiw close to another stitch at the seam.

FIG. 108 stitwh Density knitted fabric The

CHAIN STITCH stitches per unit area of a

number of

St$c@hIag; Uadarshot - A weft ways float on the back or face of .th# fabric, usua~lly extending over several warp yarns.

- This defect is caused by the shuttle PWWPal W~MJ J.eaving tti r~,prs~llturely and travelling above or beneath thm uwp tmdr $w't;o incorrect loom geometry, incorrect angle of shuttls launch, poor condition bf shuttle, or ends clinging together.
mcKsk Dyeing - Dyeing of staple fibres before carding and spinning. A process commonly used in production of woollen spun yarns.

@task SolutiQa - d relatively cowentrated solution of a dye or a @$W~ical rrhickis diluted with mter considerably when used.

mbcra - Knitted footwear where the length of the leg portion a&ends to just blow the knee. It has either a 'rib top' or 'turn-over top'. Al60 known as 'JUMB' and 'Three-QuartersHose'.

FIG. 109 STOCKING 250'

SP:45-1988

Stockinette - A plain-knitted tubular cotton fabric of loose texture; generally used for cleaning machinery and for wrapping meat. Also known as 'Mutton Cloth'.

stating materiai.
staving

Hand

stitching

to

draw

together

two cut edges of

- Bleaching wool, silk, hair or other keratinous materials in a moist condition with sulphur dioxide in chamber. (Wet stoving is the treatment of materials with a solution of a sulphite or bisulphite)

Stowage

Loops

rigging lift

- Tape, webbing or cables or wires in

cordage loops a pack.

for stowing the

Straight Line System - A production system in which single garments or parts are assembled by passing through a series of consecutive operations performed by different operators.
Straight Reeled Skeins -

without re-reeling, e.g.,
Strand

The skeins made by direct reeling i.e. CHARKHA and domestic basin reeling.

(a) A single fibre, filament or monofilament; or (b) Single ordered assemblage of textile fibres having a hi,gh ratio of length to diameter and normally used as a unit including slivers, rovings, single yarns, cords, braids, ropes, etc. Strand Core - A core of jute, manila, suitable material used in the centre manufacture of steel-wire ropes.
Strap .&g

hemp, sisal or other of the strands in the

'Sling'.
- h

Straeza

(Italian)

'Gum Waste'.

Streak - &

(b) under 'Stains'.

Strength - The ability of a material to resist rupture induced by external forces, e.g., breaking strength, tear strengt , bursting 1 strength; etc. Stress, General - The resultant internal resistance to deformation

developed within a specimen subjected to an external force,e.g., tensile stress, shear stress, or compressional stress. Note - Stress usually reaches a maximum at the time of rupture. When a textile material is subjected to a stress below that causing rupture, the stress gradually decays with time.
Stretch -

A

'proees_s change'

accompanied

by

an

increase in

dimension. 253

SP:45-1988

Stretch Yarns - Yarns made from thermoplastic fibre, usually in the form of continuous filament, which are capable of pronounced degree of stretch and rapid recovery. Stretch, Warp - The amount of

stretching sustained

by warp yarn

during sizing

operation.

Striated Patterned Carpet - Carpet in which the constituent pile yarns are composed of several single yarns of different colours; lightly twisted.

Strick (Flax/Jute) - A small bunch of flax straws, of scutched flax, or of hackled flax, of a size that can be held in the hand. Note - In the jute section of the textile industry, it is also known as strike, and refers to a bunch of jute similar to a 'head' but smaller, usually l-2 kg.
Strike - The initial rate of dyeing.

String Vest - A coarse net-type cotton vest made from fabric knitted on Raschel warp knitting machines; used as undershirt at high altitudes.
Strings -

fabrics to

Small pieces of thread inserted at the selvedges of indicate defects. Also known as 'Flaggings'.

Stripping - The removal of dye from fibre. Strong Merino
(Wool) &

'Merino'.

Strop - A length of wire, cable, cordage or webbing, with loop ends or metal fittings attached to increase the distance at deployment between two components of a parachute assembly.
Strusa (Italian) - &

'Frison'. which reinforce the substrate of

Stuffer Yarns - Warp threads a woven carpet.

Stump Sodk - A tubular knitted fabric shaped on the machine according to the requirement and closed at one end; used as a covering for the stump of the amputated portion of the body.
A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to categorize wool in relation to character, soundness, condition, degree of vegetable matter contamination, weathering and degree of dust contamination. Style categories are described as 'Extra 'Good Spinners', 'Average Topmakers', etc. Super Spinners', style

Style, Printing - A concise, though not necessarily complete, indication of the method of production of a print in terms of the process or the class or classes of dye used jar both).
Sublimation

Printing - A process employing dyes that sublime readily and have substantivity for the substrate to which they 252

SP:45-1988

are applied.
Substantive Dyes - Same as direct dyes.

Substantivity - The attraction between a substrate and a dye or other substance under the precise conditions of test whereby the latter is selectively extracted from the application medium by the substrate.
Substrate (Textile Floor Covering) - A construction, integral with use-surface and composed of one or more layers, which serves as a support for the use-surface and possibly stabilizes the dimensions and/or acts as a cushion. Certain textile floor coverings without pile need not have a substrate distinct from the use-surface. Suede Cloth - A fabric finished in such a way as to imitate suede

leather.
Suint

(a) Excretions for the sweat glands consisting of potash salt; or (b) The water-soluble portion of yolk.

of sheep, principally

SWAB - An Indian term for a bed cover in wide width coloured designs of either diamond or honeycomb

with woven effect.

Sulphur Black Tendering - It denotes the degradation of sulphur black dyed cotton materials during storage due to the formation of sulphuric acid. Sulphur Bye solution. - A dye i.e. normally applied ,from sodium sulphide

Sunn Hemp - A soft fibre obtained from the inner bark of sunn Plant, Crotolaria Jun eq The fibres are long (45 to 150 cm), grey or brown with acwide range of colour and quality due to differences in preparation. It is used mainly for twines and cordages. It is also known as 'Sunn Hemp','Bombay Hemp', 'Madras Hemp', 'India Hemp', 'Sana', etc. Sunray Pleats - Pleats radiating from a single point usually the centre of full circular skirts.
Superfine Suppression Merino Wool h

'Merino'.

from the

(Shape) - The creation of shape by removal of material surface area of the garment.

Surab - A soft, light-weight, weave'gi%ing plain effect.

lustrous

fabric

woven

in twill

Surfactant - An agent soluble or dispersible in a liquid, which reduces the surface tension of the liquid. (A contraction of 'Surface-Active Agent'). 253

SP:45-1988

Surgical Lint - A highly absorbent sterilized fabric in plain weave, with a raised fleecy surface used for surgical dressings. SUSI - Fine plain weave cotton fabric with narrow coloured white warp stripes. Warp and weft yarns are bleached. SUTLI SUZNI An Indian 'SUJAE'. term for twine used for packing and

purposes.

- $ee

Swealing (a) Migration of dye into the angles during drying of a fabric. of folds and creases

removal of colour, dirt, or a grease into the (b) Partial surrounding fabric, caused by improper technique in removing stains by hand from a fabric by aqueous or solvent treatment. NoteThe 'Sweal-Mark'. resulting mark is frequently referred to as a

Sweat Ends - A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool Board to indicate sweaty staples adhering to fleece extremities and pieces. Sweat&d 6002 - $&8 'Pulled Wool'. knitted or outergarment rooms

SIMIlCsr - A generic term for tight-fitting such as cardigan, pullover and slipover.
Sweeping nclste

in a

textile

- Sweepings mill.

from the floors

from various

Swelled Edges - An effect a specific and regular garment. Swellipg tian,af

achieved by a row of stitching sewn at distance from the finished edge of a the total liquid imbibi-

Agent - A substance that causes a fibre to increase. - & - m 'Bathing 'Trunk'. (Knitted) Costume'.

SwimlrAing Coatam
Stirring Swiss
Rib

Trunk
-

Syar.'Rib Fabric

(2 x 2)'.

Swollen swollen

Fills Diameter (Cotton) - The diameter of a fibre when to its maximum extent in 18-percent caustic soda solution.

Sydney %&pack - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking pack with loose top, measuring 137 x 69 x 69 cm (normally with 102 ends/dm and 35 pie, s/dm), weighing approximately 521 g including top without stri L s.
8JndeB - A detergent

i.e. not a soap 254

(a contraction

of 'synthetic

detergent').
Synthetic

by the

- A term to denote man-made fibrea or filaments produced polymerization of monomers.

or bmt-sleeved uuterwear T-Shirt (Knitted) - A half-sleeved with round neck and with folded rib Sapa --attwhed to the neck and sometimes to sleeves and bottom also.

FIG. li0
T-VYCOME Tab Yarn - *

T-SHIRT 'Coir Yarn'

(k) under

(or Header) - A short length of plain weave fabric, normally woven at each end of a roll of tyre cord fabric for the purpose of supporting and holding the cords in proper position with respect to each other. Tab Collar - Shirt collar made with two short tabs which fasten under the tie knot together, to the shirt neckband, or with a collar button. Tabby

(a)

A soft silk fabric usually printed, plain woven and employing untwisted raw silk as warp and weft.

(b) A full width sample of tyre cord, usually one metre long with two tabs at its ends to enable its removal'from the roll. Tabilized - Crease-resistant process rayon fabrics. of linen, cotton and spun

Tack Tear - The measurement of the resistance of a coated fabric to tearing under conditions simulating an inartallation that has been tacked in place. Tacking - Machine or hand stitching, sometimes decorative, to reinforce parts of a garment (see 'Bar Tacking'). In some sectionr of the industry this term is also used to describe the temporary joining together of parts of a garment, prior to final sewing 'Basting'). (&2!%&&2 Tacking Cut -

Small

sewing

holes

along

the

selvedge

of the

fabric.
255

;P:45--1988

Note - Tacking is sewing of cloth along face of cloth during wet processing.

edges to protect

Taffeta Ribbon - A ribbon of silk or of rayon or other man-made fibre of plain weave with usually high warp density and very almost rib generally with a woven tubular fine imperceptible, selvedge of contrasting weave. applied to various cloths made with the plain Taffetta - A term when made of rayon or silk. Tafettas are weave, especially by a fine cross closely woven, smooth aqd crisp, and characterized as the ends considerably rib. This rib is due to the construction, picks. outnumber the Tail End - The finishing end of a woven piece or a package out of yarn. of the

Tail Ends (Defect) - Uncut weft-ends protruding selvedge; more common in automatic looms. Tailing Take-Up (a> The dimension (b) in length of yarn on twisting. - m 'Ending'

The difference between the straightened lengths of warp threads due to their bending weft threads. piece-dyed glazed

and woven around the

Tammies - Plain weave and wool weft. Tannery Wool - See

fabric- from cotton

warp

'Pulled Wool'. 10 cm in width and

Tape - A woven
not exceeding

narrow fabric not exceeding 3.4 g/m/cm width. fabric strip of

Tape (Knitted) - A knitted or without selvedges.

narrow

width

with

Tape Elastic - A textile tape containing rubber or other elastomers rubber-like stretch in at least one direction. to permit Tape Length - The distance between inserted during sizing of warps. Tape Sizing - A process of applying the successive cut marks

size

to the

warp. used

Taped Seam - A seam which includes straight tape, normally to prevent or control stretching and for strength. Taper Splicing - & 'Point Splicing'. strain-bearing part thicker

Tapered Rope - Rope with rest of the rope.

than the

256

SP:45-1988

fabric of compound structure Tapestry - A closely woven figured in which the pattern is developed by the use of coloured yarns in the warp or in the weft or both; a fine binder warp and weft may be incorporated. It is normally used for upholstery. Note - Originally, the term was applied to furnishing fabrics in which the design was produced by means of coloured threads inserted by hand as required. Modern tapestry fabrics are woven jacquard looms, coloured yarns being used to produce the zensired pattern. There are various cloth structures in which two or more warps and wefts of different colours and in some cases of different materials may be used. The face of the cloth is usually of uniform texture, the design being developed in various colours, but in some tapestry fabrics figures of the brocade type formed by floating some of the threads, are also found. Taping - A defect in sized warps in which groups of ends are stuck together by size to give a tape like appearance. Dry Taping, yarns without Tar Sewn - Preparation the application done with of weavers of size. bitumenized beam directly from crepe

- Sewing

yarn

or twine.

Tare Mass (Weight) - The mass of all external and internal packing materials or other type of containers of a case, roll including the mass of bobbins, tubes, etc. Tarpaulin - A made-up article, such as wagon of tarpauling or other heavy cloth. cover, usually made

Tarpauling - Double warp jute tarpaulin clotn In a plain weave made wholly of jute with double warp and single weft, interwoven weighing not more than 610 g/m2 (18 ounces/ydz) having the number of warp threads not more than 118/dm (30/in.) and weft threads not more than 55/dm (14/in.). Tarry Fabric - A medium to heavy weight cotton fabric woven with loop piles on one or both sides. The loops may cover the entire surface or form stripes, checks, designs, etc. (see 'Pile Fabric'). Tartan - Z-and-Z twill woollen and worsted fabrics woven in elaborately coloured check designs and worn as shawls or plaids as kilts in Scotland. over the* shoulder and - Silk of natural copperish colour obtained from a Tasar Silk species of wild lepidopteran insect (Antheraea Mylitta) belonging leaves of a variety of to the Assamensis group. It feeds on the forest trees such as Asan (Terminalia Tomentosg), Arjun, (Termin(aorea Robusta), and Ber (Zizvnhus Jujuba), Sal ia Arjuna), Himalayan Oak (Quercus Serrata), and is habitant of Bihar, Orrisa, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh. of tufts of loosely - An ornamentation, consisting Tassels intervals on both ends hanging pieces of yarn, tied at equal or shawls. Also known as 'BUMBLES'. (widths) of the mufflers 257

SP:45-1988

Tear - An opening in the structure of a fabric warp or weft yarns, or both, are severed. Tear (Wool) combing. - The ratio of weight of top to

in which

several

noil produced

in

Tear Drop (Cannage) - A fabric condition characterized by short eliptical deviations of one or more adjoining picks. Tear drops are most pronounced in taffetas and cross grain weaves. Principal Causes - Efficient timing, over-sized warp, uneven etc. warp tension, incorrect harness penetration of sizing solution,

- A piece of fabric, Tear-Off Cap of a pack, and torn off by tension to deploy. the parachute

lightly in the

sewn over the opening static line, allowing

Tearing Strength - The force required to start or continue in a fabric under specified conditions. Teaze Teazer - See h 'Willey'. 'Willey, - Fleece Dust'. finished coating fabrics made

a tear

Teddy Cloths mohair.

of wool

or

TEENSUTI - An Indian term for a very plain weave made from three-ply yarns. Teg Same as - See hog but the term is used

strong

cotton

fabric

in

to denote

finer wool.

Teg Wool

'Hog Wool'.

Temperature Range Properties .- A qualitative technical evaluation of the behaviour of a dye obtained by examination of the influence of temperature on the uptake of dye in a given time under specific conditions. - 3-ply manila or Temperband Cord 'S' direction, used in jute spinning bobbins. Temple yarns, Cutting or both, sisal cord, hard laid in the frames as tension aids for weft

- Fracture or damage of the warp yarns, adjacent to the edge of the fabric.

Principal Cause - This defect is often caused by hooked, temple pins during weaving. flattened, or otherwise damaged Tenacity - The breaking by the linear density of mN/tex. Tender - Wool is applied. that load of a material under test divided the unstrained material expressed as

will

break

relatively

easily

when tension

258

Temple

of a

the selvodge Mark -. Holes or surface disturbances along fabric due to bad or improperly adjusted temples.

FIG. 111

TEMPLE MARK

abnormally weakened during any of the Tender Sports - Places operations through which the cloth passes. These are latent defects which cannot be detected in normal inspection.
Tennis Cloth - Cotton warp

and

wool

weft

Z-and-2

twill weave

fabrics.
- All wool 2-and-2 twill weave fabrics made from Tennis Flannel worsted yarns of white or off-white colours. - A white sports shirt; generally, used Tennis Shirt (Knitted) by tennis players [see 'Sports Shirt (Knitted)']. Tennis Tensile Socks - &

(a) under

'Anklet'.

length deformation exhibited by Strain - The relative a specimen subj,ected to a tensile force. Strain is expressed as a fraction of the nominal gauge 1ength;also as a percentage 'Elongation'). (%%U&ZJ
Tensile Strength

(a)

Genu - The strength shown by a specimen subjected to tension as distinct from torsion, compression or shear. per unit cross-sectional area of the unstrained specimen, e.g., kilogram per square millimetre.

(b) Specific - The maximum tensile stress expressed in force

(cl

True - The maximum tensile stress expressed in force per unit cross-sectional area of the specimen at the time of maximum load.
Stress - The resistance to
259

Tensile

tensile deformation developed

SP:45-1988

within a specimen subjected to tension by external force.'The tensile stress is commonly expressed in two ways. Either as the f,orce per unit cross-sectional area of the unstrained specimen or as the force per unit linear density of the unstrained specimen, the latter is more frequently used in textile testing and is referred to as specific stress. Tensile Test - A to a force tending Note Tension test to measure the resistance of a material to stretch the specimen in on-e direction. test is not regarded as a tensile test.

The tearing

Bar - &

(4) under

`Bar'. waterproofed and used in the

Tent Cloth fabrication Tent Line purposes. Tenterfng Terry -

- Dense cloth usually of tents. - A 3-or 4-strand

line used

for tent guys and other

a

'Stentering'. - & 'Plush Fabric (Knitted)' loops. let-off

Fabric

(Knitted) band Cause

Terry Off

- A

in a terry

section

that has no terry by incorrect

Principal motion. Terry terry on Plain fabric.

- This defect

is caused

- Terry

loops appearing

within

a plain

area of a

Principal motion.

Cause

- This defect

is caused

by incorrect

let-off

Teschengurt - Short lengths of tape or webbing, across and external to the rigging lines, joining adjacent lobes of the . _ peripheral hem to increase the rate of inflation of the parachute. Tex - The system based on metric units as the direct decimal universal system for describing the linear density (mass per unit length) of fibres, filaments, slivers, and yarns; it is also the name given to the combination grams per kilometre (see also 'Count of Yarn'.). The multiple and sub-multiples recommended for use in preference to other possible combinations are as follows: Grams per metre or kilograms per kilometre - kilotex,

Milligrams

per kilometre

- millitex, - decitex.

I>ecigrams per kilometre TexJpique Fabric &

(c)

under

'Pique

(Weft Knitting)'. applied natural to or

Textile - Originally a woven fabric; the term is now from fibres, filaments or yarns, any manufacture 260

SP:45-1988

man-made, obtained

by interlacing.

Note --For example, thread, cords, ropes, braids, lace, embroidery, nets and cloths made by weaving, knitting, felting, bonding, and tufting are textiles.
Textile Floor Covering - An article having a-use-surface composed of textile material and generally used for covering floors. Floor Covering With Pile, Pile Carpet

Textile

having a textile use-surface formed from fibres projecting from a substrate.
Textile Floor Covering Without Pile -

a

- A floor covering layer of yarns or

of

a

non-pile
Floor

textile

use-surface
Knotted

A floor covering .composed and possibly a substrate.
Knotted Pile Carpet -

Textile

Covering

with

Pile,

Carpet produced by knotting the pile-forming yarns around the warp yarns of the substrate.
Textile Floor Covering with Needled Pile, Needled Pile Carpet -

'Needling; Needle (a Pile carpet produced by the needling Bonding') of textile materials, and bonding by physical or chemical processes or by a combination of both. The pile may be either cut or looped.

Use-surface

Substrate

1. Fibres forming 2. Fibrer remaining 3. Back coat

the pile in the substrate

FIG. 112
Textile Material

EXAMPLE OF TEXTILE FLOOR COVERING WITH NEEDLED LOOP PILE

Without PiYe, Formed of Bonded Pextilo Floor Covering pile, in which the - Textile floor covering without use-surface is composed of entangled textile materials bonded together by a mechanical, physical, or chemical process, or by a combination of two or more of these processes. Textured Pile - See

(f) under 'Pile'.

- A variation in surface level caused, e.g., by Textured Surface embossing or differential needling. Thatching Twine - A twine used for securing reeds while thatching

roofs. 261

SP:45-1968

with Stitched-on Pile; Stitched-on Pile Textile Floor Covering Carpet - Pile carpet in which the pile is attached to the substrate by stitching.

1. Tuft 2. Primuy

#uppOrt fabric

3. Binding 4. Needle

thread

FIG. 113 INSERTION

EXAMPLE OF CUT PILE CARPET PRODIJCED BY OF TUFTS OF PILE STITCHED ON BY NEEDLE (LONGITUDINAL SECTION)

Thermos01 Dyeing ('j%ermosoling) A continuous dyeing process used for thermoplastic fibres by which the dye is first deposited fibre surface by padding in aqueous dispersion of dye and on the fibre by the application of then diffused and dissolved in the dry heat for 30-60 seconds at 1800-23oOC depending upon the of the dye and solubility of particle size of the dye, volatility in the fibre and the thermal properties of the fibre. the dye 'Thick End - See 'Wrong End!. of a fabric due to closer yarns [see also (2) and

Thick Place - A bar across the width spacing of picks or due to coarser weft (5). under 'Bar']. Thick Beft - W (5) under 'Bar'.

- A substance of Thickner used to increase the viscosity liquors. pastes or Thickness cords. Gauge - The

or gummy nature i.e. a gelatinous or finishing of printing, dyeing,

thickness,

in

mm, of

tyre yarns

or tyre

- A bar across Thin Place spacing of picks or due to (5) under 'Bar'].

the width liner weft

of a fabric yarns [See

due to wider also (2) and

Thread - The result of twisting together in one or more two or more single, folded, or cabled yarns. Mote 1 - The -berm is frequently 262 used to

operations

describe

single

SP:45-1988

yarns. Note 2 - In the natural silk industry, thread#is used as a synonym of fold, e.g., 3 thread 13/15 denier yarn.
Thread 'Marking

(a) (b)

Temporary stitches bespoke garment.

to

mark

the

fitting

lines

of a

Marking key positions such as pockets and darts by means of threads inserted through all the piles of a lay with a thread marking machine.
Per Unit Length (Woven Fabric)

Threads

(picks) in

a specified

- The number of weft yarns length of fabric.

Note 1 - The traditional unit of length has been the inch but the value should now be expressed as 'threads/cm' although the actual count may be made over 1 cm, ,2.5 cm, 5 cm or 10 cm, according to the nature of the fabric.

Note 2 - Counting manufacture: (a)

may be

done at

the following stages of

In the loom - The position of the count should be agreed. It is usually taken between the fall of the cloth and the take up roller, with cloth under weaving tension. J.,oomstate - The count is taken after the cloth has been removed from the loom and is relaxed from weaving tension, but before it is subjected to any further treatment that modify its dimensions. nlshed - The count is taken when no further processing in the piece is contemplated

(b)

Cc)

In all cases, the condition of the cloth at the time the count was taken should be specified.
Threads Per Unit Width (Woven Fabric) - The number of warp yarns (ends) in a specified width of fabric. [See 'Threads Per Unit Length (Woven Fabric) Notes 1 and 23. Hose Overlock - & Stitch

Three-Quarters Three-Thread Throwing

'Stockings'.
h

(b) of

under 'Overlock Stitch'. filamentous yarns.

-

Doubling

and

twisting

Throwing (Silk) - A process of winding with or without soarting and doubling and twisting of raw silk to make it into yarn suitable for knitting, weaving, etc.
Thrums

Those unwoven parts of warp yarn at the beginning and end of the loom beam which are cut off and generally used for 263

SP:45-1988

joining broken
Ticket Number

warp threads

during

weaving.

- The number assiijned to a sewing thread to designate

its approximate

linear density.

Note - The ticket number is an indicator of the fineness of thread. The smaller the number, the finer the thread and the larger the number, the coarser the thread.
Ticket Pocket

above it style as
Ticking Tie and

- A small pocket placed either at the waist or just on the right side of upper garment made in the same the other pockets on the garment.

- & Dye

'Bed Ticking'.
(Fabric) - A

fabric dyed

by 'Tie and Dye' method.

Tie and Dye Method (Tie Dyeing) - A handcraft method of producing patterns on a fabric by gathering small portions of the cloth and dyeing them with thread into compact knots by virtue of which the tied areas resist the penetration of the dye on subsequent dyeing and thus remain undyed, forming a pattern of small dots on a dyed ground. These dots may be white or coloured depending upon the original fabric used. Ties - A narrow width neckwear passing underneath tied with an elegant knot in the front.

the collar and cloth under

Tight End - A warp yarn or a part of it woven in the excessive tension.
Tight Tight Pick - A pick woven in the - &

cloth under

excessive tension.

Selvedge

(k) under

'Defective Selvedge'.

Time-to-Break

- The time interval during which a specimen is under (a generally increasing) tension, to reach the breaking load.

Note - Time-to:break does not include the time required to remove slack from the specimen. On machines supplied with an autographic recorder, the time-to-break is indicated by the time elapsing after the pen registers the initial strain or deformation sustained by the specimen until the pen registers the maximum force.
Tinted Fabric - A fabric which is coloured with fugitive or easily removable colouring matter commonly used for the purpose of identification. Tinted Yarn - Yarn coloured with a pale fugitive dye to distinguish it from other similar yarns.

Tinting (a) A

process of

colouring fibres wjth a fugitive dye. 264

(b)

The

colouring shade.

of

yarns,

fabrica,

etc,

to a.very

light

consisting of originally Tip--Sheared Pile -- Pile of a carpet, which has' been subjected after different lengths, loops of tips of. the longer manufacture to a shearing process to cut the pile loops.

0 1 Tuft 0 0 3
2

Loop

Substrate

FIG.

114, TIP SMEARED

PILE

(LONGITUDINAL

SECTION) Wool Board to

Time
indicate

-

adopted by the Australian A trade term the upper, end of the (wool) staple: and tapered, tipped usually weathered. heavy

(a) Thin (b) Black `I`ippy Wool

staples,

usually

in condition. of the fibres have

- Wool

in which

the tip

portions

been so damaged by natural weathering as to have markedly different dyeing properties from the root portions.
Tissue - Fine fabric, coloured and ornamented It is silver threads. Tissue Taffeta Line - A very & silk or man-made fibre, richly made from interwoven with gold and usually and used as dress material. light-weight, Line 'Taffeta'.

Toe Gore
TOP

'Gore

(Toe)'

(a) The sliver

far the that forms the starting material other drawing systems, and-i-e. worsted and certain and is of combing usually obtained by the process characterized by the following properties:

(1) (2) (3)

The absence of fibres so short as to be uncontrolled in the preferred system of drawing, A substantialy and parallel formation of the fibres,

A substantially homogeneous distribution throughout the fibres from each length-group sliver of

present. (b) The form or package in which the sliver is delivered,
265

SP:45-1988

Te&:

ball top and bump top (See Dry-Combed Tops and Wool Top'). a quality dyed in of of raw jute (M top form. wool or other fibres

al-

'Oil-Combed of Jute').

(c) Indicates TOP Dyed - Fibres

'Grading

Top Dyeing - The dyeing in package form. tw Top Finishing

as slubbing

or

- Post-combing

gilling

of

slivers.

- Of trousers. The front section of trousers, extending Top Side from the trousers' bottom to the waistband, and between the inside and side seams. Top Sliver - Combed and finisher-gilled sliver ready for drawing.

TOP Stitching - Forming exposed stitching normally sewn at a uniform distance from a seam. Mainly used as reinforcement or decoration. Top-Dyed Yarn'. TOPA (& Yarn -. Yarn made from dyed tops. Also known as 'Ingrain

- An Indian term for 'Balaclava 'Balaclava Cap' and 'Monkey Cap').

Cap' and

'Monkey Cap'

Topping
(a) The application of further colouring matter, not necessarily of the same hue or class, to a dyed substrate in order to adjust the latter to the desired final colour. (b) A light cut on a shearing Tom Self descriptive. - See (c) under 'Defective Selvedge'. of normal size 2 x 1 m wool. It is imitation machine; also called 'Ending'.

Torn Selvedge Tosh - It manufactured of shahtosh Total tufts yarns

is an unembroidered shawl out of fine variety of merino [see 'Shahtosh (Shahtush)'].

Pile Fibre Content - All yarns or fibres used to form the or loops above and within the substrate, including the dead [see 'Dead Yarn (Carpet)'].

Toughness (or Specific Work of Rupture) - It is the energy per unit mass required to rupture the specimen. It is the integral of the nominal stress strain curve and is calculated by dividing the work of rupture by the mass of the specimen under test. Tow (a) Flax or Hemp Any substantially 266 clean fibre of less than

SP:45-1938

sc_utched length,

(b)

Man-made Fibres - A large number into a loose strand or assemblage twist.

of filaments collected substantially without

Tow to Top Converter - Machine to cut or break continuous filaments and to form them into continuous sliver ready for further processing on the worsted system in a single step without necessitating carding. absorbent fabri,2s (buck-a-back, Towelling -.A variety of coarse, with 31: length i.n continuous woven honeycomb, terry weave) making without heading, usually made of cotton or linen, used f(:,r towels, bath robes, beach wear, etc. prepared for use of draftsman Tracing Cloth - A cloth specially in making ink tracings. The base fabric is a lawn frrlm fine combed and free from slubs, thick and thin places or other cotton yarn imperfections. Filled on one side and given a firm, parchment like transparent finish. Tracing Line - A 3-strand purposes. and other Trail Rope (a) A rope trailed by a balloon over the ground to decrase the ground speed and to regulate the height automatically of the rope the weight when near the ground by varying carried by the balloon.
I. I-. ' \ i' ; A rc.ps s-;ary-if,rl iy;

line used for

lacing

up

tent curtains

ati airship

for ground

handling.

Trajectory surface of

carried over the upper Baud - A band of webbing an envelope to reduce deformation under load. (usually cm; used

Tram - Soft silk yarn consisting of raw silk threads two) twisted together with a few turns, say, 1 to 2 per for weft. Tranmage -.h puckerad z~-es Sn a crepe fabric

Principal Cause - This defect is caused wefts of alternately S and 2 twists when structure. Transfer Printing another substrate, pressure.

by failure to insert required by the 30

- Transfer of a coloured design from paper to of heat and/or normally under the influence soft, sheer velvet in

Transparent Velvet - A light-weight, derivative of plain weave.

Trapped Shuttle - The effect created is that of distorting the fabric and stretching the yarn and slackness being woven into the 267

SP:45-1933

fabric

upon

start--up of loom. by loom stopping

Principal Cause - This defect is caused abruptly, trapping the shuttle in the shed.

Trash (Cotton) - Foreign matter present in bales of raw cotton, excluding abnormal items such as stone, timber, pieces of old iron, etc. Note 1 -- Normal whole seeds, either ginned or unginned, are frequently excluded from this category, but broken portions of them and also whole or broken undeveloped seeds are usually regarded as trash. Note 2 - The main component of trash is chaff including bits of seeds, leaves and stem. Dirt in the form of soil or sand is another component of trash. Fragments of foreign fibres, as sisal, jute, hemp, etc, are sometimes regarded as trash but usually receive special reference when easily recoganizable. Trawl Twine - A Z-ply twine used in the manufacture of trawl nets. The twine is made from sisal, manila or man-made fibre, and sometimes cotton yarn. Triacetate Constitution
:

Cellulose

triacetate. least 92

Characteristic : Cellulose Acetate wherein at percent of the hydroxyl groups are acetylated.

Tricot - A fine closely knitted fabric made with a number of yarns on a tricot machine, running leng,th-wise on one side and orosswise on the other. Originally, a warp-knitted 'fabric with sets of warp threads each set making a l-and-l lapping two full movement but in opposite directions. The term is now used in a generic sense to cover many types of warp-knitted fabrics. Note - Though these fabrics are normally fibre yarns, the term does not imply content. made from man-made any particular yarn

Tricotine - A hard textured fabric woven with a steep weaye. It resembles 'gaberdine' but has a distinct double line running from left to right.

twill twill

Trimmings .- The accessories required for making and ornamenting of any article of'dress, curtains, hangings or drapery. The term trimming has wide applications. To the tailor, trimmings are canvas linings, buttons etc.; to the designer or dress maker, these are linings, braids, buttons, hooks and eyes, tapes, ribbons etc. I I Trimmings (Knitted) - Strips of knitted fabric of fancy character used generally for the purpose of decorating or adorning clothing but often fulfilling a ultilitarian purpose.

266

SF':45-1988

Triple Sheer surface.

- A

tightly

woven,

sheer fabric

with

a fine

flat

a chlorinated vinyl Trivinyl -- Tel-polymer of acrylonitrile, monomer, none of which represents monomer, and a third vinyl as much as 50 percent of the total mass. Tropical Worsteds - Light-weight worsted suitings.

of distorting the effect created is that Tropped Shuttle - The fabric and stretching the yarn and slackness being woven into the fabric upon start up of loom. Principal Causes - This defect is caused abruptly, trapping the shuttle in the shed. True Wool - Non-medullated wool fibre. stronger in as 'Bathing by loom stopping

Trunk .- A knitwear having the shape of briefs but quality used for bathing or swimming. Also knwon Trunk and 'Swimming Trunk' Truss '- A bundle wrapped but neither or small bale pf jute, suitably hooped nor machine-pressed. of a garment fit, either

covered

or

fitting Try-On - The individual of confirming the size, shape and the garment is completed. Tsatlee Silk - Chinese hand-reeled is more imperfect than filature 'Book-.Silk' . Tubed Twine - A twine encased in a used as a domestic clothes line.

for the purpose before or after

silk which is uneven and silk. It is sometimes called

plastic

covering,

generally

Tubing - Braided, knitted or woven fabric of cylindrical form having width of 10 cm or more (circumference of 30 cm or more) (see also 'Sleeving'). Tubular Tubular Bag Fabric Bags fabricated made on from continuous circular tubular cloth.

Fabric

knitting

machines.

Tubular Welt - A welt produced on a rib machine by knitting on a tubular plain needles and rib needles, to form alternately, section of plain fabric. This is followed by knitting both the sets of needles together on a rib basis. Also known as 'French Welt'. Tubular Yarn - see 'Aerated Yarn'. on the basis of tuck stitches

Tuck Ripple - Relief fabric (m 'Relief Fabric'). Tuck Stitch - The stitch

produced

made when 269

a needle

retains

one

loop and

SP:45-1988

takes on one or more additional loops before

casting them

off.

FIG. 115

TUCK STITCH (SHOWN FROM BACK OF FABRIC)

Tuft - A length of yarn, e.g. I-,J-,U- or W-shaped, or a length of yarn in the form of a knot, the leg or legs of which form the pile of a carpet. Note - Flocked and certain bonded carpets are not considered as - being composed of tufts. In the case of jacquard weave carpets, the length shall be considered as length of tuft taken from a portion of a carpet with a surface of a single colour.

u:shapod tuft

FIG. 116

EXAMPLE OF TUFTS

Paaim knot8

furhisfl

flnotr

FIG. 117

EXAMPLE OF TUFTS IN THE FORM OF KNOTS 270

SP:45-1988

Tucking

- A defect caused by a tuck loop or loops inadvertently produced in a knitted fabric. Tuft or Loop Column - Tufts or loops running in a line parallel to the direction of manufacture. Tuft or Loop Row - Tufts or loops running in angles to the direction of manufacture. Tufted Textile Floor Covering With Pile;

a line at right
Pile Carpet -

Tufted

Carpet in which the pile yarns are fixed in a previously manufactured base and then secured by coating or an adhesive. Examples are given in Fig. 118 and 119.

Use-surface

Substrra

1. Loop pile 2. Primary backing 3. Coating

FIG. 118

TUFTED LOOP-PILE CARPET (LONGITUDINAL SECTION)

1, Cut pi+ 2. Pdmuy backing

9. cobting

FIG. 119
Tufting Twine

TUFTED CUT-PILE CARPET (LONGITUDINAL SECTION)
- A twine used for making

tufted carpets

or mats.

- A fine, soft, very light-weight, machine-made net Tulle (Lace) with hexagonal mesh, made from silk yarns. Tulle (Woven) - A

very fine net fabric made in plain weave from

silk yarns. Of trousers. The bottoms of trouser legs, folded and Turn-ups turned back on the outside, with the raw edges hemmed on the inside. 271

SP:45-1988

Top -:r. Top (of socks or stockings) which is made sufficiently longer than usual to be turned outside during use. Also known as 'Turned Top'. Turn-Over

FIG. 120
Turned Turned Tussah Top Welt - & - &

TURN-OVER TOP

'Turn-Over Top' 'Inturned Welt'.

- A fabric made from tussah silk.

Tussah Silk
Tussore

- &

'Tasar Silk'.

- A plain fabric having ribbed effect and used for coating.

Tweed - Originally a coarse, heavy-weight, rough-surfaced wool fabric for outerwear, woven in Southern Scotland. The term is now applied to fabricsmade in wide range of weights and qualities from woollen-spun.yarns in a variety of weave effects and colourand-weave effects. The name tweed is derived from a river Tweed in Scotland. Twill Weave - The weave that produces diagonal patterns on the surface of the cloth. In the jute industry, generally 2x1 simple twill weave is used.

Twill Ore Pocket - A selvedged twill, bag measuring about 76 x 51 cm (normally with 102 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), and weighing approximately 794 g used for packing mineral ores. Twin Set, Twin Suit - A set of ladies' outerwear consisting of JUMPER and cardigan (worn together); generally of the same shade and quality. Also known as 'Twin Suit'. Twine

- Two or more yarns twisted together to produce a balance structure of continuous length. It is generally used for tying, packing and sewing:
Twist

(a) The spiral disposition of the components of a yarn which is usually the result of relative rotation of the two ends. (b) The number of turns per unit length of a yarn expressed as turns per metre (tpm) or turns per inch (tpi). (c) S-Twis& - The twist in yarn due to which its spirals are in line with central portion of letter S, when the yarn
272

SP:45-1988

is held in a vertical position. (d) Z-Twist - The twist in yarn due to which its spirals are in line with central portion of letter Z, when the yarn is held in a vertical position.
. -

s-lWlS1

t-IWIST

FIG. 121

TWIST

.

Twist Factor, Twist Mutliplier - A measure of the 'twist hardness' of yarn determined by the multiplication of the'turns per unit length by the square root of the linear density on a direct the turns per unit length by the system, or the division of square root of the count on an indirect system. Typical examples of units of twist factor are:

(a) Turns/cm multiplied by the square root of linear density of yarn in tex; (b) Turns/in. divided by the square root of yarn.
Note Twist -

cotton count of

Unit (a)

is the recommended SI Unit.

Liveliness - The effect caused by unbalanced torsional forces in any yarn, of sufficient magnitude which gives rise to difficulties in processing or defects in the resulting fabric.

Note - Examples of this spirality in knitted fabrics.

are

snarling in processing and

.

- The extension in length of yarn on untwisting, Twist Release expressed as a percentage of the length of twisted yarn. Twist Setting - Any of the several methods used to fix or set the

twist in yarns to prevent snarling, tangling, or kinking.
- The decrease in length of yarn on twisting, Twist Take-Up expressed as a percentage of the yarn before twisting.

Note - As the length of yarn before twisting may not be known, the length of the yarn after untwisting may be treated as equal to the length of the untwisted yarn for practical purposes.
273

3P:46-1988

Twist, Cable - A twine, cord or rope construction direction to successive twist is in the opposite
twist.

in which each the preceding

TwisO, single
S/S/Z

in which the Hawser - A twine, cord or rope construction as in same direction, and'first ply twists are in the dr Z/Z/S construction. of a folded
the same as

Twist-On-Twist -- Descriptive tion of the' folding twist is

yarn in which the directhat of the single twist. a specific direction

Note - The use of this term to indicate should be discouraged. of twist Twisted Twisting Yam - a See 'Folded Yarn". 'Doubling'.

Twistless Yam -. A yarn prepared without twist in order to obtain and dyeability. increased softness special properties, e.g., .Tuitty - Describes yarn of brittLe in places. Twitty Yam concentrations Two-Th;ead TYPO indicate ultimate irregular thickness and twist, and

in which local or slubbing An irregular yarn of twist have accentuated the irregular appearance. Stit,ch See
(a)

Overlock

under

'Overlock

Stitch'.

A trade term adopted style, fineness, length, processing system i.e.

by the Australian Wool Board to fault and colour, and defines woollen or worsted suitability.

Type Writer Ribbon Fabric .-A very fine quality fabric of plain weave, made from single combed yarns in very high thread counts and cut into strips and specially finished. .Continuous filament nylon is also used as alternative to cotton. Tyre Cord Fabrics; Tyre Cord Warpsheet - Fabrics which comprise the main carcass of pneumatic tyre. These have a planar textile with widely spaced weft structure consisting of tyre cord warp threads. Tyre Fabrics tyres, such include tyre in the construction of pneumatic ~_ Fabrics used etc. These breakers, chafers, as casing plies, cord fabrics and tyra canvas (cross woven) fabrics. or synthetic fibres

Pyre-Cord - Cabled yarn made from natural in tyres. for use as reinforcement Ultimate Fibre - A botanical ceil of loaf

and

Last

fibres.

Umbrella Cloth - A closely woven fabric in plain, twill, satin or covering umbrzllas.The fabric may be combination weave used for silk, man-.made fibres or blends of two or more such of cotton, fibres which is usually given a waterproofing finish. 274

SP : 45-1988

Under Pants

- h

(c) under

'Drawers' coverage of the ground structure

Under-Raised - Insufficient of a'raised fabric.

- This defect is caused by the incorrect Principal Cause number of insufficient setting of the raising machine or an through the raising machine. passes of the fabric Undercoat (Innercoat) - Short fine growth of downy woolly fibres in a mixed fleece of undomesticated sheep, goat and fur bearing animals. Underfelt See 'Scrim'. placed Combined

Underlay - A coherent layer of textile or other material, between the floor covering and the floor.

(a) (b)

Combined Underlay Backing'.

-

See

'Combined

Underlay,

Separate Underlay - An underlay and independent of the textile floor

placed on the floor covering. out during

Underpressing - The pressing assembly of the garment, usually

operations carried seam opening.

Undersides - Of trousers. The back section from the trousers bottom to the waistband, seams. and side Underwear (Knitted) - Knitwear other garments, e.g., drawers,

of trousers, extending and between the inside

worn next to the vest, etc.

skin and under

- Extruded yarn (fibre-filament) the Undrawn Yarn/Fibre-Filament are substantially unoriented and molecules of which component flow in the initial stages which exhibits predominantly plastic of stretching. Note - Undrawn yarn represents an intermediate yarns. production of man-made fibre Undyed streak Crease - In a printed colour which the from fabric, a well is missing. stage in the

defined

lengthways

Principal Cause - This defect is caused fabric through the printing machine. Uneven Appearance overall character. A fabric i.e.

by passing

a creased terms of

unacceptable

in

Principal Causes - This defect may be due small slubs, uneven blemishes, e.g. yarn, would not constitute a fault. Uneven Dyeing - A fabric which shows variation 275

to numerous small that individually

in shade throughout

SP:45-1988

the piece

at regular

or irregular

interlals.

dyeing methods or materials, Principal Causes - Faulty etc. 'difference in count or twist in yarns in the fabric, in the appearance, of a raised Uneven Raising - Irregularities fabric where areas of under--raising. and/or over-raising are present. - This defect may be caused by variations Principal Causes to raising, or in the fabric structure or in processing prior due to lack of control of the raising machine Uneven Uneven Selvedge Width -.$ee (m) under 'Defective width weft of Selvedge'. the fabric. during weaving,

-- Variation -

in the Uneven etc.

Principal Causes defective stentering,

tension

Unevenness .- The nonuniformity of the linear density of a con.tinof a strand. Following three principal uous strand or portion expressions for unevenness are in use: (a~ Unevenness. Cofficient of Variation '- The square root of of the the average squares of the deviation of linear expressed as a density from the average linear density, average linear density within the percentage of the tested length of strand. (b) Unevenness, Percent Mean Deviation .-' The average of the absolute values of the deviation of linear dezity from the average linear density, expressed as a percentage of tested length of the average linear density within the strand.
Cc>

Unevenness. Percent Mean Raw - The average of the found within units of equal ranges of linear density length, expressed as the percentage of linear density within the tested length of strand. plain weave fabric

Union Canvas (Jute/Cotton) - Closely woven made with cotton warp and fine jute weft.

Union Dye " A dye or mixture of dyes designed to yield a uniform dyeing on the fibre mixture for which it is devised. Union Fabric fibres. Union Suit - A fabric made with warp and weft of different

'- &

'Combination

Suit'. mixing and spinning two (e.g., wool and polyester

Union Yarn - Yarn or fabric made by or more different kinds of fibres. or cotton and polyester fibres, etc.)

276

SP: 45--1988

Univoltine generation

Cocoon5

Cocoons built (life cycle) in a year.

by a silk-worm

race with

one

of lay, the individual yarns are Unkinkable 'Lay -6 In this type spun with the same direction of twist as the strands themselves. rope to kink. the tendericy of the This eliminates Unraised surface Unwanted fabric. Fabric or a Fabric of Plain Surface - A fabric having a nap 01' pile. sign$ficantly free from raised fibres, Twill -- Twill lines introduced unintentionally into the

Upholsterer's and bedding.

Twine

- A 3-ply hemp

or fl&x"twine

used in upholstery

Use-Stirface (Textili: Floor Covering) .- That floor covering directly exposed to traffic.

part

of

a textile

V-Neck - A term applied to neck-opening designed, cut c>r finished shape of letter 'V' in the (a Fig.`122 and.123) Valved Bag --A jute bag with a 'Bates Valve' ). equipment (see valve to suit patent filling

Vat - A large vessel for-holding textiles for bleaching, dyeing, finishing; etc.

processing

liquor

used

Vat Acid Process - A method of dyeing .in which the vat dye is in a very fine state..of division by reducing the first converted vat dye and neutralising the alkali used in reduction by acetic acid in presence of acid stable dispe*rsing agent and subsequently this non-substantive dispersed is deposited on the fibre dye and then the fibre material is developed in a bath material containing sodium hydroxide and sodium hydrosulphite. Vat Dye which is solution oxidized Vatting soluble - A water-insoluble dye, usually co'ntainng keto groups, an alkaline aqueous normally'opplied to the fi'bre from a reduced enol (leuco)" form,-which is subsequently of in the fibre'to the insoluhle,form. of insoluble vat dye into - A process of convorsi6n substantive form under alkaline reducing conditions.

Vegetable Dyes - A dye obtained prom various forms of vegetable matter, such as, wood, bark, roo%s, berries etc. e.g. logwood, cutch, indigo,. madder, quericitron etc Velours --':Woollen costume cloth which has been and finished 'with a fibrous surface.% Velvet - A warp pile fabric, usually appearance and soft to thentouch. Velveteen a surface having felted and raised rich in

a cut

pile,

'corduroy' but having - A weft pile fabric, similar to uniformly covered with a short full cut pile. The weft 277

SP:45-1988

yarn

is soft spun, which

when

cut gives a soft smooth I 2' or dress-fabrics woven

velvety

pile.

Venetians - All wool warp satin. Vent (a) A short (b) An Vent

iinings

in eight-thread

opening in

in the hem of a garment. a garment to provide ventilation.

opening

(Parachute)

- An opening, of fabric

usually

at the apex of a canopy. the vent, sewn on to the

Vent Cap - A piece vent hem.

covering

Vent Bern - The hem, usually of the vent. Vent Patch the crown Vest

reinforced

by tape,

round the periphery

- A patch sewn into the crown or to reduce its porosity. undershirt. - Undercoat Also known

of a canopy

to reinforce

- A knitted

as

'BANIAN'

and

'GANJI'. of the

Vicuna (Fibre) llama family.

hair of the vicuna,

an animal

Vicuna Cloth - Usually a worsted warp and felted, raised but close cropped to reveal nothing to do with vicuna. Vigoureux Vinylal Constitution Example
:

woollen weft the weave.

cloth, It has

Printing

- &

'Melange

Printing'.

Linear macromolecules of polyvinyl alcohol with different levels of acetalization. polyvinyl alcohol:

:

Acetalized

Vinyon and vinyl

A man-made accetate.

fibre made

from copolymer

of vinylchloride

'Pure New Wool' according to International Wool Virgin Wool Secretariat. Commercially it means wool that has not been processed or used before and is thus distinctly different from reprocessed wool or reused wool. Viscose Constitution
:

Cellulose

II 278

SP:45-1988

Example

: Regenerated process.

cellulose

obtained

.by the viscose

Viscosity

(General)

- The internal

resistance

to flow

of a fluid.

Note - A term applied specifically to signify the viscosity hydroxide cellulose in cuprammonium of a standard solution of specified copper and ammonia content; size mixings, solution, of printing paste, finishing liquours, etc.
VN Vest

- Vest

with

V-neck

and without

sleeves.

FIG. 122
VNS Vest - Vest with V-neck

__i__ i3
VN VEST and with short sleeves.

I

----_ _---FIG. 123 VNS VEST approximately square, open textured, Voile - A light weight, cloth made from fine yarns of sufficient twist to plain weave produce round compact thread. Woven one thread per dent unless the render this impossible. as to so high number of ends per cm is

(4

- This is a typical cotton voile fabric Semi-Voil employing high twisted single yarns for warp and weft finer spun with a twist factor of using counts 50s and The yarn is usually not singed and is woven 5.5 to 6.0. in a reed 52 to 64 with similar picks. Because of the openess of the structure such fabrics are provided 12 mm The cloth is usually woven in 120 cm wide selvege. finished width and bleached/dyed/printed in rich colours for the end use as saree. Full Voile - Otherwise known as 2 x 2 voile, this employs Singles are usually two-fold yarns for warp and weft. spun with normal turns per Cotton yarns combed. fine direction as metre whilst doubling is done in the same with a doubling twist factor of 6.0 to 7.0 singles but 279

(b)

SP:45-1988

Usually the doubled yarn is singed. The ends/cm is low and ranges between 52 to 64. Ends are drawn as one per dent in the reed and with 12 border. The fabric is bleached, dyed or printed end use as saree.

in reed usually mm wide for the

(c) Half-Voile or 2 x 1 Voile - This class of fabric is similar to full-voile except in weft where instead of high twisted two-fold yarn, single yarns of equivalent count is employed. (d) Fancy Voile - This is a full voile dress material fabric woven in 90 cm finished width in a reed heavier than that employed for saree and ornamented with extra warp and/or weft figurings. VYCCMEYarn - a (m) under 'Coir Yarn'

Wadding - A loose, cohering mass of fibres, usually in the form of a sheet or roll used as padding in the making up of garments. Waist Coat (Knitted) -' A V-necked sleeveless garment with full front-opening with a closure device and extending just below the waistline. Waistband - A narrow piece of `material, binding or an assembly attached to the waist of a garment.
Wale -! A longitudinal chain garment formed by one needle.

of

loops in a knitted fabric or

Wales/5 cm - The number of wales in 5 cm measured along a course of a knitted fabric or garment. Wall Thickness - Thickness of the cell wall of a fibre.

Wall-to-Wall Textile Floor Covering - A textile floor covering which completely covers the floor space on which it is laid. Warp (Warp Yarn) (a) Threads lengthways in a fabric as woven, or (b) A number of threads in long lengths and running in the same direction intended for weaving or knitting.
Warp Crack

- &

'Crack'.

Warp Knitting - A method of knitting in which the loops made from each warp thread are formed substantially along the length of the fabric, characterized by the fact that each warp thread is fed more or less in line with the direction in which the fabric is produced.
Warp Pile

Fabric -

&

under

'Pile Fabric' 280

SP:45-1988

Warp Warp

Skip

- See - A

'Harness Skip'

short length of warp yarn that has twisted on itself owing to high twisting or insufficient tension. The snarling may occur during or prior to the weaving process.
Snarls - Short, narrow warpwise bands which are characterized difference in shade or lustre from the adjacent normal

Warp Streaks

by some warp.

Principal Causes - Ends having different dyeing affinities, different dyed lots getting mixed up in the warp, rough healds or drop wires, sharp or cut section on lease reed of warper, variation in count or twist of warp yarns,portions of warp yarns stained with oil or grease which resist dyeing, etc.
Warp Stretch - See - The

'Stretch, Warp' fabric, of one or

'Warp Stripe

more warp

presence, in a piece-dyed yarns of the wrong colour.

Principal Causes - This defect is caused by isolated yarns of different characteristics having been introduced during winding or warping and subsequently reacting differently during dyeing and finishing. Harp-Knit Fabric

yarns from needle.

- A fabric knitted on a machine that receives a warp beam and guides each yarn separately from each

Warping - The process of preparing a warp for weaving or knitting. A number of methods are employed such as beam warping, chain warping and sectional warping. Wash and Wear - A term applied to fabric and garments which satisfactorily retain their original wrinkle-free appearance during wear and after laundering, with little or no ironing. Manyof the synthetic fibers possess that property inherently; in case of the other fibers, suitable chemical-finishes are employed to obtain this effect.

Silk - Raw silk which has been soaked in Washed (or Steeped) warm soap solution so as to soften its gum and loosen its threads. Washing Liquor - An aqueous solution employed for the physical removal of extraneous substances from textile material. - Treatment of textile material in water or detergent solutions to remove substances employed in previous processes.

Washing-Off

- Silk from wild and cultivated cocoons which cannot Silk be reeled and silk from the unreelable parts of the cocoons. It also includes the waste produced during the various processes of silk reeling and throwing. It is used as a raw material for spun-silk. Waste

281

SP:45-1988

Wastes

-

Processing by-products

in the

manufacture of yarn and

cloth.
Was-by - A trade term adopted

by the Australian Wool Board to indicate wool thinly grown and/or weathered, producing excessive waste during processing.

Water

Damage - A stain that has a sharply defined straight or wavy edge and that fades away rapidly to normal colour. Principal Causes - This defect is caused by deposition of dye, soil or finishing compounds carried by water wicking through the fabric, and represents the farthest point of this migration.

Proofing - Process in which the interstices of the fabric as well as the surface of the material are covered with a film or skin in such a manner that the treated material is not only water-repellent, but impermeable to air and moisture. Water Water Repellent - Process whereby the fibres of the material are made water-repellent through coating with a hydrophobic substance or by a chemical reaction, but the fabric remains porous to air and does' not allow wetting to take place. Water Spot - An unwanted pale

area in

a piece-dyed

or finished

fabric.
Principal Causes - This defect is caused by contamination with water prior to tinting or dyeing or finishing on a pad results in a reduction of uptake of dye liquor or mangle which finishing liquor. The defect is also sometimes observed on dyed and finished fabrics. - A suit designed to keep the body temperature Water-Cooled Suft within a comfortable range by circulating water through small pipes in the suit. Water-laid Water-Mark Rope - m

'Cable-Laid Rope'.

(Defect)

(a) An unwanted moire effect produced by the pressure of the surface of one layer of fabric on another. (b) An unwanted light mark on a fabric caused.by contamination with water prior to tinting or dyeing on a pad mangle, which results in a reduction in uptake of dye liquor.
Wavy Cloth - A cloth that does not

lie flat tight or

on a loose

cutting table yarns either

(U in warp

'Cockling').
Principal Cause - Section of

or weft. 282

SP:45-1988

Weak

piece of cord or thread which is intentionally broken at some stage of the deployment of a parachute in order that the deployment may occur in some predetermined manner.
Tie (Breaking Tie)

- A

Weaners - A trade term used in Australia to denote first shearing wool from sheep of over six months age.
Wear - The number of wear refurbishing cycles $0 which an Level item has been subjected.

Wear

Service Condition - The specific conditions under which a garment is worn (e.g., at school, at leisure, or at home).

Wear

- A test in which textile garments are subjected to Test wear service conditions and evaluated for performance. Wear-Refurbishing Cycle - For a specific wear testing programme,

one complete series of events that will be terminated by laundering or dry cleaning.
Note - A description of a wear-refurbishing cycle usually includes the number of hours worn and the number of wearings an item receives prior to refurbishing (i.e., laundering or dry cleaning, or both). Wear-Wrinkle Resistant - A term applied to textile fabrics which satisfactorily maintain their appearance by recovery from sharp folds imposed during wear.

Weathered

- A trade term adopted by the Australian Wool (Wool) Board to indicate wool degraded and wasty as a result of exposure to sunlight and moisture. Weathered Piece - Fabric with discolouration or soil marks on its edges or folds produced due to exposure during storage or transit.

Weaving

form a

- The interlacing of warp fabric. (Knitted) - A

and weft circular

with one knitted

another to fabric.

Web Fabric Webbing

plain,

<a) A woven narrow fabric which weighs over 3.4 gjm/cm width (or 2.5 lb gross yd/in. width); or (b)
Webbing,

A term general.

of

classification

referring

to

webbings in

- A textile webbing containing rubber or other Elastic elastomers to permit rubber-like stretch in at least one direction (see also 'Webbing'). - a (5) under

Weft Bar

'Bar' 283

SP:45-1988

Weft

(Weft Yarn)

(a) Yarn widthways in a fabric as woven; or (b) Yarn inended for use in a fabric widthways.
Weft Bow - Excessive curvature of the weft in a fabric that may or may not extend over the full width. Principal Cause - This defect is caused by lack of control in fabric manufacuring or processing. Weft Weft Weft

Crack
Curling

- See
- &

'Crack'. 'Weft Snarls'.

Double Bow - Weft yarns in fabric which exhibit an aproximately .sinusoidal waveform for more than three quarters of the same length. .
Principal

in fabric
Weft Weft Kinks

Cause - This defect is caused by manufacuring or processing.

lack of control

- $&.j2 'Weft Snarls'.

- A method of knitting in which the loops made by Knitting each weft thread are formed substantially across the width of the fabric, characterized by the fact that each weft thread is fed more or less at right angles to the direction in which the fabric is produced. Weft Pile Fabric - w

under *Pile Fabric'.

Weft Snarls (Weft Curling, Weft Kinks) - A short length of weft yarn that has twisted on itself owing to high twist or insufficient tension. The snarling may occur during or prior to the weaving process.

FIG. 124

WEFT SNARLS 284

Sl?f45-1988

Weft

Trail

(Pulled-In

Weft,

Lashed-In

Weft,

Jerk-In

Weft)

-- An

extra yarn dragged into the cloth with regular pick.
Principal Cause - Failure of the thread holding mechanism to hold the filling from the outgoing bobbin long enough for the temple thread cutter to cut the yarn after a filling change (applicable in case of conventional looms).

FIG. 125
Weft-Knit crosswise Weftage

WEFT TRAIL
by a method of knitting from warp-knitting. in a

Fabric - A fabric
direction (Coir)

produced as distinguished

- The number of

matting per
Weighted Silk

decimeter (or
- Silk which

transverse strands foot). , '
increased

of yarn

in a

has been

in weight

and bulk
by

by the

addition of

chemicals.
or fabric

Weighting - A process for adding weight to the yarn chemicals or other substances. loading with Well

Wool Board to Bred - A trade term adopted by the-Australian indicate wool true to type, embodying style, character, evenness and handle.
quality cable-laid manila

Well Drilling Rope (or Cable) - A high rope used for oil-well drilling. Welt (a) The

extended edge of a pocket cut. material attached to form a finished opening.

A folded piece of edge of a pocket

(b) A secure edge off a knitted fabric or garment made during,

Welts made or subsequent to, the knitting process. during the knitting process usually occur at the starting end of the fabric and are formed parallel to the course. 285

SP:45-1988

Seamed welts which are made after the knitting process may occur in any position in thee fabric. (See aLsa 'Hem').
Wet Contractile Force - The maximum force developed in yarn or cord of fixed length when dipped in water. It is expressed as force per unit linear density (g/tex or g/d).

Wet Contraction - The maximum shrinkage in length of yarn or cord when dipped in water under a pre-tension. It is expressed as percentage of the original length of a specimen.

Wet Decatiz%ng
wet

- &

'Decatizing'.

spun (a) Descriptive of a

yarn of flax, hemp, or similar fibre spun from roving that has been thoroughly wetted out in hot water immediately prior to the drafting operation. effected by filaments, the coagulation of extrusion into a liquid bath.

(b) Descriptive of man-made

which is
Wether

(a) A castrated ram, and (b) Wool from second and subsequent shearing. Whale Line - A 3-strand hemp or man-made fibre line used for catching whales by harpoon. The line is made from hemp or man-made fibre yarn. (See alsq 'Harpoon Line'). Yarn Coarse

Wheeling

multifold

knitting

yarn

spun

on the

woollen system.
Whipcord

(a) A twill-woven fabric usually with a steep-warp twill and a clear finish having pronounced ribs. (b) A a 3-strand cord made from is used for fishing. jute, flax or hemp yarn. It

Whipping - Securing a loose end of a rope by means of a twine. This prevents the rope from unlaying.
White Discharge Printing - The production of coloured design on textile fabrics by dyeing and then printing with discharging agents, which destroy the dye by reduction or oxidation at the printed portions. White Resist Printing - The production of coloured design on textile fabrics by dyeing it with dyes (which are fixed in two steps i.e. dyeing and developing) and then printing with resisting agent which prevents the development at the printed portions 286

SP:45-1988

during developing background. White Rope

and 'thus cordage.

gives

a

white

effect

on coloured

- Untarred

Chalking, Whitening, textile.floor covering appearance of whitish Whiting Line - A

Frosting - A change becomes evident which regions. light-weight

in appearance of a during use by the soft lay used

3-strand

line with

when fishing for whiting and for other purposes. The line is made from hemp or flax yarn.
Whole Back - A garment back cut in one piece, not two or more as is common in tailored garments.

- A loosely twisted, braided or woven cord, tape or tube or a bundle of fibres, generally made of soft spun cotton yarns, of any liquid substance by which draws up a constant SUPPlY capillary action, used for illumination e.g. oil in lamps, melted tallow or wax in candles. Wick Widening

increasing the width of the fabric or garment by increasing the number of wales during knitting to get the desired shape.
- The act of Finish -' k firm, starched, plain calendered finish without and printed clothes. lustre, applied to light weight sheetings

Wigan

- A trade term used in Australia to denote wool that has been shorn from around the eyes and head of the sheep. Wiggings Willey (Local, Willow, Teaze) - To

open and disentangle fibres

prior to carding.
Willey, Battering --A machine often employed for the opening of short, fine, dusty and sandy wools. It has a more gentle action than the double or single-cylinder willey, in which four-bladed beaters are used instead of the spiked cylinders. Otherwise, the construction is similar to the'willey, Wool' with spiked cylinders. Double or Single-Cylinder (Spiked Willey) - A machine usually employed with greasy merino, cross-bred and the long lustre wools prior to washing and generally preceded by an automatic feed. Its action is to open out the greasy and dirty wool and remove dust and heavy foreign matter from the wool before it passes into the washbowl. Dust Wool, (Cleaning Plucker, Willey, Blending) Shake Willey, Shaker, Picker, - A machine used primarily for

Willey,

Willey, Teazer,

opening wool fibre and blending machine.
,pilley, Tenterhook Willey, Fearnought

removing .dust and also

as a preliminary

(Tenter Hook Willow, Tenterhook Teazer, Cockspur Blending Willey) - An opening and mixing machine

which delivers

the material

in a suitable state for carding. 287

SP:45-1988

Willey, Wool (Self-Acting Teazer, Wool Willow, Wool Opener, Devil) '- A machine generally used for the cleaning of wool. Carpet - A woven carpet in which the pile threads run continuously into the carpet and are treated as an integral part of the weaving process being raised above the surface of the backing to form a pile by means of wires or hooks (warp wires), or by being stretched between two backings (face-to-face weaving). After being woven, the pile may be left as a loop or cut by a bladed wire or, in the case of face-to-face weaving, by the separation of the two fabrics. Wilton Figured - A carpet usually woven on a jacquard loom, which bears a design obtained by the use of two to five frames, each of a different colour. Additional colours may be obtained by substitution (planting) of colours in any frame. Wilton, Wilton, Mottled (Stippled Wilton)

wilton but woven from plied singles of different colours.
Wilton,

- A carpet similar to plain yarns that have been folded from

Plain - A wilton carpet which bears no surface design. It is normally of a single colour, and if it has a cut pile it may be described as plain velvet. In a variation, hard-twist yarn is used.
Wincey - A light-weight fabric of the flannel type, finer in texture than baby flannel. Originally it was made with cotton warp and wool weft but it may now be made from mixture yarns containing wool.

Winch Dyeing - A dyeing process in which one or more endless lengths of fabric are drawn through the dyebath by a reel or drum rotatingbabove the surface of the dye liquor. Wind-Sock (Wind Cone, Wind Sleeve) - A wind indicator in the form of a truncated fabric cone.
Winding Wool - An operation of

transferring

yarn

from

one

form of

package to

another.

- Primarily, hair from the fleece or coat of the sheep, but extended by usage to include also that of the alpaca, camel, dromedary, llama, vicuna, cashmere goat, and angora rabbit.

Wool Base - The oven-dry mass of wool fibre free from all impurities, expressed as a percentage of sample.
Wool

the mass

of the

greasy core

Classing - A highly skilled process by which whole fleeces are separated into different classes before being baled and sold, which assists buyers to obtain their requirements. fibre Cloth - Wool fabric in which wool is dyed in yarn or form as distinguished from piece dyed fabric.

Wool Dyed

288

SP:45-1988

Wool Felt

(Pressed) - A textile material composed of wool fibres physically interlocked by the inherent felting property of wool and produced by a suitable combination of mechanical work, chemical action, moisture and heat but without weaving, knitting,. stitching, thermal bonding or adhesives. The wool fibres used are in the range of quality from 64/70s to 48s. Opener Plucker - See - &

Wool Wool

'Willey' `Willey'

Wool Quality

- The spinning quality of wool assessed primarily on the basis of fibre fineness. Crimp, waviness, handle, etc, also influence wool quality.

Wool

Sorting - A highly skilled process by with fleece and skin wool is divided into various qualities. It is usually carried out by the wool user. Wool Top - Continuous untwisted sliver of wool fibres from which the shorter fibres or noils have been removed and the fibres brought parallel to each other by combing.

Wool iwillo" - h
Wool

'Willey, Wool'

Yield (Clean Wool Fibre Content) - The weight of wool fibres, free from vegetable matter, grease, dirt and other impurities and adjusted to the standard condition of 13.8 percent moisture content, 1.5 percent alcohol extractable matter content and 0.5 percent ash content; the latter two calculated on the basis of the oven-dry mass of the scoured specimen. Woollen - Descriptive of yarns, or fabrics or garments made from yarns, which have been produced on the condenser system wholly from wool fibres, new or otherwise, within certain tolerances and allowances. Note 1 - As an adjective pertaining to wool generally, the term 'Wool' and not 'Woollen' should be used.

Note 2 - The trade term 'Woollen-Spun' is descriptive of any yarn carded, condensed and spun on woollen machinery. Such yarn might not contain any wool. It is preferable, therefore, to avoid the use of the term where possible. The term 'condenser spun' is
recommended. instead. Woollen and Worsted Weaves - Term applied usually to fabric structures using woollen-spun or worsted-spun yarns in a variety of weaves, e.g.: Corded velveteen : Corduroy

Corkskew weave Crepe weave
:

Corkskew fabric Oatmeal fabric

289

SP:45-1988

Double

plain

weave

Hairline Gaberdine

blankets, worsted

All wool

shawl

Gaberdine Herringbone

twill weave

Overcoatings, trouserings Honeycomb

Suiting

and Worstti-iI

Honeycomb Plain

weave

fabric

weave

Baize, Blazer cloth, Broad cloth, Woollen shirting, Delaine, Camlet, etc. weave Whipcords Donegal tweed, Imperial Blankets, Pilot cloth, Serge, cloth, Kersey, Angola, Tartan Barathea Amazon, Lasting, Bengaline Doeskin, Presidents, Habit etc. cloth,

Steep

twill

2/2 Twill

Twilled Warp

hopsack satin

face

Warp

rib rib weave twill sateen face twill
:

2/2 warp 2/l warp Weft face 2/l weft Weft

Crepoline Prunella Italian Cashmere, Bradford twill cloth, etc. lustre fabrics Velours, etc

rib weave

Woollen Carding - Carding with rollers and strippers with intermand condenser delivery to obtain a slubbing ediate cross-feeds spinning. ready for Woollen Woollen Cloth Count of woollen yarn, expressed Wool fabric woven from woollen-spun yarns.

(a) Dewsbury - The linear density as number of yards per ounce. (b) Yorkshire - The linear density as 256 yd skeins per pound.

of woollep

yarn,

expressed

Woollen Yarn - A yarn spun from wool which has been carded but the fibres and in which spinning not gilled or combed before cross each other in every direction presenting a rough surface. or garments or fabrics Woollen, Blended - Descriptive of yarns, on the condenser system and containing made from yarns, spun
290

SP:45-1988

not less than Woollen-Spun condensing and processing of blends or even

50 percent

of wool.

A term applied to staple yarn produced by carding, designed for the spinning on machinery originally yarns may be from wool, its wool into yarn. Such non-wool (see also Note '2 under 'Woollen').

- The jute fibre when subjected to mercerizing Woollenized Jute like wool, treatment under controlled conditions becomes scrimpy soft and fluffy; the treated jute with or without further chemical softening treatment is called woollenized jute. Woolley wool. Woolpack and 'New Like wool. The term is used to denote soft handle like

-- See Zealand

'New Jute Woolpack'.

Woolpack',

'Australian

Woolpack',

12 strands and of line, tarred, Work Line - Hemp 6, 6, 9 and used for worming in marine rigging. 5, 6 and 8 mm diameter required to bring a specimen Work of Rupture - It is the energy to rupture under a (tensile) deformation test. It is the integral and is dependent on the linear curve of the load-elongation density and length of the specimen. Workwear - Garments designed chiefly to provide a measure of general protection in use. Normally understood to exclude garments for protection against specific hazards where the term 'Protective used. Clothing' is more generally Worming - The practice of binding the grooves between the into smooth surface (a Fig. 90). spun yarn, or other small,cord, strands of a rope to produce a

from worsted yarns. In Worsted - A wide range of fabrics made general they are closely constructed of smooth, well-twisted yarns. Only a minimum of finishing is required and.the fabrics are left with a clear surface. For this reason fancy weaves and yarn-dyed suiting fabrics, include Worsteds materials are commonly used. dress fabrics, crepes, etc. tropical worsted, gaberdine, serge, but with no Worsted Carding - Carding with rollers and strippers or intermediate cross-feeds to obtain sliver. condenser delivery Worsted Cloth Wool fabric woven from worsted-spun yarns. as

- The linear density of worsted yarn expressed Worsted Count lb. (See also 'Count of Yarn,') number of 560 yd hanks per Drab Khaki, Worsted Gaberdine, merino wool slivers worsted-spun, given a clear finish. Worsted Lasting - h 'Lasting' - Khaki woven in

drab mixture of dyed weave and 2/l twill

291

SP: 45-1988

Worsted Yarn - Yarn made from long parallelised wool sliver which the short fibres have been removed by combing.

from

Worsted, Blended - Descriptive of yarn in which the fibres are reasonably parallel and which contains not less than 50 percent of combed wool, or of fabric manufactured from such yarn. Worsted-Spinning Bradford system - A system of spinning long staple and Continental system. fibre, e.g.,

Worsted--Spun - A term applied to yarn spun from staple fibre processed on worsted-spinning machinery by carding or preparing, combing and drafting; or by converting a continuous-filament tow and drafting; or from a combination of slivers or rovings from both systems. Worsted-Spun Yarn - Yarn spun from long fibre (natural, man-made or blends) slivers after removal of short fibres on the rectilinear or noble comb and drawing through gill boxes. Woven Backing - Carpet backing formed by weaving, either before manufacture of the carpet, or in the course of its production. Woven' Textile Floor Covering With Pile, carpet produced on a loom in one or more Woven Textile without pile, Wrecking mm diameter Floor Covering Without made on a loom. Pile Woven Pile Carpet operations. - Textile floor - Pile

covering

Rope used

made out of manila or man-made fibre for marine salvedge operation.

usually

80

Wristlet - A tubular band knitted threads laid-in, used by sportsmen the wrist.

on round machines with elastic for support and protection to

rl
L FIG. Wrong Denting - Wrong order 126 Wrang Draw c3r healds. - Wrong order of drawing

J

WRISTLET the ends through the reed.

of drawing

the ends through

the harness

Wrong End (Mixed End, Thick End) - A thread which differs in material, count, filaments, twist, lustre, colour or shade from the adjacent normal thread (see also 'Broken Pattern'). Note - In woven or warp-knitted appear as a vertical line running knitted fabrics as a horizontal strip and repeated at regular intervals. fabrics, the defect would warpway whereas in weft running across the fabric

292

SF:45-1988

Wrong Y-Neck in the

Weft

- :T;ee (5 ) under

'Bar'. designed, cut or finis'hed

- A term applied to neck-opening shape of letter 'Y'.

FIG.

127

Y-NECK

Yarn - A continuous strand of textile fibres of filaments with or without twist, suitable for plying, knitting, braiding, weaving or otherwise inter twining to form a textile end product. Yarn occurs in the following forms: Spun Yarn - A yarn composed staple) twisted together. of fibres (short length or

Filament Yarn -. A yarn composed of assembled with or without twist. Monofilament - A single filament

"continuous

filaments

with

or without

twist. or

Narrow Strip of Material.Su'ch as, .paper, cellophane metal foil, with or without t:?ist. Note .- Varieties include yarn, cord, thread, fancy yarn single etc. yarn,
plied

yar'n, cabled

Yarn Construction - Construction which indicates the material, count of single yarn, number of turns per unit length, number of piies and the direction of twist in the plies. Yarn Count - See
`Count

of Yarn' . made yarn from warp form. and weft which have been

Yarn Dyed Cloth previously dyed

- Fabric in the

Yarn Package - A length or lengths of yarn in a form suitable for shipping. Packages may be unsupported as handling, storing or patterns on skeins or cakes, or prepared with various winding bobbins, cops, cones, pirns, spools, tubes or beams. Yarn Regularity - Pertaining to evenness of yarn. in grams, expressed

Yarn Strength Index (YSI) (Cotton) - The breaking load, of yarn of a 100 m skein divided by the linear density units (see also 'Count Strength Product'). in tex Yarn, Backing - The base yarn that holds the pile stuffer yarn and the warp and the weft. by the Yarn, Blended - A single yarn spun from a blend

in place

formed

or mixture

of

293

SP:45-1988

different Yarq

fibres. (or Cord) - See 'Cord'.

Cabled

Yarn, Carded - Yarns made from fibres that have been carded but not combed in the manufacturing process. Most spun yarns are of this type. Yarn, Combination - A ply yarn different types of fibres, e.g., and acetate rayon. Yarn, Cross-Blended - A single of different type of fibres, and rayon staple. twisted from single yarns of silk and rayon or viscose

yarn spun from a blend or mixture e.g., yarn spun from cotton fibre

Yarn, Fancy -. A yarn that aiffers significantly from the normal appearance of a single or plied yarn due to the presence of irregularities, deliberately prod,uced during its formation. Yarn, Filament .-See (b) under 'Yarn intentional flakes or unevenness

Yarn, Flake -- Spun yarn containing in fibre arrangement.

Yarn, Intermediates -. A generic term for products obtained during the conversion of fibres to yarns, including card webs, laps, slivers rovings, tops, etc. Yarn, Kraft - A yarn made by twisting a strip from wood pulp by the sulphate proc`ess. of paper manufactured

Yarn, Self-Blended - A single ysrn spun from a blend or mixture of the same types of fibre,e.g., spun rayon yarn produced from staple of different lengths and different counts. Yarn, Thick and Thin --A continuous filament, vi s c 0 se or acetate rayon rnsdr2purposely uneven operation. Yarn, Union .- Yarn made by mixing different kinds of fibres or yarns. Yarns, below, novelty yarn of in the spinning

and spinning

two or more given

Worsted, Colour Terms - Ill all the definitions the expression 'calour' includes black and white.

(3)

Double Earl - A yarn consisting of one end of two cCl,lours that have been roved together (as in marl) twisted with one end of another two colours that have be on rclved together. Ijalf-.Marl - A yarn consisting of one end of mixture shade or solid colour, twisted with one end of two colours that have been roved together (as in 'Marl'). -. A yarn consisting of two identical single ends

W

;c 1 Marl

294

SP:45-1988

twisted colours

together, the single ends being roved together. that have been

composed

of two

Cd) Melange
printed (e) Mixture blended

that have .-A yarn spun from tops (see 'Melange Printing'). - A yarn made together. from fibres

been melange

of two or more colours

(f) (e)

Single Marl - A single yarn composed have been roved together.

of two colours

that

yarn made as single marl in Single Mottle - A single respect of combination of colours but the marl effect is from two half-weight rovings of obtained by spinning is a different colours into the single end. (The effect of colour than in a single marl.) sharper contrast Solid Colours colour. - A yarn made from fibres of a single

(h) (ii)

Twist -- A yarn consisting of two single ends of different single ends being either colours twisted together, the mixture shades. colours or of solid

XLeIIlhowing - The yellow discolouration that may develop on textile or storage over a long period. materials during processing, use Y%eBd - A general term expre ssing the proportion of clean wool in specific definitions of yield exist greasy sample. Various ' Te.g., Schlumberger dry, Noble oil). section of a garment covering the front and/or Yoke -. The upper level. This usually to chest back from the shoulder seams, to the main body of the garment. section is separately sewn Yolk Z-Lay - Extraneous See - &g matter of animal origin in greasy wool.

'Direction 'Twist'.

of Lay'.

Z-Twist

heavily milled and Zibeline - A heavy wool costume fabric, pile of fibres on the surface raised, and finished with a long laid in one direction.

295

SP: 45-1988

TABLE 1 INTERNATIONAL Base Units QUANTITY Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary QUANTITY Plane angle Soild angle Derived Units Units

SYSTEM OF UNITS

(SI- UNITS)

UNIT metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

SYMBOL m kg : K cd mol

UNIT radian steradian

SYMBOL rad sr

QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla harts siemens volt Pascal

SYMBOL
N

DEFINITION 1N q l 1J q 1 1w q l lWb=l 1T =1 lHz=l 1s =l 1V q 1 lPa=l kg.m/sa N.m J/s v.s Wb/ma c/s (s-1) A/V d/A
N/m2

J

w
Wb T HZ S V Pa

296

SP:45-1988 TABLE sl` Characteristic 2 RECCMMEtNDED SI UNITS FOR TEXTILES SI Unit ApplicationAbbreviation (4) centimetre mm mm, cm m mm cm mm, cm (5) Fibres Samples, test specimens (as appropriate) Yarns, ropes, cordage, fabrics Narrow fabrics Other fabrics Samples, test specimens (as appropriate) Carpets, druggets, DURRIES (as appropriate) Delicate fabrics Other fabrics, carpets, felts Yarns Fibres Filaments, filament yarns Slivers, ropes, cordage Fibres Yarns, ropes, cordages Ropes, cordage Woven fabrics (as appropriate) Number Number Number Number per per per per centimetre decimetre centimetre decimetre ends/cm ends/dm picks/cm picks/dm ends/cm Reeds Knitted fabrics appropriate) Courses per centimetre Courses per decimetre Wales per centimetre Wales per decimetre
297

unit (2)
Length (3) Millimetre Millimetre, Metre

2.

Width

Millimetre

Centimetre Millimetre,

centimetre

3. 4.

Thickness Linear density

Micrometre Millimetre Tex Militex Decitex Kilotex

(micron)

urn mm

tex
mtex dtex ktex (micron) urn mm
mm

5.
6. 7.

Diameter Circumference Threads in fabric: Lengthwise 2) b) Widthwise

Micrometre Millimetre Millimetre

8. 9.

Warp threads in loom Stitches in* knitted fabric: Lengthwise 8) b) Widthwise

Number per centimetre

(as

course/cm course/dm wales/dm wales/dm

SP:45'1988

Characteristic & (1) 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. (21 Stitch length Mass per unit area Mass per unit length Twist Test or gauge length Breaking load Unit (3) Millimetre

SI

Unit Abbreviation (4) mm g/ma g/m turns/cm turns/m mm, cm
mN

Annlication (5) Knitted fabrics, made-up fabrics Fabrics Fabrics

Grams per square metre Grams per metre Turns per centimetre Turn5 per metre Millimetre, Millinewton Newton centimetre

Yarns, ropes, cordage (as appropriate) Fibre, yarn and fabric specimens (a5 appropriate) Fibres, delicate yarns (individual or skeins) Strong yarns (individual or skeins), ropes, cordage, fabrics Yarns Fibres, yarns (individual or skeins) Yarns (as appropriate) Fabrics Fabrics (as appropriate) Carpet5 Pile carpets

N

16. 17.

Breaking Tenacity

length

Kilometre Millinewton per tex

km mN/tex

18.

Twist factor or twist multiplier

Turns per centimetre x turns/cm square root of tex x tex Turns per metre x square turns/m root of tex x tex Newton per square metre Millinewton, Millimetre Newton N/cm2 mN, N mm

19. 20. 21. 22.

Bursting

ctrength

Tear strength Pile height Pile density

Mass of pile yarn in g/mz/mm pile grams per square metre height per millimetre pile height Millinewton per tex per unit deformation mN/tex/unit deformation

23.

Elastiic

modulus

Fibres, yarns, strands

298

SP:45-1988

TABLE 3 SL YARN COUNT NO. SYSTEM

CONVERSION FACTORS FOR YARN COUNTS - DIREXT SYS= UNIT OF LENGHT USED UNIT OF YARN
COUNT

AND TEX CONVERSION &CTORS
TO TRX WROM

SYMBOLIC %IT OF ABBREVIA- MASS USED
TION

TO OTHER YARN

-

COUNTS FROM TEX lg 1P 1 lb 1000 m 9000 m g/l000 m g/9000 m Ta = 9 Tt Tj =
0.02903 Tt

OTHER YARN COUNTS

1. 2. 3.

Tex Denier Grist [Jute, Hemp, Linen (dry spun )I

Tt Td Tj

Tt = 0.1111 Ta Tt = 34..45 Tj

14400 yd lb/14400 yd (spyndle unit)

TABLE 4 SL YARN COUNT NO. SYSTEM

CONVERSION FACTORS FOR YARN COUNTS.- INDIRECT SYSTWS UNIT OF MASS USED UNIT OF YARN COUNT

AND TEX 'TORS TO TEX FROM OTHER YARN
CCIIlNTS

SYMBOLIC UNIT OF ABBREVIA- LENGTH TION USED

CONVERSION TO OTHER YARN COUNTS FROM TEX
NeC

1.

Cotton count (spun-rayon staple, spun silk) Linen (wet spun) MBe~ric (cotton a.lld woul ) Woollen (Dewsbury) Woollen (Yorkshire) Worsted

Nt?C

840 yd (hank)

1 lb

840 xd/lb

= 590.? Tt

2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

NIL

300 yd

1 lb 1 kg
1 02

300 yd/lb 1000 m/kg
3 yd/oz

NIL = m Tt
Nm = 18(a8 Tc
=

,Tt = 16j4
N.3L Tt = m NIil Tt = 31000

(lea) Nm
Nd
NV

1000 m (hank)
' 1 yd

Nd

31000 Tt Tt

Na
Tt = 1939

256 yd (skein) ' 560 yd (hank)

1 lb i ib

256 yd/lb 560 ydiib

NV

=m

NV

New

Tt = 885.8

NEW
299

SP 45-1988

APl?Em1x LIST OF INDIAN STANDARDS RJZFERRED IN TEE HANDBOOK

1.

IS:177-1977

Cotton

drills

(third revision) for testing (revia)

2.

IS:196-1966

Atmospheric conditions (Reaffirmed 1984)

3.

IS:271-1975

Grading of'white, TOSSA and DAISEE Indian jute (second revision)

uncut

4.

IS:1349-1964

Methods for determination of wool fibre content of raw wool (revised) A-twill jute bags (revised) food grains cement

5. 6. 7.

IS:1943-1964 IS:L2566-1984 IS:2580-1982

B-twill jute bags for packing (second revisim) Jute sacking bags for packing (second revision) Indian hessian

8.

IS:2818 IS:2818 IS:2818

(Part l)-1971 (Part 6)-197'7

General

(first revision) contract regain

245 g/m2 at 16 percent

9.

IS: 2873-1969

Packaging of jute products (Zirst revision) Heavy tee jute bags

in bales

10
11
.&A.

IS;2874-1964 IS:2875-1964 IS:2938-1964 IS:3667-1984 IS:3668-1966 IS:3750-1966 IS:3751-1966 IS:3794-1966 IS:3966-1967 IS:3984-1967 IS:4436-1967

Jute corn sacks Method B-twill Liverpool of grading jute cloth twill raw silk (first revision) cloth

12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20.

(L-twill)

Jute corn sack cloth Heavy tee cloth twill (L-twill) bags

Liverpool DW flour

jute cloth

DW flour bags Jute bagging for wrapping cotton bales

300

SP:45--1988

21. 22. 23.

IS:6359-1971 IS:9685-1981 IS:11205-1984

Method

for conditioning unproofed

of textiles proofed textile

Sand bags,

and cuprammonium terminology of

Classification and floor coverings. Glossary animal

24.

IS:11206-1984

of textile terms - Wool and other fibres, their processing and products.

301

