IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE SELECTION, INSTALLATION MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHGEAR CONTROLGEAR
PART ( Third II Reprint SELECTION JUNE 1992 )

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

AND AND

UDC

62 I.3 16'3/`7'004 : 006'76

0 Copyrlgbr 1982
BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN, 9

INDIAN
BAHADUR NEW DELHI 110002

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR MAR0

Gr 11

October 1982

IS : 10118( Part

Xl) - 1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTIU: FOR THE SELECTION, INSTALLA'TION AND MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHGEAR AND CONTROLGEAR
PART II SELECTION

Code of Practice

for Power Installation and Maintenance Committee, ETDC 20
Representing Calcutta Electric Calcutta Supply

Sectional

Chairman S~rm K. K. Boss

Corporation

Ltd,

SRRI A. CRATTI5RJgE ( &tern& to Shri K. K. Bose) Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore SHRI B. C. ALVA SHHI T. N. R. Rae (Altrmta) Chief Elrctrlcal Inspector to the Government SHIII M. J. ANANUAMU~THY Tamil Nadu, Madras INSPICTOR ELEcTnrarL (TECHNICAL) TO TllE GOVT.IINIMENT OR TAMIL NADU ( Alternate ) Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay SHRI P. D. Baonn~ Salfr R. C. BAJ~AL ( Afternate ) Sicmcns India Ltd, Bombay Slmr v. S. BHATIA SH r<, K. K PAXT ( Ahrnutr ) The Federation of Electiicity Undertakings SI~RI K. V. CHAUBAL India, Bombay SHRI K. S. Josn~ ( A~tcrnatc ) Railway Board, Ministry of Railways CHIEY ELECTI~ICAL ENCINEBR DEPUTY DII<ECTOI<STAICDARDE (ELEC)-IV, RDSO ( Altcrnatc ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi CHIEF ENGINEER (ELEC)-I Sc-nv~~cm OF Wonrs (ELEC)-I ( AItrrnotc )

of

of

( Continued an page 2 ) Q copyrighf 1982 BUREAU Thir publication is protected OF under INDIAN STANDARDS of 1957) and the Indian Coplright Act (XIV

rrprochmion in whole or in part by any mrans exttspr with writttm pFrmis4on ofrhr publisher shall bc drarmrd to br an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982

Mmbrrs SEBI II. L. DESHPAND~

RtpWk?lg Electrical Engineer to the Maharashtra, Bombay Larsen (t Toubro Ltd, Bombay Gorernmenr of

SHRI DEVENDER NATE S~ILI T. P. R. SARMA ( Altermale ) Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara SHRI IL V. DHARMADHIKARI Maharashtra State Electricity Boards, Bombay S~rtr I'. J. HAsTAK Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi M~~~BER ( HYDRO-ELECTRIC ) DIRECTOR (HED)-I ( Altrrrvlfe ) NGEF Ltd, Bangalore SEBI D. R. NEELAPPA REDDY SEXI S. S. N. MIJRTEY (Alternate) Fact F,ngineering & Design Organization, Sam K. P. R. PILLAI Udyogamandal SERI C. R. R. MENON (Alternuts) Engineer-in-Chief'a Branch, Army Headquarters LT-COI, B. B. RAJPAL ( Ministry of Defence ) SHRI S. K. SHANOARI (Alfsrmtr) Engineering Construction Corporation Limited, S=I RAXEB RAY CHOUDHURI Bombay SHRI L. E. D. CRWZ ( Afternate ) The Bombay Electric S-1 B. M. SAMANT Supply C Transport Undertaking, Bombay SERI S. R. UGRANKAR( Aksrmfr ) Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking, New Delhi S-I I. C. SANQER &RI P. S. SAWHNEY ( Ahnalr) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of S-1 SARDULSINPunjab, Chandigarh SERI D. S. UPPAL ( Altmarc ) Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras SERJ V. SITRYINATHAN SE&I S. KBISHNARAJ ( Alternate ) Tariff Advisory Committee, General Insurance SERI R. SATYABAL Association of India, Bombay SHRI K. K. MANDAL ( Alfsrnata ) Rural Electrification Corporation Ltd, New Delhi SEBI R. K. SAXENA SHRI G. L. D~A ( Alfmate ) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government of Da T. C. SIDHAN Kerala, Trivandrum Bharat Heavy Electricah Ltd, Secunderabad 6~~1K.s. SUBRAHYANIYAM
SHRI G. P. PAHWA ( Altcmalr ) SJXBI G. N. THADANI SHa: S. G. COIIEALB

Engineers
( Ah"&

India Ltd, New Delhi

)

S-1

Kerala State Electricity Boards, Trivandruni S. VAIDYANATHAN SHRX R. VAXADARAJAN ( Alternate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-o$cio Men&r ) SERI S. P. SACHDEV, Director ( Elec tech) Srcrelary SHRI K. GAYESE Assistant Director ( Elec tech), IS1 ( Coafiavod on poc# 60 ) 2

IS :10118( Part II ) - 1982

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SWITCHGEAR AND CONTROLGEAR
PART II SELECTION

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 3 March 1982, after the draft finalized by the Code of Practice for Power Installation and Maintenance Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. 0.2 The object of this standard ( Part II ) is to provide guidelines for the selection of s\\itchgear and controlgear and the associated auxiliary equipment. 0.3 It has been generally felt that the requirements of the switchgear sf different voltage ratings can be conveniently covered in a single standard. Keeping this in view, the Indian Standard IS : 3072-1975* was brought out to cover equipments for indoor and outdbor use. Equipment so covered included circuit-breakers, isolators and other switches operating on ac or dc. Separate Indian Standards had been formulated as follows, for detailed codes of practices for fuses, ac induction motor starters, high voltage ac circuit-breakers and other switches: IS : 3106-1966 Code of practice maintenance of fuses ( voltage for selection, installation not exceeding 650 volts ) and motor

IS : 3914-1967 Code of practice for selection of ac induction starters ( voltage not exceeding 1000 volts )

IS : 5124-1969 (`ode of practice for installation and maintenance of ac induction motor starters ( voltage not exceeding I 000 V ) IS : 5987-1970 Code of practice nor exceeding 1 000 V) IS : 7987-1976 Guide for selection for selection of switches ( voltage

of high voltage ac circuit-breakers

*Code of practice for inst4lation and maintenance of awitchgear (&f rroisia ). 3

IS : IO118 ( Part

II)

- 1982 brought practice electric utilizmg out with a view to presenting in a for the Lnarious types of switchgear power systerrl, filling up the gaps the latest in concepts iutroduced in

0.4 This standard is being cogent fashion, the codes of and controlgear used in between these specifications, the pr-oduct specifications.

0.5 This standard presents the subject product-wise, bringing out the relevant goo:I practices recommended for LT and H'f applications separately. This standard is being brought out in four parts, namely: Part Part Part Part I II III General, Selection, In\tallarion, and

IV Maintenance. parts shall be read in conjunction with each other.

All these

0.6 In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from the information contained in the Indian Standar-ds listed in 0.3. On publicariorr of this standard (Parts I to IV ), the Indian Standards in 0.3 would stand withdrawn. 0.7 During the preparation of various parts of this standard, the expert had kept in view tile fact that the Panel, responsible for- the same, standard could at best give guidance on the brrlk of tire equipment used in the country and should be understood in the manner; that aspects relating to seiertion, installation or maintenance of EHV equipment as welt as those intended for very special application would have to be supplemented with additional data, not attempted by the present series. 0.8 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this the final value, observed or calculated, st;lndard is complied with, :,xprrs.sing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1!100*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off x~alue should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II ) covers guidelines for selection switchgear and controlgear for indoor and outdoor use. 1.2 The requirements provided those in Part I of this standard. *Rules for rounding off numerical here shall be read of all types of

in conjunction

with

value ( r#atird ). 4

IS I 10118 ( Part II) - 1982 SECTION 2. GENERAL 2.0 The CRITERIA FOR 1 GENERAL SELECTION

information collected on the nature of the installation and the availability of equipment combined with the characteristics of the same as conforming to the relevant Indian Standard shall guide optimum choice.

2.1 The selection of equipment shall be based on criteria, such as the function of the equipment, type of the equipment, enclosures, dimensions, rating and operational characteristics, type of duty envisaged and other relevant considerations as listed in this standard.
<he purposes of this standard, NOTE -For denote any type of switchgt-ar or controlgear. the term `equipment' is used to

2.2 The service conditions for which an equipment is suitable are defined These normally include ambient in the respective product' standards. temperature conditions and the reference ambient temperature, altitude, degree of tolerable pollution and such atmospheric pressure, humidity, other conditions under which the design of the equipment is expected to guarantee the declared performance. The actual service conditions at the location of installation of the equipment shall be studied to assess any correction factors to be employed. This should be of consideration while selecting the equipment. Guidance on the same shall be obtained from the relevant Indian Standards or from manufacturer's instructions.

SECTION 3. SPECIFIC

2 SPECIFIC VOLTAGE

GUIDELINES EQUIPMENT

FOR LOW
OF EQUIPMENT 1000 V ac or 1200

GUlDELINES FOR SELECTION FOR VOLTAGES UP TO AND INCLUDING V dc

3.1 Fuses 3.1.1 I~zrnrtion - A fuse in an electric circuit stands guard at all times to protect the circuit anr! the equipment connected to it from damage within the limits of its rating. 3.1.2 ClnssiJiration according to the: b) principle c) principle
-

Fuses for low voltage

application'

can be classified

a) type of contacts of the fuse-link, of replacement of operation, of the fuse-link, and against contacts and influences.

d) degree of protection

IS t 10118( Part II ) - 1982
The broadly
a)

accepted

classification

is therefore:

Rewirable type ( see IS : 2086-1963*) type

r reversible type, { non-reversible type, and 1 sliding type D-type (see IS : 8187-1976t) with knife-blade contacts, for bolted connection, and with cylindrical caps

b) Cartridge

, c

i Link-type 1 [see IS : 9224 1 ( Part I )- 1979$]
The fuses should be used in each live conductor of the distribution NOTE lThey should not be used in the neutral conductor or a conductor which' k system. alwavs earthed while the sys.tem is live. The various points to be consiLfered for the selkion 01' the appropriate type and rating of the fuse are explained further. devices are discriminative, then the fault is localized and NOTE `2 - If protective only tht: faulty portion is disconnected. The rewirable fuses do not offer reliable discrimination. Th: fuse-clcmenr of the rewirable fuse is exposed to atmosphere; it oxidizes with the time and, therefore, it results in premature operation of the fuse. Further tts characteristics are easily affected by the fluctuation in the ambient temperature or by the improper handling during installation. Due to the ageiog effects, the rewirable fustks cannot be calibrated accurately. dartridge fuaea, both D-type and link-type, on the other hand, have definite characteristica.

3.1.3

Rnting and Operational

Characteristics below 1 000 V, shall be in

3.1.3.0 The selectionof fuses, for voltages respect of the parameters listed below: a) Rated b) Rated voltage; current and rated frequency, and

if applicable;

c) Breaking

capacity; characteristics.

d) Cut-off characteristics; e) Time-current

for ac or dc application or for NOTE - TYP of SuPPll- The fusm are designed both. It is not necessary that the furea desigazd for ac rhouid also be suitable for use on dc systems or mica versa. `Specification volts ( reused ). tspecification fSpecificatlon for carriers and base1 used in rewirable type electric fura up

to 650

for D-type fuse% for low voltage fura:

Part I General requirementr. 6

IS : 10118( Part II) - 1982 3.1.3.1 Rated voltage to or higher than: a) the .voltage anti The rated voltage of the fuse should always be ac
or

equal

of the circuit

in single-phase

2-wire

dc circuit; in

b) the line voltage or the voltage between three-phase ac or 3-wire dc circuits.

the outer

conductors,
enclosure,

two or more phase circuits are in the same NOTE I -When be considered as a three-phase system.

it should

NOTE 2 - Fuses rated for a particular voltage can, however, be used on lower voltage systetm but care rhould be taken to check that the arc voltage gwwrated by the fuse during its oprration is not more than the system insulation capability.

Example :
When a 415 V fuse is to be used on a 60 V system, the switching voltage shall not exceed the value corresponding to the system voltage [ JCCIS : 9224 ( Part I j-1979*]. This shall be guaranteed by the manufacturer. 3.1.3.2 Rated cement and rated frequency (for ac ) - Since the characteristics of fuses are related to the rated current, the selection of appropriate rated current of a fuse for a particular installation will mainly depend upon the fuse characteristics and Ihe type of load (see 5.2.1 ). Further, manufacturer should be consulted for any derating factor for installation of the fuse unit at higher surroundins air remperatllre, also taking into consideration the type of enclosure and the presence of any other heat generating source in close vicinity of the fuse. The rewirable fuses are standardized for rated currents up to 100 A, but the link-type cartridge fuses are standarciized for currents as high as 1 250 A. The fuse-links ( fuse wire in case of rewirable fuses ) are available in a range of rated currents for flexibility of selection. On the other hand only a few sizes of the fuse-bases and carriers are standardized, each permitting the use of a number of fuse-links of different ratings. Under certain circumstances, such as in cable distribution pillars of electric supply undertakings, it may be preferable to select the fuse-base of such a design which permits installation of fuse-links of maximum number of ratings for the sake of flexibility. However, adequate care shall be taken to ensure that during replacements, the correct ratings of the fuse link be chosen. The electrical apparatus and the connecting cables and wires have to withstand overloads and short-circuit specific thermal capacity
*Specification for low voltage fuses

: Part I Ccnrral requirementa. 7

IS : X0118( Part II) - 1982 currents of certain duration. The fuses used for protection shall therefore be so selected that they are rated to operate before the thermal capacity limit of the electrical apparatus is reached. The manufacturer of the apparatus shall state the maximum rating of the fuse that should not be exceeded. In the absence of any marking regarding fuses, it implies that the fuse meets the conditions 45 and 62 Hz only. rated frequency on ac for frequencies between

3.1.3.3 Breaking capacity - The fuses used in a particular installation should have a breaking capacity rating equal to or more than the prospective short-circuit current at the point of installation. Therefore, when calculating the prospective short-circuit current and the breakmg capacity rating of the fuses to be used, it is recommended that due allowance should be made for potential increase of the prospective shortcircuit current available as a result of the natural growth of the system or installation. Rewirable fuses up to 16 A rated current should not be used in locations where short-circuit level exceeds 2 kA and those of higher ratings should be used in such locations where the short-circuit level is fuses should 4 kA ( see IS : 29861963* ). D-type or link-type cartridge be used for higher breaking capacities. Cartridge fuses are now available with breaking capacity exceeding 100 kA. Breaking capacity of a fuse is expressed in modern times in kiloamperes ( rms ) and is applicable for a given voltage. IS : 9224 ( Part II )-1979t specifies for industrial appiications, a minimum breaking capacity of 50 kA. 3.1.3.4 Time-current characteristics - For the sake of comparison of two fuses, it may be necessary to compare the time-current characteristics of the fuses ( see 5.2.1 ). This is a curve giving the virtual time ( for example, pre-arcing time or operating time ) as a function of the under stated conditions of operation. prospective breaking current Together with the cut-off characteristics and the I't ( joule Integral ) characteristics, it gives a clear picture of the behaviour of the fuse under a given condition. The standard zones of time-current characteristics based on an ambient temperature of 27�C and on a maximum rated voltage of 500 V ac are given in IS : 9224 ( Part II )-19797 for .ink type cartridge fuses. `Specification for carriers and bases used in rewirable
650
~1315 ( muired).

type .

electric

fuses

up

to

tSprcification for Low voltage fuses : with high breaking capacity ror industrial

Part II Supplementary
applications

requirements for fuses ( ~u~neding IS : 2208 ).

8

1s : 10118 ( Part II 1 - I982 General purpose fuse-links are those capable of breaking untie) specified conditions all currents which cause melting of the Fuse-ekment The standard tinle-current zones nnd up to its rated breaking capacity. the limits for general purpose fuse-links of rated currents of 100 A to 1 000 A are identical to gl and gZZ. Back-up fuse-links are those capable of breaking all currents between thelowest current on its time-current characteristicrsand its rated breaking short-circuit protection. These are generally used to provide current. Standard time current zones for back-up fuse-links are given in IS : 9224 ( Part II )-1979*. 3.1.3.5 Cut-of characteristics - Cut-off characteristics give the cut-off current as a function of the prospective breaking cllrlent under stated conditions of operation. These represent the highest values of current At high prospective shop t-circuit likely to be experienced in* service. currents, the fuses exhibit cut-off property for pre-arcing times less than 5 millisecond and thereby prevent the heavy short-circuit currents to reach their crest value ( see Fig. 1 ). The rewn-able type of fuses do not possess this property. The cut-off property of the fuses is very hralpfrrl since it protects the connected equipment from the thermal and dynalnic effects of heavy short-circuit currents which would have otherwise been applied. The manufacturers should be contacrei\ For the cut-& V~\WS of fuses of different ratings at various prospective short-circuit currents.
SHORT-CIRCUIT CURRENT WITH DC COMPONENT
k

LlMll FU

SYMMETRICAL SHORT- CIRCUIT CURRENT

t. = Pre-arcing
I, = Arcing time

time

FIG.

1

OSCILLOCRAM

SHOWING

CUT-OFF

`Sprrification fc,r low voltsgr fllsrs : with high breaking capacity for induslrial

Part 11 Stippl-mcntarv rt,qllirrmwts for Tots-s application< ( st~pcrdi~g IS : 2208 ). 9

IS : 10118 (Part II ) - 1982
Generally, the information is provided in the form of curves as shown in Fig. 2. It should be noted that the cut-off current is expressed in peak value. On the abscissa, the initial symmetrical prospective current Z in kA ( rms ) is plotted in the logarithmicscale and the maximum current peak Zc in kA on the ordinate as an instantaneous value. The influence of the dc component on the crest value in short-circuit paths is seen from the straight lines running at an angle of 45". The maximum vallte of current ( crest value of the first half wave ) is represented by the straight line belonging to the particular dc component. To determine the peak current &, the ordinate should be drawn over the value calculated for the initial symmetrical short-circuit current. It always intersects the straight line of the dc component concerned, and in most cases also that of the fuse. The value of the ordinate of this point of intersection or the smaller value, if there are two points of intersection, is the maximum peak current i, in kA. In normal low voltage systems, a dc component up to approximately 50 percent may be expected. Within the range above the 0 percent line in Fig. 2, that is, as soon as a dc component is present, current limitation takes place even with pre-arcing times above 5 millisecond ( up to 10 millisecond ). For dc, no general values can be laid down for the current limitation, since in the event of a short-circuit, the inductance in the parricular system greatly affects the current rise. Similar values apply under normal conditions also. An example Example showing the cut-off property of fuses is given below

:

:
Fuse-links symmetrical rms value of 200 A rated short-circuit ) (see Fig. 2 ). 50 percent current are to be installed. Initial current I = 20 kA ( computed value ) I A ) 20 kA

dc component Without With

-

( assumed

fuses : Current peak - 40 kA ( the ordinate intersects the 50 percent line at point

fuses

: Limited

current peak = 14.5 kA ( the ordinate I = 20 kA intersects the characteristic line of the 200 A fuse at point B ).

3.2 Switches 32.1 Function - The basic function of a switch is to connect or isolate The fuses in the composite unit of switches and fuses, or select a circuit. additionally serve to protect the equipment connected in the circuit mainly against short-circuit. 10

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982
C COMPONENT

60

2 a a

w151

-1

INITIAL

SHORT-CIRCUIT

CURRENT

I

IN kA(rms)

FIG. 2. 3.2.2
equipment,

CUT-OFF CHARACTERISTIC OF CARTRIDGE FUSES

Classijicalion
to the method of operation switches are classified as having: operation operation of manually of of

3.2.2.1 According

operated
IS : 4064 IS : 4064

manual a) Dependent ( Part I )- 1978*] manual b) Independent ( Parr I )-197P ]

[ s.:e 2.1.5.3 [see 2.1.5.5

*Specification for air break switches, air-break disconnrctors air-brnak switcbdiaconnrclors and few combination units for voltztge'r not exceed&g 1 Ooo V ac or 1 200 V dc: Parr I Grnrral rrquiremrnts (J%A~ rcoiian ). II

IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982 3.2.2.2 According enclosure, disrlnction 3.2.2.3 The following: a) Number b) Number type to the degree of is made in accordance of equipment can protection prr:ivided with IS : 21+`7-i!1o2*. also be characterized
by the

by

the

of poles, of positions

( if more

than

two ), and in the case of ac number of

c) Kind of current phases and rated

( ac or dc ) and frequency.

3.2.2.4 Switches are also further categorized depending severity of the duty, they can withstand, namely, the utilisation and as detailed in IS : 4064 ( Part I )-1978t.

on the category,

N~I'~E - G~ntrol switches, which serve the purpose of controlling the operation of switrhgcar or controlgtaar include: manual control switches, electromagnetically op rated control switches and pilot switchrs. 3.2.3
Rntirlg

and Operatimal
selection

Characteristics shall be based on the parameters

3.2.3.0 The indicated below: a) Utilisalion b) Frequency c) Rated d) Rated e) Marking f) Number

of switches

category, of operation,

voltages, currents, and breaking capacities, and

of poles. hJve

been

3.2.3.1 Utilj17tatiorz ~cz/eg~ry -The utilisation categoriejofswitchcs specified and defined in the following standards: a) Switclles [ seti IS : 40.;4 (Part and switch I ) - 1078: 1, [ set' IS : 406& ( Part

b) Dlxonnectors 1978t 1, and

disconnectors

I )-

*Spcificdtion for drgrees of protection provided by c~~losures for low-voltage swircllgi ar and controlgear. IOT air-break switcheq, air-br-ak disconns*ctors, sir-brrak switchtSp.~ciiicaiion tliu onnectors :~ntl fus :: combination units for volragcs not cxcttssdlng IWO V ac or 1200 V dc: Part I Grneral requirrments (jrsr rtvision ).

12

IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982 c) Switches The switches to perform. for motor duty [see IS : 40114 ( Part II)-1978*]. should be selected to suit the duty they are required

3.2.3.2 Frepenry of operation - Isolators and switches covered in IS : 4064 ( Part I )-1978T are designed for noI mally, operation once in a while. In case of very frequent operation, either molar control switches coveI-ed shall be used or the manufacturer by IS : 4064 ( Part II )-1978* consulted. 3.2.3.3 Rated voltage operational insulation An equipment voltage voltage ( U,), ( U, ). is defined and by the following:

a) Rated b) Rated rated

The rated voltage of the switch shall be so selected as to suit the operational voltage of the system in which it will be used. following

3.2.3.4 Rafed currenfs - An equipment is defined by the rated currents [ ice 4.3.2 of IS : 4064 ( Part I)-19781 1: a) Rated b) Rated thermal current (1(h), and

operational

current

(1, ).

While deciding the rated operational current of the switcil, both the and the temperature-rise making and breaking capacity (see 3.2.3.5) permissible shall be borne in mind. 3.2.3.5 Making and brenhng capacity - With respect to making and breaking capacities the switches are classified according to the utilization category given in the relevant ISS. Where switches are used for direct control of motors [see 5.1.2.3 (a) 1, the making and breaking capacity should correspond to those specified in IS : 4064 (Part II )-1978*. 3.2.3.6 It is very essential to keep the making and breaking in mind while selecting the units as has been explained in 5. --capacity

l Sp&ficz+rion for acbrrak switches, air-break disconnectors, air-break switchdirconm~c~ors 2nd fusr~ combination units for voltages not cxcrrding 1 000 V ac or 1 200 for the direct switching of individual motors (jirst V dr: Part II Specific requirements rtiion ) . tSpc*cificntion for air-break switches. air break disconnectors, air-brtsak switchdisronnrrtors and ftlsr-combination units for voltages not exceeding 1000 V ac or I 200 V dc: Part I General requirements (firs1 rruirtoa).
13

I8 t 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982 3.2.3.7 Short-circuit rating -It is important to select a switch of sufficient capacity depending upon the prospective value of the fault curr+nt expected at the point of installation, and the factors given below:

4

Short time withstand capaci& -

The switches should be of sufficient capacity to withstand the thermal and dynamic effects of short circuit current. While deciding the withstand capacity, one should take due consideration of the protective device used in series with the switches for the protection against short circuit, that is, the tripping time of the circuit breakers, the operating time of the fuses and their cut-off characteristics, if any.

b) Short-current

making capacity - For certain application, it may be unavoidable that switches ( never disconnector ) are closed on an existing fault. In such cases, it should be ensured that switches have sufficient making capacity so that they do not get damaged before the fault is cleared by the protective device installed in series.
isolators nor switches are intended to break the circuits on short-circuit breaking capacity is assigned to them.

short

NOTE -Neither circuit. No

3.2.4 Combination 1978*

Units of Switches

and Fuses -

See IS : 4064 ( Part

I )-

3.2.4.1 Arrangement of switches and fuses-The composite unit of switches and fuses may have the fuses either incorporated on the moving In the former case, the member of the switch or installed separately. composite units are termed as `fuse switch' and in the latter case as These terms are only by way of differentiation although `switch-fuse'. there is no difference in their performance, requirements, tests, etc, as laid down in, the corresponding Indian Standards. It is possible to have different rating for the switch and fuse in a combination unit. However, excepting under special conditions, the rating of the fuse should not exceed the rating of the switch. 3.2.4.2 short-circuit Fllse combination units are characterised current [ see IS : 4064 ( Part I )-1978* 1. by the rated fused

3.3 Circuit Breakers - SeeIS : 25 16 ( Parts I and II/Set 3.3.1 Function - The basic function circuit and the equipment connected of a circuit-breaker to it, make carry

1 )-19777. is to protect and break the the

1200 V dc: Par! I General requirements ( jirsl rruisron ). tSpecification for alternating current circuit-breakers: Parts I and II Rrquirements sod tests, Section 1 Voltagea not exceeding 1000 V ac or 1200 V dc (&t rwi.rion ).

l Specification for air-break switches, .air-break disconnectors, air-break switchdisconnecton and fuse-combination units for voltages not exceeding 1000 Vat or

14

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982
rated current satisfactorily at the rated voltage, as well as at abnormal It shall also be capable of making on to fault up to system conditions. its rated making capacity and breaking any short circuit up to its rated breaking capacity without any difficuhy. 3.3.2 ChsiJication operation, circuit a) dependent b) independent c) dependent
According to the method of control of the closing breakers are designated as having:

manual

closing, closing, and

manual

power closing,

d) stored energy closing. According to the interrupting and break. by the by: enclosure medium, they are divided into:

a) air-break,

b) oil immersed

According to the degree of protection provided distinction is made in accordance with IS : 2147-1962*. The type of equipment a) number c) method e) provision
performance

is also further

characterized

of poles, of closing, and for maintenance.
are also classified depending on their short-circuit

b) kind of current, d) method of opening,

NOTE- Circuit breakers
category.

3.3.3

Rating and O@rational &aracicrtitics The selection of circuit breaker shall be made given below: voltages, currents, frequency, short-circuit short-time making withstand and breaking current, categories.
To: low-voltage

3.3.3.0 parameters

based

on the

a) Rated b) Rated c) Rated d) Rated f) Rated

capacities,

and

g) Short-circuit

performance

*Specification. for degra rwitchgrar and controlgcar.

of protection provided by enciorures 15

IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982
The characteristics a) control b) types circuits and of the circuit and air supply breaker systems, and also includes:

characteristics of auxiliary

of releases, switches.

c) chnrncter-istics

3.3.3.1 Rated voltap
rated voilages a) Rated b) Rated

- A circuit breaker is defined by the following [ see 4.3.1 of IS : 2516 ( Parts I and LL~Sec 1 )-1977* 1: operational insulation voltage voltage ( U, ), and ( Vi ). shall be so selected as to in whicn it will be used. by the following 1 )-1977*]:

`The rated voltage suit the rated operational

of the circuit breaker voltage of the system

rated

3.3.3.2 Rated currerztr - A circllit breaker is defined currents [see 4.3.2 of IS : 2316 ( Parts I and II/Set a) Rated b) Rated thermal current ( &-, ), and current ( 1, ).

uninterrupted

3.3.3.3 Ratcdfrequwy - The he so chosen as to suit the service

rated frequency frequency.

of the equipment

shall

3.3.3.4 Rated shwt-circuit making and breaking capacities - The assigned values of short-circuit making and breaking capacities imply that the eqllipment is capable of making and breaking the current up to and including the rated capacity at an applied voltage and recovery voltage respectively, corresponding to 110 percent of the rated operational voltage. 3.3.3.5 Short-circuit performance category - The short-circuit performance category of the equipment st:ltes the rated operating sequence and the condition of the circuit-breaker after performin: this sequence at the rated short-circuit making and breaking capacities. For the same circuit-breaker, the values of the rated short-circuit breaking and corresponding making be different for different short-circuit performance capacities may Categories.

l Specificnr~on I'or alternating current circtlit-breakers:
and trsts, Section

1 Voltages not exceeding

Parer I and II Requiretnrntr 1000 V ac DC 1200 V dc (jr~, rcukion).

IS:10118(Part II)- 1982 3.3.3.6 The following characteristics selecting the circuit-breaker: a) For control b) For circuits should also be considered supply
and its

while and
and

-Rated control kind of current
pressure

voltage
limits

air-supply

systems -Rated

volumes of air at atnlospheric pressure required for each closing and each opening operation c) For shunt release and under t&age release d) For over-current release e) For 3.4 Motor auxiliary Starters
devices

Rated

voitage

and kind of current of

switches

Rated thermal current, kind current and range of settings -As in IS : 6875 ( Par-t I )-19'73*.

3.4.1 Ftlnction - The motor starter comprises ttle main switching together with protective devices and the control and auxiliary such as, push buttons, limit switches and pilot lamps. A motor starter has the following functions to perform:

devices,

a) Start b)

and stop the motor. This is the fundamental job of every starter. It shall be capable of switching the motor ON and OFF the line repeatedly, safely, quickly and dependably;

Lirnit motor inrush current, where necessary. This may be achieved by actual reduction of voltage at motor termin, 1s; temporary reconnection of stator winding; connecting resista:lce in the rotor circuit either temporarily or permanently or by other suitable means; Permit Under automatic voltage control protection when required; equipment; ). and ( if required

cl 4
3.4.2

4 Protect motor and other connected
Classification

3.4.2.1

The following

are the main types of motor starters [ SC~IS : 8544 ( Part I )-1977t 1.

in use:

a) Direct-on-line
lSmcificasicn circuik including 1200 V dc: Part tSpecification

starters

for control switches ( switching devices for control and suxiliarv contractor rclsts ) for`voltagO s kp to and itrcluding I 000 V ac and 1 Cenrral rrquiremrnts and tests. for motor starters for voltages not exceeding 1000 V: Pan I Direct-on-

line ac starten. 17

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982 b) Reduced voltage starters ( 1 < 1 1 Star-delta starters [ see IS : 8544 ( Part II )-1977* ] Auto-transformer starters [ se8 IS : 8544 ( Part IV )- I979t ] III/Set 2 )-1979: ]

c) Rheostatic 3.4.2.2

rotor starters

[ see IS : 8544 ( Part are further of control: classified

These types of starters to the method

as follows:

a) According

1) automatic b) According 1) manual; 2) 3) 4) 5)

( by pilot switch or sequence ( by hand-operation, of operation: to the method

control

); etc );

2) non-automatic

push-buttons,

electromagnetic; motor-operated; pneumatic; and electro pneumatic. to the interrupting medium:

c) According

1) air-break; and 2) oil-immersed break. d) According to the degree of protection in IS : 2147-1962s. 3.4.2.3 Star-delta starters in addition depending on the method of change-over a) Automatic changeover changeover provided by enclosures as

to 3.4.2.2 are further classified from star to delta, as follows: Controlled by a timer or under current relays, and Controlled buttons. by

b) Non-automatic

by hand or by push-

1 OCOV: Part II Star delta starters. tSpecilication for motor starters for voltages not exceeding 1000 V: Part IV Reduced Voltage ac starters; two-step auto transformer starters. :Specifiration for motor starters for voltages not exceeding I Ooo V: Part II1 Rheortatic rotor starters, Section 2 Additional requirements for as rheostatic rotor controllers. $Spwificarion hr degrecr of protc?ction provided by enclosures for low-voltage &vitchgcar and controlgear.

-*Specification for motor starters for voltages not exceedinc

18

IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982 3.4.2.4 Auto-transformer classified: a) According the FULL 1) automatic starters in addition from to 3.4.2.2 the starting are further position to

to method of changing ON position: changeover -

!J) non-automaticchangeover b) According to the method

Controlled by a timer or by under current relays Controlled by hand or by push but ton. the auto-transformer:

of connecting

1) open transition starters; and 2) closed transition starters. c) According to the method of cooling the auto-transformer:

1) air-cooled by connection, and 2) cooled by immersion in oil. 3.4.2.5 Rheostatic classified as follows: a) According 1) automaic rotor starters, in addition to 3.4.2.2 steps: are further

to the method changeover

of changing -

starting

2) non-automatic 3) semi-automatic b) According

changeover changeover.

Controlled by a timer by an under current relays - Controlled by hand by pushbuttons.. of resistors:

to the means of cooling

1) cooled by connection, 2) rooied by forced air, and 3) co&d by immersion in oil. 3.4.1.6 The following feautures of the switching device in the ma;u circuit shall aisa ix! considered whiic selecting the equipnxnt: a) nunlber c.i pole:<; nrediuyn ( air, oil, et.`- );

b) inir:rruprir,g

of operation [ for CX`Iml <:P~ dependent m:rn~~ai c) method operation, depcndenr power opc'rxtion ( contzctor ): store<: e:illrgv operation, ctc 1; ancj d) rated values. is

IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982

3.4.2.7 The starter may be provided with one or more of the Some of these types requires consultation following relays or releases. between the manufacturer and the user while selecting the equipment:
a) Release with shunt coil (shunt trip ), may be dependent or

b) Overload time-delay relay ( which independent of previous load ), c) Under voltage opening relay or release,

d) Instantaneous e) Other The star-delta are:

overcurrent

relay or release,

and

relays or releases.

types and characteristics of automatic changeover devices for These type starters would also have a bearing on selection. ( for example, relays. Characteristics or motor starters shall be based on the specified time all-or-nothing relays ), and

a) timers

b) under current 3.4.3

Rating and Operational The selection given below: voltages, currents, frequency, current criteria

3.4.3.0 parameters

a) Rated b) Rated c) Rated d) Inrush e) Making

and overload

settings,

and bearing category,

capacity,

f) Utilization g) Frequency h) Number

of operation, and type of auxiliary with short-circuit contact, and devices ( see 5.2.4.1). protective

k) Co-ordination 3.4.3.1

Rated voltage and frequency

a) A starter may have different rated voltages corresponding to those of main circuit [ rated operational voltage ( U,:b and rated insulation voltage ( U, ) 1, control circuit and auxiliary circuit. Further, the making and breaking capacities of the main and auxiliary contacts are stated at different rated voltages. 20

IS : 10118( Part II) - 1982

b)

The control

circuit

voltage

has extra significance

in defining:

cl

1) the limits of voltage in which the starter shall close positively, and 2) the drop-off voltage. ln accordance with IS : 2959-197.5' and IS : 8544 ( Part I )1977t, the contactors and starters shall close positively between Thus, if there is 85 to 110 percent of the rated control colrage. a starter for the rated coil voltage ot'415 V, it should positively close between 353 to 456 V. In case a 415 V starter is used for 400 V the limits available to take care of the voltage fluctuations would be: 353 456 -400 = 88.2 percent and 400 = 114 percent. The standard starters with ac coils are designed for operation on supply with a frequency of 50 Hz. NoTP:- If the coil of the starter has to be used on any frrquency other
than 50 Hz, the manufacturer of the starter should be consultrd.

4

e) When
3.4.3.2
a)

exceptionally quiet operation conditions necessitate, ac contactors with dc coils.
Rated currrnts

is required or other system or starters may be provided

Unlike other products, the term `rated current' that is, the maximum current with which the starter may be loaded continuously without the temperature-rise of the equipment exceeding the maximum permissible limits, generally does not prove suficient to bring out clearly all the capabilities of the starters. It is, also necessary to consider the type of duty cycle. `ro make the matter clear, the value of current which fises the temperature-rise is known as rated thermal current ( I,, ) and is based on the standard ( 8 hours) duty. On the other hand, the value of current in terms of which the making and breaking capacity is specified is known as rated operational current ( I, ). b) For uninterrupted duty, a starter may have to be derated for It,, . In case of starters with silver contacts, which do not rerluire there is generally no derating necessary for self-cleaning, uninterrupted duty. High ambient temperature shall, however, be considered and derating factors obtained from the manufacturers.

*Specification for contactors for valtagcs not exceeding 1000 V ac or 1200 V dc. (firs1 rmi*inn ). tSprcification for motor starters for voltagc>s not exceeding 1 000 V: Part I Dirccton-line ac starters. 21

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982 3.4.3.3 Inrurh-current criteria - While starting a motor direct-on-line, it draws a heavy inrush-current from the supply system. This may cause voltage drop likely to interfere with other equipment on the system. Further from the point of view of load connected, it may become necessary to make the stalting smooth. In case of the above J,WO conditions, it would be necessary to limit the inrush current particularly
for
bigger capacity directly across the motors. The starters which connect

the

motor

employing current generally star-delta,

lines are called direct-on-line starters and those limitation for squirrel cage induction motors are primary resistance, reactor or auto-transformer type.

starting of motors. The NOTE - Th-re are usually limitations on direct-on-line maximum rating of motor for direct-on-line starring varies from place to place and should be ascertained from the distribution authorities. 3.4.3.4

Making and breaking capacity azd utilization category

4

The making and breaking capacity of a starter depends on the voltage, frequency and the type of the load. AC motor starters have been classified into two categories with typical applications as given in Table 1 of IS : 8544 ( Part I )-1977*.
NOTE-The
capacity requirements and test conditions for making and breaking of starters of these categories have also been specified therein.

b) Table

2 of IS : 8544 ( Part I )- 1977* prescribe conditions and requirements for making and breaking capacities of motor starters corresponding to different utilization categories, and also details of the conditions and requirements for normal load operation of motor starters corresponding to ditrereht utilization categories. These should be referred to for selection of a starter for any particular utilization category.

4 A starter

may even be uprated for operational current! for example, AC, category starter may be used at higher operatlonal current while performing AC, duty provided the value does not exceed the rated thermal current (Ith ). Similarly, such starters may have to be derated while performing AC, duty.

4

Making and breaking capacity and the rated thermal current are two different things altogether and both shall be taken into If a starter has a consideration for selecting a suitable starter. rated thermal current of lOA, it is not at all necessary that it may start a motor also rated for IOA. It also depends upon its making capacity, which shall be at least 60A (six times full load current ) to start the motor direct-on-line rated for lOA,
not exceeding L000 V: Part I Direct-

*Specification for motor starters for voltages on-line ac starters.

IS : 10118( Part II) - 1982 3.4.3.5 Frequency of operation

4 b)

In the relevant ISS, the starters are different intermittent duty ratings also.

classified

according

to

For certain devices, such as machine tools and rolling mills, a Such an operation starter may have to operate very frequently. has the following effects: 1) Greater 2) Higher 3) Higher mechanical breaking wear and tear, requirements, and capacity

temperature-rise,

4) Reduction

in the life of contacts.

cl

It is not only important to know the number of operations per hour, but also the period in each cycle for which the starter remains closed and open. This is determined from the following expression: On-load Factor = Switching-in period I----Total period per cycle carrying x 100

Thus, for example, a starter 10 minutes shall be termed as:

100 A for 4 minutes in every minutes ' or per hour, 40 percent ' (see

' Intermittent ` Intermittent
Fig. 3).

duty 100 A, 4 minutes/IO duty 100 A, 6 operations

TIME IN MINUTES FIG. 3 INTEPMITMNT LOADING CYCLE

23

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982
d) If the frequency of operation is very rapid, such as in inching, the starters open even before the st:arting inrush currents have died down, with the result that unlike ordinary operations, the starters have to break even higher currents. 3.5 Factory Built Assemblies consideration.

of Switchgear

and Controlgear

-

Under

SECTlON

3

SPECIFIC GUIDELINES VOLTAGE EQUIPMENT

FOR HIGH OF EQUIPMENT

4. SPECIFIC GUIDELINES FOR SELECTION FOR VOLTAGES ABOVE 1000 V 4.1 Fuses 4.1.1 Fzcnction - The provisions given in 3.1.1 shall
4.1.2 voltages Classification above
1 000 V:

apply.

4.1.2.1 The
a)

following

-

are the two main

types

of fuses for system

Current limiting fuses [ SIX IS : 9385 ( Part I )-1979*

] ] (

general purpose back-up Class Class 1 2

b) Expulsion and similar fuses [ SEG1s : 9385 ( Part II )-1980f 4.1.3

R&rg

and Operational Characteristics above 1 000 V shall be

4.1.3.0 The selection of fuses for voltages made based on the parameters given below: a) Rated b) Rated c) Rated voltage, current, insulation level, and

d) Class of fuse. 4.1.3.1 Specific guidelines on the choice and application voltage fuses are provided in IS : 9385 ( Part III )-19801.
*Specification tSpecification $Spccification fusea.

of

high

for high voltage fuqes: Part I Current limiting fuws. for high voltage fuses: Part 11 Expulsion and similar fuses. for high voltage fuses: Part III Application guide for high voltage

IS : 10118(Part II) - 1982 4.1.4 JVotes ONCircuit Protection 4.1.4.0 Circuits to be protected may classes, steady load circuits and fluctuating
be divided into load circuits. two general

4.1.4.1 Steacly load circuitsCircuits with loads which do not fluctuate much above normal value may be called ` steady load ' circuits. If, as often happens, fuses are the only protection in a steady load circuit, their rated current would be the standald value, equal to or the next Ijigher than that of the circuit or of the apparatus, whichever is smaller. If other over-current protection is pro\ ided, or if discrimination is required, a fuse ol` still greater rated current may be permissible or necessary.

4.1.4.2 FLuctr;atir/g load circuits - Circuits with loads which may fluctuate to peaks of comparatively short duration above normal value, for example, motor circuits, capacitor circuits and transformer circuits, all of which are subject to a switching transients, may be called ` fluctuating load circuits `.
For fluctuating-load circuits, the fuses should have time current characteristics such as to allow the transient o\er-current to be carried without operation. For this purpose it is usually necessary to select fuses of a rated current greater than that of the circuit. a) Motor circuits - Fuses for service on motor circuits should be carefully selected to ensure freedom from unwanted oper<ltion due tc on startmg and, at the same time, to a\-oid deterioration frequent starts with currents greater than the rated current oi the fuse but less than the fusing current corresponding to the *duration of the switching-in peak. b) Capacitor circuit5 - It is essential that fuses shall not be b:Dwn by the inrush current which flows when a capacitor is switched in. It is accordingly desirable to obtain a definite recommendation from the fuse manufacturer as to the current rating of the fuse.
C)

Transformer circuits - The following factors, where appropriate, should be taken into consideration in choosing the current rating of the fuse in the choice of primary circuits OCtransformers: 1) The inrush current (the inrush current tends to decrease full-load current, transformer rating ); 2) Overload currents to be carried as a proportion with increase of in

by the transformer;

3) Discrimination with fuses or relays in the secondary circuit, bearing in ,mind that such protection is usually required to operate without blowing the primary fuse; 25

fS I 10118 (Part II)-1982 4) The desirability, on overhead systems, of reducing the risk of fuses being blown as a result of lightning over-voltages; 5) The necessity of operating sufficiently fast for phase-to-earth faults in the :ransformer secondary terminal zone; and 6) Discrimination devices nearer with fuse or other to the supply source. over-current protective

4.1.4.3 I)iscrimit~a~ion - The following sub-clauses set out the principles on which correct discrimination in operation between fuses and fuses or between fuses and other over current protective devices depends. In view of the many variables in\.olved in predicting discrimination it is recommended that the assistance of the manufacturer should be sought in the form of specific information on discrimination.

FAULT ' FAULl (11 PROSPECTIVE FIG. 4 CURRENT

(2)

TYPICAL TIME/CURRENT CHARACTERWTICS OF CURRENT LIMITING FUSES OF DIFFERENT CURRENT .X~TINGS

a) Dixriminotion

between furrs - Discrimination occurs when the fuse or fuses nearest to a fault operate, leaving ail other Since discrimination is required fuses in the circuit unimpaired. at any current up to the maximum fault levei of the system, it is necessary that the time current characteristics of a'ny fuse A must lie, throughout its length, below that ofany fuse B nearer to the supply point, as shown in Fig. 4. Where fuses are used on the primary and secondary sides of a transformer, the current ratio should be taken into account. Discrimination can be relied upon under these conditions, however, only when the arcing time of fuse A is small compared with its pre-arcing time. 26

IS : 10118

( Part II ) - 1982

The first important factor for discrimination is pre-arcing time; in the second place it &all be noted that an alteration in the temperature of the fuses gives them time current characteristics different from the type test values; and in the third pkace it shall also be noted that the time current characteristics may differ from the type test values according to circuit conditions (for example, asymmetry and power factor) at the time of On short-circuit, since the pre-arcing time is short, discrimination cannot be predicted from pre-al cing time current characteristics. This is because the arcing time becomes a higher proportion of the total operating time, wirh the result tha[ the current during the arcing time of the smaller fuse may cause the larger fuse to operate. Information on arcing time may be used to prepare curves of virtual tota! operating time to assist in predicting discrimination. An alternative method of' predicting discrimination is to compare the operating joule integrai of the smaller fuse with the pre-arcing joule integral of the !nrger fuse. Figure 5 shows generally the diEerence in form between the time current characteristics of expulsion fuses and those of current limiting fuses, and when, those apply, a wide divergence

PROSPEC

TiVE

CURRENl

D - Expulrion fuse C - Currt nt limiting rust Fro. 5 TYPICAL TIME/CURRENT CHARACTERIS?~S OF A CURRZNTLIMITING FUSE AND AN EXPUUION Fuse 27

M I 10118( Part II) - 1982
of current rating is necessary. The characteristics of the fuses selected should be widely separated at small currents, in order that they shall not cross at larger currents.

b)

Discrimination between fusrJ anti other over-current protcctivr devices The general use of fuses with other over-current protective devices is for back-up protection; that is to say, the other device is required to clear the lower values of fault-current through the normal operation of its automatic trips, and only at currents above some predetermined value is the fuse required to take over the protection of circuit. It is, therefore, necessary that the time current characteristics of the fuse and of the other devices shall cross at the desired value of current. This promotes continuity of supply by allowing operation of the fuses only with electricai faults and minimizes the possibility in three-phase circuits of single-phasing, such as may be caused by the operation of a fuse in one phase only. Figure 6 shows a typical time current characteristic for a fuse and some other devices, T being the take-over point. At currents above 7 there remains the possibility that although the fuse interrupts the circuit, the current it passes may, by its magnetic or thermal effects, damage the other device; therefore, quite apart from any question of breaking-capacity, the back-up fuses should have a small cut-off current. It is desirable that the other device should have an adequate short-time current rating. The take-over point should be zt a current slightly less than the breaking capacity of the other device but to avoid unnecessary operation of the fuses by any currents that can be safely interrupted by the other device, it is necessary to ensure that the take-over point is not unduly low. In addition, the maximum cut-off current of the fuse, whether under symmetrical or asymmetrical conditions, must be within the making capacity of the other device. To ensure this, it may be necessary to use a fuse of lower current rating than would be required by other considerations. Where the breaking capacity of a motor starting device does not greatly exceed the starting current of the motor, close co-ordination between fuse and over current relay is necessary However, in selecting an to ensure adequate protection. an ample margin must be allowed appropriate fuse rating, against repetitive motor starting surge currents in order to guard against possible fuse ageing and it is usually advisable to seek the For this application, actual fuse manufacturer's guidance. 23

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982 current rating is of secondary importance compared with the ability of a given fuse to withstand stated motor surge conditions and the aim should be rather to select a fuse having the lowest values of cut-off current and total Z2t for a given motor starting abi!ity. IS related to total operating-time
is related to openmg (see relevant IS for circuit breakers) time SUPPLY

I"\,
FAULT PROSPECTIVE CURRENT protrctivr devict 01' A CURRENT DEVICE E -: Other over-current F = Fuse 1:~. I; TYPIGAL TIME/CURRENT CHARACTERI~TYX IJMITINC: ~+JSE ANn ANOTHER OVER-(IURREST

4.2 Switches
4.2.1 Func/im

--

`l`he

provisions

given in 3.2.1 shall apply.

4.2.2 Clnss$~alicm - There exists a large variety of switches ( isolators ) vvhicI1 may he grouped broadly as indoor type and outdoor type and further classified as fb!loWS:
a)

b) c) d) e)

Air break,`oil break/gas, On-load or off-load, Single-pole or three-pole, Indi\.idual operated or group Operating mechanism: I ) Manual, 2) Pneunlatic, 3) Electrical. and

operated,

29

IS I 10118 ( Part IL ) - 1982 f) Open type or metal g) Type of mounthg: I) Horizontal 2) Vertical. h) Type of break: 1) Horizontal, 2) Vertical, and 3) Pantograph. i) Number 4.2.3 of breaks per pole. Character&tics above 1 000 V ac shall be upright, and enclosed,

Rating aped Operational

4.2.3.0 Selection of switches for voltages made based on the parameters listed below: a) Rated b) Rated c) Rated d) Kated voltage: frequency; current, breaking current carrying

capacity

under

site conditions;

current; level; current; off-load, capacitor switching, etc );

e) Basic insulation f) Rated

peak short-circuit duty ( on-Ioad, acceleration; current; capacity; pressure

g) Switching h) Siesmic

,j) Short-time k) Making m) Rated

of compressed and

air/gas

supply;

n) Accessories

required;

p) L'isual discharge voltage. Norr,: -- Itc,ms (qi, !h!. rn) and !p) are noratally
for voltages above 132 kY for which th:: uvx shocld

requiwd to be considered consult thy :nanufacturer.

4.3 Circuit

Breaktrs The provisions The of 3.3.1 shall apply. shall apply, except (g) and

4.3.1 Function 4.3.2 Classijication (h) therein.

provisions

of 4.2.2

30

IS : 10118 ( Part II) - 1982 4.3.3 Rating and Operational Characteristics for voltages below: above 1 000 V

4.3.3.0 The selection of circuit breakers hall be made based on the parameters given a) Rated b) Rated c). Rated d) Rated e) Rated 1') Rated voltage, insulation frequency, normal current, breaking recovery current, level,

short-circuit t.ransient

Loltage,

g) Out-of-phase h) Rated j) Rated operating duration

charact'eristics, sequence, of short-circuit, cable-charging breaking and and current, single capacitor bank

k) Rated line-charging breaking cllrrents, m) K;tted small inclucti\,e factors, rrquirements.
p\trcit.rxr

n) Overvoltage p) Reclosing NOI.%- TIIC

should furnish full particulxrr of rhz .iuxiliary eq~~tpmrrit, burh as r( xto:s, trm,f~>rm-r-, - tc, whiclt mav b, ttvd tn conjuzxtion WJI~ the ,,lrLuit-tmxkclillrtallatton for the inf'urmation of the m.~nular;curr:r.

4.3.3.1

Selectinn of rated volicge

a) The rated voltage of' the circuit-breaker should be chosen so as to be XI least eq11al to the highest voltage ofthe system at the I,oint whet-e the circi!it-breaker is LO he installed. i\io~~ ---`rhr: variations
systr,1:1. vxtaliuns
brvakrr.

p rrnlttccl by rh III IIA!I iLcctri( I(-. Rule
of rh.
in

on dcclarwi

V:~IIC of high account

4t pnwnt may conflict wills :I,<>

voltage

and wtra

high .wltagt.

s :?ply
wlth

volt.\gc
tit,,

take-n into

:tcc:~rdsncc

rclcvdnt

Indi.in

f.,ct ~i,wld

IN hr>rm: tn rntnd

whole svlrctrng

while desgning the chrc,uit. on c:rck:rt-brq:akers. Srhie the rat ,d voltage ol I: circuit-brcake:s
St~ndsrtls

b) `The rated vloltage of a circuit-breaker shall be selected irom the stand:\rd vaIu+.*s given in IS : 25,6 ( Part Il,lSec 2 )-1')80*. . . Preferred combinations of raced voltage, rnleti short-arcult The currpnt and rated normal cl:? rent are also ,yik-cn th:rein.

l Spe< afi(alion I:tr :rJ~~nating circuit-Sreakw% <&age, above I 000 V SC (&f ,CCIAU)~ ;.
31

Part

II

Raring,

S*'CI~O~ 2

FCT

IS u 10118( Part II ) c 1982 insulation level specified in Tables 1 to 3 of IS : 2516 ( Part II) Set 2 )-1980* should also be taken into account in the selection of the rated voltage. c) The rated voltages given in IS : 2516 ( Part II[Sec 2 )-1980* are voltages between lines. 4.3.3.2
a)

Shection of sated insulation level
1.

This standard an&es in orincinle to circuit-breakers both in exposed and non-exposed installitions, but the test voltage values for circuit-breakers in non-exposed installations are under consideration. rated insulation level of a circuit-breaker shall be selected from Tables 1 to 3 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )-1980*. The values in these standards apply to both indoor and outdor circuit-breakers in exposed installations. For the choice between the different insulation levels corresponding to a given rated voltage, reference shall be made to IS : 3716-1978t. It shall be specified in the enquiry whether t!le circuit-breaker is to be of indoor or outdoor tyoe.

b) The

4

The insulation co-ordination in an electrical system serves to minimize damage to the electrical equipment due to overvoltages and tends to confine flashovers ( when these cannot be economically avoided ) to points where they should cause damage to economically and operationally acceptable level. should he taken to limit the overvoltages on the terminals of the circuit-breaker to stated values below the insularion level. The choice of specifying the values to which the lightning overvoltages should be limited is referred to in IS : 3716-19787.

d) Precautions

Where a circuit-breakeris required for a position necessitating a higher insulation level, this shall be specified in the enquiry.
If circuit-breakers having reduced insulation are to be installed where Sol-E they may be used for synchronitation, an increase of the value of power-frequency withstand voltage across the open circuit-breaker may be necessary.

4.3.3.3 Ratedfrequency - The manufacturer should be consulted if a circuit-breaker is to be used at any frequency other than its rated frequency.
*Specification for alternating circuit-breaken: Part II Rating, voltages above 1 000 V ac (./ir~r rrvtiion ). tApplication guide for insulation co-ordination (J%SIrevi.+ ). Section 2 For

32

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982 4.3.3.4
a) The 7;;

Selection of rated normal turfant

rated normal current of a circuit-breaker shall he selected the standard values given in 7 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )*. Preferred combinations of rated normal current, rated voltage and rated short-circuit current are given in 23 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )-1980*.

b) It should be noted that circuit-breakers have no specified continuous overcurrent capability. When selecting a circuitbreaker, therefore, rated normal current should be such as to make it suitable for any load current that may occur in service. Where overcurrents are expected the manufacturer should be consulted. 4.3.3.5 Selection of rated short-circuit breaking current a) As stated in 8.0 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )-1980*, the rated short-circuit breaking current is expressed by two values, namely: 1) the rms value of its ac component ( short-circuit 2) its percentage dc component. current ), and

varies with time from the b) The percentage dc component When the circuit-breaker meets incidence of the short-circuit. the standard requirements stated in 8 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )-1980*, the percentage dc component the circuit-breaker may deal with is not less than the value given in Fig. I of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )-1980* at the end of the time interval corresponding to the shortest possible opening time of the circuit-breaker plus, for a circuit-breaker to be tripped solely by a farm of auxiliary power a minimum delay time of one half cycle of rated frequency. Fig. 1 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/SecZ )-1980' is based on constancy of the ac component and a short circuit power factory of 0.07 for 50 Hz. c) When the application point is sufficiently remote electrically from rotating machines, the dc decrement is negligible and it is only necessary to verify that the short-circuit power factor is not less than 0.07 and the minimum time delay of the protective equipment is not less than one half cycle of rated frequency. In these ,conditions, it is suficient that the selected circuit-breaker has a rated short-circuit breaking current not less than the initial symmetrical fault current at the point where the circuit-breaker is to be installed.
*Specification for alternating circuit-breakers; above 1 ooo v ac ( rroirien ).

jirs;

Part II Kating,

Section 2 For voltaga

33

IS : 10118( Part lX) - 1982
d) In some cases, the percentage dc component may be higher than the standard values given in Fig. 1 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set `2 )For instance when circuit-breakers are in the vicinity of 1980*. centres of generation, the ac component may decrease more quickly Aen iu the normal case. The short-circuit current may In such then not have a current zero for a number of cycles. circumstances, the duty of the circuit-breaker may be eased, for example, by delaying its opening, or by connecting an additional damping devices with another circuit-breaker and opening the circuit-breakers in sequency. If the standard valuesofpercentage dc component cannot be adhered to, the required percentage shall be specified in the enquiry and testing shall be subject to agreement between the manufacturer and the user [see also 4.3.3.6 ( c ) ( 2 ) 1. e) The rated short-circuit current shall be selected from the standard values given in 8.2 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )-1980*. Preferred combinations of rated short-circuit current rated voltage and rated normal current are given in Table 13 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/f&c 2 )-1980*. 4.3.3.6 Selectiorr or/ rated trnnsient recovery voltage Jrst-pole-to-clear and rated characteristicsfir short-litu faults fiutor

a) The prospective transient recovery voltage wave of the system should not exceed the reference line representing the transient recovery voltage specified for the circuit-breaker; it should cross the specified delay line close to zero voltage hut should not recross it later, see 9 of IS : 25 16 ( Part I I/Set 2 )- 1Y80*.
NOTE - Thr transient recovc'ry voltages which appear when breaking the highest short-circuit currents are not necessarily more severe than these which appear For example, the rate-of-rise of transient recovery voltage may he in other cases. higher when breaking smaller currents.

b) The stpsdard values given for rated voltages of 72.5 kV and less apply to a first- ole-to-clear factor of 1.5, but for voltages exceeding 72'5 k PI a choice between first-pole-to-clear factors l-3 and 1.5 is provided. The factor I.3 is based on a system with effectively earthed neutral where difficulty due to threephase faults not involving earth is considered highly improbable. For applications in isolated neutral and resonent earthed systems, the first-pole-to-clear factor 1'5 should be used. For applications in system with effectively earthed neutral in cases where the probability of dificulty due to three-phase faults not involving
*Specification for alternating circuit-breakers: voltages above 1 000 V ac ( J%JI r&&n ). Part II Rating, Section 2 For

34

IS : 10118 (Part

II) - 1982

earth cannot be disregarded, and the applications in systems with non-effectively earthed neutral, a first pole-to-clear factor of 1'5 may be necessary. c) Generally it may not be necessary to consider alternative transient recovery voltages as the standard values specified cover the majority of practical cases. More severe conditions may occur in some cases, for instance:

1) In the case of a short-circuit immediately after a transformer without any appreciable additional capacitance between the transformer and the circuit-breakers, both the peak voltage and rate-of-rise of transient recovery voltage may exceed the values specified. 2) In the case of a short-circuit on circuit-breakers in the vicinity of centres of generation, the rate-of-rise of transient recovery voltage may reach higher values than those indicated in this standard. d) In such cases it may be necessary for special transient recovery voltage characteristics to be agreed between the manufacturer and the user. e) When circuit-breakers are required for installations necessitating the assignment of rated short-line fault characteristics, the line on which they are to be used shall have a surge impedance and peak-factor not greater than the appropriate values given in 10.1.2 and Table 7 of IS : 2516 (Part II/Set 2). 1980*. f) Even in cases, where requirements of ( e ) above zre not met, it is still possible that a standard circuit-breaker is suitable, especially if the short-circuit current of the system is less than the rated short-circuit-breaking current of the circuit breaker. `This may be established by calculating the prospective transient recovery voltage for short-line. faults from the rated characteristics by the method given in Appendix B of E : 2516 ( Part IIiSec 2 )-1980* and comparison with the prospective transient recovery voltage deribed from the actuai characteristics of the system. `?;) If special short-line fault c!lnracteristics hc agreed to between the manufacturer are required, and the user. they shall

4.3.3.7 Selection of out-of-prse rharacteristirs - !n case of' slvitching duriug out-of-phase conditions, the rcqu:irements 0: this :;iandard where a I_._ *Specification for alternating circuit-brrakrrs: +oltmger above 1 @OO V 3~ (&t ~rvirin~ ). 35
Part II Kating, .\,rtion 2 For

IS : 10118(Part

II) - 1982

rated out-of-phase breaking current as given in 14 of IS : 251ti ( Part II/Set 2 )-I980* has been assigned, cater for the great majority of applications of circuit-breakers. Several circumstances would have to arise simultaneously to product a severity in excess of those covered by the tests sl'ecifled and, as switching during out-of-phase conditions is rare, it woll!d be uneconomic to design circuit-breakers for the most extreme In locations where frequent out-of-phase switching operations conditions. are anticipated, or where for other reasons out-of-phase switching is a matte! of substantial concern, the user should consider determining actual A special circuit-breaker, or one rated at a system rccol. cry voltages. higher voltage, may sometimes be requil-etl. AS an alternative solution, the sever-ity of` out-of-phase sM.itching duty is being Icduc,cd in several systems by using relays with co-ordinated impedance bcnsitivc elements to cc,mloI the instant of power being appliccl to the opening release so that interruption may occur either substantially alter or sr\bstantialIy before the instant the ptrase angle is 180". Arranging rel::ys to open both ends of a line silr~uIt;mcously may be of subst;.miA :~dclit ionnl benefit from both ;t prob:,bility and a transirnt voltage point of view.

:I)

?`11(. ra(ec! short-circuit that \zhich corresponds

making current or a circtiit-brrnker is to the I-atpd volt;tge [ SFP 11 of IS : 251~;

( Part II/%X

2 )-1980'

1.

bj l`h~ selcclc~ 1 circuit-bleaker Aould IA;I\(' a la11 d short-rircult nlaking current not less than the highest peak value of fault currem. Unless otherwise stated, the rated s1101 I-nr.czit making CUHcnt is 2'5 times ( that is, approximately 1.8 h 42 times ) the ac component of the rated short-circuit breaking current. c) In some cases, for example, when induction motors are
electrically close, the maximum peak value of tile fault current may be more than 2'5 times the ac component of the shortbe circuit current. In such cases, a special design should avoided and a standard circuit-breaker having a suitable rated short-circuit making current should be selected. 4.3.3.9 a) The 7:;: Selection of operating sequence in raraice rated operating sequence of a circuit-breaker shall be one operating sequence given if 13 of IS : 25 16 ( Part II/Set 2): . Unless otherwise specrfied, the values of the time Part II Rating,
Section

I 000V ac (Jrsl rcuLh

*Specification for circuit-breakers:
).

2 For valtages above

IS : 10118( Part II)
intervals given in 13 of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )-1980' apply and the rated operating sequences provided for are: 1) 0-3minCO 3 min CO, and CO (for circuibbreakers

- 1982 shall

2) O-@3s-CO-3minfor rapid auto-reclosing).

intended

The timing of 0.3 second is suitable in cases where three poles of the breaker trip for all types of faults.

all the

W if 4

the current, the circuit-breaker is capable of breaking on auto-reclosing is less than the rated short-circuit breaking current, this shall be specified by the manufacturer. When the operating sequence in service is more severe than provided for in this standard, this shall be specified by the user in his enquiry and/or order, so that the manufacturer may modify the rating of the circuit-breaker appropriately. Examples of circuit-breakers for special duty are those used for controlling arc furnaces, electrode boilers and, in certain cases, rectifier plants. Single-pole operation of a multi-pole circuit-breaker, for example, with a view to single-phase making and breaking, is also a special duty. of short-circuit (for circuit-breakers uot

4.3.3.10 &leclion of rated duration fitted with direct ouercurrent release )

a) The standard value of rated duration of short-circuit of IS : 2516 ( Part II/Set 2 )-1980* is one second. b) When a higher duration However, be consulted.

given in 12

is necessary, the manufacturer should a value of 3 seconds is recommended.

c) For short-circuit durations greater than the rated duration, the relation between current and time, unless otherwise stated by the manufacturer, is in accordance with the following formula: 1% = constant 4.4 Factory Built Assemblies Under consideration. of Switchgear and Controlgear -

l Specification for alternating circuit-breakers: Part voltages above I 000 V ac (&t rruisiom ).
37

II Kahg,

Srcrion

2

For

IS : 10118 ( Part SECTION SELECTION 5. OTHER

II) - 1982 4 MISCELLANEOUS GUIDELINES FOR OF SWlTCHGEAR AND CONTROLGEAR OF SELECTION OF EQUIPMENT

CONSIDERATIONS

5.0 The following paragraphs, provide for such considerations other than those covered in the earlier clauses; considerations of typical application for whicll the equipment is intended, circuitry, load, and other service conditions which have a bearing on selection. 5.1 Switches ( voltages below 1 000 V ) [ SC' also 3.2 J.

feeder arrangement utilizing 5.1.1 Main Switchboards -A typical switches on main switchboards feeding other sub-distribution boards is shown in Fig. 7. These are generally used FS isolator, composite unit of isolator and fuses or cotnposite unit of load break switches and fuses.

5.1.1.1 As isolafor --Switches are sometimes used on main switchboards as isolators in series with non-drawout type of circuit breakers but These isolators are not supposed to make or break any befol-e them. current but are required to be operated off-load to disconnect the circuitbreaker from the supply for maintenance purposes. For such applications, Furtherisolators conforming to IS : 4064 ( Part I )-1978* may be used. more, it should be ensured that unless the isolators are installed at a place approachable to authorized persons only, interlock is provided to safeguard that the isolator contacts open or close only after circuit breaker is in the `off) position.
5.1.1.2 :!s lz composite unit of isnlaior dnd HRC frlses T When the circuit breaker does not have a breaking capacity sufficient for the prospective short-circuit current at the point of installation, HRC fuses are used to provide back-up protection (MC 5.2.2.2 ). Under such circumstances, the isolators and fuses may be combined together with advantage as one unit to serve dual purpose of isolation of the circuit breaki:r and safety during replacement of the fuses. NWE - For co-ordination of circuit breakers and fuses see 5.2.2.2.

5.1.1.3 -4s composite unit of load brcdk switches andfuscs - When a feeder is feeding other sub-distribution boards it is preferable to use a circuitbreaker but snm~ time for economic considerations switch-fuse units are used instead of circuit-breaker where considered adequate on duty consideration. A circuit-breaker shall be preferred wherever frequent operations are involved and if remote operations are envisaged. While the fuses protect the cable, the switch is used to make and break the circuit.
disconnectors and fuse combination units for voltages not exceeding 1000 V ac or 1 200 V
*Specification for air-break switches, (&I air-break disconnectors, air-break
switch-

dc: Part I General requirementa

rroirion ).

38

COMPOSITE UNIT OF ISOLATOR AND FUSE FUSE ISOL ATOR @

Q

CIRCUI~-BREAKER

4

CIRCUIT-BREAKER

t; ..

E
7A Isolator 78

A composite
isolator

unit of and fuse

IC

Load break switch
wlth fuse

FIG. 7

APPLICATION OF SWITCH ON MAIN SWITCHBOARD

IS I 10118( Part II ) - 1982 5.1.2 Load Feeders 5.1.2.1 Switch to be operated on ` no load ' - If a switch is intended to be operated_only on ' No Lqad `, then it can only serve the purpose of isolating other equipment from the supply after the load has been Under these conditions, an isolator switched off by some other device. would prove most economical although any other type of switch could also be used. If isolators arc: used care should be taken that either they are interlocked with the main load switching device like circuit-breaker, starter, etc (se? Fig. 8A ) so that they can only be operated after the main device is in the off position or they should be approachable only to authorized persons.
5.1.2.2 Feeders with steady load - In case the load is steady, such as for light and power circuits, all that is necessary is to consider the power If the circuit is fairly non-inductive (power-factor factor of the circuit. greater than 0.8 ), then a switch conforming to ac 21 category will do; otherwise, either switches of other categories IS : 4064 ( Part I )-1978* or motor control switch will have to be selected. 5.1.2.3 Feeders with fluctuating load - The typical fluctuating motor or condenser feeders where the switches are used either starter or as isolator in the motor feeder. loads are as motor

a) As motor stnrfer - When a switch is used as a motor starter, it should comply with the requirement of IS : 4064 ( Part II )-1978t. Guidance may be taken from 3.4 for tile proper selection as a starter. For very small motors ( generally less than 1 kW j, accurate protection of the motor is sometimes dispensed with and fuses are used together with starter as a rough overload and shortcircuit protection ( see Fig. 8B ). This is, however, not encouraged. An improvement upon this circuit is on the incoming side and motor starters for the individual outgoing feeders as shown in Fig. 8C. For bigger motors, starter with an overload protective device should be used for each individual motor ( see Fig. 8D ) or a combination of circuit-breaker with star-delta, reversing or simlar purposes motor starters made as shown in Fig. 8E. Fuses are required before the circuit breaker if the short circuit level is higher the breaking capaciy of the circuit breaker. *Specification fbr air-break switches, air-break disconnectors, air-break switchdisconnectors and fuse-combination units for voltages not exceeding 1000 V ac or 1200 V dc : Part I General requirements (/irsr rroirtin ). tspecificacion for air-brc,ak switches, air-break disconnectors, air-break switch disconnectors and fuse-combination unitr for voltages not exceeding 1 000 V ac or 1200 V dc : Part II Specific requirements for the direct switching of individual motors (JrS# &&a). 40

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982
b) As isolating switch - A typical circuit of a motor feeder as is commonly adopted is shown in Fig. 8F. The starter is there to switch ON and OFF the motor. The switch is intended to ease isolation for carrying out the maintenance work on the motor and the starter. The switch may also sometimes be called upon to break the circuit in emergency. The ftrses are used for shortcircuit protection and they may be combined with the switch. The provision of the switch as means of isolation in a motor feeder should be studied from the following aspects: 1) The frequency at which be carried out, 3) Cost involved. maintenance and work is required to

2) The extent of safety desired,

COMPOSITE UNIT 6)301;O;s~OR

MOTOR

STARPER

MOTOR STARTER

FUSE

0
8C

CIRCUIT-BREAKER

MOTOR STARTER

MOTOR STARTER

41

IS : 10118( Part II)- 1982

CIRCUIT BREAKER

LOAD BREAK

MAIN

LOAD

BREAK

SWITCH

Fnc.

8

TYPICAL ARRANGBMENTS OF Swrrcwes IN h40TOR hEDBRS

5.12.4C'onden~ar load .-. The current taken by capacitors leads the Hence the selectxon of the switches needs ca.r~tirI voltage almost. by 9OT. consideration as it is liable to be &.ected hy the active recovery voltage When a capacitor is shout circuited the during the switching period. peak due of the di$charge Currcnl is high, Sut decrease9 rapidly since the frquency is high and the time constant is low. Generally, standard switches may be ured with suitabln derating. The extent to which the deraring has to be applied is KO be obtained from the manufacturer of the switches. 42

IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982 5.2 Fuses ( Voltages Below 1000 V ) 5.2.1 General
-

Seealso3.1.

A fuse should be selected such that: due to momentary overload, or short-

a) it does not operate

b) it operates only in case of excessive sustained overloads circuit, and c) it offers proper discrimination.

It should also be borne in mind that due to higher fusing factor, the fuw should generally be treated as a means for short-circuit protection and other devices having relays releases with accurate operation should be employed for the overload protection when the connected equipment does not have any overload capacity. The considerations necessary for the selection of general purpose fuses designed for ordinary types of loads are explained in 5.2.2 to 5.2.5. Fuses for special types of loads like rectifiers, railways or mines requirements, should be selected in consultation with the manufacturer. 5.2.2 Radial Feeders with Steady Load - In such cases, fuses are generally the only means of protection of the connected cables and wires. The life of cables reduces very considerably even with slight sustained overload. It should, therefore, be kept in mind that the cable has sufficient overload capacity in relation with the minimum non-fusing factor of the fuse selected. 5.2.2.1 Co-ordination between twofuses in series - It is a good practice to provide fuses at the point where the cross-section of the cables decreases. There may, therefore, be three and four fuses behind one another in a radial feeder without any other protective device in between ( JeGFig. 9A ). proper selectivity is, therefore, necessary SO that in the event of a fault, only the fuse nearest to the fault operates and the others remain intact. Since in a ra.diai feeder, almost the same value of the fault current flows through all t,he fuses in Series, it is &ear that all such fuses should not :,ave the same rating. Fig. 913 shows the typical characteristic curves of the cartridge f`uses. Thesr CUI`VC!::~re drawn between the pre-arcing time and the prospective short-circ,ui: current. There is a considerable difFerence betwern the pKa.-arcq time: of two cotrsecgti, e fuses at lower For CIPX ~liscrirninnlior: in overioad prospective short-circilic CUrfeolt, When Ihe twO fuses have a difkrence range, it is gene4lv szfficient. of 25 percent between their pre-arcing time. in the rsnqe of higher time of the minor prospective short-circuit currents, if the pre-arcirlg fuse; is less than 0 02 second, two fuses cokmected in series would offer discriminate operation only if the rotal I"t value of the minor fuse is less 43

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982
than the pre-arcing I"t of the major further borne in mind that: fuse [see Fig. 9C 1. It should be

a) due to the manufacturing tolerances, the pre-arcing fuse is not an exact value, but varies to some extent; b) as soon as the arcing takes in the circuit reduces very thus the major fuses are the pre-arcing time of the

time of the and

place in the minor fuses the current sharply due to the arc resistance and not affected to the same extent during minor fuse.

The manufacturers should therefore be consulted for the proper rating of the fuses which would offer discriminate operation between one another for the prospective short-circuit currents expected at the point of As a rough guide, a ratio of l-5 between the rating of the installation. major and minor fuses may be expected to give discriminate operation for fault levels up to 40 kA. 5.2.2.2 Co-or&a&r. between a circuit-breaker and a fuse on the incoming side - When fuses are used for the back-up protection of circuit-breakers, link-type fuses are normally used for this purpose. The circuit-breakers are usually provided with overload and short-circuit releases and their operating times are SO co-ordinated by the supplier that no damage is caused to the circuit-breaker for the duration of short-circuit current For the co-ordinated selection of the according to their tripping time. fuse, the following requirements should therefore be fulfilled: a) For normal overloads, the circuit-breaker should be tripped its own overload relay and the fuse should not operate; by

b) Short-circuit release should trip the circuit-breaker for all shortcircuit currents within its breaking capacity and the fuse should not operate; and c) For all short-circuit currents in excess of breaking capacity, the fuse should operate sufficiently early so as to prevent opening of the circuit breaker on currents in excess of its breaking capacity and damage due to the thermal and dynamic effects. A well co-ordinated combination in the range of heavy short-circuit current is shown in Fig. 10. It should be ensured that: a) the rating of the fuse is as high as possible so that the characteristic of the fuse lies as far away as possible (point No. 1 in Fig. IO ) from the point of intersection of overload and short-circuit release characteristic ( see also 5.2.4.1). Thir fulfills the requirements of S22.2 (a). 44

IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982

b) the fuse characteristic and the short-circuit release intersect at a point ( No. 2 in Fig. lo), within capacity of the circuit-breaker. This fulfills the of 5.22.2 (b); and
C)

characteristic the breaking requirement's

the total operating time of the fuse is less than the tripping delay of the circuit-breaker for short-circuit currents equal to the breaking capacity of the circuit-breaker. This fulfills the requirements of 5.2.2.2 (c).

It may be seen that the above combination gives ideal protection. Accurate characteristic curves for circuit-breaker, short-circuit releases, etc, are generally not available and it is recommended that manufacturers should be consulted. The use of fuses advantages: of maximum permissible rating has the following

a) Prevention of indiscriminate operation under overloads - The fuse characteristics lies much above the overload characteristic of the bimetal release and, as such, chances of indiscriminate operation under normal overload conditions are totally elimated; b) Less frequrnt replacement of fuses - The fuse does not operate at short-circuit currents less than the breaking capacity of the circuit-breaker. Frequent operation of the fuses is thus prevented and there is, therefore, less expenditure and less idle time; c) Break of circuit on all the three phases - The combination results in ideal conditions of discriminate operation ensuring the tripping of the circuit-breaker in all cases `On-load' within its breaking capacity and ` Off-load ' for currents in excess. The circuit, therefore, breaks on all three, phases and the occurrence of shortcircuits is indicated; d) Interchangeability and less number of spares - Usually the same fuse rating may be used for the back-up protectionof different feeders having settings of the bimetal and short-circuit releases which differ greatly. 3.2.23 Co-ordination between a circuit-breaker and a fLse on the outgoing It is quite customary to provide on the distribution boards only circuit-breakers for incoming feeders and fuses for outgoing feeders as shown in Fig. Il. In such a case, the fuse has to operate for all the faults on the outgoing feeders and the circuit-breaker should not trip. The short-circuit release provided on the circuit-breaker should be of time delayed type as otherwise the circuit-breaker is liable to trip due to the short-circuit current impulse even of a short duration. As a rough guide, a time lag of between 50 to 150 millisecond should be provided in t& characteristic of the fuse-link and the short-circuit release for the expected short-circuit current as shown in Fig. 1 I.
sids-

45

IS t 10118( Part II ) - 1982

CURRENT o - Overload relay characteristic of circuit-breaker b - Short-circuit release characteristic of circuit-breaker c- Arcing time characteristic of circuit-breaker dPre-arcing time characteristic of fuse c-Total time characteristic of fuse f-Tripping delay of circuit-breaker d - Breaking capacity of circuit-breaker h-Thermal release j -Instantaneous short-circuit release k-Back-up fuse FIG.

10 nC~-~~~~~~~~~~ BETWEEN A FUSE (F) AND A CIRCUITBREAKER( CB); FUSE PRECEDING THE CIRCUIT-BREAKER

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982

CURRENT 1 - Short circuit release characteristic 2 -Characteristic of fuse curve of circuit-breaker

FKJ.

11 CO-ORDINATION BETWEEN A FUSE ( F) CIRCUIT-BREAKER ( CB); CIRCUIT-BREAKER PRECEDING THE FUSE

AND

A

5.2.3 Meshed Eeeders with Steady Load - Unlike radial feeders, in the mesh connected circuits, the fuses have to be kept of the same rating although in case of a fault, the short-circuit current in the different feeders may be In Fig. 12 is shown a junction point. In case of a short-circuit different. the total short-circuit current Z(1) is the sum of the short-circuit currents Z(2), Z(3) and Z(4).
If the short-circuit current had been distributed equally, the fuses (2), (3) and (4) would all be carrying one-third of the total current in fuse (1) and, as such, proper discrimination may be expected. But depending upon the impedance within the different circuits, it is also possible that the short-circuit currents in any part, for example, Z(2) may be about 80 to 90 percent of the total current Z(1). This becomes a critical stage and it may happen that both the fuses (1) and (2) operate simultaneously. In case of meshed circuits, it is, therefore, important to know the of the fuses which would still give ratio of Z ( Part )/I ( total) discrimination at expected prospective short-circuit current. Fuses are available which are even discriminative at a ratio of above 80 to 90 percent depending upon the rating of the fuse and the short-circuit current. These detaJs should be obtained from the manufacturer. 5.2.4 Fkders with Fluctuating Loads - Motor Feeders - Heavy starting The rating of the current are usually associated with the motor feeders. fuse has, therefore, to be high enough that it does not operate due to 48

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982
normal starting currents. The fuse so selected may not offer adequate overload protection to the motors and, therefore, other devices, such as The fuses for bimetal relays or releases, should be used for this purpose. motor feeders are hence used to protect the motors and the starting gear against short-circuits only.

I

El, j
-

FAULT uu &TOTAL)

FIG.

12

DISTRIBUTION OF SHORT-CIRCUIT MESHED NETWORK

CURRENTS

IN A

5.2.4.1 Co-ordination qf &es with motor starters [see also Appeitdix A of IS : 8544 ( Part I)-1977* ] 7 It is necessary to co-ordinate the characteristics of the fuse provided for the short-circuit protection and overload relay or release provided on the motor starter ( contactor ) so that the following requirements are fulfilled:
Fuses a> does

does uot operate and the overload protection device also not operate during the starting of the motor. Further the fuse should not operate for such overloads as may be handled by overload protection device. fuse disconnects the supply to the motor starter sufficiently early before the starter or overload protection device is damaged due to the thermal and dynamic effects of excessive currents.
for voltages not excemiing I 000 V: Part I Direct-

b) The

*Specification for motor staiters on-line ac sprters.

49

IS : 10118 ( Part 11) - 1982 c) The fuse should disconnect the supply suficiently early so that the motor starter is not required to break the current in excess of its breaking capacity. In order to arrive should be known: at the proper co-ordination, the following protection

1) Cold condition characteristics device ( curve 1 in Fig. 13 ),

of the overload

2) The maximum thermal strength of the combination of motor starter and the overload protection device (point R in Fig. 13), 3) Maximum Fig. 13 ), breaking capacity of the starter of the fuse ( point Tin ( curve 2 in

4) Pre-arcing time Pig. 13), and 5) Total-time If the combination Fig. 13 then:

characteristics

characteristics is properly

of the fuse (curve co-ordinated

3 in Fig. 13). as shown in

1) point

A, that is, point of intersection of curves (1) and (2) should lie above and to the right of the point B which depends upon the starting current and the starring time of the motor ( 5 times the rated current I for 5 seconds in Pig. 13 ). This would fulfill the requirements of 5.2.4.1 (a); Point M, that is, point of intersection of curves (1) and (3) should lie to the left of point R. This would fulfill the requirement of 5.2.4.1 (b); and intersection of curve (3) and Z-should lie below the point P, of curve (1) and the vertical would fulfill the requirement

`7

4

3) Point N, that is, point of vertical ordinate from point that is, point of intersection ordinate from point T. This of 5.2.4.1 (c).

The manufacturers of motor starters should supply the starter as well as the overload protection device so co-ordinated that the overload protection device would trip the starter (or contactor ) such that neither the starter nor the overload device itself is damaged. The consumer has, therefore, mainly to worry about the proper co-ordination of the fuse and in the absence of full information available on the above manufacturers should be consulted for the lines, the appropriate rating of the fuse. 50

IS : 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982

H
FIG. 13

1

2 MULTIPLE

5
OF

10 R&TED CURREN (~1~)
OP

0

C:O-KEL..`I`ION RELAY

&rWEKY AND

c.!IfAKACTI!RISTK:S BACK-UP FUSES

T~RMAL

51

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982
[ see also 9 of IS : 2516 sometimes used with advantage for the starting of the motors. The considerations for co-ordination with the fuse are the same as described under 5.2.2. 5.2.4.3 It would be seen from the above that for the sake of proper discrimination, only HRC cartridge fuses should be used for the motor feeders. Unlike HRC fuses, there is no possibility for the indication of the operation of the rewirable fuse-element either and unwarranted operation of the rewirable fuse is often responsible for single-phasing faults of the motors. It is also important to ensure that fuse selected from the above considerations offers adequate protection against excess currents to the connection cables (or wires ) between the fuse and the starter and the motor. It may be sometimes necessary either to select the cables of higher cross-section or reduce the rating of the fuse, if that should be possible. 5.2.5 Feeders with Fluctuating Loads - Transformers Feeders, Capacitor Feeders, etc - For transformers, capacitors battery chargers and fluorescent lighting circuits, the effect of high switching surges should be considered. The manufacturers should be consulted for the proper rating of the fuse although as a rough guide, the rating of about 50 percent greater than the normal current may be taken. 5.2.5.1 In case of transformer feeders, it also becomes necessary to coordinate the characteristics of the high voltage and low voltage fuses. It should be borne in mind that while the fuse on the low voltage side protects the transformer from overload due to the faults on the low voltage system, the high voltage fwe takes care of the ftiults inside the transformer. Example: Assuming a transformer rated for 160 kVA, 1I/O-415 kV with an impednnre of 4.75 percent, the rated low voltage current would be 225 A and the rated high voltage current would be 8A. The rated current of the fuse on the low voltage side would, therefore, be 200 A, in line with 5.2.2. Taking care of the switching surges, the fuse on high voltage side should be of rating much more than 8A alid it can be 15A depending upon the co-ordination as shown in Fig. 14. The maximum short-circuit current should be taken as: 100 x 1 160 x ____-____ = 4.66 kA 4.75 x 1/3 x 0'415

5.2.4.2 Co-ordination offuses and circuit-breakers ( Parts I and II )-1977* ] - Circuit-breakers are

-*Specification and tests. for alternating current circuit-breakers:

Parts I and II Requiremcntr

52

.
IS : 10118 ( Part II) - 1982 Considering a case of infinite bus the above arrangement will ensure that for all short-circuit currents up to 4.66 kA on the low voltage side, the !ow voltage fuse operated earlier than the high voltage fuse. While comparing the characteristics, care should be taken that pre-arcing Z2t characteristics of the high voltage fuses are less than the total ZLt characteristics of the low voltage fuses.
LOW VOLTAGE7 FUSE 2OOA 600 HIGH 60 VOLTAGE FUSE flGH VOLTAGE FUSES

160 kVA ll/O*L15kV

z ?i " : L w I I=

IC

LOW VOLTAGE FUSE 200A

1

O-1

o-01 lo-5 1

2

5 CURRENT

10 IN

20 kA

SHORT-CIRCUIT

FIG. 14

CO-ORDINATION

BLTWEEN 1.0:~ VOLTAGE VOLTAGE FUSES

AXD HIGH

5.3

Motor

Starters

( Voltages

Below 1 ODOV ) c see also 3.4 )

5.3.0 General Guidance

for

Common Types

of Starters

5.3.0.1 Several types of starters with different combinations for various applications may be used. Although various factors, as described earlier in detail, should be kept in mind for nccllrate selection, Table 1 may serve as a. general guidance for selection of starters. 53

IS : 10118 ( Part II) - 1982
TABLE 1 GUIDANCE ON SELECTION OF APPLICATIONS ( Clalua X3.0.1 SL No. TYPE or
,,PPLICATION TYPLOI CONTROL

STARTERS )
TYPE OY STABTER

FOR

VARIOUS

SWrTCHrN~

OPEnAnoNs PLBHona
(5) Up to about 150

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4) -On-Off and rystem selector switch or starter Pole charging or starter Motor-protection cirCuit-breaker switch

Manually-operated units i) Direct-on-line starting an d of control S-phase induction motors

i

1

%" about
Up to about 30

1 Remote-operated motor-protection circuit-breaker I

u%" ab0ut
9oto ab0ut
Up to about 1200

Remote-oprrated units r Manually-operated 1 units ii) Star-delta starting of 3-phasr: induction motors Remote-operated units ( with automatic changeover from star todelta )

or oi IAir-break immersed c 0 nwith r tactor-starter over-load rl-lay 1 Air-break contartor starter I CManually oprratcd star-delta starter Automatic type starter 1

I

contactor star-delta

[Face-plate starter in with conjunction I motor-protection circuit-breaker or contactor Oil-immersed drum starter in conjuncmotorI tion with circuit( protection breaker or contactor I if required

UCabout

i

[Manually-operated ( starting ) I iii) Starting speed
Of

siipring

and control J-phase motor9

1 I 1
54

I Drum-type

i

starter in conjunction with resistor and motorprorrction circuitbreakers or contactor

VPab0ut
( Con/inucd)

IS I 10118 ( Part II ) - 1982 TABLE I GUIDANCE
23. (1) TYPE 01 APPLICATION (2) ON SELECTION APPLICATIONS OF STARTERS - Contd TYPEOF STABTEE (4) Drum-type starter in coniunciion wirh resiitor and motprprotection circuitbreakers or contacfor FOR VARIOUS SWIT0liINO OPBRATION~ PEB Hons (5) Up to about 150

TYPB 01 CONTROL (3) Manually-Operated (starting unit.9 speed retand ting )

I

I

Manually-operated units iv) Switching auxiliary of circuit Mechanically operated units Short circuit protecrion line

rMomentary-contact conrrol station food1 ( including I switch ) { Twist switch (maintained contact operation ) Twist switch ( momentary con1 tact operation) Momentary-contact limit switch

r Fuse
Switch fuse unit Motor protection circuit-breaker 1 rMotor protection circuit-breaker Motor protection I circuit-breaker 1 (in conjunction with fuse, if required ) I 1Contactor with overload relayr ( in conjunction I 1 with fuse ) Protection circuitbreaker ( with undrr voltage release ) with I Contactor 1 holding contac1s rProtcction circuit1 breaker (with time lag release ) 1 Contact with 1 holding contacts

overload Motor protection
V)

Overcurrent and under-voltage protection

Undervoltage rtantaneour

(in)

Undervoltage ( time lag)

55

E6 : 10118( Part II) - 1982 5.3.1 MO& of Operation of Motor Starters
The starters may either be manually operated or control through auxiliary devices, such as, push buttons, limit switches, float switches, etc. Manual control may be adopted with a limited frequency of operation. Automatic control not only gives the possibility of greater frequency of operation but also permits installation of main switching equipment away from the actual drives. Manually operated switch starters have been in vogue due to the simplicity of construction and may be used when remote control and automation are not required. M any a time motor protection circuitbreakers are also used as motor starters with advantage as they incorporate short-circuit protection as well, provided the short-circuit protection has sufficient breakjng capacity thus extra means, such as, fuses which are required in case of switch or contactor starters need not be provided. While using motor protection circuit-breakers without back-up fuses, it should be examined whether the short-circuit level at the place of installation is within the short-circuit capacity of the motor protection circuit-breakers as also if the switching duty required may be catered by the motor protection circuit-breaker. Manual starters may be used where operation is limited to lesser frequency of operation and where automatic operation is not required. Closing and opening is done by hand except in case of overload release. The contactor starters may be used where either remote or repeated operation is required. They permit sufficient flexibility of connection. 5.3.1.1 Motor switches - They are available in a variety of executions, such as, ON-OFF switches, system selector switches, pole-changing switches, star-delta switches. a) The distinguishing feature of these switches is that they are usually operated by hand and that, depending on the particular application, they have two or more switching positions for closing, opening or transferring circuits. b) The making and breaking capacity of the switches corresponds to the starting current of the molars. The switches are generally suitable for continuonsly closed duty and for intermittent duty up to 150 switching operations per hour. They are used primarily for the direct closing, opening and transferring of motor circuits without having to interrupt short-circuit currents which are interrupted by circuit-breakers or fuses. 5.3.1.2 Motor-protection circuit-breakers - Circuit-breakers are distinguished by their ability to interrupt short-circuit currents within specified

3.3.1.0 General may have automatic

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982
These values. circuit-breaker are provided with trip-free latch mechanism and trips. A may be opened either manually or by automatic release.

a) Both overcurrent and undervoltage release and other protectiv features may be incorporated. When the supervised electric variable (current or voltage ) deviates from the rated value by more than a certain amount, the breaker is automatically tripping may also be tripped. Auxiliary trips for remote provided. b) The circuit-breakers are suitable for continuously closed duty up to switching frequency of 30 switching operations per hour. They are designed either for manual or remote operations. In addition to the switching ON and OFF of motors, they are also used for protecting the system, motor and switchgear from overload, short-circuits, undervoltage and voltage failures. The making and breaking capacity is selected accordingly. HRC cartridge fuses may have to be used for back-up protection if the circuit-breakers do not have sufficient rupturing ( breaking ) capacity according to the short-circuit level at the place of installation. 5.3.1.3 Contactors - Contactors are distinguished by powen mechanism ( electro-magnets ) which closes the contactor and keeps it ir its closed position as long as the operating power is maintained ( magnet energized ). When the magnet becomes de-energized, the contacts open. a) Their making and breaking capacity corresponds to the starting current of the motors. The contactors are suitable for continuously closed duty and for intermittent duty up to 1 200 switching operations per hour. b) Contactors are used chiefly for automatic electric control systems Contactors require either or for remote switching of motors. fuses or circuit-breakers for short-circuit protection. 5.3.2 Combination

of Switching

Devices

5.3.2.1 Equipment in a motor feeder -Taking into consideration the various types of switching devices and necessity for overload and shortcircuit protection together with means of isolation, there are various The usual arrangements combinations possible for the motor feeders. are shown in Fig. 15 and have been explained below: a) The arrangement u shown in Fig. 15 is very commonly adopted for individual motor feeders. The overload protection is provided on the starter. The short-circuit protection is provided by the 57

lS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982 fuses. The switch is intended as means of isolation. The Someswitch and the fuse may be combined in one housing.
times, the switch or both the switch and the fuse are installed in If the fuses are outside, then it the same housing as the starter. should be ensured that it is possible to remove them even when energized but off load, for example, by means of insulated fuse carrier or fuse pullers. b) The arrangement b shown in Firr. 15 is onlv a modification of a and is usuzly adopted when a nimber of kotor feeders are fed This system is usually from a common fuse distribution board. A common isolating device adopted for motor control centres. is provided in the incoming supply to the fuse board for the sake of economy.

4

In the arrangemeEt a shown in Fig. 15 a motor protection circuitbreaker is used as motor starter. The overload and short-circuit This method may protection is provided on the circuit-breakers. be used only for the direct-on-line starting, but has the advantage that circuit-breaker is always available ready for switching-in after the fault and does not require replacement as in case of fuses. If fuses are used as back-up protection to the circuitbreakers then they may also be used for isolation if they are capable of removal even when energized; otherwise, a switch may have to be used.

d) In the arrangement b shown in Fig. 15 the starter is without any protective devices and takes the form of a motor control switch or a contactor or combination of contactors. The circuit-breaker acts as means of isolation and additionally offers overload and short-circuit protection for the feeder through its releases. This arrangement proves quite ideal and economical for starter cembinations, like star-delta or 2-speed at places where manual control through switch may be accepted.
NOTE- If a motor protection circuit-breaker is used as a motor starter it should be verified that it is of adequate short-circuit capacity to cope w\th the system faultlevel at that point; otherwise falser of adequate short-circuit capacity tocope with

the rystem fault-level at chat point or fuses of adequate short-circuir capacity should be wed along with the circuit-brealers. 5.3.3 For the purposes of stltcti>n, details of the special features of different motor starters are provided in Appendix A. This provides guidance on their characteristics, the circuitry in which they are employed, with a comparative analysis on their relative performance. 58

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982

ARRANGEMENT

0
I

b

ISOLATING* DEVICE

SHORT-CIRCUIT PROTECTION

STARTER

MOTOR

*Another isolating device may have to be provided near the motor away from the motor.

if the atartet

k

FIG. 15

TYPICAL ARRANCIEYENTSOF EQUIPYENT IN MOTOR FEEDERS

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.3.3 >
SPECIAL FEATURES OF DIFFERENT ( Under Consideration)

A

MOTOR

STARTERS

59

IS : 10118( Part II ) - 1982 ( Confinuedfrompap 2 )
Panel

for Selection,

Installation and Maintenance Controlgear, ETDC 2O/P25
Rcpresanting Delhi Electric The English Madras

Switchgear

and

Members SERI 0. P. ANAND SHRI J.\GMOHAN ( Altcmatc ) SERI c. I<. BAI.ASUBRAMANIAN

Supply Undertaking, El~~ric Company

New Delhi of India Ltd

+SH~~I M. SESI~ADBI ( Almemak) Larsen & Toubro Limited, Bombay SHRI DEVENDEII NATH Maharashtra State Electricity Board, Bombay SIWI P. D.Ja*~rarltDan NCEF Ltd, Bangalore Sam JAWED AWED SHI~I I. NARAYANA RAO ( Altemafe ) Chief Electrical Inspector to the Government DE T. C. SIDHAN Kerala, Trivandrum PROP G. RAVINDRAN NAIR ( Alternate ) Kernataka Electricity Board, Bangalore SHRI SYED KI~ADER MWIUDDIX Bharar Heavy Electricala Ltd, Secundeti SHRI R. SCBBAI~AO SIII~IK C. LAAARI ( AItcmalr ) Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi SHRI G. N. THADANI SHRI M. K. DAS ( Altrrnatc ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd. I3ombav SHRI A. S. UURALIKAB SERI S. R. POTNIS ( AItcrnatr )

c

1l Shri M. Sahadri, chaired the Panel Meetings. 60

. __

BUREAU
Headquarters;

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanetha Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all offices)

Regional
Central *Eastern Northern

Oflees: : Manak

Telephones
[ 331 01 31 3311375 36 24 99 21843 C31641 `t: ;; :; 41 2916 I 6 32 92 95

Bhavan, 9 Bjahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI-1 10002 : 1 /14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 Sector 35-C, : SC0 445-446, CHANDIGARH 160036

Southern tWestern

: C. I. T. Campus, : Manakalaya,
BOMBAY

MADRAS

600113 \East),

E9 MIDC, 400093

Marol, Andheri

Branch

Oflees:
26348 1 26349 38 49 55 1 38 49 56 66716 5 36 27 3 31 77 23 1083 6 34 71 C6 98 32 21 68 76 [ 21 82 92 62305 621 04 [ 621 17 2 51 71 Nagar, 52435
27 66 00 69 65 26 22 36 71

`Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 SPeenya Industrial Area, 1 st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 761002 53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 58-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister 117/418 Marg, C Scheme, Nagar, JAIPUR 302005 208005

B Sarvodaya

KANPUR

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA T.C. No, 14/1421, University P.O., TRIVANDRUM 695035

800013 Palayam

Oflce (With Sale Point) : Pushpanjali, 1st Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji PUNE 411005

inspection

*Sales Office in Calcutta is at 5 Chowringher Approach, P.O. Prlncep Street, Calcutta 700072 tSales Office In Bombay Is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, Born bay 400007 SSales Ofice In Bangalore Is at Unity Bullding, Naraslmharaja Square Bangalore 560002
Printed at Smco

Prlntlno Proor. Dolhl. Indli

