IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997

Indian `Standard

GUIDE FOR TYPES OF MEASUREMENTS FOR STRUCTURES IN RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS AND CRITERIA FOR CHOICE AND LOCATION OF MEASURING INSTRUMENTS
PART 2 CONCRETE AND MASONRY DAMS

( First Revision

I)

ICS

93.160

@ BIS 1997

BUREAU OF INDIAN ML4NAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR
NEW DELHI
JLGW

STANDARDS
SHAH ZAFAR 110002 MARG

1997

Price Group

5

Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation

Sectional Committee, RVD 16

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Structures Instrumentation Sectional Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Dams and related works are built to last many decades, and form key structures to the development of river basin potential for irrigation, water supply, flood control, navigation, recreation and power generation. Inherent in the reservoir water storage are tremendous forces which the dam is expected to withstand throughout its operational life. Consideration of the disastrous effect of the failure of a dam in terms of loss of life and property and the negation of planned benefits of the project, make it imperative that means should be available in the dam for providing information on continued assurance of its safety. The extent of internal distress in a dam cannot always be directly measured. However, diagnostic procedures are available which can help in identifying most ailments. Xey to these procedures is effective instrumentation, which is a vital part of dam design. Instruments strategically implanted in thevital zones can provide meaningful clues. The objcctlves of instrumentation are manifold. The instruments embedded in or installed at the surface of dams and other hydraulic structures keep a constant watch over their performance in service and indicate the distress spots which call for remedial measures. Thus these instruments play an important role in checking the safety of the structure. Observations from l.he instruments form a cumulative record~of the structural behaviour. The study of structural behaviour provides an important aid in modifying purely theoretical treatment so as to include the effect of actual field conditions. Most hydraulic structures are built on rather conservative assumptions to provide for the `unknowns' in the design. Observations from the instrumentation help reduce these `unknowns' and place the future designs on sounder footings. The information obtained through measurements promotes the understanding of the influence of various parameters on the structural behaviour and leads 10 formulation of more realistic design criteria. Various new or modified consrruction techniques like rolled concrete construction are being evolved. However, thcsc techniques are not accepted by the engineers till their long term performance is proved. The observations from instruments help to evaluate the suitability or otherwise of the new modified techniques. Many dams, particularly older ones, are modified to allow for increased capacity, increased safety or on account of some efficiencies noted. Tnstrumenration readings, available before and after the modifications, will help to clarili' and indicate whether the remedial actions were effective or otherwise. The condition of dam and its overall safety has to be checked regularly not merely to satisfy the engineer community but also to dzmonstrate to the public at large that the dam is safe performing in accordance .with the design assuniplions. Masons is a hclerogt:iicl>us material and there is very little experience of instrumentation in it. Further, propcr'jes, such as crcc'~\;compressive, flexural and tensile strengths; modulus of elasticity; and thermal propcrtics cannot bc CA: ily ascertained in the case of masonry dam construction. The instrumentation has, thcrcfore, limitations as far as masonry dams are concerned. However, as experience of instrument:1lion in masonry dam:. is gained, better idea can be had regarding the use and utility of instrumentation in masonry dams. Thic standard was fir+;1 peiblished in 1976. The revision of the standard has been taken up to incorporate certain change:; found nc:cessary. Objective of instrumentation has been enlarged. Due to over conservative design of dams in a seismic zone, special emphasis has been given on seismic instrumentation. In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the' standards and prac:til:es prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the lick! in this counlr;:`. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calcuiated expressing the result of test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revtied)`. The number of significant places retained in ahe rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 7436

(Part 2) : 1997

Indian Standard

GUIDEFORTYPESOFMEASUREMENTS FORSTRUCTURESINRIVERVALLEY PROJECTSANDCRITERIAFOR CHOICEAND LOCATIONOFMEASURING INSTRUMENTS
PART 2 CONCRETE AND MASONFWDAMS

( First Revision )
1 SCOPII This standard (Part 2) lays down the types of measurements need to be done in concrete dams and masonry dams in river valley projects. Criteria for choice and location of the required measuring instruments are also given.
NOTE - Details of specifications, instrumentation, maintenance and observation of individual instrunients will be covered by separate codes.

IS No. (Part 2) : 1996

Title Vibrating wire type cell

13073 Code of practice for installation, (Part 1) : 1991 maintenance and observation of displacement measuring devices for concrete and masonry dams: Part 1 Deflection measurement using plumb lines 13232 : 1992 Code of practice for installation, maintenance and observation of electrical strain measuring device in concrete dams

2

REFERENCES

2.1 The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard: ISNo. 4967 : 1968 Title Recommendations for seismic instrumentation for river valley projects Metcorolob?J - Raingauge, non recording (first revision) Meteorology - Raingauges, recording specification Code of practice for installation and observation of instruments for temperature measurement inside dams - Resistance type thermometers Code of practice for installation, maintenance and observation of pore pressure measuring devices in concrete and masonry dams: Electrical resistance type cell

3 OBLIGATORY AND OPTIONAL MEASUREMENTS 3.0 No general rule can be given for the type of measurements to be made at dams as they are of many kinds, have different site conditions and have different problems. Even then some kinds of measurements are obligatory for all concrete dams while others-are optional. 3.1 Obligatory Measurements The following measurements dams : are obligatory for all

5225 : 1992 5235 : 1992 6524 : 1972

a> Uplift pressure at the base of the dam at a

sufficient number of transverse sections;
`b) Cl 4

8282

Seepage into the dam and appearing downstream there-from; Temperature of the interior of the dam; and Displacement measurements - Except for very small structures (of height 20 m and

(Part 1) : 1976

3

IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997

below not involving any foundation plications).

com-

Displacement measurements should include one or more of the following types of -measurements : 3.) Those determined by suspended plumb lines; 2) Those determined by geodetic measurements where warranted by the importance of the structure; 3) Those determined by embedded resistance jointmeters at contraction joints where grouting is required to be done. 3.2 Optional Measurements
The following measurements are optional and may be undertaken where warranted by special circumstances of project. These would be beneficial for high dams, for structures of unusual design, for structures where unusual or doubtful foundations exist, for the verification of design criteria and for effecting improvement in future designs:

water becomes cloudy or discoloured, contains increased quantities of sediment, or changes radically in chemical content, a likely serious seepage problem is indicated. 4.2.2 It is customary to provide grout curtain near the upstream face of the dam. Besides, a drainage curtain in the foundation and porous drain in the body of the dam are provided to intercept any seepage that passes through the grout curtain and through the body of the dam respectively. Measurement of seepage water alongwith uplift measurement at the plane of contact of the dam and its foundation will give direct indication of the effectiveness of the grout curtain and drainage curtain and will indicate whether any remedial measures are necessary. The chemical analysis of the seepage water through the foundation drainage system will help in assessing whether any foundation material is being washed out. 4.2.3 Likewise the quantum of water passing through ungrouted contraction joints or cracks would indicate about the workmanship in general as also any damage that might have been caused to the seals in the contraction joints. The chemical analysis of the water in the case of masonry dam may be indicative of any possible leaching action on the mortar used in the construction of the masonry dam. Corrective measures such as grouting of dam and foundation, besides improving existing drainage or providing additional drainage could thus be planned. 4.2.4 Wet spots or seepage appearing at new or unplanned locations at the abutments or downstream of a dam could also indicate a seepage problem. Measurement of-seepage downstream of the grout curtain provides a direct indication of the adequacy and effectiveness of the grout curtain, drainage curtain and functioning of the drains and holes to decide when and where remedial measures may be required. 4.3 Measurement
of Temperature

a) b) c) d)

Stress Strain Pore pressure (as distinct from uplift pressure), and Seismicity of the area and dynamic characteristic of the structure.

Due to ever increasing demand of power, emphasis has been laid to construct large size of hydro electric project with very high dam. With the present trend, dam sites are neither geologically ideal nor seismically suitable as most of the best sites have already been considered for the purpose. Due to this reason those measurements that were considered optional at the time of framing this code may become obligatory now for high dams specially in the Himalayan region. 4 TYPES OF MEASUREMENTS
4.1 Measurement of Uplift Pressure

It is important to determine the magnitude of any hydraulic pressure at thebase of a dam. The effect of uplift on a dam is to reduce its effective weight on account of resulting buoyancy.

4.3.1 Measurement of Temperature during Construction

4.2 Measurement
4.2.1

of Seepage

Seepage is, undoubtedly, the best indicator of the overall performance of a dam because this reflects the performance of entire dam and not just the condition at discrete instrumented points. Any sudden change in the quantity of seepage without apparent cause, such as a corresponding change in the reservoir level or a heavy rainfall, could indicate a seepage problem. Similarly, when the seepage
2

For concrete gravity dams it is very important to know the thermic variations in the dam during its construction which enables to determine whether the concrete setting process is normal or otherwise. To achieve this purpose, temperature measuring devices are embedded within the dam body and also mounted on the surface according to a predetermined plan foruseful observations. Any abnormal setting process indicated by temperature observations may lead to a change in the concrete lift height, and also changes in the treatment of ag-

IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997 gregates before concreting and of the mass concrete during curing. 4.3.2 Mensurement of Temperatilre of the Dam Illterior It is necessary to measure temperature inthe body of concrete and masonry dams in order to ascertain the nature and extent of thermal stresses and the consequent structural behaviour of the dam and also to ascertain when to undertake grouting of contraction joints that may have been provided for the structure. 4.3.3 Measurement
Water and Air of Temperature of Reservoir

involves vertical and horizontal displacement part of foundation with respect to dam.

of

4.4.4 Displacement of One Part of the Dam Relative to other Parts of the Dam Measurement of relative displacement of two points in a dam is a direct indication of structural behaviour of the dam. The deflection characteristics of a dam observed for the first few years will reveal any dangerous tilt or movement of the dam. These observations are made by regular and inverted plumblines. The plumbline data together with other supporting data may be used to study the elastic behaviour of the dam. 4.4.5 Displacement of Dam with Reference to Surrounding Area This measurement gives the absolute displacement of the dam with respect to surrounding area, and is a direet indication of structural behaviour of the dam. Provisions would be made for periodic deflection measurements. Where topography permits, this can be~done by theodolite from fixed bases, using either line-of-sight over the top of the dam or by turning angles to targets on the downstream face and at the crest. At concrete dams, the deflections should be consistent with changes in reservoir water surface level and in temperature and should not change appreciably from year to year. 4.4.6 Measurement of Tilt Tilt is measurement of rotation invertical plane. It is normally measured with the help of tiltmeter system consisting of tiltmeter sensor, tilt plates and indicator. Tiltplates are bonded to the surface of mass of structure under observation. The sensor is oriented on three pegs of tiltplate and senses change in tilt of tiltplate. The portable indicator gives the degree of rotation. 4.5 Measurement of Stress

Measurement of temperature of reservoir water and air is essential for distinguishing the effects of ambient and water temperatures on such measurements as deflection, stresses, strains, joint movements and settlements. 4.4 MeaSurement of Displacement Measurement of displacement of points either between two monoliths, or between foundation and body of the dam or the displacement of any joint of the dam with respect to the surrounding area will immediately reveal any distress conditions developing in the dam. Measurement of displacement is thus one of the most important factors to bestudied while observing the structural behaviour of a dam. 4.4.1 Internal Joint Movement Concrete and masonry dams are generally built in blocks separated by transverse joints. It is essential to know whether there is any relative movement between two blocks. The movement is likely to be due to differential foundation behaviour. Further, the relative movement of blocks is important from the point of view of groming of transverse contraction joints. 4.4.2 Sltrfnce Joint Movement Measurement of joint movement at the surface of the locations accessible from galleries is made by detachable gauges with a view to assess the amount of joint opening of two blocks of the dam. These gauges may also be advantageously used for observation of opening or of closing of surface cracks at any location. 4.4.3 Foundation Displacement Measurement of vertical or horizontal displacement of foundation provides information for taking preventive measures for inclination, distortion etc. of structures. The data can also be used for studying the elastic and inelastic properties of dam and foundation. Measurement of foundation displacement

Direct measurement of stress developed inside the mass of concrete or masonry helps in watching the structural behaviour~of dams and their foundations. Any adverse change in stress will indicate distress conditions and remedial measures can be taken. The observation of stress also helps in studying the assumed stresses and actual stresses in dams and this can be used in improving upon the design procedure. 4.6 Measurement of Strain

Factors like temperature, chemical action, moisture change and stress result in volume changes which case strain in the structure. The measure-

IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997

ment of strain, therefore, becomes necessary. As the design of structures is based on stress it is essential to measure the stresses developed in the structures during its life time. Moreover, the instruments available for measurement of stresses can measure only compressive stress and not the tensile stress. Further, the stress measuring instruments arc more expensive and delicate than strain meters and hence, it is a common practice to measure the strain and to calculate from it the developed stress. 4.7 Measurement
4.7.1 of Pore Pressure

4.10.1 Rainfill Measurement

Rainfall measurement is routinely carried out as part of hydrological observation. 4.10.2 Wave Height and Ice Effect Measurement of height of wave and effect of ice are also useful for interpretation of results ofstructural behaviour of the dam. 4.10.3 Measurement of level of Silt Deposit at the
Upstream Face of the Dam

Since large concrete and masonry dams are provided with internal formed drains located near the upstream face, a record of pore pressure development and its variations would indicate the effectiveness and adequacy of these drains. Any sudden unusual increase in the pore pressures will be indicative of choking up of these internal drains and any unusual reduction from the normal would indicate possibility of formation of cracks or establishment of flow channels in the body of the dam. 4.7.2 Measurement of uplift in the foundation is mandatory for all gravity dams and is generally accomplished by uplift pressure pipes which provide a direct indication of the prevailing magnitude of uplift resulting from the operating reservoir heads and consequently the effectiveness of the grout curtain close to rhc upstream face of the dam and effectiveness of the drainage curtain provided in the foundation apart from checking of design assumptions for its stability. 4.8 Seismicity~of the Area and Dynamic
Characteristic of the Structure

This would be useful for determining the pressure due to silt deposit on the upstream face of the dam. 4.10.4 Other Meterological Measurements Other meteorological measurements such as of wind velocity and wet and dry bulb temperatures may also be made. 5 AUXILIARY DATA TO BE COLLECTED
5.1 Data to be kept of construction/operation

stages: The following data of construction/operation stage should be kept: Concrete or masonry placing diagram, showing lift placement date, placing temperature and lift thickness; type of method and duration of curing;

a>

b) Cooling arrangements,
details; cal features; and

if any, and their

C> Final rock elevations and unusual geologid) Record of joint grouting operations.
5.2 Data to be kept from Control Operations
The following data of control operations

Surveillance of seismic environment of the project site needs special attention in case of large dams to know about the seismicity of the region before taking up construction. Creation of a reservoir generates additional load on the surrounding area and underlying geological strata. Thus, it becomes csscntial to know the change in the seismicity pattern, if any, due to creation of large reservoir. The behaviour of dam during an earthquake also needs to be assessed. For these purposes, a seismological laboratory may be established near the project site. 4.9 Measurement
and Downstream of Water Level on Upstream Side

should be

kept: a) Cement content; water-cement ratios; aggregate grading; amount of entrained air; admixtures used; if any; Physical and chemical properties of cement including heat of hydration; Chemical and physical gregates; and properties of ag-

b) c)

d) Maximum and minimum air temperatures. 5.3 Laboratory Data The following-laboratory data should be collected : a) Specific heat; conductivity; diffusivity; thermal coefficient of expansion dynamic and static modulus of elasticity; creep; compressive, flexural and tensile strengths of concrete; b) Similar properties for masonry to the extent possible;

This measurement is useful for calculating the water pressure on the upstream face and downstream face of the dam. 4.10 Other Measurements The following other measurements which would aid in interpretation of the main instrumentation data are also necessary.
4

IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997

Specific surface of cement used for joint grouting and properties of pozzolana, if used; and Data of Water Samples. 6 CIIOICE OF INSTRUMENTS AND I~OCA'I'ION OF MEASURING INSTRUMENTS 6;O Instrumentation should be provided in at least one deepest overflow block and two abutment blocks. It should also be indicated that the number of instrumented blocks may be increased with the increase in length of dam. 6.1 General 6.1.1 Instruments presently available are designed on four basic principles via. mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic and electrical. Electrical type instrumcnts include unbondcd resistance type, and vibrating wire. Out of the four types of instruments mechanical, pneumatic and hydraulic type of instruments are simple, rugged, reliable, cheaper and easy to operate but have lower response and lower accuracy. The mechanical type cannot be read remotely while pneumatic and hydraulic though can be read remotely, have problems with connecting tubes of blocking and breaking. Whereas electrical type of instruments facilitates easy remote reading, use of data logger and computers apart from their high sensitivity, high resolutions and accuracy. 6.1.2 Bonded strain gauge type of instruments should not be used for embedded applications. In special applications where the other types of instruments have limitations viz, dynamic measurements, these may be used only on surface and accessible locations and for short term observations. The unbonded resistance wire type and vibrating wire type of instruments have long term stability and are in USC extensively. The main disadvantages with the bonded strain gauge types are that they suffer from drift due to creep in bonding material and backing material, variation in cable conductor resistance due to temperature, leakage resistances between cable conductors due to moisture ingress. Thus they are unsuitable for long term application. The unbonded resistance wire type instruments also suffer from the influence of change in cable conductor resistance and leakage resistance between conductor due to temperature changes and moisture ingress respectively. Hotiever the effect can be minimized and temperature corrections applied. 6.1.3 Vibrating wire type instruments are not sensitive to cable resistance and moisture movement. They are under influence of temperature changes but the effect is less significant. They are either compensated for temperature changes or they are
5

supplied with the moistures or correction factor by the manufacturer to compensate the effect. 6.1.4 There is no simple rule which can determine the number of instruments, their exact type or location. Their determination remaining primarily a matter of experienced judgement. 6.1.5 The number of devices installed in a dam is less important than the selection of proper types of instruments, their location and intelligent interpretation of the data. 6.1.6 The quality of instruments should bc of paramount importance since these are expected to work for very long periods, say 25 - 30 years. More importantly so because embedded instruments cannot be retrieved and repaired if these become defective. 6.1.7 In a selection of equipment, service requirements must be carefully weighed. An instrument of rugged construction that gives reasonably accurate results may be preferable to a more precise but delicate instrument. 6.1.8 Ideally, the instruments selected for a given situation should have the following characteristics:

a>It should
stability;

be sufficiently accurate;

b) It should have long term reliability and C> It should have low maintenance
ments; techniques; It should have low cost; and It should be simple but rugged.
Instruments

require-

d) It should be compatible with construction

e> f>

6.2 Uplift Measuring

Instruments which may be used for measurement of uplift are uplift pressure pipes. 6.2.1 Measurement of Uplift The device for measuring uplift consists of a pipe installed at the point where uplift pressure is to be measured such that it terminates in a gallery directly above the measuring point which is generally 1 m below the base of a dam. 6.2.2 The pipes placed upstream of the grout curtain are usually inclined towards upstream face and fitted with a tee section and a -Bourdon-type pressure gauge for observing water pressure and those placed downstream of the grout curtain are read by sounding or with pressure gauge. Last iipe is generally, inclined towards downstream to cover maximum width of the dam.

IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997 6.2.3 Uplift pressure pipes are the simplest and most rugged. Only difficulty encountered in case of these pipes is when they get choked. Restoration of choked pipes is possible by drilling a hole through the pipe but if there is a bend in the pipe, drilling is not possible and the pipe has to be abandoned.

6.2.4 Uplift pressure measurements should be made at cross sections representing the principal types of foundation strata. Uplift measurements should be done at least at three cross sections in case of small dams (30 m or less in height) and at least at five cross sections in the case of large dams. The cross sections chosen should include one of the deepest overflow and non- overflow sections, and some sections near the abutments. Uplift measuring points on a cross section line should be located taking into consideration the geological features appearing at the cross section so that the effect of such geological features on the uplift picture could be evaluated. At any cross section, uplift measurements should be done at (a) upstream of the grout line; (b) between the grout line and the drainage hole; (c) immediately after the drainage hole and (d) at the end of the cross gallery. Spacing between (c) and (d) may be divided equally. In case of large-base widths a spacing of 20 m may be adopted. 6.2.5 Uplift pressure cells based on vibrating wire or unbonded resistance wire principle should be used for remote indication applications. 6.3 Seepage Measuring
Instrument

6.4.3 As temperature is one of the major factors causing stresses it is necessary to measure it at many places in the dam. A typical scheme for location of thermometers would be to place them in 1.5 x 15 m grid horizontally and verticaliy in a minimum of one block in the spillway portion of the dam and in other portions depending upon the data required for detailed study of the structural behaviour of the dam. A few thermometers should be placed near and on the downstream face to evaluate the rapid daily fluctuations in the temperature. Thermometers placed on upstream face as a continuation of the main thermometer grid will serve to evaluate lake temperatures close to the dam. For measurement of foundation temperature, thermometers should be placed near the base of the dam and also in holes drilled in the foundations at desired locations (see also IS 6524). As unbonded resistance wire type stress, strain and joint meters measure temperature accurately, it is not necessary to install thermometers at their locations. For details see IS 6524. 6.5 Displacement
Measurement Instruments

6.5.1 Internal Joint Movement

Two types of joint meters are available, namely (a) Unbonded resistance wire type, and (b) vibrating wire type. In the case of large dams joint meters should be provided in at least three blocks, deepest central block and a block each in the abutment portion. In plan of a given elevation the joint meters in each of these blocks should be installed on the centre of the longitudinal joints and at the centre of the transverse dimensions of the monoliths in the block, spaced about 15 m vertically for the entire heights of the longitudinal and transverse joints. This spacing may be modified in the top portion of the joint if joint height does not permit of 15 m spacing for the entire height. 6.5.2 Swface Joint Movement Surface joint measurements are made either on the surface or at locations accessible from galleries. The measurements are made by calibrated tapes by fixing two reference points one each on either side of the joint and by accurately measuring the distance between the two points at certain intervals. This discloses the amount of joint opening. 6.5.2.1 Portable gauges with dial indicators are most common mechanical gauges for measurement of surface movements. Scratch gauges are occasionally used. 6.5.2.2 These measurements should be taken at locations corresponding to embedded joint maters 6

Small notches and weirs may be constructed at points where seepage is to be measured. From the water level readings at these points quantity of seepage can be computed. Where any drainage hole shows abnormal flow (quantity and pressure) a regular program of observations of pressure and quantity cf seepage may be necessary. Float operated water level sensors using vibrating wire load cell is one type instrument that should be used for remote indication. 6.4 Temperature
Measuring Instruments 6.4.1 Temperature measurement can be done by either (a) resistance thermometers or (b) vibrating wire type thermometers.

6.4.2 The resistance thermometer works on the principle that resistance of an electrical wire is a function of temperature. The vibrating wire type works on the principle that a change in length of vibrating wire results in proportional change in natural frequency. Resistance type thermometers are accurate yet comparatively less costly~and hence are extensively used.

IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997

so that results can be compared. The surface joint measurements are also taken where surface cracks are noticed. 6.5.3 Foundation Displacement 6.5.3.1 Foundation displacement vertical or horizontal. can either be

6.5.4.3 One plumb line is installed at the deepest central section and also one each on either side at quarter points of the dam. If the height of the dam does not change much one plumb line can be installed each at one-third the length of the dam. 6.55 Displacement of Dam with Reference to Surrounding Area 6.5.5.1 This measurement is done by surveying methods, namely, either by geodetic method or collimation method. 6.5.5.2 In the geodetic method two piers are constructed one on each bank and also on the downstream side of the dam. The piers are used for accurately locating the theodolite for angular measurements. Targets are fixed on the downstream face of the dam and accurate measurements of movements of these targets arc made from the two piers with precision instruments. Theodolite stations should be connected to an orientation point outside the influence of the dam and shift of the theodolite stations accounted for in the computations. 6.5.5.3 The geodetic method has the advantage of measuring absolute displacement very accurately but involves complicated~calculations. 6.5.5.4 Targets should preferably be fixed on grid pattern at locations which detail the horizontal and vertical elements of the structure as adopted for theoretical analysis. Targets should also be located in the blocks containing the plumb line so that the displacements by the two methods can be compared. The actual results of displacement can then be compared with analytical results. 6.5.5.5 In the collimation method, a line of sight is established which remains fixed during the life of the structure. The movement of points on the dam crest are then measured with reference to the line of sight. Collimeter is used for establishing the line of sight. Targets for the observation should preferably be fixed on each block.
-

6.5.3.2 Vertical foundation displacement is measured through a borehole drilled in-the foundation from the foundation gallery by anchoring one end of a thin galvanized wire rope at lower end of the borehole-and providing a plumb bob to the other end taken over a pulley. Foundation movement thus can be measured in terms of displacement of the bob. The plumb bob over a pulley arrangement can be replaced by electrical devices like unhonded strain gauge, vibrating wire strain gauge, LVDT or a potentiometer. For the electrical type devices except potentiometer thewire rope can be replaced by a series of interconnectable rods. The instrument is known as borehole extensometer. 6.5.3.3 The measurements should be taken at all points where foundation deformation is expected to be significant. It is preferable to have one measurcment each in a grid of 30 x 30 m. 6.5.3.4 The vertical displacement of foundation can also be ascertained by installing joint meters between the contact of the foundation and the dam. The end fixed in the foundation can be mounted on a pipe with its lower end anchored at the bottom of a drilled hole. 6.5.3.5 Horizontal foundation displacement can bc measured by inverted plumb line. Inverted plumb line consists of a wire; the lower end ofwhich is anchored in the foundation while the upper end is attached to a float, buoyed up by water in a covered tank. The displacement of the wire is measured by a co-ordiscope or microscope and micrometer_slide. The inverted plumb line should bc installed in the same block in which normal plumb line is installed so that results can be used together. 6.5.4 Displacement of Dam by Plumb Line 6.5.4.1 A plumb line consists of a wire, suspended through a shaft in the dam, the upper end of the wire being anchored to the body ofthe dam and the lower end carrying a heavy weight. The oscillations of the plumb line are damped by immersing the plumb weight in oil. 6.5.4.2 The deflection of the wire is measured with reference to a reference point. The displacement of wire is measured by a co- ordimeter and coordiscope or microscope and micrometer slide. 7

6.5.6 Measurement of Tilt

-

Tilt is measurement of rotation in vertical plane. It is normally measured with the help of tiltmeter system consisting of tiltmeter sensor;tilt plates and indicator. Tiltplates are bonded to the surface of mass of structure under observation. The sensor is oriented on the three pegs of the tiltplate and senes change in the tilt of tiltplate. The portable indicator gives the degree of;otation. 1 6.5.6.1 The instrument consists of a base which is permanently fixed in the concrete and a clinometer

IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997 which is placed on the base. The clinometer is properly placed on the base and air bubble is centered with the help of a micrometer screw. The reading of the micrometer screw obtained at any particular line of observation when referred to the initial reading gives the value of tilt. 6.5.6.2 Tilt measurements are also made by vibrating wire clinometers. Vibrating wire type clinometers are either surface-mounted or embedded in the body of the dam. A cylindrical core houses a special pendulum surrounded by damping oil. A vibrating wire is stretched between the pendulum and the core. The instrument works on the principle that any change in the position of pendulum will change the tension in the vibrating wire and its frequency of vibration~will change. 6.5.6.3 Tilt measurements should preferably be marie where plumb line observations are made so that results can be compared and used together. For details IS 13073 (Part 1) may be referred to. 6.6 Stress Measuring Instruments
6.6.-I One of the stress meters commonly used consists of mercury filled diaphragm to which is attached a measuring unit consisting of unbonded resistance-wire strain meter. The stress applied to the mercury filled diaphragm is converted into strain by elastic deformation of diaphragm and is measured by the strain meter. The meter is useful only for the measurement of compressive stress and cannot be used for tensile stress measurement.

term strain measurements for finding out the structural behaviour of dams. 6.7.2 Meters which can be used on Surface and Accessible Locations
The meters of the first class consist of a sensitive

dial gauge and by some arrangement the dial gauge measures the change in distance between two fixed points on the surface. The magnification of displacement between the two points is obtained by mechanical and optical means. Bonded wire, unbonded wire and semi conductor gauges are used for special applications only. 6.7.3 Embedded type Meters that have embedment applications are the unborided resistance wire type and the vibrating wire type. The former works on the principle that the electrical resistance of the wire changes with the strain applied while in the latter the frequency of vibration of the wire changes with the strain applied. In the determination of the strains at a particular point in a massive structure several choices of placing the instrument may be made, such as :
The only stable strainmeters

a>One

strain meter : This will provide strain history in one direction at the point without checking;
: This still provides information on only one axis but gives the reassurance of checking; and

b) Duplicate strain meters on one axis

C) Five strain meters: Four 45O apart in the

6.6.2 Stressmeter is located only in zones subjected to compression. As the maximum stresses are developed near the foundation both in reservoir full and empty conditions and at a location Where height of the dam is maximum, the stressmeters should be located in the monolith of maximum height. There should be at least 5 stress meters in a straight line from upstream face to downstream face and in the horizontal plane. Stresses may also be measured at special locations where high stressets are anticipated or where special information is desired. Stress meters could also be used on the upstream face of the dam for the determination of pressure exerted by silt. 6.7 Strain Measuring
6.7.1 Instruments

plane of interest and one normal 10 the plane. Principal strains can thus be calculated from data furnished by a group of strain meters.

Strain meters can be generally divided into two classes, namely (a) meters which can be used on surface and at accessible location; and (b) meters that can be embedded into the body of the structure. Surface strain measuring devices are useful for superficial and short term strain measurements. Embedded type instruments are useful for long 8

6.7.3.1 In addition to the set of strain meters indicated in (c) above, one `rio stress' strain meter is required to be installed by the side in conjunction with strain meter groups to determine the corrections to be applied on account of creep, autogenous growth and -thermal expansion of mass concrete. This is accomplished by embedding an ordinary strain meter in a typical mass concrete which is isolated from deformation due to loading but is responsive to the temperature, moisture and growth changes prevailing in the mass concrete of the structure. If a check is desired, another set of 5 strain meters as indicated in (c) above may be installed.

6.7.3.2 In the case of masonry dams, alongwith normal strain gauge meters, it is recommended that long gauge strain meters using unbonded resistance wire strain meters or joint meters or vibrating wire type long basis extensometers may be provided

IS 7436 (Part 2) : 1997

in a group side by side. This is called no-stress strainmcter. `No Stress' strain meter embedded by the side of each group should be ordinary unbonded resistance wire or vibrating wire type strain meter.
6.7.3.3 It is necessary to have at least five strain meter locations in a straight line from upstream l'ace to downstream face and in one horizontal plane. The strain meters should be near the foundation level as stresses are maximum there. 6.7.3.4

Stress meters and strain meters aregenerally installed side by side so that results of both the observations can be used together. Stress and strain meters may be installed at any location where development and observation of stress is of intercst. For details IS 13232 may be referred to.
6.8 Pore Pressure 6.8.1 Measuring Instruments

6.9.2 The strong motion accelerographs and structural response recorders should be installed in the dam at the base (in a recess provided in the foundation gallery and at the top of the dam. If the height of the dam exceeds 100 m, these may also be installed near the mid-height of the dam. The location may be suitably selected to avoid the background seismic noise created due to the vibration originating from the appurtenant works of the dam. The instruments located in the foundation gallery are meant for observing the input ground motion in the event of major earthquake. The instruments located at the top of the dam are expected to provide information about response of the structure to the earthquake. 6.10 Water Level Measurements Automatic water level recorders are installed on the reservoir to record the water level fluctuations. The measurement of water level is essential for establishing relation between the water level variations and the structural parameter variations being monitored. The water level measurement is a routine measurement as a part of hydrological observations for the dam project. 6.11 Other Measurements 6.11.1 Rain Fall Rainfall measurement is also a routine measurement as part of hydrological observations. Rain gauges ordinary or self recording type are normally installed at each dam site, however, use of~advanced type rain gauges such as tipping bucket are not ruled out from use but are recommended being more accurate (see IS 5225 and IS 5235). 6.11.2 Wave Height Wave height can be measured by installing wave height recorder. The wave height information is important to assess free board of the dam. 6.12 A simple, portable, battery operated readout unit with 4-digit LCD display should be used. Calibration data for each transducer should be provided when a simple readout unit to read frequency is used, for converting the frequancy readings to relevant engineering units. Readout ~units with facility to read the relevant engineering units directly on the display can be used in place of the frequency readout units.

The device for measuring pore pressure could be hydraulic, pneumatic or electrical type. 6.8.2 The electrical pore pressure cell (Piczomcter) is either of the unbonded resistance wire type or vibrating wire type. Detailed information on them would be available in IS 8282 (Part 1) and IS 8282 (Part 2). 6.8.3 Installation of pore pressure meters is a prccisc job and should be carried out with great care. In concrete andmasonry dams, these meters may be installed normally at 10 to 15 m spacing along the width of the dam. The bottom row of pore pressure meters may be located either at the contact plane of foundation and concrete, or just above the foundation or in the foundation by drilling holes as may be required by the design. A second row may be installed at one-third or half the height of the dam. For details IS 8282 (Part 1) and IS 8282 (Part 2) may be referred to.
6.9 Earthquake 6.9.1 Measurements

As per recommendations of IS 4967 a seismological observatory for the entire project is to be established at the project site. The location of observatory should be so selected that the firm rock or suitable ground is available for founding the instrument pillars. The observatory may preferably be located at site which is unaffected by vibrations caused by power house operations, etc.

Bureau

of Indian

Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

No part of these~publications may be reproduced in any form BIS has the copyright of ali its publications. without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to theDirector (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments arc issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions', This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. RVD 16 ( 175 ),
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17,323 38 41 { 337 84 86 99,337 85 9120 61 26,337 { 60 38 20 43 25

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mat-g, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA

700054 160022

: SC0 33.5-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113

{ 235 02 15 16,235 19,235 04 23 42 15
: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. G~HAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PIJNE. THIRUV4NANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Dee Kay Printers, New Delhi. India

