IS : 5182 ( Part IX ) - 1974 
(Reaffirmed 2014) 


Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
AIR POLLUTION 


PART IX OXIDANTS 
( Second Reprint JUNE 1986 ) 


wc 614.71:626.52:543.27 [54-31] 


Sr 


© Copyright 1975 


INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


January 1975 


IS : 5182 (Part TX ) - 1974 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
AIR POLLUTION 


PART IX OXIDANTS 


Air Pollution Sectional Committee, CDC 53 


Chairman Representing 
Suri J. M. Dave National Environmental Engineering Research 
Institute (CSIR ), Nagpur 
Members 


Sarı Р. К. YBNNAWAR ( Alternate to 
Sari J. M. Dave) 


Dr G. D. AGGARWAL Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur 
Dr А. V. S. PrRABEAKARA Rao ( Alternate ) 
Da J. S. AHLUWALIA Indian Oil Corporation J.td, New Delhi 
Ов R. К. Сорта ( Alternate ) 
Suri N. С. ASHAR Dharamsi Morarji Chemical Co Ltd, Bombay 
Dr M. S. Vaınva ( Alternate ) 
Dz S. P. BRATTAOHARYA ^. Directorate General of Technical Development, 
New Delhi 
Da M. K. CHAKBABORTY Central Mining Research Station (CSIR), 
Dhanbad 
Dr J. К. Ѕ1мнаА ( Alternate ) 
Ѕиві R. S. CHATIM Bombay Municipal Corporation, Bomba y 
Suri G. F. KHAMBATTI ( Alternate) 
Dr B. В. CRATTEBJEE All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, 
Calcutta 
DR D. CAOUDAURY Union Carbide India Ltd, Calcutta 
Dr A. К. Awasrny ( Alternate ) 
Dr G. C. Das Calcutta Municipal Corporation, Calcutta 
Dx P. J. Deoras Society for Clean Environment ( SOCLEEN ), 
Bombay 


Dr S. B. CHAPHERAR ( Alternate I) 
Ѕнв Т. N. MAHADEVAN ( Alternate II) 


Suri B. K. Dutra Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, New Delhi 
Suri M. R. AGARWAL ( Alternate ) 

Srrı D. U. HATTIRODUR Cement Manufacturers’ Association, Bombay 

Dr H. B. MATHUR Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Dr P. N. MURHERJEE Central Fuel Research Institute (CSIR ), Dhanbad 

Dx P. PADMANABHAMURTHY Meteorological Department { Ministry of Tourism & 


Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 
( Continued on page 2) 


@ Copyright 1975 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 


This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 


IS : 5182 (Part IX ) - 1974 


( Continued from page 1) 


Members Representing 
Sunt B. P. PUNDHIR Indian Institute of Petroleum (CSIR ), Dehra Dun 
Sar Р. K. Совт, ( Alternate ) 
Dr $. $. RAMASWAMY Directoraie Genera) Factory Advice Service & 


Labour Institutes, Bombay 
Suri S. C. Kare (Alternate) 


Suri У. К. RANADE Hindustan Steel Ltd, Ranchi 
Dr R. K. Durra (Alternate) 
Spri В. K. Sex GUPTA 5. F. India Ltd, Calcutta 
Suni A. MOOK RERJEE ( Alternate ) 
De V. V. SRIRVAIKAR Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 
Sarr S. A. SUBRAMANIAM Central Water & Power Commission ( Power Wing ), 
ew Delhi 


Sari K. V. VENKATESHWARAN National Organic Chemical Industries Ltd, Bombay 
Suri К. D. AMRE ( Alternate, 


Dr P. К. ViJAYABAGHAVAN Ministry of Defence (R & D) 
Dr K. P. R. VITTAL MURTBY National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 
Dr D. G. Vyas Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, Ahmedabad 
Dr S. H. Zaini Industrial Toxicology Research Centre (CSIR), 
ucknow 


Dr Р. N. ViSWANATHAN ( Alternate Y) 
Dr J. L. Kaw ( Alternate 11) 
Dr G. M. SAXENA, Director General, ISI ( Ex-oficio Member ) 
Deputy Director (Chem) 


Secretaries 


Dr А. К. BHATTACHARYA 
Deputy Director ( Chem ), ISI 


Ѕнв S. ARAVAMUDHAN 
Assistant Director (Chem), ISI 


1S:5182 (Part ІХ )- 1974 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR MEASUREMENT OF 
AIR POLLUTION 


PART IX OXIDANTS 


0. FOREWORD 


0.1 This Indian Standard (Part IX ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 26 September 1974, after the drafı finalized by the Air 
Pollution Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


0.2 The oxidants in the atmosphere originate from both man-made and 
natural sources. Nitrogen oxides and ozone result from air oxidation, 
electrical discharges and solar radiation. In urban areas fuel burning and 
auto exhausts contribute significantly to nitrogen dioxide concentration. 
Chlorine may originate from chemical processes. 


0.2.1 Photochemical oxidants result from a complex series of atmos- 
pherie reactions initiated by sunlight. When reactive organic substances 
and nitrogen oxides accumulate in the atmospliere and are exposed to 
ultraviolet component of sunlight, the formation of new compounds, 
including ozone and peroxyacyl nitrates, takes place. 


0.3 In the preparation of this standard. considerable assistance has been 
derived from ASTM.D 2912-1970 ‘Standard method of test for content of 
oxidizing substances in the atmosphere’ published by American Society 
for Testing and Materials, Philadelphia { USA). 


0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 


1. SCOPE 


1.1 This standard ( Part IX ) prescribes a method for ¿he determination 
of low concentrations of ozone plus other oxidants such as nitrogen 
dioxide, chlorine, peroxyacvl nitrate, etc, which may be present in the 
atmosphere. It may be used for the manual determination of oxidants 
in concentrations between 0°01 and 10 ppm as ozone. 


*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
g 


3 


15 : 5182 (Part IX ) - 1974 
2. PRINCIPLE 


21 Micro amounts of ozone and other oxidants are collected by absorp- 
tion in a solution of potassium iodide buffered to a pH of 6°8. The 
released iodine equivalent of the concentration of oxidant present in the 
air is determined spectrophotometrically by measuring the absorption of 
triiodide ion at 352 nm. 


3. INTERFERENCES 


3.1 The method is not specihc for ozone since other oxidizing and 
reducing substances may interfere. 


3.2 Many oxidizing substances besides ozone, will liberate iodine in this 
method. Nitrogen dioxide, chlorine, peroxy acids, hydroperoxides and 
peroxyacyl nitrates may also act as oxidants. Reducing gases such as 
sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide act as negative interferences. 


3.3 Nitrogen dioxide is known to give 10 percent of the response of an 
equivalent molar concentration of ozone. Nitrogen dioxide reaction 
occurs as a result of nitrite ion formation in solution. The contribution 
of the nitrogen dioxide to total oxidant may be estimated by concurrent 
analysis for nitrogen dioxide 


3.4 The interference from sulphur dioxide is serious. Up to a hundred 
fold ratio of sulphur dioxide to oxidant may be eliminated by incorporat- 
ing a chromic acid paper absorber in the sampling train upstream from 
the bubbler ( absorber ). 


4. SENSITIVITY 


4.1 When 10 ml of absorbent solution is used, a range of concentrations 
between 2 and 20 pg (1 to 10 al) of ozone corresponds to absorbances 
between 0°] and J unit in a !-cm cell. For atmospheric samples containing 
up to 20 ppm of ozone, linear relationships are obtained between absor- 
bance and sample size. 


5, APPARATUS 


5.1 Sampling Probe — When a sampling probe is used it should consist 
of glass or stainless steel with a small plug of asbestos, cotton, etc, to 
screen out particulates and insects. It has been reported that ozone at 
low concentrations will decompose rapidly upon contact with polyviny! 
chloride or rubber tubing. Ifa rubber tube is used, the sampling probe 
should be as short as possible and it is best not to sample at too slow a 
rate, 


IS : 5182 (Part IX )-1974 


5.2 Absorber — An all-glass bubbler or a bubbler with diffuser may be 
used for collecting the sample. Bubblers should be kept clean and dust- 
free. Clean the impinger with chromic acid cleaning solution followed by 
rinses with tap water and distilled water. Sufficient absorbing solution 
should be taken in the bubbler. 


5.3 Air Metering Device — A calibrated flow meter or any device that 
measures rate or volume with an accuracy of 2 percent may be used to 
determine the volume of air sampled. 


5.4 Air Pump — Any pump that will deliver up to about 10 litres of air 
per minute. 


5.5 Spectrophotometer — Any suitable spectrophotometer or filter 
photometer provided wití a proper filter (352 nm) is satisfactory. 
Stoppered cuvettes or tubes suitable for ultraviolet use should be used 
to hold the solutions. 


6. REAGENTS 


6.1 Absorbent — Dissolve 14 g of potassium dihydrogen phosphate 
( KH;PO,), 14:20 g of disodium hydrogen phosphate ( Na;HPO, ) and 
10 g of potassium iodide successively and dilute the mixture to 1 litre with 
disulled water. Age at room temperature for at least 1 day before use. 
Measure the pH and adjust to 6:8 + 0°2 with sodium hydroxide or 
potassium dihydrogen phosphate solution. This absorbing solution may 
be stored for several weeks in a glass stoppered brown bottle in the 
refrigerator and for shorter periods at room temperature without deteriora- 
tion. The absorbing solution should not be exposed to sunlight. 


6.2 Standard Iodine Solution — Dissolve 16 g of potassium iodıde and 
3:173 g of iodine successively and dilute the mixture with distilled water 
to exactly 500 ml to make a 0°05 N solution. Age at room temperature at 
least one day before use. 


7. SAMPLING 


‚ 7.1 Assemble a train consisting of a U-tube with chromium trioxide paper 
(if presence of sulphur dioxide is expected, its interference may be 
eliminated, see Appendix A ), bubbler, flowmeter or air metering device, 
and pump. Use ground-glass connections upstream from the impinger. 


7.2 Pipette exactly 10 ml of the absorbing solution into the bubbler and 
sample at a rate of 0'5 to 3 litres/min for up to 30 minutes. The flow rate 
and time of sampling should be adjusted to obtain a sufficiently large 
concentration of oxidant in the absorbing solution. Approximately 2 pg 
of ozone may be obtained in the absorbing solution at an atmospheric 
concentration of ("01 ppm by sampling for 30 minutes at 3 litres/min. 


5 


15:5182 (Part IX ) - 1974 


7.3 At higher concentrations the sampling time and rate may be reduced 
so as to keep the absorbance of the solution within the range of the 
instrument. (The method is not adopted to concentrations much in 
excess of 10 ppm. ) 


7.4 The total volume of the air sample collected should be corrected to 
standard conditions of 25°C: and 760 mmHg if temperature and pressure 
deviate appreciably from these conditions. Do not expose the absorbing 
solution to sunlight. 

Nore 1— When ozone in the ppm range in air is passed through two impingers 
in series very little iodine wiil be liberated from the solution in the second impinger. 
However, the use of bubblers with diffusers, which have equally high sampling 
efficiencies, nevertheless results in less iodine liberation for a given amount of ozone. 
Therefore bubblers with diffusers should not be used in sampling for ozone and other 
oxidants. 


Nore 2 — The efficiency of collection of the bubbler or bubbler with diffuser for 
oxidants should be determined by connecting at Jeast one more absorber in series 
and by estimating the icdine liberated in each of them. The calculated efficiency 
should be used to correct the results. 


8. CALIBRATION 


8.1 Prepare a 0:002 5 N iodine solution by pipetting exactly 5 ml of the 
("05 N standard solution (normality should be checked before use) into 
a 100 ml volumetric flask and diluting to the mark with absorbing 
solution. Prepare lour or more standard solutions in 25 ml volumetric 
dasks by pipetting 0`1 to | ml portions of the 0'002 5 N iodine solution 
into the flasks, diluting to the mark with absorbing solution and mixing. 
Immediately after preparation of this series, read the absorbance of each 
at 352 nm. The solutions should cover the 0"1 to 1 unit absorbance 
range. 


9. PROCEDURE 


9.1 If significant evaporation of solution occurs, add double distilled 
water to bring the liquid volume to 10 ml. Read the absorbance at 
352 nm against double distilled water within a 30 to 60-minute period after 
collection in a 1-cm cuvette or tube. Ozone liberates iodine through 
both a fast and a slow set of reactions. Some of the organic oxidants 
also have been shown to cause slow formation of iodine. Some indi- 
cation of the presence of such oxidants and of gradual fading due to 
reductants may be obtained by taking several readings during an extended 
period of time. Determine the blank correction (to be subtracted from 
sample absorbance) every few days by reading the absorbance of unex- 
posed reagent. 


10. CALCULATIONS 


10.1 Subtract the absorbance of the blank from the absorbance of the 
standards. Plot corrected absorbances against the normalities of the 


6 


18:5182 (Part IX )- 1974 


standardized solutions. From the line of the best fit the normality corres- 
ponding to an absorbance of exactly one shall be determined. To obtain 
a value, M, representing microlitres of ozone required by 10 mi of 
absorbing solution to produce an absorbance of one, multiply this 
normality by the factor 1'224 x 10°. 


10.2 For l-cm cells, M should be approximately 96. Results for air 
samples may be computed from equation: 


Oxidant (as Оз), ppm = AM/V 


where 
A = corrected absorbance, and 


V = volume of air sample (in litres) per 10 ml of absorbing 
solution corrected to 25°С and 760 mmHg (correction is 
ordinarily smali and may be omitted ). 


NoTE — 1 mg/litre = 509 ppm of ozone at 25°C and 760 mmHg. 


APPENDIX A 
( Clause 7.1 ) 


REMOVAL OF SULPHUR DIOXIDE 


A-1. Elimination of the interference caused by sulphur dioxide, even if it 
is present in as high as 100-fold ratio to oxidant, is accomplished by 
incorporating an extra large (70-ml) absorbing U-tube in the sampling 
train upstream from the impinger. The absorbent which removes sulphur 
dioxide without loss of oxidant, is glass fibre filter paper (usual commer 
cial form which has been flash-fired to free it from organic binder ) 
impregnated with chromium trioxide. Add 7'5 ml of aqueous solution 
containing 1:25 g of chromium trioxide and 0°35 ml concentrated sul- 
phuric acid dropwise over 200 cm? of paper so that, visually, the solution 
is uniformly dispersed on the filter. Dry in an oven at 80 to 90°C for 
1 hour. Cut the paper into 6 x 12 mm strips each, fold once into a 
V-shape, pack into the U-tube, and condition by drawing 02 ppm ozone 
through the tube for 1 hour or dry air overnight. The absorbent has a 
long storage life (at least 1 month), but deteriorates rapidly with use. If 
it becomes visibly wet from sampling humid air, it shall be dried with 
dry air, before further use. 


Caution: Care in filter preparation and use is important, since a 
poor filter gives zero oxidant results. 


