**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13736-3-0 (1993) : Classification of Environmental 
Conditions, Part 3: Classification of Groups of 
Environmental Parameters and their Severities, Section 0: 
Introduction [LITD 1: Environmental Testing Procedure] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13736 ( Part 3/8m ) : 1993 
lEC Pub 721-3-0 (1984) 

Indian Standard 

CLASSIFICATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL 

CONDITIONS 

PART 3 CLASSIFICATION OF GROUPS OF ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS 

AND THIER SEVERITIES 

Section Introduction 



UDC 621-38-038 : 620193 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110002 

June 1993 Pric* Group 5 



Environmental Testing Procedures Sectional Committee, LTP 02 



NATIONAL FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard, which is identical with lEC Pub 721-3-0 ( 1984 ) ^Classification of environ- 
mental conditions — Part 3 : Classification of group of environmental parameters and their 
severities. Introduction*, issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission, was adopted 
by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Environmental Testing 
Procedures Sectional Committee ( LTD 02 ) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommuication 
Division Council. 

The text of the lEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard 
without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian 
Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

Wherever the words 'International Standard* appear, referring to this standard, they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard*. 

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of lEC 68, referred in this 
standard and has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard. 

Part 1 of this Indian Standard deals with classification of environmental parameters and their 
severities. The subsequent parts are intended to deal with the following: 

a) Environmental conditions appearing in nature 

b) Classification of groups of environmental parameters and their severities. 

Amendment No. 1 issued to lEC Pub 721-3-0 ( 1984 ) is given at the end. 

Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting it 
in this Indian Standard. 



IS1373C (P«rt3/SecO):l»»3 
lEC Pub 721-3-0 (1984) 



Indian Standard 

CLASSIFICATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL 

CONDITIONS 

PART 3 CLASSIFICATION OF GROUPS OF ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS 

AND THIER SEVERITIES 

Section Introduction 

Scope 

I EC Publication 721-3: Classification of Environmental Conditions, Part 3: Classiflcation 
of Groups of Environmental Parameters and Their Severities, establishes classes of environ- 
mental parameters and their severities, covering the extreme (short-term) conditions which 
may be met by a product when being transported, installed, stored and used. Separate groups 
of classes are given for different product applications (e.g. weather-protected stationary, 
mounted in ground vehicles, transportation). The classes also take into account the degree of 
restriction of the use of the product from very restricted conditions (e.g. in temperature- 
controlled rooms) to unrestricted conditions. 

The classiflcation covers natural as well as man-made conditions. 



Object 

This Introduction is a guide for the use of all parts of I EC Publication 721-3. It contains 
background information including information on application and limitation of the classes 
given in various parts of I EC Publication 721-3. It describes the difference between the envir- 
onmental conditions the product will meet during its life, described by the classes in I EC 
Publication 721-3, and conditions of test used to assure that the product will work satisfac- 
torily under such environmental conditions. The use of I EC Publication 721-3 in the design, 
limitation of conditions and protection is also included. The differences are explained 
between extreme environmental conditions with a small probability of being exceeded, 
normally approached only for short periods, and more long-lasting normal environmental 
conditions. 

Reference to I EC Publication 72 1 -3-0 is strongly recommended in order to avoid misuse of 
the classes deflned in the other parts of I EC Publication 721-3. 



\. Content and layout 

Separate groups of classes of environmental conditions are given for the following product 
applications: 

Publications 721-3-1: Storage; 

721-3-2: Transportation; 

721-3-3: Stationary Use, Weather-protected; 



(IECpagc7) 



IS 13736 ( Pftit 3/Sec ) : 1993 
TEC Pub 721-3-0 (1984) 

721-3-4: Stationary Use, Non-weathcrprotected; 
721-3-5: Ground Vehicle Installations; 
721-3-6: Ship Environment; 
721-3-7: Portable and Stationary Use. 
The classes are identified by: 

— a digit defining the application (1 for storage, 2 for transportation, 3 for stationary use» 
etc.); 

— a letter for climatic conditions (K), biological conditions (B), chemically active substances 
(C), mechanically active substances (S) or mechanical conditions (M). To be extended if 
necessary; 

— a further digit indicating severity, where a higgler digit normally indicates more stringent 
conditions. A class may be further divided into H (High) or L (Low) to allow for condi- 
tions where, for example, the temperature may be severely low but never high. 

Example: Class 2K3, where: 2 • transportation; 

K- climatic conditions; 
3 - severity. 

The parts of I EC Publication 721-3 contain tables giving all classes, including the severity 
of each environmental parameter for each class. In addition, every publication includes an 
appendix giving details of conditions which products are assumed to meet and which form a 
basis for the classes. These appendices are intended to guide the user of the publication in his 
selection of the class appropriate to his special product application. 



4. Background Informatton for the selection of environmental parameters and severities for the 



The environmental parameters listed for a class are the conditions covered by the class to 
which a product will be subjected. They are selected by using the complete set of environ- 
mental parameters in I EC Publication 721-1: Classification of Environmental Conditions, 
Part I: Classification of Environmental Parameters and Their Severities, as a "check list". 

The severities given for each environmental parameter are those which are exceeded either 
for an insignificant part of the continuous exposure time (e.g. temperature conditions), or for 
an insignificant fraction of the total number of events (e.g. shocks). Thus the classes given in 
I EC Publication 721-3 can be used for defining the maximum short-term environmental 
stresses of a product, but do not give any information on the long-term, or total life duration 
of the product environmental stresses. This is illustrated in Figure 1, page 1 1. 



( lEC page 9 ) 



IS 13736 (]tet3/SM0):1993 
DEC Fob 721-3-0(1984) 



P{x>Xo) 
Fraction of time, or 
fraction of total number 
of events when x^ 
is exceeded 10 



05- 




\ Seventy 



P|x>xJ is low 



43&/B4 



Fig. 1. — Illustration of the fraction of time or fraction of the total number of events when a 
certain environmental severity is exceeded. 



The severities given in the classification are represented by one value xu whilst the infor- 
mation needed for defining the totality of environmental stresses during the lifetime of a 
product includes the total curve, P(x> xq) for all values of xq. 

Although available data do not make it possible to give an exact figure on the probability 
level used in the classification, P(x> x\) is usually considerably less than 0.01. 

A product will be simultaneously exposed to a large number of environmental parameters. 
Some of the parameters are statistically dependent, for example, low air velocity and low 
temperature, sun radiation and high temperature. Other parameters are statistically inde- 
pendent, for example vibration and temperature (normally). 

The probability of simultaneous exposure to extreme severities of independent environ- 
mental parameters x and y is equal to the product of the probabilities of exposure to each of 
the parameters, i.e.: 

Pix.y>xuyi)^Pix>xi)^ P(y>yx) 

Example: If the probability of exceeding each of the parameters 

P{x>xi) '^P{y>y\) - 0.01, then P(x,y>xi,y\) - 0.0001 

It should be noted that in many cases the product is exposed fqr 6nly limited periods to the 
environment from which the statistical data have been collected. In such cases severities in the 
classification have been selected which have a probability higher than 0.01 of being exceeded. 
Consequently, the probability of the combination of the product being exposed to the 
environment and of the class limit severity is reasonable (in the order of magnitude of 0.01). 



(lECpagcll) 



IS 13734 (Pait3/Sec0):1993 
lEC Pub 721-3-0 (1984) 

S. Goidance for the use of lEC PubUcatioii 721-3 

S.l General 

All products have to be designed to survive and work in more or less severe environments. 
Basically they will be affected by the environmental influences in two ways: 

— by the effects of short-term extreme environmental conditions, which may directly cause 
malfunction or destroy the product; 

— by the effect of long-term subjection to non-extreme environmental stresses, which may 
slowly degrade the product and Anally cause malfunction or destruction of the product. 

The short-term extreme environmental conditions, deflned in I EC Publication 721-3, may 
occur at any time in the product*s life. A product may be unafTected by an extreme condition 
when it is new but fail when it is subjected to the same condition after being used for a long 
period due to the effect of ageing. 

Extreme conditions may affect the product: 

— only when the product is non-operating (e.g. during storage and transportation), 

— only when the product is operating, 

or both. It is therefore important for the product speciflcation, when referring to a certain 
class in I EC Publication 721-3, to deflne whether the product is required to be capable of 
operating or only to survive without permanent damage,* when being subjected to the condi- 
tions described by the class. 

The environmental classes may be used as a basis for the choice of design and test levels. 
This does not imply that the class limits should be used as design and test levels, nor that zero 
failure rate should be required at the class limits. Design and test levels must always be chosen 
from case to case with respect to acceptable risk of failure, i.e. with higher or lower severity 
depending on expected consequences of failure. 



5.2 In the design, limitation of conditions and protection 

I EC Publication 721-3 is basically intended to be used as a basis for deflning the actual 
environmental conditions for which a product has to be designed. The designer niust be aware 
that the physical influence of environmental conditions may be the result of a certain number 
of environmental parameters. 

Example: The highest temperature achieved on the surface of a product may be the result of 
the combination of the temperature of the surrounding air, solar radiation, heat 
radiation from a nearby heating element, open oven, etc. 

The manufacturer or user of the product may reduce the severity of an environmental 
parameter by protecting the product, for example, by using an enclosure for transportation 
and storage or by mounting the product on vibration or shock isolators. The environmental 
severities given by the classes in I EC Publication 721-3 shall then be applied to the product 
including its protection, not to the product itself. 



(IECpagcl3) 



IS 13736 (Part3/Sec0):1993 
lEC Pub 721-3-0 (19S4) 

By means of the information given in the appendices to the various parts of I EC Publi- 
cation 721-3 it is possible for the manufacturer and user to define restrictions in the transpor- 
tation, storage or use of the product, which will bring the application into compliance with a 
lower severity class. 

It is often economical and technically important to find an optimum between: 

-^ the environmental resistance of the unprotected product; 

— the protection of the product from environmental influences; 

•— restrictions in transportation, storage and use of the product. 

It should be noted that an overdesign of a product, in order to withstand environmental 
conditions more extreme than necessary, does not necessarily result in higher reliability. An 
overdesign or unnecessary built-in protection may lead to a more complex product with an 
increased number of failure modes. Furthermore, overdesign of products as well as unne- 
cessary requirements on locations in order to ensure environmental conditions less severe 
than necessary, can become very expensive. 

S.3 For defining appropriate levels for qualification testing 

As mentioned under Sub-clause 5.2 above, the classes in I EC Publication 721-3 can be 
used as basis for design, protection and introduction of restrictions. Demonstration of the 
capability of the product to meet the environmental condition includes a number of activities, 
from instructions for selection of basic materials used in the product including material 
testing, instructions for surface treatments, etc., to testing of samples of the complete product 
under simulated environmental conditions. 

The testing is made in a selection of the environmental parameters, or sometimes combina- 
tions thereof, which may be detrimental to the product. An environmental test requirement is 
described by: 

— environmental parameter; 

— testing procedure; 

— testing severities. 

In addition requirements are given related to the specific product, for example rating, func- 
tional requirements, acceptable degradation etc. 

Environmental testing procedures for testing are standardized in I EC Publication 68: 
Basic Environmental Testing Procedures. 

The severities used for testing must be related to the testing procedure, which attempts to 
produce the effects of the actual environment. This reproduction is often different from the 
actual environmental conditions. 

Examples: — A high temperature test on a heat dissipating product is designed to simulate 
the thermal effect of subjecting it to conditions of high air temperature, solar 
radiation and other possible heat sources dependent on the application. 

— In a shock test, (he product is subjected to shocks of simple pulse shapes (e.g. 
half-sine), whilst the actual conditions cannot be described by such simple 
pulses. A transformation by means of comparing the shock spectrum of the 
actual conditions with the shock spectrum of the test pulse is needed. 



(lECpagclS) 



IS 13736 (Pait3/SecO):lM3 
lEC Pub 721-34 (1984) 

(The transformation of actual conditions into test conditions is not within the scope of I EC 
Publication 721.) 

The conditions given in lEC Publication 721-3 are those with a small probability of being 
exceeded but without safety margins. In addition to selection and transformation of actual 
conditions into test conditions the designer of test requirements can add margins to coven 

— tolerances oftest equipment and control devices; 

— inequalities between the sample used for testing and other specimens of the product; 

— other factors. 

As a summary it is emphasized that the classes in I EC Publication 721-3 define actual 
extreme environmental conditions. They should not be directly applied for qualification 
testing. They may, however, be used as basic material for defining test levels for such testing, 
together with methods for transformation of actual conditions into test conditions, safety 
margins, etc. 



(IECpagcl7) 



IS 13736 (Pait3/Sec0):1993 
EEC Pub 721.3-0 (1984) 



Amendment 



No. 1 

April 1987 
to 



Publication 721-3-0 
198<i 



Classification of environmental conditions 

Part 3: 

Classification of groups of environmental 

parameters and their severities 

Introduction 



Page 1 

Add to Clause 2: Object, after the first paragraph insert the following: 

This Introduction also gives guidance for applying factors of duration and 
frequency of occurrence in characterizing the contribution of a significant 
parameter of a class. 

Page 6 

Add the following clause: 

6. Duration and frequency of occurrence 

6 . 1 General 

The severities specified in the classes of lEC Publication 721-3 are 
those which will have a low probability of being exceeded. They occur for 
only a fraction of time or for a limited number of events. 

For certain applications it may be Important to know how long or how 
often significant levels of environmental parameters bear upon the 
product. Depending on the local situation or on the use profile of a 
product, duration or frequency of occurrence of single environmental 
parameters may be different. The knowledge of the expected duration or 
frequency of occurrence may significantly influence the design of the 
product or protective measures (details of building construction, etc.) at 
the location of application (during storage, transportation or use). 

The underlying problems are often of a statistical and very complex 
nature. Such situations cannot be dealt with in a standardized manner. 
The following tables and examples can only convey a limited amount of 
Information. They should therefore be used only in simple cases or when 
no more relevant information on durations Is available. 



IS 13736 (Fftrt 3/Sec 0) : 1993 
mc Pub 721-3-0 (1984) 



6,2 Duration and frequency of occurrence 



6.2.1 Table I contains a standard selection of total durations which may be 
related to each application. 

6.2.2 Table II contains a standard selection of maximum durations of a 
single occurrence, and Table III contains a standard selection of durations 
of occurrence or number of events per unit time. These durations or 
frequencies may be related to each environmental parameter of a class 
normally characterizing the situation when the contribution of that para- 
meter is significant. 

Depending on the situation, the term "significant" is considered in 
this text to cover situations such as the following: 

the state described by the parameter is reached, for example, conden- 
sation, icing, etc.; 

the parameter value is beyond the corresponding severity of the next 
lower class, for example, low air pressure, high air temperature, low 
relative humidity, high relative humidity, etc.; 

the parameter exceeds any defined threshold value, which then has to 
be stated together with the duration or frequency selected. 

A relationship between the durations and frequencies of Table II and 
Table III, and the total durations of application in Table I may be'given. 

6.2.3 Appendix A gives examples of application of standard values of dura- 
tion and frequency of occurrence. 



TABLE I 
Total duration of application 



AppM cation 


Duration 


Storage 

Transportation 

Use 


1 month 6 months 1 year 2 years 3 years 
24 h 1 week 1 month 6 months 
1 year ' 5 years 10 years 20 years kO years 



1) 



Exceptional cases may call for a very short duration, for example 
weather sondes. 



IS137M (r»n3f8*c9)tl993 
lEC Pub 721-3^ (1984) 



TABLE II 
Maximum duration of single occurrence 



1 


s 


10 


s 


1 


min 


0.5 


h 


1 


h 


8 


h 


2k 


h 


1 


week 


2 


weeks 


1 


month 



TABLE III 
Frequency of occurrence 



Duration of occurrence 
per unit tlme^^ 


or 


Number of significant 
events per unit time ' 


0.5 h 

1 h 

8 h 

2i> h 

1 week 

2 weeks 

1 month 

2 months 
6 months 


1 
2 
5 

10 



^^ Unit time to be selected from the following: second, minute. Iiour, 
24 h, week, month, year. 



IS 13736 (Pftrt3/SecO):1993 
lEC Pub 721-3-0 (1984) 



APPENDIX A 
EXAMPLES OF APPLICATION 



Application of the standard values of duration and frequency of occur- 
rence to actual cases is exemplified in the following: 



A1 . Example No. 1 

The product will be transported by normally available transportation 
means from the manufacturer to the user over a Idng distance without 
special care or protection. 



Environmental classification: 
Duration of transportation: 
Duration of significant vibration: 
Number of significant shocks: 
Number of significant free falls: 



2K4/2B2/2C3/2S2/2M3 
1 month 

1 week per month 
1 per h 
10 per month 



A2, Example No. 2 

The product is to be used in a weatherprotected stationary instal- 
lation. 



Environmental classification: 

Duration of use: 

Duration of significant vibration: 

Maximum duration of significant 
vibrations: 

Number of significant shocks: 



3K3/3Z1/3B1/3C2/3S2/3M2 
10 years 
1 week per year 

8 h 

1 per 24 h 



A3. Example No. 3 



The product is intended for portable and non-stationary use. 

7K4/7Z2/7Z6/7Z10/7B2/7C3/7S3/7M3 



Environmental classification : 

Duration of use: 

Duration of wetness (condensation, 
precipitation, spraying water): 

Duration of significant influence 
of chemically active substances: 

Duration of icing, frosting: 

Number of significant free falls: 



5 yedrs 

2 months per year 

0.5 h per 24 h 

1 month per year 

2 per year 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark 
on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system 
of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and 
operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by 
BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under 
which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards AcU 1986 to 
promote harfnonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality 
certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced 
in any form witfiQ^the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, 
in the course oriaSjilementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type 
or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director 
( WblicatioSs ), BIS 

Revision of tttdian Standards 

Amcndm«?3ts are is^ed to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards 
aji^Jso re^viewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaflSrmed when such review 
incS^Ues'that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up tdr revision. Users of Indin Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latipst amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference: 

Doc: No. LTD02(0017/BN) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. "' , Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 11002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Common to all Offices ) 



Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 

NEW DELHI 110002 
Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f37 84 99, 37 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700054 [37 86 26, 37 86 62 

^53 38 43, 53 16 40 
i 53 23 84 



Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 



{ 



pn 01 31 

\331 13 75 

f37 
1.37 

{■ 



235 02 16, 23S 04 42 

235 15 19, 235 23 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) r632 92 95, 632 78 58 

BOMBAY 400093 \632 78, 91, 632 78 92 

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 

Hnated at Ptintwell PrinteM, Alisa^b, ^yfdiiT 



