( Reaffirmed 2004 )

IS : 9001 ( Part 16 ) - 1985

lndian Standard
GUIDANCE ENVIRONMENTAL
PART 16 ACOUSTIC

FOR TESTING
NOISE TEST

Environmental

Testing

Procedures

Sectional

Committee,

LTDC

2

Chairman LT-GEN D. SWAROOP ( RETD ) 89 Munirka Enclave, New Delhi Members
WC+-CDR A. K. DHIN~RA

Representing Instrumentation Ltd, Kota

_

SHRI A. P. GUPTA ( Alternate ) BRIQ R. C. DHINGRA ( RETD ) Electronics Regional Test Laboratory ( North ), New Delhi SHRI K. C. CEHABRA ( Alternate ) DR P. K. DUTTA Peico Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay SRRI V. NARAYANAN ( Alternate ) SHRI GHASITA SINGH Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute ( CSIR ), Pilani SHRI B. P. GHOSH National Test House, Calcutta SHRI B. C. MUKHERJEE ( Alternate ) SHRI G. R. GHOSH Society of Environmental Engineers, Bangalore SHRI T. C. GOSALIA The National Radio & Electronics Co Ltd, Bombay JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( S & T )/TESTS, RDSO ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow JOINT DIRECTOR STANDARDS ( S & T )/LAn, RDSO ( Alternate ) BRIM L. G. KETKAR Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Bangalore SBRI B. RAGHVENDRA RAN ( Alternate ) SHRI S. P. KULIZARNI Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' Association, Bombay DR P. K. DUTTA ( Alternate ) SHRI I. C. MATHUR Directorate of Technical Development & Production ( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ). SQN-LDR K. N. SAMPATH KUMAR ( Altcnrute ) SHRI H. V. MENTA Posts and Telegraphs Board, New Delhi SHRI T. S. VASUDEVAN ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 @ Copyright 1986 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9091 ( Part

16 ) - 1985

( ContinucJfrom page 1 )
Members SHG&~. R. ANANDAKUMARAN
SHRI

Representing Lucas-TVS Limited, Madras

SHRI C. RAN~ANATHAN ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Trombay, Bombay D. V. PETKAR SHRI JAODISH LAL ( Alternate ) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. S. K. PRASAD SHRI D. S. GOPALAKRISHNA ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. RAMA~AO SHRI T. D. VEERVANI ( Alternate ) Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. V. RAO SHRI LAKSHY~NARAYANA ( Alternate ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal SHRI I'. K. SAMA DR 0. P. CHHABRA ( Alternate I ) SHRI B. K. MAHAJAN ( Alternate II ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), Bangalore SHXI P. K. SHUKLA SHRI G. S. PAI ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI K. K. TANEJA New Delhi SHRI H. S. DUREY ( Alternate ) Department of Electronics, New Delhi DR R. Cl. TR~PATRI DR A. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) All India Instrument Manufacturers' & Dealers' SHTCI H. C. VERMA Association. Bombav DEPUTY SECRETARY, IMDA ( Alternate) ' ' Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&cio Member ) SRRI N. SRINIVAS~N, Director ( Electronics ) Secretary SHRI HARCHAT~ANSINQR Joint Director ( Electronics ), IS1

Panel for Mechanical
Convener SHRI

Tests, LTDC

2 : P8

P. K. SHUKLA Members
SHRI

Ministry of Defence ( R & D ), Bangalore

B. M. DALI~( Alternate to Shri P. K. Shukla ) Electronics Regional Test Laboratory ( North ), SHRI K. C. CHHABRA New Delhi SHRI B. B. SH~HA ( Alternate ) P&co Electronics & Electricals Ltd, Bombay DR P. K. DIJTT~ SHRI V. N.~RAYANAN ( Alternate) Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore SHRI D. S. GOPAT~AKRISHN.A Ministry of Defence ( DGI ), Bangalore LT-COL G. R. M~LI~AN LT-COL AMARJIT S~NGH ( Alternate ) Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad SITRI K. M. MANKAD Lucas-TVS Ltd. Madras SIIRI C. RANo4NITHAN Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore SHRI P. V. RAO SHRI LAKSHMINARAYANA ( Alternate ) Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay SHRI S. P. T~IUKEAL

2

IS : 9001 ( Part 16 ) - 1985

Indian Standard
GUIDANCE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL TESTING
PART 16 ACOUSTCC NOISE TEST

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 16 ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 July 1985, after the draft finalized by the Procedures Sectional Committee had been Environmental Testing approved by the Electronics and ~Telecommunication Division Council.
0.2 This standard ( Part 16 ) covers the noise test. The test procedure is covered guidance details for acoustic in IS : 9000 ( Part 21 )-1985*.

considerable assistance is derived 0.3 While preparing this standard, from Test No. 2 of JSS 55555-1977 `Environmental test methods for issued by the Ministry of Defence, electronic and electrical equipment', India. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960t. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part 16 ) covers guidance test for electronic and electrical items.
2. CHOICE derived details for acoustic noise

OF TEST

SPECTRA
( Part 21 )-1985*
items: Part

2.1 The test spectrum

given in Fig. 2 of IS : 9000 from consideration of the following factors.

is
21

*Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic Acoustic noise test. tRules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ).

and electrical

3

IS : 9001 ( Part

16 ) - 1985

2.1.1 The external exhaust overall noise level can range from 130 to 165 dB when both jet and rocket noise are considered. Below this range acoustic problems are unlikely, whilst above this range special attention is necessary. 2.1.2 The maximum band level occurs in the frequency range 200 to 1 000 Hz with a 6 dB per octave roll off at higher and lower frequencies. 2.1.3 The attenuation by the 10 dB. Above I 000 Hz the per octave, giving up to 30 dB ever, these figures are only involved. skin, etc, below attenuation can attenuation at generalizations 1 009 Hz is of the order of increase at a rate of 6 dB higher frequencies. Howsince many factors may be

2.1.4 Depending on the type of vehicle, maximum boundary layer noise will normally be in the region of 145 dB, with a spectrum closer to white than that for jet noise. 2.1.5 When exhaust and boundary layer spectra are combined, and skin attenuation is taken into account, the result is similar to the external spectrum for jet noise only. 2.1.6 Although the preferred signal should be random, reverberation conditions may modify the amplitude distribution giving misleading distribution measurements in the reverberation chamber. 2.1.7 These one particular considerations give rise to general purpose test, but should type of noise predominate, a special test may be required. IN THE SELECTION OF A TEST

3. SOME CONSIDERATIONS FACILITY 3.1 Choice of primarily with ment. Hence of an enclosed

Test Chamber - The test is based on conditions arising aircraft equipment which operate in an enclosed compartthe first characteristic of the normal environment is that space.

3.1.1 The greater part of the acoustic field in such enclosed compartments is usually due to secondary radiation of sound from vibration of the surrounding structure. Thu*; the sound radiating source may comprise a large area of the compartment. 3.1.2 A combination of enclosed space, reflective surfaces and a relatively large radiating area, will result in sound waves being reflected and transmitted in random directions to build up a diffuse field. This is closely simu!ated in a reverberation chamber. Other types of chamber that may be considered would not give the same correlation of pressures over the item, and would therefore not excite item resonances in quite the same way. 4

IS : 9001 ( Part

16 ) - 1985

3.2 Realism in the Choice of Test Chamber Size -- The class of equipment and components to be dealt with is to be confinedto the airborne type, although some conclusions may have more general applications. 3.2.1 Much airborne equipment will be in the form of `black boxes', They will seldom which will generally be the largest items to be tested. approach 1 m3 in volume, a more realistic limit being in the order of In general, components will be enclosed inside the black boxes 0.1 m3. so that, for the component, the environment is enclosed in the box ( or whatever equipment the component operates in ). 3.2.2 The'volume of operating space for equipment cannot be specified, although some generalizations may be permissible. The largest volumes are usually passenger and crew compartments where an overall noise level of less than 120 dl3 makes noise problems unlikely. Crew compartments of small military aircraft have a relatively small volume ( 8 m3 or less ), but noise levels up to 135 dE are possible. Generally, airborne equipment subject to intense noise environments will be operating in small compartments in the nose, tail wings and underfloor compartments. Possible exceptions are where aircraft have large underfloor cargo spaces, or in the case of military aircraft where electronic equipment may be carried in large bomb bays. 3.2.3 It is unlikely to find equipment operating in volumes of the order of 500 m3, and even more unlikely that such equipment will require an acoustic test. Components will operate in an environment formed by the casing of the equipment and can therefore be tested in a small test chamber. 3.3 Standardization of Test Conditions - Standardization of test conditions is needed if different establishments are to obtain similar results with the same type of item. In addition, if the cataloguing of equipment as complying with a specification is to have meaning, the conditions need to be related to some standard conditions. These conditions would include frequency spectra, sound pressure levels and type or pattern of acoustic field. 3.4 Preferred Test Chambers The best available means of achieving a representative test is to obtain standardization by testing in standard forms of chamber, and to obtain realism by having these forms of realistic size. A range of three test chamber sizes has been chosen to cover most likely cases: a) A small test chamber suitable for component testing; b) A medium and c) sized chamber to cater for a wide range of equipment; larger volume.

A large chamber

to provide

for cases needing 5

IS : 9001 ( Part 16 ) - 1985 3.4.1 The
effective size and shape of the chambers have been chosen to meet an compromise between technical and economic considerations.

3.5 Acoustic Noise Generators - For the acoustic test, a source should be capable of delivering controllable random noise at high power, controllable in that the shape of the spectrum can be changed without A high efficiency is also desiraltering the randomness of the output. able, although this tends to take second place to the requirement mentioned first.

3.5.1 At the present time, the most suitable devices are those which are electromagnetic in operations; loudspeakers and electromagnetic air modulators. The only .other suitable device is the random siren although No available noise this is of doubtful value due to control problems. generator is entirely satisfactory from power output, spectral range, or controllability points of view.
3.5.2 More literature. details of these generators should be obtained from current

4. PREFERRED

CHAMBER

AND GUIDE TO SUITABLE

SOURCES

4.1 Test Chambers 4.1.1 The preferred test chamber is an uneven pentagon as shown in Fig.1 of IS : 9000 ( Part 21 )-1985* and in order that a measure of standardization of the test can be achieved it is recommended that the size of the chamber be chosen from one of three sizes having the following dimensional constants:
n = O-5 m n = 1'25 m n==3m The mean absorption coefficient ( CC ) should be between 0.03 and 0.04.

4.1.2 Material suitable for the test chamber include painted brickwork, smoothed concrete, or steel or aluminium plate. Vibration damping of the wall and horns coupling the sources to the chamber is of importance if high absorption, due to mechanical resonance, is to be avoided. Absorption coefficients for these materials commonly range from 0.02 to O-05; with adequate vibration damping the figure is closer to 0!02 than 0.05.
*Basic environmental Acoustic noise test. testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part 21

6

IS : 9001 ( Part 4.1.3 Brick although this and concrete may also give should normally be avoided.

16 ) - 1985

figures of less than 0.02, The recommended range

for ais a compromise between power requirements, diffusion and smoothness of frequency response. Absorption coefficients, when tending to be high, may sometimes be reduced by coating the appropriate surfaces with an epoxy paint. 4.1.4 acoustic coefficient The sound source Initially energy. opening and the item are also absorbers of it may be found best to assume the absorption opening to be unity (cc = 1 ).

of the sound source

4.1.5 Absorption by the item would normally be 10 W, as the item would have a similar absorption coefficient range to those materials quoted above. If, however,~the item to be tejted has non-metallic or highly resonant surfaces, special consideration should be given to the absorption by the item. 4.2 Acoustic Power Requirements may be initially estimated from: Power Watt Level (PWL) where z.z SpL The basic power requirement

10 log10

dB referred

to lo-12 watt

PWL W SPL

=

10 logloW

+

120 dB; in watts; level in decibels referred to

-= acoustic = sound
2 x

power

pressure IO-5 Pa; and

R

=

room constant -

in m2 is found from:

S a

= total surface :: mean

area absorbing coefficient

acoustic

energy

in m2; and area.

absorption

of the surface

4.2.1 Most sound sources deliver their power unevenly through the spectrum, so that spectrum shaping may be accomplished by reducing the power output in the most efficient part of the output spectrum of the source. Additional power may, therefore, be required to allow for the inefficiency of the source in parts of its'output spectrum. 4.2.2 For the test chambers recommended in 4.1.1 the higher coefficient ( z = 0.04 ) should be assumed in initial calculations. absortion

4.3 Source Requirements - An indication of power requirements and of the type of source which may be associated with the recommended test chamber, is given in Table 1. 7

IS : 9001 ( Part 16 ) - 1985
TABLE 1 -TYPICAL SOURCE ( Clm4se 4.3 SPECTRUM APPROX OVERALL SPL Te;t=cp5m$r Acoustic power Source GRADE A 130 dB 0.5 W ( A ) 30 W ( E ) loudspeaker REQUIREMENTS

)
GRADE C 150 dB 50W(A) 6 off lOOW(E) . pressure drive unit or 50 W air (A) modulator 500 W ( A ) 500 W ( A ) air modulater GRADE D 160 dB 500 W (A) 500 w ( A ) air modulator

GRADE B 140 dB 5 W

(A )

1OOW (E) pressure drive unit

Test chamber Acoustic n = 1'25 m* power Source

5 W

(A )

50W(A) 6off 100 W ( E ) pressure drive unit or 50 W iZ!JatoY

4kW(A) 2 off 2kW(A) air modulator or random siren 16kW (A)

1OOW (E) pressure drive unit

Tyt=c$az*ber

Acoustic power Source

25 W ( A )

250 W ( A )

2 kW(A) 2kW(A) air modulator

250 W ( A ) 3 off air modula100 W ( E) pressure tor drive unit or 25W(A) air moduiator

a off

2kW( A) air modulator or random siren for

*See Fig. 1 of IS : 9000 ( Part 21 )-I985 Basic environmental electronic and electrical items: Part 21 Acoustic noise test.

testing

procedures

~been

4.3.1 Acoustic
increased to allow

powers, as calculated for spectrum shaping

by the method in 4.2 have and other uncertainties.

in

table

4.3.2 Input power for loudspeakers and pressure drive units is given electrical watts, all other power being given in acoustic watts. In the

these are shown

as watts ( E ) and watts ( A ) respectively. may not necessarily

4.3.3 Any the frequency

individual device range required.

cover the whole

of

4.3.4 The air modulators referred to are not necessarrly commercially availab!e in the intermediate sizes, but represent types which are feasible and would be suitable. A 2 kW ( A ) modulator is available and could be used in the absence of intermediate sizes. 8

IS : 9001( Part 16 ) - 1985 4.3.5 The use of a large number of sources should be avoided where possible. Since the source area is absorbent to sound, the addition of extra sources will increase the absorption and a state may be reached where the SPL falls when more sources are added. Thus one high powered source is in general more effective than a number of low powered sources. 4.3.6 A random siren is a possible alternative to the air modulator where very high acoustic powers are required. With this type of device, however, spectrum shaping is very difficult to achieve. In addition, special care should be taken to ensure that the output is random under all conditions of use. 4.3.7 Unless otherwise specified in the relevant specification, the time duration to expose the item in the different types of sound pressure chambers shall be taken as 10 hours.

9

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units QOA(LNTITY Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

SYSTEM
UNIT metre

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS)

SYMBOL m k s A K cd mol

kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

Supplementary
QUANTITY

UNIT radian steradian

SParBOL

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUANTITY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

SYMBOL N 1 1

DEFINITION N =!I kg.m/s* J = 1N.m

J
W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 W = 1 J/s 1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 1 1 1 T = 1 Wb/ms S = 1 A/V 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-1) V=lW/A` Pa = 1 N/m*

