( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Basic Standards

on Electronics

and Telecommunication

Sectional

Committee,

LTD 01

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard (First Revision) which is identical with IEC Pub QC 001002-l (1998) `IEC Quality assessment system for electronic components (IECQ) - Rules of procedure - Part 1 :Administration' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Basic Standards on Electronics and Telecommunication Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. The revision has been undertaken in order to align Indian Standard with the latest International Standard as under IEC quality assessment system for electronic components (IECQC), it is obligatory for each member country to adopt IECQC standards as their national standards without any change. The text of the IEC standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: Wherever the words `International `Indian Standard'. CROSS REFERENCES In this Indian Standard, places the following: international the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their respective Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be read as

Standard

Corresponding

Indian Standard

Degree of Equivalence Identical

IEC QC 001002-2 (1998) IEC Quality assessment system for electronic components (IECQ) - Rules of procedure - Part 2 : Documentation IEC QC Quality electronic - Rules Approval 001002-3 (1998) IEC assessment system for components (IECQ) of procedure - Part 3 : of procedures

IS QC 001002-2 : 2000 IEC Quality assessment system for electronic components (IECQ) - Rules of procedure : Part 2 Documentation

IS QC 001002-3 : 2000 IEC Qualityassessment system for electronic components of procedure : Part 3 (IECQ) - Rules Approval of procedures

do

IEC QC 001003 (1998) IEC Quality assessment system for electronic components (IECQ) - Guidance documents

IS QC 001003 : 2000 IEC Quality assessment system for electronic components (IECQ) - Guidance documents

do

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of the following standards referred in this adopted standard and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: IEC QC 001004 (1998) Specifications list countries

IEC QC 001006 (1998) Register

of participating

Indian Standard

IS QC 001002-1: 2000 IEC QC 001002-l(1998)

IEC QUALITY ASSESSMENT SYSTEM FOR ELECTRONIC COMPONENTS -(IECQ) RULES OF PROCEDURE
PART 1 ADMINISTRATION

1
1.1

Participation
Types of participation

( First Revision )
by the

Depending Certification

upon the existence of the necessary national bodies and their acceptance Management Committee (CMC), a participating country in the System may Co-ordination

a)
b)

participate in the CMC with voting rights and in the inspectorate (ICC) as a consulting member with limited voting rights, or participate

Committee

in the CMC with voting rights and in the ICC as a full member with voting rights.

NOTE 1 Participation in the System is illustrated in the following diagram which is based on the rules contained in 1.2 to 1.4. A country having a National Committee of the IEC, a National Standards Organization, a National Authorized Institution, and paying dues to th;CMC is a participating country with voting rights in the CMC. A participating country -

I

I
I

being a certifying country

J

I

not being a certifying country
I

I

I

I

1

having an approved National Supervising Inspectorate

using the approved National Supervising Inspectorate of another participating country
I

and having a National Certification Body
I
I

I

l

I

I

and having a National Certification Body

is a consulting member of the ICC with limited voting rights

NOTE 2 The term "participating country" has no political significance. NOTE 3 The National Certification Body function may be discharged by the National Supervising Inspectorate, the National Authorized Institution or other organization, as designated in the national rules. NOTE 4 Rules for access to the System by manufacturers, specialist contractors, distributors and independent testing laboratories in non-participating countriesare given in clause 8. 1

IS QC 001002-1 IEC QC 001002-I

: 2000 (1998)

1.2

Entry to the System

1.2.1 Any National Committee of the IEC desiring to participate in the System shall submit an applicationto the Secretariat. In this application the following information shall be included: a) confirmation of the existence or the formation in its country of the National Authorized Institution (NAI) (see 6.1 .la) of the Basic Rules) and of the National Standards Organization (NSO) (see 6.1.1 b) ofthe Basic Rules); the information required for inclusion in QC 001006, the Register of participating -countries (see 1.5); the statement that ,ihe remaining requirements of 10.1 of the Basic Rules will be satisfied in its country; the date upon which it is desired to become a participating country in the System.

b) c) d)

1.2.2 The Secretary shall inform the NAls of all participating countries of the application. The Chairman and Secretary shall ensure that the requirements of 1.2.1 have been met by the candidate participating country. Its National Committee shall be informed by the Secretary of-the acceptance of its application and, with the authorization of the Treasurer, its NAI shall be informed~of the amount of its dues and its contribution to the Working Capital Fund and the date upon which they are payable. 1.2.3 The country's participation in accordance with 1. la) shall become effective upon receipt of the dues or on the date indicated in 1.2. Id), whichever is the later, and all relevant information shall be entered in QC 001006, the Register of participating countries. There shall be no reduction in dues for entering the System during the current year. 1.2.4 1.3 The country's NAI shall be requested to appoint delegations to the CMC and to the ICC. Entry as a certifying country

1.3.1 A participating country desiring to apply the certification procedures for electronic components and/or materials produced in its national territory, either totally or as prescribed in QC 001002-3, clause 2, may either

a)
b)

apply for full membership of the ICC, or seek to delegate the responsibility for the surveillance of ail procedures for quality assessment necessary for the System and for the supervision in its country of the use of the attestation of conformity to the approved National Supervising Inspectorate (NSI) of another participating country.

1.3.2 In the case of 1.3.1 b), the agreement of the NSI, with the consent of its NAI, shall, before becoming effective, be submitted to the ICC for approval. 1.4 Entry as a full member of the ICC

1.4.1 The NAI of any participating country desiring to become a full member of the ICC shall submit an application to the Secretariat. in this application, the following additional information shall be included: a) confirmation of the existence or the formation in its own country of an NSI which can fulfil the function described in 6.1.2b) of the Basic Rules, and of the existence or recognition of calibration services (see 6.1.2~) of the Basic Rules); the information required for inclusion in QC 001006, the Register of participating countries; a copy of the National Statement of Surveillance Arrangements (NSSA); 2

b) c)

IS QC 001002-1: 2000 IEC QC 001002-l(1998) d)

a statement that the participating country will satisfy the additional requirements of the Basic Rules and the provisions of the Rules of Procedure relating to quality assessment; a declaration of its readiness to participate in a reasonable share of the examination visits (see QC 001002-3, ciause ?).

e)

It is permitted for a National Committee of the IEC to submit this application simultaneously with that required in 1.21. 1.4.2 Copies of the application, together with all associated documents, shall be sent by the Secretariat to the NSls of the participating countries which are full members of the ICC and to all NAls. 1.4.3 The !CC shali deal with the application in accordance with the relevant procedures of QC 001002-3, clause 1. When the NSI has been approved, the NAls shall be informed. The country's participation in accordance with 1.1b) becomes effective when the CMC has confirmed the approval at a meeting or, unless objections are raised in writing, six weeks after the circulation of the information, whichever is the earlier. The relevant information shal! be entered in QC 001006, the Register of participating countries. If the approval is not confirmed, the Chairman of the CMC, after consultation with the Chairman of the ICC, shall decide on the further action to be taken. 1.4.4 NSI.
1.5 1.5.1

An NAI may appeal to the CMC against the decision of the ICC regarding the approval of its

QC 001006, Register of participating

countries

The Register shall include the following information for each participating country:

a) b) c)

the name and address of the NAI; the name and address of the NSQ; the number and title of any national document used to implement the Basic Rules and the Rules of Procedure of the System in the country, or a statement that implementation is achieved through their direct adoption.

1.5.2 The Register shall furthermore include the following information for participating countries which are full members of the ICC: a) b) c) d) e) the name and address of the National Certification Body (NCB) (see NOTE 3 to 1.l b) and NSI; the number and the title of the NSSA; the Mark of Conformity, if any, and the information to be associated with it (see QC 001002-2, clause 2); the geographical area over which the NSI exercises jurisdiction; the technological area over which the NSI exercises jurisdiction.

1.53 When an NAI of a participating country has ~delegated the responsibility for the surveillance of all procedures for quality assessment necessary for the System to the approved NSI of another participating country, this shall also be stated in the Register. 1.5.4 An amendment, or a revised version, of the Register shall be issued within three months of authorization for a new entry or any other change of the information required for this Register.

3

IS QC 001002-1: 2000 IEC QC 001002-l~(1998)

2
2.1

Certification
General

Management

Committee

The CMC is responsible for the management of the System and includes among implementation of the Basic Rules and the maintenance of liaison with other bodies.

its duties

the

The Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Treasurer of the CMC , collectively, have the authority to take action with respect to the administration of the System in accordance with the Rules of the System. Such action shall be reported to the CMC in writing. 2.2 The Chairman of

-2.2.1 The Chairman shall take office on the first day of January of the year after the meeting the IEC Conformity Assessment Board (CAB) at which he/she has been appointed. 2.2.2 a) b) c) d) e) 9 The principal duties of the Chairman are

to decide upon the agendas for meetings of the CMC, to convene meetings of the CMC, appropriate,

to invite observers

to meetings whenever

to preside over meetings of the CMC, to act on ~behalf of the CMC between its meetings, to give guidance the System. to the Secretary on behalf and of the CMC in accordance with the Rules ~of

2.2.3 The Chairman has the right, ex-officio, to attend the meetings groups established by the CMC.

of the ICC and of all working

In the case of death, incapacity or resignation of the Chairman, the Secretary shall initiate 2.2.4 arrangements for the appointment of a new Chairman, if necessary by correspondence. Pending this appointment, the Vice-Chairman shall fulfil the functions of Chairman. 2.2.5 Six months before the expiration of the term of office of the Chairman (see 8.1 of the Basic Rules), the Secretary shall invite nominations from the NAls to be submitted within two months. The nominations shall be circulated by the Secretary to the NAls without stating the names of the proposers. There shall be a vote at the next meeting of the CMC and, if more than one candidate has been nominated, it shall be taken by secret ballot. The decision shall be taken in accordance with 14.3 of the Basic Rules and the name of the nominee shall be submitted to the CAB for appointment. 2.3 The Vice-Chairman of the Chairman when the latter is unable

The Vice-Chairman shall take over the functions 2.3.1 to perform them for any reason.

The procedure for the election of the Vice-Chairman shall be the same as that given for the 2.3.2 Chairman. The name of the nominee shall be submitted to the CAB for appointment.

4

IS QC 001002-1 IEC QC 001002-l

: 2000 (1998)

2.4 2.4.1 a) b) c) d)

The Treasurer The principal duties of the Treasurer are to guide the Secretary in financial matters related to the IECQ, to establish and to present to the CMC the budget on the basis of the information supplied by the Secretary, to present, with his observations, the audited annual financial reports of the IECQ to the CMC, and to supervise the finances of the IECQ.

2.4.2 In the case of death, incapacity or resignation of the Treasurer, the Secretary shall initiate arrangements for the appointment of a new Treasurer, if necessary by correspondence. Pending this appointment, the Vice-Chairman shall fulfil the duties of Treasurer. 2.4.3 The procedure for the election of the Treasurer shall be the same as that given for the Chairman. The name of the nominee shall be submitted to the CAB for appointment. 2.5 The Secretary for the operation of the Secretariat of the CMC (see

2i5.1 The Secretary is responsible clause 5).

2.5.2 In the case of death, incapacity or resignation of the Secretary, the General Secretary of the IEC shall, in consultation with the Chairman, provide for a temporary replacement and shall initiate arrangements for the appointment of a new Secretary. 2.5.3 Six months before the expiration of the term of office of the Secretary (see 8.6 of the Basic Rules), the General Secretary of the IEC shall invite nominations from the NAls to be submitted within two months. The nominations shall be circulated by the General Secretary of the JEC to the NAls without stating the names of the proposers. There shall be a vote at the next meeting of the CMC and, if more than one candidate has been nominated, it shall be taken by secret ballot. The decision shall be taken in accordance with 14.3 of the Basic Rules and the name of the nominee shall be submitted to the CAB for appointment. 2.6 2.6.1 Meetings Date and place of meetings

Meetings shall be held at least once a year, the date and the place being normally decided during the previous meeting. The Chairman may call a special meeting on his own initiative and shall call a special meeting at the request of one-third of the participating countries. In such cases, the Chairman shall decide the date and place of the meeting after consulting the delegations. 2.6.2 Documents

Documents related to CMC meetings shall be sent to (or from, respectively) the NAls with the following -deadlines:
-

-

invitation, agenda, documents for discussion: documents for information: national comments on discussion documents: decisions: 5

12 weeks 6 weeks 2 weeks before

before before before end of

meeting meeting meeting meeting

IS QC 001002-1: 2000 IEC QC 001002-l(19W

Any meeting may in an exceptional case discuss an item not on the agenda, or for which the discussion document has not been circulated in due time. In that case, any delegation has the right to-object to taking a decision on that item at the meeting or, within `four weeks after circulation of the decision, to challenge the decision taken. Any document to be tabled at a meeting shall be supplied in sufficient number by its originator. 2.6.3 Quorum

A quorum for a meeting is obtained when delegations from more than one half of the participating countries are present at the meeting. If there is no quorum, the meeting shall proceed, but in such circumstances where decisions require confirmation, a vote shall be taken by correspondence subsequent to the meeting. 2.6.4 Point of view of participating countries not represented

A participating country which is unable to send its delegation to a meeting may express its point of view either in writing or, after notifying the Secretary, through another delegation. The point of view so expressed shall receive the same consideration as those of participating countries which are present. 2.6.5 Minutes

The unconfirmed Minutes of a meeting shall be circulated by the Secretary within one month of the meeting in English. Any comments on the Minutes shall be submitted in writing within two months of their'circulation. The Minutes shall be confirmed at the next meeting unless the interval between meetings is more than eight months, in which case confirmation shall take place by correspondence. The confirmed Minutes shall be signed by the Chairman and Secretary. 2.7 Voting

2.7.1 Decisions of the CMC which require voting after a meeting in accordance with 14.3 of the Basic Rules shall be submitted by the Secretary to the NAls within two months of the meeting, with the request to state, within three months of the dispatch of the document, whether or not they are in favour of each proposed decision. 2.7.2 If a vote is taken at a meeting in accordance with 14.3 of the Basic Rules, proxy voting is permitted but shall be limited to one right of proxy per delegation. 2.7.3 The Chairman may decide that a vote on a matter of minor importance may be taken between meetings by correspondence. The propos-al is adopted when, within two months of its dispatch, no opposing vote has been received. Otherwise the matter shall be dealt with at the next meeting of the CMC. 2.7.4 When a vote is taken by correspondence, a report on the results of the voting shall be circulated by the Secretary to the NAls. 2.6 Duties

The duties of the CMC are primarily to implement the Basic Rules, and, in particular

6

IS QC

001002-1: 2000

tEC QC 001002-l (1998)
2.8.1

Concerning specifications to be used in the System:

a)

to promote, through liaison with the Advisory Committee on Electronics and Telecommunications (ACET), the development of the IEC standards which include the ne~cessaryprovisions for carrying out quality assessment procedures; to have published in QC 001004 a list of standards acceptable for use in the System (see QC 001002-2, clause 1); to accept for use in the System and to have published in QC 001004 a list of provisional specifications submitted by NAls (see QC 001002-2, clause 1). Concerning governing documents for the System: to submit to the CAB any amendments to the Basic Rules (see clause 17 of the Basic Rules); to establish and amend the Rules of Procedure, in agreement with the ICC on matters which concern the latter (see clause 7) and to report such amendments to the CAB. Concerning participation: to receive the documentation required under clause 1 from countries wishing to participate in the System; to authorize, after due consideration, entries in QC 001006, the Register of participating countries; to consider appropriate procedures for suspension or other such action which may be necessary in connection with participating countries and recommend accordingly to the CAB. Concerning the ICC: to appoint the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the ICC; to have the decisions of the ICC concerning the approval of the NSls recorded by the Secretary and circulated to the CMC for confirmation, and to have the additional information entered in QC 001006, the Register of participating countries;
to receive reports from the ICC; to study matters drawn to its attention by the ICC;

b) c)

2.8.2 a) b)

2.8.3 a) b) c)

2.8.4 a) b)

c)
d)

e) 9 2.8.5 a) b) c) d) e) 2.8.6 a) b)

to take action on complaints forwarded to it by the ICC; to take action on appeals from NAls against decisions made by the ICC. Concerning the CAB: to make proposals to the CAB concerning the Chairman, Treasurer and Secretary of the CMC; appointments of the Chairman, Vice-

to consider and approve reports for submission to the CAB; to consider and agree upon the annual draft budget, including the annual dues, for submission to the CAB (see 16.4 and 16.5 of the Basic Rules), and to agree upon the accounts, for submission to the CAB (see 16.7 of the Basic Rules); to submit matters of major policy concerning the System to the CAB for its approval. Concerning other matters: to establish and maintain liaison, when needed, with other international organizations taking part in work related to the System; to give the necessary instructions to the Secretary to carry out the work of the CMC;

IS QC 001002-1 : 2000 IEC OC 001002-l (1998) c) to

decide upon any other action to implement the governing documents of the System.

2.9

Guidance Dpcuments

2.9.1 In cases where the Basic Rules and the Rules of Procedure require amplification to ensure that the System operates in a uniform manner, the CMC may, in accordance with 2.8.6 c), decide to approve the publication and implementation of Guidance Documents.

2.9.2 A Guidance Document, which is published in QC 001003, is one which amplifies points of detail contained in a Rule of Procedure. It shall not conflict with any of the Basic Rules or Rules of Procedure, and it shall not impose any additional requirements or restrictions without the prior amendment of these Rules.
2.9.3

Guidance Documents may be prepared by either the CMC or the ICC. They shall be submitted by the CMC to the voting procedures of 14.3 of the Basic Rules before publication and implementation.

3
3.1

Inspectorate Co-ordination Committee
General

The ICC is responsible to the CMC for the supervision of the uniform application of the Rules of Procedure concerning quality assessment and includes among its duties the co-ordination of the activities of NSls. It shall advise the CMC on any matters related to quality assessment. All decisions made by the ICC shall be regarded as binding on the NSls. Each delegation shall indicate, at the request of the Chairman, the date on which a decision will become effective in its country. 3.2 3.2.1 a) b) c) d) e) Composition The composition of the ICC is as follows: a permanent delegation from each member (see 1.l); a Chairman; a Vice-Chairman; a Secretary; the Chairman of the CMC or a representative appointed by him.

3.2.2 The permanent delegation of each full member shall consist of not more than two persons appointed by their NAI, of whom at least one shall be a member of the NSI. The permanent delegation of each consulting member shall consist of only one person, appointed by the NAI. 3.2.3 3.3 Attendance at meetings may be restricted in the case described in 3.6.6. The Chairman

3.3.1 The Chairman, who shall be a member of an approved NSI, is appointed by the CMC on proposal from the ICC, for three years, with the possibility of re-appointment for one further period of three years. During his term of office the Chairman shall not act as a nationaldelegate. 3.3.2 The Chairman shall take office on the first day of January of the year after the meeting of the CMC at which he/she has been appointed. 8

IS QC

001002-1: 2000

IEC QC 001002-l(1998) 3.3.3 a) b) c) d) e) 9 9) The principal duties of the Chairman are as follows: to decide upon the agendas for meetings of the ICC; to convene meetings of the ICC; to preside over meetings of the ICC; to invite observers to meetings whenever appropriate; to act on behalf of the ICC between its meetings; to ensure, in co-operation with the Secretary of the CMC, that the decisions of the CMC are carried out; to give guidance to the Secretary on behalf of the ICC in accordance with the Rules of the System.

3.3.4 In the case of death, incapacity or resignation of the Chairman, the Secretary shall initiate arrangements for the appointment of a new Chairman, if necessary by correspondence. Pending this appointment, the Vice-Chairman shall fulfil the functions of Chairman. 3.3.5 Six months before the expiration of the term of office of the Chairman, the Secretary shall invite nominations from the NAls to be submitted within two months. The nominations shall be circulated by the Secretary to the NAls without stating the names of the proposers. There shall be a vote at the next meeting of the ICC and, if more than one candidate has been nominated, it shall be taken by secret ballot. The decision shall be taken in accordance with 14.3 of the Basic Rules and the name of the nominee shall be submitted to the CMC for appointment. 3.4 The Vice-Chairman

3.4.1 The Vice-Chairman, who shall be a member of an approved NSI, is appointed by the CMC for three years, with the possibility of re-appointment for done further period of three years. The Vice-Chairman may at the same time be a national delegate-to the ICC. 3.4.2 The Vice-Chairman shall take over the functions of the Chairman when the latter is unable to perform them for any reason. 3.4.3 The procedure for the election of the Vice-Chairman shall be the same as that given for the Chairman. The name of the nominee shall be submitted to the CMC for appointment. 3.5 The Secretary

The Secretary of the CMC shall provide the Secretariat of the ICC. 3.6 3.6.1 Meetings Date and place of meetings

The date and the place of the ICC meeting are normally decided during the previous meeting. The Chairman may call a special meeting on his own initiative and shall call a special meeting at the request of at least three full members. In such cases, the Chairman shall decide the date and place of the meeting after consulting the delegations. 3.6.2 Documents

Documents related to ICC meetings shall be sent to (or from, respectively) the NAls with the following deadlines:
9

IS 06 001002-1 : 2000 IEC QC 001002-l (1998) -

-

invitation, agenda, documents for discussion: documents for information: national comments on discussion documents: decisions:

12 weeks before 6 weeks before 2 weeks before before end of

meeting meeting meeting meeting

Any meeting may in an exceptional case discuss an item not on the agenda, or for which the discussion document has not been circulated in due time. In that case, any delegation has the right to object to taking a decision on that item at the meeting or, within four weeks after circulation of the decision, to challenge the decision taken. Any document to be tabled at a meeting shall be supplied in sufficient number by its originator. 3.6.3 Quorum

A quorum for a meeting is obtained when delegations from more than one half of the full members are present at the meeting. If there is no quorum, the meeting shall proceed, but in such circumstances where decisions require confirmation, a vote shall be taken by correspondence subsequent to the meeting. 3.6.4 Point of view of members not represented

A member which is unable to send its delegation to a meeting may express its point of view either in writing or, after notifying the Secretary, through another delegation. The point of view so expressed shall receive the same consideration as those of members whose delegations are present. 3.6.5 Minutes

The unconfirmed Minutes of a meeting shall be circulated by the Secretary within one month of the meeting in English. Any comments on the Minutes shall be submitted in writing within two months of their circulation. The Minutes shall be confirmed at the next meeting unless the interval between meetings is more than eight months, in which case confirmation shall be taken in writing. The confirmed Minutes shall be signed by the Chairman and Secretary. 3.6.6 Confidential matters

The ICC may sometimes have to deal with matters which are confidential to a manufacturer or to a particular NSI. In such cases, the delegates of full members, who are members of NSls, shall consider the matter. Any decision shall be taken in accordance with the voting procedures described in 3.7, and shall be circuiated to all members. 3.7 Voting

3.7.1 Each full member has one vote. In those cases where it has been stipulated in these Rules of Procedure that all members have voting rights, each consulting member also has one vote. The Chairman of the CMC, or his representative, and the Secretary have no vote. The Vice-Chairman has no vote by virtue of his -position but, if he is the sole delegate of a full member present at a meeting, he may vote on behalf of the member even though he may be acting as Chairman of the meeting. 3.7.2 Decisions are normally taken during a meeting. However, if the Chairman so decides, or if any full member so requests, the proposal shall be submitted to a vote by correspondence.

10

IS QC

QO1002-1: 2000

IEC QC 001002-l(1998) Decisions on matters voted upon during a meeting shall be positive if approved by a simple majority of those members voting. The Chairman shall not normally vote, but if the votes are equally divided the Chairman shall decide on the action to be taken. Decisions on matters voted upon by correspondence shall be positive if approved ~by a simple majority of those eligible NAls who have taken part in the vote. A vote by correspondence is terminated when all NAls which are entitled to vote have voted or three months after the circulation of the voting document, whichever is the shorter. Where the votes are equally divided the Chairman shall decide on the action to be taken. 37.3 The approval of an NSI shall always be submitted to a vote by correspondence QC 001002-3, clause 1). 3.7.4 Voting by proxy shall not be allowed. (see

The Chairman may decide that a vote on a matter of minor importance in which all 3.7.5 members have voting rights may be taken between meetings by correspondence. The proposal is adopted if, within two months of its dispatch, no opposing vote has been received. Otherwise the matter shall be dealt with at the next meeting of the ICC. 3.7.6 When a vote is taken by correspondence, a report on the results of the voting shall be circulated by the Secretary to the NAls. 3.8 Duties

The duties of the ICC are 3.8.1 a) b) c) d) Concerning quality assessment: to approve the NSSAs submitted by participating countries and any subsequent changes to the initial statements; to approve NSls, in accordance with QC 001002-3, clause 1 (see 2.8.4b)); to prepare, for inclusion in the Rules of Procedure, documents describing the means by which national procedures for quality assessment can be judged as to their equivalence; to co-ordinate the activities of the NSls in order to ensure the equivalence of application of the procedures for quality assessment between them. Concerning the CMC: to propose to the CMC, if necessary, amendments to those Basic Rules for the System which concern quality assessment procedures; to propose to the CMC, if necessary, amendments and additions to those Rules of Procedure for the System which concern quality assessment procedures (see 49) and 4h) of the Basic Rules); to propose to the CMC any action to be taken. to facilitate-the implementation of the Basic Rules of the System and-the Rules of Procedure relating to the work of the ICC; to propose to the CMC the procedures, or changes to the procedures, for handling complaints made in a country, other than the country of release, on the subject of the quality of components or materials delivered with an attestation of conformity, when the disputes so raised cannot be resolved by the NSls concerned (see clause 9); to examine the technical validity of such complaints and to inform the CMC of the results of that examination (see clause 9); to give its advice to the CMC on practical difficulties resulting, or likely to result, from the quality assessment requirements of the applicable standards and specifications; 11

3.8.2

a) b)

c)
d)

e) 0

IS QC 001002-1: 2000 IEC QC 001002-l(1998) 9) to

appoint a representative to attend the meetings of the CMC, without voting rights.

4
4.1

Working groups
Setting up of a working group

A~working group may be set when decided by the CMC (see 7.3 of the Basic Rules). The CMC shall provide it with clearly defined terms of reference and shall ensure that it ~does not undertake any work which is within the scope of any existing technical committee of the IEC. 4.2 Procedures

The procedures adopted by any working group set up by the CMC shall be in accordance with those prescribed in the ISO/IEC Directives.

5
5.1

Secretariat
Function

The Secretariat of the CMC shall further the objects of the Committee by taking executive action as instructed by the Committee at its meetings or as directed by the Chairman, and by carrying out the day-to-day work of the Committee between meetings. The Secretariat has similar functions in respect of the ICC. 5.2 Duties

The detailed duties of the Secretariat, headed by the Secretary, are as follows. 5.2.1 Administration and Secretariat

The Secretary is in particular responsible as Secretary at the meetings of the CMC and the ICC. In addition, the Secretary is an ex-officio member of all Working Groups of the CMC. The Secretary shall have no vote at any meeting which he/she attends. 5.2.2 Matters concerning membership

The Secretary shall take such action as is laid down in clause 1 for the admission of new participating countries to the CMC, and as laid down in clause 15 of the Basic Rules should any participating country resign its participation or have its participation cancelled. The Secretariat shall make entries in and maintain QC 001006, the Register countries of the System in accordance with the procedure given in clause 1. It shall the names and addresses of the permanent delegates of each NAI to the CMC, those of their working groups which have a permanent character. These lists shall the NAls. 5.2.3 Finance and budget of participating maintain lists of to the ICC and be circulated to

See clause 6.

12

IS QC

001002-1: 2000

IEC .QC 001002-l (1998) 5.2.4 Documents and records

The Secretariat shall maintain complete and indexed files of all documents necessary for the operation of the System, showing date of circulation and, where possible, hold -a limited number of spare copies. 5.2.5 External relations

The Secretary shall be responsible for executing the decisions of the CMC concerning the establishing and maintaining of liaison with other organizations taking part in work relating to that of the CMC. 5.2.6 Miscellaneous

When authorized to do so, the Secretary shall carry out the procedure for the dissolution of the System (see clause 18 of the Basic Rules).

6
6.1

Financial administration
Dues

6.-l .l After the CAB has approved the budget (see 16.5 of the Basic Rules), the Secretary shall ask each NAI for the payment of its agreed annual dues. He shall inform the Treasurer of any dues not paid by the end of June of the budget year and send reminder letters as necessary. He shall send further reminder letters to any NAI which has not paid before the end of September. 6.1m.2 The Secretary shall draw the attention of the CMC to any NAI whose dues for a given calendar year~have not been paid by 31st December of that year (see 16.8 of the Basic Rules). 6.2 Expenditures

The Secretary is authorized to initiate expenditure in accordance with the approved budget, subject to control procedures that shall be agreed between the Chairman and Treasurer of the CMC. 6.3 Bank account

63.1 The funds of the CMC shall be deposited in a bank approved by the Treasurer in the country where the Central Office of the IEC is located. The Treasurer may, at his own discretion, direct that funds in excess of those required for normal expenses be deposited in a savings account. 6.3.2 Funds of either of the accounts may be withdrawn to pay approved expenses. The Chairman and the Treasurer shall designate those persons whose signatures are authorized for withdrawal of these funds in accordance with local banking regulations. 6.4 Auditing and circulation of accounts

6.4.1 The Treasurer shall recommend the name of a professional auditor to the CMC which shall be responsible for ratifying the appointment. 6.4.2 The method of keeping the accounts shall be agreed between the Treasurer and the Secretary.

13

IS QC 001002-1 : 2000 `IEC QC 001002-l (1998)

6.4.3 When an organization, other than one under the direct control of the Secretary, has the responsibility for book-keeping for the CMC, the Secretary, in conjunction with the Treasurer, shall institute a method of authorizing payments from the account of the CMC.

7

Amendments to the Rules of Procedure.of the System

7.1 Proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure shall be communicated in writing to the Secretary, who shall send copies of them to the NAls for discussion at a meeting of the CMC. When the proposed amendments include quality assessment -aspects, the Secretary shall place a note on the first page drawing attention to this and shall send copies to the delegates of the ICC for examination and comment (see 49) of the Basic Rules). In the case of doubt, the Secretary shall seek advice of the Chairman in this matter. 7.2 If approved by the CMC, as originally proposed or as modified at the meeting, and having taken account of the comments from the ICC for those amendments concerning quality assessment, the proposed amendments shall be sent to the NAls for approval in accordance with 14.1 and 14.2 of the Basic Rules.

8

Access to the System by manufacturers, specialist contractors, distributors and independent testing laboratories in non-participating countries
Countries which are members of the IEC

8.1

8.1 .I Applications from a country which is a member of the IEC shall normally follow the procedures for entry to the System as raid down in 1.2. 8.1.2 Jn circumstances where the applicant is unable to gain the support of the corresponding IEC National Committee to form an NAI, the matter shall be brought to the notice of the CMC. 8.2 8.2.1 Countries which are not members of the IEC Entry to the System

8.2.1 .l Manufacturers, specialist contractors, distributors and independent testing laboratories in a country which is not a member of the IEC shall notify the CMC of their wish to join the System by submitting an application to the Secretary of the CMC. In this application they shall indicate a) the name and composition of the body seeking to join the System, or whether the application is being made by a single manufacturer, specialist contractor, distributor or independent testing laboratory, and whether a system for the quality assessment of electronic components is already operating in the country.

b)

8.2.1.2 The application shall be accompanied by a declaration in writing agreeing that, if granted access to the System, the applicant will abide by the Rules of the System. The application shall also indicate how it is proposed to implement these Rules, and show what measures have been taken to ensure compliance in the country with the reciprocity requirements of the Basic Rules. 8.2.1.3 Copies of the application and accompanying declaration shall be sent by the Secretary of the CMC to the NAls.
14

IS QC

001002-1: 2000

IEC QC 001002~1(!998) NAls shall submit any objections against proceeding with the application within two months of despatch of the information by the Secretary. The Chairman of the CMC shall decide if the objections raised are sufficient in importance to require discussion at the next meeting of the CMC. Qtherwise he shall instruct the Secretary to inform the applicant to proceed according to 8.2.2 or 8.2.3. 8.2.2 from a body representing manufacturers, Application distributors and independent testing laboratories specialist contractors,

82.2.1 The manufacturers, specialist contractors, ~distributors and independent testing laboratories in a country which is not a member of the IEC shall endeavour to form a body which will have duties similar to those of an NAI, and shall be called the (country of origin) National Management Institution (NMI). 8.2.2.2 The applicant shall submit a National Declaration of Procedures describing the proposed national organization (using clause 8 of the Basic Rules as a model), the means by which the Rules of the System will be implemented and the means by which the surveillance of all procedures for quality assessment necessary for the System shall be performed. He shall describe, in particular, the NMI, giving its terms of reference, composition, and the degree of support it has nationally. A National Standards Organization need not be organized in a country having an NMI. The National Declaration shall be circulated by the Secretary of the CMC to all NAls and shall be considered at the next meeting of the CMC. NAls shall be requested to vote at the meeting in accordance with 14.3 of the Basic Rules on whether they are of the opinion that the procedures described in 6.1.1 a) of the Basic Rules and the requirements of 1.2.1 have been adequately met. When the CMC is satisfied with the description of the arrangements made by the applicant, the ICC shall be informed accordingly. 8.2.2.3 The applicant shall use the services of an approved NSI of a participating country, subject to the consent of the NAI of that country. The following procedure shall be adopted: a) The NSI of the country accepting responsibility for certification in the applicant's country shall seek the approval of the ICC as specified in QC 001002-3, subclause 1.7 prior to undertaking its surveillance duties. The NSI shall inform the ICC of the expected amount of certification activity and the means by which it intends to perform the surveillance. The NAI of the country whose NSI is to undertake the surveillance shall verify that the procedures stated in the National Declaration are able to be operated in a satisfactory manner.

b)

It shall prepare a report which shall be circulated by the Secretary of the CMC to all NAls for approval in accordance with 14.3 of the Basic Rules prior to its NSI undertaking surveillanceduties. 8.2.2.4 When the ICC .is satisfied with the surveillance arrangements proposed by the approved NSI, it shall inform the CMC accordingly. The CMC shall then confirm the applicant as associated with the System subject to the receipt of.dues (see 1.2.3). Appropriate entries shall be made in an annex to the Register of participating countries. 8.2.2.5 Where the CMC is not satisfied with the arrangements made by the applicant it shall, with appropriate assistance from the ICC, give guidance to the applicant on how the requirements may be met. Where such guidance involves members of the CMC or the ICC in visits to the applicant's country or in additional expenses on the Secretariat, the applicant shall be responsible for all justified expenditure incurred.

15

IS QC

001002-1:2000

IEC QC 001002-l(1998) 8.2.3 Application from a single manufacturer, specialist contractor, independent testing laboratory, or from a small number of them distributor or

8.2-3.1 If the number of interested parties in a country which is not a member of the IEC is insufficient to form an NMI (see 822.1) or there are other reasons which make the formation of-such NMI impossible, the applicant shall seek the permission of the CMC to operate with the direct assistance of an NAI. 8.2.3.2 The applicant shall then contact an NAI having an NSI and shall request the use of its services. If the NAI concerned and its NSI are willing to undertake the responsibility, the NAI shall investigate the reasons why the applicant has been unable to achieve the formation of an NMI (see 8.2.2.1). It shall then prepare a report on its findings and, if still prepared to undertake the responsibility, give-a description of the means which it intends to employ in administering the System with respect to the applicant. It shall submit the report and description to the Secretary of the CMC who shall circulate them to all NAls for approval in accordance with 14.3 of the Basic Rules. The NSI shall seek the approval of the ICC as specified in QC 001002-3, subclause 1.7 prior to undertaking its surveillance duties. it shall in particular inform the ICC of the anticipated amount of certification activity and the means by which it intends to perform the surveillance. 8.3 Acceptance of provisional specifications from countries not having an NAI or NMI

Provisional specifications proposed by manufacturers or specialist contractors from countries which are not members of the IEC shall be submitted to the NAI servicing that country. This NAI will review and submit the documents in accordance with QC 001002-2, clause 1. Detail specifications prepared by approved manufacturers or specialist contractors from blank detail specifications, or from instructions for the preparation of detail specifications, shall be submitted for approval to the NAI servicing that manufacturer in accordance with QC 001002-2, clause 1. 8.4 Rights of an NMI

When an application has been approved by the CMC in accordance with the procedures given in 8.2.2, the NMI shall be granted the rights of an NAI within the System, except for the following: a) b) c) it shall not have voting rights with respect to changes to the Procedure; its delegates shall not hold office in the CMC or ICC; any other matters which the CMC or ICC deem to be the exclusive rights of IEC member countries. Appeal Basic Rules or Rules of

8.5

Where a manufacturer, specialist contractor, distributor or independent testing laboratory in a nonparticipating country is unsuccessful in gaining access to the System by means of the procedures given in 8.2.2 or 8.2.3 it shall communicate the facts to the Secretary of the CMC. The CMC shall endeavour to obtain a solution which is acceptable to the applicant and yet which guarantees the integrity and objectives of the System. 8.8 Finance

All costs shall be charged to the NMI if one has been established, or, if no such body exists, to the NAI or to the NSI, subject to the consent of the NAI, of a country providing the inspectorate service. Each applicant shall be assessed an annual amount equal to the dues his country would have been required to pay if it was a member of the System.

16

IS ac

001002-1: 2000

IEC QC 001002-l(1998) The fees for all new members on joining contribution to the Working Capital Fund. shall consist of the current year's dues plus a once only

If any applicant believes that the dues levied against it represent conditions which are less favourable than those applied to suppliers of like products or services in participating countries, the applicant may appeal to the CMC.

9
9.1

Arbitration
Arbitration

and appeals
and appeals procedures

In the case of a dispute with regard to the quality of components or materials, the parties concerned shall undertake all possible steps to resolve the dispute between themselves. If their efforts do not lead to a solution satisfactory to the complainant and the manufacturer, the following procedures may used: a) b) if the complainant shall apply; if the complainant was manufactured, Arbitration and the manufacturer come from the same country, 13.4 of the Basic Rules or materials

comes from a country other than that in which the component 9.2 or 9.3, or both, below shallapply.

9.2

procedure

9.2.1 This procedure is an attempt to resolve the dispute rapidly without invoking the formal appeals procedure in 9.3. For it to be used, both parties in the dispute shall agree to accept it. 9.2.2 Any request for arbitration shall be sent to the Chairman of the ICC, with a copy to the Secretary of the ICC. The reasons for the complaint shall accompany the request and shall be submitted by one of the NSls involved, with a copy to the complainant and the manufacturer concerned, and not directly by the complainant unless the complainant is in a country a) b) which has no NAI, or the NAI of which does not possess responsibilities to another NSI. an NSI and has not delegated the corresponding

Under conditions a) -or b) the complainant should be advised by the NSI of the manufacturer that he may submit his complaint directly to the ICC. 9.2.3 Within three weeks Arbitration Committee. The composition a) b) c) of receiving the complaint the Chairman

involved

of the ICC shall appoint

an

of the Arbitration of the ICC;

Committee shall be as follows:

the Chairman permanent

delegates

of two full members of the ICC; of the Arbitration Committee without

the Secretary voting rights.

of the ICC, who shall act as the Secretary

The Chairman

of the ICC shall preside over the Arbitration

Committee.

9.2.4 -No member of the Arbitration Committee shall be a member of an NSI, or from a country, which is a party to the dispute. If the NSI of the Chairman is involved, the Vice-Chairman shall preside over the Arbitration Committee. If the NSI of the Vice-Chairman is also involved, the Chairman shall designate a member of another NSI to preside.

17

IS QC 001002-1 IEC QC 001002-I

: 2000 (1998)

9.2.5 dispute.

The members of the Arbitration

Committee

shall be acceptable

to the parties involved

in the

9.2.6 The Arbitration unanimous. 9.2.7 a) b) 9.2.8

Committee

shall

act in an impartial

manner

and any decision

shall

be

The terms of reference of the Arbitration to examine the complaint, and

Committee

shall be

to make proposals which, if accepted by both parties, could resolve the dispute. The Arbitration Committee may meet or may work by correspondence.

9.2.9 The detailed reasons for the complaint shall be sent by the Secretary of the ICC to the members of the Arbitration Committee and to the NSls of the, manufacturer and the complainant. The documents shall be sent directly to the complainant if no NSI exists in his country. The whole matter shall be considered as confidential. 9.2.10 The Secretary of the ICC shall invite the NSI of the complainant, or the complainant himself if 9.2.2 a) or b) applies, to submit within two weekq in writing, any additional information considered necessary , particularly any evidence of the failure of the components or materials to comply with the relevant specification. 9.2.11 The Secretary of the ICC shall then invite the NSI of the manufacturer concerned within two weeks, in writing, all information which justifies or explains the circumstances. 9.2.12 The Arbitration Committee shall study the submissions and may interview experts if the Committee, or one the parties, considers it necessary. It shall decide on the complaint within four months of having been appointed. 9.2.13 The complainant, the manufacturer and their NSls shall be informed in writing by the Secretary of the ICC of the proposed solution. If no objections are received within four weeks, the arbitration shall be deemed to have been accepted. Any objections received will initiate the appeal procedure by the ICC (see 9.3). 9.2.14 The CMC shall be informed of the outcome any confidential information. 9.3 Appeals procedure of the arbitration procedure, without disclosing to submit

any parties

or

9.3.1 If the dispute between the parties cannot be settled with the aid of the NSls involved, or by the arbitration procedure as a second step, or if one of the ~parties does not accept arbitration, the matter shall be brought as an appeal to the ICC, followinglthe procedure given in 9.2.2. 9.3.2 The ICC shall examine, at a meeting and from a technical point of view, the validity of the complaint. This meeting shall be held in accordance with 3.6.6 if all of the three following conditions are met a) b) any party to the comptaint claims that information proprietary or confidential to a manufacturer, specialist contractor, distributor or user will be disclosed during the hearing of the complaint; the general nature of such information is described, and

c)

the Chairman of the ICC agrees that the claim is justified.

18

IS QC 001002-1: 2000 EC QC 001002-l (1998)

9.3.3 a) b)

However, the ICC shall be competent

to~examine a complaint only if test results, component or material has

the matter concerns interpretation of test procedures, quality and -other technical questions, and the complaint comes from ~a country been manufactured.

other than that in which the component

or material

If the matter of complaint appears to the ICC to -have a bearing on the Rules, or an interpretation the~Rules, it shall be referred to the CMC.

of

9.3.4 The Secretary of the ICC shall send to the ICC or to the delegates to a meeting held in accordance with 3.6.6 the reasons for the complaint, which were already available as a result of the arbitration, or any additional information which was received, in good time before the meeting of the ICC which will deal with that matter. Both parties may be represented at that meeting as observers on that item of the agenda. If a decision at that meeting seems inap,propriate, the ICC shall study the submissions and may interview any parties or experts and decide at the next meeting. 9.3.5 -The ICC may entrust the solution to an Investigation Committee, which will be appointed by the Chairman and will act in the same manner as the Arbitration Committee. Its conclusions shall be submitted in wnting to the members of the ICC (see 3.6.6). These conclusions will be deemed to be a decision of the ICC unless any objections are received within six weeks, after which time they shall be transmitted to the parties involved by the Secretary of the ICC. 9.3.6 Objections against the conclusions of the Investigation Committee shall be considered the next meeting of the ICC (see 3.6.6),`which will reach a decision at its meeting. Both complainant and manufacturer item of the agenda. have the right to take part as observers at

in that meeting for that

This decision shall be sent, in writing, to the parties involved concerned shall take any appropriate action.

and to the CMC. If necessary,

the NSI

If, after a decision of the ICC, the complainant is of the opinion that he has not been accorded a fair hearing under the Rules of the System, he may appeal to the CMC, whose decision shall be final. 9.4 costs If experts are necessary (see 9.2.12 and 9.3.4) their costs

Each party shall bear its own expenses, shall be borne by the losing party. 9.5

Record
by the Secretary of the

A record of all complaints and of all appropriate actions shall be maintained ICC. This information should be available to all NSls and NAls. Confidential 9.6 information shall not be included in that record.

Dispute between approved organizations
which requires

Where a dispute occurs between approved organizations within the System arbitration, the preceding procedure shall be adopted by the Chairman of the ICC.

19

