Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


чч — eS Hast ичтей d 
tart ета Ттт Ф Тт 


sperearfa — Тат 


Geosynthetics — Geotextiles for 
Permanent Erosion Control in Hard 
Armor Systems — Specification 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


ada AM эй 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM чая, 9 етте эъ BÉ we feeei-110002 
Lm МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in | www.standardsbis.in 


October 2015 Price Group 6 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Soil banks or slopes exposed to constant concentrated flows, currents or waves cannot support vegetation and 
thus need to be protected from erosion by hard armor systems. These systems include fabric formed revetments, 
gabions, articulating concrete blocks and riprap. In a hard armor system, water can seep in or out of the bank or 
slope and gradually carries soil particles with it creating voids causing loss of armor support over time called 
piping and thus culminates in shifting, rolling or other instability in the armor system. The traditional system 
may use controlled thickness filter layers of graded sand which is very costly and difficult to construct especially 
on steep slopes. 


Geotextiles with specific hydraulic and soil retention properties to complement the soil needing protection can 
be used as standard filter layers for hard armor systems as these can be installed with ease on slopes even under 
water and are cost effective. Depending upon the gradation of the bank soil, either a non-woven or a woven 
geotextile can be selected and used beneath hard armor system in an erosive environment. 


The primary function of geotextile in permanent erosion control applications is filtration. Geotextile filtration 
properties are a function of site hydraulic conditions and the in-situ soil gradation, density, and plasticity. 


Survivability of geotextiles is very important from the viewpoint of their long term durability and is defined as 
resistance to mechanical damage during construction and initial operation. The ability of a geotextile for permanent 
erosion control to survive installation and associated pressures during service shall be assured, if it is to perform 
as designed. Installation damage to a geotextile is a function of the following: 


a) Geotextile thickness, 

b) Type and weight of construction equipment used for fill spreading, 
c) Grain size distribution of backfill, 

d) Angularity of backfill, 

e) Polymer used in the manufacture of geotextile, and 

f) Geotextile manufacturing process. 


Geotexiles are mainly made from polyester (PET) or polypropylene (PP). PP is lighter than water, strong and 
very durable. PET is heavier than water, has excellent strength and creep properties, and is compatible with most 
common soil environments. Geotextiles are mainly of two types, namely, woven and non-woven geotextiles. 
Knitted and stitch bonded geotextiles are occasionally used in the manufacture of specialty products. Non-woven 
geotextiles are highly desirable for subsurface in planer drainage, and erosion control applications as well as, for 
road stabilization over wet moisture sensitive soils. Out of woven geotextiles, slit film fabrics geotextiles are 
commonly used for sediment control, that issilt fence and road stabilization applications but are poor choices for 
subsurface drainage and erosion control applications. Monofilament woven geotextiles have better permeability 
making them suitable for certain drainage and erosion control applications. High strength multifilament woven 
geotextiles are primarily used in reinforcement applications. 


The Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following International Standard referred in this Standard and 
has decided that it is acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: 


International Standard Title 
ISO 10722 : 2007 Geosynthetics — Index test procedure for the evaluation of mechanical damage under 
repeated loading — Damage caused by granular material 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16392 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — GEOTEXTILES FOR PERMANENT 
EROSION CONTROL IN HARD ARMOR SYSTEMS — 
SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers general and performance 
requirements for geotextiles used between energy 
absorbing armor systems and the in-situ soil to prevent 
soil loss resulting in excessive scour and to prevent 
hydraulic uplift pressures causing instability of the 
permanent erosion control system. 


1.2 This standard does not apply to other types of 
geosynthetic erosion control materials such as turf 
reinforcement mats. 


1.3 Woven slit film geotextiles, that is, geotextiles 
made from yarns of a flat, tape-like character, shall 
not be used for permanent erosion control applications. 


NOTES 


1 This is a material purchasing specification and design review 
of its use for intended applications is recommended. This is not 
a construction or design specification. Erosion control of a hard 
armor system is a site specific design issue which should be 
addressed by site engineer. Design details for geotextile used 
as a permanent erosion control in hard armor system, such as 
geotextile type and thickness, slope steepness, fill thickness 
and associated details, shall be as shown on the contract 
drawings. 

2 This specification is based on the default geotextile selection 

appropriate for conditions of equal or less severity than either 

of the following: 

a) Armor layer stone weights do not exceed 100 kg, stone drop 
height is less than 1 m and no aggregate bedding layer is 
required; and 

b) Armor layer stone weights exceed 100 kg, stone drop height 
is less than 1 m and the geotextile is protected by a 150 mm 
thick aggregate bedding layer designed to be compatible 
with the armor layer. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. АП standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in IS 13321 (Part 1) and the following shall apply. 


3.1 Minimum Average Roll Value (MARV) — The 
average value of roll minus two standard deviations. 
Statistically, it yields a 97.7 percent degree of 
confidence that any sample taken during quality 
assurance testing shall exceed value reported. 


3.2 Erosion versus Sedimentation — Erosion occurs 
when soil particles are displaced due to the impact of 
raindrops, moving water or wind. Sedimentation occurs 
when eroded particles (sediments), carried by water 
or wind, are deposited in another location where they 
can cause problems. Clearly, sediments (suspended 
eroded particles) and sedimentation (redeposited soil 
particles) cause the problems commonly associated 
with erosion. Erosion control can prevent problems 
from ever starting. Sediment control can only attempt 
to minimize the extent of these problems. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Geosynthetic materials shall be inert to commonly 
encountered chemicals, resistant to rot and mildew, 
and shall have no tears or defects which adversely 
affect or alter its physical properties. Materials required 
for complete and proper installation of geosynthetic 
materials that are not specifically described herein 
(such as pins, nails, washers, etc) shall conform to the 
manufacturer's recommendations and be as selected 
and supplied by the contractor subject to final approval 
by the engineer. 


4.2 Polymers used in the manufacture of geotextiles, 
and the mechanical fasteners or threads used to join 
adjacent rolls, shall consist of long chain synthetic 
polymers, composed of at least 95 percent by weight 
of polyolefins (polyethylene or polypropylene) or 
polyesters when tested as per dissolution method in 
respective solvents as specified in IS 667. They shall 
be formed into a stable network such that the ribs, 
filaments or yarns retain their dimensional stability 
relative to each other, including selvedges. Polyolefin 
material shall be made resistant to ultraviolet light by 
adding 2-3 percent carbon black. Recycled polyester 
shall not be used in the manufacture of geotextiles and 
only virgin polyester shall be used for manufacture of 
polyester containing geotextiles. The isophthalic acid 
content of the virgin polyester shall be nil when tested 
according to the method prescribed in Annex B. 


IS 16392 : 2015 


4.3 Geotextiles shall be dimensionally stable and able 
to retain their geometry under manufacture, transport 
and installation. Woven slit film geotextiles (that is, 
geotextiles made from yarns of a flat, tape-like 
character) shall not be used. Geotextiles used for 
permanent erosion control shall conform to the 
requirements specified in Table 1. Average of test 
results from any sampled roll in a lot shall meet or 
exceed the minimum values specified in Table 1. 


NOTES 


1 All numeric values in Table 1 except Apparent Opening Size 
(AOS), represent MARV in the weakest principal direction. 
Values for AOS represent maximum average roll values. 

2 The property values in Table 1 represent default values which 
provide for sufficient geotextile reinforcement and survivability 
under most construction conditions. 


5 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA 
CONFORMITY 


FOR 


5.1 Lot 


The quantity of the same class of geotextile 
manufactured from the same polymer under identical 
conditions and supplied to a buyer against one dispatch 
note shall constitute a lot. 


5.2 Sampling for tests shall be done in accordance with 
IS 14706 from each lot. Acceptance shall be based on 
testing of conformance samples obtained using 
procedure given in IS 14706. 


5.3 Testing of samples shall be performed in 
accordance with the methods referred to in this standard 
for the indicated requirement(s). The number of 
specimens to test shall be as specified in each test 
method. Product acceptance shall be determined by 
comparing the average test results of all the specimens 
within a given sample to the specified MARV. 


5.4 Criteria for Conformity 


The geotextile shall be tested for all the requirements 
as specified in Table 1 and in 4.1 to 4.3. When any 
individual sample fails to meet any specification 
requirement, that roll shall be rejected and two 
additional sample rolls shall be selected from the same 
lot. The lot shall be declared conforming to the 
requirements of this standard, if neither of these two 
additional samples fails to comply with any part of 
this specification, otherwise the entire quantity of rolls 
represented by that sample shall be rejected. 


6 MARKING AND LABELLING 


6.1 The geotextile material shall be marked with the 
following by attaching the printed labels: 


b) Identification of the geotextile material as per 
manufacturer’s recommendation, for 
example, polyester multifilament woven 


geotextile for permanent erosion control; 
c) Class of geotextile material, that is Class 1 or 
Class 2; 
d) Batch number, lot number and roll number; 
e) Date of manufacture of geotextile material; 
f) Anyother information/instruction prescribed 
by the manufacturer or by the law in force; 
g) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; 
and 
h) The Country of origin. 


6.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The geotextile may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


6.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by 
the provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers, may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


7 PACKING 


The geotextile shall be packed in rolls or as per the 
contract or order. Each roll or package shall be 
protected by wrapping it in a LDPE film of minimum 
thickness of 40 ц to prevent it from the adverse impact 
of heat and moisture, oil, grease, dirt, dust and other 
stains during shipment and storage prior to deployment. 


8 INFORMATION AND SAMPLES TO BE 
SUBMITTED BY THE MANUFACTURER 


8.1 The manufacturer shall submit to the purchaser 
the following: 


a) Geotextile product sample approximately 
] m? or larger; 

b) Geotextile product data sheet and certification 
from himself or by third party certification 
such as the use of the Standard Mark stating 
that the geotextile product supplied meets the 
requirements of this standard; and 


c) Manufacturer's installation instructions and 
general recommendations. 


9 STORAGE AND PROTECTION 


9.1 During storage, elevate the geotextile rolls off the 
ground and adequately protect them from the 
following: 


a) Site construction damage; 

b) Excessive precipitation; 

c) Extended exposure to sunlight; 
d) Aggressive chemicals; 


IS 16392 : 2015 


Table 1 Requirements of Geotextiles for Permanent Erosion Control Applications 
(Clauses 4.3 and 5.4) 


SI Characteristic(s) Requirement Method of Test, 
No. ры Ref to 
Class 1 Class 2 
Elongation Elongation Elongation Elongation 
< 50 percent > 50 percent < 50 percent > 50 percent 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Index properties: 
a) Type of geotextile <—Woven/non-woven— > <— Woven/non-woven —> — 
b) Roll length, m, Min «—50 or 100 or as agreed——> <—50 or 100 or as agreed ——> IS 1954 
c) Roll width, m, Min «—— 5.0 or as agreed —> <——5.0 or as agreed ——— IS 1954 
d) Grab strength, N, Min 1400 900 1100 — IS 16342 
e) Sewn seam strength, N, Min 1 200 810 990 — IS 15060 
f) Trapezidal tear strength, N, Min 500 350 400 — IS 14293 
g) Abrasion strength, Min (see Note 1) 550 400 350 — IS 14714 
h) CBR puncture strength, N. Min 500 350 400 — IS 16078 
j Burst strength, kPa, Min 3 500 1700 2700 — IS 1966 (Part 2) 
ii) Structural integrity properties: 
a) In-situ soil passing 0.075 mm sieve IS 1670 
(IS 200 sieve), Percent 
1) Course < <15 > < <15 > 
2) Medium < 15—50 > < 15 - 50 > 
3) Fine < >50 > < >50 > 
b) Permitttivity, s', Min IS 14324 
1) Course < 0.7- > < 0.7- > 
2) Medium < 0.2 > < 0.2 > 
3) Fine < 0.1 > < 0.1 > 
c) Apparent Opening Size (AOS), mm, Max IS 14294 
1) Course < 0.43 > < 0.43 > IS 13162 (Part 2) 
2) Medium < 0.25 > < 0.25 > 
3) Fine < 0.22. > < 0.22 > 
iii) Durability properties: 
a) Pullout Interaction Coefficient, at 6 mm < 0.8. > < Not applicable ———» IS 16380 
displacement, Normal load equal to 5 kPa, Min 
(see Notes 2 and 3) 
b) Coefficient of Direct Shear at peak geotextile < 5 > < Not applicable ——> Annex C 
shear strength, Normal load equal to 5 kPa, Min 
(see notes 4 and 5) 
c) Resistance to installation damage, Percent < 95/93/90 > «€ 95/93/90 » ISO 10722 
retained Strength, SC/SW/GP (see Note 6), Min 
d) Ultraviolet stability at 500h, retained strength, 70 70 IS 13162 (Part 2) 
percent of original strength, Min 
NOTES 


1 After abrading the geotextiles for 250 cycles, the grab strength shall be calculated by the method specified in IS 16342. 


2 The coefficient of interaction, C,, is the ratio between the average shear stress on the geosynthetic specimen in the pullout test and the 
mobilized shear stress in the fill material in direct shear tests under the same confining stress and shall be calculated as follows: 


- ЁК, 
Ps 2LW(o, tan@+c) 
where 
С, = coefficient of interaction; 
F >= measured pullout force; 
L= initial length of the geosynthetic specimen; 
W = initial width of the geosynthetic specimen; 
с, = applied normal stress; 
ф = friction angle of the fill material; and 
с = cohesive intercept of the fill material. 


3 For pullout interaction coefficient test, rate of displacement may be increased to 125 mm/min. A graded angular base material as 
described in Table 2 shall be used in laboratory testing. Test sample shall be at least 0.3 m in length and 0.3 m in width. 


4 Forcoefficient of direct shear test, rate of displacement may be increased to 50 mm/min. А graded angular base material as described 
in Table 2 shall be used in laboratory testing. Test sample shall be at least 0.3 m in length and 0.3 m in width. 


(Table 1 continued) 


IS 16392 : 2015 


Table 1 (Concluded) 


5 The coefficient of direct shear shall be determined using the peak geotextile shear strength with the shear strength of the graded 
angular base measured at the same displacement as the peak geotextile shear strength. 


6 Resistance to installation damage (loss of load capacity or structural integrity) when subjected to mechanical installation stress in 
clayey sand (SC), well graded sand (SW) and crushed stone classified as poorly graded gravel (GP). 


7 Class 2 geotextile may be specified if these have sufficient survivability based on field experience, laboratory testing and visual 
inspection of a geotextile sample removed from a field test section constructed under anticipated field conditions or if, 


a) armor layer stone weights exceed 100 kg, stone drop height is less than 1 m and the geotextile is protected by a 150 mm thick 
aggregate bedding layer designed to be compatible with the armor layer. 


b) armor layer stone weights do not exceed 100 kg and stone is placed with a zero drop height. 


8 Permittivity and permeability of geotextile shall be greater than that of the soil. 


9 For Class 2, the required MARV tear strength for woven monofilament geotextile shall be 250 N. 


e) Flames or temperatures in excess of 71?C; 


f) Excessive mud, wet concrete, epoxy, or other 
deleterious materials coming in contact with 
and affixing to the geotextile material; and 


5) Any other environmental condition that may 
damage the physical property values of 
reinforcement. 


9.2 Store the geotextile material at temperatures above 
-20°C. 

9.3 Lay the rolled materials flat or vertical on ends. 
9.4 Do not leave the geotextile material directly 


exposed to sunlight for a period longer than the period 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


9.5 Each geotextile roll shall be wrapped with a 
material that will protect it from damage due to 
shipment, water, sunlight and contaminants. 


9.6 Keep geotextile dry until installation, and do not 
store directly on the ground. 


Table 2 Gradation of Base Material for 
Determining the Coefficient of Interaction and 
Direct Shear (Sliding) 


(Table 1) 
SI No. Sieve Size Percent Passing 
mm 
a) (2) (3) 
i) 37.5 100 
ii) 25 95 - 100 
iii) 19 60 - 100 
iv) 4.75 30 - 60 
v) 0.425 10-30 
vi) 0.075 3-10 


NOTE — LL « 30 and PI « 10 


IS 16392 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
IS No. Title IS No. Title 
667 : 1981 Methods for identification of textile trapezoid tearing strength 
fibres (first revision) 14294 : 1995 Geotextiles — Method for 


1670 : 1977 Methods for test sieving (first 
revision) 
1954 : 1990 Determination of length and width of 


woven fabrics — Methods 
(second revision) 
IS 1966 (Part 2) : Textiles — Bursting properties of 
2009/ISO fabrics — Determination of bursting 
13938-2 : 1999 strength and bursting distension: Part 
2 Pneumatic method (second 
revision) 


determination of apparent opening 
size by dry sieving technique 


14324 : 1995 Geotextiles — Methods of test for 
determination of water permeability- 
permittivity 

14706 : 1999 Geotextiles — Sampling and 
preparation of test specimens 

14714 : 1999 Geotextiles — Determination of 


abrasion resistance 


15060 : 2001/ . Geotextiles — Tensile test for joints/ 


6359 : 1971 Method for conditioning of textiles ISO 10321: 1992 seams by wide-width method 
13162 (Part 2):  Geotextiles — Methods of test — 16078:2013 Geosynthetics — Static puncture test 
1991 Part 2 Determination of resistance to (CBR test) 
the exposure of ultraviolet light and 16342:2015 Geosynthetics — Method of test for 
water (Xenon-Arc type apparatus) grab breaking load and elongation of 
13321 (Part 1): Glossary of Terms for geosynthetics geotextiles 
1992 : Part 1 Terms used in materials and 16380 : 2015 Geosynthetics — Method of test for 
properties measuring geosynthetic pullout 
14293 : 1995 Geotextiles — Method of test for resistance in soil 
ANNEX B 
(Clause 4.2) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR ISOPHTHALIC ACID CONTENT OF THE VIRGIN POLYESTER FIBRE 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


This method is applicable to measure isophthalic acid 
content in polyethylene terephthalate sample. The 
polymer sample is digested in benzyl alcohol, 
depolymerized then esterified to dibenzyl isophthalate, 
dibenzyl terephthalate and glycol's. Isopropyl titanate 
is added as a depolymerization catalyst. The sample is 
analyzed by gas chromatography and the peak areas 
of the two esters are used to estimate the weight 
percentage dimethyl isophthalate using an internal 
standard. 


B-2 POTENTIAL ENVIORMENT ISSUE 


B-2.1 In case of spillage, it can lead to pollution near 
the workplace area and environment hazard. After 
analysis sample is disposed as per laid down procedure. 


B-2.2 Hydrogen, nitrogen and instrument air are used 
during analysis. The hydrogen gas has no adverse 
ecological effects are expected. Hydrogen does not 
contain any Class I or Class II ozone depleting 
chemicals. However hydrogen is explosive. Gaseous 
nitrogen is an inert non- flammable gas. High 
concentration in air may cause deficiency of oxygen 
with the risk of unconsciousness and death. Chloroform 
in high concentration in air can kill most animals in 
few minutes. 


B-3 POTENTIAL SAFETY, OCCUPATIONAL 
HEALTH ISSUES 


B-3.1 Proper PPE's like safety goggles, apron, surgical 
hand gloves to be used. 


B-3.2 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


IS 16392 : 2015 

B-3.3 Leak check to be carried out while handling of 
gas cylinder. 

B-3.4 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


B-3.5 Inhalation of chloroform causes dilation pupils 
with reduced reaction to light as well as reduced 
intraocculat pressure, Irritation of mucous membrane, 
conjunctiva. If contacted with skin and eyes cause 
irritation. Seek medical advice if inhaled. 


B-3.6 Use leather hand gloves while handling hot 
apparatus and equipments. 


B-4 APPARTUS 


B-4.1 Gas Chromatograph (GC), with flame 
ionization detector. 


B-4.2 Capillary Column, 60 m length and 0.53 mm. 
B-4.3 Dispensette or Pipette, 2 ml, 5 ml and 10 ml. 
B-4.4 Volumetric Flask, 100 ml, 500 ml. 

B-4.5 Beaker 

B-4.6 Funnel 

B-4.7 50 ml Flask 


B-4.8 Heating Mental, to maintain temperature of 
250°C 


B-4.9 AR Grade Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) 
B-4.10 AR Grade Benzyl Alcohol 

B-4.11 AR Grade Chloroform 

B-4.12 AR Grade Isopropyl Titnate 

В-4.13 AR Grade Dimethyl Suburate 


B-5 PREPARATION OF 
SOLUTIONS 


STANDARD 


B-5.1 Stock Dibenzyl Suburate (Internal Standard) 
Solution 


Take 1.0 + 0.01 g of dimethyl suburate (DMS). Add 
100 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 
titnate digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 500 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. 
Dimethyl suburate will get converted into dibenzyl 
suburate (DBS). Mark the stock solution as DBS per 
2ml = X-XXXX mg 


B-5.2 Stock Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) Solution 


Take 0.2 + 0.01 g of dimethyl isopthalate (DMI). Add 
40 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 
titnate digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 100 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. This 


will be converted to dibenzyl isopthalate (DBI). Mark 
the stock solution as DBI per 2 ml = X-XXXX mg. 


B-5.3 Standard Solution for Response Factor 


Take 2 ml of solution prepared in B-5.1 and 2 ml of 
solution prepared in B-5.2. Add 10 ml of chloroform. 


B-5.4 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Stock Solution 


Weigh out accurately 0.200 + 0.005 g of pure DMI 
powder into round bottom flask, add 30 ml of benzyl 
alcohol and 3 drops of isopropyl titante, reflux the 
solution for 5 h reagent and dilute to 100 g by isopropyl 
alcohol, calculate actual DMI concentration by 
considering its purity and label the flask with actual 
weight taken. Consider this weight during calculation 
of IPA by GC. 


B-5.5 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Solution for GC 
Injection 


Take 2.0 ml IPA stock solution and add 2 ml internal 
standard (see B-5.1) and further add 10 ml of 
chloroform, same bottle to be labelled as 2.0 percent 
IPA Inject 1 ul in GC. 


B-6 CALIBRATION FOR PERFORMANCE 
CHECK - TWICE /MONTH STANDARD CHIPS 


B-7 ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 


Inject 1 ul of standard solution for response factor (see 
B-5.3) and calculate response factor. Inject 1 ul 
of 2 percent standard IPA solution. If value of 2.0 
percent standard IPA solution is varying in the range 
of 0.01 percent, then there is no need for change in 
response factor. If there is deviation in value then rerun 
standard solution for response factor (see B-5.3). 
Weight 0.2 x 0.02 g of chips into the round bottom 
flask. Add 2 ml of benzyl alcohol. Add 3 drops of 
isopropyl titanate. Digest the solution for 1 h. Allow it 
to cool up to room temperature. Add 10 ml of 
chloroform. Add 2 ml of internal standard solution that 
is solution prepared in B-5.1 and shake vigorously. 
Inject 1 ul of sample solution into gas chromatograph. 


B-8 CHROMATOGRAPH SETTINGS 


Injector temperature : 300*C 
Detector temperature : 320°C 


Oven temperature : 270°С 
Gas flow rates 

Nitrogen : 20 psig 

Hydrogen : 30 + 10 ml/min 

Air : 300 + 20 ml/min 


Attenuation :-4 
Range :1 


В-9 CALCULATION 


IS 16392 : 2015 


W, = weight of DBS in solution, in mg; 


А A, = area of DBI in standard solution; and 
x 
Response factor (RF) = zine W, = weight of DBI in standard solution, in mg. 
A, XW, 
RF x mg of Internal Standard x Area 
where of IPA in sample x 100 
Percent IPA = - З 
A, = area of dibenzyl suburate (DBS) (Internal Weight of sample, in mg x Area 
standard) solution; of internal standard in sample 
ANNEX C 


(Clause 4.3 and Table 1) 


METHOD OF TEST FOR DETERMINING THE COEFFICIENT OF SOIL AND GEOSYNTHETIC 
FRICTION BY THE DIRECT SHEAR 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


C-1.1 The shear resistance between a geosynthetic and 
a soil, or other material selected by the user, is 
determined by placing the geosynthetic and one or 
more contact surfaces, such as soil, within a direct shear 
box. A constant normal force representative of design 
stresses is applied to the specimen, and a tangential 
(shear) force is applied to the apparatus so that one 
section of the box moves in relation to the other section. 
The shear force is recorded as a function of the 
horizontal displacement of the moving section of the 
shear box. 


C-1.2 The test is performed at a minimum of three 
different normal stresses, selected by the user, to model 
appropriate field conditions. The limiting values of 
shear stresses are plotted against the applied normal 
compressive stresses used for testing. The test data are 
generally represented by a best fit straight line whose 
slope is the coefficient of friction between the two 
materials where the shearing occurred. The y-intercept 
of the straight line is the adhesion. 


C-2 APPARATUS 


C-2.1 Shear Device — A rigid device to hold the 
specimen securely and in such a manner that a shear 
force without torque can be applied to the specimen. 
The device consists of both a stationary and moving 
container, both of which are capable of containing dry 
or wet soil and are rigid enough to not distort during 
shearing of the specimen. The travelling container shall 


be placed on firm bearings and rack, or other 
mechanism, to ensure that the movement of the 
container encounters low friction and is only in a 
direction parallel to that of the applied shear force. 
NOTE — The position of one of the containers should be 
adjustable in the normal direction to compensate for deformation 
of the substrate and geosynthetic. The container should also be 


aligned to minimize any moment produced by non-colinear 
forces on the containers. 


C-2.1.1 Square or rectangular containers are 
recommended and they should have a minimum 
dimension that is the greater of 300 mm, 15 times the 
dg, of the coarser soil used in the test, or a minimum of 
five times the maximum opening size (in plan) of the 
geosynthetic tested. The depth of each container that 
contains soil shall be a minimum of 50 mm or six times 
the maximum particle size of the coarser soil tested, 
whichever is greater. 


NOTE — d,, is the equivalent grain diameter (mm) at which 
85 percent of the soil is finer by weight. 


C-2.2 Normal Stress Loading Device, capable of 
applying and maintaining a constant uniform normal 
stress on the specimen for the duration of the test. 
Careful control and accuracy (62 percent) of the normal 
stress is important. Normal stress loading devices 
include, but are not limited to, weights, pneumatic or 
hydraulic bellows, or piston-applied stresses. For 
jacking systems, the tilting of loading plates shall be 
limited to 2° from the shear direction during shearing. 
The device shall be calibrated to determine the normal 
stress delivered to the shear plane. 


IS 16392 : 2015 


C-2.3 Shear Force Loading Device, capable of 
applying a shearing force to the specimen at a constant 
rate of displacement in a direction parallel to the 
direction of travel of the moving container. The 
horizontal force measurement system shall be 
calibrated, including provisions to measure and correct 
for the effects of friction and tilting of the loading 
system. The rate of displacement shall be controlled 
to an accuracy of 610 percent over a displacement 
range of of at least 6.35 mm/min to 0.025 mm/min. 
The system shall allow constant measurement and 
readout of the shear force applied. An electronic load 
cell or proving ring arrangement is generally used. The 
shear force loading device should be connected to the 
test apparatus in such a fashion that the point of the 
force application to the traveling container is in the 
plane of the shearing interface and remains the same 
for all tests. 


C-2.4 Displacement Indicators, for providing 
readout of the horizontal shear displacement and, if 
desired, vertical displacement of the specimen during 
the consolidation or shear phase. 


Displacement indicators such as dial indicators, or 
linear variable differential transformers (LVDT), 
capable of measuring a displacement of at least 75 mm 
for horizontal displacement and 25 mm for vertical 
displacement are recommended. The sensitivity of 
displacement indicators should be 0.02 mm for 
measuring horizontal displacement. 


C-2.5 Geosynthetic Clamping Devices, required for 
fixing geosynthetic specimens to the stationary section 
or container, the travelling container, or both, during 
shear. Clamps shall not interfere with the shearing 
surfaces within the shear box and shall keep the 
geosynthetic specimens flat during testing. Flat jaw- 
like clamping devices are normally sufficient. Textured 
surfaces or soil shall be used to support the top and/or 
bottom of the geosynthetic. These surfaces shall permit 
flow of water into and out of the test specimens. 
Selection of the type of texture surface should be based 
on the following criteria. 


C-2.5.1 The gripping surface shall be able to prevent 
the outside surface of the geosynthetic being sheared 
from slipping to the extent that the geosynthetic fails. 


C-2.5.2 The gripping surface shall be able to 
completely transfer the shear stress through the outside 
surfaces into the geosynthetic. 


C-2.5.3 The gripping surface shall not damage the 
geosynthetic and should not influence the shear 
strength behavior of the geosynthetic. 


C-2.6 Soil Preparation Equipment, for preparing or 
compacting bulk soil samples. 


C-2.7 Miscellaneous Equipment, as required for 
preparing geosynthetic specimens. A timing device and 
equipment required for maintaining saturation of the 
geosynthetic or soil samples, if desired. 


C-3 GEOSYNTHETIC SAMPLING 


Take a minimum of three specimens for shearing in a 
direction parallel to the machine (or roll) direction of 
the laboratory sample and three specimens for shearing 
in a direction parallel to the cross-machine (cross-roll) 
direction. The specimens should be sufficiently large 
to fit snugly in the container described in C-2.1.1 and 
they should be of sufficient size to facilitate clamping. 
АП specimens should be free of surface defects, etc. 
Take no specimens nearer the selvage or edge of the 
geosynthetic production unit than 1/10 the width of 
the unit. 


C-4 CONDITIONING 


Bring the specimens to moisture equilibrium in the 
atmosphere for testing textiles as specified in IS 6359. 


C-5 PROCEDURE 


C-5.1 Place soil or rigid substrate in the lower 
container, as required. Compact the soil at the specific 
moisture content to the density desired. If soil is used, 
fill the lower container with soil so that the surface of 
the soil specimen protrudes a distance equal to one- 
half of the dg; of the soil. A protrusion of 1 mm is 
sufficient for fine-grained soils. Level the soil surface 
carefully. 


C-5.2 Place the geosynthetic specimen loosely over 
the substrate. Remove all folds and wrinkles in the 
geosynthetic. Clamp or otherwise fix the end of the 
specimen temporarily, and reset it to ensure that the 
geosynthetic specimen is in complete contact with the 
soil. Verify that the protrusion of the soil substrate is 
suitable as outlined in C-5.1. 


C-5.3 Fix the two halves of the shear box in the start 
position. Clamp or fix the upper half of the shear box 
so that it cannot move during the next step of 
preparation. 


C-5.4 Place the upper substrate or soil at the desired 
density and moisture content in a manner that 
minimizes damage to the geosynthetic specimen. 
Apply the seating normal stress. 


C-5.4.1 Apply the normal seating load. 


С-5.4.2 If the seating load does not equal the normal 
load for testing, apply the normal load for testing and 
monitor the vertical displacements until the sample 
comes to equilibrium. Verify that equilibrium is 
reached before proceeding. 


C-5.4.3 After the consolidation period, reclamp the 
geosynthetic specimen to the upper or lower container, 
as required. 


C-5.5 Place the displacement indicators and assemble 
the shear loading device. Create a gap between the 
upper box and lower box. The gap should be large 
enough to prevent friction between the boxes during 
shear but small enough to prevent soil particles from 
entering into the gap and creating friction. If necessary, 
adjust the location of the horizontal loading ram to 
minimize the induced moment. 


C-5.6 Apply the shear force at a rate of 1 mm/min. 


C-5.7 Record the shear force as a function of 
horizontal displacement. Record a minimum of 50 data 
points per test. 


C-5.8 Run the test until the applied shear force remains 
constant with increasing displacement. Displacements 
ranging from 25 to 75 mm are generally required to 
generate a constant shear force for shearing between 
geosynthetic and soil interfaces. 


C-5.9 Remove the normal stress and disassemble the 
device at the end of the test. Carefully inspect and 
identify the failure surface and the area of the clamp. 
Failures should be consistent for all tests in order for 
the test data to be comparable. 


C-5.10 At the end of the test, remove the soil specimen 
(if used) to determine the density and moisture content. 


C-5.11 Repeat the procedure for a minimum of two 
additional normal compressive stresses. 


C-5.12 Plot the test data as a graph of applied shear 
force versus horizontal displacement. For this plot, 
identify the limiting value(s) of shear force. Determine 
the horizontal displacements for these shear forces. 


C-6 CALCULATION 


C-6.1 For tests using soil, calculate the initial and final 
water content, unit weight, and degree of saturation, if 
required. 


C-6.2 Calculate the apparent shear stress applied to 
the specimen for each recorded shear force as follows: 


p E SER 
A, 
where 
T = shear stress, in kPa; 
F. = shear force, in kN; 
Е ы. = correction to shear force for friction, in kN; 
and 
A. = corrected area, in m?. 


IS 16392 : 2015 


C-6.2.1 For tests in which the area of specimen contact 
decreases with increased displacement, a corrected area 
shall be calculated. This will occur in test devices in 
which the stationary and travelling containers have the 
same overall plan dimensions. In this case, the actual 
contact area will decrease as a function of horizontal 
displacement of the traveling container. For square or 
rectangular containers, the corrected area is calculated 
for each displacement reading using the following 
equation: 


A, = A,- (d x W) 


where 
A, = corrected area, in m?; 
A, = initial specimen contact area, in m?; 
d = horizontal displacement of the travelling 
container, in m, and 
W = specimen contact width in a direction 


perpendicular to that of shear force 
application, in m. 


C-6.2.2 No area correction may be required for tests 
in which the stationary container is larger than the 
travelling container, provided that the horizontal 
displacement of the travelling container does not result 
in а decrease in specimen contact area. 


NOTE — For devices which apply the normal stress to the 
interface as a constant force, for example by dead weights, any 
area correction applied to the shear force shall also be applied 
to the normal force. 


C-6.3 Plot the limiting values of shear stress versus 
applied normal stress for each test conducted. Limiting 
values are typically at peak shear stress and at the end 
of the test. Other limiting values may be specified by 
the user. The shear stress and normal stress axes shall 
be drawn to the same scale. 


C-6.4 Connect the data points with a straight line. 
Some judgment and experience may be required to 
construct this line, which is referred to as the strength 
envelope. The slope of the failure envelope is the 
coefficient of friction. The angle of friction is 
determined using the following equation: 


d, = tan" (и) 


where 
d, - angle of friction corresponding to the 
limiting shear stress, in degree, and 
w, = coefficient of friction corresponding to the 


limiting shear stress. Friction angle and 
adhesion intercept are typically reported for 
the peak shear stress condition. 


C-6.5 Additionally, the coefficient of friction may be 
calculated at some condition other than peak horizontal 


IS 16392 : 2015 
force, such at a specific value of shear displacement 
or at the end of the 


test. The procedure given in C-6.4 can be used to 
determine a friction angle and adhesion intercept, using 


10 


the shear stress and normal stress for this other 
condition. Parameters obtained for a condition other 
than peak horizontal force should be clearly defined 
and the condition for which they apply defined. 


IS 16392 : 2015 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TX 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Coir Board, Kochi 


Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
E. I. Dupont India Pvt Ltd, Gurgaon 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
Jaya Shree Textiles, Hooghly 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Supreme Nonwovens Pvt Ltd, Hyderabad 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


11 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. Pati (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SHRIMATI ККА Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


SHRI NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri МАМІЅН Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr U. S. SARMA 
Suri М. KuMARAsWAMY PILLAy (Alternate) 


Dn Swapan GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gupta (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


Suri К. GANESH 
SHRIMATI VEDIKA Kapoor (Alternate) 


Suri S. MAsoop HUSAIN 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Currwis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. ASHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Кооѕнік Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
SHRI PAWAN SHARMA 


Suri Y. К. KUSUMGAR 
Dn М. К. TALUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri К. К. GANDHI 
Suri К. P. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. К. KHASTAGIR (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALUcHAMY (Alternate) 


Dn SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH ВАСИ (Alternate) 


Suri С. K. CHAUDHURI 
Suri С. К. Jain (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Dr SaunasBH Vyas (Alternate) 


IS 16392 : 2015 


Organization 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Urja Products Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Dr МАМЅНА MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SuDAM (Alternate) 


SHRI JANAK NANAVATY 
SHRI S. P. BORKAR 


SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ‘ʻE’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. GUPTA 


Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


12 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1026). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme УП M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


