Indian Standard ESAN 


qa sit Aas Sue — aei 
(aT FRİ) 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products — 
Glossary of Terms 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 65.160 


© BIS 2016 


ARMA A At 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM FH, 9 e AH Art, as feeci-110002 
Velie” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


May 2016 Price Group 4 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division 
Council. 


In the field of tobacco and tobacco products, various terms are being used. Most of the terms connote different 
meanings to different people thereby creating confusion and disputes. A standard definition serves as a means of 
communication and helps in uniformity of understanding. 


This standard was originally published in 1982 and revised in 2000, 2007 and amended in 2009. In this revision 
terms and definitions for the new tobacco products have been included and existing provisions have been updated. 


IS 10335 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


TOBACCO AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS — 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


( Third Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers definitions of terms commonly 
used in tobacco production and tobacco industry. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following definition 
shall apply. 


2.1 Activated Carbon — An odourless, tasteless and 
highly porous form of carbon having extremely large 
surface area, which makes it highly adsorbent and finds 
use in cigarette filter. Activated carbon is available in 
granules, pellets or fibre form. 


2.2 Aerosol — Suspension of very minute particles of 
liquids and/or solids in a gas. Tobacco smoke is an 
aerosol of liquid particles suspended in a mixture of 
gases. 


2.3 Arhatiya — Arhatiyas are commission agents and 
stockists of tobacco. 


2.4 Badava Lanka — One of the three types of lankas 
classified according to the degree of submergence. 
These are intermediate to merka and oota lankas and 
get submerged in medium floods. 


2.5 Baisakhi — The second (summer) crop of hookah 
tobacco grown in Bihar, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal. 


2.6 Bajjar — Dry snuff applied on teeth and gums, 
generally by women in Gujarat. It is also known as 
tapkeer, gul, mishiri. 


2.7 Baru Aku — A class in which the local buyers of 
lanka tobacco grade the leaf. The two leaves, next to 
the kota-aku class are grouped under this category. 


2.8 Besigayo — Term used in Gujarat for a condition 
wherein tobacco seedlings die due to damping-off 
disease. 


2.9 Bhattha — White incrustation on chewing tobacco 
leaf surface. 


2.10 Bhokani Sua — Stem piercing needle used in 
Bihar. 


2.11 Bhuka/Bukti — Terminology used in Gujarat for 
lamina portion of bidi tobacco. 


2.12 Bidi — A smoking article made by hand rolling a 


mixture of tobacco flakes solely in Tendu (Diospyrus 
spp.) or Ashitri (Bauhinia spp.) leaf to hold the contents. 
Bidis are either conical or cylindrical in shape. Bidis 
may be with or without filter plug. 


2.13 Bispath — Sand leaves of either motihari or jati 
plants are collected, strung on a thin bamboo strip and 
placed in a shed for curing. 


NOTE — Mostly, these are retained for family consumption 
and sold only if found excess. These usually do not fetch 
remunerative price. Some farmers leave them in the field and 
do not collect at all. 


2.14 Bitri — An early type of motihari tobacco, 
flowering in about 42 days after planting and extensively 
cultivated in the Uttar Danga of North Bengal. 


2.15 Bodu — Telugu name of Orobanche (Orobanche 
cernua). Also known as malle. 


2.16 Boodida Tegulu — Telugu term of the disease 
powdery mildew caused by Erysiphe cichoracearum, 
popularly known as ash disease. 


2.17 Burley Tobacco — A type of air-cured tobacco, 
which originated with a plant found in 1864 in Brown 
County, Ohio, USA. It was an aurea variety and 
probably a mutation. Burley tobaccos are light to light 
brown in colour with low sugars, high fill value and 
absorbing capacity. 


2.18 Butta and Mohar — Reddish brown spots of 
spangles which develop on matured bidi or chewing 
tobacco leaf known as butta in Charotar (Gujarat) and 
mohar in Nipani area (Karnataka). 


2.19 Calcutti — Nicotiana rustica type tobacco used 
for zarda, chewing, hookah, snuff or bidi. 


2.20 Casing — A sauce, made by mixing specified 
ingredients to be added hot to tobacco lamina and/or 
stem before cutting for improving their processability. 


2.21 Cellulose Acetate — A secondary cellulose 
acetate commonly known as cellulose acetate (CA) in 
tobacco industry. It is a white, odourless, tasteless, non- 
toxic, hydrophilic, partially acetylated cellulose 
manufactured from natural, renewable resources such 
as wood pulp. It is used in making cigarette filter, textile, 
diapers and surgical products. 


IS 10335 : 2016 


2.22 Chandra — A style of tobacco hand (peti) used for 
grading purpose. The process involved in this case is 
similar to that of chhatai, Chandra hand is given a heart 
shape along its edges by proper arrangement of the 
leaves. This style is used in Assam, Calcutta and Cuttack 
markets. Only Motihari leaves are tied in this style. 


2.23 Chap Gadi — One kind of bulk heap, which is 
rectangular in shape and in construction. Hands are 
placed as close as possible in a very compact manner. 
The construction of such gadies keeps driage losses to 
the minimum. 


2.24 Chebrole — The natu variety (N. tabacum) in 
Chebrole area of Guntur district of Andhra Pradcsh. 
This is used for cheroots. Its leaf is deep brown with a 
gloss, fine texture and aroma. 


2.25 Chemima — Second grade in hookah and 
chewing tobacco consisting of small leaves. It is also 
known as chotkior male moorhen. 


2.26 Cheroot — A smoking article made of fermented 
tobacco leaves, rolled into various sizes of 
circumference and lengths. They are tapered from a 
thick to thin end, which are open. 


2.27 Chewing Tobacco — Chewing tobacco, as its 
name suggests is a tobacco preparation for chewing 
purpose, also taken with paan (betel leaf). Gutka, surti, 
zarda, quiwam and dokta are some of the different types 
of chewing tobacco preparations. 


2.28 Chhatai — A style of tobacco hand (peti) for 
grading purposes. A few leaves of good size and quality 
are first arranged one over the other. Then leaves of 
medium and small size are so arranged that the small 
sized leaves usually come in between the medium sized 
leaves. The petioles of all the leaves are collected in 
good size, placed on the upper side of the hand and the 
hand is finally tied. In tying quality hands, usually red 
coloured tamaals are used. The tamaals are looped 
around the cluster of petioles about 4 cm below their 
butt ends. A second loop of tamaal is given at the base 
of the petiole. The edges of the hands are packed then 
trimmed on all sides by a special knife removing any 
protruding projections. The finished hands weigh about 
Y to 3⁄4 seer (approx 466 g to 700 g). These hands are 
more popular with Assam markets. Both motihari and 
jati leaves may be tied in this style. 


2.29 Chhebua — Name for fourth grade chewing 
tobacco leaf in Bihar. 


2.30 Chhotaki — Name for third grade chewing 
tobacco leaf in Bihar. 


2.31 Chillum — A conical shaped earthen tube to which 
a piece of wet cloth is attached while smoking. It is a 
smoking clay pipe to hold tobacco and ember. 


2.32 Chitri Disease — A Gujarati term for the root rot 
disease complex in which the plants prematurely dry 
on one side. The disease appears in patches. Fusarium, 
a fungus is normally associated with the disease. 


2.33 Chukka Tegulu — A telugu name for frog-eye 
leaf spot in flue cured Virginia tobacco. This disease 
caused by the fungus. Cercospora nicotianae is more 
common in nurseries and fields, particularly if there 
are frequent rains or if the crop is frequently irrigated. 
Field crop also develops spot when grown under 
monsoon conditions or under high humidity conditions. 


2.34 Chura/Churmal — Marathi name of tobacco 
powder having small flakes of tobacco in it. 


2.35 Chutta — A smoking article made by hand rolling 
tobacco leaf by the smoker. It is common in Andhra 
Pradesh. 


2.36 Cigar — A smoking article made by rolling filler 
tobacco leaves into a cylinder, bound with a binder 
tobacco leaf and sheathed with a wrapper tobacco leaf. 


2.37 Cigarette — A smoking article made up of cut 
tobacco blends wrapped in a cigarette paper with or 
without filter. It may contain casing, flavour and other 
ingredients. 


2.38 Cigarette Filter — An air permeable device 
(manufactured using for example paper, cotton, 
cellulose acetate etc). The filter is attached to the 
cigarette during manufacture to reduce particulate 
matter. The filter may contain other adsorbents such as 
activated carbon, etc. 


2.39 Cigarette Paper — A speciality paper, with 
controlled porosity and combustibility, manufactured 
mostly from bleached wood pulp to wrap cut tobacco 
blend to make cigarette. 


2.40 Creamy Snuff — A tobacco paste, consisting of 
finely ground tobacco mixed with substances like clove 
oil, glycerine, spearmint, menthol and camphor. 


2.41 Cruz — One of the two main grades of cigar and 
cheroot tobacco. It consists of damaged and immature 
leaves. 


2.42 Curing — A process of promoting desired visual, 
physical and chemical changes by controlled drying of 
tobacco leaves after harvesting. A number of curing 
processes are practiced depending upon the type of 
tobacco and quality desired. 


a) Sun-curing — Tobacco leaves are tied 
together, hanging on wooden sticks and dried 
by exposing them directly to sun. 

b) Air-curing — Tobacco leaves are tied 
together, hanging on wooden sticks and dried 
in the air under covered and ventilated sheds. 

c) Flue-curing — Tobacco leaves are dried in 


specially designed barns with the help of 
indirect heat through flue pipe. Particularly 
used for Virginia tobaccos. 

d) Fire-curing — Tobacco leaves are dried by 
hanging over green wood fires 

e) Pit-curing — Tobacco plants are placed in pits 
lined with plant materials and covered with 
soil for 6-8 days. 

f) Ground-curing — The whole plant is cut and 
allowed to remain on the ground with 
occasional turning until desired leaf colour is 
achieved. 

g) Rack-curing — Wilted tobacco plants are 
strung on racks in the open and turned 
occasionally to ensure uniform curing. 

h) Katta type of curing — Ref rack curing. It is 
generally used for natu tobacco. 


2.43 Cut Rolled Stem (CRS) — The mid ribs separated 
from tobacco leaf, known as stems in tobacco trade, 
that are processed through moistening, rolling, cutting 
and drying to make them suitable for use in cut tobacco 
blend. 


2.44 Dalal — Commission agent, also known as 
arhatiya. 


2.45 Dana — Hookah tobacco lamina. 


2.46 Danka — Midrib and veins are removed from 
hookah tobacco (N. rustica) leaves. The remaining 
lamina is powdered and is known as danka, used for 
chewing purposes. 


2.47 Desi Tambaku — Chewing tobacco (N. tabacum). 


2.48 Dhumti — A smoking article made by rolling 
tobacco leaf in the leaf of another plant (for example 
jack fruit, banana, hansall). It is prepared by smokers. 


2.49 Dokta — A coarse chewing tobacco product 
generally flavoured with spices and taken with or 
without the betel leaves. In some provinces it is better 
recognized as gundi. 


2.50 Done Baru (Boat Shaped) — Lanka tobacco 
variety grown in East Godavari district of Andhra 
Pradesh. 


2.51 Donka Baru — A type of lanka tobacco that has 
a broad and long boat shaped leaf. 


2.52 Ethaku Baru — A type of lanka tobacco having 
a lengthy and narrow leaf. 


2.53 Expanded Tobacco — Volumetrically expanded 
tobacco, also known as puffed tobacco, which has 
relatively increased fill value. This is a part of tobacco 
blend. 


2.54 Fill Value — It is the volume occupied by unit 


IS 10335 : 2016 


weight of cut tobacco at predetermined moisture level 
under a specific stress. 


2.55 Filler Mixture — The processed cut tobacco 
blend, which is ready to be used in a smoking article. 


2.56 Flavorants — The odoriferous substances that 
are added to tobacco products. 


2.57 Flue Cured Virginia Tobacco — Virginia and 
similar tobaccos, which have been cured by the flue 
curing process. 


2.58 Gadia — A style of tying tobacco used for hookah, 
pipe and snuff purposes. This practice is prevalent in 
Sanand Taluk of Ahmedabad district in Gujarat. 


2.59 Gainer or Paudh — Local name for hookah pipe 
tobacco nursery in Karnpil area of Uttar Pradesh. 


2.60 Galia — A term used in Gujarat for bottom (sand) 
leaves of bidi tobacco. 


2.61 Gandiu — Local name for bidi tobacco variety 
formerly grown in Gujarat. 


2.62 Ganj — A heap of country tobacco. 


2.63 Gavva Kota — A method of harvesting natu 
tobacco in which a part of the stem is cut along with 
the leaf for sun curing. 


2.64 Geran — A mixture of bidi tobacco lamina pieces 
and veins, which adhere to the midrib while stripping 
the leaf and which fall apart on drying of the midrib. It 
constitutes 10 percent of the saleable produce and 
ispurchased at the same price as bhuka. 


2.65 Giran — A style of tobacco hand (peri) used for 
grading purpose. In this case the bunches having4-5 
leaves, originally looped for curing by the farmers and 
sold after spreading, are arranged as such in the hand 
form and are finally tied as in the case of chhatai style. 
Such motihari hands are preferred by Purulia markets 
in West Bengal, whereas jati hands find market in 
Assam and Tripura. 


2.66 Grade Specification for Flue Cured Tobacco 
Grown in Black Soils — The grades for flue cured 
tobacco grown in black soils adopted by the Tobacco 
Board of India are given in Table 1. 


2.67 Grading System/Grades — It is a system of 
identifying tobacco leaves based on quality parameters. 
It forms a common language (in code) that will indicate 
most or all of the following factors: 


(a) Tobacco type; 

(b) Plant position; 

(c) Ripeness; 

(d) Breadth of grade; 

(e) Form (bundles, machine strips, etc); 


IS 10335 : 2016 


Table 1 Grade Specification for Flue Cured Tobacco Grown in Black Soils 
(Clause 2.66) 


S. Grade Colour Body Texture Blemish not to Corresponding 
No. Exceed AGMARK Grade 
a) 2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 

i) Farm-I Bright lemon or orange Thin to medium Soft 25% 1 to4 
ii) Farm-II Light brownish yellow or Brownish Medium Good 25% (white to LBY 1 

lemon yellow blemish 
allowed) 

iii) Farm-II Light Brown Good to medium Medium 50% LBY 2 
iv) Farm-IV Brown Heavy body Medium to coarse 50% (brown Brown 

blemish allowed) 

v) Farm-V Dark Brown Heavy body Medium to coarse 50% Dark Brown 
vi) Farm-VI Light greenish orange Good Soft to medium 10% LG 
vii) Farm-VII Light medium green Heavy Medium to coarse 25% LMG 
viii) Farm-VII Medium green Heavy Medium to coarse 35% MG 
ix) Farm-IX Dark green Coarse Coarse — DG 
x) Farm-X Orange, yellow green and/or brown Variable = = Pl & Bits 


(f) Country and region of origin; and 
(g) Crop year. 


In case of oriental tobaccos, the seed code may also be 
indicated. 


2.68 Gudakhu — A paste made of tobacco, molasses 
and flavour. It is applied to the teeth and gums. 


2.69 Gudaku Tobacco — Tobacco mixed with 
molasses to give paste like structure for smoking in 
hookah known as gudaku in Gujarat. 


2.70 Gugro — The bidi tobacco for which gugro 
method of harvesting is used. The colour of the produce 
is more towards green base. 


2.71 Gugro Method of Harvest — A method of 
harvesting of bidi tobacco in Gujarat. The method 
comprises stripping of lamina of mature leaves from 
the standing plants, and spreading for drying on the 
ground exposing lower lamina surface directly to the 
sun. The produce so harvested is more towards green 
base. 


2.72 Gul — Pyrolyzed tobacco applied to the teeth and 
gums (see also 2.119). 


2.73 Gulla and Tepa — Lower leaves which comprise 
the low grade leaf of Janka tobacco. These leaves are 
poor in body and size. 


2.74 Gummadi Baru — A type of Lanka tobacco 
having broad leaf 


2.75 Gundi — The chewing tobacco products mostly 
sold as gundi in Orissa. It is also known as Dokta. 


2.76 Gutka — A chewing tobacco product, consisting 
of tobacco flakes, areca (betel) nut, catechu and lime 
along with flavourants and sweeteners. 


2.77 HDBRG Tobacco — Harvel De Bouxo Rio 
Grande (HDBRG) tobacco, popularly known as HD 


Burley tobacco. 


2.78 Hemti — The local name of N. rustica tobacco 
being grown in West Bengal and used for chewing 


purpose. 
2.79 Hoge Soppu — Kannada term for tobacco. 


2.80 Hookah — An Indian name given to a waterpipe 
smoking device in which the tobacco smoke passes 
through water before inhalation. As the smoke passes 
through water a characteristic gurgling sound is 
generated. For this reason, hookah is also called gud- 
gud, hubble-bubble, etc. 


2.81 Hookah Tobacco — A smoking tobacco product 
prepared by treating tobacco with treacle and flavorants 
and owes its name to the fact that it is ordinarily smoked 
in hookah. 


2.82 Jati — A distinct petiolate type tobacco grown 
only in Bengal and East Bihar used for hookah and 
chewing purpose in India. 


2.83 Jawari — Local name for bidi tobacco variety 
grown in Sholapur. 


2.84 Jugal (Pair) — It is a style of tobacco hand (peti) 
for grading purposes in Assam, Kolkata and Cuttack 
markets and only motihari leaves are tied this way. In 
this case the leaves are arranged in such an inter-locking 
manner when the petioles get clustered in two bunches 
instead or one as in the case of chattai. The individual 
cluster of petioles is secured at their base separately. 
The butt ends of both these clusters are then pushed 
nearer and tied into a single bunch, looping around a 
sufficiently long tamaal at their top. Thus the cluster 
of petioles forms a pair and hence the name jugal is 
given to this style of tying. In appearance, these hands 
look wider than the simple chattai hands. Trimming of 
edges of such hands is done to give a regular shape. 


2.85 Jura — Hookah tobacco sold in Punjab. 


2.86 Juris — The stalks that are rolled into ropes, along 
with the leaves of hookah tobacco, after pit curing in 
Punjab. 


2.87 Jutty — The ground leaves (primings) of Indian 
air- and flue-cured tobaccos, which are dried on the 
plant or the ground and then gathered. The leaf is thin, 
with a papery structure and an almost neutral aroma. 


2.88 Kaccha Arhatiyas — Dealers who deal only 
locally to purchase tobacco through brokers and store 
the tobacco until it is sold. 


2.89 Kaduva — Strong and pungent type of hookah 
tobacco. 


2.90 Kakar — A term used in Gujarat to denote the 
sharpness of the edges of bidi tobacco flakes, which 
could be felt by hand pressing the tobacco flakes. 


2.91 Kandi — Bits of roots, stems or leaf ribs of 
chewing tobacco and bidi tobacco. 


2.92 Karchi — Leaves developed from the suckers of 
the cut stems, which comprise a very poor quality leaf 
of lanka tobacco. 


2.93 Karuvazhai — Lower quality of cigar tobacco, 
grown in and around Dindigul taluk and surrounding 
areas in Tamil Nadu on account of its higher yield and 
suitability for chewing. 


2.94 Kata Gadi — A bulk heap rectangular in shape 
with a single continuous line of hands forming its 
exterior with their butt ends facing outwards. The 
interior is composed of narrow vertical columns 
separated vertically by consecutive columns. The 
interior of the heap is thus exposed to air currents, which 
prevents any abnormal rise in the temperature of the 
tobacco. 


2.95 Katcha — A modified system of dhollimpu used 
in Andhra Pradesh in which leaves of the lowest grade 
are removed. 


2.96 Kendu Leaves — Leaves that are used for bidi 
wrapper, also known as tendu leaves. 


2.97 Khaini — A chewing tobacco preparation made 
from fermented tobacco and lime. It may contain 
flavour. 


2.97.1 Filter Khaini — Khaini packed in water 
permeable pouch. 


2.98 Khambira — The first stage in the preparation of 
hookah tobacco. 


2.99 Khamira — Fermented stuff of snuff tobacco. 


2.100 Kharsan — Fourth grade or sand leaves of 
chewing tobacco of Bihar, 


2.101 Kota Aku — A class in which the local buyers 


IS 10335 : 2016 


of lanka tobacco grade the leaf. The top two leaves, 
which are well developed, come under this class. 


2.102 Kutcha Grading — It consists of two or more 
grades in a bale. 


2.103 Lakari — Powdered hookah tobacco stalk used 
in hookah and chillum, Generally, lakari and dana are 
mixed in the ratio of 1 : 3 before finally mixed with 
molasses. Sometimes lakari not mixed with dana is 
also used for hookah and chillum. 


2.104 Lakda — The midrib and portions of stalk/bark 
of bidi tobacco as known in Gujarat. 


2.105 Lanka Tobacco — A country type tobacco 
grown on the islands of Godavari and Krishna rivers in 
Andhra Pradesh. These islands are called lankas and 
hence the name lanka tobacco. This tobacco is famous 
for its aroma, even flavour and ash characteristics with 
high nicotine content. It is air-cured and pit-cured and 
has been in use for a long time, before the introductionof 
flue-cured tobacco. It is a distinct variety of N. tabacum. 
Lanka tobacco of the Godavari belt is used for the 
preparation of cheroots and chuttas and that of Krishna 
area for cigars and snuff. 


2.106 Larka — A hookah tobacco variety, tall plant 
with smaller leaves. 


2.107 Leaf-wise Harvesting — A method of 
harvesting bidi tobacco. Only the mature leaves 
exhibiting full spangle development are plucked and 
placed in the field with their upper surface facing the 
ground for drying. 


2.108 Lilvo — Bidi tobacco cured by rack-curing 
method and having green base. 


2.109 Lilvo Method of Harvest — This method 
comprises harvesting of matured bid; tobacco leaves 
and tying them on the string for rack curing under partial 
shade. The final produce is of green base and hence it 
is called /ilvo. 


2.110 Lingakarshana Yera Butta — Telugu name for 
Pheromone traps. 


2.111 Maagudu Tegulu — Telugu name of damping 
off disease of tobacco seedlings caused by Pythium 
aphanidermatum (see also 2.8). 


2.112 Mainpuri Tobacco — It is a popular chewing 
tobacco made by mixing tobacco, slaked lime, finely 
cut areca nut, camphor and cloves. It is akin to gutkha 
(see also 2.115). 


2.113 Male Moorhan — Second grade chewing 
tobacco leaf as it is called in Bihar. 


2.114 Mattasam — A class in which the local buyers 
of lanka tobacco grade the leaf. Two to three leaves 
next to baru aku, belong to this group. 


IS 10335 : 2016 


2.115 Mawa — A chewing tobacco preparation made 
from thin shavings of areca nut, tobacco and slaked 
lime. A sweet variety known as Meetha Mawa is also 
available and contains grated coconut, dried fruits and 
other sweetening agents (see also 2.112). 


2.116 Melimi — Telugu term for the top grade in 
irrigated natu tobacco. 


2.117 Menta — A local term used in Cuttack district 
of Orissa, for the sale of tobacco to the consumer by 
means of bundles at a flat rate and not by actual weight. 


2.118 Meraka Lankas — One of the three types of 
lankas classified according to the degree of 
submergence only when the river is in high floods. 


2.119 Mishri — A tobacco preparation, which is not 
chewed or smoked but is applied on teeth and gums. It 
is made by roasting powered tobacco on a hot plate till 
it turns black uniformly (see also 2.72). 


2.120 Moist Snuff — A type of oral snuff, which has 
high moisture content. Moist snuff is especially popular 
in USA (see also 2.153 and 2.154). 


2.121 Moorhan — First grade of chewing tobacco leaf 
as it is called in Bihar, consisting of big leaves and 
also known as jotia. 


2.122 Motihari — Local term for N rustica variety of 
hookah tobacco in North Bihar and Bengal areas. It is 
also known as vilayati and culcuttia. 


2.123 Nasal Snuff — A smokeless tobacco product 
made from ground tobacco. It is used by inhalation 
through the nose. It is called as Nas-var in North India. 


2.124 Nasayam — Telugu name for nasal snuff. 


2.125 Natu Tobacco — A group of local varieties of 
Nicotiana tabacum grown in northern districts of 
Andhra Pradesh. 


2.126 Oosikappal — An early type of tobacco mostly 
grown in Erode area of Coimbatore district and Athur, 
Thammampatti areas of Salem district in Tamil Nadu. 
It is used exclusively for cheroot. The leaves are very 
much narrower compared to other types. Hence the 
name, oosikappal meaning needle shaped. The leaves 
are yellowish green in colour, thin in texture and the 
resin deposit is medium. 


2.127 Oota Lanka — One of the three types of lankas 
classified according to the degree of submergence. 
These are low lying and during floods, the water stands 
to a height of 4.5 m or more. 


2.128 Oriental Tobacco — It is sun cured tobacco 
predominantly grown in Turkey, Greece and Balkans, 
part of the Orient and hence the name. It belongs to the 
main species of tobacco Nicotiana tabacum. It is 
distinguished from other types in the same category by 


its relatively small leaves that are produced in large 
numbers and its typical aromatic quality. 


2.129 Pan Sukaro — A term for leaf burn disease in 
Gujarat. 


2.130 Pheri — Third grade of hookah and chewing 
tobacco varieties consisting of useless and sand leaves, 
also known as kharsan. 


2.131 Pipe Tobacco — Blend of tobacco lamina 
usually cased and flavoured for use in a pipe. It is 
available in the form of loose or pressed. 


2.132 Pogaku — Telugu name of tobacco. 
2.133 Pokala — Malayalam name of tobacco. 
2.134 Pokayilai Kalan — Tamil name of Orobanche. 


2.135 Poopal— Tamil term for formation of a white 
incrustation during fermentation of chewing tobacco. 


2.136 Popatia — Term used in Gujarat for parrot green 
colour of bidi tobacco. 


2.137 Pucca Arhatiyas — Commission agents who 
enter into transaction with outside merchants only. 


2.138 Pugaiyilai — Tamil name of tobacco, literally 
meaning smoke leaf. 


2.139 Purbi Khaini — A name for chewing tobacco 
prevalent in Dharbhanga district of Bihar. 


2.140 Quiwam — A smokeless tobacco product made 
by concentrating aqueous tobacco extract to a thick 
paste. It is used in paan (betel leaf) as such or mixed 
with spices and other additives. 


2.141 Raddi — The midribs, after removal from 
hookah leaves are powdered and used in hookah and 
chillum smoking either mixed with or without molasses. 


2.142 Rainti— One of the three grades of desi tobacco, 
available in Northern Bihar, consisting the top leaves. 
The leaves are greenish brown in colour and medium 
in size, texture and strength. 


2.143 Rassa — Hookah tobacco sold in Uttar Pradesh. 


2.144 Rassi — One of the two main grades of cigar 
and cheroot tobacco consisting of all good leaves. 


2.145 Raw Nas-var — The fine powder, passing 
through a blotting cloth of size 100 mesh, used to make 
snuff powder. 


2.146 Reconstituted Tobacco —Residual tobacco, 
which is otherwise not in a physical state suitable for 
being used, converted into a usable sheet. This is used 
as a part of tobacco blend. 


2.147 Ripeness — A subjective indicator of the 
maturity of the tobacco leaf if it is ready to be harvested 
for the intended purpose. 


2.148 Sand Leaf — Leaf from the bottom picking of 
the plant having sand and dust on it. 


2.149 Seetaphalapu Tegulu — Telugu term of mosaic 
disease. 


2.150 Shengiu — Bidi tobacco variety with narrow and 
thin leaves. 


2.151 Smokeless Tobacco Products — Tobacco 
products that are not consumed by smoking. 


2.152 Smoking Tobacco Products — Tobacco 
products that are consumed by smoking. 


2.153 Snuff — A general term used to describe 
smokeless tobacco products made from powdered 
tobacco. It is finally ground cased tobacco mixture. 


2.154 Snus — Tobacco formulation consisting of finely 
ground or cut tobacco, casing, flavour, sweetener and/ 
or salt, buffer agent, etc, available in loose or sachet 
form. Snus is uniquely manufactured using a tobacco 
pasteurisation process. 


2.154.1 Loose Snus — Snus, used in loose form. 


2.154.2 Portion Packed Snus — Snus, used in sachet 
(water permeable pouch). 


2.155 Soguni — A medium late type of Motihari 
tobacco, flowering after about 45 days of planting. 


2.156 Soneri (Golden Yellow) — One of the four main 
colours into which the trade circles in middle Gujarat 
grade the bidi tobacco leaf. 


2.157 Steam Treated Stem (STS) — Cut stems 
subjected to high-pressure steam followed by 
immediate drying to enhance fill value. 


2.158 Stripping and Sorting — Sorting of good leaves 
from damaged and spotted leaves, and then stripped, 
that is, the midrib is separated from the leaf (lamina). 


2.159 Surti — A chewing tobacco preparation, highly 
perfumed and consumed with betel leaf. 


2.160 Talatrunchuta — Telugu name for topping. 


2.161 Tamaku (Tambaku) — Tobacco is known as 
tamaku/tambaku in Bengali, Gujarati, Hindi and 
Marathi languages. 


2.162 Tapkeer — Pyrolized tobacco powder applied on 
teeth and gums (see also 2.6 and 2.72). 


2.163 Tendu Leaves — Leaves obtained from the tree, 
Diospyrus melanoxylon are popularly used for 
wrapping bidis because of their size, texture, agreeable 
flavour and resistance to decay. Also known as Kendu 
leaves. 


2.164 Thota — Telugu name for planted crop of 
tobacco. 


IS 10335 : 2016 


2.165 Tobacco Blend — A combination of selected 
grades/types of tobacco in a specified proportion used 
to create unique tobacco product. A tobacco blend may 
also contain reconstituted tobacco, CRS, STS expanded 
tobacco etc. 


2.166 Tobacco Chewing Gum — A form of smokeless 
tobacco product with shreds or powdered tobacco 
embedded in gum base, mixed with flavour, sweetener 
ete. 


2.167 Tobacco Fermentation — An enzymatic 
process to ferment tobacco by subjecting cured tobacco 
to specified moisture and temperature to produce a 
specific fermented aroma. 


2.168 Tobacco Orb — A smokeless tobacco product 
in compressed form prepared by finely ground tobacco 
embedded in dissolvable matrix composed of adhesive, 
fillers, flavour, buffer agents, sweetener etc. 


2.169 Tobacco Pasteurisation — The process of 
subjecting the tobacco formulation to heating, drying 
and cooling cycles to a specific temperature for a 
specific period of time in order to reduce 
microorganisms. 


2.170 Tobacco Pipe — A smoking device consisting 
of a bowl with a narrowing hollow tube. The bowl acts 
as a container to place and burn tobacco. The generated 
smoke is drawn into the mouth through the hollow tube. 


2.171 Tobacco Plug — A semi moist chewing tobacco 
product in small pieces consisting of tobacco leaf flakes, 
flavour etc. The pieces are usually wrapped in natural 
tobacco leaf. 


2.172 Tobacco Products — products entirely or partly 
made of tobacco. 


2.173 Tobacco Sticks — A smokeless tobacco product 
in extruded form prepared by finely ground tobacco 
embedded in dissolvable matrix composed of adhesive, 
fillers, flavour, buffer agents, sweetener, etc. 


2.174 Tobacco Strip — A smokeless tobacco product 
in cast or extruded thin film form prepared from finely 
ground tobacco embedded in dissolvable matrix 
composed of adhesive, fillers, flavour, buffer agents, 
sweetener, etc. 


2.175 Tobacco Tooth Paste — A tobacco preparation 
for applying on teeth and gums (see also 2.40). 


2.176 Tobacco Tooth Powder — A powder form of 
formulation containing tobacco as one of the 
ingredients. 


2.177 Tokra — Hindi name of Orobanche. 


2.178 Top Leaf — Grade designation of Virginia 
tobacco. It consists of top leaves and suckers (not less 


IS 10335 : 2016 


than 7.5 cm long) of any variety of Virginia tobacco. 
2.179 Vakumba — Gujarati name of Orobanche. 


2.180 Vazhikappal — An important variety of 
Meenampalayam tobacco available in Coimbatore 
district. It has long, broad and elliptic leaves with a 
high puckered surface and thick texture. The leaf is 
nearly 7.5 cm long and about 4.5 cm broad and develops 
a whitish bloom and pungent taste during, sun curing. 


2.181 Vellaivazhai — An elite cigar type tobacco 
grown only around Dindigul in Tamil Nadu. It is also 
called ‘Dindigual Cheroot’. Its leaf is thin and the colour 


is light green. It develops a heavy resin deposit at 
maturity. 


2.182 Verukaaya Tegulu — Telugu name for root-knot 
disease caused by the nematode (Meliodogyne 
incognito, Meliodogyne javanica and Meliodogyne 
arenaria). 


2.183 Vilayati — N. rustica type variety grown for 
hookah purpose. 


2.184 Zarda — A chewing tobacco product made of 
highly scented and flavoured tobacco flakes. Chewed 
along with betel nut and paan (betel leaf). 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 04 (2487). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


