IRAT HAF IS 2800 : 2019 
Indian Standard ( Amalgamation of IS 2800 Part 1 and 2) 


TAHT CH Anto Bit 
uiar cht tite ARa 


Code of Practice for Construction 
and Testing of Tubewells 


ICS 65.060.35; 73.100 


© BIS 2019 


weds Ae s” 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WA, 9 Tee TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2019 Price Group 7 


Diamond Core and Waterwell Drilling Sectional Committee, MED 21 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Diamond 
Core and Waterwell Drilling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division 
Council. 


This code of practice was first published in 1964 and revised in 1979 by splitting the requirements in two parts one 
for construction and the other for testing. IS 2800 (Part 1) was revised again in 1991. 


This standard is the amalgamation of IS 2800 (Part 1) and (Part 2). The major changes in this standard are 
as follows: 


a) Scope is modified; 
b) Drilling method is updated as per current practices; 
c) Selection of drilling method; 
d) Addition of electrical logging of borehole; and 
e) Addition of allowable sand content in well water. 
The composition of the committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2800 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF PRACTICE FOR CONSTRUCTION 
AND TESTING OF TUBEWELLS 


1 SCOPE 


This code applies to drilling, construction and testing 
of medium to high capacity, filter packed tubewells 
drilled by rotary/percussion methods and used for 
agriculture, drinking water, industrial and other related 
purposes. Standards for high capacity tubewells vary 
considerably from one part of the country to another. 
To a large extent, the hydro-geological conditions 
and well drilling methods dictate what materials or 
procedures are best. Thus, no single standard tubewell 
specification/code can be framed because of complex 
array of variables. In light of above, this code gives 
general guidance as regards to drilling, design, 
construction and testing procedures for installation of 
tubewells. The design engineer should make sure that 
each option selected does not conflict with other parts 
of tube well design or construction method. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
listed below: 


IS No. Title 

2062 : 2011 Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel (seventh revision) 

4097 : 2019 Specification for material (gravel) 
for use as filter pack in tubewells 
(first revision) 

4270 : 2001 Steel tubes used for water wells — 
Specifications (third revision) 

8110: 2000 Well screens and slotted pipes — 
Specifications (second revision) 

9439: 2002 Glossary of terms used in water-well 
drilling technology ( first revision) 

10500: 2012 Drinking water — Specification 
(second revision) 

11189: 1985 Methods for tubewell development 

12818 :2010 Unplasticized Polyvinyl Chloride 


(PVC-U) screen and casing pipes 
for bore/tubewell — Specifications 
(second revision ) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, definitions of the terms 
generally used in tubewell drilling technology specified 
in IS 9439 shall apply. 


4 TYPES OF TUBEWELLS 


There are various types of tubewells/wells but as 
explained in 1 only medium/high capacity tubewells 
are considered here: 


Medium capacity 20-50 m*/hr 
High capacity > 50 m*/hr 


4.1 Definition 


Tubewell is a structure installed deep into the ground 
to obtain large quantity of water from saturated water 
bearing strata — aquifers. Tubewells constructed in 
alluvial and valley fill formations comprise a surface 
casing pipe, a housing pipe and an intake section with 
screen/slotted pipes and blank casing. It can be with 
or without filter/gravel pack (artificially packed or 
naturally packed well). 


5 DRILLING METHODS 


There are many alternate methods available for drilling 
and these can be grouped as under: 


Percussion Rotary Jetting Driving 
Cable tool Direct 
circulation 
Hand boring Reverse 
circulation 
DTH/Odex Air rotary 
Dual rotary Auger/Bucket 
Screw 
Calyx 


However, only following methods are considered 
relevant for this code: 


a) Cable tool; 

b) Hand boring; 

c) Direct circulation rotary; 

d) Reverse circulation rotary; and 
e) Dual rotary. 


5.1 Cable Tool 


In cable tool drilling method boring is done by the 
percussion and cutting action of heavy string of 


IS 2800 : 2019 


drilling tools. Repeated lifting and dropping a heavy 
string of drilling tools in the borehole breaks or 
crushes consolidated/semi consolidated rocks into 
small fragments or loosens and breaks the material 
in unconsolidated formations such as boulders. The 
reciprocating action of the tool mixes the crushed 
material with water to form slurry at the bottom of the 
bore hole. In dry formations water is added to form 
slurry. Slurry is removed at regular intervals from the 
borehole by a bailer. 


While inthe consolidated formations open hole is drilled, 
in the unconsolidated boulder formations the borehole 
is generally cased. In the latter case pipe or casing must 
follow the drill bit closely to prevent caving and keep 
the borehole open. A drive shoe is attached to the lower 
end of the casing to prevent damage to the bottom of 
the casing pipe when it is being driven. Driving, drilling 
and bailing are repeated until the casing is at desired 
depth. For deep boreholes when friction increases to 
the point when further driving of casing is very hard, 
a string of smaller diameter casing is inserted inside 
the larger casing and drilling is continued. A number 
of reductions may be required in certain cases to reach 
desired depth. This method is most suitable for boulder 
strata. For borehole for tubewells its depth limitation is 
around 200 m as beyond this depth the friction losses 
are too high. This is very slow process of drilling and 
should be selected only when no other method is likely 
to succeed. 


ROTARY TABLE 


il 


OPEN HOLE 


/' 


,) HOSE 
7 


5.2 Hand Boring Method 


This method is similar to percussion method in action. 
But here, instead of a bit the bailer attached to a rope is 
raised and dropped by manpovver to achieve borehole 
making and once sufficient depth is drilled, the same 
bailer is lifted to land surface for removal of cuttings. 
As the drilling progresses the casing pipes are pressed 
into the ground with load. Sometimes hoisting system 
is used during removal of bailer. The process of 
dropping and lifting the bailer could also be achieved 
by mechanical means. This method when mechanized 
is suitable for alluvial (soft) strata and depth ranges of 
150-180 m only. 


5.3 Direct Circulation Rotary Method 


Under direct rotary drilling method the borehole is drilled 
by rotating a bit and cuttings are removed by continuous 
circulation of drilling fluid as the bit penetrates the 
formation. The drilling fluid is pumped from a mud pit 
down through the drill pipe and out through the holes in 
the bit; the fluid then travels upwards in the annular space 
between the hole and the drill pipe carrying the cuttings 
in suspension to the surface, The fluid is channeled into 
the settling pit/pits where most of the cuttings drop out. 
Clean fluid flows into the mud pit and it is again pumped 
back in to the hole. (see Fig. 1). 


The circulating fluid forms a coating/film on the 
borehole wall reducing chances of collapse of the 


HIGH PRESSURE 


MUD PUMP 


SETTLING PIT 
CUTTINGS 


DRILL PIPE 


DRILLING MUD 


ay 


Fic. 1 DIAGRAM OF DİRECT DRILLING PROCESS 


/' 


MUD WITH CUTTING 


BIT 


SWIVEL 


OPEN HOLE 


HIGH PRESSURE 


IS 2800 : 2019 


PUMP 
DISCHARGE 


SETTLING 
PIT 


CUTTINGS 


DRILL PIPE 


BIT 


/ / 


Fic. 2 REVERSE CIRCULATION METHOD OF DRILLING 


borehole and loss of drilling fluid. It keeps the drill 
bit cool and clean and also lubricates the bit, bearings, 
mud pump and drill pipe. The drilling fluid can be air, 
clean water and scientifically prepared mixtures such 
as bentonite clay, barite etc. The ability to lift cuttings 
depends on viscosity and the up-hole velocity of the 
fluid. A 30-45 m per minute up-hole velocity is good. 
The higher velocities are better for lifting capacities. 
This method is suitable for very deep (600-1 000 m) 
boreholes in alluvial strata. 


5.4 Reverse Circulation Rotary Method 


In reverse circulation rotary drilling, flow of drilling 
fluid, which is generally water, is reversed when 
compared with direct rotary method. The drilling fluid 
and its load of cuttings move upward inside the drill 
pipe and are discharged by the pump into a settling pit. 
An up-hole velocity of 45 m/min is useful for lifting 
the cutting load. The fluid returns to the borehole by 
gravity through a channel and moves down through 
annular space between the borehole and the drill 
pipe to the bottom where it picks up the cuttings and 


reenters the drill pipe through the ports/holes in the 
drill bit. (see Fig. 2). 


To prevent caving of the hole the fluid level must be 
kept at ground level at all times even when drilling 
is suspended temporarily. This method is not suitable 
for very shallow water level area (less than 3 m). This 
method is suitable for all water supply wells in alluvial 
strata to a depth of 150-500 m. The wells constructed 
using this method are highly efficient. Large space and 
large amount of water requirement are primary need for 
this method. 


5.5 Dual Rotary Method 


In this method the borehole is cased while it is drilled 
as is done in percussion method. In the drilling rig there 
are two rotary tables — one for the bit and the second 
for the casing. A pneumatic drill is operated at the end 
of drill pipe which rapidly strikes the rock or formation 
while the drill pipe is slowly rotated. The cuttings are 
removed by air pressure and the borehole is cased 
simultaneously with help of other table. The casing is 
also kept loose by rotating it. 


IS 2800 : 2019 


6 SELECTION OF DRILLING METHOD 


The following points must be taken into consideration 
while selecting the drilling method. A report by the 
qualified hydrogeologist taking into account these 
points may help selection of the method: 


a) Hydro-geology/geology; 

b) Water requirement for depth and diameter of bore; 
c) Accessibility and space at well site; and 

d) Availability of water for drilling. 


7 NOMENCLATURE OF TUBEWELL PARTS 
Typical cross section of the tubewell with all its 
components are given in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. 
The nomenclature of the various parts of tubewell are: 

a) Surface casing; 

b) Housing/pump chamber pipe; 

c) Casing pipe ; 

d) Screen; 

e) Reducer/taper section/reducer seal; 

f) Well bottom, bail plug or bottom plug; 

g) Centralizer; 


Components of a Tubewell Rotary Drilling 


30m 


TO ooo OOOO 


q 


i 


LAND SURFACE 
7 


BOREHOLE 
(9675 mm 


SURFACE CASING 
6600 mm 
CASING SHOE 
HOUSING PIPE 
300 mm 


BOREHOLE 
@500 mm 


OQUDQUQQUQUAŞ 
qılı du 1000 956 


REDUCER 


BLANK CASING 
63200 mm 


SCREEN SS-304 


GRAVEL 


CENTRE GUIDE 


| H-—— 


SCREEN SS-304 


.... 


BAIL PLUG 


Fic. 3 WELL COMPLETED WITH ROTARY METHOD 


h) Gravel/filter pack; 
j) Well cap; 

k) Well clamp; and 
m) Well foundation. 


7.1 Surface Casing 


Surface casing material shall be as per IS 4270. Surface 
casing may or may not be used depending on the local 
conditions and established drilling practices. It could 
be permanent or temporary after completing the well. It 
is very useful in caving areas as it minimizes washing 
and erosion of the side of a borehole. It also helps in 
avoiding contamination from shallow aquifers and 
serves as reservoir for gravel pack. The length of such 
casing should be limited to 30 m or a good clay bed 
between 20 and 30 m depth range. The diameter of the 
surface casing should be as listed in Table 1: 


IS 2800 : 2019 


Table 1 Surface Casing 
( Clause 7.1 ) 


Sl Housing Pipe Surface Casing 
No. Diameter (mm) Diameter (mm) 
a) 2) (3) 

i) 150 450 

il) 200 500 

ili) 250 550 

iv) 300 600 

v) 400 650 


When a permanent surface casing is installed, first an 
oversize hole is drilled to a good clay bed or about 30 m 
depth and in it the surface casing is lowered, centered 
and grouted. After the surface casing has set, further 


Components of a Tubewell Percussion Drilling 


LAND SURFACE 


SURFACE CASING 

(5550 mm 

BOREHOLE 

(25600 mm 

GRAVEL 

BLANK CASING 
(HOUSING PIPE) @300 mm 


BOREHOLE 
@550 mm 


SCREEN SS-304 


OVERLAP 
SEAL 


BLANK CASING 
6200 mm 


BOREHOLE 
400-450 mm 


CENTRE GUIDE 
BOREHOLE Ø 350-400 mm 
SCREEN SS-304 


BAIL PLUG 


Fic. 4 WELL COMPLETED WITH PERCUSSION METHOD 


IS 2800 : 2019 


drilling is continued with lower size bit through the 
bottom of the surface casing. 


It shall be good if this casing is made mandatory in 
domestic and public water supply wells. 


7.2 Housing Pipe or Pump Chamber Casing 


This is the upper portion of the cased section of the 
well and serves as housing for the pumping equipment. 
In a single string construction of uniform diameter, it 
comprises all casing above the top most screen. The 
material of this pipe shall be as per IS 4270. The length 
of this pipe should be estimated keeping in view the 
following factors: 


a) Present static water level; 

b) Minimum water level of record in area; 
c) Long term water level trend; 

d) Probable draw down; 

e) Possible interference with other wells; 
f) Required pump submergence; and 


g) Ten pipe diameters between the suction cone of 
the pump and top of reducer. 


The other controlling factors are sanitation, stability 
and estimated useful life of 25 years. 


The practice of providing screens in the housing pipe 
should be avoided, if possible. 


The housing pipe if not inside a surface casing should 
be grouted at surface. At all times it must be supported 
with clamps at surface. 


7.3 Casing Pipe 


It is a part of intake assembly placed against strata from 
which water is not to be drawn/tapped. The diameter of 
these pipes should normally be same as that of screen 
diameter. The material shall be as per IS 4270 and 
IS 12818 for PVC pipes. 


7.4 Screen 


The purposes of screen are to stabilize the side of the 
hole, keep sand out of the well and facilitate flow of 
water into and within the well. These may be in the 
form slotted pipes or fabricated screens. The selection 
of screen and its length shall be as per IS 4270 and 
IS 8110 and based on sieve analysis, if required. 


In the selection of screen following must be kept in 
view: 
a) Required discharge or yield (diameter and length); 
and 
b) Whether the well is natural pack or gravel pack 
(width of slot opening). 
7.5 Taper or Reducer 


The taper or reducer pipe joins the housing pipe with 
the lower intake assembly in a telescopic design. 


Depending upon the diameter of the housing pipe and 
diameter of the intake assembly the design is marginally 
modified. A typical design for 300 mm housing and 
200 mm diameter remaining intake assembly is given 
in Fig. 5. It should be made up of same material as 
that of pipe assembly. Also, the wall thickness should 
be same as that of housing or intake assembly. The 
material shall be as per IS 4270 and IS 12818 for PVC 


pipes. 


SIZE OF 


REDUCER | A B c D E F | G H 
300X200 237 | 348 | 16 12 | 80 | 200 | 100 | 12 
350X200 237 | 380 | 16 12 | 80 | 200 | 100 | 16 
400X200 237 | 430 | 20 12 | 80 | 200 | 100 | 16 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 5 REDUCER/TAPER (UNTHREADED) 


7.6 Bail Plug 


The use of phrase bail plug is not used in right spirit. 
The bail plugs are used in setting up of screens in 
percussion method of drilling by expert drillers and 
that to if the screen length is less than derrick clear 
height. Currently a bottom pipe attached to the bottom 
most screen is called bail plug. To ease the lowering 
of the pipes, this bail plug is made conical at bottom. 
The diameter of pipe, wall thickness etc. should be 
same as that of casing pipe. The length of the bail plug 
should be limited to 3 m. The material shall conform to 
IS 4270 and IS 12818 for PVC pipes. 


7.7 Centring Guides or Centralizers 


Centring guides are one of the very important part 
of the well assembly. Centring guides are essential 
for centring casing and screens for gravel packing. 
The design of the centring guides may be as in Fig. 6. 
Small variation to this can be made by using 40 mm 
vide 8-10 mm thick strap steel for the entire centring 
guide. The guide should be in a plane around the 
casing at 90° or 120° interval that is, 3-4 vertical straps 
in its circumstance. The length of each guide should 
be three times it diameter. The diameter of the guide 
should be 50-60 mm less than the borehole diameter. 
The guides should be placed at bottom on bail plug and 
at about 10-12 m interval up the hole to the reducer. 
Guides may not be placed on the screens if the length 
of screen is less than 10 m. The material shall be as 
per IS 2062. 


3 Nos. @16 4 : 
STEEL BARS 


3 Nos. 
STEEL FLAT 
40 x6 


3 Nos. 216 
STEEL BARS 


İİ 


(216 STEEL 
BAR RINGS 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 6 CENTRING GUIDE 


7.8 Well Cap 


Fitted on the tube well to keep it closed after completion 
of testing of the well and before installation of regular 
pump. It is threaded to the top of housing pipe. A typical 
design is given in Fig. 7 for 300 mm diameter housing 
pipe. The material shall be as per IS 2062 and IS 12818 
for PVC pipes. 


IS 2800 : 2019 


C 


SIZE OF 
WELL CAP 


300 


All dimensions in millimetres 


Fic. 7 WELL CAP 


7.9 Well Clamp 


This is fitted to the housing or top most pipe of the 
well to support the well assembly after it is lowered 
into the hole. This must be supported at ground with 
wooden beams initially and finally on cement plug. The 
material shall be as per IS 2062. A typical design of the 
clamp is given in Fig. 8. 


8 WATER FOR WATER WELL DRILLING 


For all water supply wells the water for drilling should 
be fresh to the extent possible. Use of contaminated 
water may contaminate the environment of the 
borehole and later may result in growth of bacteria and 
encrustation on screens. The use of brackish or saline 
water hampers the development of electric log and 
hence must be avoided. Similarly the use of cow dung 


4 ØD HOLES FOR BOLTS 


| SIZE OF 


ƏN AP A | B | c 


İ 150 


200 218.11 100 


| 168.3İ 100 | 12 
12 


All dimensions in millimeters 


Fic. 8 WELL CLAMP 


7 


IS 2800 : 2019 


to prevent caving during drilling must not be practiced 
as it may totally spoil the quality of well water. 


9 FORMATION SAMPLING 


The well bore cuttings should be collected at an interval 
of 3 m for reverse circulation and direct circulation 
methods of drilling and also at each change of formation 
material inferred. For percussion, hand boring and odex 
methods the sampling interval should be | m or less as 
per the demand of the conditions. Based on the samples 
collected a lithological log should be prepared which 
can be called a driller’s log. 


10 ELECTRICAL LOGGING OF BOREHOLE 


All boreholes drilled by reverse/direct circulation 
methods must be logged by geophysical methods. 
Minimum electric log comprising of self-potential, 
short normal resistivity and long normal resistivity 
must be run. These logs shall provide boundaries of the 
lithological units encountered during drilling and also 
useful information on formation water quality and to 
some extent formation compactness and/or grain size 
of aquifer material. The electric log and driller’s log 
should then be reviewed together to prepare a final 
lithological log. Only this lithological log should be 
kept in record and only this must be used for the tube 
well design. 


11 TUBEWELL ASSEMBLY LOWERING 
PROCEDURE 


The designed tube well assembly should be fabricated 
and arranged at surface. Final measurements should 
be made of each section of assembly. Each pipe 
should be measured to the accuracy of +/- 0.1 percent. 
The material of the assembly should also be checked 
at this time. The tube well assembly should then be 
lowered into the borehole. During lowering of the 
fabricated assembly pipes, the entire length of the 
pipes must be kept in hanging position. The assembly 
must not be forced down under any circumstance. 
After completion of filter packing also the assembly 
should be kept in hanging position by supporting with 
heavy duty clamp 


12 GRAVEL/FILTER PACKING 


The gravel shall be as per IS 4097. The filter pack 
material should such that 90 percent of it is larger than 
slot opening of the screen. And the filter pack material 
is chosen to retain most of the formation material. If 
slot opening for natural developed well comes to less 
than 0.25 mm, a filter material should be used. Also the 
filter pack material should have uniformity coefficient 
of around 2 and should not exceed 2.5. Secondly in 
uniform aquifer material the ratio of D50 gravel to 
D50 aquifer material should be 5 to 7. Under most 
conditions the maximum grain size of gravel material 
should not exceed 10 mm. 


12.1 Thickness of Gravel/Filter Pack 


By experiments it is confirmed that a properly sized 
pack with a thickness of 12 mm successfully retains the 
formation particles regardless of the velocity of water 
passing through the filter pack. Under most conditions 
the thickness of filter pack should not be more than 
200 mm for ease of development. Recommended 
thickness of gravel/filter pack is 100 mm to 150 mm. 


12.2 Filter Placement Procedure 


The placement of filter pack around the well assembly 
should slow and careful to avoid segregation of particles 
and bridging in the pack. It should be uniform around 
the assembly and for this reason it should be poured 
from at least four directions around the well. 


12.2.1 In percussion method, filter pack is fed between 
drilling casing pipe and well assembly and at regular 
interval casing pipe is jacked out. Continue this process 
till the casing pipe reaches 3 m above the top most 
screen. Fill gravel above this to 3 m more height. The 
well is then developed, till water is nearly clear. At this 
stage the gravel filling and jacking up of casing pipe 
should be done to finish gravel packing till about 30 m 
below ground level or where a good clay bed exists 
around this depth. A clay seal (sanitary seal) of 3 m 
thickness should be provided here to protect the well 
against local contamination. Rest of the borehole can 
be filled by any material. 


In the direct and reverse circulation method the borehole 
should be washed to thin down mud or drilling fluid and 
then well assembly should be lowered with centring 
guides at regular interval. The filter pack/gravel should 
then be placed as given above to finish gravel packing 
till about 30 m below ground level or where a good clay 
bed exists around this depth. A clay seal (sanitary seal) 
of 3 m thickness should be provided here to protect the 
well against local contamination. Rest of the borehole 
can be filled by any material. It must be ensured that a 
minimum of 20 m length of gravel pack is there above 
the top of the top most screen. 


13 SEALING AND GROUTING 


13.1 Grouting Surface Casing 


All public water supply wells surface casing must 
be grouted to a depth of 25-30 m from land surface 
to prevent leakage of contaminants from surface or 
shallow aquifers. Grouting surface casing involves 
filling the annular space between the casing and the 
drilled hole with cement slurry or clay. 


13.2 Seal as Packers 


In the wells finished by percussion method where 
reducer cannot be placed for technical reasons, a seal 
has to be provided between the telescoped intake 
assembly and housing pipe. This seal is either neoprene 
rubber or of lead. 


13.3 Sanitary/Protection Seal 


Where a surface casing is not used a sanitary seal 
made up of clay, plaster of paris (PoP) or cement in 
the gravel pack at a depth around 25-30 m should be 
preferred. A good location can be identified with final 
lithology where a clay bed exists. In some areas, top 
aquifers are found to be of inferior quality and there is 
need for sealing them to protect the water from deep 
aquifers. From the study of the electric log the depth 
below which water is of acceptable quality should be 
determined. A clay bed below this depth should be 
identified and the seal should be placed in gravel pack 
against this clay bed. This seal would prevent seepage 
of water from upper poor quality water aquifers to 
through gravel pack. 


14 DEVELOPMENT OF TUBEWELL 


The installed well shall be developed by any one or 
more methods specified in code IS 11189. The methods 
and equipment shall be such that the well is developed 
at a discharge about 1.25 times the required yield 
from the well. All wells shall be developed by a pump 
at the end of development process. In the last phase 
of development, the estimation of sand content and 
turbidity should be made. 


15 ALLOWABLE SAND CONTENT IN WELL 
WATER 


Sediment in well water can be destructive to pumps and 
water discharge fittings. Development methods reduce 
or eliminate high concentration of sediment in water 
well but it is impractical to assume that all sediment 
can be eliminated, even by most powerful development 
methods. Recommended limit of sediment in water 
well are as under: 


a) 1 ppm — For water directly used for processing of 
food and beverages; 


b) 5 ppm — Water for homes, municipalities and 
industries; 


c) 10 ppm — Water for sprinkler irrigation, industrial 
evaporative cooling system; and 


d) 15 ppm — Water for flood irrigation. 


16 STERILIZATION OR DISINFECTION OF 
THE WELL 


16.1 The well shall be disinfected or sterilized after 
the development by pump and before the final test. 
All wells regardless of the use should be sterilized on 
completion to prevent or retard the growth of corrosion 
or incrustation fostering organisms. This should be 
done by introducing chlorine into the water in the 
well and the immediate aquifer surrounding the well. 
The volume of water in the screen and casing should 
be estimated and sufficient chlorine added to yield 
a chlorine concentration of 1 000 ppm. The solution 


IS 2800 : 2019 


should be poured into the well and thoroughly mixed 
in the well by surging with pump. The solution should 
remain in the well for at least 6 h during which it should 
be surged at about 2 h interval. After expiration of contact 
time, the well should be pumped initially back into the 
well for about 30 min and later to waste until there is 
little or no odour or taste of chlorine in the discharged 
water. It has been found that using hypochlorite of 
10 percent concentration, the requirement of 
hypochlorite is 10 litre for every cubic meter of water 
in the well to produce. 


16.2 In case of water well for drinking water 
purposes, the quality of water should be as laid down 
in IS 10500. 


17 MEASUREMENT OF WELL 


The measurement shall cover the following parameters: 


17.1 Tube well depth measurement: the depth of the 
tube well shall be deemed to be equal to length of the 
pipes lowered. The measurement of the depth shall be 
made by twisted metallic cable strained by a plumb bob 
or by means of rigid rods. 


17.2 Water level measurement static and dynamic 
(pumping). 


17.2.1 Tape Measurement 


This is carried out by a steel graduated tape or cable 
attached with a plumb bob of suitable diameter and 
weight. The tape is chalked at the lower end to few 
meters and is lowered to the estimated depth of water 
level or a little more. Lower part of the tape enters 
the water and wets the chalk there. The line of the 
colour change donates the length of tape immersed 
in water. Subtracting this length from the reading at 
the measuring point gives depth to water level from 
the measuring point. It is always useful to have one 
25 mm diameter pipe lowered to the depth of the pump 
if water level measurements are made during running of 
pump. In this case the tape should be lowered through 
this pipe. 


17.2.2 Electric Sounder 


It can be double pole or single pole arrangement. Many 
sounders are available in the market for this purpose. 
The principle of this is shown Fig. 9. It can be locally 
fabricated by using an electric bulb in the circuit and 
connecting negative end to the casing and positive end 
through electric bulb to an insulated metallic probe 
through a strong thin wire. This insulated probe has one 
opening in the side or bottom. The probe when lowered 
into the well comes in contact with water completes the 
circuit and lights the bulb. The probe is then pulled out 
and measured from the opening on probe to the point 
where the bulb was lighted to give depth to water 
level. 


IS 2800 : 2019 


INDICATING INSTRUMENT 
FOR EXAMPLE VOLTMETER 


TWIN CABLE 


MARKERS AT 


CASING 


WATER LEVEL 


1.5 m INTERVALS 


ELECTRODES 


AIR VENT 


CONNECTIONS 


6 VOLT 
BATTERY 


GROUND LEVEL 


TWIN CABLE 


CONTACT CASING 


OOH 
ORY \ 
WABBBB@easaasaeaaa VE VE “VER “Mk VİLA“ “AL. “Mü. ia“ 


CS 
og 


PLOY? 
oreo 
LGC 


É 
oS 


MM 
o 


+, 


QS 
Si 
ə 


WEIGHTS 


LOS 
oS 
LS 


xX 


4. 


Le, 


OOOO 
KS 
SLL 


RRR RRIS 
4 


©, 


oO 
x 


nore: 


INSULATION 


OX 
Ke 


aa 
EZZEL 
74 


əs 


— ELECTRODES 
SLIGHTLY OFFSET 
TO PREVENT AIR 
BUBBLE FROM 
FORMING 


QOOOOD™ 


rN 


SİRİN” 
ÇOQ 
CANAN AVAV AF AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AV AVA AF AV AV AF AV AF: AV.AV AF AV AP AF AV AF AF AV AF 49 7 


NÝ 
Ce] 


NI 


aY 


LEFF PLR LL LISTS ə ə a a —_ YF 


COO... a 
[ZJZZZ ZL CLL eM 


NN 


(ZZZ222277777777777777777 r 


NON CONDUCTOR 


£7277777777727722"/7777."Z2:"72 8 


ENLARGED VIEW 
OF CONTACT 


Fic. 9 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS WITH DOUBLE POLE CONTACT FOR WATER LEVEL 
MEASUREMENT 


17.2.3 Air Pressure Line Method 


This consists of a tube positioned between the casing 
and the pump column pipe and extended to the depth of 
pump, a calibrated pressure gauge graduated in meters 
of water and an air pump and non-return air valve. All 
the items are installed on the well as Fig.10. The air 
is then pumped till maximum reading is observed on 
the gauge. This reading (A) indicates that all water is 


10 


displaced from the air line that is, the water column 
above the bottom of air line. The depth to water level 
then calculated as total length of air line minus A. 

17.3 Discharge Measurements 


Discharge measurements should be done with any of 
the following methods: 


a) A water meter — It is most accurate; 


AIR PUMP 


IS 2800 : 2019 


NON - RETURN 


AIR VALVE TO PUMP 
PRESSURE GAUGE 


CC 


N 


SY. SUS. 


AIR LINE TUBE 
CASING 


RISING MAIN 


WATER LEVEL (L) 


T 


Toa aa 
| 
LU 


LED 
ni 


- 


1 
m 


un 
rr 


Fic. 10 Air PRESSURE LINE APPARATUS FOR DETERMINING 
THE WATER LEVEL IN A TUBE WELL. 


b) Orifice weir method — Very accurate; field setting 
shown in Fig. 11; 


c) V-notch — Accurate enough for high discharge 
rates; and 


d) Containers — Good for very low discharge rates. 


17.4 Sand/Sediment Content Measurement in Well 
Water 


The sediment concentration should be determined 
by averaging the results of five samples taken at the 
following times during final continuous pumping 
test of at least two hours: 15 min after start of 
test, 30 min after test, 60 min after start of test, 90 
min after start of test and near the end of the test. 
The total quantity of sample should be flow rate 
multiplied by 0.05 for 1 500 litre/min the sample 
volume should be 1 500 x 0.05 = 75 liters. It means 
each part of sample should be 15 litre. The sample 
should be taken from the entire flow of pipe and not 
only the bottom or top. From this sediment content 


11 


should be determined and represented as parts per 
million or mg/litre. 


17.5 Verticality/Plumbness and Alignment 


The housing pipe or the pump chamber casing should 
be straight and aligned but need not be plumb. For 
this a 12 m long dolly should pass freely through the 
housing pipe without hanging. The dolly should be 
rigid and fitted with 30 cm long rings on either ends of 
the dolly and also in the centre. The outside diameter of 
the rings should be 15 mm less than the inside housing 
pipe diameter. If the dolly passes freely to the bottom 
of the housing pipe it can be considered straight for all 
purposes. 


The plumbness or verticality was important when 
turbine pumps were in use. But now as most water wells 
use submersible pumps verticality is not so important; 
instead the alignment and straightness is important. 
The pumps can be installed if the well housing pipe is 
straight though may be out of plumb. 


IS 2800 : 2019 


7 57 TO 9.5 


ENLARGED DETAIL OF 
ORIFICE PLATE 


GATE VALVE 


PIEZOMETER 


TUBE 


All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fic. 11 CONSTRUCTION DIAGRAM OF A CIRCULAR ORIFICE WEIR COMMONLY USED FOR MEASURING 
PUMPING RATES A HIGH-CAPACITY PUMP. THE DISCHARGE PIPE MUST BE LEVEL AND THE PIEZOMETER 
(MANOMETER) TUBE PLACED EXACTLY 24 IN (610 MM) FROM THE END OF THE PIPE. 


18 WELL TESTING FOR YIELD AND DRAW 
DOWN 


At the end of well development by a pump a yield test 
should be conducted to calculate specific capacity 
and efficiency of the well. This should be done under 
guidance of a qualified engineer or hydrogeologist. 
The yield test should be run at preselected three 
discharge rates. The discharge rates should be at 
60 percent, 80 percent and 100 percent of the rate 
at which the well has been finally developed. 
Arrangements to measure the discharge rate and the 
water levels must be kept ready. Let the well be idle 
for more than 12 h. Take water level at the start of the 
test and call it static water level or water level prior 
to the test. Start the pump and note down the time and 
adjust the rate of discharge to the lowest rate. Run the 
pump for 60 min and measure pumping water levels 
at 10 min interval during this period. Then raise 
the rate of discharge to second level and repeat the 
process and similarly for the third rate of discharge. 
Record the data in Table 2. Higher specific capacity 
of the well in the second or third step as compared to 
first or second step that is, it is higher at higher rate of 
pumping, indicates that the well was still developing 


12 


during the testing period. In such a case the efficiency 
cannot be determined. 


19 WATER QUALITY 


The samples should be collected at the end of each step 
of step draw down pumping test in sterilized plastic 
bottles. Depending upon the parameters to be analyzed 
the volume of sample should be decided. Representative 
of the chemical lab should normally collect the sample 
as per requirement. Or the sample should be collected 
as per his instructions. Separate samples should be 
collected for bacteriological and chemical. Some 
elements have a tendency to precipitate when it comes 
in contact with air. Such samples should be fixed or 
treated immediately after collection. 


20 HANDING OVER OF TUBEWELL 


The drilling agency on completion of installation of the 
tubewell shall submit a well completion report on their 
letter head that shall include the following. 


a) Location of the tubewell; 
b) Date of start of drilling; 
c) Date of completion of drilling; 


d) Method of drilling; 
e) Total depth of the borehole drilled; 


f) Diameter of the finished borehole with depth 
ranges in meters; 


g) Electrical logging/geophysical logging report; 


h) Final Lithological log with depth range, thickness 
and type of formation; 


j) Length and diameter of various pipes. Such as 
surface casing, housing pipe and casing pipe; 


k) Length and type of screens with slot width; 


IS 2800 : 2019 


m) Filter pack material, grade, volume used; 
n) Sealing and grouting, nature and depth range; 


p) Development methods deployed and periods 
thereof; 


q) Development discharge by pump; 


r) Method of sterilization and volume of chlorine 
solution used; 


s) Clear depth of the well; 
t) Pumping test data as per Table 2 in 18; and 
u) Diagram of tubewell assembly. 


Table 2 Step Draw Down Test Results 
( Clause 18 ) 


Step Period of Step Discharge Static Water Pumping Water Draw Down Specific Capacity 
No. (min) rate Ipm Level Level at End of dd (3/6) 
(liters/min) (m) Step (m) (Ipm/m dd) 
(m) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
i) 
ii) 
iii) 


13 


IS 2800 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Diamond Core and Waterwell Drilling Sectional Committee, MED 21 


Organization 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 
In Personal Capacity, Chandigarh 


AMKO Mining And Drilling Equipment Pvt Ltd, 
Mumbai 


AQSEPTENCE Group (India) Pvt Ltd (Formaly 
Known as Johanson Screens India Pvt Ltd) 

Atlas Copco (I) Ltd Pune 

Atomic Minerals Mdirectorate for Exploration 
and Research, Hyderabad 

Central Ground Water Board, Faridabad 

Central Water Commission, New Delhi 

Drilbits International Private Limited, Nashik 

Drillmax Rigs Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 

DTE of Mines and Geology, Udaipur 


Indian Pump Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 

Kores (India) Ltd, Mumbai 

Mecon Limited, Jharkhand 

Mineral Exploration Corporation Ltd, Nagpur 


Mining Associates Pvt Ltd, Asansol 


In Personal Capacity, Dhanbad 
RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


Rockdrill (India), Jodhpur 


Sandvik Smith Asia Ltd, A.P. 


The Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd, Kothagudem 


Representative(s) 


Suri AJAY AGARWAL (Chairman) 

SHRI ANUP Kumar Jour (Alternate) 
SHRI MAHESH CHANDRA JINDAL 
Suri M. G. KUVAVVALA 

Suri H. M. KUVAVALA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH ARORA 
Suri ANIL C. SHAH (Alternate) 


SHRI SHUDHANSHU NIGAM 
Suri S. Datta MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


Suri A. B. ANAND 
Suri P. S. CHATTOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK K. DUBE 
SHRI SIVASHANKAR (Alternate) 


SUPTDING ENGINEER 
Director (Alternate) 


SHRI Y. V. RAMANA MURTHY 
SHRI TUSHAR PAUL (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. BULANI 
Suri R. B. Desai (Alternate) 


Suri N. K. PARIHAR 
Suri N. K. Jonwat (Alternate) 


SHRI YOGESH MISTRY 
SHRI UTKARSH A CHHAYA (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. PATHAK 
SHRI SANDEEP DHOLI 
Suri B. K. SINHA 


Suri S. M. Josni 
Suri J. G. JANGLA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAM BABU BANSAL 
Suri ANJAY BANSAL (Alternate) 


Pror. C. K. JAIN 


SHRI S. KUNAL 
Suri P. C. Dewu (Alternate) 


SHRI KAMALKISHOR GUPTA 
SHRI RAVINDRA Ku. Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRI RANGAYYA NAIDU 
Suri N. BHASKARA Reppy (Alternate) 


Suri V. RAMA RAO 
SHRI SUBHASH CHANDRA (Alternate) 


14 


IS 2800 : 2019 


Organization Representative(s) 
Usha International Ltd, Gurgaon Suri RoHir MATHUR 
Suri Mupit MATHUR (Alternate) 
Water & Power Consultancy Services (India) Ltd, SHRI ANUPAM MISHRA 
Gurgaon Suri J. K. Rat (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 
Member Secretary 


Ms KHUSHBU .İYOTSNA KINDO 
ScIENTIST ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 21 (12110). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


