**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 10386-3 (1992) : Safety code for construction, operation 
and maintenance of river valley projects. Part 3: Plant, 
machinery [WRD 21: Safety in Construction, Operation and 
Maintenance of River Valley Projects] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&Vi ilW^K-^i^^^ T ^bi^ nVF^f 



::^^s^\n%i9^j^/;s^>^^^^ 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 10385 { Parts) : 1992 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 



Indian Standard 

SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, 

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 

PART 3 PLANT AND MACHINERY 

UDC 62602 : 614-8 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

February 1992 Price Group 1 



Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional Committee, 
RVD 21 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Safety in Construction, Operation and Maintenance of River Valley Projects Sectional 
Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. 

With large scale increase in construction activity of river valley projects, the number of major 
accidents have increased. The degree of safety achieved in project constructions has a direct 
bearing on the amount of effort expended to avoid accidents by those who control the conditions 
and practices on the project. 

There are a number of aspects that need to be kept in mind when the safety norms of an entire 
river valley project are envisaged. To this end, various aspects that need consideration, from the 
viewpoint of safety, are dealt with in various parts of this standard. 

This part covers the safety aspects to be kept in view during usage of plant and machinery. 

Various machinery, plants and other mechanized equipment play a vital role in the construction, 
operation and maintenance of river valley projects. Safety of the plants and machinery used and 
installed is an important and essential part of planning as no other segment of the project will pay 
greater dividends with minimum investment than a good safety programme. 

Inadequate safety measures in respect of plant and machinery can result, besides others, in the 
following mishaps: 

a) Loss of human lives; 

b) Temporary or permanent injury to workers; 

c) Loss or damage to equipment; 

d) Loss of material; and 

e) Loss of valuable time. 

The guidelines given in this standard are generalized and indicative in nature, given for the 
guidance of the concerned project engineers. Each project may have its own safety hazards which 
need to be identified and taken care of accordingly. Further, in addition to these general guidelines 
the instructions issued by the suppliers of various equipment should be strictly adhered to. 



IS 10386 ( Part 3 ) : 1992 



Indian Standard 



SAFETY CODE FOR CONSTRUCTION, 

OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF 

RIVER VALLEY PROJECTS 

PART 3 PLANT AND MACHINERY 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part 3 ) lays down the 
safety requirements for plant and machinery 
used in river valley projects. 

2 TRAINING TO NEW/IN-EXPERIENCED 
PERSONNEL 

2.1 An in-experienced worker is the chief 
casualty in accidents on construction sites. 
Before recruitment of any personnel, he should 
be properly screened for the job he is likely to 
be entrusted. Thorough checking and screening 
at the time of appointment in regard to his 
experience, suitability and any disability which 
might affect his work, is very essential. 

2.2 Any employee who persists in causing 
accidents should be replaced. 

2.3 It should be the duty of the safety oflScer to 
make the safety process effective. Each section 
head may hold a short safety session with his 
section as often as conditions warrant. The 
workers should be given ample opportunity to 
participate in the discussions. Sometimes the 
most effective method of emphasising safety 
practices is by demonstration. 

3 TRAINING ON ARRIVAL OF ANY NEW 
PIECE OF EQUIPMENT 

3.1 On the arrival of any new equipment both 
the operation and the repair staff should be 
trained in its use under the supervision of the 
erection personnel deputed by the firm. If 
necessary they may be shown documentaries 
and films by the erection engineers to properly 
and safely understand the working of the 
equipment. 

3.2 The operator should be encouraged to 
report any abnormal indications/noise promptly 
to the Unit Level maintenance staff. 

4 GENERAL 

4.1 The main sources of injury to operators and 
others working around machinery are: 

a) Repairing and servicing equipment in 
dangerous positions. 

b) Unexpected violent tipping of the 
machine. 



c) Unexpected violent shocks or jerks to the 
machine. 

d) Leaving earth moving and other 
equipment unattended in a dangerous 
position. 

e) Not following the safety measures 
prescribed by the suppliers of the plant 
or machinery. 

4.2 Schedules for preventive and electrical 
maintenance are quite effective and should be 
employed for various kinds of machines. 

5 SOME DO'S AND DONT's 

5.1 Do's 

5.1.1 Make all adjustments and repairs with the 
parking brake set, engine inoperative and 
hydraulic systems not under pressure. 

5.1.2 Make sure all the pressure and tempera- 
ture gauges are operative and indicating the 
work position, before commencing work. 

5.1.3 Make sure that the area behind the 
machine is clear, before reversing. 

5.1.4 Face or look in the direction the machine 
is travelling. 

5.1.5 Watch for workers in the vicinity of the 
machine, before setting it in motion. 

5.1.6 Travel with blade or bucket close to the 
ground when going up a steep grade. 

5.1.7 On all machines, set brakes when parked 
and block the wheel when parked on grades. 

5.1.8 Circle the machine before mounting it to 
make certain that no one is in the danger area. 

5.2 Dont's 

5.2.1 Get under the machine unless the engine 
is turned off and the parking brake is set. 

5.2.2 Get on or off a moving machine. 

5.2.3 Operate the machine after dusk, unless 
adequate lighting is provided. 

5.2.4 Make sudden stops with raised and/or 
loaded bucket. 

5.2.5 Short circuit the fuse links with wire. Do 
it with proper fuses. 



1 



IS 10386 (Part 3 )i 1992 

5.2.6 Break any of the interlocks provided 6 FIRST-AID FACILITIES 
unless required under emergency conditions. 

5.2.7 Operate the gates at the openings where 6'\ **a°y., ™j°0'' ??J^".^? . <=^° ^« . Seated 
excessive vibrations are noticed. satisfactorily if first-aid facihtics are maintained. 

Some members of the staff should be trained to 

5.2.8 Reverse movable equipment without having provide this treatment and each employee should 
an assistant to give directions. know how to secure it when required. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act^ 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Irdian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publication ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, 
are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in 
possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent 
to BIS giving the following reference : 

Doc : No. RVD 21 ( 3841 ) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 



Amend No. 



Date of Issue 



Text AfiFected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 BahadurlShah Zafar Marg, New^Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 



Regional OflSces : 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 
NEW Delhi-1 10002 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P- Road, Maniktola 
CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) 
BOMBAY 400093 



Telegrams : Manaksanstha 
( Common to all OflSces ) 

Telephones 

331 01 31 
331 13 75 



37 86 62 

53 38 43 

412916 



6 32 92 95 



Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, 
COIMBATORE, FARIDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAGATI, 
HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



