NAT Alan IS 609 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


Ge stat ssn & fee saat AY 
tara & were — eit aT 


( Teel FRAT ) 


Improvement of Existing Structures 
Used or Intended to be Used 
for Food Grain Storage — 
Code of Practice 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 55.220; 67.060 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SERE TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2020 Price Group 3 


Foodgrains, Allied products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Foodgrains, Allied products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee had been approved by 
the Food and Agriculture Divisional Council. 


Owing to paucity of proper food grain storage structures, the Government and trade organizations store food 
grain, in an emergency, in any building which they can easily acquire. Such emergencies have frequently arisen 
in various parts of the country during the last decade, particularly because of the sudden heavy arrivals of food 
grain at places where it was not possible to construct storage structures at short notice. Furthermore, even if 
construction of storage structures was possible, it was not undertaken for the simple reason that they might not 
have permanent utility. Since structures, thus acquired, are, not essentially built for the storage of food grain, they 
lack in many essential requirements for such storage, due to which the food grain stored in them is liable to suffer 
heavy losses. It is, therefore, obvious that in all acquired storage structures, which are not originally constructed 
for such purpose but utilized for it, either temporarily or on a long term basis, certain measures should be adopted 
in order that the desired level of proper conditions both in respect of the surroundings of such structures as well as 
in their constructional features may be maintained. 


In addition to this aspect of improvement of existing defective food grain storage structures, the food grain itself 
has, during handling in transit or storage, to be looked after carefully and in a scientific manner. Likewise, the 
structures in which food grain is stored have to be of a desired standard. Keeping in view all these various aspects 
of the subject of conservation of food grain, Bureau of Indian Standards has brought out a series of standards for 
handling in transit and storage of food grain and also for the construction of food grain storage structure. 


With view to assisting in the improvement of existing defective food grain storage structures, this standard Code 
was first published in 1955. The current revision is being taken up to update the provisions given in the standard 
in view of the latest practices being followed in this area. In this standard, particular attention has been paid 
to the fact that while suggesting methods for improvement of existing defective food grain storage structures, it 
is not either possible or economically feasible to rebuild entirely the whole or part of the storage structure. The 
various practices given in this standard are, therefore, only of such a nature as could be easily adopted without 
bringing about any radical change in the storage structure itself. Nevertheless, it is considered that the changes 
suggested herein, would be adequate to provide sufficient protection to the stored food grain from ravages by 
insects, dampness or moisture and rats. It may also be mentioned that the intention in prescribing the various 
practices for improvement and maintenance of each part of the storage structure is to serve as a guide in the 
selection of such of the practices as may be applicable to the storage structure under consideration. 


In this standard, it has been assumed that the work of improvement of the defective food grain storage structure, 
which will mainly be of the nature of repairs, cleaning, levelling of ground, etc, would be done according to the 
prevailing Codes and, therefore, the various engineering practices connected with such work have not been given. 
However, wherever it has been considered desirable to elaborate any such practices, care has been taken to include 
such elaboration in this standard. 


Metric system has been adopted in India and all quantities and dimensions in this standard have been given in 
metric system. 


The Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance 
with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised Y. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 609 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


IMPROVEMENT OF EXISTING STRUCTURES 
USED OR INTENDED TO BE USED FOR FOOD 
GRAIN STORAGE — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard prescribes the methods for improvement 
of existing structures used or intended to be used for 
food grain storage, both for bag and bulk storage type. 
It is intended to be chiefly adaptable for Government 
and trade storage of food grain. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 

277 : 2018 Galvanized steel strips and 
sheets (plain and corrugated) — 
Specification (seventh revision) 

280 : 2006 Mild steel wire for general 
engineering purposes (fourth 
revision) 

6438 : 1980 Specification for aluminium 
phosphide formulations (first 
revision) 

7247 (Part3): Code of practice for fumigation 

1974 of agricultural produce: Part 3 
Aluminium phosphide 

15219 : 2002 Aluminium phosphide powder 
formulation 

3 GENERAL 


3.1 Structures having mud floor or mud walls or 
thatched roof or those situated near river or sea bottom 
lands subject to flooding or inundations, shall not be 
used for the purpose of storage of food grain. 


3.2 As far as possible, food grain storage structure 
(FGSS) shall be at least 15 m (preferably 30 m) away 


from factories dairies, poultry runs, kilns, cattle pens, 
styes, slaughter houses, hide curing centres or tanneries, 
garbage dumping grounds, manure pits, sewage pits 
and disposal plants, and such other places, the close 
vicinity of which is deleterious to safe storage of food 


grain. 


3.3 In case of inland FGSS, it shall be ascertained that, 
as far as possible, there is sufficient off street parking 
and manoeuvring space for vehicles. Likewise, for 
FGSS situated at ferry heads, docks, etc, care shall be 
taken to ascertain that sufficient berthing, loading and 
unloading facilities are available. 


4 SITE 


4.1 Drainage — The site shall be provided with proper 
drainage. 


4.1.1 All existing pools, ponds and such other low level 
grounds within a radius of 15 m from the FGSS, where 
water is likely to accumulate or stagnate, shall be filled 
up and levelled. 


4.1.2 Drains — The open drains within a radius of 
6 m from the FGSS shall be made of brick or stone 
masonry or of cement concrete, and shall be plastered 
smooth. They shall slope towards the natural fall of the 
ground and shall be connected to an out-fall drain for 
the ultimate disposal of water. 


4.2 Cleanliness — Any garbage, weeds, shrubs and 
other such things which are likely to have a deleterious 
effect on the stored food grain shall be removed, and 
such unhygienic places cleaned up and levelled. 


4.2.1 All the branches of trees within a radius of 3 m of 
the FGSS shall be cut off. 


4.2.2 Any lumber or such other articles which may 
provide either a pathway or jumping ground for the 
rats so as to enable them to reach the FGSS, shall be 
removed. 


4.3 Rat Burrows — All rat burrows whether inhabited 
or not by rats in the vicinity of the FGSS or abutting the 
foundation of the FGSS shall be treated with aluminum 


IS 609 : 2020 


phosphide in the form of tablets/pellets. For precautions 
in handling the material and procedure, please refer 
IS 7247 (Part 3). 


5 FOUNDATION 


All pits in the ground abutting the foundation shall 
be levelled, watered, tamped and brought to the 
surrounding level of the ground. 


6 PAVEMENT 


6.1 All round the FGSS abutting the plinth, a pavement 
150 cm wide and 15 cm thick of either bricks or stone 
slabs set in lime or cement mortar, or of lime or cement 
concrete shall be constructed, if such a pavement does 
not already exist. The bricks or stone slabs of the 
pavement shall be cement pointed. 


6.1.1 The pavement shall slope outside at | in 10. 
7 PLINTH 


7.1 All cracks and crevices in the plinth shall be 
repaired. 


7.2 All rat holes in the plinth shall be closed with 
cement concrete mixed with small broken glass pieces 
roughly 6 mm size (about 1.6 kg of glass pieces to 1 m? 
of cement concrete). 


8 FLOOR 


8.1 It shall be ascertained that the floor is strong and 
non-yielding and would not transmit dampness to 
stored food grain due to seepage of ground moisture. 


8.1.1 All cracks and crevices in the floor shall be made 
up. If the floor has sagged at places, these places shall 
be dug up and rebuilt so as to bring them in level with 
the rest of the floor. 


8.1.2 All rat holes in the floor shall be closed with 
cement concrete mixed with small broken glass pieces 
roughly 6 mm size (about 1.6 kg of glass pieces to 1 m° 
of cement concrete). 


8.1.3 If the floor is either not strong and would yield 
to pressure of stored food grain, or is likely to transmit 
dampness to stored food grain due to seepage of ground 
moisture, it shall be remade in the following manner: 
Dig out the floor to a depth of 40 cm and level this dug 
out surface. Fill the bottom of this excavation with a 
10 cm layer of earth consisting of gritty or gravelly soil, 
water and tamp it hard. Over this, spread a 10 cm thick 
layer of coarse sand, and again water and tamp it. Next, 
lay a layer of 15 cm thickness of lime concrete, then a 
6 mm thick layer of bitumen, and finally, 44 mm thick 
layer of cement concrete. This last layer of cement 
concrete forms the floor). Lay the floor in alternate 


panels, not exceeding 3 m x 3 m with their joints filled 
with mastic. Plaster the floor smooth. 


9 WALLS 


9.1 All cracks and crevices in the walls or in the plaster 
of the walls shall be made up. 


9.2 The inside surface of the walls shall be plastered 
smooth with lime or cement plaster. 


9.3 The inside edges of the walls and the corners where 
they meet the floor and the roof or the ceiling shall be 
rounded off to a radius of at least 50 mm. 


9.4 If walls show signs of dampness, the plaster of 
inside surface of walls shall be removed and a coat of 
6 mm thick bitumen applied. The inside surface shall 
then be re-plastered and the surface rendered smooth. 


10 OPENINGS 


10.1 Doors — The doors shall be repaired to the extent 
necessary so that there are no chinks, gaps or spaces in 
between the door leaves and also that the leaves fit the 
frame closely. 


10.1.1 If the door leaves are made of timber, their 
lower portions shall be provided with U shaped 
0.63 mm thick, galvanized steel sheets (see IS 277), up 
to a height of 225 mm from bottom so as to cover both 
the inner and outer surfaces of door leaves. Also the 
two edges of the door leaves shall be covered by 
additional overlapping strips of galvanized steel 
sheeting up to a height of 225 mm from the bottom. 


10.2 Windows — The windows shall be provided with 
shutters. 


10.2.1 Shutters — The shutters for the windows shall 
be repaired to the extent necessary so as to fill up all 
chinks, gaps or spaces in them and fit closely. 


10.2.2 The windows, in addition to the shutters shall 
be provided with wire netting of 6 mm mesh made of 
0.560 mm thick galvanized mild steel wire (see IS 280). 


10.2.3 In case there are no verandahs, the windows 
shall be provided with sun shades (chajjas) on the outer 
side of the FGSS. 


10.2.4 The window sill shall slope outwards. 


10.3 Ventilators — The ventilators shall be provided 
with sun shades (chajjas) on the outer side of the 
FGSS and their sills shall slope outwards. 


10.3.1 If the ventilators have no shutters, wire netting 
of 6 mm mesh made of galvanized mild steel wire 
of 0.56 mm diameter shall be provided on all the 
ventilators. If there are shutters, they shall be repaired 


to the extent necessary, so as to fill up all chinks, gaps 
or spaces and also to fit closely. 


10.4 Manhole — The manhole shall be provided with 
an iron cover of suitable dimensions so as to fit tightly 
with its frame and render the opening completely 
water-tight. 


10.4.1 Cover — The cover shall be provided with a 
locking arrangement. The inside surface of the cover 
shall be provided with a wooden lining. 


10.5 Spout — The spout shall be provided with a 
shutter. 


10.5.1 Shutter — The shutter when closed, shall be 
close fitting so as to render the spout air-tight. It shall 
be provided with a locking arrangement. 


11 ROOF 


11.1 The roof shall be repaired to the extent necessary, 
so that there is no leakage or percolation of water 
through it. 


11.1.1 In case of gabled roof, if there are spaces in 
between the walls and the roof sheeting, the spaces 


IS 609 : 2020 


shall be fitted with wire netting of 6 mm mesh made 
of galvanized mild steel wire of 0.560 mm diameter. 
The roof shall project sufficiently outside the walls to 
prevent rain water coming into the structure. 


12 DRAINAGE OF RAIN WATER FROM ROOF 


Adequate provision for drainage of rain water from 
the roof shall be made. If drain pipes are already built, 
necessary repairs shall be done to them and they shall 
be properly secured at the off-take as well as to the 
walls. Their lower ends shall be cut 1.2 m short above 
the ground level and shoes for directing the water to 
fall away from the wall, provided to them. Below each 
drain pipe, a stone slab of suitable dimensions shall be 
provided on the ground so that the ground area is not 
scoured due to the water falling through the drain pipe. 


13 DISINFESTATION OF EMPTY FGSS 


After the FGSS has been improved upon in the manner 
prescribed under 12 the floor, walls and the underside 
of the roof (or the ceiling) shall be swept thoroughly 
clean. It shall then be disinfested by one of the methods 
prescribed in Annex A, before taking any food grain 
inside. 


IS 609 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 13 ) 


METHODS FOR DISINFESTATION OF EMPTY FGSS 


A-0 GENERAL 


A-0.1 Disinfestation of empty FGSS may be done 
by anyone of the two methods namely, air charging/ 
surface treatment and fumigation. 


A-0.1.1 air-charging/surface treatment can be done only 
of those empty FGSS which can be made reasonably 
air-tight, while fumigation of only those which can be 
made perfectly air-tight. 


A-0.2 During any one of these two operations, no 
spectator shall be allowed inside the FGSS. 


A-1 AIR CHARGING/SURFACE TREATMENT 


Air-charging (including spraying or  fogging)/ 
surface treatment of empty FGSS may be carried out 
using suitable recommended pesticide (for example 
Malathion) by CIB and RC in recommended doses as 
and when required. 


A-2 FUMIGATION 


A-2.1 Fumigant — Aluminium phosphide (IS 6438 
and IS 15219) 


A-2.2 For the equipment, precautions and procedure, 
see IS 7247 (Part 3). 


IS 609 : 2020 
ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 
Composition of Foodgrains, Allied Products and Other Agricultural Produce Sectional Committee, FAD 16 


Organization Representative(s) 
Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Ministry of J. S. (MARKETING) AND AGRICULTURAL MARKETING 
Agriculture, New Delhi ADVISOR (Chairman) 
Centre of Excellence for Soybean Processing, CIAE, Dr Punir CHANDRA 
Bhopal Dr S. K. Giri (Alternate) 
All India Food Processors’ Association, New Delhi SHRI SHAM BAGGARRY 
Ms Jyoti Soni (Alternate) 
CSIR-Central Food Technological Research Institute Dr M. S. MEERA 
(CFTRI), Mysore Dr V. B. SASHIKALA 
Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering & HEAD (DIVISION OF TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY) 
Technology (CIPHET), Ludhiana Dr D. N. Yapay (Alternate) 
ICAR-National Rice Research Institute, Cuttack (formerly DR AWADHESH KUMAR 
CRRI) Dr (Mrs) PaDMINI Swan (Alternate) 
ICAR-Central Tuber Crop Research Institute (CTCRI), DIRECTOR 
Thiruvananthpuram Dr M. S. SANJEEV (Alternate) 
Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC), New Delhi Suri A. K. MALHOTRA 
SHRI SIDHARTH Ratu (Alternate) 
CONCERT, Chennai SHRI R. SANTHANAM, IAS (RETD.) 


SHRI G. SANTHANARAJAN (Alternate) 
Confederation of Indian Food Trade & Industry (CIFTI)- Ms PARNA DASGUPTA 


FICCI, New Delhi Ms PRIYANKA SHARMA (Alternate) 
Confederation of Indian Industries (CII), New Delhi MR MAnisH WHORRA 
Mr Aromat Jkosui (Alternate) 
Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad Mrs Do ty A JANI 
Dr Aninpita Menta (Alternate) 
Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai Dr SitaRAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. Kamaru (Alternate) 
Consumer Research, Education, Action, Training and MR K. SURESH KANNA 
Empowerment (CREATE) SH R. PoNNAMALAM (Alternate) 
Defence Food Research Laboratory (DFRL), Mysore Dr G. K. SHARMA 
DrA. D. Semwat (Alternate) 
ICAR - Indian Institute of Maize Research (IIMR), Dr R. Sat KUMAR 
Ludhiana (formerly DMR) Dr DuaraM PauL CHAupnary (Alternate) 
Directorate General of Supplies and Transport, Delhi Cot S. C. Josut 
Mas SonaL! DuDHANE (Alternate) 
Directorate of Marketing & Inspection, Faridabad Dy AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISOR 
SMO (Stp.) (Alternate) 
Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine & Storage, PLANT PROTECTION ADVISER 
Faridabad Suri R. V. SINGH (Alternate) 
Food Corporation of India (FCI), New Delhi MRA. S. ARUNACHALAM 


MR Sacar (Alternate) 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, New Delhi Ms APRAJITA VERMA 


IS 609 : 2020 


Organization 


G.B. Pant University, Food Science Division, Pant Nagar 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


Indian Grain Storage Management and Research Institute, 
Hapur 


Indian Institute of Food Processing Technology (IIFPT), 
Thanjavur 


Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP), Delhi 


Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution, 
New Delhi 


National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship & 
Management (NIFTEM), Sonipat 


National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), Hyderabad 


National Sugar Institute (NSI), Kanpur 


Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of 
India (PFNDAIT) 


Vasantdada Sugar Institute (VSI), Pune 


Warehousing Development and Regulatory Authority 
(WDRA), New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Dr SatisH K. SHARMA 
Dr Sweta Rat (Alternate) 
Dr S. C. KHURANA 
Suri I. C. CHADDHA 


DIRECTOR 
Dr C. ANANDHARAMAKRISHNAN 


Mr DEEPAK KHEDKAR 
Mr Mapnuas CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Dr SUBHASH GUPTA 
Dr S. C. BAnsat (Alternate) 


Dr AsHuTosH UPADHYAY 
Dr RuresH Cuavan (Alternate) 


Dr K. BHASKARA CHARY 
Dr V. SuDERSHAN Rao (Alternate) 


Dr V. P. SRIVASTAVA 


Dr SHATADRU SENGUPTA 
Dr Jasvir SINGH (Alternate) 


Dr Rageev V. DANI 
Dr SANIJEEV V. PATIL (Alternate) 


Dr RADHEY KRISHNA TRIPATHI 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 16 (14864). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


