UDC

622'233'052/`053'004'5

: 621'951'025'7 [66S'O18'25]

IS : 8486 - 1977 Indian Standard
( Reaffirmed 2005 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR MAINTENANCE OF TUNGSTEN CARBIDE TIPPED INTEGRAL STEMS
1. scope - Lays down the procedure for the proper maintenance of tungsten carbide tipped integral stems conforming to IS : 7913-1975 `Specification for integral stems for percussive drilling' for obtaining the maximum efficiency from them, 2. Terminology - Different parts and other terms used in connection integral stems are shown in Fig, 1. 3. Types of Wears with tungsten carbide tipped

3.1 Fronfal WearFrontal wear occurs when drilling is done in hard rocks, such as granite and gneiss, This develops as a gradually widening flat surface on the cutting edge. Frontal grinding shall be carried out when the width of the cutting edge of the insert amounts to 3 mm, when measured at 5 mm from the periphery of the insert. This can be checked by using grinding template (see Fig. 2). 3.2 Gauge WearGauge wear occurs when the drilling is done in abrasive rocks, such as quart&e. The corners of the insert get worn abnormally fast, resulting in rounding of the insert. If this rounding is allowed to continue, the wear on the insert becomes very heavy and instead of a clearance, an antitaper is formed. In case, the drilling is continued with an anti-tapered steel, insert failures may occur as the insert is subjected to abnormally severe stress arising from the wedge action against the hole walls (see Fig. 3). These severe stresses brought on by excessive anti-taper may result in rod breakage. The corner wear can be checked by measuring the height of the anti-taper using the grinding template. The stems shall be reground on the gauge when the anti-taper height becomes approximately 8 mm (see Fig. 4 ). 3.2.1 The anti-taper height is the height of the cutting edge to the point where the clearance begins.

3.3 Propeller WearPropeller wear is a special kind of wear and is actually a combination of wear It is generally caused by poor rotation of drill rod or by unsatisfactory clearing of and deformation. In very soft rock, the cuttings cuttings, which in turn is due to poor air or water pressure for flushing, may cause propeJler wear even when the air or water pressure is normal. The reason being the fast Figure 5 shows the way penetration rate due to which the cuttings are not cleared quickly enough. in which stem is worn away and deformed along the cutting edge, especially on the leading side. Because of this the tungsten carbide insert becomes inadequately supported at the sides and the risk of insert failure becomes imminent. 3.4 Snake-Skin Wear - When drilling in certain soft rocks like magnetite, a wear surface similar to snake-skin is frequently developed (see Fig. 6). This characteristic appearance is formed by a network of cracks about 0.1 mm deep. When snake-skin is found there is a very great risk of insert breakage. It is, therefore, most important that these cracks be removed altogether when regrinding even if appreciable wear has not taken place. 3.4.1 It is advisable to regrind lightly after about 150 m of drilling even if there is no detectable wear, while drilling in soft rock. 4. 4.1 Grinding For frontal Procedure

Wear

4.1.1 The purpose of grinding for frontal wear is to restore the cutting edge of the bit. The most economical procedure is to regrind both sides equally to the point where a sharp edge is obtained along The sharp edge shall be honed to a width of O-5 mm (see Fig. 7 ) &rout three-fifths of the bit diameter. The honing shall 3s otherwise fine hair cracks will develop and cause the insert to break prematurely. he carried out with an old worn grinding stone. 4.1.2 In case of hand grinding, the edge angle and the cutting checked continuously to ensure that excessive tungsten carbide is and insert radius on a correctly ground bit shall be 110" and 80 mm zonveniently with the template as shown in Fig. 8. Care shall be cutting edge straight and in the centre of the bit. 4.2 nor Gauge WearThe most convenient bench grinder with a straight grinding wheel. edge radius of the insert shall be not ground off. The edge angle Both can be checked respectively. taken during grinding to keep the

way of grinding for gauge wear is to use an ordinary The procedure is to grind down the diameter until the

Adopted

13 June 1977

Q March 1978, ISI I
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION
ZAFAR

I _ MAWi

MANAK BHAvAN.

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

IS : 8486 - 1977
height of the anti-taper has been reduced to a height of 6 mm to ensure satisfactory clearance. It is also important to remove as much steel as necessary, below the insert ( see Fig. 9 ). In certain kinds of rock, the drills or steels are subjected to heavy gauge wear but little frontal wear. In such cases it is often possible LID to a point, to reduce the anti-taper by frontal grinding only ( see Fig. 10). . 4.2.1 After grinding, the diameter of the insert shall be checked with a sliding shall be assigned to the suitable series. caliper and the stems

,

4.3 For Propeller Wear - If the propeller wear is not excessive, a combination of frontal and gauge Particular care shall be taken with stems on which the steel has been worn grinding shall be done. On stems worn in this way, the protruding parts of the away so as to expose the corners of the insert. insert shall be ground away if the insert breakage is to be avoided ( see Fig. 11). 4.4 For Snake-Skin WearWhen snake-skin wear occurs, the surface cracks shall be completely The stem shall thus be ground down a little more than normal, and afterwards removed by grinding. the insert shall be heavily honed, both along its cutting edge and on the sides. 5. 5.1 Grinding
Selection

Technique
of Grinding Wheel

5.1.1 Wheel designationIt is extremely important that the proper grinding wheel is used to grind integral stems. Use of the right quality wheel has great influence on the grmding cost and bit life. Vitrified bonded silicon-carbide wheels shall be used for grindmg tungsten carbide tipped integral stems. A too The suitability of a wheel is also decided by such factors as hardness, grain size and structure. hard or too fine grained wheel will be clogged with steel and the tungsten carbide insert will get overGrinding cracks will then be formed in the heated (such inserts will have a shiny ' burnt' appearance). insert resulting in insert failure. In addition, the grinding operation will also be slowed down. A coarse grained wheel will produce deep scratches on the tungsten carbide forming starting points for insert failure.

5.1.1.1 A typical designation grinding wheels (revised)' suitable

of grinding wheel according to IS : 551-l 966 #Marking system for for grinding integral stems is given below:

Manufacturer's Type of abrasive Grain size -Grade Structure Type of bonding Manufacturer's

internal

code ( nature of abrasive ) carbide)

( in this case silicon

material internal

( in this case vitrified

)

code

C

46

S

V

G

5.1.2 Wheel diameter - Straight or cup wheels shall be used for grinding integral stems. Diameter of the wheel shall be suitably selected from IS : 2324-1971 ' Dimensions for grinding wheels other than internal grinding ( first revisron ) `. As vitrified bonded wheels are preferred for grinding of the integral steels, the diameter of the wheel selected shall be such that the peripheral speed of the wheel does not exceed 33 mjs [see IS : 1991-l 973 Safety code for grinding wheels ( first revision )].

2

IS : 8486 - I977

P

7 1
!

I

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.

Striking surface Shank Collar Rod Flushing hole Carbide insert Cutting edge Wing Bit

81 Bit thickness 13s Insert width 133 Width of cutting edge D Bit diameter H Insert height L Effective drill-steel length L1 Shank length R Cutting edge radius Q Clearance angle p Cutting edge angle

I

FIG.

1

FIG. 3

FIG.

4

IS : 8486

- 1977

FIG.

5

FIG.

6

-I-f FIG. 1

0.5

mm

FIG. 8

FIG. 9

FIG. 10

FIG. It

IS : 8486 - I 977 The bit shall be ground in such a way that a sharp edge is obtained along ( see 4.1.1 ). The graph ( see Fig. 12 ) shows that if a bit is ground down 0.5 mm or 1 mm too much on each side on the front at each regrind, its useful life is reduced to This emphasizes the need for correct amount 56 percent and 39 percent respectively of the normal life.
about three-fifths of the bit diameter of grinding.

5.2

Amount of Grinding -

*

0

o-5 UNNECESSARY FIG. 12 GRINDING

1.0 mm

6.

Precautions

for Proper Maintenance

i; iii]

e)

f) 9)

h) j) k)
m) 9
P) q)

Plenty of water shall be used during grinding. Sudden cooling of the inserts shall be avoided, The wheel shall rotate so that it grinds from the tungsten carbide to the steel. The drill rods shall be adequately supported during the grinding operations. The grinder shall be firmly fixed and shall be fitted with effective wheel guards. Safety glasses shall be worn while grinding. Before starting to grind, the wheel shall be test run and checked for soundness. In hand grinding, proper grinding pressure shall be used to avoid over-heating of the carbide insert. The number of grindings and the grinding time shall continuously be checked to ensure that the proper quality of wheels are used. Whenever a new grinding wheel is required, information as required by IS : 1249-1972 `Recommendations for selection of grinding wheels ( firsf revision ) ' shall be given to the manufacturer. The mechanical grinder shall be kept properly maintained and all the safety requirements according to IS : 1991-1973 shall be complied with. The stems shall be carefullv handled during transit and storage and shall not be thrown carelessly. So, the wearing Worn chucks and other parts of the rock drill cause great damage to the stems. parts of the rock drill shall be checked often and replaced with genuine parts. Proper drilling technique shall be used. There shall be sufficient flushing air or water during drilling.

EXPLANATORY
While preparing this standard Grinding considerable assistance

NOTE
has been derived from the following:

,

SRINIVASAN(~),

of drill steels.

Indian Air Comments:
5

7, 3; 1974; 7-11.

Printed

at

Delhi

Printers,

New

Delhi.

India

