**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 8629-1 to 3 (1977) : Code of Practice for Protection of 
Iron and Steel Structures from Atmospheric Corrosion [MTD 
24: Corrosion Protection] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : S020 ( Parts I to III ) - 1977 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PROTECTION OF 

IRON AND STBEL STRUCTURES FROM 

ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION 

(Second Reprint FEBRUARY 1984) 



UDC 624*0 14' 2: 620*197 




• Copyright 1978 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAPAR MARQ 

NBW DELHI |1«KB 

Gr 10 April 1978 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 MARCH 1989 

TO 

IS : 8629 ( Parts 1 to 3 ) - 1977 CODE OF PRACTICE 

FOR PROTECTION OF IRON AND STEEL 

STRUCTURES FROM ATMOSPHERIC 

CORROSION 

( Page IS, clause 6.2.2.4, line 8 ) — Substitute '90 to 300 ftn' for 
'90 (0 140 /im". 

( Pace 37, clause 7.4, line 7 ) — Substitute '90 to 300 ^i' Jor - 90 to 
140 /im'. 



i smoc :<») 



Pnnicd .i( Fnnlwell Printers, Delhi. India 



IS t 8629 ( Parts 1 1« III ) - 1977 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PROTECTION OF 

IRON AND STEEL STRUCTURES FROM 

ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION 

Corrosion Protection Sectional Committee, SMDC 29 

Chairman Representing 

Shri C. P. De Naval Chemical & Metallurgical Laboratory, 

Bombay 

Members 

Shri H. R. Bapu Seetharam Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri P. S. K. Prasad ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. S. Bhaduri National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri B. C. Biswas ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Bhattacharyva The Alkali & Chemical Corporation of India 

Limited, Calcutta 
Shri V. R. Krishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. D. Bhuptani Indian Tube Co Limited, Jamshedpur 

Shri B. N. Das Tube Products of India, Avadi, Madras 

Shri H. R. Thilkan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. M. G hosh Indian Paint Association, Calcutta 

Shri A. D. Gupta The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd, Sindri 

Shri A. N. Sindiii ( Alternate ) 
Joint Director Standards Ministry of Railways 
(Carriage ), RDSO, Lucknow 
Chemist & Metallurgist-I 
RDSO, Lucknow ( Alternate-l ) 
Joint Director ( Chemicals ) Ministry of Railways 
RDSO, Lucknow 

Chemist & Metallurgist-I I, 
RDSO, Lucknow ( Alternate-ll ) 
jr A. K. Laiiiri Engineers India Ltd, Now Delhi 

Shri G. G. Mathur National Buildings Organisation, New Delhi 

Shri S. H. Balchandani ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Misiira Bharat Heavy Klcctricals Ltd, Bhopal 

Shri A. K. Basu ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. P. Mukherjee National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR), 

Jamshedpur 
Dr Inder Singh ( Alternate) 
Shri R. N. Mukherjee Bokaro Sterl Ltd, Bokaro Steel City 



Shri K. Annaiah ( Alternate ) 



( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1978 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 8629 ( Parts I to III). 1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri R. P. Nagar Tata Consulting Engineers, Bombay 

Shri L. Pugazhenthy Indian Lead/Zinc Information Centre, New Delhi 

Dr M. N. Parthasarathi ( Alternate) 
Dr K. S. Rajaoopalan Central Electro-chemical Research Institute ( CSIR ), 

Karaikudi 

Dr N. Subramanyan ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Ramajayam Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri M. S. Nanjunda Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri G. Ramamurthy Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co Ltd, Jamshedpux 

Dr N. P. Rao Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri J. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Represent An ve Oil & Natural Gas Commission, Dehra Dun 

Representative Ashok Chemicals, Bombay 

Shri M. B. Satyanarayana Addisons Paints & Chemicals Ltd, Madras 

Dr R. Siva Kumar Pyrene — Rai Metal Treatments Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. Balakrishnan ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y. C. Subhamanya Directorate General of Ordnance Factories 

( Ministry of Defence ), Calcutta 
Shri S. N. Wazir Hindustan Steel Limited, Ranchi 

Shri B. N. Sen ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. R. Rama Rao, Director General, ISI (Ex-ojfficio Member) 



Director ( Struc & Met ) 



Secretary 

Shri B. Mukherji 

Deputy Director ( Metals ), ISI 



IS : 8629 ( Parts I to III ) - 1977 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PROTECTION OF 

IRON AND STEEL STRUCTURES FROM 

ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 September 1977, alter the draft finalized by the Corrosion Pro- 
tection Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and 
Metals Division Council. 

0.2 Tins standard has been prepared to assist engineers, architects, 
builders and others who are responsible for the choice or application of 
measures to protect iron and steel structures from atmospheric corrosion. 
The treatments suggested in this code represent the minimum acceptable 
standard of good practice for important structures. However, there may 
be some other usages for which lower standards of protection arc acceptable 
or arc necessary for reducing the initial cost even though higher mainte- 
nance cost may ensue. The recommendations made in this code are not 
intended to discourage the use of other improved or newly developed 
methods and materials which may prove to be satisfactory in service. 

0.3 An appreciation of the scientific principles of corrosion and its 
prevention is essential for efficient use of modern protective schemes. 
This standard, therefore, gives an outline of the basic principles of corro- 
sion and its prevention. It also includes data on the relative corrosivities at 
different places in India, a knowledge of which is essential in selecting a 
suitable protective scheme. 

0.4 In the preparation of this standard, assistance has been derived from 
the following publications: 

CP 2008:1966 Protection of iron and steel structures from corrosion. 

British Standards Institution. 
Rao (KNP) and Lahiri (AK), Ed. Corrosion Map of India, 

Corrosion Advisory Bureau, Council of Scientific and Industrial 

Research, Jamshcdpur. 



IS:8629(PartI)-1977 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PROTECTION OF 

IRON AND STEEL STRUCTURES FROM 

ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION 

PART I GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CORROSION AND 
ITS PREVENTION 

1. SCOPE 

1*1 This standard ( Part I ) covers tli<: general principles of corrosion and 
its prevention. It also includes data on the relative corrositivitics at 
different places in India. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in IS : 3531- 
1960* and IS : 1303-19031 shall apply. 

3. MECHANISM OF CORROSION 

3.1 Iron and steel corrode* in presence of moisture. The nature of this 
corrosion is electrochemical. At certain spots, known as 'anodic points^ 
iron enters che electrolyte as 'ions', this entry being called the 'anodic 
reaction*. The- anodic points may he breaks in the millscale or An oxide 
film on the metal, or perhaps, plat es where because of heterogeneities in 
the crystal structure the atoms require less energy to break away than 
elsewhere. However, since the passage of ions into the electrolyte leaves 
electrons behind, it may continue only if elsewhere a 'tathodic reaction* 
has been established to use up cU\ trons. A corrosion cell is thus set up. 
The cathodic reaction may be the reduction of oxygen to hydroxylton, 
although in acidic electrolytes, it may be liberation of hydrogen gas. 

3.1.1 The flow of current in the corrosion cell thus formed results in 
attack on the metal at the anode, but the cathode is not corroded. 

4. ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION 

4.1 Atmospheric corrosion may be classified into three categories, namely: 

a) dry oxidation or dry atmospheric corrosion, 

b) damp atmospheric corrosion, and 

c) wet atmospheric corrosion. 

•Glossary of terms relating to protection of metals, 
f Glossary of terms relating to paints ( revised). 



ISs8629(PartI)-1977 

4.1.1 In dry oxidation all metals develop oxide films and remain free 
from corrosion. Certain metals for example copper, silver, brass etc, are 
however, tarnished if sulphur compounds arc present in the atmosphere. 

4.1.2 In case of damp atmospheric corrosion the atmosphere contains 
large amounts of water vapour and the corrosion has a close resemblance 
to immersed condition. Water vapour is present in concentrations above 
a certain minimum value ( the 'critical humidity' see 5.4 ), and gaseous 
and solid polluants are also present in traces. 

4.1.3 In wet atmospheric corrosion, the metal surface arc wetted by 
rain and dew. In these conditions, although approaching those of 
immersed conditions, corrosion is much more aggravated due to alternate 
wetting and drying and better replenishment of oxygen than under 
immersed condition, where the limited amounts of dissolved oxygen is not 
so easily replenished. 

5. FACTORS GOVERNING THE CORROSION RATE 

5.1 The severity of corrosion is controlled by a number of determining 
factors, such as condensation, moisture, atmosphtric pollution ( both 
industrial and marine ), deposition of solid particles and surface condition 
of metals. 

5.2 Effect of Condensation and Moisture — At atmospheric tempera- 
tures, the metals used in engineering are generally resistant to direct 
oxidation and suffer rapid attack only when electrochemical action takes 
place. Usually an electrolyte is provided by a film or pocket of condensed 
moisture on metal surface or by wetting due to exposure to rain. It may 
also be provided by absorption of moisture from the atmosphere by 
hygroscopic substances like dust or other contaminants deposited on metal 
surface. Products of corrosion, such as rust are themselves hygroscopic. 
Although pure water is only a weak electrolyte, natural waters may be 
quite strong electrolytes. In industrial areas, the atmosphere is polluted 
with substances, such as sulphurous products of combustion which render 
atmospheric water much more corrosive. Near the sea and even at 
considerable distances inland, the atmosphere also contains chlorides, which 
again increases the corrosivencss of atmospheric water. 

5.3 On exposure to air, almost all metals become covered with a surface film 
of oxide. Such films are very thin. The films, which are continuous and 
firmly adherent and occupy substantially the same volume as the metal 
from which they are formed, are protective. In dry air, the metal remains 
uncorroded. However, where the metal is exposed to damp atmosphere, 
the metal surface is liable to acquire a film of condensed natural water, so 
that the immediate environment is, instead of dry air, an electrolyte 
solution. Under such conditions a thin air-formed film of oxide generally 



IS:8629(PartI)-1977 

affords little protection. Although it may be impervious to molecular 
oxygen, it is usually incapable of preventing access of ions to the metal. 

5.4 Critical Humidity — The critical humidity represent the relative 
humidity above which corrosion of metal becomes substantial. Below 
critical humidity, there is practically no corrosion although air-formed 
oxide film grows which causes some increase in mass of specimens. The 
critical value of relative humidity above which corrosion of iron becomes 
rapid is about 70 percent. 

5.4.1 In presence of polluants, the value of critical humidity is generally 
reduced. For example, in the presence of traces of sulphur dioxide, the 
critical humidity of iron is 50 percent relative humidity. Above this value, 
there is pronounced increase in the rate of attack and the specimen becomes 
rapidly covered with rust. Similarly in the presence of sodium chloride 
nuclei on its surface, the critical humidity of iron is reduced to 45 percent 
relative humidity. 

5.5 Atmospheric Pollution — Corrosion is greatly stimulated when the 
air contains sulphur dioxide and corrosive salts, such as certain sulphates 
and chlorides. The main sources oi^ those types of atmospheric pollution 
arc the combustion of coal and other fuels, exhaust gases of automobile, 
and marine spray. The amount of sulphur in coal varies, about 11*5 
percent being fairly average. The normal sulphur dioxide content in air 
varies between 10~ 5 to 10~* percent. Table 1 gives the data of salinity and 
sulphur dioxide pollution at various sites in India. Sulphur dioxide 
content varies between negligible to 1 mg of SO,/dm 2 /day. Sulphur 
dioxide contamination varies with season, being higher in winter due to 
higher fuel consumption. 

5.5.1 The action of electrolytes on atmospheric corrosion is of considera- 
ble importance in dust and salt laden atmosphere of industrial and marine 
sites. In marine atmospheres the corrodant is sea salt, which may be 
dispersed cither as liquid aerosols or dry particles. The presence of elec- 
trolytes in the air is responsible for high rates of corrosion near the sea 
where metals are directly exposed to sea surface or wind from the sea. 
Table 2 shows corrosion rates at some of the marine sites in India and the 
effects of distance from the sea. 

5.6 Effect of Different Climates — The corrosion rate is profoundly 
effected by the microclimate and to a lesser degree by the mass, size and 
shape of the metal, and by angle of exposure.' For mild steel specimens 
exposed at an angle of 45°, the corrosion suffered in one month's exposure 
and one year's exposure varies widely with the climates ( see Table 3). 

5.7 Effect of Location of Exposure — Corrosion rates of a metal also 
varies with the location where the structures are erected. The proximity 
to source of pollution also plays a vital role. 



IS: 8629 (Part I). 1977 



TABLE 1 DATA OF ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION DUE TO 
S0 2 AND CHLORIDES 

(Clause 5.5) 

Exposure Site Mean Value op Average Mean Value of Average 

Sulphur Dioxide Salinity ( mg. of NaCl/ 

Pollution ( mg of SOj/ dm 2 / day ) 
dm*/day ) 

(1) (2) (3) 

Ahmadabad 0*42 0*82 

Baiasorc — 2*44 

Bhavnagar — 14-84 

Bombay ( NCML ) 037 022 

Calcutta-Rishra 0*31 01 6 

Tiljala 0*18 0-16 

Cambay 016 2*12 

Cochin 0091 0*60 

Digha — 0-83 

Goa 0*63 — 

Gulmarg — — 

Hyderabad 0*27 — 

Jamshcdpur 0*99 — 

Jodhpur — — 

Kanpur 0*1925 — 

Kandla 0-3575 2728 

Patna 00858 0*67 

Rajkot 110 — 

Tezpur 0040 — 

Chittaranjan 1*18 — 



TABLE 2 CORROSION RATE AT MARINE SITES IN INDIA AT 
DIFFERENT DISTANCES FROM SEA 





( Clause 5.5 


i.l) 








Station 


Distance in m 
From the Sea- 


Corrosion Rate in mm 
Mild Steel 


/Year for 






r— 


Max 




■■■"■*« 
Min 


(J) 


(2) 




(3) 




.(4) 


Digha 


33 

330 

2 200 




1-35 
0*54 
0*28 




006 

0056 

0023 


Baiasorc 


22 
45 




0*63 
025 




0024 
0009 


Mandapam Camp 


45 
405 




069 
0-147 




0-287 
0088 


Madras 


30 
840 




0-34 
0-26 




013 
007 



IS:8629(PartI)-1977 



TABLE 3 ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION RATES OF MILD 
STEEL AT VARIOUS SITES 

( Monthly rate for each month reported as mm month 
and yearly rate as mm/year ) 







( c /fft/j^ 


5 3; 






Months 


K*Nt»l*R 


JODVIPUR 


c 

( 


'ak ulia 

IV CiALA ) 


Tl7PLR 


BAl ASORE 


Janu ir/ 


o nor, 7 


000 2 




oon 


003 8 


0015 


1 f brui! y 


001 > 


o 000 3 




023 


" 001 5 


002 8 


Maich 


001 "i 


000 H 




02O 


001 2 


026 


\prtl 


000 2 


000 r ) 




008 


002 1 


035 


May 


o 'H»o 8 


001 j 




ooio 


002 1 


00126 


Junr 


001 / 


003 3 




01 


0*003 -> 


0-020 3 


Julv 


o ooi 2 


n (ioi <* 




012 


003 3 


007 


Aut'usi 


o mjW 


U 002 1 




i)18 


001- 1 


013 


Si ptf ml)' » 


im,i! ' 


0j0 7 




017 


o not * 


00 > 2 


OlIoImi 


00J J' 


000 2 




( 010 


UH2 


000 8 


No\ t m1)« r 


uOt > 


uoo 2 




010 


002 


001 3 


D» t 1 mix. i 


o 00/ : 


000 ' 




o .i!3 


00") 2 


001 8 



Vt nl> 031 o noo oo 8 030 

3.8 Effect of Orientation of Exposure The oi luntatiou of metal 
specimens intlm IK ( s tile corrosion } a*"< s due to its effe< t on tlie amount ol 
moistuie or atinospluiii contaminants thai c.xn rea< t wth* the suifue. 
1 he relative cmumou of spc< mil ih l,u u^ diffiient directions Lui^elv 
depends oa tlu* extent t'> whi< h the pn vailing wind may cany the pollu- 
tion horn thv ir s )iin s. 1 he drying « ff« t t in i\ also be diffi lent at cording 
to the direi rions. However, m a audy a« an industrial site with low 
sulphur pollu'ion (Kmpur), It was observed that there \sas very little 
difference m the yeailv (onosion iate> of pane Is lacim* any direction 
Table 4 shows the variation on corrosion rat»»s of mild st el panel* facing 
t^ioundwaid and skywaid. 

5.9 Effect of Metal Composition — The type and chemical composition 
of ferrous metals have a marked influence on their lesistante to atmos- 
pheric corrosion. 

5.9.1 M lid Steel — Mild steels of the sune composition but manufactured 
by different processes corrode at substantially the same rate. Increasing 
carbon content up to a limit of 23 p< i«-ent has little eflW t. Ingot iion, 
which is really a steel with the lowest prat tu able carbon content, resist* 
corrosion no better than ordinal v mild steel. 



18x8629 (Part I). 1977 



TABLE 4 EFFECT OF ORIENTATION OF MILD STEEL SPECIMENS ON 
OUTDOOR CORROSION AT KANPUR 

(Clause 5.8) 



Months 




Orientation of 
Exposed Surface 


Corrosion Rate 
East South 


( mg/dm f /MoNTH ) 

,A. 




North 


West 


(») 




(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


December 


1961 


Skyward 
Ground ward 


178 

202 


199 
133 


234 
216 


208 
161 


January 


1962 


Skyward 
Groundward 


259 
184 


275 
135 


272 
205 


340 
239 


February 


1962 


Skyward 
Groundward 


128 
124 


84 
110 


134 
107 


108 
126 


March 


1962 


Skyward 
Groundward 


74 

50 


68 
53 


56 
72 


83 
59 


April 


1962 


Skyward 
Groundward 


11 
4 


19 
3 


3 
2 


6 
2 


May 


1962 


Skyward 
Groundward 


12 
3 


12 
1 


6 


19 

1 


June 


1962 


Skyward 
Groundward 


147 
184 


133 
144 


133 
137 


148 
136 


August 


1962 


Skyward 
Groundward 


105 
130 


125 


128 
141 


112 
150 


October 


1962 


Skyward 
Groundward 


220 
225 


206 
140 


334 

229 


318 
225 



5.9.1 .1 Small amounts of certain alloying elements, notably copper, 
chromium and nickel, increase the resistance of iron or steel to corrosion 
outdoors. The effect of the copper content is particularly marked. As is 
shown in Fig, 1, there is at first a progressive decrease in corrosion with 
increasing copper content but beyond a certain limit, which depends on 
the sulphur content of the steel, further additions cause little* additional 
improvement. A copper content of 0'20-0'35 percent for the copper 
bearing quality of steel is specified in IS : 226-1975*, 

5.9.2 Low- Alloy Steel — Low-alloy steels contain deliberate but 
relatively small- additions of alloying elements. Some of them, for 
example, a steel with 1 percent chromium, 0*6 percent copper and 
relatively high phosphorus and silicon contents, corrodes in the open 
atmosphere at one-third or less of the rate for ordinary mild steel. They 
are not, however, immune to corrosion, and are better described as 
'•low-rusting*. 

• Specification for structural steel standard quality (first revision ). 

10 



IS : 8629 ( Part I ) • 1977 



CM 



.2 
O 

in 
o 
cc 
or 
O 





A. HIGH- SULPHUR STEELS, 5 0-057. 
B. LOW SULPHUR STEELS. S 003 7. 










k 










vA 

































0-1 0-2 

COPPER CONTENT OF STEEL IN PERCENT 



0-3 



Fio. 1 



Effect of Copper Content on the Corrosion of Mild 
Steel Outdoors 



5.9.2.1 The improved corrosion resistance of copper and low-alloy 
steels outdoors is associated with the formation of a more compact and 
less permeable surface layer of rust. Natural weathering seems to favour 
this because these steels show little or no advantage when exposed indoors 
or when sheltered from rain. 

5.9.2.2 Corrosion is most rapid during the first year or so, and the 
beneficial effects of low-alloy additions are of greater practical value in the 
more corrosive atmosphere. 

5.9.3 Cast Iron — Cast iron has good resistance to atmospheric corrosion 
and this is further enhanced if the casting skin on the iron is still intact. 
The corrosion resistance of nodular graphite cast iron h at least as good 
as that offtake graphite cast iron and there is evidence that it tends to be 
rather more resistant than the latter. 

5.9.4 Stainless Steel — Stainless steels contain high percentages of 
chromium and often of other alloying elements. The most resistant, for 
example, a steel containing 18 percent chromium, 10 percent nickel and 
2 percent molybdenum, are virtually incorrodible in normal atmospheres. 
This is due to the presence on their surface of a thin protective oxide film 
which reforms and heals itself spontaneously i^ the surface is damaged. 
Stainless steels are liable to lose their corrosion resistance in non-oxidizing 
environments, which cannot repair the oxide film. 



11 



IS: 8629 (Part I). 1977 

5.10 Surface Condition 

5.10.1 Mill Scale — Structural steel plates and sections produced by 
hot-rolling are covered with a thin blue-black or reddish-blue layer of 
iron oxides. The thickness and adhesion of the mill scale vary for 
different types and sizes of section and with the rolling conditions. 
Thicknesses of 25 to 50 jxm are common on mild steel plate, but oxide 
scales up to 0*5 mm thick may result from forging or other heat treatment, 
or when a plate is heated for bending. Mill scale seldom adheres 
completely and permanently. It generally cracks and flakes appreciably 
while the steel is cooling down after rolling end is liable to spall from the 
metal during fabrication and subsequent exposure, even after protection 
by paint. Moreover, because its potential in dilute aqueous solutions is 
a few tenths of a volt nobler than that of bare steel, its presence on an 
immersed steel surface gives rise to a corrosion cell in which the steel is 
attacked wherever the mill scale has been broken. 

5.10.2 Casting Skin — The casting skin on cast iron results from the 
reaction of the silliceous mould lining with the hot metal. It is more 
adherent than mill scale and is often protective. Rolled steel and cast 
steel of the same composition corrode at much the same rates when the 
mill scale or casting skin has been removed. 

5.11 Corrosion Products 

5.11.1 General — Corrosion produces a visible layer of rust on all 
ferrous metals other than the most resistant stainless steels. Sometimes 
rust stimulates corrosion by holding moisture in contact with the steel, but 
more generally its effect is to retard corrosion. The composition of the 
steel affects the composition and properties of the rust layer and consequ- 
ently, the resistance of the metal to corrosion over a long period. The 
resulting differences between the corrosion rates of various types of iron 
and steel are more marked in the open air than when the metals are 
buried in soil or immersed in water, possibly because the conditions of 
outdoor exposure promote compaction of the surface rust. 

5.11.2 Cast Iron — When cast iron corrodes, it docs so in a way pecu- 
liar to this material. Grey cast irons normally contain elements other 
than iron to the extent of about 8 percent, including carbon in the form 
of graphite, phosphorus in the form of iron phosphide and silicon. The 
graphite and iron phosphide are virtually unaffected by most corrosion 
processes they are often found remaining ' in-situ ' after the iron has 
been removed by corrosion. The silicon also remains, but it is usually 
oxidized to silica or silicates, which help to bind the other constituents. 
As a result, the corrosion process leaves behind a non-metallic graphitic 
corrosion residue'. This largely retains the appearance and shape of the 
original iron, although, of course, it is much weaker mechanically. 

12 



IS : 8629 ( Part I ) - 1977 
6. METHODS OF CORROSION PREVENTION 

6.0 The modifications in the composition of the metals provide only a 
partial solution to the problem of reducing the corrosion of iron and steel 
structures. Preventive measures are generally needed which fall into 
three main groups namely: 

a) treatment of the environment, 

b) protective coatings, and 

c) cathodic protection. 

6.1 Treatment of the Environment — Corrosion prevention by 
treatment of the atmosphere is necessarily limited to enclosed spaces. 
Here the condensation of moisture on the metal surface, caused either by 
rapid changes in temperature or by carrying on wet processes within a 
building, often lead to severe corrosion. Remedial measures include 
lagging the steel, space heating and the installation of air conditioning 
plants to reduce the relative humidity and the atmospheric pollution. 
To prevent rusting, the relative humidity should preferably be reduced to 
50 percent and should never be allowed to rise above 70 percent. 
Desiccauts may be used for this purpose in enclosed spaces, where air 
changes are not frequent. Volatile corrosion inhibitors, which create a 
thin film on the metal, may also be used. 

6.2 Protective Coatings — The essentials of a protective scheme are 
proper surface preparation prior to coating coupled with impermeability 
and adequate thickness of the coating itself. 

6.2.1 Metal Coalings — Steel may be protected from corrosion by 
coating it with a more resistant non-ferrous metal. Zinc and aluminium 
are most commonly used for coating steel plates and sections. Both these 
metals resist corrosion in natural environments much better than iron, 
except that in humid and enclosed atmospheres for example inside: steam 
railway tunnels zinc corrodes as fast as steel. 

6.2.1.1 Zinc and aluminium coatings have the further advantages 
that they resist abrasion better than paint, and that, being anodic to iron, 
they protect the steel wt places where the coating is imperfect or becomes 
damaged. As an exception to this in some circumstances potential 
difference, between zinc and iron in water is reversed at high temperatures. 
Preferential corrosion of the iron then occurs with heavy pitting. 

6.2.1.2 Coatings of zinc or aluminium, at least 75 urn thick, may 
provides sufficient protection alone in rural districts. In more corrosive 
environments the coating should be increased in thickness to 150 \xn\ or 
painted. 

6.2.1.3 The life of bare coating of both metals are roughly pro- 
portional to the average coating mass per unit area. Zinc may be 

13 



ISt8629(PartI)-1977 

applied by several methods but the nature of the process has much less 
effect on coating itself. Aluminium coatings are generally applied by 
spraying or hot-dipping ( see IS : 6586-1972* or IS : 8508-1977t )- 

6.2.2 Paint Coating System 

6.2.2.1 Paints — A paint consists essentially of a finely divided solid 
constituent, the pigment, dispersed or suspended in a liquid constituent; 
the vehicle, which when spread out thinly changes in time to an 
adherent film. For most purposes, it is essential that this drying of the 
paint should occur within a few hours. For the majority of paints one or 
more of the following processes are involved. 

a) Evaporation of a solvent from the vehicle, leaving behind a film 
of solid material. This applies, for example, to coatings simply 
of coal tar pitch or bitumen in an organic solvent. 

b) Conversion of constituents of the vehicle, for example, linseed oil 
to the solid state by chemical changes, involving mainly oxidation 
by atmospheric oxygen. Paints often contain driers to hasten 
these changes. This applies mainly to air drying paints. 

c) Polymerization, condensation, or other reaction between the 
components of the vehicle brought about by putting a curing 
agent in the paint or by stoving. 

Many paints in common use depend particularly for their drying on 
the second process, but the nature of solvent present is also important. If 
the solvent evaporates too slowly, as may occur when painting outdoors in 
cold climate, drying will be retarded and the paint film may suffer serious 
damage whilst it is exposed to the weather in an imperfectly hardened 
condition. Too rapid evapoiation may also lead to bad results for 
example it may cause condensation on painted surface. 

6.2.2 «2 Paint vehicles — There arc three types of paint vehicles as 
follows: 

a) Oil-based vehicles, which consist mainly of vegetable drying oils, 
such as linseed oil, tung oil and dehydrated castor oil, and olco- 
resinous vehicles, which are made by incorporating resins into 
drying oils. Both these types dry mainly by oxidation. 

b) Alkyd-resin vehicles, which are virtually a special case of the 
previous type. Vehicles based on drying-oil-modified alkyd 
resins are particularly useful for the manufacture of weather- 
resistant finishing paints. These dry mainly by oxidation 
polymerization. 



•Recommended practice for metal spraying for protection of iron and steel, 
| Recommended practice for hot-dip aluminizing of iron and steel, 

14 



IS : 8629 ( Part I ) - 1977 

c) Chemical-resistant vehicles, which are used for paints that have 
to withstand very severe conditions, such as exposure to chemical 
fumes or immersion in sea-water. In the latter case good 
resistance to saponification is needed, because alkali is produced 
at the cathodes of any corrosion cells that may develop. This 
property is even more essenl ; al where paint is used in conjunction 
with cathodic protection, which renders the protected steel 
surface strongly alkaline. Epoxide resin, coal tar-epoxide. 
polyurethane, chlorinated rubber, isomerized rubber and vinyl 
resin, are some of the vehicles in this category. These dry by a 
combination of evaporation and polymerization depending on the 
type of vehicle used. 

6.2*2.3 Pigment-binder ratio — The choice of pigments for protective 
paints is discussed in 6.2.2.7. In general, for a given paint there is an 
optimum value of the ratio of pigment to binder at which the dry film has 
its best physical properties and maximum protective value. 

Although practical considerations, for example, the need for easy 
brushing, may necessitate the use of a lower pigment /binder ratio, marked 
deviations from the critical ratio will lessen the protective value of the 
paint. 

6.2.2.4 Paint systems — The protective power of a paint film increases 
with its thickness, and there is a limit below which protection is not 
adequate. Thi9 limit naturally varies with the paint, the roughness of the 
steel surface, and the severity of the corrosive conditions. For protection 
against outdoor exposure four coats of ordinary air-drying paints are gene- 
rally necessary. If the types recommended in this code are used, the 
average total dry paint film thickness of the complece paint system lies 
between about 90 and 140 /xm ( excluding filler and putti ) according to 
the nature of the individual paints. 

6*2.2.5 Discretion is needed in defining film thickness solely in terms 
of the average value, because marked differences, up to 100 percent, occur 
from paint to paint in the thicknesses applied by a skilled painter, and 
equally great differences occur as between one skilled painter and another. 

6.2.2.6 Although thicknesses of 125 |xm or more may be achieved in a 
single coat with some types of paint, for example, high-build coal tar pitch 
or bitumen paints, most current paint systems consist of several coats, in 
which different formulations are used for the priming coats and the finish- 
ing coats. Multi-coat work helps to reduce the porosity of the paint film 
and to eliminate the risk of holidays and discontinuities. But it has the 
disadvantage of introducing internal contact surfaces between successive 
coats, where adhesion troubles may occur due to pollution during painting; 
normally, however, this is a relatively infrequent cause of failure. 

15 



IS: 8629 (Part I). 1977 

6.2.2.7 Any multi-coat paint system should be studied as a whole. 
Each coat should be suitable for its function and be compatible with the 
other coats. Generally, a good bond results if the properties of successive 
coats are such, and the intervals between their application are so timed, 
that the wet upper coat exerts a slight solvent action on the surface of the 
lower one; this keys the whole paint system together. 

a) Priming paints — The properties of the priming paint are most 
important. It should 'wet* the surface readily and provide a firm and 
adherent foundation for later coats. In addition, since paint films arc not 
completely impermeable to corrosive agents, priming paints should contain 
inhibitive pigment. 

The most common inhibitive pigments are red lead, calcium 
plumbate, zinc chromate, metallic lead and zinc dust. 

Red lead and calcium plumbate paints are normally made with oil- 
based vehicles, which 'wet* steel well. More complex oleo-rcsinous vehicles, 
are often used for metallic lead and zinc chrome paints. Zinc rich paints 
are generally bound with chlorinated rubber, isomerized rubber, polys- 
tyrene, or epoxide resin vehicles; there is also a type in an inorganic vehicle. 

A zinc-rich epoxide resin paint makes a useful prcfabrication primer. 

b) Finishing Paints — The undercoats and finishing paint serve to 
protect the primer and enable it to retain its inhibiting effect on the metal. 
Some undercoats also act as a link between incompatible priming and 
finishing coats. 

Finishing coats should be highly impermeable to moisture and gases 
and show good resistance to the environment. 

Inhibitive pigments are not necessary in finishing paints, and inert 
pigments are generally more serviceable. Among these are lamellar 
pigments, such as leafing aluminium, micaceous iron oxide and silica 
graphite, which orient themselves in such a way as to reduce the perme- 
ability of the film and to retard its chemical degradation by sunlight. 
Other commonly used pigments arc red iron oxide, white lead and r utile 
titanium oxide. 

Note — Care should be taken against the use of oil or oil based paint on metal 
sprayed structure exposed to marine environments because of the likelihood of 
saponification of these materials. 

6.2.3 Other Protective Coatings — Various coatings besides non-ferrous 
materials and paints arc also used to protect iron and steel. These include 
hot-applied coal tar pitch and bitumeu, wrapping tapes, plastics, and 
cement and concrete coatings. 

Most of these coatings arc of the excluding or blanket type, that is, 
they protect the metal mainly or solely by keeping out the corrosive agent. 
The overriding consideratio ns of adequate thickness and proper adhesion 
to the steel base also apply. 

16 



IS : 8629 ( Part II ) - 1977 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PROTECTION OF 

IRON AND STEEL STRUCTURES FROM 

ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION 

PART II PRETREATMENT 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard (Part II) covers in detail the pretreatment to be 
provided to ferrous structures prior to application of protective schemes. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS: 3531-1960* and IS: 1303-1963t shall apply. 

3. GENERAL 

3.1 The finishing of iron and steel is one of the most important aspects of 
the finishing of the building materials. For efficient planning and 

^execution of painting work with ferrous metals, detailed data and 
information as given below should be taken into account: 

a) The condition of the metal surface and the presence of harmful 
materials on it ( scale, rust, moisture, grease, dirts, salts, etc ), 

b) Environment in which the paint coating will have to function, and 

c) Information on the nature of previous finish ( mrecssary for 
repainting during maintenance ). 

It is most important that any substrate, whether it has been painted 
previously or not, should be in a fit condition to receive paint. 

3.2 Surface Preparation and Pretreatment — Prctreatment and 
priming of ferrous metals under controlled conditions of the factory give* 
the best results and it is therefore advisable to adopt this method whenever 
possible. The object of such treatment is to preserve and protect the 
metal surface during transport, storage and erection and to minimize the 
'on site' preparation for final painting. Much will depend upon the time 
between the factory treatment and erection, the care with which the 
materials have been stored and handled during that period and the 
protective quality of treatment applied. 

Application of a suitable priming coat should follow pretreatment 
without delay. Subsequent coats of paint may be applied on the site. 

•Glossary of term* relating to protection of metals. 
fGlossary of terms relating to paints ( rtviud ). 

17 



IS t8629 (Part II) -1977 

4. FACTORY PRETREATMENT 

4.1 Removal of Oil, Grease, Dirt and Swarf — Generally, the 
application of any coating, lining material, adhesive or paint, requires as 
its first essential a perfectly clean surface, which is of very great importance 
while dealing with the painting of ferrous metals. Steel is normally 
supplied covered with oil and grease either as a protective layer to 
prevent corrosion or as a left-over from machining and handling. The 
customary procedure <>f applying a so-called 'shop coat' of paint after 
fabrication which consists of wiping the surface with oily cotton waste 
left-over from other operations, defeats the purpose of painting at the 
start. Any paint coat applied on greasy or oily steel surfaces will lack 
proper adhesion and will lead to the failure of the paint film. It is, 
therefore, essential prior to the application of any paint that even the 
minute tracers of grease and oil are removed. Grease removal shall be 
carried out either with solvent type or alkali type degrcasing agents. 
The most common type of degrcasing agents are dealt with in 4.1.1 
to 4.1.3. The material used is not so important as the final result which 
shall be a thoroughly clean surf ice without any oil, grease or alkali 
left* oven 

4.1.1 Solvent Cleaning — There are numerous proprietary brands of 
solvents, alkaline and emulsion cleaners available; where these are used the 
manufacturer's instructions should be followed. 

4.1.1.1 Petroleum solvent cleaning — These methods relate to the use of 
petroleum solvents (for example, mineral turpentine) for the removal of 
oil, grease, dirt and swarf from unit parts or simple assemblies having 
easily access!) >le surfaces. Petroleum solvents may also be applied to the 
' in-situ' cleaning of large units, assemblies or machinery which cannot be 
accommodated in decreasing equipment. Petroleum solvent should not be 
used for .us« mblics containing fabric, rubber, or other non-metallic 
materials, unless it is known that no harm will result. The procedure to 
be followed for petroleum solvent cleaning shall be as follows: 

a) Processes — The two main methods are given below. Details 
depend upon the quantity and characteristics of the parts or 
assemblies to be cleaned. 

i) Immersion — This method may be used for unit parts or assem- 
blies when contamination is light and when the highest 
degree of cleanliness is not essential; it is particularly suitable 
for hand cleaning in small tanks. The articles should be 
immersed in the solvent long enough to allow removal of the 
contaminants, and in no case for less than one minute. 
Agitation is desirable, and brushing or scrubbing will aid 
quick cleaning. 

18 



IS : 8629 ( Part II ) - 1977 

ii) Brushing or wiping — This method is intended for the removal 
of oil, grease and light contamination from bare metjJ areas 
of assemblies containing painted surfaces or non-metallic 
inserts that might be damaged by general application of 
solvent. It may also be used for the ' in- situ* cleaning of 
articles too large for immersion tanks or spray cleaning systems. 

b) Handling precautions — Articles should be placed on hooks or 
racks or in suitable containers that permit adequate draining. 
They should not be handled with bare hands after cleaning; clean 
gloves or similar protection should be used and handling kept to 
a minimum. 

c) Safety precautions — Petroleum solvents should be used at room 
temperature and suitable exhausts and fire extinguishers should 
be provided, as these solvents are flammable. Oil-resisting 
synthetic rubber gloves should be worn when handling articles 
during cleaning, to protect the articles from sweat residues and to 
avoid any possible effect of the solvent on the skin. Care should 
be taken to avoid breathing the petroleum solvent vapour. 

d) Limitations — Petroleum solvent cleaning suffers from the following 
drawbacks: 

i) Fire risk, 

ii) Brush or wipe or immersion methods being manual in opera- 
tion are slow and time consuming and therefore unsuitable 
on their own for continuous production lines, and 

iii) The degree of cleanliness achieved by such methods is not 
high and they are generally used for preliminary cleaning to 
supplement a proper degreasing operation. 

4.1.1.2 Trichloroethylene cleaning — This method relates to surface clean- 
ing with the trichloroethylene solvent. Trichloroethylene degreasing 
should not be used on assemblies containing fabric, rubber or other non- 
metallic materials unless it is known that no harm will result. Trichloro- 
ethylene should be of the stabilised quality and shall be periodically checked 
for acidity to prevent corrosion. Pcrchloroethylcnc may also be used. 
The procedure to be followed shall be as follows: 

a) Degreasing — The three main processes are described below. The 
precise details of the equipment and the method of operation for 
each process depends on the quantity and characteristics of the 
parts or assemblies to be cleaned; the plant manufacturers' 
recommendations should be followed. 

i) Vapour process — To remove simple films of oil and grease, 
articles may be subjected to the vapour process, in which the 

19 



IS 1 0629 (Part II) -1977 

parts are exposed in a bath of solvent vapour; the vapour 
condenses on the cold surface of the articles and the condensate 
dissolves the oil and grease, taking it away to the base of the 
tank. To ensure the maximum condensation the temperature of 
the articles should be as near to room temperature as possible 
at the time of immersion; they should be passed through or 
suspended in the solvent vapour until no further condensation 
occurs, after which no further degreasing will take place. 
Articles with a very heavy film of grease may need a second 
exposure after cooling. 

ii) Liquid process — Loosely bound contamination ( too much for 
vapour treatment) such as polishing compound, swarf and 
road dirt may be removed by immersing the parts in 
vigorously boiling trichloroethylcne. 

iii) Jetting process — ■ Articles with obstinate dirt deposits that can- 
not be removed by boiling trichloroethylcne may require 
jetting at high pressure with the hot solvent. The jetting 
should be carried out only in equipment, specially designed 
for the purpose. 

b) Handling precautions — During processing, the articles should be 
placed on hooks or racks or in a suitable container. They should 
be so arranged that there is adequate opportunity for the solvent 
to drain from holes, crevices, pockets and other irregularities. 
Parts or assemblies that would trap solvent should be rotated or 
tilted during the degreasing process to prevent drag-out of 
trichloroethylenc. Handling may be reduced by using mechanical 
and conveyor type degreasing plants which automatically rotate 
or tilt the articles. After cleaning, articles should not be handled 
with bare hands; clean gloves or similar protection should be 
used. 

c) Safety precautions — Trichloroethylcne is a toxic substance, care 
should be taken to avoid breathing the vapour near degreasing 
equipment. 

4.1 .2 Alkaline Cleaning — Alkaline solutions are good degreasing agents 
but as they are usually injurious to the skin, they should not be used except 
in process tanks. The exception is trisodium phosphate, a very mild alkali 
which is a good cleaning medium. There are three methods of alkaline 
cleaning as described below: 

a) Immersion process — For removing simple films of oil and grease 
from articles having easily accessible surfaces, the alkaline 
immersion process may generally be used. The articles should be 
immersed in hot solutions near boiling temperature of suitable 
alkaline mixtures for 1 to 10 minutes depending upon the degree 

20 



IS:8629 (Part II). 1977 

of contamination. The cleaning action may be assisted by 
agitating the solution and by low pressure sprays, particularly if 
small amounts of loosely bound dirt are present. 

b) Eleclro-cleaning Process — This method is suitable for articles that 
cannot be cleaned by simple immersion method and is quicker 
and more effective in removing adhering solids. The steel tank 
containing the electrolyte or mild steel in a suitable form shall be 
used as one electrode. The component to be degreased shall be 
the other electrode. Graphite may be used as an alternative anode 
material. The treatment may be done over a range of tempera- 
tures extending from room temperature to near boiling 
temperature. Higher temperature facilitates quicker cleaning. 
For detailed procedure of carrying out the electro-cleaning process 
reference may be made to IS : 6005-1970*. 
c) Jet Cleaning Process — For unit parts or simple assemblies with 
oil and obstinate dirt deposit alkaline jet cleaning may be used. 
Article? should be placed in suitable apparatus and subjected to jet 
of hot alkaline solution at high pressure. The conveyor of conti- 
nuous jet washing machines should be so loaded as to permit the 
jets of solution to reach all surfaces of the articles being cleaned. 

4.1.2.1 Rinsing — All alkaline cleaning should be followed by adequate 
draining but the drainge time should not be so long as to allow the 
cleaning solution to dry on the articles. Water rinsing should follow 
draining to ensure that carry over of alkali to the next stage is kept to the 
minimum. The work should not be allowed to dry before rinsing. 

Slightly alkaline rinse water ( provided that the alkalinity does not 
exceed 0* 1 percent ) prevents steel from rusting during drying. 

4.1.2.2 Handling precautions — During processing, the articles should 
be placed on hooks or racks or in suitable containers; for electro-cleaning 
these supports should maintain good electrical contact and be adequate to 
conduct the current. Articles should not be handled with bare hands 
during and after cleaning. Clean gloves should be U3ed and handling 
kept to a minimum. 

4.1.2.3 Safety precautions — Strong alkalies attack the eyes and the 
skin, and therefore goggles, rubber gloves and suitable protective clothing 
should be worn when handling alkaline mixtures or their solutions. 

4.1,3 Emulsion Cleaning 

4.1.3.1 These are diphase cleaners of oil/water emulsion type. They 
contain very little alkali but rely on powerful emulsifying agents and 
hydrocarbons to remove grease. While they cannot be compared to heavy 

•Code of practice for phosphating of iron and steel. 

21 



ISi8629 (Part II)- 1977 

duty cleaners based on caustic soda, they are very satisfactory for most 
cleaning jobs. Emulsion cleaning is particularly preferred before phosphat- 
ing as it subsequently leaves a fine textured phosphate coating. Besides, 
its operating temperature is generally lower than of heavy duty alkaline 
cleaners. Emulsion cleaners may be applied both by spray and dip, 
though the former is more common. 

4.1.4 Steam Cleaning — This method relates to the use of a jet of high 
pressure steam for the ' in-situ ' cleaning of large unit parts, assemblies and 
machinery that cannot be accommodated in a cleaning apparatus. The 
cleaning may be carried out with pure steam, or with alkaline solution/ 
steam mixtures. 

4.1.4.1 Cleaning — Where a steam supply is available it may be used 
in conjunction with a simple steam gun, or with an injector that will 
entertain alkaline solution into the steam jet, to remove oil and steam will 
remove most of the oil and grease, and loose adhering dirt Alkaline 
solution/steam mixtures will readily remove closely adhering dirt as well as 
oil. and grease. The alkaline solution should be at a concentration of 2 to 
4 percent. 

4.1.4.2 Rinsing — On completion of alkaline solution/steam cleaning; 
straight steam should immediately be directed over all cleaned surfaces so 
as to wash away alkaline deposits. 

4.1 .4.3 Handling precautions — During processing, the articles should 
be positioned to allow draining of the steam condensate. Care should be 
taken to ensure that steam does not enter delicate mechanisms, armature 
windings or other working parts from which water cannot easily be 
removed. 

The handling of article during cleaning should be kept to a minimum 
and sweat contamination should be avoided by the use of clean gloves. 

4.1.4.4 Safety precautions — Goggles and protective clothing should be 
worn when carrying out steam cleaning with strong alkalies particularly in 
confined places. Due care should be taken to avoid steam burns. 

4.1.5 Prevention of Contamination — After degreasing has been completed, 
if no dcrusting or descaling is required, the selected paint coat shall be 
applied as soon as the surface is dry, preferably without touching the sur- 
face with bare hands which may be slightly greasy even when quite clean. 
Under site conditions, this may not always be possible; nevertheless care 
should be taken to prevent the surface from getting re-contaminated. 

4.2 Removal of Ru»t and Scale — When steel leaves the rolling mill, it 
has a firmly adhering skin known as ' mill scale*. The continuous fresh 
layer of mill scale is in itself a good protection against corrosion of the 
underlying steel. However, on exposure to the atmosphere, mill scale 

22 



IS: 8629 (Part II) -1977 

absorbs moisture and finally again rust-formation take3 place. Old steel 
which has been kept for a long time in the open, has heavy layers of rust 
formed on its surface. If paint is applied on the layers of rust or loose 
mill scale, rusting continues almost to the same extent as it there was no 
paint, with the added disadvantage that under heavy layers of paint, 
progressive corrosion is not easily detected. Derusting and descaling are 
the essential preparations required prior to the application of any type of 
coating on iron and steel. There is considerable difference between the 
condition of a new steel which requires painting and old steel which has 
been allowed to weather and rust; the approach to each problem is 
different. Generally, derusting and descaling of steel may be carried out 
either mechanically or chemically. 

4.2.1 Mechanical Cleaning — This may be done by scraping, chipping, 
wirebrushing, rubbing with abrasive paper or steel wool, by flame cleaning 
or by sandblasting or shotblasting. New steel that is to be painted has 
normally a surface partly rusted and partly comprising of firmly adhering 
mill scale. Once the firmly adhering mill scale has broken, it is extremely 
difficult to determine whether the remaining mill scale is adhering firmly 
enough to be left on the surface or should be removed. For ordinary working 
conditions, it is practically impossible to remove firmly adhering mill scale 
by any hand operation. Any specification, which requires the cleaning 
down or removing of mill scale or rust by ' scraping \ sandpapering, 
chipping, wirebrushing, etc, shall, therefore, be understood to mean that 
firmly adhering mill scale will not be removed. 

4.2.1 .1 Hand scraping — On the building site, the correct procedure 
shall be to scrape thoroughly with a hand scraper followed by wirebrushing 
(first with coarse and then with fine wirebrushes ), and finally sanding the 
surface with a coarse sandpaper, steelwool or emery paper. For normal 
site application, this will give a reasonable assurance that no loose mill 
scale or heavy rust is left on the surface. For purposes of examination, 
the hand-cleaned surface shall be wiped finally with mineral turpentine, 
which also removes grease and perspiration left by handmarks. 

4.2.1.2 Scraping with mechanical power tools — Appreciably better results 
than by hand scraping may be obtained by employing power-operated 
wire-brush, although it may not be possible to remove firmly adhering mill 
scale even with this type of tool. The use of chipping hammers is restricted 
only to old rust. 

4.25 Flams Cleaning — Flame cleaning is carried out with the help of a 
special oxy-acetylene torch. The mill scale is rapidly heated while the 
underlying steel remains comparatively cold. Because of the difference in 
expansion between the heated mill scale and the bulk of the steel, the scale 
becomes loose and either falls off or is easily removed with a wire brush. 
As it may lead to buckling, of light gauge material, the process is not 
generally recommended for cleaning steel sheet or plate less than 6 mm in 

23 



IS: 8629 (Part II) -1977 

thickness or section under stress particularly where the latter are heavily 
corroded and several passes of the blow pipe are required. It shall always 
be ensured that the number of passes the oxy-acctylenc flame makes over 
a surface docs not exceed three. The primer coat of paint shall be applied 
when the surface is still warm that is immediately after the flame cleaning 
has been carried out and the scales removed by brushing or wiping. 

Note — Necessary precautions should be observed against hazards from fumci and 
fire during flame cleaning. 

4.2.3 Sandblasting, Gritblasting and Shotblasting — The process of 
sandblasting or shotblasting is the most thorough system of cleaning steel. 
The principle is to impinge under pressure of air, a jet of sharp sand or 
granulated steel ( steel grit ) on to the metal surface, removing in the 
process any rust and scale, including firmly adhering mill scale. A steel 
surface properly cleaned by sandblasting may be immediately recognized 
by its silver-grey surface and the criterion for good sandblasting or 
shotblasting is the even colour of the surface so cleaned. Precautions shall 
be taken when sandblasting or shotblasting light gauge steel to see that 
buckling does not occur as a result of continuous impingement of sand or 
steel shot under high velocity. 

4.2*3.1 Sandblasting is injurious to the labour carrying out this work. 
Suitable spray masks shall, therefore, be worn by workmen to prevent them 
from inhaling silica sand dust, which may lead to silicosis. 

4.2.4 In areas, where presence of inflammable vapours is a possibility, 
such as near petrol tanks in oil terminals or refineries, special non-sparking 
wire brushes, chipping hammers and scrapers shall be used. Precautions 
with regard to sandblasting operations in inflammable areas shall be 
observed. 

4.2.5 Chemical Cleaning ( Pickling ) 

4.2.5.1 Sulphuric acid, hydrochloric acid or phosphoric acid pickling — Where 
descaling is required to be done chemical pickling in any of the above acid 
is necessary. It also removes rust. Pickling is carried out at the factory 
premises. Sulphuric acid is used commonly between 5 to 20 percent 
concentration preferably hot ( 60 to 80°C ). Hydrochloric acid, being a 
fuming acid, is used only at room temperature, having 20 to 50 percent 
strength. Phosphoric acid used generally hot ( 60 to 85°C ) at 5 to 25 per- 
cent is the most expensive of the three acids. Where only derusting, is 
required to be done chemically, phosphoric acid solutions are preferably 
used. The detailed procedure to be followed for using these acids shall be 
in accordance with IS: 6005-1970*. 

4.2.5.2 After chemical cleaning in any of the above acids, the articles 
shall be thoroughly washed to remove all traces of acid. This shall be done 

•Code of practice for phosphating of iron and steel. 

24 



IS: 8629 (Part II). 1977 

in two or three successive water immersion baths or by water-power jets. 
After removal of the pickled steel from the washing bath, a fine layer of 
rust (oxide) will immediately form. This can be prevented by dipping 
the steel into a 1 to 2 percent phosphoric arid solution which should be 
carefully rinsed ofT with dean water. A phosphoric acid wash shall not be 
used, however, if the articles are subsequently to be phosphated for rust- 
proofing and paint bonding, and the phosphate wash should not be consi- 
dered as a substitute for this. 

4.2.5.3 Derusting in acids shall be handled with care in order to 
prevent excessive attach on, as well as embrittlement, of the metal. Acid 
inhibitors should be used for this purpose. 

4.2.6 Electro-chemical Cleaning — It is possible to remove rust and scale by 
the following electrolytic methods. For details of the various methods 
IS: 6005-1970* may be referred. 

4.2.6.1 Cathodic treatment in acid solution — Removal of rust and scale 
may be accelerated as compared with ordinary pickling. Acid is econo- 
mized and attack on the metal is reduced, but hydrogen embrittlement 
may be serious. 

4.2.6.2 Cathodic treatment in alkaline solution — Hydrogen embrittlement 
is less in this case than in acid solution. 

4.2.6.3 Anodic treatment — This may be carried out in cither acid or 
alkaline solutions. Passivating conditions are established and oxygen ( not 
hydrogen ) is produced at the surface. Hydrogen embrittlement is usually 
avoided but there is a slight risk, especially with highly stressed parts, of 
hydrogen being formed in the acid process when the current is switched off 
and while the work is being removed from the bath. Anodic treatment 
produces smut on certain steels which should be removed by brushing and 
washing before phosphate treatment. 

4.2.6.4 Alkaline derusting processes — Derusting at factory site may also be 
carried out by processes employing alkalies with or without electrolytes. 
The processes will completely remove any rust and grease in the same 
operation without any attack on the metal. 

4 3 Intermediate Protective Treatments — After the preparation of 
iron and steel surfaces and prior to the application of the protective and 
decorative paint finishes, a number of intermediate treatments may be 
adopted to give iron or steel articles additional protection against corrosion. 
Some important intermediate treatments are dealt below. 

4.3.1 Hot-Dip Metallic Coatings — The principle is to immerse the iron 
or steel articles in a bath of molten metal thereby covering the surface with 
a protective film. The most commonly known of these processes is the 

•Code of practice for photphating of iron and steel. 

25 



IS: 8629 (Part II) -1977 

hot-dip galvanizing ( see IS : 2629-1966* ) process, that is, the immersion of 
the steel in molten zinc. Aluminizing ( see IS : 8508-1977f ) that is, coating 
by dipping steel into molten aluminium, may also be adopted; the painting 
of aluminized surfaces requires consideration in regard to the selection of 
the type of paint for the primer coat. Normally, red lead priming paints 
should not be used for aluminized surfaces. 

4.3.2 Metal Powder Cementation — This process, the trade name of which 
is 'shcrardizing', covers the application of zinc powder by heat cementation 
(sintering). The application is effected at a temperature around 380°C, 
in closed rotating drums having an inert atmosphere when the zinc diffuses 
inside the steel, to give a desired coating thickness. The finish is a dull 
grey, hard sponge, which for satisfactory corrosion resistance shall be 
paint-finished. This is the most important powder cementation process, 
but there are other processes based on aluminium and chromium. 

4.3*3 Flame Sprayed Coatings ( Metal and Plastics ) — The most commonly 
used metals in this process are zinc, aluminium and cadmium. Application 
is made by feeding metal wire or metal powder through an oxy-acetylenc 
flame gun. The coatings are parous and, therefore, require sealing with 
paints; the porous coating provides an excellent bond for the paint. 
The flame spraying process is also extensively used with plastics 
(polyethylene, polvamides, etc) which form highly corrosion- resistant 
coatings ( see IS : 5905-1970$ and IS : 6586-1972§ ). 

4*4 Phosphate Treatment —The most widely used pretrcatments for 
good adhesion of paint to metal surfaces as well as for the prevention of 
rust, are the numerous hot tank phosphating processes. These are most 
popularly known under such trade names as ' Granodising ', ' Bonderising ', 
' Walterising ', etc. 

The principle involved is the conversion of steel surface into an 
inorganic phosphate coating, such as iron, zinc or manganese phosphate. 
The use of phosphating solutions either by the hot or cold process is 
recommended ( see IS : 6005-1970|| ). 

4.5 Non-aqueous Phosphate Resin Coatings — These are generally 
iron phosphate coatings based on solvent resin which forms a self-sealing 
iron phosphate coating on the surface. They may be applied on a clean 
dry surface by brush, dip or spray at room temperature both in the factory 
and at site. 

• Recommended practice for hot-dip galvanizing of iron and steel. 

t Recommended practice for hot-dip aluminizing of iron and steel. 

{Sprayed aluminium and zinc coatings on iron and steel. 

§ Recommended practice for metal spraying for protection of iron and steel. 

dCode of practice for phosphating of iron and steel. 

26 



IS: 8629 ( Part II)- 1977 

4.6 Etching or Wash Primers — This treatment is based on the 
deposition of an acid-bound resinous film on the surface in such a manner 
as to enhance the adhesion of subsequently applied paint coatings. The 
film may be applied by brush, spray or dip. The film has good adhesion 
to the metal substrate. 

5. ON-SITE PRETREATMENT 

5.1 Surface Untreated or Protected With a Temporary 
Protective — These are dealt with at site as follows: 

a) Temporary protective materials applied to steel sheets to protect 
during storage, transport and erection should be removed with 
suitable solvent as a preliminary to other preparatory treatments 
(** 4.1.1.1 and 4.1.1.2). 

b) Lubricants used in the rolling of steel sheets may be particularly 
tenacious and may have undesirable effects on paint adhesion. 
The use of abrasive paper wetted with suitable solvent, is effective 
in removing the worst effects of these materials. Where joints are 
welded, soldered or brazed care should be taken to remove fluxing 
material before painting. This may be effected with a 10 percent 
aqueous solution of formic acid followed by thorough washing, or 
with suitable solvents. 

c) Surface*; which are protected with a temporary protective may be 
steam cleaned as mentioned in 4.1.4. 

d) In the case of hardened alloys the surface shall be treated by 
mechanical roughening combined by degreasing. Such work 
should be carried out as thoroughly as possible to ensure that the 
paint will adhere well and give protection and durability. The 
surface should be well scraped or swabbed with a suitable solvent, 
and then abraded with abrasive paper and finally rinsed with 
successive portions of clean solvent on clean swabs. 

e) Proprietary compositions may be used as recommended by the 
manufacturers to degreasc and passivatc or degrease and etch the 
surface, but care should be taken, unless the manufacturers specify 
otherwise, to remove all residues by wiping or washing where 
possible, before painting and also to ensure that the compositions 
do not contaminate other parts of the structure. 

5.2 Surface Already Factory Pretreated and /or Primed — They 
should be carefully inspected and damaged areas should be thoroughly 
degrcased by clean solvent swabbing, any corrosion products formed 
should be thoroughly removed and touched up with a coat of wash or 
etching primer or suitable chemical pretrcatment solutions. The rectified 
areas should then be brought forward with appropriate primer, putty, 
finish coats, etc. 

27 



IS:8629(PartII)-1977 

5.3 Solvent Cleaning — This shall be carried out in accordance 
with 4.1 J. 

5.4 Brush Derusting with Phoshporic Add or Proprietary 
Products — Apply phosphoric acid, with a brush or swab, rubbing where 
necessary with a steel wool pad, to assist rust removal. Keep the surface 
well wetted with the phosphoric acid. Wash off the phosporic acid 
thoroughly after derusting paying particular attention to seams and 
crevices. Proprietary products are used following the manufacturer's 
instructions. 

5*5 Mechanical Cleaning — This shall be carried out in accordance 
with 4.1.1. 

5.6 Etching or Wash Primers — This shall be carried out in accordance 
with 4.4. 

5.7 Phosphating — Proprietary products, both aqueous and non-aqueous 
for phosphating in-situ may be used following the manufacturers' 
instructions ( see 4.4 ). 

6. PRETREATMENT OF METAL COATED STEEL 

6.1 Zinc coated steel and galvanized steel surfaces should be chemically 
treated or allowed to weather before painting. This is necessary because 
zinc being reactive, forms zinc soaps with the paint medium and adhesion 
of paint is quickly impaired. In some cases wash primers/calcium 
plumbate primer may be used without special surface treatments. Alumi- 
nium coated surfaces is generally treated with prctreatment primer. 

6.2 Factory Prctreatment — The surface should be freed of oil, grease or 
any external contaminant by means of the procedure described in solvent 
cleaning method before applying any of the treatments recommended 
below. Proprietary compounds, may be used in accordance with the 
manufacturers' instructions. 

6«2«1 Crystalline Zinc Phosphating Treatment — The zinc surface is converted 
to a crystalline zinc phosphate to inhibit corrosion, increase adherence 
and durability of paint film. The treatment may be provided by dip, 
spray or brush application. 

6.2.2 Chromale Treatment — This consists of a dip or spray with a dilute 
solution of a mixture of chromic and other acids to provide a thin amor- 
phous chromate coating that increases corrosion resistance and paint 
adhesion ( seelSi 1340-1977* ). 

6.2*3 Aqueous Chromic Organic Treatment — Certain water soluble resins 
with chromium compounds may be applied to zinc surfaces by roller coat 

•Code of practice for chromate conversion coating on zinc and cadmium coated articles 
and sine base alloys. 

28 



IS: 8629 (Part II) -1977 

or other suitable means, such as by dip or squeeze rolls. The resultant 
coating provides a corrosion resistant film that increase the adhesion of 
applied paint film. 

6.2.4 Etching or Wash Primers — This treatment should be carried out 
on the lines given in 4.6, for both zinc and aluminium coated surfaces. 

6.3 On-Site Pretreatment 

6.3.1 Surfaces Untreated — The surface should be thoroughly degrcascd by 
solvent wipe and then applied with wash or etching primers. 

6.3.1.1 The surface should be thoroughly degrcascd by solvent wipe 
and then cleaned and brushed with suitable phosphating chemicals. 
Some of these are similar in action to the phosphating solutions, while 
others are based on acids or other mordants. The use of mordants 
containing copper is not recommended since the last traces of copper, which 
are difficult to remove, stimulate corrosion. After using the cleaning and 
phosphating solutions, the surface should be thoroughly wiped or rinsed 
with clean water to remove acids and salts, which might be deleterious if 
allowed to remain. 

6.3.1.2 If the zinc or galvanized steel is allowed to weather up till the 
bright spangles disappear before painting, it attains a condition suitable to 
receive paint without the necessity of degrcasing or etching; it will be 
necessary, however, to clean down to remove dirt, corrosion products, etc. 
Since galvanizing alone, if of reasonable thickness is sufficient to protect 
the steel from corrosion for some years in normal atmospheres, a few 
months delay before painting is not likely to result in corrosion. 

6.3.1.3 An alternative process is to abrade the surface thoroughly with 
emery cloth lubricated w r ith a suitable grease solvent to produce a uniform, 
fine matt surface, and subsequently wash with successive portions of clean 
solvent. This process is laborious and suitable only for small areas. 

6.3.2 Surfaces Alieady Factory Puireated andjor Primed — Such surf ires 
should be treated on the lines given in 5.2. 

7. IMPORTANCE OF EARLY APPLICATION OF PAINTb 

7.1 After completion of the pr« cleaning, I he feirou* surfaces shall be 
immediately painted unless a rust-proofing ( phospharing) or other interim 
process is employed. In the latter ca*c, the prccleaning shall be followed 
immediately by that process. If, for instance, a sandblasted piece of steel 
is left exposed in a coastal area for only 12 hours, slight rust formation 
would be visible and the iron oxide thin formed would readilv absorb 
moisture from the humid atmosphere. Sandblasted steel left exposed for any 
length of time would thus have to be retreated. In chemical cleaning, after 
removal of excess acids by thorough washings, the articles shall be 
immediately dried and painted. Correct timing is essential in all processes 
of preparation, while painting the ferrous surfaces. 

29 



IS : 8629 ( Part HI)- 1977 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR PROTECTION OF 

IRON AND STEEL STRUCTURES FROM 

ATMOSPHERIC CORROSION 

PART III PROTECTIVE SCHEMES 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part III ) illustrates the details of painting operations, 
paint schedules and other coating applications applicable to ferrous 
structures for protection against atmospheric corrosion. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given in 
IS : 3531-1960* and IS : 1303-1963t shall apply. 

3. GENERAL 

3.1 All aspects of the work involved in the protection of steel structures 
against corrosion should be considered at an early stage in the development 
and planning of any project. This includes all the steps to be taken 
throughout the application of a protective scheme from the delivery of the 
materials to the fabricating shop to the completion of the work at site, 
together with provision for subsequent inspection and maintenance. 

4. RECOMMENDED PROTECTIVE SCHEMES FOR GENERAL 
STRUCTURES 

4.1 Basis oi* Recommendation — When selecting the appropriate grade 
of protection attention should be given to the severity of the exposure 
conditions, nature of the structure, its utility, expected life and 
maintenance schedule. The recommendations made in Table 1 for the 
protection of steel work used outdoors are based on the results reported 
from the outdoor exposure tests carried out at various centres in India 
and also on experience of the protective scheme gained both by research 
and by observations of their behaviour in service. 

'Glossary of termi relating to protection of metals. 
fGlouary of tcrmi relating to painti ( noistd ). 

31 



IS: 8629 (Part III). 1977 

4.1.1 On the basis of the relative corrosivity of outdoor atmospheres in 
various parts of India, the different regions may be broadly classified into 
the following categories: 

Very high Above 0*23 mm/yr 

High 0-13 - 0*25 mm/yr 

Moderate 005 — 0'13 mm/yr 

Low 0-025 — 005 mm/yr 

Very Low Below 0025 mm/yr 

4.2 Protective Schemes — Taking into consideration the various factors, 
broadly three different grades of protective schemes have been suggested 
in Table 1 for areas with different corrosivities. They represent the 
minimum acceptable standard of good practice and should prove economi- 
cal in maintenance. Each protective scheme consists of a metal coating or 
a method of preparing the steel surface, followed by a paint system, 
sometimes after an intervening pietrcatmcnt. Individual components of 
each system may be obtained from Table 1 . 

4.2.1 Grade A Scheme — This consists of an initial protective scheme 
applied to last for a period of 5 years or more with repainting period 
varying between 5 and 8 years and above depending on the environment. 

4.2.2 Grade B Scheme — This consists of an initial coating to last for a 
minimum period of 3 years, with repainting schedule varying between 3 
and 5 years. 

4.2.3 Grade C Scheme — This consists of a coating system which requires 
renewal every year or every alternate year. 

4.3 Performance of a Protective Scheme — It is rather difficult to 
predict the performance of a protective scheme and selection should gene- 
rally be made on the basis of accumulated experience. The performance 
of coatings on similar structures or units generally provide the guidance on 
which to base a sound judgement. It is not always possible to recommend 
the unequivocally the best system for a particular situation; only systems 
which arc expected to give a reasonably good life may be suggested. The 
user has to select the best combination of the protective scheme depending 
on economics and availability. 

5. SURFACE PREPARATION 

5.1 Proper surface preparation contributes more than any other single factor 
to the success of a protective scheme. 

5.1.1 Where a metal coating is to be applied, the method of surface pre- 
paration is implicit in the nature of the metal coating itself, for example, 
gritblasting is essential before metal spraying. 

32 



IS: 8629 (Part III)- 1977 

5.1.2 Methods of preparation of steel surfaces for painting are discussed 
in Part II. The choice between them is influenced by the nature of the 
structure, the condition of the steel surface and the corrosiveness of the 
environment. Badly corroded steel needs special attention. 

5.2 Blast cleaning is recommended for ail paint systems applied to impor- 
tant steel structures and to structures whose location or function render 
access difficult. It should also be used for steel work subjected to the 
following service conditions: 

a) Severely corrosive atmospheres, 

b) Sudden variations of temperature, 

c) Alternating stresses, and 

d) Continuous vibration. 

Blast cleaning roughens steel and it is essential that an adequate 
thickness of priming paint be applied to cover the peaks on the surface. 

5.3 Where practicable, pickling followed immediately by an organic coating 
is an acceptable alternative lo blast cleaning throughout, except that blast 
cleaning to a first quality finish is preferable beneath chemical resistant 
paint? for best results. 

5.4 Flame cleaning is inferior to blast cleaning and pickling for use on new 
steel work. It is of value for drying the steel at the time of painting and for 
some types of maintenance work. 

5.5 Intermediate Protective Treatment — The adoption of inter- 
mediate treatment like phosphating and wash /etch primer treatment, after 
cleaning and dcr listing of steel surfaces and prior to application of protec- 
tive paint finishes may give additional protection against corrosion. The 
life of a paint scheme may, be improved by r )0 percent due to phosphating 
and somewhat less for wash/etch primer. 

6. METAL COATINGS 

6.1 Metal coatings, when used in combination with suitable paint systems, 
prevent the onset of rusting in severely corrosive conditions where paint 
alone gives protection only for a limited ( short ) period. Therefore, they 
are particularly valuable where it is essential that rusting should not take 
place, or where the intervals between maintenance are protracted. They 
, are also effective in chemical atmospheres, provided proper metallic coating 
is chosen. 

6.1.1 For steel work the choice generally lies between hot-dip galvanising, 
sprayed zinc and sprayed aluminium. If a zinc coating is to be used 
alone, hot-dip galvanising should be generally preferred, because of the 
smoothness and freedom from porosity of this type of coating. 

33 



ISt8629(PartHl)-1977 

6.1.2 Aluminium coatings are useful for protecting steel in severe service 
conditions at high temperatures and form a good basis for heat resisting 
paints. Aluminium coatings need protection against alkaline exposure 
conditions. 

6.2 Metal coatings need not be painted, provided they are thick enough to 
withstand the service conditions for the desired life of the structures. They 
give long term protection, for example, unpainted zinc coatings weighing 
570 g/m 1 of surface ( 75 to 100 /xm thick ) have been observed to last for 
5 years or more in an industrial environment and for much more than 20 
years in a rural one. However, they do not protect steel in enclosed humid 
and polluted spaces. An unpainted aluminium coating 200 gm/m 1 had an 
even longer life of above 10 years in an industrial environment. 

6.3 The paint may be applied to metallic coating with or without 
etch/wash primer followed by two coats of zinc chromate in modified 
phenolic stand oil primer or red oxide/zinc chromate primer for both 
aluminium and zinc coatings. The remaining coats of the paint system 
should be adequate to build up the necessary total dry film thickness. If 
the roughness of the sprayed metal surface exceeds the recommended limit 
of 100 /xm maximum amplitude, extra coat of priming paint should be 
applied and the roughness should be reduced before painting by rubbing 
lightly with emery cloth. The finishing coat sliould be the same as shown 
in Table 1. The total dry film thickness should be atlcast 150 /xm. 

6.3.1 A repainting schedule of once in every 4 years on a metal coated 
and painted steel structure has been found to prevent onset of rusting on 
the steel base of the structure. 

7. PAINTS 

7.1 Priming Paints — The essential property of the individual paints in 
a system is that they should provide successful protective schemes' when 
combined in the recommended manner. Ordinary red-oxide may be 
dependent upon only for inland dry places like Delhi. Zinc chromate/ 
red-oxide and barium chromate should be used in areas where humid 
tropical conditions are obtained. It may be necessary to use zinc 
chromate in modified phenolic stand oil or red lead primer in coastal 
areas where manned conditions are obtained. It has also been found 
advantageous to use zinc chromitc in expoxy for both hand cleaned and 
pickled surfaces. 

7.1.1 Red Lead Primer ( IS : 102-1962*) — Red lead in linseed oil 
priming paint has been used satisfactorily for many years. It is specially 
useful when paint has to be applied to imperfectly prepared surfaces, 
carrying broken mill scale and rust, which result from weathering and hand 

•Specification for ready mixed paint, brushing, red lead, nonsctting, priming ( revised ). 

34 



IS: 8629 ( Part IU). 1977 

cleaning. Its relatively slow drying property is a disadvantage when 
painting outdoors in grossly polluted atmospheres or where limited covered 
space is available for painting indoors. 

7.1.1.1 The use of red lead is permissible only within the provision oi 
the Lead Regulations. Such paints shall not be applied by spray. They 
shall not be put on surfaces that are to have flame treatment for example, 
cutting or welding nor they be used in confined spaces where wire-brushing 
or other abrasive treatment is probable at the time or for later maintenance 
work. 

7.1.2 Z} nc Chromate Primer {IS : 1874-1962*) — This consists of zinc 
chrome pigment and suitable extender based on an oleo-resinous medium. 
It is specially suitable for priming light alloys used in the aircraft industry, 
but is generally used for the protection of light alloys as well as steel work. 

It may be used both under marine and inland outdoor conditions. 
It is, the other usual alternative to red lead primer where use of lead 
pigment is prohibited. It is non-toxic and is suitable for application both 
by brushing and spraying, and dries quickly. 

It is valuable for use over sprayed metal coatings for which purpose 
rcdlead primer is unsuitable. Generally a prctreatment should be applied 
before the zinc chrome paint. 

It has been commonly used as shop coats but it should not be left 
long before being overcoated. The inhibitive chromate pigment may be 
leached out if it is exposed to rain. 

7.1.3 Zinc R* c h Primer — The metallic zinc pigment in these primers 
should be bound in a medium of epoxide resin, chlorinated rubber or 
polystyrene so as to yield a paint suitable in all respects for brush 
application. Zinc rich paints in cold-cured epoxide resin media are used 
as prcfabrication primers and are also applied at full coating thickness to 
fabricated steel. 

Other uses of zinc rich paints are as primers in chemical resistant 

!)aint systems and for making good -the damage to metal coatings which, 
or example, occurs after welding, before these are painted. Zinc rich 
paints should be applied only to carefully prepared steel, preferably to 
blast-cleaned surfaces. 

7.1.4 Red Oxide, Z™ Chromate Primer {IS : 2074-1962} ) — It consists of 
16 parts of zinc chrome in combination with red oxide of iron and small 
proportion of suitable extender based on <m oleo-resinous medium. 

•Specification for ready mixed paints, universal zinc chrome, priming ( synthetic ) for 
light alloys for aircraft*. 

fSpecification for ready mixed paint, red oxide-zinc chrome, priming. 

35 



IS: 8629 (Part III) -1977 

Being non- toxic it is suitable for application both by brushing and spray- 
ing and it dries quickly. It may be used both on ferrous and nonferrous 
surfaces but it is generally used for the protection of steel in inland outdoor 
conditions. In respect of protective property on ferrous surfaces it is 
inferior to zinc chromate primer. 

7.2 Finishing Paints — The distinction between undercoats and finishing 
coats is not sharply defined in paint systems used to protect structural 
steel work. Frequently the uadercoat is a tainted version of the finishing 
paint. 

7.2.1 Aluminium paint conforming to IS: 2339-1963* is recommended 
mainly for its reflective value. 

7.2.2 Synthetic enamel conforming to IS : 2932- 196 If m l° n g °il alkyed 
medium is an acceptable alternative. 

7.2.3 Oil based paints conforming to IS: 117-19G4J and IS: 128-I962§ 
containing lead, zinc and titanium pigment may also be used. They 
lose their gloss and their colour is slightly impaired particularly, in rural 
environments. Chlorinated rubber based paints may also be used 
especially for marine environment. 

7.3 Application of Paint — The performance of any painting system is 
strongly influenced by the manner and circumstances in which it is applied. 
Important factors include programme, correct stoiagc of paint and its 
preparation for immediate use, the ambient conditions at the time of 
painting, the perparation of the surface for painting, the method of 
applying the pai'nt, and the standard of workmanship. 

7.3.1 It is difficult to apply paint satisfactorily outdoors in bad weather, 
therefore if site painting is contemplated, it is wise to study the local meteo- 
rological data and chose the periods when the best weather conditions arc 
to be expected for example, in summer ( hot and dry days ) and not rainy 
seasons. Where painting under adverse conditions is unavoidable, provision 
of heating or of some form of temporary shelter may be helpful. 

7.3.2 Painting is skilled work, which should generally be done under 
competent and qualified supervision. For important work suitable inspec- 
tion arrangements should be made. 

7.3.3 The common methods of applying paint are by brush, rolling, air 
pressure spraying, airless spraying and dipping. 

♦Specification for aluminium paint for general purposes, in dual container. 

-(-Specification for enamel, synthetic, exterior, Type 1, (a) undercoating, (b) finishing, 
colour as required. 

{Specification for ready mixed paint, brushing, finishing, exterior, semi-gloss, for general 
purposes. 

§Specification for ready mixed paint, brushing, finishing, semi-gloss, for general purposes, 
black ( uvised ) . 

36 



IS 1 8629 ( Part HI)- 1977 

7.4 Thickness of Paint Film —Total thickness of the dry paint film is 
an important factor and it is vital that this should be adequate for the 
purpose in hand. Where circumstances permit, full use should be 
made of non-destructive thickness testers to check the thickness of indivi- 
dual coatings and of the complete painting scheme. The paint systems 
suggested in Table 1 are intended to provide an average total dry paint film 
of at least 90 to 140 /.m according to the individual paints used. 

8. CONDUCT OF THE WORK 

8.1 Surface Preparation — The surface preparation should be thorough 
and the bare metal surface should be primed as soon as possible afterward 
but in any case within 4 hours. If prepared surfaces are left uncoatcd for 
a longer period, they should be inspected before painting and if necessary;, 
prepared again. 

8.2 Acceptable standards, as regards the condition for application of the 
protective scheme at the fabricator's works and site, surface cleanliness 
before coating, interval between coats and the conditions during transport 
to the site, should be mutually agreed upon. 

8.3 Application of Coating — The procedure of applying the whole or 
the major part of the protective scheme under cover before despatch to the 
site is preferred since the painting may be done under predetermined 
controlled conditions. The resulting performance of the protective scheme 
shall generally be markedly superior to that obtained when painting is done 
at site. 

8,3.1 When any part of the protective scheme is to be applied outdoors, 
at works or at site, it should be ensured that the weather condition is as 
favourable as possible. Some indication may be obtained by studying the 
local meteorological data. 

8.4 Sprayed Metal Coatings — They are porous and when they are to 
be painted, they should preferably be sealed immediately after application 
with a pretreatment primer or other suitable organic coating. 

8.5 Contact Surface and Edges — In structures in exposed positions or 
in highly corrosive conditions, the surfaces to be permanently in contact 
having been properly cleaned, should each be given a coat of priming paint 
before assembly and brought together while this is still wet. Special care 
should be taken of rough surfaces and the contact surfaces should be left 
painted. 

8*5.1 In the case of structures within the electricity industry that may 
be subject to heavy fault current, for example, overhead line towers and 
substation structures, no paint should be applied to the mating surfaces of 
joints unless it has been confirmed that the paint has and shall retain in 
service an adequately low resistance. 

37 



IS:8629(PartIH)-1977 

8.5.2 The contact surfaces of joints made with friction grip bolts should 
be left unpainted. Special care should be taken after assembly to paint 
all edges and corners near the joints, together with the bolt heads, nuts and 
washers, so as to prevent the ingress of moisture. Special care is necessary 
for areas condensation and restricted air movements. 

8.6 Drying Time — Each coat should be allowed to dry thoroughly ( and 
to become sufficiently cured in the case of chemical resistant paints that dry 
by reaction between their components ) before the next one is applied. 
Before proceeding, a check should be made that the new coat is not 
softening the underlying paint. 

9. MAINTENANCE 

9.1 Maintenance is made much easier if the necessary requirements are 
taken into account at the design stage. 

9.2 The aim should be to keep the steelwork free from deterioration and 
need of repair, whilst retaining an acceptable appearance, with the 
minimum of expenditure. This may be achieved by well thought out, 
predetermined maintenance programmes, or by repainting when inspection, 
which should be made systematically at regular intervals, shows this to be 
necessary. In assessing maintenance, any operational losses and other 
indirect costs due to interruption of production or service should be 
included. 

9.3 The repainting of structures should always be taken in hand before the 
protective coating shows sign of serious breakdown. Postponement of 
repainting until this occurs will inevitably increase the cost of the work. 
Secondly, it pays to aim at the longest possible interval between rcpaintings 
by using the paints best suited to the particular conditions. The cost of 
the material generally forms but a small part of the total cost of repainting, 
although the quality of the paints purchased should naturally be 
commensurate with the prices paid for them. 

9.4 Maintenance work may involve repainting the whole structure, or 
alternatively patch-painting to make good local breakdown followed later 
by complete repainting when general deterioration of the old paint has 
become evident. The work itself is usually more difficult than initial 
painting, because the choice of method of surface preparation is more 
restricted; moreover, the conditions at site may be controlled only to a 
limited extent. This is particularly true for marine structures where the 
maintenance of areas in the tidal and splash zones is especially difficult, 
because of the relatively short period varying from day to day during 
which these arc accessible. Similarly, in industrial environments, there 
arc many places where steam, exhaust gases, fumes, grit and other forms 
of atmospheric pollution render it difficult to obtain good conditions for 
painting* 

38 



IS : 8629 ( Part III)- 1977 

9.5 The procedure adopted should be designed to restore a continuous film 
of paint of the necessary minimum thickness, generally an average of 
125 /*m, over the whole surface of the structure. Present practice rarely 
achieves this standard over badly corroded areas. 

9.6 Unless experience has shown the need for change, it is preferable to use 
the same types of finishing paint again. It may be necessary to change 
the priming paint to accommodate the site conditions, and for the paint 
manufacturer to adjust the formulation of paints to be applied over old 
paint, for example by altering the pigment /vehicle ratio, so as to compen- 
sate for the porosity of the weathered surface. Where a change is made, 
the new paint shall be compatible with the old. For example, there is a 
risk of failure when an oil paint is applied over an old coal tar pitch or 
bitumen coating; some coal tar pitch and bitumen coatings are also 
mutually incompatible. 

9.7 It is improbable that the degree of breakdown of the protective scheme 
may be uniform over the whole structure. Minor modifications to the 
structure to increase paint durability at the worst affected areas should, 
therefore, be considered. There may be places whcie smoke and fumes are 
trapped or where the drainage is ill-devised and water lies about on the 
steel. Drainage may be improved, smoke traps bricked up, and removable 
baffles fitted to protect the steel against exhaust and chemical fumes. ' 

9.8 Clearly, maintenance painting is practicable only for structures that 
are accessible for at least limited periods. For inaccessible immersed parts 
of marine structures and for buried structures generally, the only possible 
course when the initial protective scheme fails to last for the desired life of 
the structure is to install cathodic protection [ see IS : 8062 ( Part I )-1976* 
and IS : 80§2 ( Part II )-1976* ]. 

9.9 Criteria for Repainting 

9.9.1 Paint — The breakdown of the protective paint film, in order of 
increasing seriousness, takes the form of chalking, checking, cracking 
blistering, ruststaining and, finally, the breakthrough of rust and flaking 
of the paint. 

9.9.1.1 Repainting should always be carried out before the finishing 
coats have ceased to protect the priming coat properly, or have deteriorated 
to such an extent that they do not provide a suitable basis for new paint. 
This procedure makes it unnecessary to remove the bulk of the old paint, 
and in time leads to the building up of a thick paint film all over the 
structure. If breakdown is not permitted to proceed beyond the chalking 
stage, the only surface preparation needed before repainting is washing 
down and drying off. 

•Code of practice for cathodic protection of steel structures: 
Part I General. 
Part II Underground pipelines. 

39 



IS:8629(PartlII)-1977 

9.9.1 .2 The difficulty and cost of maintenance painting increase greatly 
if the work is deferred beyond the time when marked erosion of the finish- 
ing coats has occurred, accompanied possibly by the development of rust 
pustules that have not broken the paint film. After the paint film has been 
ruptured by rust, breakdown proceeds at an increasing rate and the stage is 
reached at which repainting cannot be done satisfactorily without removing 
the old paint completely, which adds greatly to the expense incurred. 

9.9.1.3 The criteria for deciding whether repainting should be under- 
taken or not will vary with the age of the structure. The decision may also 
be complicated by the fact that breakdown is seldom uniform all over the 
surface, so that some parts may need renewal and others not. 

9.9.1 .4 The necessity for repainting old structures that have been 
properly maintained and already repainted several times generally arises 
through serious degradation of the outer coat or coats of the paint system 
or through the development of serious rusting at joints, edges, nuts, bolts, 
and places that are difficult to protect well, for example pockets or parts 
subject to stress concentration or vibration. Then the degradation of the 
old paint and the degree of local bieakdown are the determining factors, 
and pictorial rust scales, have little bearing on the matter. 

9.9.1.5 For new structures, failure of the initial painting scheme 
generally takes a different form, and is often determined by blistering and 
flaking of the paint film, with rusting of the basis steel, ovet a relatively 
small proportion of the surface. This may occur long before the degrada- 
tion of the paint itself reaches the critical stage. The type of failure is 
characteristic of weathered and hand-cleaned steel, and it should become 
less frequent now that blast-cleaning and other beUcr methods of surface 
preparation are more generally adopted. 

9.9.1.6 In practice, therefore, where the paint was applied to 
weathered and hand-cleaned steel, it may be wise to regard a small degree 
of rust and rust-staining as the criterion for repainting a structure in the 
early stage of its life. On blast-cleaned surfaces initial breakdown may take 
the form of pinpoint rusting at peaks in the steel surface that have not been 
adequately covered with paint. On pickled surfaces and on blast-cleaned 
surfaces to which sufficient paint cover has been provided, peak rusting is 
absent, and repainting becomes necessary only when the finishing coats are 
showing erosion to such an extent that the priming coats arc not 
sufficiently protected. 

9.9.1.7 If peak rusting develops, repainting should be undertaken at 
once. If the work is done as soon as the defect becomes evident a thorough 
scrubbing down with clean, fresh water should prove sufficient surface 
preparation for the application ( after the surface has dried thoroughly ) of 
a further coat or further coats of paint. 

40 



IS: 8629 (Part III) -1977 

9.9.1.8 Another type of failure occurs, in which the paint film becomes 
embrittled and loses much of its adhesion without serious rusting of the 
substrate. As paint in this condition does not provide a suitable basis for 
repainting, it is necessary to strip to bare metal and start again. 

9.9.2 Metal Coated Structures — Hot-dip galvanized surfaces left unpainted 
originally should be painted before the useful life of the zinc coating nears 
its end. Slight rust-staining is not an infallible indication of this, because 
the discoloration is often due to corrosion of the iron-zinc alloys that lie 
below the surface of the coating itself and not to attack on the basis steel. 
The safest course, however, is to paint as soon as marked discoloration is 
observed. 

9.9.2.1 Bare sprayed metal coatings may be adjudged to require 
painting at the following stages: 

a) When the first signs of rusting of the basis metal are observed, 
on a zinc coated surface. Generally the transition from slight 
rusting to complete rusting takes only a few months and the pain- 
ting should be undertaken immediately. 

b) When the coating itself begins to crumble appreciably because 
of the formation within it of aluminium corrosion products, on a 
aluminium-coated structure. 

Rust stains frequently develop at an early stage on bare 
sprayed aluminium coatings ( probably because of the porosity 
of the coating). These are generally transient and may be 
ignored. 

9.9.2.2 As a general principle, it is advisable to paint over a metal 
coating some time before this is approaching the end of its life rather than 
to postpone the operation until the coating shows marked failure. It is 
important to avoid delay in repairing paint over metal coatings. Moisture 
retained in a broken down paint film may cause rapid corrosion and 
wastage of a metal coating beneath it. 

9.10 Timing of Operations — Although there may be rare cases where 
it is practicable to remove a structure, part by part, paint the parts under 
good conditions elsewhere, and replace them after painting; maintenance 
painting almost invariably takes place on site. If the structure is an out- 
door one, inclement weather will seriously interfere with and complicate 
the operations. Maintenance should, therefore, be programmed for times 
when suitable weather can be expected. Local factors, such as the closing 
down of nearby smoke-producing plant during a works holiday, may affect 
the choice of date. 

10. PROCEDURE FOR REPAINTING 

10.1 General — If good practice has been followed at all stages of the 
initial or previous painting, and maintenance is undertaken at the proper 

41 



IS: 8629 (Part in) -1977 

time, it should seldom be necessary to strip all the old paint from a struc- 
ture before repainting it. The ideal condition in which none of the old 
paint has deteriorated b'eyond the stage at which a simple washing down 
suffices is equally rare. Some parts of the structure will need repainting 
before the main body of the paint has neared the end of its life. It may 
be better to repair these damaged areas by patch-painting and to leave the 
rest alone until later. Experienced judgement will strike the economic 
balance between this course and repainting all over at regular intervals. 
The decision may well turn on aesthetic considerations and the accessibility 
of the structure. 

10.1.1 The number of coats to be applied when complete repainting is 
undertaken will also be decided by economics. The increase in the interval 
between repainting? resulting from the use of more coats of paint should 
be balanced against the increased cost of materials and labour, the compa- 
risons being made on a cost per annum basis. 

10.1.2 It is more difficult to attain the desirable standards of workman- 
ship and satisfactory ampient conditions for application at site than in the 
shop, where practicable temporary screens or cover should be provided to 
shield areas from rain and heavy atmospheric pollution. 

10.2 Surface Preparation 

10.2.1 General — Thorough surface preparation is essential to the 
success of maintenance painting. With the exception of pickling, the 
methods described in Part II are also practicable at site, but in general 
they are likely to prove less efficaceous there than when used initially in 
the shop. 

10.2.1.1 The choice of method depends on the condition of the old 
paint. Since the conditions of the paint may vary in different parts of the 
structure, it may be better to employ a variety of methods. 

10.2.1.2 Chemical rust removers and paint strippers are not 
recommended. If, exceptionally, paint strippers have to be uwl, a non- 
flammable solvent type, based on methylene chloride, should be selected, 
and great care should be taken to remove all residues from the surface. 

10.2.1.3 All removable obstructions to the surface, for example 
advertisement hoardings, should be taken down and as few as possible of 
them replaced after the repainting is completed. 

10.2.1 .4 Particular attention should be paid to the cleaning out of 
crevices and other places where dust and dirt have collected, and the filling 
in of such crevices with inhibitive mastic paste or steel packings coated with 
red lead paint, should be considered. The use of fillers to build up a 
fmooth surface prior to repainting badly corroded members is best avoided 
where stress-carrying members are concerned, because this may disguise the 
loss of section and thus lead to a false sense of security. 

42 



IS: 8629 (Part III) -1977 

10.2.2 Hand-Cleaning — Hand-cleaning, to be effective, must be done 
thoroughly. 

Washing down with fresh water will often be necessary and should be 
regarded as a normal procedure for marine structures; failure to remove 
the deposits of sea-salts on these may lead to rapid failure of paint applied 
to them. The water should preferably be warm and contain 1 or 2 percent 
of liquid detergent. The cleaning should be completed by rinsing with 
clean, hot, fresh water, taking care to remove residues of the cleaning agent 
from folds and crevices. 

10.2.2.1 Pressure steam jets are effective for removing adherent grime 
from sound paint, but care is needed to avoid damage to the paint itself. 
Emulsion cleaners may also be used and are less liable to damage the paint, 
but the residues must be thoroughly removed by warm water rinsing. 

10.2.2.2 Any oil or grease present on the old paint should be removed 
by treatment with clean white spirit or naphtha or a mixture of the two 
or by means of mixtures of aqueous detergents with organic solvents; alter- 
natively, steam jets may be used. The same methods may be used to clean 
bare steel surfaces. 

10.2.2.3 If deterioration has not reached the stage where stripping to 
bare metal is desirable, light scraping and wire-brushing should precede 
the cleaning. The aim should be to break any fine blisters and to remove 
any isolated nodules of rust and all loosely adherent pain without damaging 
the firmly adherent paint surrounding these isolated areas. 

10.2.2.4 Whatever the condition of the old paint that is allowed to 
remain, some slight roughening of the surface, for example by light Sand- 
papering, is desirable as this tends to improve the adhesion of the new 
painting scheme. Mild surface abrasion may be essential when preparing 
some hard gloss finishes for repainting. 

10.2.3 Blast-Cleaning — Where the old paint has to be removed comp- 
letely, blast-cleaning, if practicable, is the best surface preparation. The 
conduct of this process at site is made cheaper by the use of an expendable 
abrasive; when this cannot be used because of the dust created, closed-circuit 
vacuum apparatus may be a substitute. The same precautions should be 
taken as in the shop to avoid contamination of freshly blasted surfaces and 
to limit the interval before priming them. Because of these factors, the 
progress of blast-cleaning at bite is greatly expedited by the use of a 
quick-drying primer. 

10.2.4 Flame-Cleaning — Where access is difficult, or where the steel has 
become badly pitted, or where humid conditions make it difficult to get a 
dry surface for painting, flame-cleaning is often the best and sometimes the 
only practicable means of obtaining a reasonable standard of surface 
preparation. 

43 



IS: 8629 (Part III)- 1977 

10.2.4.1 Flame-cleaning should not be used to remove thick coatings 
of tar or bitumen; nor is it an economical procedure for stripping old intact 
paint. As a rough guide, .its use should be considered only when the break- 
down of the old paint has reached roughly 20 percent of rust by area or 
beyond. 

The process cannot be used near glass or flammable materials, and 
difficulty may arise in disponing of the dust to which it gives rise. The heat 
of the flame distorts light sections. 

10.2.5 Metal Coatings 

10.2.5.1 Where zinc and aluminium coatings are intact, the 
preparatory work may be restricted to washing down with fresh water and 
scrubbing with hard bristle brushes. This procedure should be used when 
zinc-coated steel that has not been painted initially has begun to show signs 
of deterioration but has not rusted appreciably. Where the zinc coating 
has disappeared over areas of appreciable size and patches of rust have 
appeared, the surface preparation should be the same as for steel. Unless, 
however, the zinc has corroded away entirely, hand-cleaning shall generally 
be preferable to blast-cleaning or flame-cleaning ( which destroy the zinc ). 
Steal wire brushes should be used. 

10.2.5.2 Where sprayed aluminium coatings have crumbled appre- 
ciably or where local rusting has occurred, vigorous wire-brushing is 
recommended. 

10.3 Painting Schemes 

10.3.1 The surface preparation together with the types and number of 
doats of paint used for maintenance painting will be governed to a large 
extent by the condition of the old paint, which may not be uniform all over 
the structure. Broadly, three kinds of surface may be distinguished: 

a) Areas of intact adherent paint where deterioration is confined to 
chalking and erosion of the outer coats, accompanied perhaps by 
slight checking and unbroken blistering. These areas should be 
cleaned, washed down and dried, and then given one or more 
coats of finishing paint. 

b) Areas where appreciable but not excessive paint breakdown has 
occurred and there is some blistering and pinhead rusting, but 
where the coating is otherwise sound and adherent. These areas 
should be scraped, wire-brushed, washed down and dried. They 
should then be given one or two coats of suitable priming paint, 
followed by two coats of the finishing paint. 

c) Areas where the paint has deteriorated badly and has lost its 
adhesion, and where the steel has rusted appreciably. These areas 
should be cleaned down to bare metal, preferably by blast-cleaning; 

44 



ISj8629(Pmrtm).1977 

flame-cleaning may be an acceptable alternative. If neither 
method is practicable, resort shall have to be had to hand-cleaning, 
assisted with power tools. A complete painting scheme should 
then be applied Co these bare areas in accordance with the 
appropriate recommendations. 

In practice, a uniform and clear-cut distribution of these three types 
of breakdown over a given structure seldom occurs, and a broad sub- 
division of the complete surface into areas of reasonable size may prove 
necessary. 

10.3.1.1 Experience is the best guide as to where to draw the dividing 
line between areas of type (b) and type (c). The former are most likely 
to arise at early maintenance paintings. Generally, the performance of the 
maintenance scheme will fall off progressively as the degree of rusting of the 
surface over which it is applied increases. 

103.2 The total number of coats of paint in the maintenance schemes 
suggested above is a matter of judgement, but it should suffice to restore 
the paint film to a satisfactory thickness everywhere. In some circum- 
stances, for example where access is difficult, it may be economical to apply 
more coats than the minimum necessary, so as to increase the interval 
between maintenance periods. 

10.4 Conduct of Maintenance Work 

' 10.4.1 Where different treatments are given to different areas of a 
structure, planned co-ordination of the work is important. It may, for 
example, be advisable, where complete repainting is contemplated, to clean 
down the firmly adherent paint before patch-painting is taken in hand. At 
areas where the paint is removed entirely, the areas of clean bare metal 
should extend for at least 25 mm all round the boundary of the defect. 
The ridges of sound paint surrounding the patch-painted areas should be 
carefully chamfered with sandpaper, so as to remove steep edges between 
tho old and the new paint. 

10*42 Immediately following the preparation of the surface for patch- 
painting, the first priming coat should be applied. This coat and each 
of the following coats should be carried over the adjoining sound paint all 
round for at least 50 mm. When the structure is not to be completely 
repainted, an attempt should be made to match the finishing paint to the 
old paint, but a full finishing coat or coats may have to be applied if a 
uniform appearance is essential. 



45 



IS : 8629 ( Part IU ) - 1977 



TABLE 1 RECOMMENDED PROTECTIVE SCHEMES TO BE USED UNDER DIFFERENT CORROSIVE CONDITIONS 

(Ohm 4.1, 4.2, 6,3 W 7,4) 



Component* of Pkotbgtive Schemes 


Intensity of Corrosion 




Less than 
0*025 mm per vcar 


OWS-O^mm 
per year 


0'05-0'l2mro 
pa year 


0'12-0'25mm 
per year 


More than 
0*25 mm per year 


Surface Preparation 


Hand-cleaning 


1 • 


i • 









Flame-cleaning 


A 


A 


A 1 • 


• 




Pickling 








O 


O 


Sand- or grit-blasting 








A 1 


A 1 


Metallic Coating 


Aluminium 


0*07-0-12 mm thick 










A 


0*02-0-07 mm thick 








A 


1 


Zinc 


0*07-0-12 mm thick 










A 


0"02-0-07 mm thick 








A 


D 


Primer Paint Coat- 
ing 


Zinc-cbromate 


Single coat 


A 1 


A ■ 


• 




1 


Double coat 








n 


A 


A 


Red lead 


Single coat 


A 


A 









Double coat 






A I 


1 • 




Finishing Paint 
Coating 


Aluminium 
pigmented 


Single coat 


1 


1 








Double coat 


A 


A • 


A 1 • 


A I 


A 1 


Synthetic enamel 


Single coat 


D 











Double coat 


A 


A O 


A o o 


A D • 





A Grade A - Scheme to last for initial period of 5 years. | Grade B - Scheme to last for initial period of 3 years. • Grade C - Scheme to last for initial period of 1 year. 
A Alternative, O Alternative. O Alternative, 

Note 1 - One of the three grades ol ibe protective scheme should be chosen depending upon the required initial life for a particular type of structure. The components of that 
grade of the protection scheme may be obtained from the table for areas with different corrosivities. 

Note 2 - Life of the various painting schemes, indicated in the table may be improved substantially, if the steel surfaces are subjected to intermediate protective trcatrents, like, 
phosphatic and etch/wash primers ( m 5,5 ). 

47 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS (SI UNITS) 



Base Uniti 










Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 






Length 

Mass 

Time 

Electric o it rent 

Thermodynamic 

temperature 
Luminous intensity 
Amount of substance 


metre 

kilogram 

second 

ampere 

kelvin 

candela 
mole 


m 

kg 

a 

A 

K 

cd 
mol 






Supplementary Units 










Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 






Plane- angle 
Solid angle 


radian 
•teradian 


rad 
sr 






Derived Units 










Quantity 


Unit 


Symbol 




Definition 


Force 

Energy 

Power 

Flux 

Flux density 

Frequency 

Electric conductance 

Electromotive force 

Pressure, stress 


newton 

joule 

watt 

weber 

tesla 

hertz 

Siemens 

volt 

pascal 


N 

J 

W 

Wb 

T 

Hz 

S 

V 

Pa 


1 
1 

1 

I 
1 

1 
I 
1 


N - 1 kg.m7t» 
J - 1 N.m 

W - 1 J/s 
Wb - I V.s 

T - 1 Wb/m* 
Hz - l c/s ( s-» ) 

S - 1 A/V 

V - 1 W/A 
Pa - 1 N/m" 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10002 
Telephones : 2660 21, 27 01 31 Telegrams 

Regional Offices : 



Western : Novelty Chambers. Grant Road 

Eastern : 5 Chowringhee Approach 

Southern : C. I, T Campus 

Northern : B69. Phase VII 



BOMBAY 400007 
CALCUTTA 700071 
MADRAS 600U3 
S.A.S. NAGAR 
(MOHALI ) 160051 



Manaksanstha 

Telephone 

6 32 92 95 
27 50 90 
41 24 42 
8 78 26 



Branch Offices: 

'Pushpak\ Nurmonamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur 

'F* Block, Unity Bldg, Narasimharaja Square 

Gangotri Complex, Bhadbbada Road, T.T. Nagar 

22B Kalpana Area 

5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg 

R 14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme 

117/418 B Sarvodava Nagar 

Patliputra Industrial Estate 

Hantex Bldg (2nd Floor), Rly Station Road 



AHMADABAD 380001 2 03 91 

BANGALORE 560002 22 48 05 

BHOPAL 462003 6 27 16 

BHUB ANESH W AR 75 1014 5 36 27v 

HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 

JAIPUR 302005 6 98 32 

KANPUR 208005 4 72 92 

PATNA 800013 6 28 08 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 32 27 



Printed at Seema Offset Press, Delhi. India 



