NAT Td IS 1892 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


пат ferd suae 
әт згачо — ofa ат 


(ана дет) 


Subsurface Investigation for 
Foundations — Code of Practice 


(Second Revision ) 


ІС5 93.020 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR чая, 9 serere TH AMT, 4% ее — 110002 


Vee МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR МАКС 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 13 


IS 1892 : 2021 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, СЕО 43 


ЕОКЕМОКО 


This Indian Standard (Second Revision) was adopted by Ше Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


A subsurface investigation for a construction site is essential for a preliminary design and subsequently to finalize 
the foundation design. The object of the investigation is to provide the designer with all necessary information 
about the existing site and ground conditions. This will include description of ground variations, outcrop of rocks, 
presence of vegetation/organic matter or marshy land, nearby natural drain, requirement of ground improvement, 
requirement of treatment of foundations due to presence of harmful chemicals in soil and water, etc. A knowledge 
of the subsoil condition and the ground water table and its fluctuation is a prerequisite for subsurface evaluation 
of the site. 


The detailed subsurface investigation enables to draw vertical section of the strata in the proposed construction area 
with design parameters, grain size distribution, Atterberg’s limits, soil classification, shear strength parameters, 
compressibility parameters, swelling properties, drainage properties, etc derived from laboratory testing. The 
information about variations in the ground water table from location to location and its seasonal fluctuation is also 
required. Above information along with topographical survey will provide the engineer the necessary details for 
design of economical foundation and its execution at site. 


All the field investigations and laboratory testing should be carried out under supervision of a qualified geotechnical 
engineer or a qualified civil engineer having experience in the field of geotechnical engineering. This is essential 
to ensure that all the requirements about the testing equipment and test procedures have been strictly followed and 
quality data is obtained. Further analysis and interpretation of such investigation and field/laboratory test results 
require expertise in geotechnical engineering. 


In view of large variations in the nature of super structures, extent of plan area and the soil strata conditions, no 
single method/approach can be suitable for all situations. The choice of type and number of tests and depth of test 
depends on the nature of substrata variation, type of loading and the type of structure proposed at a given location. 
This standard is intended to provide guidelines on ways to proceed in a given situation. 


This standard is intended to cover the subsurface investigation required for planning and design of foundations 
for building(s), structures including industrial structures and infrastructure projects. However, the subsurface 
investigation for river valley projects is not covered in this standard. 


This standard was first published in 1962 and subsequently revised in 1979 based on the experience gained in 
this field over the years. This revision has been brought out to incorporate provisions relating to latest techniques 
and equipment developed and being used in the country for subsurface investigation. Improvements to take into 
account the data gathered and experience gained since the last revision of the standard have also been incorporated. 


The following major modifications have been incorporated in this revision of the standard: 


a) Scope of the standard has been extended to cover foundations for industrial structures and 
infrastructure projects; 


b) Provisions on location and depth of investigation have been modified; 


c) Provisions on various boring techniques have been updated and continuous soil samplers have been 
included; 

d) Provisions on wash boring and mud-rotary boring have been deleted; 

e) Series of in-situ tests have been added, such as static cone penetration test using piezocone with 
pore pressure measurement (CPTu), field California bearing ratio (CBR) test, cross hole seismic 
test (CHST), ground penetrating radar survey (GPR), spectral analysis of surface wave (SASW) and 
multi-channel analysis of surface wave (MASW), dilatometer test (DMT) and in-situ permeability 
test, etc; 


f) Provisions on optical and acoustic tele-viewer methods have been added; and 
g) Provisions on pressuremeter test (PMT) have been detailed. 


IS 1892 : 2021 


The following are some of the important standards dealing with the subsurface investigation aspects and are 
utilized for report preparation: 


IS No. 
IS 1080 : 1985 


IS 1498 : 1970 
IS 1888 : 1982 
IS 1892 : 2021 
IS 1904 : 2021 


IS 2131: 
IS 2132: 
IS 2720 
IS 2809: 
IS 2810: 
IS 2911 


IS 2950 (Part 1) : 
1981 


IS 3025 


1981 
1986 


1972 
1979 


IS 3043 : 2018 
IS 4078 : 1980 
IS 4434 : 1978 
IS 4453 : 2009 


IS 4464 : 2020 


IS 4651 (Part 1) : 
2020 


IS 4968 (Part 1) : 
1976 


IS 4968 (Part 2) : 
1976 


IS 4968 (Part 3) : 
1976 


IS 5249 : 1992 
IS 5313 : 2020 


IS 5529 (Part 1) : 
2013 


IS 5529 (Part 2) : 
2006 


IS 6403 : 1981 
IS 6926 : 1996 


IS 6935 : 1973 
IS 6955 : 2008 


Title 


Code of practice for design and construction of shallow foundations in soils (other than raft, 
ring and shell) (second revision) 


Classification and identification of soils for general engineering purposes (first revision) 
Method of load test on soils (second revision) 
Subsurface investigation for foundations — Code of practice (second revision) 


General requirements for design and construction of foundations in soils — Code of practice 
(fourth revision) 


Method for standard penetration test for soils (first revision) 

Code of practice for thin walled tube sampling of soils (second revision) 

Method of test for soils (relevant parts) 

Glossary of terms and symbols relating to soil engineering (first revision) 

Glossary of terms relating to soil dynamics (first revision) 

Design and construction of pile foundations — Code of practice (relevant parts and section) 


Code of practice for design and construction of raft foundations: Part 1 Design 
(second revision) 


Methods of sampling and test (physical and chemical) for water and wastewater (relevant 
parts) 


Code of practice for earthing (second revision) 
Code of practice for indexing and storage of drill cores (first revision) 
Code of practice for in-situ vane shear test for soils (first revision) 


Subsurface exploration by pits, trenches, drifts and shafts — Code of practice 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for presentation of drilling information and core description in geotechnical 
investigation (second revision) 


Planning and design of ports and harbours — Code of practice: Part 1 Site investigation 
(second revision) 


Method for subsurface sounding for soils: Part | Dynamic method using 50 mm cone 
without bentonite slurry (first revision) 


Method for subsurface sounding for soils: Part 2 Dynamic method using cone and bentonite 
slurry(first revision) 


Method for subsurface sounding for soils: Part 3 Static cone penetration test (first revision) 


Determination of dynamic properties of soil — Method of test (second revision) 
Guide for core drilling observations (second revision) 


In-situ permeability tests: Part 1 Tests in overburden — Code of practice (second revision) 
In-situ permeability test: Part 2 Tests in bedrock — Code of practice (second revision) 


Code of practice for determination of bearing capacity of shallow foundations (first revision) 


Diamond core drilling — Site investigation for river valley projects — Code of practice 
(first revision) 
Method of determination of water level in a borehole 


Subsurface exploration for earth and rockfill dams — Code of practice (first revision) 


15 Мо. 


18 7422 


18 8009 


Part 1: 1976 
Рап 2 : 1980 


IS 8763: 
IS 8764: 
IS 9143 
IS 9179 
IS 9198 
IS 9214: 
IS 9259: 
IS 9640: 
IS 9669: 


IS 10050: 


IS 10060 


IS 10074: 
IS 10108: 
IS 10589: 


IS 10837 


IS 11229 


11315 (Part 11): 


1985 
IS 12070 
IS 13372 


Part 1: 
Part 2 : 


IS 15681 
IS 15686 


IS 15736 


1978 
1998 


: 1979 
: 1979 
: 1979 


1979 
1979 
1980 
1980 
1981 
: 2013 
1982 
1982 
1983 
: 1984 


: 1985 


: 1987 


1992 
1992 
: 2006 
: 2006 


: 2007 


IS 1892 : 2021 


Title 


Symbols and abbreviations for use in geological maps, sections and subsurface exploratory 
logs (relevant parts) 


Code of practice for calculation of settlements of foundations 

Shallow foundations subjected to symmetrical static vertical loads 

Deep foundations subjected to symmetrical static vertical loading 

Guide for undisturbed sampling of sands 

Method for determination of point load strength index of rocks (first revision) 
Method for the determination of unconfined compressive strength of rock materials 
Method for preparation of rock specimen for laboratory testing 

Specification for compaction rammer for soil testing 

Method of determination of modulus of subgrade reaction (K value) of soils in field 
Specification for liquid limit apparatus for soils 

Specification for split spoon sampler 

Specification for CBR moulds and its accessories 

Method for determination of slake durability indexs of rocks 

Geotechnical investigation for power house sites — Code of practice (first revision) 
Specification for compaction mould assembly for light and heavy compaction test for soils 
Code of practice for sampling of soils by thin wall sampler with stationary piston 
Specification for equipment for subsurface sounding of soils 


Specification for moulds and accessories for determination of density index (relative density) 
of cohesionless soils 


Specification for shear box for testing of soils 


Method for the quantitative descriptions of discontinuities in rock mass: Part 11 Core 
recovery and rock quality designation 


Code of practice for design and construction of shallow foundations on rocks 

Seismic testing of rock mass — Code of practice 

Part 1 Within a borehole 

Part 2 Between the boreholes 

Geological exploration by geophysical method (seismic refraction) — Code of practice 


Recommendations for preparation of geological and geotechnical maps for river valley 
projects 


Geological exploration by geophysical method (electrical resistivity) — Code of practice 


In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this 


country. 


The composition of the Committee and the concerned Panel responsible for the formulation of this standard are 


given in Annex H. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Hi 


IS 1892 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


SUBSURFACE INVESTIGATION FOR 
FOUNDATIONS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard deals with subsurface investigation 
required for planning and design of foundations for 
building(s), structures including industrial structures 
and infrastructure projects excluding river valley 
projects, to determine: 


a) A brief geological description of the site, with 
history of seismicity of the area, presence of 
surface drainage, etc. 


b) Sequence and extent of various soil layers and 
rock strata in the region which is likely to be 
influenced due to the proposed construction. 


c) Nature of each stratum, their physical, chemical 
and engineering properties. 


d) Suitability of the stratum to support the foundation 
or its use as construction material. 


e) Location of ground water table, its variation 
across the site, seasonal fluctuations and chemical 
composition. 


f) Requirement of any ground improvement/ 
treatment of existing soil with respect to proposed 
construction. 


g) Substrata response to dynamic loading as well as 
environmental changes, if any. 


h) Suitability of earth as fill material. 


j) Seepage, and requirement of dewatering, vertical 
support for deep excavation, etc. 


k) Foundation system, either shallow foundation or 
deep foundation. 


1.2 The standards listed below which have been 
formulated to cover special aspects of investigation for 
specific works shall also be referred for investigation 
for such works: 


IS 4464, IS 4651 (Part 1), IS 6926, IS 6955, IS 7720, 
IS 10042, IS 10060, IS 11385, IS 13216, IS 13578, 
IS 14330, IS 14592 (Part 1), IS 15662, IS 15681, 
IS 15736. 


2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed in Annex A contain 
provisions, which through reference in this text, 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time 
of publication the editions indicated are valid. All 


standards are subject to revision and parties to agreement 
based on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 GENERAL 


3.1 In areas, which have been already developed, data 
from nearby structures may be utilized in planning the 
investigation. Information, such as type of foundations 
used, records of borehole or trial pits, depth of water 
table as observed in nearby well or borewell, any specific 
problems faced, etc, may be collected. 


3.2 Planning of Investigation 


The subsurface exploration consists of geotechnical 
investigation including subsurface sounding tests and 
geophysical investigations, wherever necessary. The type 
and extent of investigation shall be decided based on the 
nature of the project, the variations in strata condition and 
the necessity of the input data required for the design and 
construction of foundations or for temporary support for 
deep excavation. The investigation generally proceeds 
in stages. However, the characteristics of the subsurface 
strata and conditions are assessed in greater detail as the 
stages of investigation proceed. 


In case of off-shore locations, suitable working platform 
shall be required. 


It is also necessary to carry out subsurface investigation 
in the borrow area from where the earth material will be 
used for construction of earthen embankments, etc. 


4 STAGES 
INVESTIGATTON 


OF SUBSURFACE 


4.1 The stages of subsurface investigation are: 
a) site reconnaissance; 
b) preliminary investigation; 
c) detailed investigation; 
d) construction stage investigation; and 
e) post-construction stage investigation. 


4.2 Site Reconnaissance 


4.2.1 Site reconnaissance would help in deciding future 
programme of field investigations, that is, to assess the 
need for preliminary and/or detailed investigations. 


1S 1892: 2021 


This would also help in determining scope of work, 
methods of exploration to be adopted, in-situ tests to be 
carried out and administrative arrangements required 
for the investigation. Where detailed information 
on the geotechnical conditions is not available, an 
inspection of site and study of topographical features 
are helpful in getting information about soil, rock and 
ground-water conditions. Site reconnaissance includes 
a study of local topography, excavations, ravines, 
quarries, escarpments; evidence of erosion or landslides, 
behaviour of existing structures at or near the site; 
water level in streams, water courses and wells; flood 
marks; nature of vegetation; drainage pattern, location 
of seeps, springs and swamps, evidence of expansive 
soils. Information on some of these may be obtained 
from topographical maps, geological maps, pedological 
and soil survey maps, vicinity maps, metrological data 
and digitized images. 


4.2.2 Data regarding removal of overburden by 
excavation, erosion or landslides should be obtained. 
This gives an idea of the amount of pre-consolidation 
the soil strata has undergone. Similarly, data regarding 
recent fills is also important to study the consolidation 
characteristics of the fill as well as the original strata. 


4.2.3 The type of flora affords at times some indication 
of the nature of the soil. The extent of swamp and 
superficial deposits and peats will usually be obvious. 
In general, such indications, while worth noting, require 
to be confirmed by actual exploration. 


4.2.4 Ground-water Conditions 


The ground-water level fluctuates and will depend 
upon the permeability of the strata and the head causing 
the water to flow. The water level in streams and water 
courses, if any, in the neighbourhood, should be noted, 
but it may be misleading to take this as an indication 
of the depth of the water table in the ground. Wells at 
the site or in the vicinity give useful indications of the 
ground-water conditions. Flood marks of rivers may 
indicate former highest water levels. Tidal fluctuations 
may be of importance. There is also a possibility of there 
being several water tables at different levels, separated 
by impermeable strata, and some of this water may be 
subject to artesian head. It is also important to collect 
water samples to check its suitability for construction 
purpose and any treatment of foundation required for 
corrosion protection. 


4.2.5 Enquiries Regarding Earlier Use of the Site 


In certain cases the earlier uses of the site may have 
a very important bearing on proposed new works. 
This is particularly so in areas, where there have been 
underground workings, such as worked-out ballast 
pits, quarries, old brick fields, coal mines and mineral 
workings. Enquiries should be made regarding the 
location of shafts and workings, particularly shallow 
ones, where there may be danger of collapse, if heavy 
new structures are superimposed. 


4.2.5.1 The possibility of damage to sewers, conduits 
and drainage systems by subsidence should also be 
investigated. 


4.3 Preliminary Investigation 


The purpose of preliminary investigation is to assess the 
feasibility of a project. The preliminary investigation 
includes determination of approximate depth, thickness, 
extent and composition of sub-strata, ground water table 
and also to obtain approximate information regarding 
strength and compressibility of the various strata. The 
preliminary investigation comprises boreholes with 
standard penetration test (SPT), collection of disturbed 
samples (DS), undisturbed samples (UDS), dynamic 
cone penetration test (DCPT), trial pits and laboratory 
testing. 


Geophysical investigation may also be carried out 
during the preliminary investigation to establish the 
sequence of layers, their approximate properties, depth 
of bedrock, etc. 


4.4 Detailed Investigation 


Planning of detailed investigation is generally based 
on the information obtained in the preliminary 
investigation. The objective is to find the sequence of 
various layers, thickness of the layers, ground water 
table and detailed engineering properties of each layer. 
Detailed investigation involves in-situ (field) testing 
and laboratory testing. 


The in-situ tests are described in 6. Laboratory testing 
on soil/rock/water samples collected from the site is 
carried out to determine the index, physical, engineering 
and chemical properties as given in 5. Annex B gives 
various methods of investigation and their applications. 


The type and number of tests shall depend upon the 
nature of the project, geology of the area and site 
conditions. 


4.5 Construction Stage Investigation 


During construction, there may be a requirement 
of additional investigation to overcome Ше 
difficulties/modifying the foundation system due to 
change in subsoil/ground water conditions. The type 
of test required shall be selected from those specified 
under detailed investigation. 


4.6 Post-construction Stage Investigation 


At times, in order to study the behaviour/strengthening 
of substructure/foundation, investigation may be 
required. 


5 SUBSURFACE EXPLORATION 
This clause includes the following: 

a) Geophysical investigation; 

b) Trial pits; 


с) Subsurface soundings; 

d) Boring in soil; 

e) Core drilling in rock; and 

f) Location and depth of investigation. 


5.1 Geophysical Investigation 


The geophysical investigation includes measurement 
of physical properties of the ground based on which the 
type of strata and depth of strata can be approximately 
evaluated. These tests provide a quick means of 
getting useful information about the stratification and 
underground utilities. This will enable to plan the 
depth/extent of the in-situ tests and type of test to be 
carried out in-situ and in the laboratory. 


The method provides only approximate parameters 
about the strata which need to be confirmed by 
conducting detailed investigation. These methods 
may be employed to get preliminary information on 
stratigraphy or complement a rationalized boring 
programme by correlation of stratigraphy between 
widely spaced boreholes. 


Commonly adopted geophysical tests are given in 
Table 1. 


Table 1 Geophysical Tests 
( Clause 5.1 ) 


Type of Test 
(1) (2) (3) 


1) Electrical resistivity test 
(ERT) 


п) Seismic refraction test (SRT) 


Property Measured 


Electrical resistivity 


Primary wave velocity 


iii) Cross hole seismic test 
(CHST) and down hole 
seismic test (DHST) 


iv) Spectral analysis of surface 


Shear wave velocity 


Primary/Shear wave 


wave (SASW) and velocity 
multi-channel analysis of 
surface wave (MASW) 
v) Ground penetrating radar Electromagnetic 
survey (GPR Survey) intensity (Resistivity) 
vi) Thermal resistivity test Thermal conductivity 
5.2 Trial Pit 


This method consists of excavating a pit at the 
site and thereby exposing the strata. This enables 
visual inspection of the strata, collection of 
disturbed/undisturbed samples and carrying out in-situ 
tests. Generally, trial pits are excavated up to 4 m depth 
below the ground level. 


Minimum dimension of the pit shall be such that there is 
an adequate working space for excavation and carrying 
out sampling/testing. Generally, the pits have planned 
dimensions varying from 1 m x 1 m up to 3 m x 3 m 
depending on the depth required. 


After the pit is excavated, the details of the strata shall 
be recorded with the description of each layer with 


IS 1892 : 2021 


thickness and ground water table, ifany. After collecting 
the samples/in-situ testing, the pit shall be backfilled 
with the same excavated material. Arrangement shall 
be made for dewatering below ground water table. 
Precautions shall be taken to prevent surface water 
draining into the trial pit. 


5.3 Subsurface Soundings 


Subsurface soundings provide quick means to get 
continuous resistance against penetration indicating 
compactness of the strata. The following sounding tests 
are generally carried out: 


a) Dynamic cone penetration test; 
b) Static cone penetration test; and 


c) Static cone penetration test using piezocone with 
pore water pressure measurement. 


The limitation of soundings is that samples cannot be 
collected. In addition, strata having stones, gravels, 
boulders, etc and stiff formations cannot be penetrated 
by sounding device. 


5.4 Boring in Soil 


Various techniques are available for boring in soil 
depending on the substrata and depth of investigation. 
Commonly used boring methods are given below and 
described in 5.4.1 to 5.4.4. 


a) Auger boring, 

b) Shell and auger boring, 
c) Rotary boring, and 

d) Percussion drilling. 


In general, the diameter of the borehole is about 100 mm 
to 150 mm. In boreholes, in-situ testing like standard 
penetration test along with collection of disturbed and 
undisturbed samples at regular depth intervals and at 
change of strata is carried out. Other in-situ tests may 
also be carried out in the boreholes as per requirements. 


In order to prevent caving in of soil during boring, 
stabilizing fluid like bentonite slurry/temporary steel 
casing or combination of both should be used. 


The bottom of the borehole shall be cleaned prior to 
sampling/testing at different levels. 


If the standard penetration test (SPT) ‘N’ value greater 
than 100 with characteristics of rock is met with, 
the borehole shall be advanced further by chiselling. 
Chiselling shall be continued for a maximum depth 
of 20 cm or for a period of 2 h, whichever is earlier. 
During chiselling rock fragments shall be collected. 
Identification of rock strata shall be on the basis of 
visual examination of SPT sample and rock fragments. 
After it is established that rock is met with, borehole 
shall be advanced further by drilling in rock and core 
shall be collected. When the borehole is terminated in 
soil strata, an additional standard penetration test shall 
be carried out at the termination depth. 


1S 1892: 2021 


5.4.1 Auger Boring 


An auger is either power or hand operated with periodic 
removal of cuttings. The bore profile is prepared based 
on physical observation of the cut material removed 
from auger. 


The process is slow in case of manual operation. Hand 
operated auger is generally used for boring up to a 
depth of 6 m. Casing is not used in this method. The 
method is convenient considering ease of mobilization. 
The auger is used in soil where borehole stands 
unsupported. Auger is penetrated into the ground for 
a depth of about 300 mm to 600 mm, and the auger is 
withdrawn for removing the cuttings. The auger is then 
reintroduced to extend the borehole. 


5.4.2 Shell and Auger Boring 


Shell and auger boring is adopted for deep boreholes. 
The equipment consists of auger and a shell (bailer) 
for boring, connected with steel wire ropes/drilling 
rods which are lowered/raised with the help of tripod 
and mechanical winch. The casing is lowered in the 
borehole by rotating/pushing to the required depth. 


The auger is generally used up to the ground water 
table followed by shell. 


The shell is raised/lowered repeatedly to cut the soil at 
the bottom and the cut material collected in the shell is 
removed. In stiff cohesive soil, it may be necessary to 
soak the borehole while boring above the ground water 
table. Where ground water is encountered, the water 
level in the borehole shall always be maintained at or 
above the water table. 


The method is efficient to drill in hard strata but may 
disturb the soil at the bottom of the borehole. The 
method should be adopted with caution to minimize 
disturbances in the soil, prior to sampling/testing. 


5.4.3 Percussion Boring (see Fig. 1) 


This method should only be used for drilling boreholes 
in bouldary and gravelly strata where other boring 
methods become ineffective. 


In this method, the formation is pulverized/broken by 
repeated blows using a bit or a chisel. Water should be 
added at the time of boring, and the cuttings are baled 
out at intervals. The bit/chisel is suspended by a cable 
or rods from a hoist. 


As this method involves repeated dropping of a 
heavy chisel and can disturb the strata considerably, 
it is preferable that at least 0.5 m above the level of 
sampling/testing, the use of percussion method shall be 
discontinued and the borehole advanced/cleaned with 
shell or any other suitable method till the sampling 
depth has reached. 


5.4.4 Rotary Boring (see Fig. 2) 
In this method, boring is advanced by the cutting action 


of a rotating bit which should be kept in firm contact 
with the bottom of the hole. The bit is connected at the 
end of hollow, jointed drill rods which are rotated by 
a suitable chuck. Water/stabilizing fluid like bentonite 
slurry is pumped continuously down the hollow drill 
rods and the fluid returns to the surface through the 
annular space between the rods and the side of the hole, 
and the casing may not be generally required. This 
method can be used in all type of strata. 


5.5 Core Drilling in Rock 


Core drilling in rock shall be carried out with rotary 
hydraulic rig using diamond-tipped bit (see Note) as per 
IS 6926. The core drilling equipment shall conform to 
IS 10208. Drilling shall be carried out with NX/HX size 
diamond-tipped drill bits or impregnated diamond bit 
depending on the type of rock formation. Double tube 
core barrel with core lifter shall be used. The diamond 
bit is attached to double tube core barrel with reaming 
shell. The bit cuts an annular groove into the formation 
and the inner core formed by the groove enters into 
the inner barrel as a core sample. The circulating fluid 
is injected through the annular gap between the outer 
barrel and inner barrel and hence the fluid does not 
come in contact with the core received in the barrel. 
This prevents damage to the core by washing out of the 
loose particles in the joints (if any) and improves both 
core recovery and rock quality designation (RQD). 
After advancing the core barrel, the barrel is withdrawn, 
the rock cores are removed by detaching the core cutter, 
reassembled and introduced back in the borehole for 
further coring. Indexing and storage of drill cores shall 
be in accordance with IS 4078. 

NOTE — Tungsten carbide bit may be used for rocks like, 

shale, siltstone and claystone. 
The drilling rig shall have necessary facilities to 
regulate the spindle speed, bit pressure and water 
pressure during core drilling to get good core recovery. 
The rotational speed of the bit (spindle speed), the 
amount of downward pressure applied on the bit 
(bit pressure) and water pressure shall be suitably 
adjusted and properly monitored so that the core is 
collected with least disturbance and avoid shearing of 
the core from its base. 


Drilling run should be 0.75 m in length. This can be 
increased up to 1.5 m run in case core recovery is more 
than 50 percent in two successive 0.75 m drill runs. If 
the core recovery is nil, then SPT shall be performed 
before commencing the next drill run. 


If at any time a blocking of the bit or grinding of the 
core is indicated, the core barrel shall be immediately 
withdrawn from the borehole regardless of the length 
of drill run completed. 


5.6 Location and Depth of Investigation 


5.6.1 The location and depth of investigation points 
shall depend upon the type of structure/building 


CROWN SHEAVE 


MAIN DRILLING 


CABLE SAND SHEAVE 


SAND LINE 
7.9TO9.5mm 
SPUDDING 
SHEAVE 
SPUDDING ARM 
BAILER OR 
SAND PUMP. 


SAND REEL 


BASE ON SKIDS AND 
CRIBBING OR MOUNTED 
ON TRUCK 


See ENLARGED 


АС DETAIL- A 


SHAFT FOR 
SPUDDING ARM 
AND SPOOLING 
SHEAVE 


POST 


IS 1892 : 2021 


A'SINKER BAR' SIMILAR 
TO BUT MUCH SHORTER 
THAN THE DRILL STEM 
SOMETIMES INSERTED 


HERE ROPE 


SOCKET 


CASING 


COUPLING JARS 1.5 ТО 2.1m 


USED ONLY IN ROCK 
OR MATERIALS IN 
WHICH BIT MAY 
STICK 


SLURRY OF 
WATER AND 
GROUND-UP 
MATERIAL IN 
LOWER PART OF 
HOLE 


DRILLING STEM 2.4 TO 7.6 т 
FOR 150 mm HOLE 


CASING SHOE — 


DRILLING ВП 1.2 TO 1.8 m 


р 


ENLARGED DETAIL "А" 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR PERCUSSION DRILLING 


IS 1892 : 2021 


TOWER MAST 


SWIVEL HOSE 


STAND PIPE 


YOKE AND KELLY DRIVE 


STAND PIPE HOSE 


DRIVE ROD MUD PUMP 
ROTARY MAIN MUD PIT 
DRIVE v == 


HOISTING 
DRUM 


OVERFLOW 
DITCH 


SETTLING 


SLIPS PIT 


А 


HYDRAULIC / СІПГА----- EN ! See VIEW ! 
CYLINDER SPIDER >... ! ABOVE 1 


CASING 


DRILL PIPE 


DRILL 
COLLAR 


DRILL BIT 


FIG. 2 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR ROTARY DRILLING 


considering variation in substrata based оп Ше 
preliminary subsurface investigation or available 
geotechnical data in an already developed site. The 
investigation points should be arranged in such a 
pattern that the stratification can be assessed across 
the site. The guidelines as specified in 5.6.2 and 5.6.3 
may be adopted for deciding the location and depth of 
boreholes/trial pits and other in-situ tests. 


5.6.2 Disposition of Boreholes/Trial Pits 


The guidelines for disposition of boreholes/trial pits 
are given in Table 2. In case significant variation in 
stratification is observed, additional boreholes/tests, as 
required may be carried out. 

Table 2 Disposition of Borehole/Trial Pit 


( Clause 5.6.2) 


SI Type of Location of 
No. Structure/Buildings Borehole/Trial Pit 
(1) 2) (3) 
i) For lightly loaded At least one 
residential building (such as borehole/trial pit in the 


single/double storeyed building) centre of the building 


(see Note) 


At least one borehole 
in each corner and one 
in the centre 


site 
of about 


ii) For  building(s in a 
covering an area 
0.4 hectares 


iii) a) For structure/building 
having any of the plan 
dimensions exceeding 50 m 


Boreholes in a grid 
pattern with points at 
not more than 50 m 
distance, subject to 
a minimum of two 
boreholes. Boreholes 
should cover built-up 
areas. 


b) For multiple buildings in 
а site covering an area of 
more than 0.4 hectares 


c) For multistoried buildings 
and structure of height less 
than and equal to 50 па 


iv) For multistoried buildings and Minimum three 
structure of height more than 50 boreholes at each 
m building/structure 


v)  Linearstructures (roads, railways, 
embankments, pipelines, 
boundary walls, tunnels, retaining 
walls, transmission lines, etc) 


Boreholes at a spacing 
of 50 m to 500 m 


In highly erratic 
substrata, spacing may 
be suitably reduced. 
In uniform substrata, 
the spacing may be 
suitably increased. 


vi) Solar power plant One borehole for every 


2 to 5 hectares subject 
to a minimum of 
5 boreholes per site 


NOTE — Boreholes are preferred over trial pits. 


5.6.3 Depth of Investigation 


5.6.3.1 The depth of investigation shall be adequate 
enough to provide necessary data for estimating 
safe bearing capacity and settlement. In general, the 
investigation shall be carried out to a minimum depth to 
which the increase in stress level due to the foundation 
load is lesser than 10 percent of the in-situ stress level. 


IS 1892 : 2021 


The depth of investigation also depends on the risk 
induced by the presence of weaker formations below 
the influence zone to be stressed due to the proposed 
construction. 


5.6.3.2 The following guidelines may be followed for 
adopting the depth of investigation: 


a) Shallow foundation (other than raft foundations) 
in soil — The depth of investigation shall be up 
to 2 to 3 times the estimated width of the largest 
foundation below the expected founding level. 


b) Raft foundation (minimum foundation width 
equal to 6 m for the purpose of investigation) 
in soil — Raft foundation is a substructure 
supporting an arrangement of columns or walls 
in a row or rows and transmitting the loads to 
the soil by means of a continuous slab with or 
without depressions or openings. In case of raft 
foundation the depth of investigation shall be up to 
1.0 to 2.0 times the width of the raft foundation 
below the expected founding level. 


c) Pile foundation in soil— The depth of investigation 
shall be sufficiently below the expected founding 
level of piles but this should not be less than 5 m 
or 5 times the diameter of piles, whichever is more 
beyond the estimated pile termination level. 


d) Embankments — The depth of investigation shall 
be 1.0 to 2.0 times the height of the embankment. 


e) Well foundation in soil — The depth of 
investigation in the case of well foundation shall 
be 1.5 to 2.0 times the width/diameter of the well 
from the estimated termination level of the well. 

f) Penetration into rock — In case rock formation 
is encountered prior to the termination depth of 
boreholes as stipulated in (a) to (e) above, the 
boreholes may be extended by minimum 5 m in 
rock strata depending upon rock characteristics 
and project requirements. 

NOTE — The depth of investigation may be suitably arrived 


as per the specific requirements for any other foundation/ 
substructure. 


5.6.4 Other In-situ Tests 


The location and depth of investigation for other in-situ 
tests shall be as per the requirements. 


6 IN-SITU TESTING 


In-situ tests provide information about the strength and 
deformability characteristics of the strata. Following 
are the in-situ tests which may be conducted depending 
on the nature of the strata and project requirements: 


a) Standard penetration test (SPT); 
b) Vane shear test (VST); 

c) Pressuremeter test (PMT); 

d) Plate load test (PLT); 

e) Cyclic plate load test (CPLT); 


1S 1892: 2021 


f) Block vibration test (B VT); 
g) Dynamic cone penetration test (ОСРТ); 
h) Static cone penetration test (SCPT); 


J) Piezocone with pore pressure measurement 
(CPTu); 


k) Flat dilatometer test (DMT); 
m) Electrical resistivity test (ERT); 
n) Seismic refraction test (SRT); 


p) Down hole, up-hole and cross hole seismic test 
(CHST); 


g) Spectral analysis of surface wave (SASW) and 
multi-channel analysis of surface wave (MASW) 
test; 


r) Ground penetrating radar (GPR) survey; 

s) Thermal resistivity test; 

t) In-situ permeability test; 

u) Modulus of subgrade reaction; 

v) Field california bearing ratio test (CBR); and 
w) Optical and acoustic tele-viewer methods. 


6.1 Standard Penetration Test 


This test shall be conducted in all types of soil deposits 
in a borehole to assess soil characteristics. The test shall 
be conducted in accordance with IS 2131. However, 
it is preferred to use automatic trip hammer in place 
of drop hammer as mentioned in IS 2131. The depth 
interval between the bottom of the standard penetration 
test and next undisturbed sampling/any other test shall 
not be less than 500 mm. 


6.2 Vane Shear Test 


Field vane shear test shall be performed inside the 
borehole to determine the shear strength of cohesive 
soils, especially in soft clays which are highly 
susceptible to sampling disturbance, in accordance 
with IS 4434. 


6.3 Pressuremeter Test 


The test is carried out to determine the in-situ 
stress-strain characteristics of the substrata. 


The test involves positioning of a radially expandable 
probe at the desired depth in a borehole and applying 
increments of pressure to inflate the probe thus 
applying increasing radial stresses on the substrata in 
the walls of the borehole and measuring the volumetric 
deformations at different pressure increments. Applied 
pressure versus volumetric deformation is plotted and 
analyzed. Further details regarding the test are given in 
Annex С. 


6.4 Plate Load Test 


Plate load test shall be conducted to determine the 
load/settlement characteristics of the substrata. The 
specifications for the equipment and accessories 


required for conducting the test, the test procedure, field 
observations and reporting of results shall conform to 
IS 1888. 


6.4.1 Test for Determination of Modulus of Subgrade 
Reaction 


Modulus of subgrade reaction shall be determined in 
accordance with IS 9214. 


6.5 Cyclic Plate Load Test 


This test shall be carried out to determine the dynamic 
soil properties required for the analysis of foundation 
subjected to dynamic loads. This test shall be conducted 
on similar lines as the ordinary plate load test. In 
addition, unloading shall also be done before each stage 
of loading. Test set up, load increment, maximum load 
intensity, recording of field data, etc shall be as per 
IS 1888 and IS 5249. 


After each stage of loading, the load shall be removed in 
a minimum of two stages. After each stage of reduction 
of load, dial gauge readings and settlements shall be 
taken for at least one hour until the readings stabilize. 
Thereafter the next loading stage shall commence. 
Analysis of test data shall be reported as per IS 5249. 


6.6 Block Vibration Test 


This test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 5249 
to determine the dynamic soil properties required for the 
analysis of foundation subjected to dynamic loads. 


A test pit of suitable size depending upon size of block 
should be made. The size of the pit may be 3 m x 6m 
at the bottom and a depth preferably equal to proposed 
depth of foundation. The test should be conducted above 
the ground water table. In case of rock, the test may be 
performed on the surface of rock bed itself. The bottom 
of the pit should be leveled. Side slopes of the pit should 
be stable. Analysis of test data shall be reported as per 
IS 5249. 


6.7 Dynamic Cone Penetration Test (DCPT) 


Dynamic cone penetration test is a method of sub surface 
sounding, wherein a continuous record of soil resistance 
is obtained from of the ground to the depth below by 
driving a cone. Dynamic cone penetration test shall be 
conducted either as per IS 4968 (Part 1) or as per IS 4968 
(Part 2), as required. The test shall be conducted up to the 
required depth; however, in order to avoid damage to the 
equipment, driving may be stopped when the number of 
blows exceeds 35 for 100 mm penetration when the cone 
is driven dry [as per IS 4968 (Part 1)] and 20 for 100 mm 
penetration when the cone is penetrated by circulating 
slurry [as per IS 4968 (Part 2)]. The specification for 
the equipment and accessories required for performing 
this test, procedure, field observations and reporting of 
results shall be in accordance with IS 4968 (Part 1) or 
(Part 2), as applicable. For gravelly deposits (gravel size 
100 mm to 120 mm), DCPT may be conducted as per 
IS 10042. 


6.8 Static Cone Penetration Test (5СРТ) 


Static cone penetration test is conducted to record the 
continuous in-situ penetration resistance of soils below 
the ground level. The specification for the equipment 
and accessories required for performing the test 
procedure, field observations and reporting of results 
shall be in accordance with IS 4968 (Part 3). 


6.9 Static Cone Penetration Test using Piezocone 
with Pore Water Pressure Measurement (CPTu) 


The test is used to record the continuous in-situ 
penetration resistance, frictional resistance along with 
pore water pressure during penetration at the level of 
the base of the cone. For CPTu, all measurements shall 
be made by sensors contained in penetrometer. 


The cone shall be pushed into the soil at a constant rate 
of penetration. 


Test performed using this test method provide a 
detailed record of cone penetration which is useful for 
evaluation of site stratigraphy, homogeneity, voids or 
cavities and other discontinuities. The use of friction 
sleeve and porewater pressure element can provide 
an estimate of preliminary soil classification and 
correlations with engineering properties of soils. 


NOTE — The test procedure, field observation and reporting 
of result may be referred from international standards. 


6.10 Flat Dilatometer Test (DMT) 


The test is used to determine in-situ strength and 
deformation properties of soils. The test consists of 
inserting a blade-shaped steel probe vertically into the 
soil with a thin expandable circular steel membrane 
mounted flush on one face and determining, at selected 
depths or in a semi-continuous manner, the contact 
pressure exerted by the soil against the membrane when 
the membrane is flush with the blade and subsequently 
the pressure exerted when the central displacement 
of the membrane reaches 1.10 mm. Further details 
regarding the test are given in Annex D. 


NOTE — The test procedure, field observation and reporting 
of results may be referred from international standards. 


6.11 Electrical Resistivity Test 


This test is carried out to assess the substrata profiles 
(that is, soil and rock profiles) over large areas at a 
relatively lower cost and can thus supplement the 
information obtained from detailed site investigations. 


This test involves placing four electrodes in line along 
the ground surface and passing an alternating current 
through the outer two current electrodes and measuring 
the resulting potential drop between the two inner 
potential electrodes . From the resistance, calculated as 
the ratio of the potential drop to the current applied, the 
apparent resistivity of the substrata (that is, soil or rock 
strata) is determined by multiplying with applicable 
factors which are dependent on the geometry and 
spacings of the four electrodes. The electrode spacings 


IS 1892 : 2021 


are varied and the apparent resistivity of the substrata is 
determined for various electrode spacings. 


Detailed analysis/interpretation of the plot of apparent 
resistivity versus electrode spacings is carried out 
to assess the number and type of substrata and their 
thicknesses. 


The equipment and accessories required for carrying out 
the test, the test procedure, recording of observations, 
presentation and analysis of results shall be in 
accordance with IS 15736. 


Electrical resistivity tests are also carried out to 
determine the earth resistivity of the substrata for use 
in the design of earthing systems. The equipment and 
accessories required for carrying out the test for earth 
resistivity determination, the test procedure, recording 
of observations, presentation and analysis of results 
shall be in accordance with IS 3043. 


6.12 Seismic Refraction Test 


This test is carried out to assess the substrata profiles 
(that is, soil and rock profiles) over large areas to 
supplement the information obtained from detailed site 
investigations. 


This test involves the generation of seismic waves 
in the ground using a suitable seismic source and 
recording these seismic waves through geophones 
(that is, instruments which convert ground vibrations 
to electrical signals) located in a line along the ground 
surface at regular distance intervals. From the recorded 
waveforms, the arrival times of the seismic waves at 
different geophone locations are determined and a plot 
is then drawn of the geophone distances versus the 
corresponding arrival times. The refraction/reflection 
of the seismic waves at the interfaces of the various 
substrata leads to variations in the arrival times of the 
seismic waves at larger distances from the seismic 
source. The slopes of the lines connecting the data 
points on such a plot give the seismic wave velocities 
of the various substrata. The thicknesses of the various 
substrata so identified are determined by detailed 
analysis/interpretation of the plot which are based on 
the principles of refraction/reflection of the seismic 
waves. 


The equipment and accessories required for carrying out 
the test, the test procedure, recording of observations, 
presentation and analysis of results shall be in 
accordance with IS 15681. 


6.13 Downhole, Uphole and Crosshole Seismic Tests 


These tests are carried out to determine the seismic 
wave velocity profiles with depth and therefrom the 
profiles of dynamic modulus of rigidity (that is, shear 
modulus) and dynamic Young’s modulus (that is, elastic 
modulus) with depth. 


In the downhole seismic test, seismic waves are 
generated in the ground by a suitable seismic source 
at the ground surface near a borehole and the seismic 


1S 1892: 2021 


waves so generated are recorded using geophones 
located at different depths within the borehole. On the 
other hand, in the uphole seismic test, seismic waves 
are generated at different depths within a borehole by 
a suitable seismic source and the seismic waves so 
generated are recorded using a geophone located at the 
ground surface near the borehole. 


In the crosshole seismic test, seismic waves are 
generated at different depths within a borehole termed 
the source borehole, using a suitable seismic source 
and the seismic waves so generated are recorded using 
geophones installed at the corresponding depths in one 
or two other boreholes termed the receiver boreholes, 
located in a straight line with the source borehole at 
predefined borehole spacings. 


In these tests, from the recorded waveforms, the 
seismic wave velocities are determined and therefrom 
the dynamic shear and elastic moduli are determined. 


The equipment and accessories required for carrying 
out the downhole or uphole seismic test, the test 
procedure, recording of observations, presentation 
and analysis of results shall be in accordance with 
IS 13372 (Part 1). 


The equipment and accessories required for carrying 
out the crosshole seismic test, the test procedure, 
recording of observations, presentation and analysis of 
results shall be in accordance with IS 13372 (Part 2). 


6.14 Spectral Analysis of Surface Wave (SASW) and 
Multi-Channel Analysis of Surface Wave (MASW) 
Test 


The tests are used for evaluation of substrata properties 
based on the generation of wave propagation phenomena 
like reflection, refraction and dispersion. Compression 
and surface wave velocities are measured. Further 
details regarding the test are given in Annex E. 

NOTE — The test procedure, field observation and reporting 
of results may be referred from international standards. 
P-wave and S-wave velocities as obtained from above 

tests can also be used to get seismic tomography. 


6.15 Ground Penetrating Radar Survey 


Ground penetrating radar (GPR) is a tool to assess the 
presence of soil/rock strata and to identify presence 
of buried objects such as pipeline, conduit, concrete, 
etc. This works on the principle of reflection of the 
electromagnetic waves at the interface of two different 
materials. The depth of penetration below the ground 
surface can be increased by reducing the frequency. 


6.16 Thermal Resistivity Test 


Thermal resistivity test is conducted to determine 
the thermal conductivity of soil and soft rock in field 
using thermal needle probe procedure. Further details 
regarding the test are given in Annex F. 


10 


NOTE — The test procedure, field observation and reporting 
of results may be referred from international standards. 


6.17 In-situ Permeability Test (in Soil) 


In-situ permeability test is conducted to determine the 
water percolation capacity of the sub strata. This test is 
performed inside a borehole/trial pit at specified depths. 
The type of test shall be either pump-in or pump-out test 
depending on the subsoil and ground water conditions. 
Pump-in test is suitable for sub-strata with or without 
ground water; wherein pump-out test is conducted for 
sub-strata with ground water. 


6.17.1 Pump-in Test 


Pump-in test is conducted in a borehole/trial pit by 
allowing water to percolate into the soil. 


a) Constant head method (in borehole) — This test 
is preferred for soils with high permeability. The 
specification for the equipment and the procedure 
of testing shall be in accordance with IS 5529 
(Part 1). 


Falling head method (in borehole) — This method 
is preferred for soils with low permeability. The 
specification for the equipment and the procedure 
of testing shall be in accordance with IS 5529 
(Part 1). 


Percolation test (in trial pit) — Percolation test in 
trial pit shall be conducted as per IS 2470 (Part 1). 


6.17.2 Pump-out Test 


Pump-out test is conducted in a borehole by pumping 
out of water from sub-soil. The specification for 
the equipment and procedure for testing shall be in 
accordance with IS 5529 (Part 1). 


b) 


с 


— 


6.18 In-situ Permeability Test (in Rock) 


In-situ permeability test is conducted inside the drilled 
hole by pumping in water under pressure to determine 
the percolation capacity of the rock stratum. The test 
may be conducted by single packer method or by double 
packer method. The specification for the equipment and 
the procedure of testing shall be in accordance with 
IS 5529 (Part 2). 


6.18.1 Single Packer Method 


This method shall be adopted when the bottom 
elevation of the test section is the same as the bottom 
of the drill hole and where it is considered necessary to 
know the permeability value during drilling itself. This 
test shall be useful where the full length of the hole 
cannot stand encased or ungrouted. The packer shall be 
fixed at the top level of the test section, such that only 
the test section lies below the packer. Water shall then 
be pumped through a pipe into the test section under 
a required pressure and maintaining it till a constant 
quantity of water intake is observed. The amount of 


water percolating through Ше hole shall be recorded 
at every 5 min intervals. The test shall be repeated 
by increasing the pressure at regular intervals up to 
a pressure limit as specified in IS 5529 (Part 2). The 
details and observations during the test shall be suitably 
recorded in a proforma recommended in Annex B of 
IS 5529 (Part 2). 


6.18.2 Double Packer Method 


This method shall be used when the permeability of an 
isolated section inside a drill hole is to be determined. 
Packers shall be fixed both at the top and bottom of the 
test section such that their spacing is exactly equal to 
the length of the test section. 


6.19 Field California Bearing Ratio (CBR) Test 


This test is carried out to determine the in-situ CBR 
value of the compacted subgrade on which the road 
pavement will be constructed so as to confirm that 
the in-situ CBR value is equal to or greater than the 
design CBR value for the road pavement. The test 
involves applying static loading to cause penetration 
of a cylindrical plunger of standard diameter into 
the compacted subgrade material and recording the 
applied static load to cause the required increments 
of penetration till the required maximum penetration 
of the plunger is achieved. Based on the plot of the 
recorded applied load and corresponding penetrations 
of the plunger, the CBR value is determined as the ratio 
of the applied test load to the predefined standard load 
for different standard penetrations of the plunger. The 
equipment and accessories required for carrying out 
the test, the test procedure, recording of observations 
and presentation of results shall be in accordance with 
IS 2720 (Part 31). 


6.20 Optical and Acoustic Tele-Viewer Methods 


The optical and acoustic tele-viewers provide a 
continuous, 360° view of the borehole wall that 
allows rock mass discontinuities to be identified and 
characterized. Both devices can be oriented within the 
borehole so that the absolute orientation of features 
like bedding planes can be measured. An optical 
tele-viewer (ОТУ) uses a camera to record 
high-resolution images of the borehole wall and 
includes lights for illumination. An OTV is best suited 
for dry boreholes or boreholes filled with clear water. 
Any conditions that produce cloudy or murky water or 
coatings on the borehole wall, limit the usefulness of 
the OTV. If good images are obtained, it is possible to 


11 


IS 1892 : 2021 


identify locations and orientations of joints, bedding 
planes, foliations, faults, shears, and other naturally 
occurring rock mass discontinuities. 


The acoustic tele-viewer (ATV) uses ultrasound 
pulses from a rotating sensor in an open, fluid-filled 
borehole to record the amplitude and travel time of 
the signals reflected at the (high-impedance) interface 
between fluids and the borehole wall. Because an 
ATV uses ultrasound rather than visible light, the 
borehole fluid is not required to be clear. Rock mass 
discontinuities in the wall of the borehole will change 
the amplitude of the reflected acoustic wave compared 
to the surrounding material. The method does not work 
well in soil because of the lack of a high-impedance 
boundary between the fluid and soil. ATV surveys are 
used to provide information regarding locations and 
orientations of joints, bedding planes, faults, shears, 
and other naturally occurring rock mass discontinuities. 


7 SAMPLING 


7.1 In order to identify the type of soil/rock and to 
determine the physical, chemical and engineering 
properties of sub strata, samples of soil, rock and water, 
as applicable are collected during the investigation. The 
samples are of the following two types: 


a) Disturbed sample — The sample in which natural 
structure of the material is disturbed; and 


b) Undisturbed sample — The sample in which the 
natural structure of the material is not disturbed. 


7.2 The type of sample, quantity of sample and number 
of samples to be collected depends on the purpose of 
investigation and the nature of the strata condition. The 
interval at which the samples are collected depends 
on the type of strata variation of the profiles within 
the strata. Generally, undisturbed samples (UDS) are 
collected at depth interval of 3.0 m or change of strata, 
whichever is lower. The depth between UDS and SPT 
are generally staggered at 1.5 m so that at every 1.5 m 
depth either UDS is collected or SPT is collected. In 
case of variations of profiles within a strata, the samples 
shall be collected at a frequency of at least every 1.5 m 
to 2 m depth interval in a borehole. 


Wherever undisturbed sampling is not possible, such 
as in cohensionless soil or some utility service is 
encountered during the investigation, the same may be 
replaced by standard penetration test. In cohesive soils, 
when N value is above 32, undisturbed samples may be 
replaced by standard penetration test. 


IS 1892 : 2021 


7.3 The following are the methods that are usually 
employed for sampling: 


Nature of 
stratum 


Method of 
sampling 


Type of sample 


Shovel, pick 
axe,etc 


Disturbed Auger and shell 


boring 

Split spoon sampler 
Soil ( Block sample 
Tube sampler 
Undisturbed 4 Piston sampler 
Core cutter sampler 


[ Continuous soil 
sampler 


Blasting 


Disturbed Chiseling 


Rock 


Undisturbed Coring 


7.4 In cohesive soils, it is possible to collect undisturbed 
samples for examination and testing. In cohesionless 
soils below water table, undisturbed sampling is 
difficult with the samplers other than piston sampler. 


7.5 Disturbed soil sample and undisturbed soil sample 
are to be obtained as per 7.5.1 and 7.5.2, respectively. 


7.5.1 Disturbed soil sample 


Disturbed sample of soil is obtained during the course 
of excavation of trial pit, boring, and after conducting 
standard penetration test. This sample can be used 
for testing of physical and chemical properties. The 
disturbed sample of clay is also useful for determining 
shear strength of remoulded sample. 


7.5.2 Undisturbed soil sample 


Undisturbed sample is obtained from pits and 
boreholes in such a manner that moisture content and 
structure do not get altered. This may be attained by 
careful protection, packing and by the use ofa correctly 
designed sampler. 


Various methods of undisturbed sampling are as 
follows: 


a) Block Sample — The block sample is generally 
collected in cohesive soils. A block of soil shall 
be carefully removed with a sharp knife ensuring 
that the ground water is not in direct contact with 
the soil. The sample shall be cut and trimmed to a 
suitable size not exceeding 0.3 х 0.3 m x 0.3 m. 
A wooden frame of slightly larger size is placed on 
the block and the gap between the block and the 


12 


b 


с 


а 


wm 


— 


— 


wooden frame is filled with molten wax. The wax 
is poured till the top surface of the block is also 
covered up to the edge of the wooden frame. The 
top surface is then sealed with a wooden plank 
nailed to the wooden frame. The entire block 
sample with the wooden frame 15 then removed. 
The block 15 then placed upside down and the top 
surface levelled and sealed with molten wax and 
wooden plank. 


Tube Sample — The tube sample is generally 
collected in all kinds of soil except clean sands and 
gravels. The tube sampler should be lightly oiled 
or greased inside and outside to reduce friction. 
It should then be attached to the boring rods and 
lowered to the bottom of the bore hole or trial pit. 
The sampler should be pushed down into the soil 
by hand or by jacking; alternatively, the sampler 
may be driven by blows from a “monkey”. 


The depth to which the sampler is driven should 
be carefully monitored in order to avoid excess 
driving which will compress the soil. A sampling 
head with an 'overdrive' space will allow the 
sample tube to be completely filled without 
damaging the sample. After driving the sampler 
to required depth, the sampler should be rotated 
to shear off the core and then withdrawn. After 
withdrawal of the sampler, the excess length of 
sample beyond the sampler should be trimmed off 
and the soil at the cutting edge should be further 
removed to a depth of about 2.5 cm and shall be 
sealed with molten wax to minimize the loss of 
moisture content and to avoid disturbance during 
transportation. Similar kind of sealing should be 
done at other end as well. The sampling shall be 
carried out in accordance with IS 2132. 


Piston Sample — In soft cohesive soil and very 
loose cohesionless soil especially below ground 
water table, piston sampler is used to collect 
undisturbed soil sample. The procedure of 
sampling shall be as per IS 8763. 


Rock Core Sample — Core sample is collected in 
core barrel during rock drilling. After withdrawal 
of core barrel from drill hole, core is removed 
from the barrel and the cores are placed in a tray 
and transferred into boxes specially prepared for 
the purpose. The boxes should be made from 
seasoned timber or any other durable material 
and shall be indexed on the top of the lid as per 
IS 4078. The cores shall be numbered serially and 
arranged in the boxes in a sequential order. The 
description of the core samples shall be recorded 
as per IS 4464. Care shall be taken to maintain 
the direction of extrusion of sample same as to 
that while coring. The continuous record of core 
recovery and RQD should be mentioned in the 
core log as per IS 11315 (Part 11). 


e) Sub-soil Water Sample — Sub-soil water sample 
is collected for chemical analysis. In such a case, 
the water in the borehole should be bailed out and 
allowed to rise from which the sample should be 
taken. Method of water sampling should be as per 
IS 3025 (Part 1). 


7.6 The guantity of soil sample reguired depends 
on the type of tests to be carried out. In case of bulk 
samples for various tests, the guantity reguired is 
generally about 20 to 30 kg. However, the soil sample 
reguired for various tests shall be in accordance with 
IS 2720 (Part 1) or the relevant Indian Standard. 


7.7 Sampling Tools 


7.7.1 General 


In order to collect undisturbed samples of good guality 
from boreholes, sampling tools as covered in 7.7.2 to 
7.7.3 shall be used. The sampling tools will differ for 
cohesive and non-cohesive soils, and for rocks. 


7.7.2 The fundamental reguirement of a sampling tool 
is that on being forced into the ground it should cause 
as little displacement, remoulding and disturbance as 
possible. The degree of disturbance is controlled by the 
following three features of its design: 


a) Cutting edge; 
b) Inside wall friction; and 
с) Non-return value. 


7.7.2.1 Cutting edge 


The dimensions of the cutting edge play an important 
role in the quality of sample. A typical cutting edge 
is shown in Fig. 3. A cutting edge should embody the 
following features: 


a) Inside clearance (C,)— The internal diameter (D ) 
of the cutting edge should be slightly less than that 
of the sample tube (D ) to give inside clearance. 
The inside clearance, calculated as follows, should 
be between one percent and 3 percent of the 
internal diameter of the sample tube. This allows 
for elastic expansion of the soil as it enters the 
tube, reduces frictional drag on the sample from 
the wall of the tube and helps to retain the core: 


C, x 100 


с 


where 
C, = inside clearance, 

D 

5 


inside diameter of the sampling tube; 
and 


D, = inside diameter of the cutting edge. 
b 


wm 


Outside clearance (C ) — The outside diameter 
(D,) of the cutting edge should be slightly larger 
than the outside diameter (D,) of the tube to give 
outside clearance. The outside clearance should 


13 


IS 1892 : 2021 


not be much greater than the inside clearance. 
This facilitates the withdrawal of the sampler 
from the ground. The outside clearance should be 
calculated as follows: 


D,-D 
C, = — — x100 
D, 
where 
С, = outside clearance, 
D. = outside diameter of the cutting 
edge; and 
D, = outside diameter of the sampling 
tube. 
c) Area ratio (4,) — The area ratio, calculated 


as follows, should be kept as low as possible 
consistent with the strength requirements of the 
sample tube. Its value should not be greater than 
about 20 percent for stiff formations; for soft 
sensitive clays an area ratio of 10 percent or less 
should be preferred. Where it is not possible to 
provide sufficient inside clearance, piston sampler 
should preferably be used. 


D} - D? 
A - w 


А ———x100 percent 


where 
A = area ratio; 
D „= outside diameter of the cutting shoe; and 
D, = inside diameter of the cutting shoe. 


7.7.2.2 Wall friction 

Wall friction can be reduced by, 
a) suitable inside clearance; 
b) a smooth finish to the sample tube; and 
с) oiling the tube properly. 


7.7.2.3 Non-return valve 


The valve should have a large orifice to allow the air 
and water to escape quickly and easily when driving 
the sampler. 


7.7.2.4 Recovery ratio 


For a satisfactory undisturbed sample, taking into 
consideration the influence of the inside clearance 
[see 7.7.2.1 (а)| when excess soil is prevented from 
entering the tube, the recovery ratio calculated as 
follows should be between 98 and 96 percent. 


R => 
Н 
where 
R = recovery ratio; 
L= length of the sample within the tube; and 
Н- the depth of penetration of the sampling tube. 


IS 1892 : 2021 


SAMPLE 


Вет TUBE 


CUTTING 
SHOE 


Ес. 3 DETAILS OF CUTTING EDGE 


7.7.3 Types of Samplers 
7.7.3.1 Open tube sampler 


The open tube sampler is an ordinary seamless steel tube 
with its lower edge chamfered to make penetration easy. 
Subject to the reguirements of undisturbed sampling, 
an open tube sampler with a separate cutting shoe may 
also be used. The sampler head which connects the 
tube to the boring rod is provided with vents to permit 
water to escape when sampling under water and check 
valve to help to retain the sample while withdrawing 
the sampler (see IS 2132). 


7.7.3.2 Split spoon sampler 


Split spoon sampler is a modified form of the open tube 
sampler, in which the sampling tube is split into two 
halves held together by the cutting edge and the sampler 
head. This sampler enables the visual observation on 
the sample and makes the removal of the sample easier. 


The split spoon sampler driven as specified in IS 2131, 
may be used in foundation investigations to collect 
samples for visual identification and preliminary 
laboratory tests. 


7.7.3.3 Piston sampler 


A piston sampler consists of two separate parts, (a) the 
sample cylinder and (b) the piston system; the latter 
which is actuated separately, fits tightly in the sampler 
cylinder, and shall be in accordance with IS 10108. 


14 


7.7.3.4 Core cutter sampler 


Core cutter confirming to IS 2720 (Part 29) meeting 
the requirements of a tube sampler can be used for 
collection of undisturbed samples from the ground 
surface/trial pit. 


7.7.3.5 Continuous sampler 


Continuous soil samples of diameter 75 to 100 mm can 
be extracted from all soil types. For this, hydraulic feed 
drilling/coring machinery is employed. The sampler 
consists of core barrel with inner tube assembly and 
core catcher. 


7.7.3.6 Rocks 


Cores of rock should be taken by means of rotary 
drills with a coring bit. Other types of drills, such as 
shot drills may also be used. All types of rotary drills 
should be fitted with core barrels and core catchers 
which break off the core and retain it when the rods are 
withdrawn. Double tube core barrels should be used for 
ensuring better core recovery and picking up soft seams 
or layers in bed rocks. 


7.8 Ground Water Table 


The depth of the ground water table, its seasonal 
fluctuation and the quality of ground water is important 
for the foundation design. The design needs to be 
checked for both the extreme conditions when the 
ground water table is the lowest and when it is the 


highest. In the sites which are likely to be water logged 
during monsoon, the maximum depth of water above 
ground level shall be estimated. 


7.8.1 Purpose of Ground Water Study 


The knowledge of ground water is reguired for the 
following purpose: 


a) Estimate the bearing capacity of Ше foundation; 


b) Estimate the rate of dewatering, if reguired for 
foundation construction; 


c) Check the stability of underground structures 
which are likely to be subjected to uplift forces; 
and 


d) Select suitable type of cement and steel to take 
care of the harmful chemicals in the ground water, 
if any. 

The water sample shall be taken during completion 
of the soil investigation. The borehole shall be left 
protected and undisturbed for a period of 24 h. This 
allows the water level in the borehole to get equalized 
with the outside ground water table. The depth of water 
table shall be then measured with any of the convenient 
sounding device. Required water samples shall also 
be collected for chemical analysis. Ground water 
shall be tested for its salt content, alkalinity or acidity, 
chloride content, carbonate content, pH value, etc. For 
this purpose, if stabilizing fluid like bentonite slurry is 
used, the same shall be removed from the borehole by 
continuous flushing with fresh water. After flushing, the 
water within the borehole shall be pumped out and the 
borehole allowed recouping to the ground water table. 


In industrial areas, contamination may arise from 
industrial waste which has been dumped in the nearby 
area. Samples of such contaminated ground water 
should be collected and chemically analyzed in the 
laboratory. 


7.8.2 Dewatering 


Wherever deep excavations are envisaged for 
construction of foundation such as pier foundation, 
basement excavation, underground storage tanks, track 
hopper, etc, the study on permeability of the strata is 
essential. /n-situ permeability tests shall be carried out 
to assess the ground permeability which is required 
in the design of dewatering system. In layered strata, 
the permeability of individual layers shall be obtained 
to check the flow rate and possibility of quick sand 
condition during excavation and dewatering. 


7.9 Protection, Handling and Labelling of Samples 


7.9.1 Care should be taken in protection and handling 
of samples and in their full labelling, so that samples 
can be received in a fit state for examination and testing 
and can be correctly recognized as coming from a 
specified trial pit or boring. Suitable methods are given 
in Annex G. 


15 


IS 1892 : 2021 


7.9.2 Extrusion of Samples 


Undisturbed samples of soil retained in a liner or 
seamless tube sampler which arrive in the testing 
laboratory, sealed with wax at both ends, have to be 
taken out of the liners or tubes for actual testing. This 
should be done very carefully without causing any 
disturbance to the samples themselves. The wax may 
be chipped off by a penknife. This may also be done 
by slightly warming the sides of the tube or liner at the 
ends when the wax will easily come off. If the tubes or 
liners are oiled inside before use, it is quite possible 
for samples of certain moisture range to be pushed out 
by means of suitably designed piston extruders. If the 
extruder is horizontal, there should be a support for the 
sample as it comes out from the tube so that it may not 
break. For screw type extruders, the pushing head shall 
be free from the screw shaft so that no torque is applied 
to the soil sample in contact with the pushing head. All 
extruding operations shall be in one direction, that is, 
from cutting edge to the head of the sample tube. For 
soft clay, samples pushing with an extruder piston may 
result in shortening or distortion of the sample. In such 
cases, the other alternative is to cut the tube by means 
of a high speed hacksaw in proper test lengths and fill 
the testing moulds, by placing the cut portions directly 
over the moulds and pushing the sample in, with a 
suitable piston. After the sample is extruded, it should 
be kept either in humidity chamber or in a desiccator 
and taken out only when actual testing is carried out, to 
avoid possible loss of moisture. 


8 LABORATORY TESTING 


8.1 General 


8.1.1 All laboratory tests shall be conducted with the 
calibrated equipment/apparatus and the tests shall 
be carried out in accordance with the relevant Indian 
Standards. 


8.1.2 Depending on the type of substrata and technical 
requirements, appropriate laboratory tests shall be 
conducted on soil, rock and water samples collected 
in the field. Laboratory tests shall be scheduled and 
performed by qualified and experienced personnel who 
are thoroughly conversant with the work. 


8.2 Tests 


Following laboratory tests shall be conducted as per 
relevant Indian Standards [see IS 2720 (all parts) and 
IS 1498, IS 9143, IS 13030, IS 9221, IS 8764, IS 9179, 
IS 10050, IS 10082, IS 10782, IS 12608, IS 13047, 
IS 3025]. 
a) Test on disturbed/undisturbed soil samples: 

1) Visual and engineering classification; 

2) Sieve analysis and hydrometer analysis; 

3) Atterberg limits (liquid limit, plastic limit and 

shrinkage limit); 


1S 1892: 2021 


4 
5 
6 


— 


Specific gravity; 


w 


Free swell index; 


— 


Light/Heavy compaction test 
(standard/modified proctor compaction test); 


7 
8 
9 


— 


California bearing ratio; 
Relative density (for sand); and 


Laboratory permeability test (constant 
head/falling head). 


Test on undisturbed soil samples: 


YS — 


b 


ме 


1) Bulk density and moisture content; 

2) Unconfined compression test (оп remoulded or 
undisturbed sample); 

3) Swelling pressure (on undisturbed and 
remoulded sample); 

4) Direct shear test (o (drained/undrained) 
(on remoulded or undisturbed sample); 


5 


— 


Triaxial compression tests (on undisturbed or 
remoulded sample), 


1) Unconsolidated undrained, 


п) Consolidated undrained test with/without 
the measurement of pore water pressure, 
and 


ш) Consolidated drained; 
6) Consolidation test; and 
7) Vane shear test. 


c) Test on rock samples: 


ме 


1) Visual classification; 
2) Water absorption; 
3) Porosity; 

4) Density; 

5) Specific gravity; 

6) Hardness; 

7) Slake durability; 


8) Uniaxial compression test (both saturated and 
unsaturated); 


9) Point load strength index; 


10) Deformability test (both saturated and 
unsaturated); 


11) Tensile strength (Brazilian); and 
12) Triaxial compression test. 


d) Chemical analysis on subsoil and ground 
water-Tests are conducted to determine the 
concentration of following chemicals: 


1) pH value; 

2) Sulphates (SO, and/or SO); 
3) Chlorides; 

4) Carbonate; 

5) Nitrate; 

6) Organic matter; and 


7) Any other chemicals harmful to the foundation 
material. 


In case of ground water, colour, odour, turbidity and 
specific conductivity should also be determined. 


9 SUBSURFACE INVESTIGATION REPORT 


9.1 General 


On completion of the in-situ and laboratory tests, 
subsurface investigation report shall be prepared which 
should include, geological information, procedure 
adopted for investigation, field observations, laboratory 
test data, analysis, interpretation, recommendation, etc. 


9.2 Information to be Provided 
The report shall include but not be limited to the 
following: 

a) Plan showing location and depth of in-situ tests; 

b) Geological information of the area; 

c) General topography of the site; 

d) Past usage and historical data of the site, if 
available; 

e) Borelog/trial pit log (see Fig. 4 for format of 
borelog); 

f) In-situ test results; 

g) Plot of standard penetration test (N values 
both uncorrected and corrected) with depth for 
identified areas; 

h) Laboratory test results (see Fig. 5 for format for 
laboratory test results); 

j) Summary of strata profile; and 

k) In case of pressuremeter tests, the following 
should be furnished: 

1) Calibration record including, description of 
membrane and sheath on probes, dimension of 
thick walled cylinder, length of flexible tubing, 
calibration curves/chart, temperature, etc. 

2 


— 


Drilling record including, borehole number, 
method of making borehole, log of soil type 
and condition, depth of water in borehole, 
weather and temperature. 


3 


— 


Test Record: Type of test, date and time, depth 
of centre point of probe, volume readings at 
30 s and 60 s elapsed time and corresponding 
pressure readings, notes on any deviation from 
standard test procedure. 

Field pressuremeter, creep and air calibration 
curves indicating P, P, and P. Corrected 
pressuremeter and creep curves indicating 
P, P, P, along with calculation for the 
corrections. 


9.2.1 Reporting of in-situ and laboratory test results 
should be in accordance with relevant Indian Standards. 


16 


9.3 Analysis and Interpretation of Results 
The following shall be included in the report: 
a) Analysis of test results. 


b) Discussion and interpretation of results analyzed 
including basis of adopting design parameters for 
the substrata. 


c) For shallow foundations: 
1) Net allowable bearing pressure considering 
shear as well as settlement criteria for isolated 


footing, continuous strip footing and raft 
foundation. 


17 


IS 1892 : 2021 


2) Modulus of subgrade reaction and modulus of 
elasticity of substrata. 


d) For pile foundations: Safe load carrying capacity. 
e) Dynamic soil properties such as shear wave 


velocity, dynamic shear modulus, Poisson’s ratio, 
damping ratio, as applicable. 

f) Suitability of the soil for backfilling around 
foundations. 

g) Susceptibility of sub-soil strata to liquefaction, if 
any, in the event of dynamic loading. 


h) Remedial measures against the presence of 
harmful chemicals in the sub-soil/ground water. 


IS 1892 : 2021 


ӘМІМОЯ 105 JO q3uoOd МОД ІУИМОҢ Үр 


эта сор 
ТЕРІ omgeuSig 0 эшен Ееее гадае nee эшең 
ие по )/л9шоз)вп) Копову 

зутешен s: NOME on[vA SMOIg d "€ ens Jo uondrioso(q 

(ш) ydog ‘ON odÁT, 145 Jo 'oN yda Jo yda 
A'IdINVS Lds aWAOUd TIOS 
eee eene eee пзашвидловатфив | ce e es раза uoneuruuo | mmm eem цеш әуе 
eese eene ere eee aped | creme праэа Вшвео | vemm eem jeg org 
"€——— | TT TTE :921 Susep әуес 294 МО 
—— ты» :(тепопао) ѕәуешр1оод $40 ЕЕЕ ла apoqaiog ‘тает AD 
————M— :sojeurp100;) [e20 ]/AoAng eee eeeeeeeegaldureg JoadAp | cem OTRO] 
ПЕ оные Оле лоцешрш | "meme commons 
ТЕТІН (Ta) [242 poonpoy eene e [imm a 
ИЕ ON дог пенни шпон ро об, | eee рода 
ләшшен а епови :pasy PWWA а, ледшпк ә|оцәлоЯ 
ӘМІНОЯ TIOS AO АЯООЯЯ 
AVN АОКЯЗУ 


18 


IS 1892 : 2021 


300 NI ONITING 3307) AO (HOO AOA IVWAOJ gi 


e UHR ова ыа 
B Robo Rol d REOR REOR RIS RR o1njeusig Met VEN Mui aInjeusis Miet SurmN 
зпеупзпо дешовп.) Копеву 
8S c| ^| g gr el ol св & S| SİZ 
= Е E о = ю Z S = o е a | 7 
“| = SE 7| g ej | 8| и 2 |5 
e 2 E ms E 901011959 - 
с 5 S © Б пат d 
9 ае ž = 
d) 1221” g 
Е 2 3 m 
mw | $ 5 š 
алцәч = 145 
зара EKR z a di 
JeeulgUH/IOSIAJOOnS | — н оао | ome : ysrurg ojeq 
PPP : Iodo Mus гдс поцешиләт, есь СТВ 
“““ е“ ее “г.. “..... : а SAGER NA аав QE UA wasa ia ni d. 3 
(Iguondo) вәуешрлоо> 649 ша Зшвео ва 294 AD 
e e e sia : ƏZIS 91580) 
:9а° MO 
e ки зауешрлоог) AdAING T" : та o[ouo1ogq оаза RR REOR RR RR ТУТ RR RR YE 11018907] 
Tw : posn pueg jo әк, ы аа ы А А işa 8 1K 
T : (TD ]9^91 рәопрәч ee ee ee ee ее е : заошатаБЯ Jo IJEN ооо ооо о во ооо ооо ооо ооо о о во в вое ооо оо ово сое : 1901081.) 
%%44..ы-ш.....г..!шшшвев.......шшш! : "ON дог Uii T DOTON защыа JO odAT, аа ната 2) (ет А | 
ләшшен длълептетд :рѕпләшшон 010202020200 tM лодшпк ә|оцәлоЯ 


MOONY кгокггпча ячо HO ачоэяч 


ЯИУМ AONHDV 


19 


IS 1892 : 2021 


Name of Owner: 


Project Name of Boring Agency 
BORE LOG DATA SHEET BOREHOLE NO. Co-ordinate 

In-situ Test Nos. | Samples Nos. | Commencement Date 

Penetrometer (SPT) Undisturbed (UDS) Completion Date 

Cone (Pc) Penetrometer (SPT) Borehole Diameter 

Vane (V) Disturbed (DS) Level of Ground 

Water Sample (WS) Water Struck At 
Standing Water Level 
Type of Boring 
Soil Sampler Used 
DESCRIPTION SYMBOL N-VALUE SAMPLES 


Ref. No. Depth (m) 


4C FORMAT FOR BORE LOG DATA SHEET 


Fic. 4 FORMAT FOR BORE LOG 


20 


IS 1892: 2021 


TIOS 304 SLINSAY LSA], АЧОТУНОЯУ | 30, IVWAOT VS 


118 Apues/pues 
Ks KoAvyo 
“4913 YSTUMOIG 


0071 


TOSAN 


TOHE 


(%) 
pues 


(%) 
MIS 


(96) 
PARID 


9716 UTL) 


попезуязето SI 


»>lolual 
в = 83 
ова 2l 
JABE 
EEE 
(%) | (%) | ӘДЕТІ 
IS | Id | TI | =” |S 
Symurq ШЕ 
$,3.19q.19}7V ISIL 433094438 


орем род 


(90) 1u93u0;) oJnj3sto]q 


[E1njeN 


AWARD Iyd 


(119/3) 


Ала 


(сшо/8) 


Aysuoaq | Аизпоа 


Wa 


S1exue» pue siopinoq 
10 sooe чим pues 
Ars ‘AOS *[SIMO[[9A. 


uonydu9s9g 
o[dureg 


(ш) 


yda 


‘ON 
o[dureg 


“ON 
зточелоя 


21 


IS 1892 : 2021 


NILA 
peduy 
(сиш/м)я 
(5507 %) 
ssoupunog 
звопрлен 
xopuj 
Аушделпа ALIS 
xopuj 
43549135 реот juroq 
дшпоцов 
Jo шоюцроу 
° 
A a 
2 8 
Š S 
ш 
в 
Еш a 2 
ез 5 
"5 Ë 
"2 Е > 
за 6 " 
= я 
5 Q 
> Š 
> 
Ayazın әәә 
(%) Хиволо4 


(%) 1u93u0;) лезем, 


(«шо/8) Orsuəq 


Bulk | Dry 


0094119594 


w ydq 


‘ON A 


‘ON на 


22 


5B FORMAT FOR LABORATORY TEST RESULTS FOR ROCK 


Fic. 5 LABORATORY TEST FORMAT 


10 SAFETY IN SUBSURFACE 
INVESTIGATION 
10.1 The investigation procedures are mostly 


semi-mechanized. Fully manually operated subsurface 
procedures are also common. The machines have heavy 
and moving parts that are neither properly isolated nor 
adequately covered. Many accidents are reported from 
subsurface investigation sites, mostly due to negligence 
and lack of precaution. Subsurface investigation works 
are often executed in barren lands where cross country 
power lines are present. In the case of urban areas, 
underground service lines and power cables are not 
easily detectable. A major contribution to the accidents 
is due to overhead and underground power lines. 


10.2 Investigations are required to be executed near 
unsupported vertical or steep cuts, over steep slopes and 
similar unfavourable terrains. Traversing the machines 
over steep slopes are common. The ground is often 
infested with roots and trunks of cut trees, reptiles, etc. 


23 


IS 1892 : 2021 


10.3 Trial pit excavations shall be adequately cordoned 
off with reflector bands or hand rails. The excavated 
material shall be placed at a minimum of | m from 
the edge of an excavation. A ladder, stairway or ramp 
shall be in place for entering and exiting an excavation 
more than 1.5 m deep. Ladders shall extend more 
than | m from the top of the excavation. Exposure to 
underground facilities is a common hazard for workers 
in or near excavation work. Therefore, excavation work 
cannot begin until all owners of underground facilities 
have been notified and the accurate locations of all 
underground facilities have been determined. 


10.4 The workers and other personnel shall be adequately 
protected by safety gears from these potential risks. 
Safety shoes, safety helmets and safety jackets with 
reflectors shall be mandatory. Safety goggles and safety 
belts shall be used as the work environment demands. 


10.5 The works carried out near operating plants 
and factory pose more risk. All the safety measures 
demanded by such factory or plant environment shall 
be strictly adhered to during the investigation. 


1S 1892: 2021 


15 №. 


1498 : 1970 


1888 : 1982 


2131:1981 


2132 : 1986 


2470 (Part 1): 
1985 


2720 (all parts) 

3025 (Part 1): 
1987 

3043 : 2018 


4078 : 1980 


4434 : 1978 


4453 : 2009 


4464 : 2020 


4651 (Рап 1): 
2020 


4968 


Part 1: 1976 


ANNEXA 
( Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title 


Classification and identification 
of soils for general engineering 
purposes (first revision) 


Method of load test on soils 
(second revision) 


Method for standard 
penetration test for o soils 
(first revision) 

Code of practice for 


thin-walled tube sampling of soils 
(second revision) 

Code of practice for installation of 
septic tanks: Part 1 Design criteria 
and construction (second revision) 

Methods of test for soils 

Methods of sampling and test 
(physical and chemical) for water 
and waste water: Part 1 Sampling 


Code of practice for earthing 
(second revision) 


Code of practice for indexing 


and storage of drill cores 
(first revision) 
Code of practice for 


in-situ vane shear test for soils 
(first revision) 


Subsurface exploration by 
pits, trenches, drifts and 
shafts — Code of practice 


(second revision) 


Code of practice for presentation 


of drilling information 
and core description in 
geotechnical investigation 


(second revision) 


Planning and design of ports and 
harbours — Code of practice: Part 1 
Site investigation (second revision) 


Method for subsurface sounding 
for soils 


Dynamic method using 
50 mm cone without bentonite 
slurry (first revision) 


24 


IS No. 


Part 2 


Part 3 


5249 : 


5313: 


5529 
Part 1 


Part 2 


6926: 


6955 


7720: 


8763 : 


8764 : 


9143: 


9179: 


9214: 


9221: 


: 1976 


: 1976 


1992 


2020 


: 2013 


: 2006 


1996 


: 2008 


1991 


1978 


1998 


1979 


1979 


1979 


1979 


Title 
Dynamic method using 
cone апа bentonite slurry 
(first revision) 
Static cone penetration test 
(first revision) 
Determination of dynamic 


properties of soil — Method of test 
(second revision) 


Guide for core drilling observations 
(second revision) 


In-situ permeability tests 


Part 1 Tests in overburden — Code 
of practice (second revision) 


Part 2 Tests in bedrock 
(second revision) 


Diamond core drilling — Site 
investigation for river valley 
projects Code of practice 
(first revision) 


Subsurface exploration for earth 
and rockfill dams — Code of 
practice (first revision) 


Criteria for investigation, 
planning and layout 
for barrages and weirs 


(first revision) 


Guide for undisturbed sampling of 
sands 


Method for determination of 
point load strength index of rocks 
(first revision) 

Method for the determination of 
unconfined compressive strength 
of rock materials 


Method for preparation of rock 
specimen for laboratory testing 


Method of determination of 
modulus of subgrade reaction 
(k-value) of soils in field 


Method for determination of 
modulus of elasticity and poisson’s 
ration of rock material in uniaxial 
compression 


IS №. 


10042: 


10050: 


10060 


10062: 


10082: 


10108: 


10208: 


10782: 


11315 (Part 11) 


: 1985 


1981 


1981 


: 2013 


1991 


1981 


1982 


1982 


1983 


11385 : 2008 


12608: 


1989 


Title 


Code of practice for site 
investigation for foundation in 
gravel-boulder deposit 


Method for determination of slake 
durability index of rocks 


Geotechnical investigation Юг 
power house sites — Code of 
practice (first revision) 


Proforma for analysis of unit rate of 
quarryingrockbymechanicalmeans 
(first revision) 

Method of test for determination of 
tensile strength by indirect tests on 
rock specimens 


Code of practice for sampling of 
5015 by thin wall sampler with 
stationary piston 


Specification for diamond core 
drilling equipment 

Method for the laboratory 
determination of dynamic modulus 
of rock core specimens 


Method for the quantitative 
descriptions of discontinuities in 
rock mass: Part 11 Core recovery 
and rock quality designation 


Subsurface 

canals and 
works 
(first revision) 


Method for determination of 
hardness of rock 


exploration for 
cross > drainage 
Code of practice 


25 


IS No. 


13030 : 1991 


13047 : 1991 


13216 : 1991 
13372 


Part 1 : 1992 
Part 2 : 1992 
13578 : 2008 


14330 : 1996 

14592 (Part 1) 
: 1998 

15662 : 2006 


15681 : 2006 


15736 : 2007 


IS 1892 : 2021 


Title 


Method of test for laboratory 
determination of water content. 


Porosity, density and related 
properties of rock material 
Method for determination of 


strength of rock materials in 
triaxial compression 


Code of practice for geological 
exploration for reservoir sites 


Seismic testing of rock mass — 
Code of practice 


Part 1 Within a borehole 
Part 2 Between the borehole 


Subsurface exploration for barrages 
and weirs — Code of Practice 
(first revision) 


Ground water investigation for 
hydraulic structures — Guidelines 


Planning and design of barrage 
power houses — Guidelines: Part 1 
Investigation, planning and layout 


Geological exploration for gravity 
dams and overflow structures — 
Code of practice 


Geological exploration by 
geophysical method (seismic 
refraction) — Code of practice 

Geological exploration by 
geophysical method (electrical 


resistivity) — Code of practice 


IS 1892 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.4 ) 


METHODS OF SUBSURFACE INVESTIGATION AND 
PROPERTIES/PARAMETERS MEASURED 


SI No. Method Property/Parameter Measured 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) Electrical resistivity test (ЕКТ) Electrical resistivity 
п) Seismic refraction test (SRT) Primary wave velocity 
iii) Cross hole seismic test (CHST) and Down hole Shear wave velocity 
seismic test 
iv) Spectral analysis of surface wave (SASW) and Primary/Shear wave velocity 
Multi-channel analysis of surface wave (MASW) 
v) Ground penetrating radar survey (GPR Survey) Electromagnetic intensity (Resistivity) 
vi) Thermal resistivity test Thermal conductivity 
vii) Standard penetration test (see IS 2131) Penetration resistance in terms of number of 
blows (N) 
vii) Static cone penetrometer test [see IS 4968 (Part 3)] Penetration resistance in terms of point 
resistance and frictional resistance 
ix) Piezocone with pore pressure measurement Penetration resistance with pore pressure 
measurement 
x) Dynamic cone penetrometer test [see IS 4968 (Part 2)] Penetration resistance in terms of number of 
blows (М) 
xi) Boring in soil Identification of subsoil strata 
xii) Drilling in rock (Percussion and rotary drilling) Identification of rocky strata 
xiii) Sampling in soil/rock Index and engineering properties 
xiv) Sampling in ground water Physical and chemical properties 
xv) Plate load test (see IS 1888)/Cyclic plate load test Load and settlement 
(see IS 5249) 
xvi) Мапе shear test (see IS 4434) Torque 
xvii) Block vibration test (see IS 5249) Resonance frequency 
xviii) | Pressuremeter test Applied pressure and volume change 
xix) Flat dilatometer test Corrected contact pressure and corrected 
expansion pressure, Horizontal stress index 
and material index 
xx) In-situ permeability test Discharge with time period 
xxi) Modulus of subgrade reaction (see IS 9214) Load and settlement 
xxii) Field California bearing ratio test (CBR) Load and settlement 
xxii) Borehole camera logging 360? view of the borehole wall which allows 


26 


identification of rock mass discontinuities 


IS 1892 : 2021 


ANNEX С 
( Clause 6.3) 
METHODOLOGY OF PRESSUREMETER TEST 


C-1 PRESSUREMETER TEST 


The test provides in-situ stress-strain characteristics of the 
substrata. The test set-up consists of radially expandable 
probe and control panel. The schematic arrangement of 
the test set-up is shown in Figs. 6 and 7. 


The size of the borehole shall be compatible to the size 
of the radially expandable probe of Ax, Bx or Nx size. 
The probe is lowered in the borehole to the desired depth 
using a coaxial flexible tubing connected with the control 
panel. The control panel shall have pressure gauges of 
different pressure ranges to measure the applied pressure. 
The control panel shall have a suitable volume measuring 
device with minimum least count of 1 cm?. The capacity 
of the test set-up shall not be less than 8 000 kPa. 

NOTE — The test can be conducted up to a maximum pressure 

of 20 000 kPa. 
The equipment shall be calibrated for pressure losses 
due to stiffness of the inflatable probe and for volume 
corrections due to expansion of the coaxial flexible 


VOLUME CONTROL 


PRESSURE GAUGE 


L 
m P 


tubing. The probe shall be inflated by applying pressure 
in egual increments. Applied pressure shall be maintained 
for a period of at least 60 5, and the volume change shall 
be recorded at 30 s and 60 s. The test shall be continued 
till one of the following conditions occur: 


a) The volume of the probe is 1.5 times of its initial 
volume, or 


b) Ultimate failure of soil/rock occurs, or 
c) Maximum specified pressure is reached. 


A plot of applied pressure versus volumetric deformation 
is prepared based on the recorded results of the test. A 
typical graph of pressuremeter test results is shown in 
Fig. 8. The field curve and calibration data (air calibration 
and pipe calibration) are presented together with the 
corrected pressure versus volume curve. 


The test is most appropriate in clays, silts and sands 
where particles are small compared to the size of the 
membrane. 


CONTROL PANEL 


GAS CYLINDER 


ROBE (AFTER INFLATION) 


FIG. 6 SCHEMATIC PRESSUREMETER TEST SET-UP 


IS 1892 : 2021 


PRESSUREMETER TEST UNIT 


PRESSURE, in bars 


1000 


900 


800 


700 


600 


500 


400 


300 


200 


100 


Ес. 7 PRESSUREMETER TEST FLOW DIAGRAM 


RADIALLY 
EXPANDABLE PROBE CONTROL PANEL 
INNER MEMBRANE OUTER COVER VOLUME CHANGE | PRESSURES 
MEASURING CELL GAURD CELL 

INFLATE BY 

MEASURING CELL GAURD CELL 

(WATER) (GAS) 
WATER | GAS (СО?) / №) | 
COAXIAL HOSE 


FIELD CURVE 


PIPE TEST 


[ CORRECTED CURVE 


AIR CALIBRATION 


0 100 200 300 


400 500 600 700 800 


VOLUME, in cubic centimetres 


FIG. 8 TYPICAL GRAPH OF PRESSUREMETER TEST 


28 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
0 


900 


IS 1892 : 2021 


ANNEXD 
( Clause 6.10) 
FLAT DILATOMETER TEST (DMT) 


D-1 GENERAL 


This Annex describes the general overview of flat 
dilatometer test (DMT) in soil investigation and its 
design applications. This test is suitable for all types of 
soil excluding gravels and boulders. 


D-2 EQUIPMENT AND 


PROCEDURE 


TESTING 


D-2.1 The main parts of a dilatometer equipment and 
the layout are detailed in Fig. 9. 


The nominal dimensions of the blade are 95 mm width 
and 15 mm thickness. The blade has a cutting edge 
to penetrate the soil. The apex angle of the edge is 
24° to 32°. The lower tapered section of the tip is 50 mm 
long. The blade can safely withstand up to 250 kN of 
pushing thrust. The circular steel membrane is 60 mm 
in diameter. Its normal thickness is 0.20 mm (0.25 mm 
thick membranes are sometimes used in soils which 
may cut the membrane). The membrane is mounted 
flush on the blade and kept in place by a retaining ring. 


The pressure source is a gas tank equipped with a 
pressure regulator, valves and pneumatic tubing to 
connect to the control unit. The pressure regulator 
(suitable to gas type) shall be able to supply a regulated 
output pressure of at least 7 - 8 MPa. When testing in 
most soils, the output pressure is set at 3 - 4 MPa. In 
very hard soils, the output pressure is further increased 
(without exceeding the high-range gauge capacity). 


D-2.2 Before insertion of flat dilatometer in soil, the 
membrane shall be calibrated as shown in Fig. 10. 
The calibration procedure consists in obtaining the 
AA and AB pressures necessary to overcome membrane 
stiffness. AA and AB are then used to correct the A, B 
readings. 


NOTE — In air, under atmospheric pressure, the free 
membrane is in an intermediate position between the A and B 
positions, because the membranes have a slight natural outward 
curvature (Fig. 11). AA is the external pressure which must be 
applied to the membrane, in free air, to collapse it against its 
seating (that is, A-position). AB is the internal pressure which, 
in free air, lifts the membrane centre 1.10 mm from its seating 
(that is, B-position). 


29 


D-2.3 The dilatometer blade is inserted in to the 
soil hydraulically, usually at the rate of 20 mm/s 
(penetration rates from 10 to 30 mm/s can also be 
used). At each of the desired depths, the membrane 
is inflated horizontally into the soil and two readings 
of pressure are taken. The first reading, p, (corrected 
contact pressure before inflation) is collected in 
about 15 sec when the membrane is flush with flat 
blade (6 = 0), and the second reading, p, (corrected 
expansion pressure after inflation) is taken at 
б = 1.10 mm, approximately taken 30 $ later. 


As soon as the second reading is obtained, the 
membrane is quickly deflated, and the blade is pushed 
to the next test depth. These two pressures are used to 
calculate three DMT indices, (a) material index (Г); 
(b) dilatometer modulus (Е); and (c) horizontal stress 
index (K,). The material index serves to identify 
the soil type, the dilatometer modulus provides the 
measure of soil stiffness and the horizontal stress 
index is used to profile soil strength and stress history. 


D-3 OBSERVATION AND INTERPRETATION 
OF RESULTS 


D-3.1 Various symbols and terminologies used for 
DMT are detailed in Table 3. It also gives different 
formulae to interpret results from DMT. Horizontal 
stress index, K, and material index, /, are deduced 
using the formulae given in Table 3. 


D-3.2 Based on the results of DMT, various soil 
layers can be characterized using Fig. 12. 


D-3.2.1 Typical examples of DMT results for normally 
consolidated (NC) site and over-consolidated (OC) 
site are shown in Fig. 13 and Fig. 14 respectively. 


D-3.3 In addition to soil characterization, the stiffness 
parameters obtained from DMT results can further be 
used for determination of other parameters such as 
settlement calculation and liquefaction analysis. 


IS 1892 : 2021 


HYDRAULICALLY PUSHED BY 
PENETROMETER OR DRILL 
RIG OR OTHER EQUIPMENT 


22226. 


£ = 


ААА GÜLSE 


1.1 тт 


1 DILATOMETER BLADE 
2 PUSH RODS (FOR EXAMPLE, CPT) 
3 PNEUMATIC-ELECTRIC CABLE 
4 CONTROLBOX 
5 PNEUMATIC CABLE 

6 GASTANK 

7 EXPANSION OF THE MEMBRANE 


FIG. 9 TYPICAL SET-UP AND ARRANGEMENT OF FLAT DILATOMETER TEST EOUIPMENT 


30 


IS 1892 : 2021 


CLOSED DURING 
CALIBRATION 


PULL FOR 


+4 


PUSH FOR 
AB 


Fic. 10 CALIBRATION OF FLAT DILATOMETER 


FREE 


Fic. 11 POSITION OF THE MEMBRANE (FREE, А AND В) 


31 


IS 1892 : 2021 


Table 3 Basic Terminology and Associated Formulae for DMT 


( Clause D-3.1 ) 


SINo. Symbol Description Basic DMT Reduction Formulae 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) D, Corrected first reading p, = 1.05 (A — Z„ + AA) — 0.05 (B - Z,, — AB) Z,, = Gauge reading when 
Ж ; _ vented to atm. If AA & AB are 
ii) P, Corrected second reading p,=B-Z,,- AB measured with the same gauge 
used for current reading A & B, 
set 
Z,, = 0 (4, is compensated) 
iii) Т, Material index 157 (p,- p (p,- uj) u, = pre-insertion pore pressure 
iv) K, Horizontal stress index К- @,-4,) -су су = pre-insertion overburden 
strees 
v) Es Dilatometer modulus Е = 34.7 (p, — pj) Е is not a Young's modulus E. 
E, should be used only after 
combining it with K, (Stress 
History). First obtain M yr = Ry 
E, then e.g. Е 0.8 = My, 
vi) K, Coefficient of earth Ком“ (Ky 1.5) 947 — 0.6 for I. < 1.2 
pressure in situ 
vii) ОСК Overconsolidation ratio OCR мг = (0.5 К) 156 for I, < 1.2 
viii) C, Undrained shear strength C, pui ^ 0.22 6^ v, (0.5 Kp) 125 for I, < 1.2 
ix) ф Friction angle P aenur 28° + 14.6? log K, - 2.1? log’ К, for I, > 1.8 
х) C. Coefficient of C, pur 27 emt, t,o. from A-log t DMT-A decay 
consolidation curve 
xi) k, Coefficient of permeability К-С у,„/М, (М 3 Kp Moun) 
xii) Y Unit weight and (see chart in Fig. 12) 
description 
xiii) M Vertical drainage Мм: = Ru Ep 
constrained modulus ifl < 0.6 В =0.14+2.36 log K 
р= “° м t & D 
11,23 Ви= 0.5 + 2 log K, 
10.6 <1,<3 R =R. t (2.5—R,,,) log K, 
with К, = 0.14 + 0.15 (1,-0.6) 
ifK,>10 R = 0.32 + 2.18 log K, 
ИВ, < 0.85 set R,, = 0.85 
хіу) u, Equilibrium pore pressure uy- p,= C- Z, + AA In free-draining soils 


32 


2000 


EQUATION OF THE LINES 


Ep=10 (n * m log Ip) 


1000 


500 


200 


Ep, in bars 


100 


50 


20 


MUD 
AND/OR 
PEAT 


0.1 0.2 


(1 bar = 100 kPa) 


Fic. 12 TYPICAL CHART TO CHARACTERIZE SOIL ТУРЕ FROM DMT 


0.5 1 
MATERIAL INDEX, |, 


33 


IS 1892 : 2021 


IS 1892 : 2021 


MATERIAL INDEX 


0.1 05 1 


2 
(m) 


UNDRAINED SHEAR 
STRENGTH 
1.5 2 


2 
CONSTRAINED MODULUS (m) 


Z  HORIZONTAL STRESS 
(m) INDEX 


"Гат | 


5 ECLAY 


10 


15 


20 


25 


30 


35 


40 


45 


50 


55 


60 


(1 bar = 100 kPa) 


800 : 1 


Fic. 13 Typıcar DMT RESULIS FOR NC SITE (K. = 2) 


2 2 2 
MATERİAL INDEX (m) CONSTRAINED MODULUS (m) UNDRAINED SHEAR (my. Rİ P STRESS 
STRENGTH INDEX 

0.1 05 1 540 0 400 800 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 4 8 12 16 

0 Tarr т 0 Т Т 0 Т Т Т Т 0 Т Т T 
CLAY ӨШТІ SAND 

2 - 2 |, 4028 ж - 
<= = 

ak 4 ak J ak - 

sk | - 6 A 4 sk - 

8L | | - 8L 4 8b - 

10 | - 10-- 4 sok - 

12 k | | - 12+ 4 12 4 

14 L 4 14 L 4 14 - 

16 - | = 16 + 4 16 4 

18 | | - 18 | Jj 18- - 

20-4 | - 20 |- 4 20b - 

22 |- | - 22 |- 4 2 - 
| l l l l l l l 

2A 06 18 9o 1 2 3 4 8570 4 в 12 16 

Ip Cu (bar) Ко 


(1 Баг = 100 kPa) 


Fic. 14 Typıcar DMT Везотт$ FOR ОС SITE (K, >> 2) 


34 


IS 1892: 2021 


АММЕХ Е 
( Clause 6.14) 


SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF SURFACE WAVES (SASW) METHOD AND MULTICHANNEL ANALYSIS 
OF SURFACE WAVES (MASW) METHOD 


E-1 SPECTRAL ANALYSIS 
WAVES METHOD 


OF SURFACE 


The spectral analysis of surface waves (SASW) method 
is used to determine the dynamic shear modulus of 
soils. The method uses dispersive characteristics of 
Rayleigh wave to determine the variation of shear 
wave velocity (V.) with depth in the range of 10 cm to 
100 m. The application of SASW includes geotechnical, 
pavement and structural systems for assessing material 


stiffness, condition and layer thickness. The depth of 
investigation (D) depends on the available access at 
surface along line of receivers (2D). 


The equipment required for subsurface geotechnical 
SASW investigations are geophone receivers, sledge 
hammers or drop weights as sources, data acquisition 
system and computer programmes for interpretation. 
Schematic diagram for SASW field setup and 
arrangement of source and receivers are shown in 
Fig. 15. 


PC 
DATA ACQUISITION 


SYSTEM 


SOURCE 
FORWARD 
CONFIGURATION 


SOURCE 
REVERSE 
CONFIGURATION 


FORWARD PROFILE 
MEASUREMENT 


REVERSE PROFILE 
MEASUREMENT 


RECEIVER SPACING < d 


MEASUREMENT 


REVERSE PROFILE 
MEASUREMENT 


RECEIVER SPACING = 2d 


15B ARRANGEMENT OF SOURCE AND RECEIVERS 
Fic. 15 SASW SET-UP 


FORWARD PROFILE 


IS 1892 : 2021 


The objective field measurement is to determine 
phase difference between two receivers over wide 
range in frequencies. Two profiles, a forward profile 
and a reverse profile, are typically obtained in SASW 
measurements where the accessible surface is struck 
by a hammer on two opposite sides of the pair of 
receivers. Interpretation involves interactive masking, 
that is, construction of experimental dispersion curve 
and making composite dispersion curve followed by 
forward modelling or by inversion analysis to obtain V. 
profiles. It is simpler for sites where stiffness increases 
with depth. Typical dispersion curve and V. profile 
obtained in SASW 15 shown in Fig. 16. 


E-2 Multichannel Analysis of Surface Waves 
(MASW) Method 


Multichannel analysis of surface waves (MASW) 
method gives the shear wave velocity (V). It involves 
measurement of arrival times of seismic surface waves 
generated from seismic sources at predetermined 
pattern and analyses the propagation velocities. The 
application of this technique includes soil-bed rock 
mapping and seismic site characterisation. 


Equipment for MASW includes multichannel 
seismograph (24-channel or higher), 4.5 Hz geophones 
placed at about 3 m to 5 m spacing, and waves can be 
generated using sledge hammer or weight drop. The 
schematic diagram of MASW field survey is given in 
Fig. 17. 


ITER 2 
ITER 8 
ITER 5 


700 - 


ITER 1 


ITER 11 


PHASE VELOCITY, in m/sec 


0 50 100 


| | 
150 200 250 


ЕКЕОПЕМСУ, in Hz 


16A DISPERSION CURVE ADJUSTMENT 


SHEAR WAVE VELOCITY, in m/sec 


0 200 400 600 
1 | 1 


1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 2200 
1 1 1 1 П П 


ІТЕК 11 


ОЕРТН, іп т 


ІТЕК 8 


16B Vs PROFILE 


Fic. 16 TYPICAL DISPERSION CURVE AND VS PROFILE OBTAINED IN SASW 


2 MODE 


SOURCE-RECEIVER (SR) 


CONFI 


GURATION 


INCREMENT OF 
SR (dSR) 


PULL-MODE 


Ф 


LOOL 


I—SOURCE OFFSET (Х1)-- -к 


STATION— | 


СНАММ 


SEISMIC SOURCE 


(SLEDGE HAMMER) | 


TRIGGERING CABLE 


RECEIVER 
SPACING (dx) 

MULTI-CHANNEL 
DATA LINES SEISMOGRAPH 


(ACQ DEVICE) 


IS 1892 : 2021 


CONTROLLER 
(PORTABLE COMPUTER) 


RECEIVER SPREAD 


Е p LENGTH (0) 


23 24 


GEOPHONES 


STATION # 
OFFSET (m) 14 19 24 29 
CHANNEL# 5 10 15 20 


RECORD 
1015 1020 1025 1030 


ONE RECORD 
(OR SHORT GATHER) 


Fic. 17 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM ОЕ MASW FIELD SURVEY 


37 


IS 1892 : 2021 


ANNEXF 
( Clause 6.16) 


THERMAL RESISTIVITY TEST FOR SOIL AND SOFT ROCK BY 
THERMAL NEEDLE PROBE PROCEDURE 


F-1 GENERAL 


The thermal conductivity of substrata is used to analyze 
and design systems like underground transmission 
lines, oil and gas pipelines, radioactive waste disposal, 
and solar thermal storage facilities. 


This test method provides a procedure for determining 
the thermal conductivity of soil and rock using a 
transient heat method. This test method is suitable only 
for isotropic materials. 


F-2 TEST PROCEDURE 


The thermal conductivity is determined by a variation of 
the line source test method using a needle probe having 


THERMAL NEEDLE ES 


HEATER WIRES 


CONSTANT CURRENT 
SOURCE 


a large length to diameter ratio to simulate conditions 
for an infinitely long, infinitely thin heating source. The 
probe consists of a heating element and a temperature 
measuring element and is inserted into the substrata. 
A known current and voltage are applied to the probe, 
and the temperature rise with time is recorded over a 
period of time. The temperature decay with time after 
the cessation of heating can also be included in the 
analysis to minimize effects of temperature drift during 
measurement. The thermal conductivity is obtained 
from an analysis of the time series temperature data 
during the heating cycle and cooling cycle, if applicable. 


TEMPERATURE MONITORING 
ELEMENT 


THERMAL READOUT 
UNIT 


Fic. 18 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR THERMAL RESISTIVITY TEST 


38 


IS 1892 : 2021 


ANNEXG 
(Clause 7.9.1 ) 
HANDLING AND LABELLING OF SAMPLES 


G-1 HANDLING OF SAMPLES 


G-1.1 Disturbed Samples of Soil 


Where samples are required for testing, or where it is 
desirable to keep them in good condition over long 
periods, they should be treated as follows: 


a) Immediately after being taken from the bore 
hole or trial pit, the sample should be placed in a 
cloth bag or tin preferably in a glass jar of at least 
0.5 kg capacity, and it should fill this container 
with a minimum of air space. The container should 
have an air-tight cover. In this way the natural 
water content of the sample can be maintained for 
one or two weeks without appreciable change. 


b) The containers should be numbered and a label as 
described in G-2 should be placed immediately 


under the cover in a container. 


— 


с 


wa 


The containers should be carefully packed in 
a stout wooden box (preferably with separate 
partitions) with saw dust or other suitable material, 
to prevent damage during transit. 

d) Where necessary, the samples should be tested for 
natural water content immediately on arrival at the 
laboratory and an accurate description made of the 
sample. In such a case, proper precautions should 
be taken to preserve the natural water content 
during sampling. During the interval while the 
samples are awaiting transport, they should be 
stored if possible in a cool room. 


G-1.2 Undisturbed Samples of Soil 


The following conditions of handling and protection of 
undisturbed samples are to be regarded as a minimum 
requirement for samples taken by the usual methods; in 
special cases it may be necessary to take more elaborate 
precautions: 


a) Samples which are retained in a liner or which are 
retained in a seamless tube sampler should receive 
the following treatment: 


Immediately after being taken from the boring or 
trial pit, the ends of the sample should be cut and 
removed to a depth of about 2.5 cm (or more in the 
top to cover any obviously disturbed soil). Several 
layers of molten wax should then be applied to 
each end to give a plug about 2.5 cm thick. If the 
sample is very porous, a layer of waxed paper 
should first be placed over the ends of the sample. 
Any space left between the end of the liner or 
tube and the top of the wax should be tightly 
packed with saw dust or other suitable material; 
and a close-fitting lid or screwed cap be placed 


39 


on each end of the tube or liner. The lids should, 
if necessary, be held in position by adhesive tape. 
If the longitudinal joint of the liner is not air-tight, 
this should be waxed and protected by adhesive 
tape in the same way as the lid. 


b 


— 


Samples which are not retained in a tube should 
be wholly covered with several layers of molten 
paraffin wax immediately after being removed 
from the sampling tool, and then placed in a 
suitable metal container, being tightly packed 
in the container with saw dust or other suitable 
material. The lid of the container should be held 
in position by adhesive tape. If the sample is very 
porous, it may be necessary to cover it with waxed 
paper before applying the molten wax. 


с 


— 


A label bearing the number of the sample, 
preferably of the type shown in G-2, should be 
placed inside the container just under the lid. 
It should be placed at the top of the sample. In 
addition, the number of the sample should be 
painted on the outside of the container, and the top 
or bottom of the sample should be indicated. 

d) The liner or containers should be placed in a stout 
wooden box, preferably with separate partitions, 
and packed with saw dust, paper, etc, to prevent 
damage during transit. 


e 


wm 


It is desirable to test the undisturbed samples 
within two weeks of taking them from the boring 
or trial pit, and during the interval while awaiting 
transport and test, they should be stored, if possible 
in a cool room, preferably with a high humidity, 
say 90 percent. 


G-1.3 Samples of Rock 
G-1.3.1 Block Specimens 


The reference number of the sample should be recorded 
on it either by painting directly on the surface of the 
specimen, or by attaching to the specimen a small 
piece of surgical tape on which the number is written in 
Indian ink or indelible pencil. Samples should then be 
wrapped in several thicknesses of paper and packed in 
a wooden box. It is advisable to include in the wrapping 
a label of the type described in G-2. 


G-1.3.2 Cores 


In the case of small diameter drill cores, it is usual to 
preserve the whole core. This is best done in core boxes 
which are usually 1.5 m long and divided longitudinally 
by light battens to hold 10 rows of cores. The box should 
be of such depth and the compartments of such width 
that there can be no movement of the cores when the 


1S 1892: 2021 


box is closed. The lid of the box should Бе adeguately 
secured (see 15 4078). 


G-1.3.2.1 Great care should be taken, in removing the 
core from the core barrel and in placing it in the box, 
to see that the core is not ішпей end for end, but lies 
in its correct position. Depths below the surface of the 
ground should be indicated at 1.5 m intervals by writing 
the depth in indelible pencil on a small block of wood 
which is inserted in its correct position in the box. The 
exact depth of any change of strata should be shown in 
the same way. Where there is a failure to recover core, 
this should be recorded in the same way. 


G-1.3.2.2 Where specimens аге required for 
examination or analysis, short lengths of core may be 
split longitudinally by means of a special tool known as 
core splitter. One-half of the specimen should remain 
preserved in the box. Large diameter drill cores are 
usually too heavy to be treated in this way. As a rule, 
they are laid out in natural sequences for examination 


on the ground. Specimens required for detailed work 
may be treated as block specimens (see G-1.3.1). 


G-1.3.2.3 The properties of hard clays and soft rocks 
depend to some extent on their moisture content. 
Representative samples should therefore be preserved 
by coating them completely with a thick layer of wax 
after removing the softened skin. 


С-2 LABELLING OF SAMPLES 


G-2.1 All samples should be labelled immediately after 
being taken from the bore hole or trial pit. 


Records should be kept on a sheet of the type shown as 
below. These sheets are serially numbered and bound 
in book form in duplicate. Each sheet carries a portion 
which may be detached along a line of perforations 
and which is used as a label [see G-1.1 (b) and 
G-1.2 (c)]. On this portion the serial number of the 
sheet is repeated three times, so that the chance of its 
being defaced is diminished. 


BOUND AT PERFORATED TEAR 
THIS EDGE HERE OFF SLIP 
No: 1 100 No: 1 100 
SAMPLE RECORD 
Посайой «esee nr pr ———" 
BoringNo................. R.L. of ground surface ...................... 
Positionofsample,from.............................. 
ТО PEE below ground surface No: 1 100 
Container NO: «Le dell вана 
Туре of Sample: Disturbed/Undisturbed 
Remarks: 
Signed: №: 1 100 


40 


IS 1892 : 2021 


ANNEX H 
(Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Soil and Foundation Engineering Sectional Committee, CED 43 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 202/395, Jodhpur 
Park, Kolkata 700068) 


In Personal Capacity (D-/903, PWS, 7 Hills, 
Narsingi(v), Kokapet Road, Ranga Reddy 
500089) 


AFCONS Infrastructure Limited, Mumbai 

AIMIL Limited, New Delhi 

Association of Consulting Civil Engineers (India), 
Bengaluru 


Association of Piling Specialists (India), Mumbai 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Noida 


CEM Engineers & Consultants Pvt Ltd, Bhubaneswar 


Cengrs Geotechnica Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 


Central Designs Organization, Water Resources 
Deptt, Govt of Maharashtra, Nashik 


Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New 
Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 

CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre, 
Chennai 


D-CAD Technologies, New Delhi 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Technological University, Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr N. Som (Chairman) 


Dr D. N. NARESH (Vice Chairman) 


ӛнкі P. S. BANSOD 
SHRI V. RAMAMURTY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 

SHRI LALIT MOHAN PATHAK (Alternate) 
SHRI SUDHANWA AMOL SHINGAREY 

SHRI CHANDRAMOULEESWAR 5. (Alternate) 
SHRI V. T. GANPULE 

SHRI MADHUKAR J. LODHAVIA (Alternate) 
SHRI С. PUSHPAKARAN 

ӛнкі HEMANT MALHOTRA (Alternate) 
SHRI ASHOK BASA 
SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 

бнвт RAVI SUNDARAM (4/fernate Г) 

SHRI SORABH GUPTA (Alternate П) 
DIRECTOR 
SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER 

EXECUTIVE ENGINEER (Alternate) 
SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR 

SHRI SIDHARTHA MITRA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJESH KHARE 

SHRI SAUROBH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Dr R. CHITRA 

SHRI MAHABIR Dixit (4/fernate) 
SHRI DIPANKAR PAUL 

Suri T. K. Roy CHOUDHURY (A/ternate) 
SHRI MANOJIT SAMANTA 

DR S. GANESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI KANWAR SINGH 

DR P. S. PRASAD (Alternate) 
Dr Р. KAMATCHI 

SHRIMATI R. SREEKALA (Alternate) 
Dr K. G. BHATIA 
SHRI GOVIND RAM SHIROMANI 

SHRI К. К. Gupta (Alternate) 


PROF ASHOK KUMAR GUPTA 


41 


IS 1892: 2021 


Organization 


Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Е S Engineers Pvt Limited, Chennai 


Gammon Engineers and Contractors Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Geodynamics Ltd, Vadodara 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Ground Engineering Limited, New Delhi 

Gujarat Engineering Research Institute, Vadodara 

Hydraulic and Engineering Instruments (HEICO), 
New Delhi 


Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 

Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
Indian Road Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Society of Earthquake Technology, Roorkee 
ITD Cementation India Ltd, Kolkata 

Jadhavpur University, Kolkata 

Keller Ground Engineering Pvt Ltd, Chennai 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief's 
Branch, Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), New 
Delhi 


M N Dastur & Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


MECON Limited, Ranchi 


Representative(s) 


SHRI V. К. PANWAR 
SHRI SANJOY BHOWMIK (Alternate) 


DR A. VERGHESE CHUMMAR 


SHRI VENKATARAMANA. N. HEGGADE 
SHRI SANDEEP M. GHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAVI KIRAN RAMESH VAIDYA 
SHRI SUJAN KULKARNI (Alternate) 


DR TIMIR BARAN GHOSAL 
SHRI PRASHANT TUKARAM İLAMKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR JAIN 
SHRI NEERAJ KUMAR JAIN (Alternate) 


SHRI К. A. KESHVANI 
SHRI R. S. Vasava (Alternate) 


SHRI JATTINDER SINGH 
SHRI RAUNAQ SINGH (Alternate) 


SECRETARY 


Pror T. G. SITHARAM 
ProF G. L. SIVAKUMARA BABU (Alternate) 


DR G. V. RAMANA 
Dr J. T. SHAHU (Alternate Г) 
DR PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate II YP) 


PROF PRIYANKA GHOSH 


PROF SUBHADEEP BANERJEE 
PROF RAMESH K. KANDASAMI (Alternate) 


PROF DEEPANKAR CHOUDHURY 
PROF Dasaka Murty (Alternate) 


PROF MAHENDRA SINGH 
PROF VISHWAS А. SAWANT (Alternate) 


SECRETARY GENERAL 
DIRECTOR (T) (Alternate) 


PROF T. G. SITHARAM 
Dr B. К. MAHESWARI (Alternate) 


SHRI MANISH KUMAR 
SHRI SACHIN Kamar (Alternate) 


PROF SIBAPRIYA MUKHERJEE 
PROF RAMENDU BIKAS SAHU (Alternate) 


ӛнкі V. V. S. RAMADAS 
ӛнкі MADAN KUMAR ANNAM (Alternate) 


Dr К. S. RAMAKRISHNA 
SHRI JESUDOSS ASIRVATHAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RANJAN KUMAR PANDEY 
SHRI AJAY Kumar (Alternate) 


DR Авншт DASGUPTA 


SHRI SUVENDU Dey (Alternate) 


SHRI SHANKAR RAY 


42 


Organization 


Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 

Mumbai Port Trust, Mumbai 

Nagadi Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi 
National Institute of Disaster Management, New 


Delhi 
NTPC Limited, Noida 


Research Designs and Standards Organization 
(Ministry of Railways), Lucknow 


RITES Limited, Gurugram 
Safe Enterprises, Mumbai 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 


Simplex Infrastructures Limited, Chennai 


Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Mumbai 


Telangana State Research Laboratories, Hyderabad 


The Pressure Piling Co (I) Pvt Limited, Mumbai 


In personal capacity, New Delhi (Flat No. 220, Ankur 


Apartments Mother Dairy Road, Patparganj, 
Delhi 110092) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 1892 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


ӛнкі Н. М. ASWATH 
SHRI ANIL PRUTHI (Alternate) 


Dy CHIEF ENGINEER (DESIGN) 


SUPERINTENDING ENGINEER (DESIGN) (A/ternate) 


Dr V. V. S. Rao 
DR N. SANTOSH RAO (Alternate) 


DR CHANDAN GHOSH 
SHRI AMIR ALI (Alternate) 


SHRI JITENDER KUMAR 
SHRI Монт JHALANI (Alternate) 


SHRI SAMEER SINGH 
SHRI S. K. OJHA (Alternate) 


SHRI ALOK GARG 
Suri S. K. Kapoor (Alternate I) 
SHRI SANDIPAN HORE (Alternate П) 


SHRI VIKRAM SINGH RAO 
SHRI SURYAVEER SINGH RAO (Alternate) 


PROF Y. K. JAIN 


SHRI SHANKAR GUHA 
DR V. BALAKUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJEEV GUPTA 
SHRI B. N. NAGARAJ (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI J. SRIDEVI 
SHRI P. JOHN VICTOR (Alternate) 


SHRI V. C. DESHPANDE 
SHRI PUSHKAR V. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST “Е AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


| REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI MADHURIMA MADHAV 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


43 


1S 1892: 2021 


Panel for Revision of IS 1892, CED 43: P6 


Organization Representative(s) 


In Personal Capacity (Flat No. 202/395, Jodhpur Ок М. Som (Convener) 
Park, Kolkata 700068) 


In Personal Capacity [Apartment D-1903, PWS, 7 Dn D. М. NAREsH (Vice Chairman) 
Hills Narsingi (V), Gandipet Road, Ranga Reddy 
District, Telangana 500 0891 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Noida SHRI С. PUSHPAKARAN 
Cengrs Geotechnica Pvt Ltd, Noida SHRI SANJAY GUPTA 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi SHRI SAUROBH KUMAR GUPTA 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station, Dr R. CHITRA 

New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Powai Dr DEEPANKAR CHOUDHURY 
Nagadi Consultants Pvt Limited, New Delhi DR N. SANTOSH RAO 
NTPC Limited, Noida SHRI JITENDRA KUMAR 


SHRI Monit JHALANI (Alternate) 


44 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 43 (14250). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 С.Т.Т. Scheme VII М, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

МОМВАТ 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


