( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 2809 - 1972

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND SYMBOLS RELATING TO SOIL ENGINEERING

( First Revision )
Soil Engineering
Chairman PROF DINESHMOHAN Members SHRI D. R. NARAHARI I Alternate to Prof Dinesh Mohan )` University of Jodhpur, Jodhpur PROF ALAM SINGH Cementation Co Ltd, Bombay DR A. BANERJEE SHRI S. GUPTA ( Alternate ) Land Reclamation? Irrigation & Power Research SHRI B. B. L. BHATNAGAR Institute. Amrltsar In personai capacity ( P-820, .New A&we, SHRI K. N. DADINA Calcutta 53 ) Hindustan Construction Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI A. G. DASTIDAR Bihar Institute of Hvdraulic & Allied Research. SHRI R. I,. DEWAN Khagaul, Patna . Indian Geotechnical Society, New Delhi DR G. S. DHILLON Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi PROFR. N. DOGRA SHRI S. K. GULATI ( Alternate) Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) JOINT DIRECTOR RESEARCEI ( FE ), RDSO DEPUTY DIRECTOR RESEARCH ( SOIL MECHANICS ), RDSO ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI S. S. JOSHI SHRI S. VARADARAJA( Alternate ) Central Board of Irrigation & Power, New Delhi SHRI I. P. KAPILA Rodio Foundation Engineering Ltd; and Hazarat & SHRI G. KUECKELMANN Co, Bombay SIIRIA. H. DIVANJI( Alternate ) Public Works Department, Government of Punjab SHRI 0. P. MALHOTRA Concrete Association of India, Bombay SHRI M. A. MEHTA SHRI T. M. MENON ( Alternate ) Central Water & Power Commission, New Delhi SHRI R. S. MELKOTE DEPUTY DIRECTOR ( CENTRAL SOIL MECHANICS RESEARCH STATION( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

Sectional

Committee,

BDC

23

Representing Central Building Roorkee Research Institute ( CSIR),

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN,

INSTITUTION
ZAFAR

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 1

MARG

IS : 2809 - 1972
( Continued from page 1) Members SHRI T. K. NATARAJAN Representing Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR), New Delhi National Buildings Organisation, New Delhi SHRI RAVINDERLAL SHRI S. H. BALACHANDANI ( Alternate ) Buildings & Roads Research Laboratory, Public RESEARCH OFFICER Works Department, Government of Punjab Engineering Research Laboratory, Hyderabad RESEARCHOFFICER University of Roorkee, Roorkee DR SHAMSHER PRAKASH Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee SHRI H. D. SHARMA Roads Wing ( Ministry of Shipping & Transport ) SHRI S. N. SINHA SHRI A. S. BISHNOI ( Alternate ) Concrete & Soil Research Laboratory, Public Works SUPERINTENDING E N o I NE E R Department, Government of Tamil Nadu ( PLANNING AND D E s I G N CIRCLE ) EXECUTIVE ENGINEER ( INCHARGE, SOIL MECHANICS & RESEARCH DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI C. G. SWAMINATHAN All India Instruments Manufacturers & Dealers SHRI H. C. VERMA Association, Bombay SHRI S. R. TALPADE (Alternate) Public Works Department, Government of Uttar SHRI H. G. VERMA Pradesh SHRI D. C. CHATURVEDI( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-ojicio Member ) SHRI D. ATITHASIMHA, Directo; ( Civ Engg) Secretary SHRI G. RAMAN Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

_

Glossary of Terms

Subcommittee,

BDC 23 : 4

DR SHAMSHER PRAKASH Members SHRI D. N. BHARCAVA SHRI P. NANDAKLMARAN SHRI B. G. RAO DR SWAMI SARAN

University of Roorkee, Roorkee Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee School of Research & Training in Earthquake Engineering, Roorkee Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee University of Roorkee, Roorkee

2

IS t 2809 - 1972

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS AND SYMBOLS RELATING TO SOIL ENGINEERING (

First Revision)
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 February 1972, after the draft finalized by the Soil Engineering Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 A series of Indian Standards covering soil testing, site investigation for foundations, etc, is being published; this includes a large number of terms relating to soil engineering. The extensive use of these terms has necessitated the preparation of this glossary. 0.3 This standard was first published in 1964. In this revision some new terms have been included; definitions of some terms already included have been changed and the physical dimensions are given in F, L and T instead of M, L and T. 0.4 A number of definitions include symbols, and the units of measurements The symbols appear immediately after the name of the are also indicated. term, followed by the unit in parentheses. No significance should be placed on the order in which the symbols are presented where two or more are given for an individual term. The physical dimensions of quantities are indicated by capital letters as follows: F = L = T = D = Force Length Time Dimensionless the definition is this is not the case,

0.4.1 Where synonymous terms are cross-referenced, included with the earlier term alphabetically. Where the later term is the more significant.

0.3 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by basing the standard on the following 3

IS : 2809 - 1972 publications: ASTM D 653-67 Terms and symbols relating mechanics. American Society for Testing and to soil and Materials. rock of of

Progress report of the Committee on Definitions and Standards the Soil Mechanics and Foundations Division. Proceedings the American Society of Civil Engineers.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers definitions of terms relating to soil engineering. The symbols that are used to represent some of the terms are also given. 2. DEFINITIO,NS 2.1 Absorbea Water - Water held mechanically ( by surface tension ) in a soil mass and having physical properties not different from ordinary water at the same temperature and pressure. 2.2 2.3 Active Active Earth Pressure State of Plastic Ratio See ` Earth Pressure `. Equilibrium `.

Equilibrium

See ` Plastic

2~4 Activity

of the plasticity

index to the clay fraction. soil and another material

2.5 Adhesion - Shearing resistance between under zero externally applied pressure:

Symbol
Unit Total adhesion adhesion clay and c0 G silt that has been

Unit
FL-2 F or FL-l deposited in

2.6 Adobe-A light coloured shallow desert basins or lakes.

2.7 Adsorbed Water - Water in a soil mass, held by physico-chemical forces, having physical properties substantially different from absorbed or free water or chemically combined water at the same temperature and pressure. 2.8 Aeolian Deposits and loess deposits. 2.9 `A' Horizon Wind-deposited `. material, such as dune sands

See ' Horizon

2.10 Air Entry Value -The minimum pressure of air or suction that destroys the capillary tension of water in the pores of a saturated porous stone. 4

IS : 2809 - 1972
2.11 Air-Space Ratio, G, ( D ) - Ratio of volume of water that can be drained from a saturated soil under the action of the force of gravity to total volume of voids, as determined in a specified testing method. 2.12 Air Void Ratio e, ( D ) volume of solids in a soil mass. The ratio of the volume of air space to the

2.13 Allowable Bearing Pressure ( Gross ), qa ( Gross ) ( FL-Z) - The maximum allowable gross loading intensity on the ground in any given case, taking into account the maximum safe bearing capacity ( gross ), the amount and kind of settlement expected, and the ability of the given structure to take up this settlement. It is, therefore, a combined function of both the site conditions and characteristics of the particular structure it is proposed to erect thereon. 2.14 Allowable Bearing allowable bearing pressure Pressure ( Nett ), qa ( Neit ( gross ) minus the surcharge.

) ( FL -2) -

The

2.15 Allowable Pile Bearing Load ( Allowable Load on Pile), Qa ( F ) - The load which may be safely applied to a pile after taking into account its ultimate bearing resistance, pile spacing, overall bearing capacity of the ground below the piles and allowable settlement. 2.16 Alluvium - A general term for all detrital deposits resulting from the the sediments laid down in river beds, operation `of rivers, thus including Unless flood plains, lakes, fans at the foot of mountain slopes and estuaries. otherwise indicated alluvium is unconsolidated. 2.17 Angle of Internal Friction ( Angle of Shearing Resistance), $, ( Degrees ) - Angle between the abscissa and the tangent to the curve representing the ,relationship between the shearing resistance at failure to normal stress acting within a soil. 2.18 Angle of Obliquity, Y ( Degrees ) - The angle between the direction of the resultant stress or force acting on a given plane and the normal to that plane. 2.13 Angle of Repose, cc ( Degrees )-Angle between the horizontal and the maximum slope that a soil assumes through natural processes. For granular soils the effect of the height of slope is negligible; for cohesive soils the effect of height of slope is so great that the angle of repose is meaningless. 2.20 Angle of Wall Friction, 6 - Angle between the abscissa and the tangent of the curve representing the relationship of shearing resistance to normal stress acting between soil and surface of another material. 2.21 Anisotropic Mass - A mass having different directions at any given point. 2.22 Apparent Cohesion See ` Cohesion 5 `. properties in different

IS ;2809 - 1972 2.23 Aquifer reservoir. 2.24 Arching-The soil mass to adjoining transfer of load by shear less-yielding or restrained from a yielding parts of mass. part of a A water bearing formation that provides a ground water

2.25 Area of Influence of a Well, u ( Lw2) - Area surrounding a well within which the piezometric surface has been lowered when pumping has produced the maximum steady rate of flow. 2.26

the sampler follows:

Area Ratio of a Sampling Spoon, Sampler or Sampling Tube, The area ratio is an indication of the volume of soil displaced by A,(D)in proportion to the volume of the sample, calculated

as

A, (%)
where

=~=y
I

x 100

=* = maximum external Ds = minimum internal the cutting edge.

diameter diameter

of the sampling of the sampling

spoon, and spoon at

-A layer of specified or selected material of 2.27 Base Course (Base) planned thickness constructed on the subgrade or sub-base for the purpose ofserving one or more functions, such as distributing load, providing drainage and minimizing frost action. 2.28 Base &change - The physico-chemical process whereby one type of ions ( cations ) adsorbed on soil particles are replaced by another type. The base exchange capacity signifies the capacity of soil to retain bases up to its highest limit; it also defines the power of the soil to combine with base in such a manner that they cannot be easily removed by leaching with In ' water, but can be exchanged by an equivalent amount of other bases. other words it represents a limit beyond which the saloids would be highly hydrolyzed. 2.29 Bearing Capacity Factor ( D ) - Non-dimensional factors proposed by Terzaghi for the computation of bearing capacity. first

2.30 Bearing Capacity, Maximum Safe, pO( FLm2 ) - The maximum intensity of loading that the soil will safely carry with a factor of safety against shear failure irrespective of any settlement that may result. 2.31 Bearing Capacity of Pile, Ultimate, required to produce a condition of failure. 2.32 2.33 Bearing Bearing Capacity, Pressure, Ultimate Allowable 6 Q, ( F ) The load per pile Bearing Bearing Capacity Pressure `. `.

See ` Ultimate See ` Allowable

IS : 2809 - 1972 2.34 Bedrock ( Ledge ) Any in-situ solid rock below soil.

2.35 Bentonitic Clay ( Bentonite ) - A clay with a high content of the mineral montmorillonite, usually characterized by high swelling on wetting. 2.36 2.37 Berm A shelf that breaks See ` Horizon the continuity `. of a slope.

c B ' Horizon

2.38 Black Cotton Soil -Black cotton soils are inorganic clays of medium to high compressibility and form a major soil group in India. They are predominantly montmorillonitic in structure and black or blackish grey in colour. They are characterized by high shrinkage and swelling properties. 2.39 Boglime ( Lake Marl ) - A white fine-grained powdery calcareous deposit precipitated by plant action, on the bottom of many ponds; also found in glaciated areas and closely associated with peat deposits. 2.40 Boulder - A more or less rounded block or fragment of rock and of Usually boulders are rounded by average dimension 300 mm or greater. being carried or rolled along by water or ice; sometimes also by weathering in place in which case they are known as boulders of weathering, disintegration or exploitation. 2.41 Bulb of Pressure See ` IPressure Bulb `.

2.42 Bulking-The increase in volume of a material due to handling. Rock bulk upon excavation; damp sand bulks if loosely deposited, as by dumping, because the apparent cohesion prevents movement of the soil particles to form a reduced volume. 2.43 Caliche Soil cemented by porous calcium carbonate.

2.44 California Bearing Ratio, CBR ( D ) -- The ratio of the force per unit area required to penetrate a soil mass with a circular piston of 50 mm diameter at the rate of I.25 mm/min to that required for corresponding The ratio is usually determined for penetration of a standard material. Where the ratio at 5 mm is consistently penetrations of2.5 mm and 5 mm. higher than that at 2.5 mm, the ratio at 5 mm is used. 2.45 Capillary in the interstices 2.46 Capillary Action ( Capillarity ) -- The rise or movement of a soil due to capillary forces. Flow See ` Capillary Migration `. in of water

2.47 Capillary Fringe Zone which water is held by capillary

The zone above the free water elevation action.

2.48 Capillary Head, B ( L ) - The potential, expressed that causes the water to flow by capillary action. 7

in head of water,

IS : 2809 - 1972
2.49 Capillary Migration (Capillary Flow) -

The movement of water

by capillary action. 2.50 Capillary Rise ( Height of Capillary Rise), B, ( L ) - The height above a free water elevation to which water will rise by capillary action. 2.51 Capillary action. T;zz, Centrifuge Water Moisture Water subject to the influence
CME -

of

capillary

Equivalent,

See ` Moisture Equiva-

2.53 ` C ' Horizon

See ` Horizon `.

2.54 Clay - An aggregate of microscopic and submicroscopic particles derived from the chemical decomposition and disintegration of rock constituents. It is plastic within a moderate to wide range of water content. 2.55 Clay Size That portion of the soil finer than 0.002 mm. 2.56 Cobble - A rock fragment, usually rounded or semi-rounded, with an average dimension between 80 and 300 mm. 2.57 Coefficient 2.~~s~~~fficient of Absolute of Active Viscosity See ` Coefficient of Viscosity `. See ` CoefficiLnt of Earth Earth Pressure

2.59 Coefficient of Compressibility ( Coefficient of Compression ) e secant slope, for a given pressure increment, of the (u,) (L2 F-I)-Th effective pressure-void ratio curve. 2.60 CoeffiFient of Consolidation, c, ( L2 T-l ) - A coefficient utilized in the theory of consolidation, containing the physical constants of a soil affecting its rate of volume change: c, = where k e = = 0, = yu, = coefficient of permeability, LT-1; void ratio, D; coefficient of compressibility, L2 F-l; and unit weight of water, FL-S.
of
consolidation,

k(l+e) a, yw

NOTE -In the literaturepublished prior to 1935, the coefficient usually designated C, was defined by the equation: c= k

QlYw(l+~) This original definition of the coefficient of consolidation may be found in some more recent papers and care should be taken to avoid confusion.

IS : 2809 - 1972 2.61 Coefficient of Curvature ( C, ) It is given by C, =. DC ",s" L corresrondinr

where D1,,, DSO, D,,, are the diameters to 10, 30, and 60 percent finer. lateral effective soil mass. pressure and vertical efftctlve

of particles

2.62 Coefficient of Earth Pressure,_ K ( D ) -The
pressure

ratio between . . the . at any pomt m the

2.62.1 Coeficient of Earth Pressuyc, Active, KA ( D ) -The smallest value of the coefficient of'earth pressure resulting when the soil expands laterally till failure. 2.62.2 Coeficient of Earth Pyessu~e, at Rest, X0 coefficient of earth pressure when the soil is permitted compress laterally.

(D ) neither

Value of the to expand nor

2.62.3 Coeficient of Earth Pressure, Passive, Kp ( D ) -The maximum value of coefficient of earth pressure resulting when the soil is compressed laterally thereby inducing failure in the soil. 2.63 Coefficient of Permeability ( Permeability ), k ( LT-l ) - The rate of flow of water under laminar flow conditions through a unit crosssectional area of porous medium under a unit hydraulic gradient and standard temperature conditions (usually 27�C ). 2.64 Subgrade Reaction (Modulus of Subgrade Ratio of load per unit area ( applied through a centrally loaded rigid body ) of horizontal surface of a mass of soil to corresponding settlement of the surface. It is determined as the slope of the secant drawn between the point corresponding to zero settlement and the point of l-25 mm settlement, of a load-settlement curve obtained from a plate load test on a soil using a 75-cm or greater loading plate.

Reaction ), k ( FL-3 ) -

Coefficient

of

2.65

of Uniformity, C, ( D ) - The ratio D,,/D,,, where diameter corresponding to 60 percent finer on the grain to 10 percent size curve and D,, is the particle diameter corresponding finer on the grain-size curve.

Coefficient

De0 is the particle

2.66 Coefficient of Viscosity ( Coefficient of Absolute Viscosity ), p ( FTL-m2 ) - The shearing force per unit area required to maintain a unit difference in velocity between two parallel layers of a fluid, a unit distance apart. 2.67

Coefficient of Volume Compressibility ( Modulus of Volume Change ), m, ( Lw2F-l ) - The compression of a soil layer per unit of original thickness due to a given unit increase 9 in pressure. It is numerically

fS:2809-i972
equal to the coefficient of compressibility
void ratio, or a. 1+e 2.68 Cohesion, c (FL-2 )-The portion of the shear strength indicated by the term c, in Coulomb's equation, s = c $- @ tan 4. 2.68.1 forces. Cohesion, Abparent Cohesion in granular of a soil divided by one plus the original

soils due to capillary

2.69 Cohesionless Soil-A soil that when unconfined has little or no strength when air-dried and that has little or no cohesion when submerged. 2.70 Cohesive Soils - A soil that when unconfined strength when air-dried and that has significant cohesion has considerable when submerged.

2.71 Colloidal Particles - Soil particles that are so small that the surface activity has an appreciable influence on the properties of the mass. ThC physico-chemical forces dominate the gravitational forces. 2.72 Compaction manipulation. The densification of a soil by means of mechanical

Curve ( Moisture-Density Curve ) - The curve 2.73 Compaction showing the relationship between the dry unit weight ( density) and the water content of a soil for a given compactive effort. Test ( Moisture-Density Test ) - A laboratory 2.74 Compaction compaction test procedure whereby a soil at a known water content is placed in a specified manner into a mould of given dimensions, subjected to a compactive effort of controlled magnitude and the resulting unit weight determined, The procedure is repeated for various water contents suflicient to establish a relation between water content and dry unit weight. 2.75 Compressibility to decrease in volume 2.76 Compression - Property of a soil pertaining when subjected to load. Curve See ' Pressure-Void Ratio to its susceptibility Curve `.

2.77 Compression Index, C, ( D ) pressure-void ratio curve on a semi-log 2.78 Concentration Bussinesq equations 2.79 Consistency-The soil to deformation. 2.80 Consistency the liquid limit Index minus

The slope of the linear portion of the plot, with pressure on the log scale. used in modifying the of vertical stress. by a fine grained Ratio of

Factor, n (D ) - A parameter to describe various distributions degree of resistance

offered

( Relative the natural

Consistency ), Z, ( D ) water content to the

plasticity

10

IS : 2809 - 1972

index of a soil: WLI, = --y---where WL = liquid limit, content, and WO= natural moisture I, = plasticity index.

wo

2.81 Consolidated-Drained Test ( Slow Shear Test ) - A soil test in which a soil specimen is first allowed to consolidate fully under an applied stress and shear stresses are then applied in such a manner that there is full dissipation of excess pore water pressure developed during shear. 2.82 Consolidated-Undrained Test ( Consolidated Quick Test ) In this case, the soil is consolidated under applied normal loads but no drainage of water from the soil is permitted to take place during shear. 2.83 Consolidation - The gradual reduction in volume of a soil mass partly or fully saturated resulting from an increase in and continued application of compressive stress and is due to the expulsion of water from the pores. 2.83.1 Initial Consolidatio?l ( Initial Compression ) - A comparatively sudden reduction in volume of a soil mass under an applied load due principally to expulsion and compression of gas in the soil voids preceding primary consolidation. 2.83.2 Primary Consolidation ( Primary Compression ) ( Primary Time Effect ) - The reduction in volume ofa soil mass caused by the application of a sustained load to the mass and due principally to a squeezing out of water from the void spaces of the mass and accompanied by a transfer of the load from the soil water to the soil solids. 2.83.3 Secondary Cowolidation ( Secondary Compression ) ( Secondary Time E$ect ) - The reduction in volume of a soil mass caused by the application of a sustained load to the mass and due principally to the adjustment of the internal structure of the soil mass after most of the load has been transferred from the soil water to the soil solids. 2.84 Consolidation Curve See ` Consolidation Time Curve `.

2.85 Consolidation Ratio, vz ( D) - Th e ratio of the amount of consolidation at a given point within the subsoil and at a given time to the total amount of consolidation obtainable at that point under a given stress increment. 11

IS : 2809 - 1972 2.86 Consolidation specimen is laterally plates. Test, One Dimensional-A test in which the confined in a ring and is compressed between porous

2.87 Consolidation Time Curve ( Time Curve ) ( Consolidation Curve ) ( Theoretical Time Curve ) - A curve that shows the relation between the degree of consolidation, and the elapsed time after the application of given increment of load. 2.88 Contact Pressure, p ( FLea )-The the surface of contact between the foundation produced by the self weight of the foundation soil reaction per unit area at and the underlying soil mass, and all the forces acting on it,

2.89 Controlled Strain Test - A test in which the load is so applied that a controlled rate of strain results ( a test in which a specific rate of deformation is applied and the reaction to this deformation is measured ). 2.90 2.91 Controlled Stress Test - A test in which is subjected is applied at a controlled rate. Creep of soil and rock a) Slow movement imperceptible except to observations b) The time dependent compressive stress. deformation waste down slopes of long duration.
usually

the stress

to which

a

specimen

behaviour

of soil under constant

2.92 Critical Circle ( Critical Surface ) - The sliding surface assumed in a theoretical analysis of the stabiligy of a soil mass for which the factor of safety is a minimum. 2 93 Critical Density - The unit weight of a saturated granular material below which it will lose strength and above which it will gain strength when subjected to rapid deformation. 2.94 Critical Height, H, ( L ) - Th e maximum height at which a vertical or sloped bank of soil will stand unsupported under a given set of conditions. 2.95 Critical Hydraulic Gradient See ` Hydraulic Gradient `. at which a

2.96 Critical Slope - The maximum angle with the horizontal sloped bank of soil of given height will stand unsupported. 2.97 Critical Surface See ` Critical Circle `.

2.98 Critical Void Ratio, e, ( D ) - Void ratio prior shear in which nett volume change at failure is zero. 2.99 Cryology ground. The study of the 12 properties of snow

to the process ice and

of

frozen

IS : 2809 - 1972
2.100 Deflocculating Agent ( Deflocculant ) ( Dispersing Agent ) An agent that prevents fine soil particles in suspension from coalescing to form floes. 2.101 Degree of Compaction, D, ( D ) - The ratio of dry density of compacted material in the field to the laboratory standard maximum dry density of the material multiplied by 100. 2.102 Degree of Consolidation ( Percent Consolidation ), U ( D ) The ratio, expressed as a percentage of the amount of consolidation at a given time, within a soil mass to the total amount of consolidation obtainable under a given stress condition. 2.103 Degree bf Satpration ( Percent Saturation ), S,. ( D ) - The ratio, expressed as a percentage, of the volume of water in a given soil mass to the total volume of voids. 2.104 Density See ` Unit Weight `.

it is recognized that density is defined as mass per unit volume, in the field of soil mechanics the term is frequently used in place of unit weight. 2.105 Density Index ( Relative Density ) ( Degree of Density), lu ( D ) - The ratio of the difference between the void ratio of a cohesionless soil in the loosest state and any given void ratio, to the difference between its void ratios in the loosest and in the densest states:

NOTE-Although

I,=e,,,Ze x emax - emin
where

100

eniaz = void ratio in loosest state, e= void ratio in the field, and e emin = void ratio in its densest state obtainable 2.106 Deviator Stress od ( FL-' )-The and minor principal stresses in a triaxial 2.107 Dilatancy - The shearing deformation. expansion difference test. in the laboratory. between soils when the major subject to

of cohesionless

2.108 Direct Shear Test - A shear test in which soil under an applied normal load is stressed to failure by moving one section of the soil container ( shear box ) relative to the other section. 2.109 Discharge a porous medium flow. Z.110 Dispersing Velocity, v (LT-l) - Rate of discharge of water through per unit of total area perpendicular to the direction of Agent See ` Deffocculating Agent `.

13

IS t 2809 - 1972
2.111 Drawdown ( L ) - Vertical distance the free water elevation is lowered, or the reduction of the pressure head due to the removal of free water. 2.112 Dry Density ( Dry Unit Weight oven dry soil per unit volume of soil mass. 2.lr3 Earth boundary: Pressure-The pressure ), ya ( FL-3 ) or force exerted The weight of

by soil on any

Symbol
Pressure Force P FL-s F

Unit
or FL-l

P

2.113.1 Active Earth Pressure, PA, PA - The minimum value of earth This condition exists when a soil mass is permitted to yield pressure. sufficiently to cause its internal shearing resistance along a potential failure surface to be completely mobilized. 2.113.2 Earth Pressure at Rest, P,, P, - The value of the earth pressure when the soil mass is in its natural state without having been permitted to yield or without having been compressed. 2.113.3 Passive Earth Pressure, P,, fl,, - The maximum value of earth This condition exists when a soil mass is compressed sufficiently pressure. to cause its internal shearing resistance along a potential failure surface to be completely mobilized. D,, ( L ) - Particle 2.114 Effective Diameter ( Effective Size j, diameter corresponding to 10 percent finer on the grain-size curve. 2.115 Effeciive Drainage Porosity See ` Effective force Porosity `. a soil

2.116 Effective Force, P ( F )-The mass by inter-granular pressures.

transmitted

through

2.117 Effective Porosity ( Effective Drainage Porosity ), n, ( D ) _ The ratio of the volume of the voids of a soil mass that can be drained by gravity to the total volume of the mass. 2.118 2.119 2.120 2.121 2.122 Effective Effective Effective Effective Elastic Pressure Size Stress Unit State See ` Stress `. Diameter `.

See ' Effective -

See ` Stress `. See ` Unit Weight State `. a soil mass

Weigbt

when the internal resistance of the mass is not fully mobilized,

of Equilibrium

of stress within

14

IS 2.123 Equipotential Line -

:2809-1972

Line joining various points in a soil mass at which the piezometric head is the same ( that is, water will rise to the same elevation in piezometric tubes ). 2.124 Equivalent Diameter ( Equivalent Size ), D ( L ) - The diameter of a hypothetical sphere composed of material having the same specific gravity as that of the actual soil particle and of such size that it will settle in a given liquid at the same terminal velocity as the actual soil particle.

2.125 Equivalent Fluid - A hypothetical fluid having a unit weight such that it will produce a pressure against a lateral support presumed to be equivalent to that produced by the actual soil. This simplified approach is valid only when deformation conditions are such that the pressure increases linearly with depth and the wall friction is neglected. 2.126

Excess Hydrostatic Pressure -

See` Hydrostatic

Pressure `.

2.127 Exchange Capacity ( Base Exchange Capacity ) - The capacity to exchange ions as measured by the quantity of exchangeable ions in a soil. 2.128 Failure by Rupture Moisture See ` Shear Failure `. Equivalent `.

2.129 Field

Equivalent

See ` Moisture

2.130 Filter ( Protective Filter ) - A layer or combination of layers of pervious materials designed and installed in such a manner as to provide drainage, yet prevent the movement of soil particles due to percolating water. 2.131 Fines Portion of a soil finer than a 7.5-micron mass formed of forming IS Sieve. by the

2.132 Floe aggregation 2.133 2.134

-Loose, open-structured of minute particles. The process -

in a suspension

Flocculation Flocculent

floes. `. by two adjacent

Structure -

see ` Soil Structure

2.135 Flow flow lines.

Channel

The portion

of a flow net bounded

2.136 Flow Curve - The locus of points obtained from a standard liquid limit test using the mechanical device and plotted on a graph representing water content as ordinate on an arithmetic scale and the number of drops as abscissa on a logarithmic scale. 2.137 Flow Failure - Failure in which long distances in a fluid-like manner. a soil mass moves over relatively

2.138 Flow Index, Z, ( D ) - The slope of the flow curve obtained from a liquid limit. test using the mechanical device ( given by the difference in water contents at 10 blows and at 100 blows ).

IS : 2809 - 1972 2.139 Flow Line - The path that a particle of water follows in its course of seepage under laminar flow conditions. 2.140 Flow Net - A graphical representation of flow lines and equipotential lines used in the study of seepage phenomena. 2.141 Flow Slide-The failure of a sloped bank of soil in which the movement of the soil mass does not take place along a well-defined surface of sliding. 2.142 Flow Value, N+ (Degrees ) A quantity equal to tan 2(45"+ $)>

where #I is the angle of internal friction of soil. 2.243 Footing - A spread constructed in brickwork, masonry or concrete under the base of a wall or column for the purpose of distributing the load over a larger area. 2.144 Foundation - That part of the structure which is in direct contact with and transmits loads to the ground. 2.145 Free Water ( Gravitational Water ) ( Ground Water ) ( Phreatic that is free to move through a soil mass under the Water ) -Water influence of gravity. 2.146 Free Water Elevation ( Water Table ) ( Ground Water Surface ) ( Free Water Surface ) ( Ground Water Elevatio,n ) - Elevations at which the pressure in the ground water is zero with respect to the atmospheric pressure. 2.147 Frost, Action - Freezing and thawing of moisture in materials and the resultant effects on these materials and on structures of which they are a part or with which they are in contact. 2.148 Frost Boil a) Softening liberation of soil occurring during a thawing period due to the of water from ice lenses or layers. of soft

b) The hole formed in flexible pavements by the extrusion soil and melt waters under the action of wheel loads.

c) Breaking of a highway or airfield pavement under traffic and the ejection of subgrade soil in a soft and soupy condition caused by the melting of ice lenses formed by frost action. 2,149 Frost Heave - The raising of a surface due to the accumulation ice in the underlying soil. 2.150 General Shear Failure See ` Shear Failure `. of

2.151 Glacial Till ( Till ) - Generally unstratified, unconsolidated and heterogenous mixture of clay, sand, gravel and boulders, deposited directly 16

IS : 2809 - 1972 by glacier-ice, not by glacier them. It may be a) englacial c) subglacial ( carried b) superglacial waters, though it may be locally modified by

within the ice mass ), along beneath the glacier ). ) process or

( borne on the ice surface ), or ( dragged

2.152 Gradation ( Grain-Size Distribution ) ( Soil Texture Proportion of material of each grain size present in a given soil. 2.153 Grain-Size Analysis of determining gradation. ( Mqchanical Analysis ) The

2.154 Gravel - Angular, rounded or semi-rounded soil of particle size between 4.75 mm and 80 mm. 2.155 2.156 2.157 2.158 2.159 Gravitational Ground Water Water -See See ' Free Water `. `.

particles

of rock

` Free Water
-

Ground Water
Ground Hardpan Water -

Elevation Surface

See ` Free Water

Elevation `.

`.

See ` Free Water dense soil.

Elevation

Layer

of extremely

NOTE - Hardpan is a formation which forms by precipitation of dissolved materials, such as calcium carbonate or silica at depths below the surface year after year. When this accumulation takes place, the subsoil is more or less firmly cemented and limits downward movement of water. This formation does not soften when wetted with water. 2.160 Heave - Upward movement of soil caused by expansion or displacement resulting from phenomena, such as moisture absorption, removal of overburden, driving of piles, frost action and hydrostatic pressure. 2.161 Height of Capillary Rise See ` Capillary Rise `.

2.162 Homogeneous Mass - A mass that exhibits essentially the same physical properties at every point throughout the mass. 2.163 Honeycomb Structure See ` Soil Structure `.

2.164 Horizon ( Soil Horizon) - One of the layers of the soil profile, colour, structure and chemical distinguished principally by its texture, content. 2.164.1 ` A ' Horizon - The uppermost layer of a soil profile from which Usually inorganic colloids and other soluble materials have been leached. contains remnants of organic matter. 2.164.2 ` B ' Horizon-The layer of a soil profile in which leached from the overlying ` A ' horizon is accumulated. material

17

IS : 2899

- 1972

~2.1643 ` C ' Horizon - Undisturbed parent material from which the overlying soil profile has been developed. 2.165 Humus - A brown or black material formed by the partial decomposition of vegetable or animal matter; the organic portion of soil. 2.166 Hydraulic Gradient, i, s ( D ) -The difference or drop of hydraulic

head per unit distance

of flow, $

2.166.1 Critical Hydraulic Gradient, i, ( D ) -Hydraulic gradient at which the inter-granular pressure in a mass of cohesionless soil is reduced to zero by the upward flow ofwater. 2.167 Hydrostatic Pressure, U, ( FLe2 ) - The pressure in a liquid under static conditions; the product of the unit weight of the liquid and the difSerence in eicvalion between lhe given point and the free water elevation.

-

2.167.1 Excess Hydrostatic Pressure ( Hydrostatic Excess Pressure ), ii, u ( FL-Z) The pressure that exists in pore water in excess of the hydrostatic pressure.

2J68 Hygroscopic Capacity ( Hygroscopic Coefficient ), uO ( D ) Ratio of the weight water absorbed by a dry soil in a saturated atmosphere at a given tcmpcraturc to the weight of the oven-dried soil.

of

2.169 Hygroscopic air-dried soil. 2.170 Initial tion'. j 2.171 2.172 2.173 2.174

Water

Content, ( Initial

WH (D ) -

`The water content of an )See ` Consolida-

Consolidation Silt -

Compression

Inorganic

See ` Silt `. See ` Stress `. See ` Principal Plane `. See ` Stress `.

Intergranular IutermeclZate Intermediate

Pressure Principal Principal

Plane Stress -

2.175 Isochrone - A curve showing the distribution of the excess hydrostatic pressure in a soil layer or strata at a given time during a process of consolidation. 2.176 Isotropic Mass ties ) in all direc~tions. 2.177 Kaolin A mass having the same property a high percentage ( or properof kaolinite.

A variety

of clay containing

2.178 Laminar Flow ( Streamline Flow ) ( Viscous Flow ) - That type of&w in which the path of any particle is not intersected by that of the other particle and in which head loss is proportional to the first power of the velocity.

1%

IS 2.179 Landslide ( Landslip
of rock

:2809- 1972

) ( Slide ) or soil, in which

soil hillside, place. 2.180

or mass

The failure movement

of a sloped bank of of the mass takes

Leaching-The

removal See ` Bedrock `.

of soluble

soil elements

and colloids

by

percolating 2.181

water.

Le'dge -

Le (D ) - The increase in one dimension of 2.182 Linear Expansion, soil mass, expressed as a percentage of that dimension at the shrinkage limit, when the water content is increased from the shrinkage limit to any given water content.
2.183 Linear Shrinkage, L, (D ) - D ecrease in one dimension of a soil mass, expressed as a percentage of the original dimension, when the water content is reduced from a given value to the shrinkage limit. 2.184 Line of Creep - The path that water follows along the surface of contact between the foundation soil and the base of a hydraulic or other structure. 2.185 Line, Phreatic See ` Phreatic Line `.

2.186 Liquidity Index ( Water-Plasticity Ratio ) ( Relative Water of the natural Content ), IL ( D ) - The ratio, expressed as a percentage, water content of a soil minus its plastic limit to its plasticity index. 2.187 Liquid Limit, WI. - The water content, expressed as a percentage of the weight of the oven dry soil, at the boundary between licjuid and plastic states of consistency of soil. NOTE--- For. the purpose of determination of liquid limit, it is defined as the water content at which a pat of soil, cut by a groove of standard dimensions, will flow together for a distance of 12 mm under the impact of 25 blows in a standard liquid limit apparatus; or as the water content of,a soil paste, prepared in a specified mould, into which a cone of specified .dimensions and wergbt penetrates by 25 mm wben dropped onto the paste in a specrfied manner.
2.188 Loam A soil containing sand, silt and clay, any of these, with or without organic matter.

or a combination

of

2.188

Local

Shear

Failure

-

See ` Shear

Failure

`.

2.138 Loess - A uniform, aeolian deposit of silty material having an open structure and relatively high cohesion due to cementation of clay or calcarous A characteristic of loess deposits is that they material at grain contacts. can stand with nearly vertical slopes. soil or rock deposited for 2 .I81 Made-up Ground - Refuse, excavated the purpose of filling a depression or raising a site above the natural surface level of the ground.

19

IS : 2809 - 1972 2.192 Major Principal Principal Plane Stress See ` Principal See ` Stress `. Plane `.

2.19_3 Major 2.194 2.195 2.196 2.197 Mass

Unit Weight-See Ana!y_sis Plane Stress -

` Unit Weight
See ` Grain-Size See ` Principal See ` Stress `.

`. Analysis `. Plane `.

Mechanical Minor Minor

Principal Principal

2.198 Modulus of Elasticity ( Modulus of Deformation), E( FL-Z) The ratio of stress to strain for a material under given loading conditions; numerically equal to the slope of the tangent or the secant of a stress-strain curve. The use of the term Modulus of Elasticity is recommended for materials that deform in accordance with Hooke's law; the term Modulus of Deformation for materials that deform otherwise. 2.199 Modulus Reaction `. 2.200 Modulus Compressibility'. of Subgrade of Volume Reaction Change-See See ` Coefficient of Subgrade of Volume on

` Coefficient

2.201 Mohr Circle - A graphical representation the various planes at a given point.

of the stresses acting

2.202 Mohr Envelope ( Rupture Envelope ) ( Failure Envelope ) ( Rupture Line ) - The envelope of a series of Mohr circles represenbing stress conditions at failure for a given material. According to Mohr rupture hypothesis, a rupture envelope is the locus of points the co-ordinates of which represent the combinations of normal and shearing stresses that will cause a given material to fail. 2.203 Moisture Content ( Water Content ), w (D ) -The ratio expressed as a percentage of the weight of water in a given soil mass to the weight of solid particles under a specified testing condition. 2.204 2.205 2.206 Moisture-Density Moisture-Density Moisture Equivalent Curve Test See ` Compaction See ` Compaction Curve `. Test `.

2.206.1 Centtijilge Moisture Equivalent, W, CME ( D ) -The water content of a soil after it has been saturated with water and then subjected for one hour to a force equal to 1 000 times that of gravity. 2.206.2 expressed drop of Field Moisture Equibalent, FME - The minimum water content of the weight of the oven-dried soil, at which a as a percentage on a smoothed surface of the soil will not water placed 20

IS : 2869 - 1972 immediately be absorbed by the soil but will spread and give it a shiny appearance. out over the surface

2.207 Moraine - Used to designate unstratified glacial deposit ( that has not been subjected to the sorting action of water ) consisting of stiff clay ( rock flour ) packed with subangular stones varying in size range from clay to boulders. 2.208 2.209 2.210 Muck Mud Neutral An organic A mixture Stress soil of very soft consistency. of soil and water in a fluid or weak solid-state. See ` Stress `. Deposit - A soil deposit that has pressure greater than the existing

2.211 Normally Cqnsolidated Soil never been subjected to an effective effective overburden pressure. 2.212 Normal Stress See ` Stress `.

2.213 qptimum Water Content (Optimum Moisture Content w,, ( D ) - The water content at which a soil can be compacted to the maximum dry unit weight by a given compactive effort. 2.214 Organic Silt A silt with high organic content.

In general, organic 2.215 Organic Soil - Soil with high organic content. soils are very compressible and have poor load sustaining properties. 2.216 Over-Consolidated subjected to an effective burden pressure. 2.217 2.218 Parent Passive Material Earth State Soil Deposit-A soil deposit that has been pressure greater than the present effective over Material from which a soil has been derived.

Pressure of Plastic

See ` Earth Pressure `. Equilibrium See ` Plastic Equili-

2.219 Passive brium `. 2.220 Peat composition consistency. -

A fibrous mass of organic matter in various stages of deto black in colour and of spongy generally dark brown

2.221 Penetration Resistance, PR - Force required to produce a given penetration into soil of a pile, casing, sampling tube or penetrometer. 2.222 Penetration Resistance Curve ( Penetration curve showing the relationship between the penetration water content. 2.223 Percentage Air Voids, total volume of the soil mass. n, Volume Curve ) - The resistance and the

of air in a soil mass to the

21

2.224 Percent Compaction - The ratio expressed as a percentage of dry unit weight of a soil to maximum dry unit weight obtained in the laboratory compaction test over the same soil. 2.225 2.226 Percent Percent Consolidation Saturation See ` Degree of Consolidation `. `.

See ` Degree

of Saturation

2.227 Perched Water Table-A water table usually of limited area maintained above the normal free water elevation by the presence of an intervening relatively impervious confining stratum. 2.228 2.229 2.230 Percolation Permafrost Permeability See ` Seepage Perennially `. frozen soil. of soil which permits percolation.

The property

2.231 pH ( D ) - The pH value of hydrogen-ion concentration is a It is expressed as measure of the acidity or alkalinity ( basicity ) of a soil. follows:

where H+ = 2.232 Phreatic seepage. 2.233 2.234 2.235 fluid. Phreatic Phreatic Piezometer the hydrogen-ion Line Surface Water The concentration free water in moles/l. surface `. of the zone of upper

See ' Free Water See ` Free Water `.

Elevation

An instrument -

for measuring at which

pressure

in the pore in

2.236 Piezometric Surface a series of piezometers.

The surface

water will stand

2.237 Pile - Relatively slender structural otherwise introduced, into the soil, usually vertical or lateral support.

element which is driven, or for the purpose of providing

2.238 Piping - Il'he movement of soil particles by percolating water leading to internal erosion and the development of channels in the soil mass. 2.239 Plastic Deformation See ` Plastic Flow `.

2.240 Plastic Equilibrium - State of stress within a soil mass or a portion thereof, which has been deformed to such an extent that its ultimate shearing resistance is mobilized. 22

fs: 2609 - 19%
2.240.1 Active State of Plastic Equilibrium by an expansion of a mass. 2.240.2 Passive State nf Plastic Equilibrium by a compression of a mass.

-

Plastic

equilibrium

obtained obtained

Plastic equilibrium

2.241 Plastic Flow ( Plastic Deformation ) - The material beyond the point of recovery, accompanied deformation with no further increase in stress. 2.242 Plasticity - The property of a soil which beyond the point of recovery without cracking . change. 2.243 liquid Plasticity Index, Zp ( D ) limit and the plastic limit. Numerical

deformation of a by continuing

allows it to the deformed or appreciable volume difference between the

2.244 Plastic Li@t, w, ( D )-The water content, expressed as a percentage of the weight of oven dry soil, at the boundary bet++,ecn the plastic and the semi-solid states of consistency of the soil. NOTE-For purposes of determination, plastic limit is defined as the water content at which a so2 will just begin to crumble when rolled into a thread approximately 3 mm in diameter.
2.245

which
varies

Plastic Range ( Plastic State ) - The range of consisrency within The water content in this range a soil exhibits plastic properties. between the liquid limit and the plastic limit. Plastic Soil A soil that exhibits ( Pore Water plasticity. )See ` Neutral
Stress '

2,246 2.247
under

Pore Pressure ' Stress `,

Pressure

2.248 Pore Pressure Coefficients ( D ) - The due to changes in applied stresses is expressed coefficients known as pore pressure coefficients.

change in pore pressure in terms of empirical

2.249 Porosity, n ( D ) -The ratio, usually expressed as a percentage, of the volume of voids of a given soil mass, to the total volume of the soil mass. 2.250 Potential Drop, between two cquipotential 08 (L )The difference in pressure head The vvhich by an
1ineS.

2.251 Preconsolidation Pressure maximum effective pressure to which 2.252 Pressure, it acts. 2.253
arbitrarily

( Prestress ), p,, ( FL-2 ) a soil has been subjected. by the area over

p ( FLb2 ) -

The load divided

Pressure Bulb-The zone in a loaded selected isobar of stress. 23

soil mass bounded

IIS: 2809 - 1972
2.254 Pressure Void Ratio Curve representing the relationship between soil as obtained from a consolidation shape when plotted on a semilog paper ( Compression effective pressure test. The curve with pressure on Curve ) - 4 curve and void ratio of a has a characteristic the log-scale. ) ( Primary planes

2.255 Primary Consolidation ( Primary Time Effect ) - See `Consolidation'.

Compression

2.256 Principal Plane - Each of three mutually perpendicular through a point in a soil mass on which the sheering stress is zero. 2.256.1 Intermediate Princijal Plane of the intermediate principai stress. 2.256.2 the major Major Principal Plane-The principal stress. Plane The plane plane normal

to the direction of

normal

to the direction to the direction

2.256.3 Minor Principal minor principal stress. 2.257 2.258 Principal Profile Stress

The plane normal

of the

See ` Stress `. Profile `. shearing

-- See ' Soil

2.259 Progressive Failure - Failure in which the ultimate resistance is progressively mobilized along the failure surface.
NOTE - In progressive failure, the ultimate sheering resistance less than the peak shearing resistance.

may be considerably

2,269

Protective

Filter

-

See ` Filter `.

2.261 Quick Condition ( Quick Sand ) - Condition in which water is flowing upwards with sufficient velocity to reduce the shear resistance of the soil through a decrease in inter-granular pressure. 2.262 Quick Test See ` Unconsolidated-Undrained Test `.

2.263 Radius of Influence of a Well ( L ) - Distance from the centre of well to the closest point at which the piezometric surface is not lowered when pumping has produced the maximum steady rate of flow. 2.264 2.265 Relative Relative Consistency Density Soil Soil See ` Consistency Index `. structure modified Index `.

See ` Density

2.266 Rejmoulded by manipulation. 2.267 rock. Residual

Soil that has had its natural

Soil formed by the in-situ weathering

of the parent and

2.268 Rock - Natural solid mineral matter connected by strong permanent cohesive forces, occurring in large masses or fragments. 24

IS : 2809 2.269 2.mO Rock Flour Rupture See ` Silt `. ( Rupture Line ) See ` Mohr

- 1972

Envelope

Envelope

`.

2.271 Sand - Cohesionless aggregates of angular, sub-angular, rounded, rounded, flaky or flat fragments of more or less unaltered or mineral of size between 4.75 mm and 75 microns. 2.272 quick 2.273 2.274 Sand Boil - The loosening and lifting conditions prevailing in the soil mass. Saturated Saturation Unit Weight -- See ` Unit up of soil particles Weight `.

subrocks, due to

Curve -

See ` Zero Air Voids

Curve `. Compression water )

Consolidation ( Secondary 2.275 Secondary ( Secondary Ti,me Effect ) - See ` Consolidation `. 2.276 Seepage ( Percolation through the soil. 2.277 Seepage by seepage. 2.278 Seepage )Slow movement The force

of gravitational

Force, f ( F ) Line The path

transmitted

to the soil grains seepage,

that water follows during

2.279 Seepage Velocity V, ( LT-" ) The rate of discharge of seepage water through a porous medium per unit area of void space perpendicular to the direction of flow. 2.280 Sensitivity - The ratio of the unconfined compressive strength of an undisturbed specimen of the soil to the unconfined compressive strength of specimen of', the same soil after remoulding at unaltered water content. The effect of remoulding on the consistency of a cohesive soil. 2.281 Shaking Test - A test used to indicate the amounts of rock flour, silt, or very fine sand in a fine sists of shaking a pat of wet soil, having a consistency palm of the hand observing the surface for a glossy if a rapid then squeezing the pat, and observing subsequent cracking of the soil occurs. presence of singificant grained soil. It conof thick paste, in the or livery appearance, apparent drying and

2.282 Shear Failure ( Failure by Rupture ) - Failure in which movement caused by shearing stresses in a soil mass is of sufficient magnitude to destroy or seriously endanger a structure. 2.282.1 General Shear Failure - Failure in which the ultimate strength of the soil is mobilized along the entire potential surface of sliding. 2.282.2 Local Shear Failure strength of the soil is mobilized sliding. Failure in which the ultimate shearing only locally along the potential surface of

25

IS : 2809 - 1972
2.283 Shear Strength, shearing stresses. 2.284 Shear ` Stress `. Stress s ( FL-2 ) Th e maximum resistance of a soil to See

( Shearing

Stress ) ( Tangential numericald soil ).

Stress ) ifference

2.285 Shrinkage Index, Z,, (D )-The the plastic and shrinkage limit ( remoulded

between

2.286 Shrinkage Limit ( Remoulded Soil ), w, ( D ) - The maximum water content expressed as percentage of oven-dry weight at which any further reduction in water content will not cause a decrease in volume of the soil mass, the soil mass being prepared initially from remoulded soil. 2,287 Shrinkage Limit ( Undisturbed Soil ) wsu( D ) - The maximum water content expressed as percentage of oven-dry weight at which any further reduction in water content will not cause a decrease in volume of the soil mass, the soil mass being initially of soil in its undisturbed state. 2.288 Shrinkage Ratio, R (D ) - The ratio of a given volume change, expressed as a percentage of the dry volume, to the corresponding change in water content above the appropriate shrinkage limit, expressed as a percentage of the weight of the oven-dried soil. 2.289 Silt ( Inorganic Silt ) ( Rock Flour ) - Fine-grained soil or finegrained portion of soil which exhibits a little or no plasticity and has a little or no strength when air dried. 2.298 Silt Size - The portion of a soil finer than 75-micron coarser than 0.002 mm and exhibiting properties indicated 2.291 Single-Grained Structure See ` Soil The Structure `. developed IS Sieve in 2.289. and

2.292 Skin Friction, f ( FLwz ) between soil and a structure.

frictional

resistance

2.293 Slaking - The process of breaking ed soil is immersed in water. 2.294 Slow Test -

up or sloughing Test `.

when an indurat-

See ` Consolidated-Drained

2.295 Soil ( Earth ) - Sediments or other unconsolidated accumulations of solid particles produced by the physical and chemical disintegration of rocks, and which may or may not contain organic matter. 2.296 Soil, Black Cotton See ` Black Cotton Soil `.

2.297 Soil-Forming Factors - Factors, such as parent material, climate, topography, organism and time involved in the transformation vegetation, of an original geologic deposit into a soil profile. 2,298 Soil Horizon See ` Horizon `.

IS : 2809 - 1972 2.299 Soil Mech&s - That branch of engineering which deals with the application of soil science, the static and dynamic laws and principles of mechanics and hydraulics to engineering problems dealing with soil as structural material. 2i300 Soil Profile ( Profile ) - Vertical section of a soil, showing the nature and sequence of the various layers, as developed by deposition or weathering, or both. 2.301 Soil Stabilization - Chemical or mechanical treatment designed to increase or maintain the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to improve its engineering properties. 2.302 Soil Structure Arrangement of soil particles in soil mass. of floes of soil a

2.302.1 Flocculent Structure - An arrangement particles instead of individual soil particles. 2.302.2 Honeycomb Structure - An arrangement comparatively loose, stable structure resembling

composed

of soil particles having a honeycomb.

2.302.3 Single-Grained Structure - An arrangement composed of individual soil particles, characteristic structure of coarse-grained soils. 2.303 2.304 2.305 Soil Suspension Soil Texture Specific Gravity Highly diffused `. mixture of soil and water. See ` Gradation

2.305.1 Apparent S'e$c Gravity, G, ( D ) -Ratio of the weight in air given volume of the impermeable portion of a permeable material ( that is, the solid matter including its impermeable pores or voids ) at a stated temperature, to the weight in air of an equal volume of distilled water at the stated temperature.

of a

2.305.2 Bulk S'ec$ic Gravity ( SpeciJc Mass Gravity ), G, ( D ) - Ratio of the weight n air of a given volume of a permeable material ( including both permeable and impermeable voids normal to the material ) at a stated temperature, to the weight in air of an equal volume of distilled water at the stated temperature. 2.305.3 Spec$c G ruvity of Solids, G ( D ) - Ratio of the weight in air of given volume of soil solids at a stated temperature, to the weight in air of an equal volume of distilled water at the stated temperature. 2.306 Specific soil particles. 2.307 Stability of the stability Surface ( L-l ) The surface area per unit volume of

Number, N, ( D ) - A Pure number used in the analysis of a soil embankment, defined by the following equation:

\

27

IS : 2809 - 1972 where Cd Y E;, 1 2.308 2.309 2;310 Stability mobilized effective critical cohesion, unit weight, height and of the stability number. of the sloped bank. It is the reciprocal Stabilization `. Test `.

Factor (D) -

Stabilization Standard

See ` Soil -

Compaction

See ` Compaction

2.311 Standard Penetration Resistance - Number of blows required for 30 cm penetration of a standard sampling spoon with a 65 kg hammer falling freely through a height of 75 cm. 2.312 given 2.313 Strain, E, e ( D ) direction. Streamline Flow The change in length Flow `. within the per unit of length in a

See ` Laminar The

2.314 Stress, soil mass. 2.314.1

Q, p, f ( FLm2 ) -

force per unit area acting

;,f(

Efective Stress ( EJective Pressure ) ( Inter-granular Pressure >, e average normal force per unit area transmitted from FL-2) -Th grain to grain of a soil mass. It is the stress which to a large extent controls the mechanical behaviour of a soil.

2.314.2 fleutral Stress ( Pore Pressure ) ( Pore Water Pressure ), u, u, ( FL-2 ) - Stress transmitted through the pore water ( water filling the voids of the soil ) . 2.314.3 Normal given plane. Stress, (r, p ( FLm2 ) The stress component normal to a

2.314.4 Principal Stress, q, oz, C+ (FLqi) three mutually perpendicular planes intersecting which the shearing stress is zero.

Stresses acting normal to at a point in a body, on

2.314.4.1 Intermediate principal stress, ts2 ( FLW2 ) - The principal stress whose value is neither the largest nor t,he smallest ( with regard to sign ) of the three. 2.314.4.2 Major principal stress, regard to sign ) principal stress. 2.314.4.3 Minor principal stress, regard to sign ) principal stress. 2.314.5 Shear Stress The stress component q

( FLW2 ) -The

largest smallest

( with ( with ) _

cr3 ( FLb2 ) -The

( Shearing Stress ) ( TangentialStress tangential to a given plane.

), T, s ( FL-2

28

fs : is09
2.315 Structure See ` Soil Structure `.

- 1972

2.314.6 Total Stress, 6, f ( FL-2 ) -The total force per unit area acting within a mass of soil. It is the sum of the neutral and effective stresses.

2.316 Sub-base-A layer used in a pavement system between the subgrade and base course, or between the subgrade and cement concrete pavement. 2.317 Sqbgra-de pavement system. The soil prepared and compacted to support the to

2.318 Subgrade Surface - The surface support the pavement system. 2.319 2.320 Sub.merged Subsoil a) Soil below b,) That 2.321 Talus slope frornwhich 2.322 2.323 Tangential Theoretical a subgrade or fill. part of a soil profile Unit Weight -

of the earth or rock prepared Weight `.

See ` Unit

occurring

below `A' horizon. soil at the foot of a natural

Rock fragments mixed with they have been separated. Stress Time See ` Stress `. -

Curve

See ' Consolidation

Time

Curve `.

2.324 Thermo-Osmosis - The process by which water is caused to flow in the pores of a soil mass due to differences in temperature within the mass. 2.325 Thixotropy - It is the property of certain clays by virtue of which they regain, on standing for a short time, a part of the original strength lost due to remoulding, at unaltered moisture content. 2.326 2.327 Till Time See ` Glacial Curve Till `. Time Curve `.

See ' Consolidation

2.329 Time Factor, I',, T (D )-Dimensional factor, utilized in the containing the physical constants of a soil stratum theory of consolidation, influencing its time-rate of consolidation, expressed as follows: 7-= where k = coefficient of permeability k(l+e)t a, yr.H2 _ c,.t

H* (LT-l ) ;
(T);

t?= void ratio ( dimensionless ); t = elapsed time that the stratum has been consolidated
29

IS : 2809 - 1972 ( LsF-1 a, = coefficient of compressibility = unit weight of water ( ~FL-s ); YW ); ) ; and

c, = coefficient
H

of consolidation

( Ls T-l

= thickness of stratum drained on one side only. If stratum is drained on both sides, its thickness equals 2H(L). Surface soil, usually containing organic matter.

2.329

Tqp

Soil -

2.330 Torsional Shear Test - A shear test in which a relatively thin test specimen of solid circular or annular cross-section, usually confined between rings, is subjected to an axial load and to shear in torsion. In-place torsion shear tests may be performed by pressing a dentated solid circular or annular plate against the soil and measuring its resistance to rotation under a given axial load. 2.331 Total Stress See ` Stress `. ZT ( D ) The ratio of the plasticity index to

2.332 Toughness the flow index.

Index

2.333 Transformed Flow Net - A flow net whose boundaries have been properly modified ( transformed ) so that a net consisting of curvilinear squares can be constructed to represent ilow conditions in an anisotropic porous medium. 2.334 Transported Soil by wind, water, or ice. Soil transported from the place of its origin

2.335 Triaxial Shear Test ( Triaxial Compression Test) - A test in which a cylindrical specimen of soil encased in an impervious membrane is subjected to a confining pressure and then loaded axially to failure. 2.336 Turbulent Flow-That type offlow in which any particle may move in any direction with respect to any other particle, and in which the head loss is approximately proportional to the second power of the velocity. 2.337 Ultimate Bearing Capacity ( Gross ), q0 (gross ), quzt (gross ) e g ross intensity of loading at the base of a foundation which (FL-s)-Th causes shear failure of the soil support. 2.338 Ultimate Bearing Capacity ( Nett ), q0 ( nett ), quzt ( nett ) ( FL-2 ) - The nett intensity of loading at the base of a foundation which causes shear failure of the soil support, in excess of that at the same level that is ultimate bearing capacity due to the surrouhding surcharge, ( gross ) minus the surcharge. 2.339

per unit area at which an unconfined
standard dimensions

Unconfined

Compressive

Strength p. qu (FL-" )-The load prismatic or cylindrical specimen of of a soil will fail in a simple compression test. 30

IS : 2809 - 1972 2.340 Unconsolidated-Undrained
Test ( Quick Test ) - A soil test in which the water content of the test specimen remains practically unchanged during the application of the confining pressure and the additional axial ( or shearing force ). is not fully

2.341 Under-Consolidated Soil Deposit -. A deposit that consolidated under the existing effec&e overburden pressure. 2.342 Undisturbed methods in which to the sample. 2.343 Unit

Sample - A soil sample that has been obtained by every precaution has been taken to minimize disturbance y ( FL-s ) Weight per unit volume of a soil mass.

Weight,

2.343.1 Dry Unit Weight, yd ( FLw3 ) - The weight of oven dry soil ( soil solids ) per unit of total volume of soil mass. 2.343.2 Efictive Unit Weight, ye ( FLB3 ) -That unit weight of a soil which, when multiplied by the height of the overlying column of soil, yields the effective pressure due to the weight of the over-burden. 2.343.3 Saturated Unit Weight, mass when saturated. ysat ( FL_3 ) -The unit weight of a soil

2.343.4 Submerged Unit M/eight, ysub ( FL-3 ) - The weight of the solids in air minus the weight of water displaced by the solids per unit of volume of soil mass; the saturated unit weight minus the unit weight of water. 2.343.5 Wet Unit Weight ( Mass Unit Weight ) ym, ywct ( FL-s volume of soil mass, ) The weight (solids plus water) per unit tive of the degree of saturation. 2.344 Uplift'The Unit Total upward of total irrespec-

water pressure Symbol u U

on a structure: Unit FL-* F

uplift uplift

2.345 Vane Shear Test-A laboratory or in-place shear test in which a rod with thin radial vanes at the end is forced into the soil and the resistance to rotation of the vane is determined. 2.346 Varved Clay-Alternating thin layers of silt ( or fine sand ) and clay formed by variations in sedimentation during the various seasons of the year, often exhibiting contrasting colours when partially dried. 2.347 2.343 Virgin Viscous Compression Flow Curve See ` Compression Flow `. Curve `. See ` Laminar

2.343 Void - Space in a soil mass not occupied by solid mineral matter. This space may be occupied by air, water, or other gaseous or liquid material. 31

IS : 2809 - 19% 2.350 Void Ratio, e ( D ) - The ratio of the volume volume of solid particles in a given soil mass. of void space to the

2.350.1 Critical void Ratio, e, ( D ) -. The void ratio prior to the process of shear in which the nett volume change at failure is zero. 2.351 Volumetric Shrinkage ( Volumetric Change ), V, ( D ) - The decrease in volume, expressed as a percentage of the soil mass when dried, of a soil mass when the water content is reduced from a given percentage to the appropriate shrinkage limit. 2.352 Wall Friction, f' ( FL-Z) - Frictional a wall and the soil in contact with the wall. 2.353 Water Cjontent See ` Moisture resistance `. the mobilized between

Content

2,354 Water Holding Capa.city ( D ) - The smallest value to which water content of a soil can be reduced by gravity drainage. 2.355 2.356 Water Water Plasticity Table-See Ratio See ` Liquidity Water Elevation Index `. `.

` Free

2.357 Water Voids Ratio, of solids in a soil mass. 2.358 Wet Unit Weight-See

e, ( D ) -

Ratio

of volume `.

of water to volume

` Unit

Weight

2.359 Zero Air Voids Curve ( Saturation moisture content curve for 100 percent saturation.

Curve ) -

Dry

density

32

