атт Ah IS 10872 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Renta — aren Чат 


(чест FRAT ) 


Malathion — Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 13.300; 71.060.50 


© BIS 2023 


тЇ Ҥч St 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR чач, 9 SEL ME STAHL AMT, Ag (8 - 110002 
Nee’ МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2023 Price Group 7 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Malathion is an organo-phosphorus insecticide-acaricide used extensively in India and all over the 
world for control of a wide spectrum of insects and mites in agriculture, horticulture, veterinary, public 
health and household complex. 


Malathion insecticide-acaricide is itself a poor inhibitor of the enzyme cholinesterase. However, on 
conversion into its oxygen analog, malaoxon, for example, by liver enzymes, it in activates 
cholinesterase leading to accumulation of acetylcholine at synopses in the nervous system, skeletal and 
smooth muscles, and secretory glands. These are stimulated at low and depressed at high 
concentrations of malaoxon. However, due to rapid detoxification by aliesterases in the liver and other 
organs, malathion is of lower toxicity than most other pesticides and continues to be one of the safer 
pesticides known to man. The elimination of accidents is vital to public interest. Accidents produce 
social and economic loss, and impair individual or group productivity. Realization of this loss has led 
the authorities to devote a good deal of attention to safety education. Apart from general precautions, 
some typical precautions are required to be taken during manufacture, storage and handling of 
malathion. This code of safety lays special emphasis on these points. 


The properties of malathion listed in 4 have been taken from literature and have been included for 
information only. Moreover, these properties pertain to pure malathion. BIS has published a separate 
standard IS 1832 : 1978 on the requirements and the methods of sampling and test for malathion 
intended for industrial purposes. 


This standard was originally published in 1984. With a view to update the standard based on the 
experience of last two decades and on the currently available data, the Committee felt a need to revise 
the standard. 


In this revision all the amendment issued, and general properties have been incorporated and 
modifications have been made to update safety measures for controlling hazards and essential 
information on symptoms of poisoning, first-aid, medical treatment, storage, handling, labelling and 
employee safety. 


The various clauses of the standard have been aligned with the format being applied for all Indian 
Standards on code of safety of chemicals. 


There is no ISO standard on the subject. In preparation of this standard considerable assistance has also 
been derived from the following publications: 


a) The merck index-an encyclopedia of chemicals, drugs, and biologicals, Cambridge, UK Royal 
Society of Chemistry, 2013; 

b) Sax’s dangerous properties of industrial materials, volume three, 11% edition, Richard J. Lewis 
Sr., Wiley-interscience publication, 2004; 

c) NIOSH, Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
Centres for Disease Control, 1990 (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health); and 

d) IPCS-International Program on Chemical Safety, 2004 edition. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in 
Annex A. 


IS 10872 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
MALATHION — CODE OF SAFETY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


11 This code describes properties of 
malathion, nature of hazards associated with it, 
medical information on symptoms and signs of 
poisoning; differential diagnosis; measures for 
first aid and medical treatment; good safety 
practices in storage, handling transport and 
use; decontamination and disposal of 
containers and spillage; and requirements for 
safety education. 


1.2 This code does not deal with specifications 
for design of building; engineering and safety 
equipment; methods and ingredients used in 
manufacture; or with application dosages and 
directions for use as a pesticide. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. 
All standards are subject to revision, and 
parties to agreements based on this standard 
are encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent editions of these 
standards: 


IS No. Title 
IS 1260 (Part 1) Pictorial markings for 
: 1973 handling and labelling of 


goods: Part 1 Dangerous 
goods (first revision) 


IS 3043 :2018 Code of practice for 
earthing (second 


revision) 


IS 4155: 2023 Glossary of {еги 
relating to chemical and 
radiation hazards and 


hazardous chemicals 

(first revision) 
IS 8190 (Part 2) Requirements for 
: 1988 packing of pesticides: 


Part 2 Liquid pesticides 
(second revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions 
given in IS 4155 shall apply. 


4 PROPERTIES 
4.1 General Information 


Malathion is an insecticide in the chemical 
family known as organophosphates. 


4.1.1 Chemical Name — 541, 
2-di (ethoxycarbonyl) ethyl О-о dimethyl 
phosphorodithioate and dimethyl 


dithiophosphate of diethyl mercaptasuccinate 


41.2 Common Name and Synonyms — 
malathion, maldison, mercaptothion, carbofos 


4.1.3 Uses 


A non-systemic insecticide and acaricide of 
low mammalian toxicity. Used to control 
coleoptera, diptera, hemiptera, hymenoptera 
and lepidoptera in wide range of crops, 
including cotton, pome, soft and stone fruit, 
potatoes, rice, vegetables. Used extensively to 
control major arthropod disease vectors 
(culicidae) in public health programmes, 
ectoparasites (diptera, acari, mallophaga) of 
cattle, poultry, dogs and cats, human head and 
body lice (anoplura) household insects 
(diptara, othoptera) and for the protection of 
stored grain. 


4.2 Identification 

4.2.1 Formula — C\oHi9O6PS2 
4.2.2 CAS Number — 121-75-5 
4.2.3 UN Number — UN3082 
4.2.4 UN Class — Class 9 
4.2.5 Hazchem Code — 2X 

4.3 Physical Properties 

4.3.1 General 


Colourless, yellow, amber or brown clear 
liquid. Technical grade has mercaptan-like 
odour. 


4.3.2 Molecular Mass — 330.36 
4.3.3 Physical State — liquid 


4.3.4 Colour — colourless, yellow, amber or 
brown clear liquid 


4.3.5 Odour — mercaptan-like odour 


4.3.6 Boiling Point — 2.85 °C 


IS 10872 : 2023 


4.3.7 Melting Point — 156 °C to 157 °C at 
9.3 kPa (with slight decomposition) 


4.3.8 Vapour Density — not available 
4.3.9 Specific Gravity — 1.23 minimum at 
25 °C 


4.3.10 Viscosity at 25 °C — 36.78 centipoise 
(0.368 dyne/s/cm?), at 40 °С 17.57 centipoise 
(0.176 dyne/s/cm?) 


4.3.11 Vapour Pressure at 30 °C — 5.29 
х 10° Pa at 30 °C 


4.3.12 Heat of Combustion — not available 
4.3.13 Refractive Index at 25 °C — 1.498 5 


4.3.14 Solubility in Water — almost insoluble 
in water (0.000 3 g/100 g water at 20 °C) 


4.3.15 Solubility in Other Solvents — about 
145 ppm in water at 25 °C, completely 
miscible in most alcohols, esters, high 
aromatic solvents, ketones and vegetable oils; 
poorly miscible with aliphatic hydrocarbons 


4.3.16 Light Sensitivity — no data available 
4.4 Chemical Properties 
4.4.1 Reactivity 


Malathion is rapidly hydrolysed at pH above 
7.0 or below 5.0, but it is stable in aqueous 
solutions buffered at pH 5.26. Malathion 
liquids may gel if stored in direct contact with 
iron or tin plate and therefore should be kept in 
container with internal protective coatings. 


4.4.2 Polymerisation — will not occur 


4.4.3 Allotrope Formation — unstable with 
rise of temperature above 160 °C 


4.4.4 Corrosion Properties — in presence of 
moisture 


4.5 Fire and Explosion Hazard Properties 


4.5.1 Ignition Temperature — data пої 
available 


4.5.2 Auto Ignition Temperature — data not 
available 


4.5.3 Flash Point — above 160 °C (320 °F) 


4.5.4 Upper Explosive Limit — data пої 
available 


4.5.5 Lower Explosive Limit — data not 
available 


5 HEALTH HAZARD AND TOXICITY 
INFORMATION 


5.1 General Information 


a) Malathion is not cumulative in body 
tissues; 


b) Due to its effect on cholinesterase, 
continued exposure may ultimately 
reduce cholinesterase activity to 
hazardous levels; and 


c) Evidence from long-term studies show 
that malathion is not carcinogenic, 
mutagenic, teratogenic and shows no 
delayed neurotoxicity in man and 
experimental animals. 


5.2 Routes of entry 


a) Respiratory — poorly absorbed by 
inhalation and through skin; and 


b) Skin — not available. 
5.3 Toxicity Information 


5.3.1 Acute Toxicity — Moderate toxicity by 
ingestion, and low toxicity by dermal 
absorption or inhalation. Typical acute toxicity 
values for technical grade malathion are: 


а) Oral Lethal Dose (LDso) rat — 
290 mg/kg; 


b) Inhalation Lethal Concentration (LC5o) 
rat (1 h) — 84.6 mg/m; and 


c) Immediately Dangerous to Life or 
Health (IDLH) — 250 mg/m’. 


5.3.2 Inhalation No-Effect-Level 
(84 Exposures in 42 Consecutive Days) for 
Man — 64.8 mg/m? 


5.4 Antidote 


Atropine sulphate and pralidoxime chloride or 
obidoxime chloride. 


5.5 Health Effects — Signs and Symptoms 
of Poisoning, Diagnosis and Medical 
Treatment Advice 


5.5.1 Initial symptoms may include such non- 
specific features as malaise, anorexia (lack of 
appetite), frontal headache, anxiety, nausea 
and vomiting. 


5.5.2 Progressive diagnostic symptoms, for 
example, from inhalation or eye, exposure to 
very high concentrations, include the following 
— hyper-salivation, sweating, rhinorrhea, 
tightness in chest, laryngeal spasm (wheezing), 
productive cough, and visual difficulties, that 
is, aching in and behind eyes, blurring of 
distant vision, lachrymation (tears). At this 
point, muscular fasciculations and tremors may 
occur. 


5.5.3 In severe cases, for example, ingestion 
symptoms in 5.5.2 are accompanied by 
pinpoint and non-reactive pupils, abdominal 
cramps, diarrhoea, loss of reflexes and 
sphincter control, cyanosis, convulsions, 


prostration, and pulmonary edema (up to 12 h 
after poisoning). Sudden unconsciousness or 
toxic psychosis resembling, acute alcoholism, 
extreme bradycardia (slow heart-beat), cardiac 
arrhythmias and heart block may be observed. 
Respiratory depression can be caused by 
toxicant and also by hydrocarbon solvent. 


5.5.4 Continuing absorption at intermediate 
doses may cause an influenza-like illness 
characterised by weakness, anorexia and 
malaise. 


5.5.5 Miosis is typical in moderate to severe 
poisoning while hyperglycemia and glycosuria 
without acetonuria may be noted in severe 
cases. 


5.5.6 Onset of symptoms may be after 5 min in 
case of ingestion or aspiration of large 
quantities, but is usually within 12 h and 
always less than 24 h typically being one or 
more hours after direct skin ог eye 
contamination. The delay of symptoms is due 
to malathion, itself a poor cholinesterase 
inhibitor. 


5.5.7 Differential Diagnosis 


5.5.7.1 Diagnosis is based primarily on a 
history of exposure to malathion and on 
clinical evidence of diffuse parasympathetic 
stimulation. Distinguish from cerebral 
haemorrhage, heat exhaustion, hypoglycaemic 
episode, and lung and alimentary diseases, for 
example, pneumonitis, gastro-enteristis. 


5.5.7.2 Laboratory evidence of depression of 
plasma and/or RBC (red blood cell) 
cholinesterase to levels much below pre- 
exposure levels (at least 50 percent and usually 
much lower) is confirmation of 
organophosphorus poisoning, although on 
occasions this may be less pronounced than 
might be expected from the state of the patient. 
(Some individuals may have normally low 
plasma cholinesterase activity due to genetic 
reasons, that is, generation of typical enzyme 
from liver). If organophosphate poisoning is 
likely, do not delay treatment pending 
confirmation of diagnosis by blood analysis. 
Careful observation of effects of atropine and 
prelidoxime or obidoxime (toxogenin) may 
help diagnosis that is failure of parenterally 
administer 1 mg to 2 mg atropine to produce 
signs of atropinization (flushing, mydriasis, 
tachycardia, dryness of mouth) indicates 
organophosphorus poisoning. Injection of 
pralidoxime (1 g intravenous) or obidoxime 
(250 mg intramuscular) generally causes some 
recovery from signs and symptoms of 
poisoning. 


IS 10872 : 2023 


5.5.8 Emergency Aid Measures 


When symptoms of poisoning appear, 
decontaminate victim at once as follows: 


a) If skin and body parts contaminated 


Remove contaminated clothing and 
wash skin thoroughly with generous 
amounts of soap or detergent and water 
for at least 10 min, preferably under a 
shower or by submersion in a pond or 
other body or water if the exposure has 
occurred in the field. Careful attention 
must be paid to cleansing of skin and 
hair; 
b) Jf inhaled in large amounts 


Remove to open fresh air and if 
needed, give artificial respiration; 


c) If eyes are contaminated 


Irrigate conjunctiva with clean water 
for 10 min, keeping eyelids open; and 


d) If swallowed 


Avoid mouth-to-mouth respiration. 
Give activated charcoal up to 50 g (5 to 
10 tablespoon heapful) in 0.5 to 1.0 
litre warm water (for children 1 to 2 
tablespoon heapful in 1 to 2 cups of 
water). Inducing vomiting with 
common salt (2 to 4 tablespoon) in a 
glass of warm water can help to 
evacuate stomach quickly but should 
not be tried if victim is unconscious or 
if malathion emulsifiable concentrate 
(containing petroleum distillates) has 
been ingested, so as to avoid any 
chance aspiration into lungs. Vomiting 
should be induced only when conscious 
victim is lying on his side with the head 
dependent. After vomiting, have the 
victim drink a suspension of 30 g 
activated charcoal in about 100 ml 
water to limit absorption of remaining 
toxicant in gut. Take victim to hospital 
at once in all cases of ingestion. 


5.5.9 Medical Treatment of Acute Poisoning 


5.5.9.1 Treatment in general ranges from 
simple removal from exposure in mild cases to 
the rapid and simultaneous application of 
antidotal and supportive measures in severe 
cases. Delay in treatment can be life- 
threatening. 


If symptoms of poisoning appear; at once give 
atropine sulphate and pralidoxime chloride or 
obidoxime chloride as follows, whenever 
possible with supportive measures (see 5.5.12) 
being performed concurrently. 


IS 10872 : 2023 


5.5.9.2 Atropine sulphate therapy 
5.5.9.2.1 Mild to moderate poisoning 


a) Dosage for adults and children above 
12 years — 0.4 mg to 2.0 mg (1.0 ml to 
5.0 ml of usual 0.4 mg/ml solution) by 
slow intravenous injection (I.V.) or 
intramuscularly if I.V. injection is not 
possible. This dose (2 mg) of atropine is 
about ten times the dose for other 
conditions in which atropine 15 
considered therapeutic. The dose (2 mg) 
may be repeated, with or without oxime, 
at 5 min to 10 min intervals, depending 
upon response to first dose, until signs 
of atropinization appear; dry flushed 
skin, tachycardia (rapid pulse) as high 
as 140 beats/min, drying of secretions, 
that is, fall in salivation or dryness of 
mouth. Maintain a mild degree of 
atropinization for about 12 h to 24 h, or 
even up to 48 h in severe cases, to avoid 
relapse. 


b) Dose for children under 12 years — 
0.05 mg/kg body weight, that is 
0.125 ml/kg body weight of usual 
0.4 mg/ml solution, repeat every 15 min 
to 30 min until atropinization 15 
achieved. Maintain  atropinization 
further with repeated doses of 
0.02 mg/kg to 0.05 mg/kg body weight. 
Atropine protects the end-organs from 
high concentrations of acetylcholine. It 
does not reactivate cholinesterase, hence 
patient should be watched closely for 
the effects of unmetabolized toxicant 
may reappear as atropinization wears 
off. Less atropine may be needed after 
administration of oxime, for example, 
pralidoxime or obidoxime. 


5.5.9.2.2 In severe cases 


Persons with respiratory difficulties, 
convulsions and unconsciousness should be 
given 4 to 6 mg (proportionally lower for 
children) atropine sulphate I. V. initially, 
followed by repeated doses of 2 mg or as much 
as is needed to maintain full atropinization for 
at least 2 to 3 days. This should be done, 
whenever possible, concurrent with supportive 
measures for ensuring open airway and 
continued respiration (see 5.5.12.2). Atropine 
may cause ventricular fibrillations in cyanotic 
patients, and should be given only after 
satisfactory oxygenation/respiration is 
achieved. Patients condition, including 
respiration, convulsions, blood pressure, pulse 
frequency and salivation should be carefully 
observed as a guide to further administration 
of atropine. Initially atropine may have to be 


given at intervals of 5 min to 10 min. Every 
2 mg dose should give a short-lasting 
improvement of respiration and reduction in 
cyanosis and convulsions. There may also be a 
short lasting decrease of miosis. Tachycardia 
may occur and a careful watch must be kept on 
salivary secretion to prevent over- 
atropinization (signs for which are muscle 
twitching, fever, delirium). Usually, it may not 
be necessary to exceed 50 mg atropine per day. 


5.5.9.3 Oxime therapy 


Oximes are specific reactivators of inhibited 
cholinesterase and these should be used in 
cases of severe poisoning by organophosphate 
pesticides in which muscle weakness and 
twitching persist despite atropine therapy. 


5.5.9.3.1 Following atropinization slowly 
inject 1 g pralidoxime as a 5 percent solution 
(1 g in 20 ml sterile water) at no more than 
0.5 g/min, preferably over 5 min. Repeat dose 
hourly, if muscle weakness is not relieved. In 
very severe cases, this dose may he doubled. 
Slow administration may be achieved by 
giving pralidoxime in 250 ml normal saline by 
continuous intravenous drip over a 30 min to 
60 min interval, for example, at the rate of 
0.5 g/h for adults and proportionally lower for 
children taking care not to overload patient 
with fluid. If intravenous injection is possible, 
pralidoxime may Бе given Бу deep 
intramuscular injection. For pharmaceutical 
reasons, combination of atropine апа 
pralidoxime is impracticable, hence the latter 
must be given at once after the former. After 
injecting pralidoxime, the effects of atropine 
may become more evident and a reduction in 
dosage schedule of the latter may be needed. 
Pralidoxime treatment is most effective within 
24 h of poisoning. 


5.5.9.3.2 Obidoxime chloride (toxogonin) may 
be used instead of pralidoxime. Dosage — 
250 mg slow LV. or better intramuscular 
injection for adults and proportionally lower 
for children. Obidoxime has the advantage that 
it can be injected along with atropine 
intramuscularly especially in severe cases 
where patient needs treatment before full 
medical attention is available. 


5.5.10 DO NOT GIVE MORPHINE, 
AMINOPHYLLINE, PHENGTHIAZINE, 
TRANQUILIZERS OR RESERPSNE. Give 
adrenergic amines only if there is a specific 
indication. 


5.5.11 If intractable convulsions (unresponsive 
to antidotes) occur in cases of severe 
poisoning, causes unrelated to organo- 


phosphate action may be responsible, such as 
head trauma, cerebral anoxia, and mixed 
poisoning. 


Although not thoroughly tested їп these 
circumstances, diazepam (valium, calmpose) 
(5 mg 1010 mg for adults, 0.1 mg/kg to 
0.2 mg/kg for children under 6 years or 23 kg 
body weight) is probably the safest and most 
reliable anticonvulsant. 


CAUTION — Be prepared to assist pulmonary 
ventilation mechanically, if respiration is 
depressed, and to counteract phypotensive 
reactions. 


5.5.12 Supportive Measures 


5.5.121 Whenever possible, following 
measures should be performed concurrently 
with atropine and oxime therapy, especially in 
severe cases. 


5.5.12.2 It is essential to ensure that patient 
maintains a clear open airway and continued 
respiration as follows: 


a) If patient is cyanotic, put him in a prone 
position with head down and to the left, 
mandible extended and tongue pulled 
forward. Clear mouth and pharynx of 
secretions with a cloth and Бу 
aspiration; 


b)If airway obstruction persists, use an 
oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal 
airway or endotracheal tube, with 
aspiration at secretions; and 


b)If needed, maintain respiration with 
oxygen and mechanical means, for 
example, intermittent positive-pressure 
breathing apparatus. 


5.5.12.3 If ingested in quantity sufficient to 
cause poisoning promptly evacuate stomach as 
follows: 


a) If patient is conscious and alert, and 
respiration is not depressed, induce 
vomiting by tickling throat with a blunt 
spoon or finger or by giving 2 to 4 
tablespoon heapful common salt in a 
glass of water; 


b) If petroleum solvent has been ingested, 
there is risk of aspiration into lungs 
during vomiting, which could lead to 
chemical paeumonitis, hence vomiting 
in such cases should be induced only 
when the conscious patient is lying on 
his side with head dependent; 


IS 10872 : 2023 


c) In hospital, evacuation of stomach can 


be done by incubation aspiration and 
lavage followed by catharsis as follows: 


1) If patient is unconscious, 
respiration is depressed, and 
cough and gag reflexes are poor, 
insert a cuffed endotracheal tube 
prior to gastric intubation, to 
protect the lungs and maintain 
patent airway; 


2) Keep patient’s head below level of 
stomach during intubation and 
lavage (that is, in Trendelenburg 
position or left lateral decubitus 
with head of table dipped 
downward); 


3) In conscious patients and even 
unconscious patients with intact 
cough and gag reflexes, a large 
bore stomach tube (16 mm outside 
diameter) may be passed into the 
esophagus to a distance of 50 cm 
in adults; 


4) Promptly aspirate pharynx as 
regularly as possible to remove 
contents if gagging or vomiting 
occurs during intubation; 


5) When gastric tube is in place, 
aspirate thoroughly before 
lavaging stomach with 300 ml (or 
less) isotonic saline or 5 percent 
sodium bicarbonate warmed to 
body temperature. Repeat till 
returning fluid clear. Before 
removing gastric tube, instil a 
slurry of 30 g activated charcoal in 
100 ml of water to limit absorption 
of any remaining toxicant;and 


6) If bowel movement has пог 
occurred within four hours of 
ingestion, give sodium sulphate in 
water by ingestion (if patient 
conscious) and by gastric tube (if 
patient unconscious) to speed 
elimination of toxicant. 


Dosage — 

i) Adults (12 years and older) — 
15 g in about 200 ml of water; 
and 

п) Children under 12 years — 
0.2 g/kg body weight in 50 ml 
to 100 ml of water. 


IS 10872 : 2023 


d) Isotonic salt or balanced electrolyte 
solution may be given intravenously 
very cautiously to correct dehydration 
and electrolyte imbalance. In any case, 
avoid large amounts of intravenous 
fluids; 


e) Continuous and intensive observation 
of serious patients for at least 24 h 
after initial improvement is essential 
since serious and sometimes fatal 
relapses (sometimes pulmonary 
edema) may occur due to continuing 
absorption of the toxin or dissipation 
of the effects of the antidotes. It is 
essential to decontaminate patient 
thoroughly before or during antidotal 
measures (see emergency aid measures 
5.5.8); 


f) In severe cases, it may be necessary to 
treat for respiratory acidosis, pulmonary 
infections or pulmonary edema; and 


g) Taking blood samples for plasma and 
red cell cholinesterase determinations 
before and during treatment, can help 
to monitor recovery of patient. 


6 PERSONAL 
EQUIPMENT 


PROTECTIVE 


6.1 Fresh air supply masks should be provided 
inside the manufacturing plant wherever raw 
materials feeding systems are there. 


6.2 The following non-respiratory, protective 
devices are recommended for use: 


a) Chemical safety goggles, cup-type 
rubber framed or plastic goggles with 
impact resistant glass; 


b) Plastic face shields of full length with 
forehead protection; 


с 


ми 


Safety shoes, hat, gloves made of 
rubber may be used to guard against 
liquid leaks or splashes; and 


d) Full body overalls may also be worn 
and all contaminated clothing should 
be removed promptly and laundered 
and thoroughly dried before use. 


7 STORAGE, HANDLING, LABELLING 
AND TRANSPORT 


7.1 Storage 
7.1.1 Always store malathion in closed and 


clearly labelled lacquered metal drums or other 
suitable vessels, away from moisture and heat. 


7.1.2 The rooms or premises meant for storing 
malathion should be well-built, dry, well-lit 
and ventilated and of sufficient dimension. 


7.1.3 Flooring should be acid proof such that 
any leaks or spills do not damage flooring. 


7.1.4 It is desirable to have fire-proof electric 
fittings in the storage areas. 


7.1.5 Fire protection measures should be taken 
in storage area. 


7.2 Handling 
7.2.1 Usual method or procedure for handling 
and transport of chemical from 
storage/containers: 

a) When opening containers, 


transferring material, or while mixing, 
avoid contact with mouth, skin and 
eyes. If necessary, especially when 
handling dusts, a facial visor and 
gloves should be worn; 


b) Mixing, if not mechanical, should 
always be carried out with a paddle of 
suitable length. Splashes should be 
washed at once from the skin or eyes 
with large quantities of water; 


c) All operators should be provided with 
soap and washing facilities to ensure 
strict personal hygiene at the end of 
each working day. If contaminated, 
clothing should be washed at the end 
of the working day. Before eating, 
drinking or smoking, hands and other 
exposed skin should be washed with 
soap or detergent and water; and 


d) Mixers and baggers should wear 
rubber boots, gloves, aprons and 
masks. Spraymen should be provided 
with canvas shoes or boots, overalls, 
and caps with downturned brims. 


7.2.2 Decontamination апа Disposal of 
Containers and Spillage 


a) Containers 


Residual malathion preparations in 
containers should be emptied in a 
diluted form into a deep pit taking care 
to avoid ground waters. The empty 
container may be decontaminated by 
rinsing two or three times with water 
and scrubbing the sides. An additional 
rinse should be carried out with 
5 percent sodium hydroxide solution 
which should remain in the container 
overnight. [Impermeable  gauntlets 
(elbow-length gloves) should be worn 
during this work and a soakage pit 


should be provided for the storing. 
Decontaminated containers should not 
be used for storing food and drink; 


b) Spillage 


Malathion should be removed by 
washing with 5 percent sodium 
hydroxide solution and then rinsing with 
large quantities of water; and 


c) Incineration 


Decontamination of containers and 
residual malathion may be achieved by 
incineration above 700 °C followed by 
absorption of resulting gases in aqueous 
or alkaline scrubbers or washing towers. 


7.3 Transport 


7.3.1 For in plant, mechanized loading and 
unloading of containers helps to minimize 
chance exposure of operators to malathion. 


7.3.2 Always store malathion in dry, leadproof 
containers as laid down in IS 8190 (Part 2). 


7.3.3 Each container (including tankers) should 
carry an identifying label or stencil as depicted 
in IS 1260 (Part 1). The storage containers 
shall be labelled or marked to identify as 
follows: 


a) Contents of the container; 


b) Name and address of the manufacturer 
or importer of the hazardous chemical; 
and 


с) Physical, chemical and toxicological 
data as per the criteria given in the 


IS 10872 : 2023 


relevant schedule of the Manufacture, 
Storage and Import of Hazardous 
Chemicals Rules, 1989 and Insecticides 
Rules, 1971. 


While referring to the statutes, the stipulations 
given in the subsequent amendments of those 
statutes shall be taken into account. 
Manufacturers name with label warnings 
required by regulations or ordinances form part 
of the label or placard. 


NOTE — If transport of the hazardous chemical is 
involved it shall be carried out in accordance with 
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 and 
chapter VII of Insecticides Rules, 1971. While 
referring to the statutes, the stipulations given in the 
subsequent amendments of those statutes shall be 
taken into account. 


8 SPILLAGE, LEAKAGE AND WASTE 
DISPOSAL 


8.1 In case of leaks or spills, fire or explosion 
danger are not there but on exposure, danger of 
toxic vapour is there. 


8.2 Spraying of soda ash and flushing with 
water should be done for decontamination. 


8.3 Ventilation, quick washing and drainage 
are advisable. 


8.4 Persons engaged in above should avoid 
direct contact. 


8.5 Waste Disposal 


8.5.1 The waste materials obtained and the 
corresponding instructions for disposal are 
summarized below: 


SI №. Waste Material Disposal Instructions 
(1) (2) (3) 
1) No solid waste obtained — 


ii) Washings of intermediates of malathion 
are alkaline in nature and are the only 


liquid waste 


iii) Hydrogen sulphide (H2S) is produced as 


gaseous waste 


Washings should be neutralized 


Hydrogen sulphide should not be absorbed in 
caustic lye 


9 FIRE PREVENTION 


9.1 Provision of flame proof electrical 
equipment may be made. 


9.2 Open flames should be strictly prohibited 
inside the plant. Other ignition sources should 
be controlled to the maximum extent possible. 


9.3 Farthing of individual equipment may be 
done in accordance with IS 3043. 


10 TRAINING 


10.1 Employees handling malathion shall be 
provided with information on the properties of 
malathion before they handle, through well 
planned training programme. 


10.2 Preplacement training in emergency 
procedures shall include fire fighting, how to 
deal with spills, disposal procedures and first 
aid. 


IS 10872 : 2023 


10.3 Periodical refresher training shall be 
imparted to the staff members who handle 
malathion on the various aspects. 


11 HEALTH MANAGEMENT, FIRST-AID 
AND MEDICAL TREATMENT 


11.1 Health Monitoring 


11.1.1 Diagnostic studies of persons for pre- 
employment should include electrocardiogram, 
sputum gram, stain and culture, differential 
white blood cell count, and arterial blood gas 
analysis. 


11.1.2 The medical examination should take 
place every year. 


11.1.3 Proper records should be kept of 
medical examinations. 


11.2 FIRST AID 
11.2.1 Action in Emergency 
11.2.1.1 Poisioning 


a) Loosen tight clothing and remove 
obstructions, if any; 


b) Take off the contaminated clothing 
immediately; 


c) Apply artifical respiration immediately 
if breathing is stopped or irregular; and 


d) If swallowed, do not induce vomiting 
when patient is unconscious or is in 
convulsions. If the patient can 
swallow, give milk, water of milk of 
magnesia. 


11.2.1.2 Inhalation 


a) Move the patient to fresh air 
immediately; and 


b) Carry out steps in 11.2.1.1 (a) to (d). 
11.3 Splash on Face or Eyes 


a) Holding eye lids open immediately 
wash the eyes and face thoroughly in 
the eye fountains or in a stream of 
running water; 


b) Arrange for the immediate medical 
attention; and 


c) Never use eye drops or other chemicals, 
as they may increase the extent of 
injury. 


11.4 Information to be Provided to 
Physician Rendering Medical Aid 


11.4.1 Send the patient with case history or full 
details of accident including the name of the 
chemical which caused the injury or sickness. 


11.4.2 Include the suggested treatment if 
proper antidote, etc, could Бе specified 
confidently. Otherwise leave it to the 
physician. 


12 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


Incompatible with alkaline material, this 
product should be stored, handled and used in 
accordance with good industrial practices and 
in conformity with legal regulation. This 
information is based on our present knowledge 
for your guidance on safety requirements. It is 
not intended as a specification. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


IS 10872 : 2023 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization(s) 


In Personal Capacity (1204, Bhumika Residency, Sector 20 


Block No 21 Roadpali Klambolinode, Navi Mumbai, 
410218) 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysuru 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental Science, 
Government of India, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 


Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), Gwalior 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Government of India, 
New Delhi 


Department of Space ISRO), Bengaluru 


Directorate General Factory Advice Service and Labour 
Institutes, Mumbai 


Gas Industries Association, Mumbai 


Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairperson) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
SHRI H. S. DAS (Alternate) 


MS GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA VASU (Alternate) 


SHRIS. P. DOBHAL 
DR AARTI BHATT (Alternate) 


SHRI P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DR VIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
Ms LAKSHMI У. W. (Alternate) 


SHRIH. M. BHANDARI 
SHRIP. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI КАКЕЅН WADALKAR (Alternate) 


DR С. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


DR SACHIN GUNTE 


PROF SANDIP ROY 


IS 10872 : 2023 


Organization(s) 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 


Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 


National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedabad 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Ministry of Pet and Natural 


Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association of 


India 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, Nagpur 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (-4/2/6, Parijat C.H.S., Spaghetti, 
Sector-15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 410210) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


DR D. K. PATEL 
DR SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


DR K. K. SATPATHY 


PROF (DR) G. D. YADAV 
DR B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
DR DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


DR VIJAY У. BOKADE 
DR M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR B. RAVICHANDRAN 


PROF S. Р. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
D SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
SHRI K. D. PATIL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
DR SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRIM. K. JHALA 
DR YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
DR DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
SHRI D. К. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


SHRI AJAY K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (CHEMICAL) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 


(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


MS SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 


(CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.:CHD 07 (21404). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : 601/А, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector У, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : СІ.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri | 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


