IS 14749

: 2000

?Lfivhw

Indian Standard PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE OF UNDERGROUND EXCAVATION BY CYCLIC DRILLING AND BLASTING

ICS 93.020;17.020

0 BIS 2000

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110092 ZAFAR MARG

January 2000

Price Group

3

Cost Analysis

and Cost Estimates

Sectional

Committee,

WRD 19

FOREWORD This Indian Analysis-and Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Cost Cost Estimates Sectional Committee had been approved by Water Resources Division Council.

Underground excavation by cyclic drilling and blasting is very often resorted to during construction of River Valley Projects. As very large areas are involved in such operations, it becomes necessary that a proper methodology is available for rate analysis of the same. This would be helpful in integrating the economics of the project. For the~purpose of deciding whether observed or calculated, expressing IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off the rounded off value should be the a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 14749: 2000

Indian Standard PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF UNIT RATE OF UNDERGROUND EXCAVATION BY CYCLIC DRILLING AND BLASTING
1 SCOPE This standard lays down proforma for analysis of unit rate of underground excavation by cyclic drilling and blasting. This standard does not include provisions for underground !ining. 2 CLASSIFICATION For case of comparison of unit rates of various underground excavations, lhe following classification for underground excavation may be adopted: a) Based on geolcgical 1) 2) b) 1) 2) 3) Underground Underground Pull face Heading and benching Multi-drift. consideration: excavation excavation in competent in incompetent adopted: rock rock

11) Type of rock bored (igneous,

sedimentary or metamorphic) and physical properties such as compressive strength, abrasive value and modulus of elasticity. of excavation strike joint pattern. with respect to dip,

14 Orientation

13) Description of rock cover, depressions and khuds crossing over the underground cavity along its alignment. 14) Physical defects of rock formations etc). (joints, faults,

15) Ground water conditions, locations and quantity of seepage water at various periods of the year. 16) Inflammable and obnoxious (brief description). gases, if encountered

Based on method of excavation

Unit cost for underground excavation by adopting heading and benching method may be the average of unit cost of heading and unit cost of benching. The average will be weighted average depending upon the area of heading and benching. 3 TECHNICAL INFORMATION

underground 17) Methods adopted for tackling excavation (full face, heading and benching, multiple drifting, pilot tunnel/shaft, forepoling, providing double steel ribs and invert struts etc): i> ii) Reaches of competent Reaches of incompetent and fractured), rock strata, rock strata (sheared and

The following technical information would be helpful in framing the unit rate of underground excavation: 1) Name of the project.

rock cover iii) Reaches with inadequate adverse ground water conditions, iv) Reaches showing v) rock distress,

2)
3) 4) 5)

Layout plan of the project. Location with plan and longitudinal the underground component. Purpose of the underground Construction agency: or contractor i) Departmental excavation. section of

Reaches of bad rock strata which may lead to causing break through conditions, and conditions. heading : at each underground

vi) Any other adverse geological 18) Equipment

9

Drill jumbo Type Overall dimensions Number of drills/booms Motive power

ii) Name of department/contractor 6) Shape of the underground work (circular, horse shoe, elliptical, vertical walled with arch roof, vertical excavation of various shapes, etc). Excavation (excavated size of the underground component dimensions to the pay-line). section of adits of

ii)

Drilling

machines system with

7) 8) 9)
10)

(hydro-booms, ladder drilling fast rock drills, other drills) Number iv) Mucking and type. machine

Type of final lining. Location plan and longitudinal and shafts.

iii) Drill steel and drill bits (a brief description) : Make, model and capacity, number of machines

Description of alignment including mention bends, transitions, approach adit/tunnel.

IS 14749 : 2000 v) Haulage equipment Locos (diesel/ : Number, make, model electrical) and capacity Mine cars : Rubber tyred : Model and capacity carriers vi) Ventilation a) b) Ventilation duct : Diameter and type : Make, model, type, capacity and spacing (underground) main/feeder Main blowers arrangements

g)

vii) Pumping

Number of pumps Spacing of pumps

Type of pumps : Type and capacity Length, size and nature of pipelines feeder viii) Supporting arrangement arrangement inside and ix) Communication outside x) xi) Instruments main/

Time for installation support system (shotcreting, rockbolting, structural steel support, lagging, backfilling) Description of support system including spacing, etc 3 Average time lost due to hold ups/derailments in case rail mounted equipment is used k) Average cycle time ml Average advance/ excavation in one cycle 4 Overall advance/ excavation in a month P) Percentage of overbreak of the excavation up to payline excavation

(h/min)

(h) (m or m3) (m or m3)

22) Date of commencement
underground

and completion

of

for monitoring

Location and lead of dump yard from portal

19) Air supply - Installed capacity of compressors,
pipe size. Water supply length, etc Capacity of tank, pipe size,

progress from the date of start of 23) Monthly excavation to completion of excavation as per the following format: Year Month Progress Underground excavation (m or m3) -condition a brief description

20) Electrification
Main supply voltage Transformer Lighting details data (in reaches of competent and blasting: rock voltage

24) Incentive payment schemes for underground crews and results obtained (if any) 25) Industrial (if any) disputes -

21)

Excavation strata) i)

Type of strata for drilling

a brief description and their effect on progress first aid, medical

a) b) c) 4 4 f?

Average of holes Type of Number Average Average Type of

number of drill holes and size per round/cycle, cut holes pattern, and size of cut holes, depth of drill holes, actual advance, explosive and detonators used,

26) Safety arrangements
and rescue operations.

including

27) Accidents during underground excavation No. of persons dead Fatal ~accidents Major accidents Reasons of accidents of No. disabled persons

ii)

Quantity of explosive used for round/ cycle, and h) Explosive factor (kgcum) Time cycle

8)

A broad split up be given Current forecast A brief description outlining the major variations be given

a) b) c)

Moving drill jumbo up to the face and drilling cycle Average drilling rate Loading cycle, removingdrill jumbo from the muck pile, scaling down loose rocks and mucking out Time for secondary blasting -

(h/min) (cm/min) (h/min)

28) Geological forecast of strata and that actually obtained during underground excavation 29) Lessons learnt

4 PROFORMA FOR ANALYSIS OF COST FORUNDERGROUND 4.1 The proforma recommended analysis of unit rate of underground given in Table 1.
3

OF UNIT RATE EXCAVATION for use in the excavation is as

f)

(himin)

IS 14749 : 2000 Table 1 Proforma for Analysis of Unit Rate of Cost for Underground (Clause 4.1)
V&me of rock excavated per cycle = = = No. ofcycle per day (depending upon cycle time) Volume of rock excavated per day

Excavation

A CYCLE~OF

OPERATlONS
No. of Working Hours

Si
NO.

Item of Operation

a) b) C) d) e) n 6) h)

Survey and marking profile/holes
Positiomngof jumbo and drilling Chargmg and blasting Defuming Scaling Mucking Mapping Average time for shotcreting, rock bolting/rib erection and backfill concreting

Total cycle time

=

6 CHARGES B-1
Labuur Charges*:

i)
ii) iii) iv)

Foreman/Supervtsor (No. x Wage) per day @ Rs Blaster (No. x wage) per day @ Rs Electrician (No. x wage) per day `8 Rs Helperto Electrician/Blaster @IRS per day per day

Rs Rs Rs Rs Rs Rs Rs
Rs

v) Vi) Vii)

Erldurs (No. x wage)
@ Rs

Add for Indirect charges of labour = 7 ourI labour charges

:

k

Rate of labour per cum = * Other than those employed for operation and maintenance ofequipment as the same are covered under unit rate cost ofequipment.

B-2

Machinery

Charges

:
Number (3) Working hours per cycle (2) (4) ~Total working hours per cycle (9 Unit rate cost per hour, Rs (6) Amount in Rs (7)

Sl
No.

Equipment

(1) 1)
ii)

Drilling Equipment (Drill Jumbo/Jack hammer/ ._......,..._...............) Mucking Machine (Muckedwheel loader/ .,,,_._............,........)

iii)

Hauling Equipment (locos/dumpers/ ..........__....._..........)

iv)

Mucking Equipment (Minecats/ ......_...._..._._..........)

v)

Miscellaneous Equipment (Dozer/loader/excavator/ . ........__.................) Total machinery charges per cycle: Quantity ofrock excavated per cycle Total machinery charges Rate per cum = = Quantity of rock excavated Rs Rs =

3

IS 14749 : 2000 Table 1 (Continued)
B-3 Material Charges = = 100,say L = IOOL B-3.1 Drilling C'ross-sectional areaot iunnei No. ofholes required per &ce Depth ofholes Totai drilling length Cost ofdrilling accesa,ries Item a) b) c) d) Shank adapter Drill steel/ Drifter rod Couplings Bll Total cost permetre ofdrillmg = Rs x, say No. Regd.

Cost of

Life

Cost/metre

Total cost ofdrilling per cycle Quantity of rock excavated per cycle Rate for drilling per cum = R-3.2 Blasting Cost per cycle i) yelatine ANF'J PVC pipes
TO&d

=Rs = _..,__.__, cum

1OOLx

Total cost of drilling (I 00 Lx) Quantity of rock excavated

= Rs
= Rs = Rs =Rs

ii) iii)

Cost ofdetonators/fuse

coils cordex fuse,

=Rs

Cost ofconsumables = connectingwires, blasting cable, etc - per cycle

=Rs

Hence rate per cum T.

--

(i) + (ii) + (iii) of rock excavated

0uantlty

= Rs

B-3.3 Timber for Supports, Not Rleasured and Accounted for Separately Rate per cum, Lumpsum

-Rs

B-3.4 Miscellaneous Supplies Such as wire ropes: manila ropes, v-clamps, rubber gloves, shackles and artificial respiraiors, etc rate per cum, =Rs lumpsum Total material charges-per cum [(B-3.1 + B-3.2 + B-3.3 + B-3.4)] = Rs. B-4

+ Rs.

.+ Rs.

+ Rs

=Rs

Charges for Venlilation Untt rate cost ofblower perworking hour No. ofworking hours of blowers per cycle Total charges ufblower per qclc C:ost ofventilatlon duct including erection charges per cycle (Total cost of vent pipes and :lccessoriesMo. ofcycles in full length of tunnel) Total ventilation charges per cycle Quantity of rock excavated per cycle Total ventilation charges Hence rate ner cbm = Quantity of rock excavated Shop Charges Machine shop including fourdry and emithy, i) ii) Structural shop, Iii) Steel metal shop, iv) Air and water pipe shop, Carpentaryshop. v) Total shop charges per cum

=Rs = = KS = Rs

=Rs =

=Rs

B-5

lumpsum lumpsum lumpsum lumpsum lumpsum

= Rs = Rs = Rs = Rs = Rs = Rs 4

IS 14749 : 2000

Table 1 ~Concluded)
B-6 Electrical Material Charges per cum Covering i) Electric cables/wires ii) Electrical consumables iii) Electrical accessories iv) Booster/Step-down transformer i) ii) B-8 B-9 Railway trdck and accessories charges per cum Road charges per cum

= Rs

B-l

lumpsum lumpsum lumpsum lumpsum

= Rs = Rs = Rs = Rs

Water supply system charges per cum Surveying charges per cum (Control survey and~day-to-day)

B-IQ Comtnunica~lon charges percum to mclude walkie telephones, etc

lumpsum

= Rs

C
I

ABSTRACT Labourcharges

OF~CHARGES =Rs =Rs =Rs =Rs =Rs = Rs =Rs =Rs =Rs =Rs =Rs

2 3
4 5 6

Machinery charges Marenal charges Ventilation charges Shop charges Hectrical materials charges Track/road charges Water supply charges Surveying charges Communication Total facilities

7 8 9 IO

C-l

Add for

C-l .I Anc~llanes mcldentals, I Provision of: i) Labour and stafrquarters ii) Service roads iii) iv) Electric powersupply Water supply system

v) Sanitation system vi) Dramage system vii) Other amenities including first aid, medical facilities and safety arrangements and rescue operation 2 3 C-l.2 Maintenance/Operation Supervisory'works ofitems mentioned above establishment

Quality control

C-l .3 Contingencies NOTE Item C-l.1 to C-l .3 above need to be accounted for and suitable allowance made. C-l .4 Overhead and pr0fi.t This would includeestablishment, office stationery,gcneml tools and plant, staffcars, their running and maintenance, insurance, workman's compensation, statutory benefits, telephone and telecommunication facilities, interest, liabilities on borrowings from the owner and bank guarantee charges NOTE - All items mentioned demobilization and dismantling benefits payable to the labour. above shall include depreciation, installation, operation, repairs and mamtenance, mobilization and ofmachinery where used. All items of labour mentioned above shall include indirect statutoT and other _.

5

Bureau of Indian

Standards

BTS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Zndian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffhmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. WRD 19 (210). Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 01 31,323 3375,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western Branches
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3237617,3233841 3378499,3378561 3378626,3379120 60 ( 60 235 02 16,235 { 235 15 19,235 832 92 95,832 { 832 78 91,832 38 20 04 23 43 25 42 15

NEW DELHI CALCUTTA
: SC0 335-336,

110002 700054 Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 600113

: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi

: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI : Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

78 58 78 92

: AHMADABAD.

Printed at Simco Printing Fry-$

