( Reaffirmed 2001 )

1s : 11770( Part 3 ) - 1387

lndian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CONTROL OF EMISSION OF ASBESTOS DUST IN PREMISES MANUFACTURING PRODUCTS CONTAINING ASBESTOS
PART 3 NON-CEMENT ASBESTOS PRODUCTS THAN FRlCTlON MATERIALS
and

OTHER

Cement Chairmnn DP. H. C.
VIS~~ESu.nR

Concrete

Sectional

Committee,
Rcprcsentiy

BDC 2

.AY 4

National Council New Delhi

for Cement

and Building

Afaterials,

Members Research, Designs ADDITIONAL DIRFCTOI~ STAND& Standards Organization ( Ministry 01 Railways ), Lucknow ARD$ ( B & s ) DEPUTY DIRECTOR SIAX'DAKDB ( B & S ) ( Ahrnatc j Limited, Bomba! S~KI K. P. BANFIZJEE . . Larsen and Toubro SHRI Harrls~ N. MALANI ( Altrrnalr ) National Test House, Calcutta SHRI S. K. BANERJEE Bhakra Beas Management Board, Nangal Township CHIEF ENGINEER ( BD ) SRHI J. C. BASUR ( Altomte ) CHIEF I?~~~I~-EBK. ( DESIGNS ) Central Public Works Department, New Delhi EXFCIJ~I~E ENOI~EEX (D)-III ! Alftrnnte ) and Power Research Institute, Amritsar C;I:EF ENQINKI;R ( RESEARCA )- Irrigation Cum-DlRFc7oe RESEARCH OFFICER ( CCNCRETE `JECHROl.CQy j ( z-,hf,Wte ) A. P. Engineering Research Laboratories, Hlderabad DIRECTOR JOINT C1nr;c~ol; ( Altelna:t ) Central Soil and Materials Research Station, DIRECTO~Z New Delhi CHIEF RES~ARCX OFBICER ( Altcrnatc ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRECTOX ( CMDD-I ) ~P.PPTY Drv~c~r~ [ CMDD-I ) ( Altcrnatc) Stru;;gLrngirreering Research Centra ( CSJR ), SARI V. K. GHANPRAR Snap S. GOP~NATH SHKI T. TA~ILAKERA~ The India ( Alternatc ) Cements Ltd, Madras

@ Cofiflkhr
BUREAU OF INDIAN

1987 STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means ercepr with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to he an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 11770 ( Part 3 ) - 1987
( Continued from pap 1 ) Members SHRI A. K. GUPTA SHRI P. J. JAQUS DR A. K. CHATTERJEE SHRI N. G. Josn~ SHRI R. L. K~POOR Reprcscnting Hyderabad Industries Limited, Hyderabad Associated Cement Companies Ltd, Bombay ( Alfcrnatc) Indian Hume Pipes Co Ltd, Bombay Ministry of Transport ( Department of Surface Transport ) ( Roads Wing ), New Delhi SHRI R. K. SAXENA ( Alhnalr ) The Institution of Engineers ( India ), Calcutta SHRI S. K. LAHA SHRI B. T. UNWALLA ( Alternate ) National Council for Cement and Building Materials, DR A. K. MULLICR New Delhi SHRI S. N. PAL M. N. Dastut and Co Pvt Ltd, Calcutta SHRI BIMAN DASQKJPT~( Altmnata ) Hindustan Prefab Ltd, New Delhi SIIRI H. S. PASRICHA Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi; and Central SaRI Y. R. PHTJLL Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New Delhi Central Road Research Institute ( CSIR ), New SHRI M. R. CHATTERJEE Delhi ( Alternnts ) Central Buildina Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR MOHAN RAI Roorkee DK S. S. REHSI ( Alternate ) Structural Engineering Research Centre ( CSIR ), Dn M. RAMAIAH Madras DR A. G. MAUHAVA RAN ( Altarn& ) SRRI A. V. RAMANA Dalmia Cement ( Bharat ) Ltd, New Delhi DR K. C. NARANQ ( Ahmate ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, SKRI G. RAMDAS New Delhi National Buildings Organization, New Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO SHKI J. SEN GVPTA ( Alt~rnnte) Gammon India Ltd, Bombay SHRI T. N. SU~BA RAO SHRI S. A. RE~UI ( Altcrnute ) Cement Corooration of India. New Delhi QHRTA. U. RIJHSIN~HANI SRRI C. S. SHARMA ( Alternate ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, New SFIRI H. S. SATYANARAYANA Delhi SHRI V. R. K~TNIS ( Alternate ) Central Board of Irrigation and Power. New Delhi SECRETARY SHRI K. R. SAXENA ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner for Cement Industry SIIRIR. K. SINHA ( Ministry of Industry ), New Delhi Snn~ S. S. MIULANI ( Alternate ) Government of ENUINE~I~ Public Works Department, S~PERINTENIXN~ Tamil Nadu, Madras ( DESIGNS ) EXH~CUTIVE ENUINEER ( SMR DIVISION ) ( Alternate ) Orissa Cement Ltd, New Delhi SHRI L. SWAROOP SHRI H. BHATTACHARYA ( Alternate ) Gannon Dunkerley & Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. K. GUHA T~AKURTA SRRI S. P. SANKARNARAYANAN ( Alternate ) Director General, RIS ( Ex-o&o hhnber ) SI~RI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )
I

S.ecrctary N. C, BANDYOPADHYAY Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), BIS
SHRI

( Continuedon page 14

)

2

IS : 11770 ( Part 3 ) - 1987

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CONTROL OF EMISSION OF ASBESTOS DUST IN PREMISES MANUFACTURING PRODUCTS CONTAINING ASBESTOS
PART 3 NON-CEMENT THAN ASBESTOS PRODUCTS OTHER FRlCTlON MATERIALS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part 3 ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 30 July 198'7, after the draft finalized by the Cement and Concrete Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 In recent years, there has been a growing awareness that exposure to asbestos dust can have harmful effects on the health of workers. In order to give guidelines on how the risk of exposure to asbestos dust can be prevented, controlled or minimized, it was felt necessary to lay down some standards regarding safe use of different products containing improving conditions in workplaces, preventive measures, asbestos, protection and supervision of the health of workers, packaging and transport of asbestos, disposal of asbestos waste, etc. This standard laying down the recommendations for control of emission of asbestos dust in permises manufacturing products containing asbestos, has been prepared in three parts. This part of the standard lays down the recommendations for control of emission of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing non-cement asbestos products other than friction materials. Recommendations for control of emission of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing asbestos cement products and friction materials containing asbestos are The concentration of airborne covered in Parts 1 and 2 respectively. asbestos dust in work environment shall be determined in accordance with the method given in IS : 11450-1986*. 0.3 In the formulation of this standard, due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among; the standards and practices prevailing in different countries, in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from
*Method for determination of airborne asbestos fibrc concentration ment by light microscopy ( membrane filter method ). in work environ-

3

IS : 11770( Part 3 ) - 1987 `IL0 Codes of practice: Safety in the use of asbestos, by the International Labour Office, Geneva. 0.4 This standard is one of a series of Indian handling and use of asbestos. Other standards formulated and under preparation are as follows: 1984, published

Standards on safety in in the series already

IS : 11450-1986 Method for determination of airborne asbestos fibre concentration in work environment by light microscopy ( membrane filter method ) IS : 11451-1986 Recommendations for safety and health requirements relating to occupational exposure to asbestos IS : 11767-1986 Recommendations for cleaning of permises and plants using asbestos fibres IS : 11768-1986 Recommendations for disposal of asbestos waste material IS : 11769 ( Part 1 )-1987 Guidelines for safe use of products containing asbestos: Part 1 Asbestos cement products IS : 11769 ( Part 2 )-I986 Guidelines containing asbestos: Part 2 Friction for safe materials use of products

IS : 11769 ( Part 3 )-1986 Guidelines for safe use of products containing asbestos: Part 3 Non-cement asbestos products other than friction materials IS : 11770 ( Part 1 )-I987 Recommendations for control of emission of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing products containing asbestos: Part 1 Asbestos cement products IS : 11770 ( Part 2 )-I986 Recommendations for control of emission of asbestos dust in premises manufacturing products containing asbestos: Part 2 Friction materials IS : 12078-l 987 Recommendations engaged in handling asbestos for personal protection of workers

IS : 12079-1987 Recommendations far packaging, transport and storage of asbestos IS : 12080-1987 Recommendations for local exhaust ventilation systems in premises manufacturing products containing asbestos IS : 12081 ( Part 1 )-1987 Recommendations for pictorial warning signs and precautionary notices for asbestos and products containing asbestos: Part 1 Workplaces for pictorial warning IS : 12081 ( Part 2 )-1987 R,ecommendations signs and precautionary notices for asbestos and products containing asbestos: Part 2 Asbestos and its products IS : 12082 ( Part 1 )-I987 Recommendations emission: Part 1 Mining of asbestos ore 4 for control
of

asbestos

IS : 11770 ( Part IS : 12082 ( Part 2 ) Recommendations for control of emission: Part 2 Milling of asbestos ( under preparation ) Method for determination Preparation ) of asbestos concentration

3 ) = 1987 asbestos ( under

in water

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard lays do\\,n Ihe recommendations emission of asbestos dust in premises used for manufticture asbestos products other than friction materials. 2. OBJECT 2.1 The object of this standard is to recommend procedures that shall be adopted in premises used for the manufacture of non-cement asbestos products other than friction materials so as to minimize and control emission of asbestos dust in the working envir-onment for the safety of workers. 3. APPLICATION 3.1 The provisions of this standard the following asbestos products: a) Asbestos textiles, b) Compressed c) Asbestos 4. GENERAL asbestcs fibre jointings, beater addition jointings, and millboards. REQUIREMENTS shall apply to premises manufacturing for control of of non-cement

4.1 All appropriate and practicable measures of engineering control, work practice and administrative control shall be adopted to eliminate or to minimize the asbestos dust concentration in the working environment to the lowest possible level. 4.2 Engineering Controls - Engineering controls shall inciude mechanical handling, ventilation an? redesign of the process to eliminate, contain or collect asbestos dust emission by the follo\ving processes:

a) Process b) Bonding 4
d)
Genera;

separation, asbestos ventilation

automation fibres with

or enclosure; other materials to prevent air; and tools dust

generation; of working areas \cith clean operations, Local ventilation of processes, for prevention of dust dissemination; 5 equipment

IS : 11770 ( Part

3 ) - 1987 where appropriate; and

e) Use of wet methods f) Separate work places

for certain

processes.

4.2.1 Local Exhaust Ventilation

4.2.1.1
practicable, ma.intained

Where total enclosure of dust-producing local exhaust ventilation equipment shall as given in IS : 12080-1987".

process is not be provided and

4.2.1.2 For efficient operation, the exhaust ventilation shall be located as close as possible to the source of dust emission by the use of hoods, booths or enclosures. 4.2.1.3 The local exhaust remove all dust-laden air. systems shall be designed to collect and while

4.2.1.4 Openings in the enclosures shall be as small as possible still allowing access to the necessary work operation. shall work dust.

4.2.1.5 In case of captor hoods and booths, the ventilation equipment be so constructed that air turbulence and eddies created by the process or by the workers do not prevent the effective removal of

work practices shall be followed 4.3 Work Practices - Appropriate where materials or processes are used which may give rise to asbestos dust in the working environment. Such work practices shall include the following:

a) Requirements
installations, systems;

to use and maintain properly process machinery, equipment, tools, local exhausts and ventilation of asbestos products and wherever appropriate, at workplaces before processing, handling, using, cleaning, stripping and removing;

b) cl

Damping, materials machining, Regular methods;

cleaning and

of machinery

and work areas by appropriate equipment, wherever required

4

Proper use of personal protective ( Jee IS : 12078-1987t ). TEXTILES

5. ASBESTOS

5.1 Fibre Preparation 5.1.1 The plastic bags containing asbestos emptied either automatically or in an enclosed extraction system. fibre shall be opened and booth connected to a dust

*Recommendations for local exhaust ventilation systems in premises manufacturing products containing asbestos. tRecommendations for personal protection of workers engaged in handling asbestos. 6

IS : 11770( Part 3 ) - 1987 5.1.2 In either case there shall be provision for collection and disposal of empty bags within the same dust extraction system to prevent the escape of dust into the workplace.
5.1.3 The delivery of fibre from the hopper to the machine employed for opening and for the elimination of non-fibrous material shall be fully enclosed and provided with a hood. 5.1.4 The fibre shall be fed into the machine discharged within enclosed conditions under negative storage chamber. mechanically and pressure, into the

5.1.5 Where blending is required with other grades of asbestos fibre or with cotton or man-made fibres, input and olltput shall be automatically controlled, the blending itself taking place within an enclosed Blending shall not be carried out by hand-mixing or in open chamber. spaces.

5.2 Carding 5.2.1 Where practicable, direct mechanical or pneumatic feed from the blending operation to the card input shall be used. Alternatively, the fibre shall be transported in a dust-proof container.
5.2.2 Where a container is used, it shall be discharged into the card in a way which minimizes the escape of dust. This may be achieved by joining the container outlet with the entry aperture of the hopper. 5.2.3 The card or group condenser shall be interlocked 5.2.4 Wherever allowed to escape of cards between the fibre hopper with the working of the machine. and

possible, dust shall be collected and shall not be into the card enclosure or into the general atmosphere. within the enclosure by means

Negative pressure shall be maintained of the exhaust ventilation system.

5.2.5 Where entry into the enclosure is required while the machines are running, appropriate respiratory protection shall be worn. 5.2.8 Specific dust extraction points shall be located close to the particularly where pressure points are working surface of the card, created by the carding action. 5.2.7 Where laps and rope lagging are being produced, the delivery conveyor from the doffer cylinder shall deliver the material for subsequent processing and packing within an enclosed and ventilated chamber. 5.2.8 Where rovings are being produced, operators engaged in removing them from the card shall be protected by ventilation which directs the air away from them and into the card enclosure.

IS : 11770 ( Part 3 ) - 1987 Such ventilation the enclosure. 5.2.9 Rovings which minimizes 5.2.10 package, ,5.2.11 shall be in addition to the negative to the spinning pressure section within in a way

shall be transferred dust generation.

Where it is necessary to remove dry this operation shall be carried out under Hand stripping of cards

waste from the roving a ventilated hood.

shall not be permitted.

5.2.12 Cards shall be stripped by the use of a revolving cylindrical brush mounted on a traversing mechanism, in turn mounted onto the cylinder by means of the grinding brackets. The brush shall be connected to the dust extraction shall be of the low-volume, high-velocity type. 5.2.13 Small card rolls shall be cleaned and ground with an enclosed hood provided with dust extraction. 5.3 Spinning, Doubling and Winding system, which

on frames fitted

5.3.1 Where practicable, the prilnary control of dust shall be by This may be accomplished either by wetting packages for the wetting. machine feed or by applying moisture to the roving ends by passing them through water as they are fed to the spinner. 5.3.2 Dust extraction shall also be employed for additional control.

3.3.3 Automatic stop spindles or other means shall be used and dry waste shall be removed by vacuum to minimize the generation of dust from broken or loose ends. 5.3.4 Where pot spinning frames maintained under negative pressure. 5.3.5 Where flyer frames shall be observed in addilion are employed, the pot shall be

are used, low speeds and good maintenance to lvetting and dust extraction.

5.3.6 Dust control of doubling operations shall also be achieved by wetting packages for the machine feed or by applying moisture to yarn the use of automatic stop spindles ends, together with dust extraction, and the removal of dry waste by vacuum. 5.3.7 Cops shall be wound ~vet by applying moisture to the yarn. shall be

5.3.8 Traverse winding and cheese winding enclosed and fitted with a means of dust extraction. 8

equipment

IS : 11770 ( Part

3 ) - 1987

Where practicable, dust control in this operation shall be made easier by the use of temporary enclosure, such as overlapping transparent plastic strips which cover the working entrance of the enclosure, thereby minimizing the volume of air to be extracted while maintaining easy operator access and vision. 5.4 Weaving 5.4.1 Where dust extraction. practicable, dust shall be controlled by both moisture and

5.4.2 In warp beaming, heavy humidification nozzles shall be used, with wet feed packages alternative.

by means of spray as an addition or an

5.4.3 In creel warping, wet packages shall be used where practicable, Where this process has to be carried out with dry materials, the creel shall be partially enclosed by curtains. Local exhaust ventilation of the reed and winding point on the beam shall be installed. 5.4.4 In fabric weaving, wet packages, spray be used, wherever practicable. Dust extraction nozzles or wet rolls shall shall also be employed,

5.4.5 Dust control in finishing processes, such as inspection, calendering may be helped by the application of a dust-suppressant and drying, treatment or finish to the material. Violent manual or mechanical handling shall be avoided. Woven materials shall be cut, not torn. Dust extraction and, where practicable, water sprays shall be employed. 5.5 Braiding, Plaiting and Rope Lagging moisture or dust-suppressant treatment

5.5.1 Wherever shall be applied. 5.5.2 Where

practicable,

this is not possible,

the equipment

shall be enclosed. plastic to in be

5.5.2.1 A portion of the enclosure allow the operator to see the process. 5.5.3 Rope lagging impermeable wrapping. Damaged bags put inside new bags. 5.6 Packaging should be

shall be of transparent transported

supplied,

and stored

should

be repaired

with adhesive

tape or should

5.6.1 Rolls of cloth and coils of tape should speed application of plastic wrapping.

be packed

by the low-

IS : 11770 ( Part 5.6.2 Yarns,
should 5.6.3

3 ) - 1987
and rovings may with tape seals. be packed in cartons. These

rope be dust-proof

give
yarn.

total

Where practicable, shrink-wrapping encapsulation of individual units

should be employed to such as fabric or sp001s of

6. COMPRESSED

ADDITION

ASBESTOS JOINTINGS

FIBRE

JOINTINGS/BEATER

6.1 Fibre

Preparation
fibre shall be opened and booth connected to a dust

6.1.1 The plastic bags containin, (7 asbestos emptied either automatically or in an enclosed extraction system.

6.1.2 In either case there shall be provision for collection and disposal of empty bags within the same dust extraction system to prevent the escape of dust into the workplace.
6.1.3 The delivery of fibre from the hopper to the machine employed for opening and for the elimination of non-fibrous material shall be fully enclosed and provided with a hood. 6.1.4 The fibre discharged, within storage chamber. shall be fed into the machine enclosed conditions under negative mechanically and pressure, into the

6.1.5 Where blending is required with other grades of asbestos fibre or with cotton or man-made fibres, input and output shall be automatically controlled, the blending itself taking place within an enclosed chamber. Blending 6.2 Mixing shall not be carried out by hand-mixing or in open spaces.

6.2.1 Where practicable, direct mechanical or pneumatic feed from the blending operation to the mixer shall be used. Alternatively, the fibre shall be transported in impermeable bags. 6.2.2 Where impermeable bags are used, it shall be discharged the mixer in a way which minimizes the escape of dust. 6.2.3 Negative pressure shall be maintained provision of a suitable exhaust ventilation system. 6.2.4 Specific point to prevent at the feeding above into

point by

dust extraction points shall be located escape of dust into the environment. 10

the feeding

IS : 11770 ( Part

3 ) - 1987

6.2.5 Loose fibres, which may settle on the sides of the mixer during the process of mixing, shall be cleaned by using a suitable suction unit.

6.2.6 Unloading of mix from the mixer does not normally present any Nevertheless unloading operahazard as the mix is `wet' at this stage. tion shall be done wrth due care and the material placed in containers and closed with lids. 6.2.7 Empty asbestos bags, after the unloading of fibres over the mix, shall be placed in containers and closed with lids. 6.3 Sheeting
6.3.1 During the manufacture of compressed asbestos fibre jointings/ beater addition jointings, wet waste shall be collected at regular intervals and stored in polyethylene bags for disposal in an approved manner as given in 10.1. 6.4 Cutting, Sizing, Branding 6.4.1 The sheets shall be trimmed or punched to size using slow speed shears or a guillotine or a suitable punch.

6.4.2 Side trimmings and other waste material collected at the time of cutting/ punching shall be placed in polyethylene bags for disposal in an approved manner as given in 10.1 or alternatively, processed for reuse wherever possible. 7. ASBESTOS
MILLBOARD

7.1 Fibre Preparation 7.1.1 The plastic bags containing asbestos fibre shall emptied automatically, whenever practicable.

be opened

and

7.1.2 If the bags are opened by hand, this shall be carried out in an enclosed booth connected to a dust extraction system under negative pressure. 7.1.3 The bags shall be placed as close as possible feed chamber. 7.1.4 The contents being shaken. of the bag shall to the hopper or

be discharged

without the bag as to

7.1.5 Empty bags shall be disposed of immediately in a manner prevent the release of asbestos dust to the atmosphere.

7.1.6 The delivery of the fibre to the storage chamber and any subsequent weighing and mixing with other materials shall be carried out under enclosed conditions. 11

IS : 11770 ( Part 3 ) - 1987 7.1.6.1

tained

within

Exhaust ventilation with negative pressure shall the enclosure to prevent leakage of asbestos dust.
Finished Products

be main-

7.2 Handling

7.2.1 At the final stage of manufacturing, or wherever asbestos millboard products are being handled in large quantities, mechanical handling equipment should be used when practicable.

7.2.2 Individual boards, sheets or other products, when moved manually, shall be placed with care on the stack or other resting site. Dropping and dragging of finished production products shall be avoided. on site shall be within

7.2.3 All storage a designated area.

of asbestos millboard

7.2.3.1

The designated
Operations

area shall be maintained

in a clean condition.

7.3 Finishing

7.3.1 All cutting/punching

machines

shall be fitted

with

efficient

dust

extraction

system. high-velocity air systems are usually the most suitbasic mix by

7.3.2 Low-volume, able for this purpose.

7.3.3 Where possible asbestos millboard should a dust suppressant as part of the formulation. 7.3.4 vacuum Dust and cleaning. swarf shall be removed

have in the the

from

workplace

7.3.5 Vacuum shall be provided 8. GENERAL

systems, protective clothing and used where maintenance
VENTILATION

and respiratory equipment work is carried out.

with local exhaust ventilation, 8.1 Where appropriate, in conjunction the entire work area should be supplied with clean air to replace the air as it is exhausted and to reduce airborne asbestos concentrations. 8.2 The flow rates of general ventilation shall be sufficient to change air of the workplace according to safety and health requirements. 8.3 The exhausted air shall be sufficiently recirculated back to the working environment. 12 filtered and shall the

not be

IS : 11770 ( Part 3 ) - 1987 9. CLEANING 9.1 The asbestos external surfaces done in OF PLANT

AND PREMISES

work premises shall be maintained in a clean state and free from waste. All machinery, plant and equipment together with all surfaces of exhaust ventilation equipment and all internal of the building shall be kept free from dust. Cleaning shall be accordance with the provisions laid down in IS : 11767-1986*. OF WASTE of in accordance with the

10. DISPOSAL

10.1 All waste material shall be disposed provisions laid down in IS : 11768-19867.

*Recommendations t&commendations

for cleaning of premises and plants using asbetos fibres. for disposal of asbestos waste material.

13

IS : 11770 ( Part 3 ) - 1987
( Codinucd from page 2 )

Asbestos

Cement

Products

Subcommittee,

BDC 2 : 3

Convener DR S. K. CHOPRA S-436 Greater Kailash New Delhi Mambcrs SHRI S. K. BANERJEE SHRI N. G. BASAK SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Snsr S. N. BASU Rcprcssnting National Test House, Calcutta Directorate General of Technical New Delhi Development,

of Supplies Sr Disposals, Directorate General New Delhi SHRI T. N. OBOVEJA ( AIternale : SHRI S. R. BIIANDAHI Shree Digvijay Cement Co Ltd, Bombay SHRI V. R. NATARAJAI? ( Alternate ) SHRI S. K. CHAICRABORTY Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, New Delhi SRRI S. C. KUMAH ( Alternate ) DEPUTY DII~RCTOR STANDARDS Research, Designs & Standards Organization ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow (B&S) ASSISTANT DIRECTOR STANDIRECTOR, EN~IN~E~IN~ GROLOQY Geological Survey of India, Calcutta DIVISION I SIIRIS. K. MAYXUR ( Alfernntc ) Southern Asbestos Cement Ltd, Madras SHRI S. GANAPATHY GENERAL MANADER ( C-T ) Rohtas Industries Ltd, Dalmianagar SHRI D. N. SIN~H ( Alternate ) Sarbamangala Manufacturing Co, Calcutta SHRI S. S. GOENKA SHRI I. P. GOENKA ( Alternate ) SHRI SRINIVASAN N. IYER Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay DR V. G. UPADHYAYA ( Alternate ) Saurabh Construction Co, Indore SHRI P. S. KALANI Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR KALYAN DAS Roorkee SHRI K. D. DHARIYAL ( Alternnte ) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters, LT-COL KA~~LESHPRAI~ASK New Delhi SERI K. R. BHAMBANI ( Alternate ) Flowel Asbestos Products, Ahmadahad SHRI HARSIIAD R. OZA Ilyderahad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. PATTABHI SHRI A. K. GUPTA ( Alternate ) National Council for Cement and Building DR N. RAQHAVENU~A Materials, Neil Delhi DR A. V. R. RAO National Buildings Organization, New Delhi SERI J. SEN GUPTA ( Alternate i SVPERINTENDIN~ SURVEYOR OF Central Public Works Department, New Delhi WORRS ( cz ) SURVEYOR OF WORKS ( CZ ) ( Alternate ) Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Delhi %nrr S. A * SWAB:-= ( Continued on page 15 )
DARnS ( 8 & S )-II (

~hTZUt8)

14

IS : 11770( Part 3 ) - 1987 ( Continued from pug8 14 ) Panel for Safety in Handling and Use of Asbestos,
Representing Department of Bio-Technology ( Ministry of and Technology ), New Delhi

BDC 2 : 3/P2 Science

Convanar
SHRI D. K. BISWAS Mcmbrrs

Sundaram-Abex Ltd, Madras SHRI B. K. BANERJEE SHRI K. PANDARINATH ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI N. G. BASAE New Delhi SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Alternate ) Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, SBRI S. K. CHAK~ABORTY New Delhi SHRI S. C. KUMAR ( Alternate ) In personal capacity ( 7172, Varma .Nagar, Old DR G. G. DAVAY .Nagardas Road, Andheri East, Bombay ) National Institute of Health, Occupational DIRECTOR Ahmadabad Dn S. K. DAVE ( Aftmzate ) Southern Asbestos Cement Ltd, Madras SHRI S. GANAPATHY SHHI S. A. BHIBZARAJA ( Aiternale) Directorate General of Factory Advice Service and DR H. N. GUPTA Labour Institutes, Bombay SHRI V. S. SASIKUMAR ( Alternate) Everest Building Products Ltd, Bombay SHRI SRINIVASAN N. IYEIZ SHRI T. S. PRADHAN ( Alternate ) Asbestos Information Centre ( India ), New Delhi BRIG D. B. KAPOOH ( RETD ) Industrial Toxicology Research Centre ( CSIR ), DR J. L. KAW Lucknow DR N. K. MEHROTRA ( Alternate ) National Environmental Engineering Research DR M. V. NANOTHI Institute ( CSIR ), Nagpur DR D. M. DEIARMADI~IKARI ( Altwnatc ) Department of Environment, New Delhi SHRI G. K. PANDEY Hyderabad Industries Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI V. PATTABRI DR S. P. VIVEK CHANDRA RAO ( Alfertlnte ) National Council for Cement and Building DR N. RAQHAVENIX~A Materials, New Delhi SHRI RATTAN LAL ( Alternate ) Hindustan Ferodo Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. RA~~ASWAMY SHRI A. HOMED ( Alternate ) National Buildings Organization, New Delhi Da A. V. R. RAO SHRI D. N. MATHVR ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Mines Safety ( Ministry of SARI B. K. SHARAN Labour ), Dhanbad DR D. K. SRIVASTAVA ( Alternate ) Reinz Tal-Broz ( Pvt ) Ltd, New Delhi SERI NAVNIT TALWAR SHRI A. K. SHARMA ( Alternate )

15

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units
QUANTTTY

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS

)

UNIT metro kilogram second ampere kelvin candela
mole

SYMBOL m kg s A K cd mol

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary
QUANTITY

Units
UNIT

SYmaoL rad ST

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units QUA NITTY Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

radian rteradiaa

UNIT

SYYROL

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemtns volt Pascal

N

1 1

N = 1 kg.m/sr J 1 N.m 1 J/s

J
W Wb T HZ S V Pa

1 W = 1

1 Wb = 1 V.s T = 1 Wb/m* 1 Hz = 1 c/s (s-l)

1
1

s = I A/V
V = 1 W/A

1 Pa = 1 N/m'

