**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11694-1 (1986) : single-lock automatic couplings for push 
tows for inland navigation. Part 1 General requirements 
[TED 18: Inland, Harbour Crafts and Fishing Vessels] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



UDC 629-12 013-5 629-122 -43 IS : 1 1 694 ( Part 1 ) - 1986 




Indian Standard ( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
SINGLE-LOCK AUTOMATIC COUPLINGS FOR 
PUSH TOWS FOR INLAND NAVIGATION 

PART 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 



1. Scope — Specifies the general requirements for single-lock automatic couplings for push tows 
intended for a bow-to-stern connection of inland vessels in push tows, navigating in waters with 
wave height of not more than 2 m. 

1.1 This standard does not cover side couplings. 

2. Definitions and Terms — For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions and terms 
shall apply. 

2.1 Definitions 

2.1.1 Automatic coupling — k coupling mechanism together with rest elements, ensuring: 

a) 3 quick connection of vessels,- 

b) a reliable and safe bow-to-stern connection of vessels in a push tow travelling and 
m.anoeuvring in navigation conditions as stated In this standard, and 

c) a quick disconnection of the vessels. 

2.1.2 BoW'to-stern connection — Connection of the vessels of a push tow in one of the following 
ways: 

a) bow of the pushboat to the stern of the non-powered vessel; and 

b) bow of the non-powered vessel to the stern of another non-powered vessel. 

2.2 Terms 

2.2.1 Coupling — The automatic single-lock coupling. 

2.2.2 Coupling lock — The system of the coupling m.echanism. with gripping elements. 

3. Types — The couplings shall be of the following two types: 

3.1 Type A — The couplings for pushboats of up to and including 220 kW and for non-powered 
vessels with a carrying capacity of up to 1 000 t inclusive, operating in waterways with a wave height 
up to 1 "2 m and a maximum wind speed of 12 m/s. The design stress on the coupling lock shall be 
not more than 200 kN. The maximum carrying capacity of a push tow shall be not more than 2 000t. 

3.2 T^Kpe 5 — The coupling for pushboats of over 220 kW up to 1 500 kW inclusive and for non- 
powered vessels with a carrying capacity of up to 4000 t inclusive, operating in waterways with a 
wave height up to 2 m and a maxinnum wind speed of 19 m/s. The design stress on the coupling lock 
shall be not more than 2000 kN. The maximum carrying capacity of push tow shall be not more than 
19 000 t. 

4. Material 

4.1 Carbon steel shall be used as a primary material for the load-carrying parts, units and structures 
of couplings. 



Adopted 16 July 1986 



December 1986, IS! 



Gr2 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



IS: 11694 (Parti) -1986 

4.2 The carbon steel for the parts, units and structures manufacturBd or installed by welding shall 
comply with the requirements of weldability. 

5. Arrangement of Coupling 

5.1 The bow coupling of pushboat/non-powerd vessel shall consist of a coupling lock and r£st 
element. The coupling lock shall be set in the centre plane of the vessel, and the rest elements 
located symmetrically to the coupling on either side (see Fig. 1 ). 




REST 
ELEMENT 



COUPLING 
LOCK 

RECESS 



CENTRE 
PLANE 

TRANSOM 

LOCK 

GRIPPING 

ELEMENT 

REST 
ELEMENT 

FIG, 1 BOW COUPLING OF THE PUSHBQAT/NON-POWEREDjVESSEL 

5.2 The stern coupling of a non-powered vessel shall consist of a coupling beam and rest elements. 
The coupling beam shall be set In the centre plane of the vessel, and the rest elements located 
symmetrically to the coupling beam on either side {see Fig. 2). 



REST 
■ ELEMENT. 

TRANSOM 

COUPLING 
BEAM 



COUPLING 

BEAM 

PROFILE 

REST 
ELEMENT 




C ENTRE 
PLANE 



FIG. 2 STERN COUPLING OF THE NON-POWERED VESSEL 

5.3 The width location of the rest elements shall ensure the possibility of coupling either a pushboat 
to a non-powered vessel or non-powered vessels to one another. 



6. General Requirements 

6.1 The connection of the lock gripping elements with the coupling beam and the contacts between 
the rest elements shall ensure coupling of the vessels under the following initial conditions: 

a) pushboat with tanks 10 percent full — non-powered vessel in full load. 



IS:11694(Part 1 )-1986 

b) pushboat with complete tanks — non-powered vessel empty, and 

c) non-powerd vessels between themselves with a draught difference up to 0'5 m inclusive. 

6.2 The details, units and structures carrying load shall be checked by a strength calculation in con- 
formity with rules of the statutory authorities. 

6.3 Each newly manufactured coupling lock shall be bench-tested under ^ test load of not less than 
1 '5 timBs the design stress. The maximum stresses appearing in the main parts of a coupling lock 
under the effect of the test load shall not exceed 0*95 of the yield point of the material. 

6.4 The final choice of the type of coupling and the design stress for the coupling lock shall be made 
based on a preliminary determination of the external forces which may appear during travel and 
manoeuvres of the push tow of the assigned tonnage. 

6.5 The mechanism of coupling locks shall have devices to ensure the following operations during 
the operation of a push tow: 

a) disconnection of the lock under a load equal to the design stress, 

b) disconnection of the lock of a pushboat from the wheelhouse of the vessel and from the 
local post at the coupling lock itself, and 

c) disconnection of the lock of a non-powered vessel from the local post at the coupling lock 
itself. 

6.6 The disconnection of the coupling lock shall be carried out for not more than 3 min. 

6.7 The coupling structure shall not project beyond the sides of the vessel. 



EXPLANATORY NOTE 

This standard lays down the types, material and technical requirements of the single-lock auto- 
matic couplings intended for bow-to-stern connection of vessels in push tows. The waters where 
these couplings are being employed should not experience a wave height of more than 2 m. This 
part of the standard lays down the requirements which are common to Type A and Type B couplings. 
This standard is being issued in the following three parts: 

Part 1 General requirements 

Part 2 Type A couplings 

Part 3 Type B couplings 

Not withstanding what is stated in this standard, the latest rules land requirement laid down by 
the Classification Societies and Statutory Authorities in ^11 respects shall apply. 

While preparing this standard considerable assistance has been derived from ISO 7545- 1983 
'Shipbuilding and marine structures — inland navigation — Single-lock automatic coupling for push 
tows' issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO). 



Prmted at Swatantra Bharat Press, Delhi, India 



