UAT Wad IS 16654 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


pm — acta sit AA AUT 
om fe eet frome E ES] 
aa xu fuer — feria 


Geosynthetics — Polypropylene 
Multifilament Woven Geobags for 
Coastal and Waterways Protection — 
Specification 


ICS 59.080.70 


O BIS 2017 


ada AMA em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
"IW HAT, 9 SERRA rex Hm, ae feeeit-110002 
ao Y a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


April 2017 Price Group 5 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Geobags find wide usage in riverbank, beach protection and offshore breakwaters for coastal and waterways 
protection. Geobags, a geosynthetic product made of polypropylene has been used worldwide for protecting 
riverbanks and hydraulic structures from severe scouring and erosion. Geobags have also been used as revetments, 
breakwaters, etc, to build structural erosion protection measures. Such bags provide stability and prevent soil/ 
coastal erosion. Geobags technology possesses minimal impacts on fish resources and facilitates fishing activities. 
It facilitates the algal community to grow. The technology has been popular worldwide due to its easier installation, 
cost effectiveness, their technical efficiency and environmental friendliness in comparison to the conventional 
erosion protection work using cement concrete block, gravel, hard rock, etc. 


Worldwide it has been seen that erosion protection work using geobags requires less installation and maintenance 
cost, light weight equipment, less space for construction work, much less transportation cost and less energy 
requirement. The constructing materials (sand) of geobags are locally available and cost-effective compared to 
importing boulders from other sites. The geobags are lighter in weight than the traditional materials and their 
manufacturing and quality control are easy as compared to the cement concrete blocks and boulders. Geobags are 
filled with sand/dredged material and are generally used when sea shores or bunds adjacent to rivers are to be 
protected in case of an emergency. 


For best performance, geobags have to be filled to maximum volume and density with sand. These are installed in 
a pattern-placed arrangement that greatly improves their overall stability and performance. Filling task can be 
efficiently done by using water to compact the sand (hydraulically filling the sand into a bag). Filled density and 
volume are important from the view point of maximizing the stability, but it is also important from the view point 
of minimizing the effects of fill liquefaction and loss of shape of the geobags. To ensure that the contained fill is 
maintained in its dense state, the geo-textile sheet shall have adequate tensile strength. 


One major advantage of geobags is that these small volume units can be used to construct hydraulic and marine 
structures that require adherence to designed geometrical shape accurately. This makes them preferable to 
large volume units such as geocontainers when specific slope and height tolerances are to be attained. Another 
advantage of small volume units of geobags is that maintenance and remedial works can be carried out easily 
by replacing the failed bags. This is much simpler than carrying out remedial works on larger volume containment 
units. 


Geobags can be used for a range of hydraulic and marine applications as given below: 


a) Revetments — Geobags are used for revetments where their contained fill is used to provide stability and 
prevent erosion. Like geotubes, geobags have been used for both submerged and exposed revetments. 
Much of the details concerning geotube revetments also apply to the geobag revetments. To prevent 
erosion of the foundation soil at the toe of the revetment, it is common practice to extend the bottom 
layer of the geobags so that the main revetment cannot be undermined. 


b) Groynes — Geobags can be used to construct groynes to prevent the shoreline movement of sediments. 


c) Artificial reefs — Geobags can be used to construct artificial reefs. A major advantage of geobags is that, 
they can be installed to better geometric tolerances than relatively large volume geocontainers. Also 
being smaller in volume and having considerably better fill density, make the geobags less prone to 
volume changes than the relatively large volume geocontainers. Artificial reefs are normally required to 
dissipate wave energy and thus prevent erosion of the protected shoreline. Here the reef shall have 
desired height and area, with the geobags providing a mass gravity structure. Further as with geocontainers, 
geobags can be used for slope buttressing and for construction of protection dykes. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 16654 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — POLYPROPYLENE 
MULTIFILAMENT WOVEN GEOBAGS FOR COASTAL 
AND WATERWAYS PROTECTION — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies requirements for geobags 
made from polypropylene (PP) multifilament woven 
geotextiles, used for coastal and waterways protection 
applications such as revetments, river training, 
construction of groynes and artificial reefs, etc, in order 
to minimize soil erosion and control floods. 


NOTES 


1 The survivability/durability of geobags depends upon water 
pressure, soil condition, type of contents of geobags that is 
sand or gravels, water pH and temperature, etc. 


2 Woven slit film geotextiles, that is, geotextiles made from 
yarns of a flat, tape-like character, shall not be used for the 
manufacture of geobags for permanent erosion control 
applications. 


1.2 This standard does not apply to other types of 
geosynthetic erosion control materials such as turf 
reinforcement mats. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


The definitions given in IS 13321 (Parts 1) and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Minimum Average Bag Value (MABV) — 
MABV is the minimum average value of geobags 
minus two standard deviations. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Material of Geobags 


4.1.1 Geobags shall be made from multifilament 
woven fabric manufactured from ultra violet stabilized 
polypropylene, depending upon the end use 
requirements and shall conform to requirements as 
specified in Table 1. The geobags shall be inert to 
commonly encountered chemicals, resistant to rot and 


mildew and shall have no tear or defects which adversely 
affect or alter its physical properties. 


4.1.2 All property values except elongation and 
apparent opening size in this standard represent 
minimum average bag values (MABV). Average of test 
results from any sampled bag in a lot shall meet or 
exceed the minimum values specified in this standard. 
In case of elongation and apparent opening size, the 
MABV shall represent the maximum average bag value. 


4.2 Geobags shall be dimensionally stable and able to 
retain their geometry under manufacture, transport, and 
installation. 


4.3 Prefabrication of Geobags 


Geobags shall be prefabricated using UV stabilized 
polyester/polypropylene thread. The geobags shall have 
seam with double line chain stitches along the edges on 
two sides with a stitch density of 20 + 2 stitches/dm. 
Number of stitches shall be chosen in such a way that 
seam strength is at least 50 percent of fabric strength. If 
seam is intact, then the strength of fabric broken shall 
be at least 50 percent of its original strength. The sewing 
shall be done at a minimum distance of 10 mm from 
edges by using a ring spun polyester/polypropylene 
thread, as the case may be, of linear density 1 500-2 500 
Denier (167 — 278 Tex). The distance between the two 
rows of stitches shall be 5 to 10 mm. Stitch lines on 
both sides of the bags shall continue beyond the bag's 
open mouth and end in a loose loop of thread of length 
25 to 50 mm. The stitching shall be uniform without 
any loose thread or knot. 


5 MARKING AND LABELLING 


5.1 The geobags shall be marked with the following by 
attaching the printed labels: 


a) Identification of the geobag material as per 
manufacturer's recommendation, for example, 
polypropylene woven geobags for coastal/ 
waterways protection; 


b) Type of geobag/mass, in g/m?, of fabric used 
for manufacture of geobags; 


c) Dimensions (length and width) of geobag; 
d) Lot number and date of manufacture; 
e) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; 


IS 16654 : 2017 


Table 1 Requirements of Polypropylene Multifilament Woven 
Geobags for Coastal and Waterways Protection 
(Clause 4.1.1) 


SI Characteristic (s) 
No. 
(1) (2) 


A. Mechanical Requirements 


i) Tensile strength, KN/m, Min: 
a) Machine direction 
b) Cross machine direction 


ii) Elongation at designated tensile strength, percent, Max: 


a) Machine direction 
b) Cross machine direction 


iii) Seam strength, Percent of actual fabric strength, Min 
iv) Abrasion resistance, tensile strength retained, percent, 
Min: 


a) Machine direction 
b) Cross machine direction 


v) Trapezoidal tear strength, N, Min: 
a) Machine direction 
b) Cross machine direction 


vi Puncture resistance, N, Min 
B. Hydraulic Requirements 
1) Water permeability at 100 mm water head, l/m?/s, Min 
ii) Apparent opening size (AOS), micrometer, Max 
C. Physical Requirements 
i) Mass, g/m? 


ii) Length of geobag, m, Min: 
a) Small size bag 
b) Large size bag 
iii) Width of geobag (Stitch to stich), m, Min: 
a) Small size bag 
b) Large size bag 


iv) Mass of sand filled geobag, kg, Min: 
a) Small size bag 
b) Large size bag 

v) UV resistance after 500 h, Retained tensile strength in 
machine and cross machine direction, percent, Min 


f) Country of origin; and 
g) Any other information/instruction provided by 
the manufacturer/required under law. 


5.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The geobags may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


5.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details 
of conditions under which the license for the use of the 
Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


6 PACKING 


Each bundle shall be labeled or tagged to provide product 
identification sufficient for field identification as well 


Requirement (s) Method of Test, 


Ref t 
Type 1 Type 2 iod 
(3) (4) (5) 
IS 1969 (Part 1) 
55 80 
40 70 
IS 1969 (Part 1) 
25 25 
25 25 
50 50 IS 15060 
IS 14714 
75 75 
75 75 
IS 14293 
800 1500 
500 1300 
700 900 Annex B 
10 18 IS 14324 
19 250 IS 14294 
200 (2 percent) 300 (2 percent) IS 14716 
(+ no limit) (+ no limit) 
IS 1954 
0.5 - 
1.0 2.0 
IS 1954 
0.5 - 
0.7 1:5 
Electronic weighing 
44 = scale 
126 1350 
80 80 IS 13162 (Part 2) 


as inventory and quality control purpose. Bundles shall 
be stored in a manner which protects them from adverse 
impact of weather. If stored outdoors, they shall be 
elevated and protected with a waterproof cover. 100 
geobags are laid flat in a HDPE tube or wrapped in a 
HDPE film of minimum thickness of 60 microns and 
tied with a HDPE/PP tape so as to remove excess air 
and to prevent it from the adverse impact of heat and 
moisture, oil, grease, dirt, dust and other stains as well 
as to extended ultra-violet exposure during shipment and 
storage prior to deployment and placement. 


7 STORAGE AND HANDLING 


7.1 During storage, geobags shall be elevated off the 
ground and adequately protected from the following: 
a) Site construction damage; 
b) Excessive precipitation; 
c) Extended exposure to sunlight; 


d) Aggressive chemicals; 

e) Flames or temperatures in excess of 60°C; 

f) Excessive mud, wet concrete, epoxy, or other 
deleterious materials coming in contact with 
and affixing to the geo-textile material; 

g) Any other environmental condition that may 
damage the physical property values. 


7.2 The geobags shall be stored at temperatures above 
10°C and below 40°C. 


7.3 The geobags shall be laid flat. 


7.4 The geobags shall not be directly exposed to 
sunlight for a period longer than the period 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


7.5. 'The geobags shall be kept dry until installation, 
and shall not be stored directly on the ground. 


8 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA 
CONFORMITY 


FOR 


8.1 Lot 


The number of geobags of the same size, type and 
quality delivered to a buyer against one dispatch note 
shall constitute a lot. 


8.2 The number of geobags to be selected at random 
shall be according to col 2 and col 3 of Table 2. To 
ensure the randomness of selection, IS 4905 may be 
followed. 


IS 16654 : 2017 


8.3 Number of Tests and Criteria for Conformity 


8.3.1 The number of geobags to be selected for length, 
width, mass, mass of sand to be filled and pre- 
fabrication requirements shall be in accordance with 
col 3 of Table 2. For tensile strength, elongation, seam 
strength and water permeability, the number of geobags 
selected shall be in accordance with col 5 of Table 2. 
For all other tests, the number of geobags selected shall 
be as given in col 6 of Table 2. 

NOTE — If agreed to between buyer and seller, the sampling 


at the consumer/user end at site shall be carried out for deciding 
the conformity of the lot. 


8.3.2 All the geobags selected from the lot shall be tested 
for various requirements as per methods specified in 
relevant standards as specified in Table 1 and in 4.1.1, 
4.1.2, 4.2 and 4.3. A geobag shall be declared defective, 
if it does not meet any of the requirements specified in 
Table 1 and in 4.1.1, 4.1.2, 4.2 and 4.3. The lot shall be 
declared conforming to this standard, if the average of 
test results from sampled bags in a lot shall meet or 
exceed the minimum values specified in this standard 
against each requirement; except in case of elongation 
and apparent opening size where the average value of 
test results shall not be more than the value specified in 
Table 1. The lot shall also be declared as conforming to 
this standard, 1f the number of defective geobags does 
not exceed the values specified in col 4 of Table 2. In 
addition to above the lot shall meet the requirements of 
marking and labelling (see 5.1), packing (see 6) and 
storage and handling (see 7.1 to 7.5). 


Table 2 Sample Size 
(Clauses 8.2, 8.3, 8.3.1 and 8.3.2) 


SI Lot Size (No. of bundles Sample Size 


No. of 100 Geobags) (No. of Geobags) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 100 5 
ii) 101 to 200 8 
iii) 201 to 300 13 
iv) 301 to 500 20 
v) 501 to 1 000 32 


vi) 1 001 and above 50 


Permissible Number of 
Non-conforming Bags 


Sub-Sample Size 
(No. of Geobags) 


Sub-Sub-Sample Size 
(No. of Geobags) 


(4) (5) (6) 
0 2 1 
1 4 2 
1 5 3 
2 8 4 
3 10 5 
3 10 6 


IS 16654 : 2017 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title IS No. Title 
1954 : 1990 Determination of length and width of 1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
woven fabrics — Methods (second properties 
revision) 14293 : 1995 Geotextiles — Method of test for 
1969 (Part 1): Textiles —Tensile properties of trapezoid tearing strength 
2009 fabrics — Determination of 14294: 1995 Geotextiles — Method for 
maximum force and elongation at determination of apparent opening 
maximum force: Part | Strip method size by dry sieving technique 
(third revision ) 14324 : 1995 Geotextiles — Methods of test for 
4905 : 2015 Random sampling and randomization determination of water permeability- 
procedures ( first revision ) permittivity 
13162 (Part 2): Geotextiles — Methods of test: Part 2 14714 : 1999 Geotextiles — Determination of 
199] Determination of resistance to the abrasion resistance 
exposure of ultraviolet light and water 14716 : 1999 Geotextiles — Determination of mass 
(Xenon-Arc type apparatus) per unit area 
1332 (Part 1): Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: 15060 : 2001 Geotextiles — Tensile test for joints/ 
seams by wide-width method 
ANNEX B 


[Table 1, SI No. (vi)] 
TEST METHOD FOR INDEX PUNCTURE RESISTANCE 


B-1 GENERAL 


This test method is used to measure the index puncture 
resistance of geobags. 


B-2 PRINCIPLE 


A test specimen is clamped without tension between 
circular plates of a ring clamp attachment secured in a 
tensile testing machine. A force is exerted against the 
center of the unsupported portion of the test specimen 
by a solid steel rod attached to the load indicator until 
rupture of the specimen occurs. The maximum force 
recorded is the value of puncture resistance of the 
specimen. 


B-3 APPARATUS 


B-3.1 Tensile/Compression Testing Machine, of the 
constant-rate-of extension (CRE) type. 


B-3.2 Ring Clamp Attachment, consist of concentric 
plates with an open internal diameter of 45 + 0.025 
mm capable of clamping the test specimen without 
slippage. A suggested clamping arrangement is shown 


in Fig. 1. The external diameter is suggested to be 
100 + 0.025 mm. The diameter of the six holes used 
for securing the ring clamp assembly is suggested to 
be 8 mm and equally spaced at a radius of 37 mm. The 
surfaces of these plates shall consist of grooves with 
‘o’-rings or coarse sandpaper bonded onto opposing 
surfaces. 


B-3.3 Solid Steel Rod, with a diameter of 8 + 0.01 mm 
having a flat end with a 45° x 0.8 mm chamfered edge 
contacting the test specimen’s surface (see Fig. 2). 


B-4 SAMPLING 


B-4.1 Laboratory Sample 


For the laboratory sample take a swatch extending the 
full width of the geobag, of sufficient length from each 
sample of geobag so that the requirements of B-4.2 
can be met. 


B-4.2 Test Specimens 


Select from the laboratory sample, sufficient number 
of samples each having a minimum diameter of 100 mm 


to facilitate clamping. Space the specimens along a 
diagonal on the unit of the laboratory sample. Take no 
specimens nearer the selvage or edge of the geobag. 


B-5 CONDITIONING 


Bring the specimens to moisture equilibrium in the 
atmosphere for testing geobags (65 + 5 percent relative 
humidity and at 27 + 2°C). Equilibrium is considered 
to have been reached when the increase in the mass of 
the specimen, in successive weighing made at intervals 
of not less than 2 h, does not exceed 0.1 percent of the 
mass of the specimen. 


B-6 PROCEDURE 


B-6.1 Select the load range of the tensile/compression 
testing machine such that the rupture occurs between 
10 and 90 percent of the full-scale load. 


100mmz0.025mm DIA 


IS 16654 : 2017 


B-6.2 Center and secure the specimen between the 
holding plates ensuring that the test specimen extends 
to or beyond the outer edges of the clamping plates. 


B-6.3 Test at a machine speed of 300 + 10 mm/min 
until the puncture rod completely ruptures the test 
specimen. 


NOTE — The rate of testing specified is not an indication of 
the performance of the specimen for its end use. 


B-6.4 Read the puncture resistance from the greatest 
force registered on the recording instrument during the 
test. 


B-7 CALCULATION 


Calculate the average puncture resistance and standard 
deviation for all tests as read directly from the recording 
instrument. 


45mm#0.025mm DIA 


ALL HOLES Ø 8mm DIA 
EQUALLY SPACED 


~37mm+0.025 RAD 


TOP VIEW 


GEOTEXTILE 
AND/OR 
GEOMEMBRANE 


FACING SURFACES 
GROOVED WITH 'O' RING 
OR COARSE SANDPAPER 

FIXED TO PLATES 


Fic. 1 Test FIXTURE DETAIL (NOT TO SCALE) 


IS 16654 : 2017 


130mm 


50mmtimm 


(16mm MACHINE FINISH 


BEVAL 


— — —8rmmt0.1mm 


0.8X45* CHAMFER 


Fic. 2 Test PRoBE DETAIL (NOT TO SCALE) 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword) 
GUIDELINES FOR INSTALLATION OF GEOBAGS 


C-1 PREAMBLE 


C-1.1 Geobags are extensively used for river channel 
bed and bank protection, coastal/beach protection, 
scour protection of bridge piers, abutments, hydraulic 
structures etc. and construction of offshore breakwaters. 
The proven advantages of geobags include easy and 
fast installation even underwater, less transportation 
cost, less maintenance, facilitation of growth of algal 
community, low environmental impact, less 
maintenance, less energy input, etc. Geobags offer 
proven, durable, economic, eco-friendly and easy to 
construct solutions for a wide range of applications. 


C-1.2 Geobags are filled with sand/dredged material 
and are used in planned structural erosion control and 
scour protection works. Geobags have also been used 
as revetments, breakwaters, etc, to build structural 
erosion protection measures. 


C-1.3 For ensuring required performance and service life 
of geobag works, proper care has to be exercized in 
selection of the geotextile material, dimensions of the bags, 
fabrication of bags, selection of fill material as per design. 


C-2 HANDLING AND STORAGE AT SITE 


C-2.1 Geobags are packed in bundle form with suitable 
packing material and transported by appropriate means 
to protect the geobags and avoid any type of damage. 
Bundles of geobags are loaded manually/with forklift 
and can be unloaded in a similar manner at the 
destination. Use of hooks shall be avoided for loading 
and unloading of the bundles of geobags at site. 


C-2.2 The storage yard shall be located in a suitable- 
sized area depending on the quantity of materials 
required for the project. The layout of the storage yard 
shall be planned with due consideration to the 
movement of trucks and other heavy equipment that 
would be involved in the handling that is loading and 
unloading. 


C-2.3 Geobags shall be stored in such locations where 
water shall not accumulate and the area shall be immune 
from conditions that may affect the properties or 
performance of the product. 


C-2.4 The geobags shall be stored so as to be protected 


NZ LWL 


IS 16654 : 2017 


í SLOPE PORTION UNDER WATER 


BUT FAILY STABLE 
$3 
CS 


RIVER BED WHERE SCOUR TAKES 


ar DURING FLOOD 


DEEPEST OBSERVED 
SECTION 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL LAYOUT FOR INSTALLATION OF GEOBAGS 


from damage, dirt, grease, water, moisture, mud, 
mechanical abrasions, excessive heat or any other 
damage. The bundles shall be stored on a prepared 
surface and to be stacked side by side or one upon the 
other. 


C-2.5 Fire can inflict huge loss and damages to the 
materials stored in the yard. Therefore, adequate 


number of fire extinguishers shall be available inside 
the warehouse 


C-2.6 The storage area shall be protected from theft, 
vandalism and any other source which could create 
potential damage to the geobags. 


C-2.7 Under no circumstances, the geobags shall be 
exposed to temperatures in excess of those 
recommended by the manufacturer or 60°C, whichever 
is less. 


C-3 SITE PREPARATIONS 


C-3.1 The site survey and bathymetric survey for the 
affected reach, where the geobag protection is 
proposed, shall be carried out. 


C-3.2 The surface upon which the geobags are to be 
placed shall be adequately leveled and shall be free of 
protrusions that may cause snag and tear the fabric. 
Protrusions could be like ruts, erosion rills, depressions 
or debris, or any obstruction greater than 150 mm in 
height. 


C-3.3 The surface which is to be protected by the 
geobags (stream bed/bank, shoreline, etc.) shall be 
dressed/trimmed to the required grade/profile/slope as 
shown on the drawings or as directed by the engineer. 
Excavation may be mostly carried out by track mounted 
excavators. Lighter excavators may be employed, if 
required. 


C-3.4 The excavated earth may be disposed of by 
tippers/tractors to a suitable distance from the bank 
sides, so as to reduce the overburden on the existing 
bank. 


C-3.5 The loose earth residue remaining after the 
excavation by the machinery may be removed manually. 
The slope formation may be given necessary ramming 
to remove any undulations and corrected to the desired 
slope. At the bottom and top of the slope, anchor trench 
or key shall be prepared as per the required design. 


C-4 COMMENCEMENT OF INSTALLATION OF 
GEOBAGS 


C-4.1 The geobags shall be filled at a location which 
is preferably higher than the high flood level. This 
would ensure that the filling process of the bag remains 
unaffected by the rain and subsequent changes in the 
water levels. 


C-4.2 The sand used for filling may be transported to 
the site by dumpers and bulldozers or any other 
appropriate mode conducive to the local availability 
and geographical suitability. 


C-5 GEOBAGS FILLING AND LAYING 
OPERATIONS 


C-5.1 The bags shall be filled with sand by suitable 
methods as approved by the engineer. It shall be ensured 
that the bags are not damaged or excessively distorted 
during filling. 


C-5.2 The sand used for filling shall meet the gradation 
and other requirements as specified in the drawings or 
technical specifications of the project or as approved 
by the engineer. 


C-5.3 After the sand filling is completed, the geobags 
shall be weighed to confirm the desired weight as per 


IS 16654 : 2017 


the specifications and technical requirements of the 
project. 


C-5.4 After confirmation of the weight, the geobags 
shall be stitched at the mouth by means of a bag closing 
machine. Stitching shall continue beyond the bag’s end 
in a loose loop of thread of length 25 to 50 mm. 


C-5.5 After filling, for easy counting and monitoring, 
the geobags may be stored in batches of 100 or any 
suitable multiple as per the available space at site. 


C-5.6 The placement of geobags for launching apron 
may be carried out using the motor boat/barge. The 
motor boat/barge may be positioned at the required 
location with the help of total station and anchored in 
position with the help of anchors. 


C-5.7 The placement of the geobags shall be continued 
up to the location of the key at the bottom of the slope 
near low water level. 


C-6 POST INSTALLATION PRECAUTIONS 


C-6.1 Immediately after installation, ensure the proper 
placement of geobags as per design and geometry of 
the site. If any abnormality is observed, correction or 
re-dumping shall be carried out. 


C-6.2 Proper care shall be taken to avoid manual 
interference of civilians and animals which can cause 
damage to the material. 


The typical layout for installation of geobags is given 
below in Fig. 3 


IS 16654 : 2017 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association Council, Coimbatore 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, Ahmedabad 


Representative(s) 


Dr A. N. Desai (Chairman) 


Dr ANIL KUMAR SHARMA 


Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati 


Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Department of Water Resources, Assam 
Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
DKTE Centre of Excellence in Nonwovens, Ichalkaranji 


Flexituff International Limited, Mumbai 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkatta 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Int Fab, Mumbai 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


National Institute of Research on Jute and 
Allied Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Office of the Jute Commissioner, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


SHRIMATI SEEMA PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAMAN LAL 
SHRI DHRUBAJYOTI BORGOHAIN (Alternate) 


Dr D. Anita RAVINDRANATH 
Suri R. VasupEv (Alternate) 


Suri SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jar BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Dn R. CHITRA 
SHRI MANISH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr SwAPAN GHOSH 
Pror (Dr) A. K. SAMANTHA (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 
SHRI ANIKET S. BHUTE 


SHRI RAJEEVA UPADHYAY 
Suri NIMESH SHUKLA (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SINHA 
Suri Manos Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
SHRI RAJENDRA GHADGE (Alternate) 


Dr. MAHUYA GHOSH 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. CHANDRA 
Suri J. K. BEHERA (Alternate) 


Dn Anup RaksHIT 
SHRIMATI RucHITA Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ARUNA LALL 


SHRI Y. K. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. K. TaLUKDAR (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


Dn GaurAM Bose 
Dr Sanjoy DEBNATH (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. Roy 
Suri SOUMYADIPTA Datta (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
SHRI V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH BAGLI (Alternate) 


IS 16654 : 2017 


Organization 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Teijin India Private Limited, Gurugram 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


UP State Irrigation Department, Lucknow 
Veermata JijabaiT echnological Institute, Mumbai 


In personal capacity [104, Kanchanban, A. W. Vartak Marg, 
Vile Parle (East), Mumbai 400 057] 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ANANT KANOI 
SHRI SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 
Suni PANKAJ Das 


Dr ANJAN K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
Suri V. K. PariL (Alternate) 


Dr MaNisHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
DR PRASHANT BHAVE 


Suri V. N. Gore 


Suri AWADH KisHORE, Scientist “E” and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-Officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. K. Gupta 


Scientist *D' (TXD), BIS 


10 


(Continued from second cover) 


Geobags are readily available and transportable (when empty) and can be easily filled with local sand and formed 
with range of sizes to fit specific application. On the other hand it has the demerit of high sensitivity to UV 
radiation and highly alkaline or acidic water. Depending on its constituent strains properties, its life expectancy 
could be reduced by 15 percent to 75 percent in one year of exposure. Ageing due to UV radiation could be 
avoided and protected using UV resistant polypropylene. Similarly highly acidic and alkaline water could also 
significantly reduce geobags property through chemical degradation. However, in river training water mostly the 
soil is in the pH range of 6.0 to 8.5 for which polypropylene is always stable. 


Survivability of geobags is very important from the viewpoint of their long term durability and is defined as 
resistance to mechanical damage during construction and initial operation. The ability of geobags for permanent 
erosion control to survive installation and associated pressures during service shall be assured, if it is to perform 
as designed. Installation damage to geobags is a function of the following: 


a) Polymer used in the manufacture of geo-textile fabric and whether UV resistant or not; 
b) Geo-textile fabric thickness; 

c) Compacting effort and fill thickness; 

d) Grain size distribution of fill material; and 

e) Angularity of fill material. 


Guidelines for installation of geobags are given in Annex C for information only. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex D. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard 1s complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (10293). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. 
JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. RAIPUR. 
PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


