NAT HIAF IS 17446 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


agmi A gin aA h AT 
aata uid — fester 


Observational Method for Tunnelling 
in Rock Masses — Guidelines 


ICS 093.20 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM St 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH MT, 4 fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


October 2020 Price Group 4 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Rock 
Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 


In the past, there was little emphasis on instrumentation although adhoc observations were sometimes made 
if failure appeared imminent. In recent projects, many problems, for example rock bursts, support failures due 
to intense support pressures generated by squeezing and swelling rocks, water inrush, gas explosion, failure of 
steel supports, etc, have been observed. The construction engineers are facing these problems while constructing 
tunnels. As such field instrumentation for support and lining design is gaining popularity among both designers 
and construction engineers with a little hesitation due to initial hindrance to construction-progress. Of course, 
eventually construction engineers did realise the net saving in the time of completion of tunnel owing to reduction 
in number of tunnelling hazards and cost over-runs. 


Thus, one of the most important factors in the construction of tunnelling is the observation of tunnel behaviour 
during construction and accordingly upgrading the design. Monitoring and interpretation of convergence, 
deformations, strains and stresses and accordingly optimizing working procedures and support requirements are 
important specially in weaker rock masses. 


This is further elaborated with three possible design situations in rock engineering: assessing rock support from 
rock mass classifications (empirical), assessing local stability in tunnels based on deformation measurements 
(observational), and assessing the required thickness of shotcrete lining for rock support (analytical). It is important 
to see that the formal implementation of the observational method in the design of underground excavations 
should not impose any significant problems to the design process, rather should strengthen the design practices. 


The observational method is an accepted alternative to conventional design methods for geotechnical structures. 
It is an approach for managing uncertainty in tunnel design through heterogeneous rock masses of unknown 
behaviour. Thus, the observational approach is defined as follows: 


a) When prediction of geology along deep tunnels and geotechnical behaviour is difficult, it can be 
appropriate to apply the observational method, in which the design is reviewed during construction. 
When this approach is used, the following requirements shall all be made before construction is started: 


1) Scope of monitoring (prediction of uncertain ground properties/behaviour and verification of design 
assumptions, work control, back analysis, research, risk allocation, assurance and confidence) shall 
be defined. 


2) Range of all key observation variables requiring monitoring shall be defined in relation to design 
assumptions and construction sequencing. 


3) Acceptable limits of behaviour shall be established. 


4) Range of possible behaviour shall be assessed and it shall be shown that there is an acceptable 
probability that the actual behaviour will be within the acceptable limits. 


5) A plan of monitoring shall be devised, which will reveal whether the actual behaviour lies within 
the acceptable limits. The monitoring shall make this clear at a sufficiently early stage, and with 
sufficiently short intervals to allow contingency actions to be undertaken successfully. 


6) Response time of the instruments and the procedures for analysing the results shall be sufficiently 
rapid in relation to the possible evolution of the system. 


7) A plan of contingency actions shall be devised, which may be adopted if the monitoring reveals 
behaviour outside acceptable limits or rock mass is highly anisotropic or the in-situ stresses are 
highly anisotropic or high to cause rock bursts. 


b) During construction, the monitoring shall be carried out as planned and additional or replacement 
monitoring shall be undertaken if this becomes necessary. The results of the monitoring shall be assessed 
at appropriate stages and the planned contingency actions shall be put into operation if the limits of 
behaviour are exceeded. Monitoring equipment shall either be replaced or extended if it fails to supply 
reliable data of appropriate type or in sufficient quantity. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 17446 : 2020 


Indian Standard 


OBSERVATIONAL METHOD FOR TUNNELLING IN 
ROCK MASSES — GUIDELINES 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard covers the guidelines for monitoring 
and timely action based on instrumental observations 
for both small and large underground openings in rock 
masses. 


1.2 Measurements for the in-situ stresses have not been 
dealt in this standard. 


1.3 This standard does not cover conventional 
tunnelling methods in rock masses, which are covered 
in IS 15026 : 2002 ‘Guidelines for tunnelling method 
in rock masses’. 


2 BASIC AND 


REQUIREMENTS 


CONSIDERATIONS 


2.1 Design of an underground structure in rock or 
evaluation of stability and safety of an existing structure 
calls for determination of, 


a) the deformation and/or stresses in the structure 
resulting from external loads applied to the 
structure; 


b) the physical properties of the ground in the vicinity 
of the opening; 


c) the ability of the structure to withstand the applied 
stresses or deformations; 


d) the geometry and the sequence of excavation of 
the opening and supporting of the opening; 


e) the regional geology and its influence on the stress 
and displacement distribution in the vicinity of 
the opening; and 


f) the critical surface developments and nearby 
underground built environments. 


Suitable analytical methods, model studies and/or 
numerical procedures, such as the finite element or 
distinct element method are used to incorporate this 
data into the initial stage of design. 


2.2 Expected system behaviour from underground 
works and probable impact on surroundings should be 
defined as follows: 


a) Allowable deformations in expected influence 
area of underground construction, 


b) Range 
tunnels, 


of deformations anticipated inside 


c) Range of displacements anticipated over surface 
(shallow urban environment), and 


d) Loads on tunnel lining during construction. 
2.3 Functional requirements of monitoring system shall 
be specified by designer covering, 

a) extent of area to be monitored; 


b) start and stop criterion of monitoring with its 
frequency; 


c) key variables to be monitored with monitoring 
density or number of monitoring stations; 


d) accuracy and precision of reading required; 
e) responsibility of each party; 
f) requirements for system verification; 


g) data management, storage, processing and 
interpretation; 
h) response requirements (trigger levels) for 


monitoring; and 


j) protection of monitoring equipment. 


2.4 Trigger levels connect the monitoring results with 
response actions. There can be up to three to four trigger 
levels for comprehensive monitoring programme 
for critical structures. Typically, each trigger level is 
assigned a colour coding for easy identification of the 
condition. Commonly used trigger colour are, 


a) Clear — Follow the suggested monitoring regime, 
b) Green — Frequent review of observations, 


c) Amber — Enhance monitoring regime with 
frequent review of observations and working 
methods with alert notification to third parties, and 


d) Red — Controlled cessation of work, redesign and 
control access to underground works and check 
preparedness for emergency. 


Trigger levels should be worked out and assigned as 
per different rock classes and structural requirements. 


However, the design (before and during construction) 
should be frequently evaluated by conducting full 
scale field tests and then by correlating the field data 
with predicted results. Repeated feedback of field 
data into the input data of the design helps in the 
development of the reliable design techniques. Thus 
design modifications can be effected if the results of 
instrumentation and experience warrant. Principles of 
this procedure are illustrated in Fig. 1. 


IS 17446 : 2020 


SIMULATION 


REQUIRED DATA 


1. THEORETICAL 
2. NUMERICAL 
3, MODEL 


. INSTIU STRESS FIELD 

. ENGINEERING PROPERTIES 
OF ROCK MASS 

. CRITERIA OF FAILURE 

. GEOMETRY OF OPENING 


. GEOLOGICAL STRUCTURE 
. TIME - DEPENDENT BEHAVIOUR 


FIELD 
MEASUREMENT 


Fic. 1 Basic REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGN OF A STRUCTURE IN ROCK 


3 DATA REQUIREMENT 


3.1 The data obtained from instrumentation work and 
thus from observation may be used for, (a) selection 
of economical support during construction period, and 
(b) determination of basic tunnel lining-design criteria 
such as in pressure tunnels. 


3.2 Following information is required while dealing 
with tunnel supports in an effective manner, 


a) actual versus predicted behaviour of unsupported 
or partially supported openings for verification of 
assumed ground properties. 


b) time for activation of various supports after 
excavation. 


c) medium to long term ground-support interaction 
patterns. 


The answers to these questions can come only through 
instrumentation, observation and geological data. Thus, 
zones of high support pressure may be delineated and 
the pressures are actually measured so that stronger 
lining is installed but without being over-conservative 
and taking any risk to life and structure. On the basis of 
measured loads, it may be possible to use lighter lining 
compared to that predicted from the design calculations. 
The actual distribution of load on the lining can also be 
ascertained. 


Stronger lining will be required due to high support 
pressures which may have resulted due to too early or too 
late support installations or high variations in tangential 
stress in surrounding ground due to unfavourable 
interaction of tunnel shape and earth pressure coefficients. 


Another major problem faced by a designer is to know 
the direction of rock load to be considered in designing 
a support system, and whether it is absolutely essential 
to place invert (or bottom strut) along with roof support 
so that mucking roof operation is least disturbed. The 
answer is affirmative if measurements on rock load 
indicate high horizontal support pressure. 


It is also important to know the radius of failed rock 
(called coffin cover or the broken zone) in the cases of 
squeezing rock masses. 


3.3 Table 1 summarizes typical applications of various 
instruments. 


4 ROLE OF 
TUNNELLING 


INSTRUMENTATION FOR 


Tunnel instrumentation and observation can help in the 
following ways: 


a) Verifying design of support system. 
b) Advancing the state-of-the-art. 


c) Providing 
techniques. 


adequacy of new construction 


d) Controlling quality of construction. 
e) Reducing construction cost and extra payment. 
f) Diagnosing the cause of a problem. 


g) Improving construction safety by providing 
warning system. 


h) Documenting as-built conditions. 
j) Providing legal protection. 


k) Studying the time-dependent behaviour of rock 
mass. 


5 IMPORTANT MEASUREMENT 


5.1 Systematic tunnel monitoring by fixing 3-D 
bireflex targets for tunnel roof and wall displacement/ 
convergence shall always be carried out in the tunnels 
for better understanding of rock mass-tunnel support 
interaction. The convergence targets shall be fixed 
immediately after face excavation at a regular interval 
of 50 m or as and when required on the basis of the 
ground condition/geology. 


5.2 At one location five bireflex target points (or as per 
the decision of designer) are fixed to measure tunnel 
displacement/convergence (see Fig. 2). X, Y and Z 
coordinates of each target point are recorded at regular 
basis. The readings are analysed on the day of taking 
readings to get the displacement of individual target 
point and the chord convergence between various 
target points. Accordingly, the results are used for 
countermeasures, if any required. 


IS 17446 : 2020 


Table 1 Typical Applications for Various Measuring Instruments 
( Clause 3.3) 


SI No. Measurement Instrument Typical Applications 
(D (2) (3) (4) 
i) Diameter or width change a) Tape extensometer Monitoring the roof and wall deformation 
b) 3-D Bi-reflex targets Monitoring lining distortion 
ii) Surface settlement a) 3-D Bi-reflex optical Forewarning of surface settlement 
Monitoring the zone of targets Monitoring the time-dependent deformation within the rock 
influence in the rock mass b) Single point borehole mass around excavated tunnel periphery 
around tunnel periphery extensometer with 
reference datum 
c) Multi-point borehole 
extensometer 
ili) Subsurface horizontal a) Inclinometer Forewarning of surface settlement or tunnel instability by 
movement b) Borehole extensometer monitoring ground movement towards excavation or heading 
Verifying adequacy of rock bolting and other support 
iv) Tilt Tilt meter Monitoring tilting of buildings 
v) Load or  stres in a) Load cell Verifying adequacy of structural support (rock bolts, ribs, liner 
structural support b) Pressure cell plates, precast concrete liners, cross-lot bracing, tie-backs) 
c) Strain gage Determining factor of safety on shoving stresses in soft 
ground shield tunnelling 
Increasing knowledge of support behaviour as input to 
improve design procedures 
vi) Groundwater level Observation well/Standpipe Monitoring draw-down of ground water table due to tunnelling 
piezometer or shaft. Measure rate of seepage from rock mass into tunnel 
vii) Pore water pressure Piezometer Forewarning of distress to buildings due to movement of soil 
or water towards soft ground tunnel or shaft 
viii) Vibration Engineering seismograph Verifying that ground and building vibrations due to blasting 


T2 


do not exceed an acceptable limit 


T4 


T5 


Fic. 2 ARRAY or FIVE TARGET POINTS AT ONE LOCATION TO MEASURE TUNNEL CONVERGENCE 


IS 17446 : 2020 


5.3 Instruments given in Table 1 shall be used as per 
the site conditions and as per the requirements in 
consultation with the designer. 


6 TYPICAL TEST SECTION 
MEASUREMENTS IN TUNNELS 


FOR 


6.1 Layout of an extensively instrumented zone is 
shown in Fig. 3. Measurements taken consist of 
following robust and valuable instruments: 
a) Radial support pressure by pressure cells, 
b) Load on support by load cells, 
c) Depth of loosened rock mass by multi-point 
borehole extensometers, and 


d) Rock closure and support deformation by tape 
extensometer or bi-reflex targets. 


6.2 Strain in support can be measured by strain gauges. 
Instrumentation in the lined and concreted zone should 
consist of the following instruments which shall be 
embanded in concrete: 


a) Stress meters, and 
b) Strain meters. 
6.3 Besides the above mentioned instrumentation, 


following data should also be collected which is 
required at the time of analysis of data: 


a) Geology — mapping, fracture spacing and 


orientation, width of fracture zone, alteration and 
ground water. 

b) Rock mass quality (Q), rock mass rating (RMR) 
and geological strength index (GSI) 


PRESSURE CELLS 


4 -POINT B. H. 
EXTENSOMETER 


3.0m à 


c) Geophysical observations — Seismic activity, 
in-situ stresses and their orientation, micro- 
seismic activity inside opening. 

d) Time lag between excavation and installation 
of instrumentation shall be recorded along with 
a time record of further support installations 
or face advancements vis-a-vis observed 
deformations. 


6.4 Significant researches have been done on the basis 
of field data from the instrumented tunnels in past. The 
tunnel instrumentation leads to collection of new field 
data, specially in complex geological conditions, and 
thus provides a great opportunity to learn the tunnel 
mechanics. 


7 METHODS FOR PRESENTATION OF 
MONITORING DATA 


7.1 Timely and continuous analysis of results and 
their interpretation can be used to verify the design 
assumptions and predicted system behaviour and ensure 
that the structural integrity fulfils safety, serviceability 
and economical requirements. 


7.2 General Displacement Development Diagram 


Redistribution of in-situ ground stress and resulting 
radial displacements initiate ahead of tunnel face 
which is yet to be excavated. Figure 4 depcits a typical 
radial displacement development diagram. Total 
displacements consists of displacement occurring 
ahead of the face (Z,), the displacement occurring 
between excavation and zero reading (Z,,), and the 
monitored displacements after zero reading (Z = Z,). 


m 


Fic. 3 Layout PLAN OF A TYPICAL INSTRUMENTATION ZONE 


7.3 3-D Displacement Diagrams 


Assesssment of ground stabilization process can be 
visualized by plotting time-displacement or distance- 
displacment diagrams for displacement vectors for 
single/multiple points vis-d-vis various stages of 
excavation and support installations. 


7.3.1 Time-Displacement Diagram 


Displacement measurements of one or all targets in one 
monitoring cross-section are plotted in single diagram 
in relation to time. The displacement history is used to 
assess the stabilization process. 


7.3.2 Distance-Displacement Diagram 


Displacement measurements of one or all targets in 
one monitoring cross-section or same target location 
along different sections are plotted in single diagram in 
relation to the advance of face. 


7.3.3 Deflection and Trend Line Diagrams 


Deflection line diagrams represent the instantaneous 
longitudinal displacement profile (LDP) at one or more 
longitudinal section of the tunnel crown/wall at a given 
time. Several LDPs can be plotted for the same stretch 
of tunnel in single diagram. To eliminate variability in 
capturing zero reading, face displacement is considered 
zero and pre-displacement (between face and target 
installation) is produced by extrapolating the curve 


FACE 
X ZERO READING 


x 
o 


PRE- 
DISPLACEMENT 


MONITORED 
DISPLACEMENT 


IS 17446 : 2020 


from previous three monitoring stations towards the 
zero displacement. 


Trend lines are plotted on deflection line diagrams. 
These lines connect LDPs of various sections when face 
has advanced at fixed distance ahead ofthe longitudinal 
section. Each trend line relates to a distance value 
behind the face. 


In homogenous ground conditions and un-interrupted 
cyclic construction sequences, deflection diagrams are 
obtained in the shape of an Onion-Shell and trend lines 
as straight lines. 


Deflection and trend line diagrams are useful to predict 
approaching fault zones ahead of face or lack or work 
control in excavated portion of the tunnel. 


8 MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF 
RESULTS 


8.1 Monitoring plays a significant role in deciding the 
timely strengthening of primary supports otherwise 
with large deformations, in some cases, the roof 
and walls need to be trimmed to get the space for 
secondary lining. Large deformations may also create 
instability problems. Thus, it is important to have 
a good instrumentation programme and immediate 
implementation of instrumentation results to strengthen 
the primary supports. 


DISTANCE 


" OBSERVED 
DISPLACEMENT 


TOTAL 
DISPLACEMENT 


Fic 4 TvPiCAL RADIAL DISPLACEMENT DEVELOPMENT DIAGRAM 


IS 17446 : 2020 


8.2 A dual-level action plan for remedial measures is 
suggested as follows: 


a) Attention level — It is a percentage of the 
predicted deformation. On exceeding this 
level/limit of convergence, the frequency of 
readings shall be increased in order to get the 
deformation speed. This trigger limit is set to 
study the deformation trends more closely and 
take countermeasures 1f the deformation remains 
continue with the same speed to the alarm limit. 
The attention level/limit, in general, is 70 percent 
of alarm level/limit. 


b) Alarm level — It is the complete expected 
deformation from the design (coincides with the 
latest support section that will support the reached 
displacement and stress). Crossing of this limit 
will require initiating the procedure for actions 
and counter measures. 


In a tunnel in India the convergence has crossed the 
alarm limit which called for the countermeasures in 
terms of longer rock bolts and additional shotcrete 


layer (see Fig. 5). After countermeasures, further 
monitoring shows that even the countermeasures were 
not adequate. Therefore, again additional supports 
were applied to make the tunnel stable. This example 
highlights the importance of observational method 
without tunnel failure. 


9 PRECAUTIONS 


The following precautions shall be observed: 


a) Limits of deformation to be allowed shall be 
known and followed. 

b) Some time, where high deformations are observed, 
the deformed roof and walls encroach the space 
available for secondary lining. Trimming the 
primary support and applying the secondary 
lining is not only costly and time consuming 
but also disturb the stabilized rock mass around 
the opening. Monitoring shall again be carried 
out to see 1f the ground is stabilized or not and 
then only the secondary lining support shall be 
applied. 


CONVERGENCE DISPLACEMENT, mm 


12/09/2013 
19/09/2013 
26/09/2013 
03/10/2013 
10/10/2013 
17/10/2013 
24/10/2013 
31/10/2013 


ALARM LIMIT 


e 
-— 
ce 
N 
LL 
N 
O-— 
p 
«e 
e 


07/11/2013 
14/11/2013 
21/11/2013 
28/11/2013 
05/12/2013 
12/12/2013 
19/12/2013 
02/01/2014 
09/01/2014 
16/01/2014 


Fic. 5 ADDITIONAL Rock BOLT AND SHOTCRETE SUPPORT INSTALLED AFTER THE CONVERGENCE CROSSED 
THE DESIGNED ALARM LIMIT IN A TUNNEL [T1, T2, ..., T5 = BIREFLEX TARGETS; 
T1-T5, T2-T4, T2-T5 = CONVERGENCE BETWEEN RESPECTIVE TARGETS] 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Engineering AG, India, Gurugram 
Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 
Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research, Dhanbad 


CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, New Delhi 
Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 


Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 

Hindustan Construction Company Ltd, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 
Indian Institute of Technology, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling 
Technology, New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 


Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


National Diasater Management Authority, 
New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dn N. K. Samaputya (Chairman) 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 
Suri AKHIL Ras (Alternate) 


SHRI KRiPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


Suri G. P. PATEL 
Suri Upay CHANDER (Alternate) 


DiRECTOR 
Suri Hari Dev (Alternate) 


Mp Rizwan ALI 
Dn S. A. BureLe (Alternate) 


MzMBER (D&R) 
CHIEF ENGINEER, DrsiGN (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KousHik Panpit (Alternate) 


Dr R. K. GOEL 
Dn J. K. Mounot (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ GUPTA 
Suri R. K. PANIGARHI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Lr CoL PARIKSHIT MEHRA 
REPRESENTATIVE (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF UAMANI 
Suni SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


Suri M. Rasu 
SHRI PRASANTA MIsHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH KUMAR SHARMA 
Dr MauesH CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Dr MAHENDRA SINGH 
Dn Pritt MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI TRIBHUVAN SINGH 
SHRI NAVEEN SINGHAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJESH AGARWAL 
SHRI L. PRAKASH (Alternate) 


SHRI J. S. (MITIGATION) 
Dn RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 17446 : 2020 


IS 17446 : 2020 


Organization 
National Highways & Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited, Delhi 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 
Faridabad 


National Institute of Roack Machanics, Bengaluru 


National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd, 
New Delhi 


Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 
RITES Ltd, Gurugram 
THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


In personal capacity (C-/004, Park View City-2, 
Sector-49, Gurugram) 


In personal capacity (4-/25, Prodhyogiki 
Apartment, Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri N. K. MATHUR 
SHRI IMRAN SAYEED (Alternate) 


Suri A. RAJAN BABU 
Suri G. Goprnat (Alternate) 


Suri N. K. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH Rawat (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
Suni Vuav DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI PALLAB PAL 
Dn B. R. SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri T. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 


Dr MANOJ VERMAN 


Dr RAJBAL SINGH 


SHRI SANJAY PANT, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (CiviL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTATING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Dr Mano Kumar RAJAK 
ScieNrIST ‘D’ (Civit. ENGINEERING), BIS 


(Continued from second cover) 


NOTES 


1 Although some elastic deformations are lost in tunnel instrumentation, yet the time-dependent deformations are important and 
measured by quick tunnel instrumentation. It should be kept in mind that in the highly squeezing ground conditions the tunnel closure 
may continue for longer duration, if adequate measures are not taken. Time-dependent behaviour is generally not considered in 
computer-aided designs) 


2 Adequate number of instruments should be used as their survival rate is very low in tunnels in the weak rocks. 


Observations and measurements of the ground behaviour are needed in almost all tunnel projects. In principle, 
difficulties in predicting the geotechnical behaviour for underground excavations can mainly be found in the 
variation in rock mass quality, the interaction between the rock mass and support, and in the quality of the executed 
support measures. 


Considering all these aspects relating to the need and importance of observational methods and decisions 
and precautions required to be taken in that context, this new standard has been formulated, and covers 
basic considerations and requirements, data requirements, role of instrumentation for tunnelling, important 
measurements, typical test section for measurements in tunnels, methods for presentation of monitoring data, and 
monitoring and implementation of results. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rule for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 48 (14889). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


