( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS :10081- 1981

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO COMMERCIAL EXPLOSIVES, PYROTECHNICS AND BLASTING PRACTICES
ExpIoGves
Chairman SIII:I R . G . D-eoc.41~lsX,: Membrrs SHHI K. P. R. PILI,AY ( Alternate to Shri R. G. Deolaliker ) Bharat Coking Coal Ltd, Dhanbad SHlLI T. P. BALAKRISHNAN SHRI U. W. DATES ( A12cmale ) Nationat Fertilizers Ltd, sew Delhi Smzr C. S. BELWAL Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SRRI CH.4lLANJlT LAL SHRI B. R. DAVE: ( Abernete ) IDL Chemicals Ltd, Hyderabad DIG A. K. CHATTEKJEIS DR I-1. B. BATHIN.\ ( Alteraate I ) DI< G. D. PRHSAD ( Alternate II ) SHRI G. kf. GHOPRA Indian Explosives Ltd, Gomia Da S. N. SEN ( Alternate ) Narenda Explosives Ltd, Dehra Dun SIWI S. C. Das GUPTA Indo-Burma Petroleum Co Ltd, New Delhi Smtr C. M. DE:OSTHAI.E SHRI A. V. CKAWDORKAX ( Alternate ) SAPIWY Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad DIIWXTOI< ( MIX-Es EQUIPMENT ) JOINT D 1Kl!x:I'OJ1 OB LMIHES Sarem ( rlltcrnate ) National Fireworks Factory, Sivakasi SHIU rl. GRARA~URAI SHRI R. `I'H.4SoAHAIIiAPP.4~ ( Alternate ) Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad SKI~I V. KRISHNAWJRTHT SHKI M. M. Baa? TACIU I:Y.\ ( Abnate ) Srwr Il. MI~J Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi SHILI A. I;. CHA~`TP!T~JIZ;( Alternate ) ( Small Commissioner Scale SHIM K. C:. N.~~:.~Y-.wAN Development Industries ), sew Delhi Sai:r D. \`. Rae National Mineral Deveiopmrnt Corporation Ltd, Hyderahad SHIIT I'. R. GCPTA ( Alternate ) ( Cant inttrd on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1982 STANDARDS INSTITUTION Directorate

and Pyrotechnics

Sectional

Committee,

CDC 51
Factories, Calcutta

Representing General Ordnance

INDIAN

This publicatioo is protected under the ltrdian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by anv means except with written permission of the puhlishrr shall be depmrd to be an ihfringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10081- l!m
( Continued from page 1 ) Members Dn K. R. K. R.40 SHIII P. R. ROY SHRI S. S. SALODK~I~ SHRI U. W. D~TEY ( dkernate ) PROF V. P. SINCH DR SURJIT SIXTH SARI 1f. G. BHAC~AT ( &erfl& DR HARI B~ao\vAi~, Director ( Chem ) Representing Ministry of Defence. ( R&D ) . Centza\Ene Plannmg & Destgn Institute Limited, Coal India Ltd, Calcutta Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad Ministry of Defence ( DC1 ) Director

)

General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o

Member )

SHRl S. K. hfATHCI% Deputy Director ( Chemicals ), IS1

CIassification
Convener DR S. B. RAY Members

and Terminology

Subcommittee,

CDC

51 : 5

Ministry of Defence ( DGI )

SITRI M. G. &IAGWAT ( Alternate to Dr S. B. Ray ) Chief Controller of Explosives, Nagpur SrrR,r CHARaNJIT L.4L __.._ SHRI B. R. DAVE ( Alternate ) Indo-Burma Petroleum Co Ltd, New Delhi SHRI C. M. DEOSTHALE SHRI A. V. CHANDORK~R ( Alternate ) Exp~;~; Research & Development Laboratory, SERI J. S. GHARIA
SHRI I(: VEXKATESAN ( Alternate ) Mrs~s Directorate General of Mines Safety, Dhanbad .IOINT DIRECTOR OF SAFETY Central Mining Research Station, Dhanbad SnRI V. KRISHNAUJRTHI SHRI hI. M. BRATT.4CHARY_4 ( lf~t~?XUt~ ) IDL Chemicals Ltd, Hyderabad SRRI K. NaoARAJAN SHRI R. COWND_4RAJAN ( Alternate ) Indian Explosives Ltd, Gomia SRRIS.SESHAN SHRI B. S. ROY ( .ilternate j

IS : 10981- 1981

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO COMMERCIAL EXPLOSIVES, PYROTECHNICS AND BLASTING PRACTICES
0.
0.1 This

FOREWORD

Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 December 1981, after the draft finalized by the Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 The Explosives and Pyrotechnics Sectional Committee felt the necessity for a comprehensive list of terms used in commercial explosive and pyrotechnic industry and their precise and commonly agreed definitions in order to avoid ambiguity and confusion to manufacturers It is expected that this standard would eliminate and consumers. ambiguity in the interpretation of terms used in trade and industry. 0.3 Indian Standards for various explosives and their accessories have been formulated. This standard is being issued as an adjunct to these standards.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the terms commercial explosives, pyrotechnics
2. TERMS and definitions that are and blasting practices. prevalent in

AND DEFPNITIONS A

Abel Heat Test - British official heat test which is generally applied to nitro-explosives. The principle of the test is to note the time required to produce a standard tint on a potassium iodide-starch paper when the explosive is heated under specified conditions. Acoustic Warning the start of blasting A distinctive operation. audible warning used to indicate

3

IS:

10081-1981

- A self-containing power transmitting device to Explosive convert chemical energy into mechanical energy. Removers ( retractors ), thrusters, dimple motors, etc, fall in this category. Actuator, Adiabatic Ignition - Ignition of explosives and pyrotechnic which there is no virtual heat transfer.

system in

Adsorption

- The adhesion in an extremely thin layer of molecules of gases or dissolved substances or of liquids to the surfaces of solid bodies with which they are in contact.

chemical ditions.
Air-Blast

Ageing

of

and/or performance
-

Explosives

-

Changes which may include physical, of explosives due to environmental conthrough air.
Double Cartridge, ADC Test )

Shock wave transmitted
Test ( Ardeer

Air Gap Sensitivity - A test to determine

initiation donor.

the sensitivity of a charge of a receptor explosive to by the donor charge separated by an air gap in line with the

Aluminium Block Expansion Test - A test similar to lead block expansion test but superior to it when testing brisance of explosives, especially those containing aluminium. Ammunition - Explosive substances when enclosed contrivance or otherwise adopted or prepared so as to or charge for small arms, guns, rockets or other weapons thereof such as caps, detonators, primers, boosters, fuses, etc.

in any case or form a cartridge and components shells, warheads,

AN-F0

-

An explosive based on ammonium
( Authorized ) -

nitrate and fuel oil.

Approved ASA

( authorized ) by competent

When used for explosives means approved authority. lead azide, lead styphnate for and doing

- An initiatory aluminium powder. &;ilable Energy -

mixture containing

Net useful energy of explosion released
B

Back Break

-

Rock broken beyond the lines of drill hole.

B &J Test ( Bergman Junk Test ) - A test for computing the stability of a propellant and nitro-cellulose by measuring the amount of nitrogen oxides evolved when a sample is heated at 132�C or 120�C for a prescribed period.

4

1S:10081-1981
Ball Powder used in small A propellant in small and hard spherical arms ammunition. form, generally

Ballistic Mortar --- A type of compound pendulum consisting of a heavy mortar suspended by a rigid frame of light aluminium plates on a knife edge used for ballistic mortar teat for the measurement of the power of an explosive [ see 3.11 of IS : 6609 ( Part II/Set 1 )1973* 1.
- A compound pendulum propelled Ballistic Pendulum of an explosive fired from a standard cannon for determining of an explosive. by the bIast the power in

- A high calorimetric value double base propellant usually Ballistite the form of flakes containing around 40 percent of nitroglycerine. Baratolmakes An explosive the major composed of barium nitrate and TNT. charge

Base Charge ( in a Detanator ) contribution a Base Charge ( of propellant charge. Propellant

A high explosive to the power of the device. ) The principal

which of the

component

Bench Blasting -

A method of blasting in open cast mines with vertical holes in levels or benches ( in the form of steps ). potasin the based

A blasting explosive mixture containing sium chlorate, potassium bichromate, sugar and yellow wax proportions 61 : 6.1 : 27 : 5.1.

Berger ( Explosive ) -

Berger Mixture
on zinc powder

- A smoke producing pyrotechnic and chlorinated hydrocarbon. See` Two-component Gauge ) to and

composition `.

Binary Explosives Bischel Bomb
the pressure expIosion.

explosives

( Bischel

of explosion

An equipment used to determine examine the products of detonation/

Blasjo Cut Blast -

Seeunder ` Cut `.

Shock wave generated from the point of detonation which includes a shock front, a high pressure area behind the shock front and the following rarefaction.

Blasting -

A process

of loosening

rocks,
blasting

minerals,
explosives

etc, by explosives.
and accessories

*Methods of test for commercial Explosives, Section 1 Explosives, ger.eral.

: Part II

5

IS:10081-

1981

Blasting Agent - Any material or mixture consisting of a fuel and oxidizer intended for blasting not otherwise classified as an explosive and in which none of the ingredients is classified as explosive, provided the finished products, mixed and packed for use or shipment, cannot be detonated by a Xo. 8 blasting cap when unconfined. Blasting Cap See ` Detonator `.

based on nitroglycerine conBlasting Gelatine - A high explosive sisting of about 92 percent nitroglycerine and about 8 percent nitrocellulose. Blasting Machine ( Hell Boxes ) See ' Exploder `.

Blasting Mat - A net-like structure suitable material placed over a blasting Blasting Powder ( Gun Powder, sodium/potassium incorporating sulphur. Blasting used. Blasting used in sives. Blister Ratio `Tonnes

made of rope, \vire, or any other site to prevent fly rocks.

Black Powder ) - A low explosive nitrate, charcoal with and without blasted per kg of an explosive

of rock

Soluble Nitrocellulose ( BSNC the manufacture of gelatinous Shooting See ' Mud capping

) - A type of nitrocellulose nitroglycerine-based explo`.

' or ' Blaster shooting

Blown Shot - A shot which in a blown-out shot. Bomb launching

has not done any useful work on initiation used for producing destructive effect by

An explosive device against a target.

high explosive charge in an ` explosive Booster - An intermediate train ' which is easily initiated by a detonator or detonating fuse to detonate the main explosive charge completely ( same as `Primer' ). Bore Hole ( Drill sive charge. Bottom Charge Hole ) A prepared loaded hole for the insertion of a drill of explohole.

A charge

into the bottom

Box Cut Bridge Wire

See under -

` Cut `.
wire connected across two lead wires. from its fragment

A resistance

power of an explosive as distinguished Brisance - Shattering total work capacity; it indicates its ability to shatter and hard structures and is dependent upon its velocity of detonation. 6

IS : 10081- 1981 Briska Detonator with the same pressure. quantity A detonator in which extra of base charge by subjecting strength is achieved it to a much higher

Bubble Energy -

Energy contained in a bubble formed on detonation in other words, the gas pressure of an explosive charge under water, energy component of the total available energy of an explosive.

Bubble
adiabatic tective

Sensitization
compression

- Sensitization of an explosive of entrapped gas bubbles.
directly loaded

charge

by the a pro-

Bulk Loaded Explosive
wrapper

- Explosive ) into boreholes.
Power per unit volume

( without

Bulk Power Bulled

of explosive. which is a large

Hole - A bore hole with a chamber at the bottom formed by blasting a light charge of explosive to accommodate quantity of explosive (see ( Coyote blasting ' ).

Bullet Impact Test -

A test to determine the extent to which various ammunitions or explosives which are packed in regulation containers are safe against the effects of small arms fire.

Bulling

of a drill point. charge

( Chambering
hole

to obtain

) -

A procedure intended to enlarge a section a greater concentration of explosive at that distance between the main body of the

Burden ( Face Burden ) and the nearest

The free face.

Burn Cut ( Shatter Cut ) Burning Rate `unit of time. bursting The Reciprocal

&e under ' Cut `.
per the

linear regression of reaction zone measured of burning rate is the burning time. time from the application of energy to

Bursting Time -

The of the detonator.

Butt Hole ( Bottlog Socket ) in a face after firing of the charge.

A portion C

of the borehole

remaining

Cannon

charges for testing Set 2 )-1974* 1. Cap -

( Standard

permitted

Cannon ) -A

explosives

heavy steel device used to fire [ see 3.1.3 of IS : 6609 ( Part II[

See ` Detonator

`, ` Blasting

cap `.
explosives :nd accesscries

*Methods of Explosives, Section

test for commercial blasting 2 Explosives, permitted.

: Part II

7

IS : 10081- 1981 Cap Sensitive initiated Any explosive composition by a commercial No. 6 detonator. A length which can be efficiently crimped

Capped Fuse onto one end.

of safety fuse Tvith a plain

detonator

Cartridge

- A preformed unit of explosive wrapped to a predetermined diameter and length. Also a round of small arm or gun ammunition. Also a type of military pyrotechnic store. Cast Explosives
into a receptacle.

-

Explosives

which

are melted

and loaded

by casting

Cavity ( Cavitation
filled explosive bursting.

in Filled

Explosives

)-

that usually

results in non-uniform `.

An air space within burning or premature

Cavity Charge Chambering Characteristic
density

See` I3ollow charge See` Bulling Impedance
velocity `.

-

of

an Explosive -

and optimum

of detonation of an explosive of explosive

The of an explosive.

product

of or a

Charge shot hole.

~1 given quantity
Quantity

filled in an ammunition charge per unit length of

Charge Density borehole.

the

Charge Flash
a) A readily ignitable explosive charge electric primers and detonators. b) A pyrotechnic charge photo-flash cartridges, used in ignition elements such of as

used in flash producing bombs or spotted devices.

items

Charge
signal

Signal, Ejection Weight

from an underwater

An explosive device mine, used for training. of explosives charged.

designed

to eject a

Charge Weight Charging
position agents,

( Loading ) Ammunition

The act of placing

the explosive

in the desired casualty source of

for blasting. riot control

Chemical Circuit
power

- Any ammunition agents and incendiaries.
electric

containing to the

- The wiring connecting for initiating them.

detonator(s)

8

IS : 10081- 1931 according tion.
Clay Collar Classification - The division of explosives into classes and divisions to their general characteristics for storage and transporta) -

Cock ( Clay Plug -

Clay plug used for stemming.

hole.

The space left on the top of the explosive charge in a borein such a

Collar-Priming Column

- Priming of the main expolsives column way that detonation is initiated at the primer near the collar.

plosive.

Loading

-

The charging

of a borehole with a train of ex-

of subs- The ability of a substance or a combination tances to remain indefinitely in contact with an explosive without any adverse physical and/or chemical effects on each other.
Compatibility

Confined

Shots -

-

Charges fired under confined conditions.

Confinement Connector

by the surrounding

The degree of restraint exerted on the explosive charge material.

for Igniter Cord - These are used to provide a connection between the end of the safety fuse and the ignitor cord. Continuity

propagate detonation along from the point of initiation.
-

of Detonation

( COD

) - The property of an explosive to the explosives column over a length of 1 m

Cordite Coromunt Coyote .Crater Crimper

Double based propellant in the form of cords.
Cut See under ` Cut `. See ` Bulled hole `.

Blasting -

A depression in the ground caused by an explosion. A hand tool used for crimping A

a detonator

onto a safety to the

fuse.
Crimping Crimping Critical

igniting device.

Machine

-

machine

used to crimp
) -

detonators room

Station

( Capping

Station

ing used for preparing

capped fuses.

A special

or build-

Diameter - The minimum diameter at which an explosive column when initiated propagates detonation over the entire column. Zone - The zone of rock surrounding crushed by the blasting of an explosive charge.

Crushed

the borehole

which

is

9

IS : 18881- 1981 Cushion Blasting - A technique of blasting using ( see also ` Perimeter blasting `, ' Smooth blasting ' ). cut - An arrangement explosive. space cartridges an

to provide a free face at the time of blasting

The different types of cut employed in simultaneous blasting are These are defined as under-cut, middle-cut, over-cut and side-cut. follows : Under-Cut Middle-Cut Over-Cut Side-Cut provided at the floor level of the rock face. provided in the middle portion of the rock face. provided at the roof level of the rock face. provided vertically on any side of the rock face.

The different types of cut employed in delay blasting are : dragcut, fan-cut, wedge-cut, blasjo-cut, pyramid or diamond-cut, burn-cut and coromunt cut. These are defined as follows: Drag-Cut plane. Fan-Cut A cut in which A cut in which plane. shot holes are angled are angled in a vertical

shot holes

in a horizontal

Wedge-Cut -

A cut in which a wedge is formed either vertically or horizontally by pairs of holes drilled at about 60" to the face and meeting or finishing close to each other at the back of the cut. A wedge cut in the horizontal plane in which the pair of shot holes one on each side of the face has between them an angle of 30', with the trimmers at the top and bottom levels of the face.

Blasjo-Cut-

Pyramid

or Diamond-Cut - A cut consisting of a group of shot holes drilled from the periphery of a core to meet at a point which forms the back of the cut.

Burn-Cut ( Shatter-Cut ) - A cut comprising a cluster of shot holes drilled approximately at right angles to the face and placed close .to each other and parallel throughout their length, with one or more holes left empty in the vicinity of the charged holes, thus forming additional free face to relieve the burden on the charge holes. 10

IS : 10081 1981
l

Box-Cut Line-Cut -

A burn-cut in the pattern of a square or rectangle one or more empty holes interspersed.

with

A burn-cut in the pattern of a straight line with alternate charged and uncharged holes.

Coromunt-Cut - A cut comprising a cluster of parallel shot-holes drilled approximately at right angles to the face and placed close to each other with one or more empty centre holes which are actually two holes drilled close together and slightly over-lapping each other. cut off partially
Cutting

- A condition of a hole charged with explosive which has been sheered off by the blast of the previous shot. of an

Charge - A charge of explosive applied to the outside object with the aim of cutting or sheering it off. D Dead Pressed - An explosive loss in sensitivity to detonation.
pressed to such an extent

as to lead

to

Deck Charges ( Deck Loading ) - Charges placed above a base intervals and which are separated from the base charge at pre-selected charge and each other by sand or other spacing materials. Decoupling - The extent of air space left between the explosive charge and the inside wall of the borehole. Deflagration DEGN Brisk burning of an explosive without detonation. Abbreviation for diethylene glycol dinitrate.

( EGDN ) -

item mostly of relatively slow reaction time Delay - A pyrotechnic ( in mm per s ), suitable for timin, v sequence of events ( see ` train ' ). Delay Detonator - A detonator which functions at a predetermined delay after the application of energy. Delay Detonator Relays or Detonating Relays - A component of high explosive train which introduces a delay in the time of functioning of the detonating fuse. Delay Element - A component which provides a specific detonator, fuse, etc. delay in the and

Delay Interval - The interval expressed in time between initiation detonation of the bursting charge. Densification To increase the density of an explosive composition. 11

is ; 10381 - 1981 Desensitization - Desensitization ( or phlegmatization ) of an explosive means rendering it insensitive or less sensitive to heat, shock, impact, percussion, rifle bullet or friction. Detonating Cord ( Detonating Fuse ) - Essentially a small round core of high explosive covered with a protective sheath to propagate a detonating impulse. Detonation - An exothermic chemical reaction in which the advancing reaction zone in the explosive column is preceded by a shock wave. Detonation Front ( Detonation Head ) - The envelope produced by a shock wave detonating an explosive charge. Detonation Pressure Pressure exerted at the detonation front. which arrests further propagation of A device

Detonation Trap detonation front.

Detonation Velocity - The rate of advance termed detonation velocity or rate ( see VOD ). Detonator -

of the reaction

zone is

A device to start an explosive process.

detonators which when tested by sand Detonator No. 6 - Standard bomb test as prescribed in IS : 6609 ( Part III )-1973" give the following quantity of crushed sand: a) Percentage of sand passing through 500-micron less than 35. b) Percentage of sand passing through 250-micron more than 30. IS sieve . . . . . . not IS sieve . . . . . . not

Detonator No. 8 - Standard detonators which when tested by the sand bomb test as prescribed in IS : 6609 ( Part III )-1975" give the following quantity of crushed sand : a) Percentage of sand passing through 500-micron less than 50. b) Percentage of sand passing through 250-micron more than 45. Diamond Cut Seeunder ` Cut `. Initiation of a column of explosive from the IS sieve . . . . . . not IS sieve . . . . . . not

Direct Initiation mouth of the borehole.

*Methods of test for commercial Detonators, general and permitted.

blasting

explosives

and accessories

: Part III

12

IS : 10081- 1981
explosive explosive

Down Line Propagation

- Propagation charge with the initiating device column down the borehole. Seeunder ` Cut `.

of detonation in a column of spread along the length of the

Drag Cut Drifting
principles charges.

-

One of the methods in stoneblasting in coal mines. involved are similar to those of tunnelling. Operation of making boreholes for leading

Th

e

Drilling

explosive

Dry Blasting Agent/Explosive
sisting of sensitizer. ammonium nitrate

- A powder explosive generally conas the major ingredient with no explosive
in kierelbased on

Dynamite

-

guhr but now nitroglycerine.

Originally extended

referred to nitroglycerine absorbed to other high explosive compositions

Dynamite

Gelatine - Explosives based on a gelatinized mixture of NC and NG with other additives. These are also known as gelatines or are also referred to as Some gelatine NC/NG mixtures gelignites. dynamites in continental countries. IF. F ( Low Freezing ) - High explosive composition based on nitroglycerine as sensitizer with other liquid explosive such as DNT, EGDN, etc, to serve for lowering freezing point of nitroglycerine. E Electric Detonator
means of ignition.

Dynamite,

( Electric Cap ) ( for Igniters ) -

A detonator

having

electrical

Electric

Lighters

containing a pyrotechnic composition which is initiated electrically to ignite 1 Electric Storm A storm which

Specially a slotted connector for attachment to igniter cord and the cord. an electrostatic of a charge charge. of explo-

may include

Electra-Explosive
sive in contact

Devices - Devices consisting with an electro-explosive transducer. An explosive

Emulsion

Explosive

in the form of emulsion.

period of time ( usually of the Excitation Time - The minimum order of milliseconds ) for which the detonator fuse-head should be subjected to the current impulse passing through the bridgewire for ignition of the fusehead.

Exploder electric

A device detonators.

which

supplies

electrical

energy

for

initiating

13

IS : 10081-1981 Explosion Explosion Explosive - Liberation of energy sufficiently sudden to cause dynamic stress to the surroundings. Pressure -

Pressure developed on explosion.

or mixture of materials which when initiated - A material undergoes a rapid chemical change with the development of heat are broadly divided into two main Explosives and high pressure. classes. a) Low Explosive - A class of explosives which do not detonate but rather generate a large amount of gas and heat when ignited, Normally pyrotechnics and propellants fall under this class. 13) High Explosives suitably initiated and pressure.
Explosive Explosive Column Limit -

A class of explosives which detonate when and are characterized by high rate of reaction A train of explosive charges.

A

specifying the quantity transported.

limit imposed by the statutory authority of explosive that can be handled/stored or

- An explosive which explodes or detonates on Explosive Primary application of small external energy produced by friction, impact, flame or heat ( see `Initiatory Explosives' ). Explosive Secondary - A term applied to a few high explosives which are not as sensitive as the primary explosives but are more sensitive to initiation by the primary explosives. They are used as booster or exploder charges, for example, tetryl, PETN. Explosive - Strength of an explosive expressed as the perStrength centage equivalent of blasting gelatine which is arbitrarily given a value of 100 percent. This definition may not be applicable for all types of explosives. Switch - A self-contained electrically initiated smal1 unit that causes one or more electric circuits to be opened and/or closed by explosive action. Explosive Explosive Train - A series of explosive charges specially produce a desired outcome of detonation or explosion.

arranged

to

Exudation

an explosive.

-

The

appearance

of oily liquid on the inside or outside of
F

Face Burden

-

See` Burden `.

I4

IS I 10081- 1981
to impact.

Fall Hammer

-

An equipment to assess the sensitiveness of an explosive

Fan Cut -

Seeunder ' Cut `. evolution of methane ( called

Fire Damp Emission - A continuous fire damp ) in coal mine workings. Firing The act of initiating

an explosive. to the

Firing Cable - Insulated wires to connect the shots to be fired source of energy to be used. Firing Circuit - Electrical series-parallel or parallel-series wire in various ways. Firing Device Flammability combustion. Susceptibility

circuits which may be in series, parallel, obtained by connecting detonator lead `, ` Mains Firing `. of a substance to ignition and sustained and that

See` Exploder

Flammability Range - The difference between the minimum maximum percentage by volume of the gas in mixture with air forms a flammable mixture.

Flares - A pyrotechnic ammunition designed to produce a single source of intense light for relatively lon,m durations for target or air-field illumination or for signalling and other purposes. Flyrocks - Rocks thrown at an excessive distance from the blasting site. Fragmentation - The extent to which the blasted material is shattered into small fragments. The size distribution of the blasted material in the muck pile after the blast. Freezing and Thawing Test - A test in which samples of NC-based explosives are subjected to alternate freezing and storage at room temperature to see if any gel breakdown occurs, Frictiop tion. Sensitivity Sensitivity of explosive to initiation by fricTest of

Frictional Impact Test ( Torpedo Friction Test) explosives for sensitivity to impact and friction simultaneously. Fume Characteristics - Characteristics detonation fumes of explosives. ( mainly

toxicity ) of post

Fuse - A slow burning device designed to initiate an explosive system on being subjected to one of the actions such as ignition, stab, percussion or friction. 15

,lS : 10081 - I981 Fuse Detonating Fuse Head Fuse Ignitor jetting flame

-

Seei Detonating
ignition

cord `. device, without lead wires. very hot

An electrical

A pyrotechnic device and is used to ensure ready G

which burns with a ignition of safety fuse.

Gallery Test general application

A standard -

test for studying the safety of explosives in underground coal mines.

for

Gap Sensitivity Gap Test -

See ` Air gap sensitivity
test `.

`.

See` Air gap sensitivity

Gasless Composition release of very small amount

A pyrotechnic material of gaseous products.

that

reacts

with mixfrom in the

Gelatinous Gerbe which presence Gun

Explosive

ture of nitrocellulose

- An explosive consisting of gelatinized and nitroglycerine and other additives.
with 20 mm inside diameter to initiation

A pyrotechnic device usually a jet or spray of fire issues.

Grit Sensitivity
of grit.

-

The

sensitivity

of an explosive `, ` black

Powder -

See` Blasting

powder

po\vder `.

H Halved Cartridge Test - An air gap sensitivity test in which the explosive cartridge is cut into two halves to make a donor and a receptor and the cut ends face each other.
where a deflagra( explosive )

Hang Fire - A charge which fires later than intended tion stage precedes the explosion.

Heat of Explosion
is exploded

- The heat evolved in the absence of oxygen. See ` Abel heat test `.
to which

when

a substance

Heat Test thrown brisance

Heave ( Throw ) -_ The extent
from its original location.

the broken test for `. the

mass of the rock is determination of

Hess Test -

Lead block of an explosive.

compression

High Explosive HE -

See under ` Explosive 16

IS: 10081-1981 Hollow Charge/Shaped Charge - A charge incorporated with cavity to produce what is known as `cavity effect' or ` Munroe effect `. a

Hot Spots - High temperature spots produced in a layer of explosive arising out of impact, friction or adiabatic compression of entrapped gas bubbles.
I

Igniter -

A cartridge

or a charge with an initiating

device.

Igniter Cord safety fuse and sequence.

A cord which burns at a faster rate than that of the \vhich is used to ignite a number of safety fuses in Slotted and recessed metal tubes containwhich are used to connect igniter cord to

Igniter Cord Connectors ing a pyrotechnic composition safety fuse.

Illuminating Flare - A military device containing a pyrotechnic composition ( usually illuminating ) comprising mixtures based on finely powdered substances like aluminium and magnesium, compressed into the form of a candle. Impact Sensitivity ( see ` Call hammer ' ). Jncendiary Sensitivity of explosive to initiation by impact

A substance used for destructive ignition.

Incendivity - The degree to which an explosive is prone to ignite gas mixtures or coal dust in a statutory test. Induction Tiine - In firing electric detonators, the time between the breaking of the fuse wire and the detonation of the base charges. Initiating Efficiency - Ability of an initiator, reliably detonate a high explosive charge. primer or booster, to heat,

Initiation - To start an explosive reaction by means of a spark, impact, friction or a shockwave. Initiator - First element of an explosive or pyrotechnic containing a small amount of primary explosive. train

normally

Initiatory Explosive - A primary explosive alone or in combination with other ingredients used for setting off a secondary explosive usually in a detonator system. Instantaneous velocity. Fuse A fuse which propagates by burning nt high

17

Inverse Initiation of the borehole.

-

Initiation

of an explosive

column

from

the

back

K Kast Brisance Meter - An apparatus for measuring compression ( crushing ) of a copper cylinder. L the application of energy Lag Time - Time interval betkjeen electric detonator and the breaking of its electric circuit. to an the lrisancc by

Lances - Paper tubes of light construction measuring 6 to 9 mm dia and 50 to 75 mm length filled with colourcd fire composition, which is charged into the tube by temping only. These are used in set pieces, attached to a wooden framework and are meant to produce outlines of the figures of the desired pattern such as a flag, words, etc. Lanyard distance. A chord or cable for setting off a firing mechanism from a

Lead Block Test ( Trawl Lead Block Test ing the power of an explosive by the expansion lead block after firing a charge of explosive. Lead Plate Test detonators. A test which Wires ) is employed

) - A method of mcasurcaused in the cavity of a for testing the strength attached of to

Lead Wires ( Leg electric detonators. Leakage resistance

Insulated

wires permanently due to insufficient

Resistance - Leakage of current of the wire leading to the shot. See under ` Cut `.

insulation

Line Cut -

Liquid Oxygen Explosive ( LOX ) - Charged an absorbent cartridge made of combustible oxygen.

prepared ingredients

by soaking in liquid

Liquefaction - Segregation of liquid present in the explosive including segregation of liquefiable oxidizer salts in the explosives by extraneous agencies such as moisture pick up. Loading Loading practice. Loading Filling Density Pattern of blast holes with explosives. Charge Pattern per unit length explosives of borehole in mining

of loading 18

into the blast holes.

IS : 10881- 1981 Low Explosive Seeunder ` Explosives `.

Low Freeze Explosive ( Polar Explosive ) - A nitroglycerine based explosive incorporating a low freeze mixture of nitroglycerine and ethyIene glycol dinitratc ( EGDN ) with or lvithout other antifreezing ingredients. M Magazine - An approved store lvhich is exclusively appropriated keeping of explosives. to the

Magazine Shoes -- Shoes specially made lvithout iron,/steel in the soles and heels for wearing jn magazines. Mains Firing - Firing of explosives from mains of electric supply. by energising the mains circuit

Match - Cotton wicking impregnated with gunpowder, used for conveying fire to a piece or parts of pyrotechnical devices. Match Fuse - A stick of match fuse safety cigar shaped bulb of a smouldering composition over a layer of inert material around one chemically treated to merely char but not burst Mats ( Blasting ) Methyl Violet Teit and double based ) nitrogen to be evolved tions and change in pink. Middle Cut Seec Blasting mat `. - A test for stability of propellant ( single based by measurement of time required for oxides of by thermal decomposition under specified condithe colour of methyl violet paper to bright salmon consisting of a firm solid or compositions formed end of a wooden splinter, into flame on heating.

Seeunder ` Cut `.

Mine ( Explosives ) - An encased explosive or chemical charge placed in position so that it detonates when its target touches or moves near it or when it is touched by remote control. Minimum Booster - Minimum quantity of booster required able detonation of a non-cap sensitive explosive charge. Misfire detonate. A charge or a part of charge which for See` Plaster shooting `. A method of blasting to prevent fly rocks. any reason for relifails to

Mud Capping -

MuflIed Blasting -

Multiple Fuse Igniter - A device for igniting many lengths of safety fuse simultaneously by means of a master fuse. 19

IS : 18881 - 1981 Munroe Effect ( Cavity Energy Effect ) - The axial reinforcement of waves in a particular direction as a result of explosion. Muzzle Burst weapon. Muzzle Flash the barrel. Muzzle Velocity Explosion of a projectile near or at the muzzle of a iea\es

Flame at the muzzle of a gun after a projectile The velocity of a projectile N

at the muzzle end.

Napalm - Aluminium soap in powder form, gelatinized use in bombs of flame throwers. NC NCN Nitrocellulose. Nitrocarbonitrate.

in gasoline for

NCN Blasting Agent - A blasting agent either in po\vder or slurry form based essentially on nitrodarbonitrates. NG Nitroglycerine. Fumes containing various oxides of nitrogen. Delay detonators containing nonNitrous Fumes -

Non-electric Delay Detonators electric means of initiation.

Non-incendive Short Period Delay Detonators detonators for use in gassy and dusty coal mines.

Specially designed

Non-permitted Explosive - Explosives whose use is not permitted for blasting in underground gassy and dusty coal mines. 0 Obturate - To seal an explosive device to prevent particular direction. Ogive Ordinary explosive gas in a

A curved or front section of a projectile or signal. Detonator See` Plain detonator `.

Ordnance Over-cut Overdrive Oxidizer -

Large size military guns and mortars. Seeunder ` Cut `. High energy initiation of the explosive column. A substance that furnishes the reactant oxygen.

Oxygen Balance - Oxygen content relative to the total oxygen required for the complete oxidation of all oxidizable material. 20

IS:18881P PAD - Propellant device ). actuated device formerly - Incomplete CAD ( cartridge

1981

actuated

Partial Detonation

detonation. plan of holes to he drilled for

Pattern ( of Blasting ) blasting a face. Pentalite PETN Pentaerythritol

A dimensional and TNT.

Mixture of PETN

tetranitrate. A small capsule containing primary explosives holes blast-

Percussion Primer initiated by a firing pin.

Perimeter Blasting - The firing of lightly charged perimeter either prior to or at the same time as the main blast ( see ` Cushion ing `, ` Smooth blasting ' and ' Pre-splitting ' ). Permitted Detonator and dusty coal mines. -

A specially designed detonator for use in gassy

Permitted Explosive - A specially designed explosive suitable for use in gassy and dusty coal mines, which has passed certain statutory tests. Phelgmatization Picrite See` Desensitization `.

Nitroguanidine.

Plain Detonator - A metal tube closed at one end, charged with the initiating explosive consolidated under pressure, and left open at the other It is intended for use with safety fuse. end. Plaster Shooting - Also known as ` Secondary blasting ' and ` Mud capping `. It is a technique where explosive charges are blasted on the rock surface without drilling any holes. The charge is usually covered by mud or clay, and hence the name ` Mud capping `. Plastic Explosive - An explosive having plastic properties which be moulded to the desired shape. Polar Explosive Seec Low freeze explosives `. a can

Pop ( Popping, Pop Shooting ) - The breaking of rocks by firing small charge within holes which have been drilled into them. Post-detonation Fumes Fumes generated by blasting of explosives. Explosive in powder form. 21

Powder Explosive

IS : 10081 - 1981 Powderman ( Powder Monkey, Shot Firer ) See` Shot firer `.

Powder Van - A covered van specially safely ( also called ` Explosive van ' ).

designed to carry an explosive

Power - A measure of the amount of energy released by an explosive on detonation and hence of its ability. to do useful work ( same as ( Strength `, ` Weight strength ' ). Power Factor See` Blasting ratio `. An explosion which occurs

Premature Explosion/Detonation earlier than it is intended. Primer Priming explosive. See` Booster `. Charge -

In detonator manufacture,

the charge of initiating

Propellant - An explosive which by its regularity of burning produces sustained pressure in the bore of a gun for imparting acceleration to the projectile. Pyramid Cut Seeunder ` Cut `. materials for the

Pyrotechnic - An explosive containing combustible production of flame, heat, light, smoke or sound. R

trinitramine ( also knoavn as ` Cyclonite RDX - Cyclotrimethylene Hexogen ' ) , The origin of the word is ` Research Department Explosive `. Reflection Shooting - A method of seismic prospecting in which charges are fired singly or in multiples to get reflected seismic signals. Refraction Shooting - A method of seismic prospecting in which heavy charges of explosives are fired for obtaining refracted signals. Relays See` Delay detonator relays `.

Ripping - In coal mining, the removal of stone after recovery of coal to produce a road of normal size. The operation is commonly associated with longwall method of mining coal. Rotational Firing ( Sequence Firing ) predetermined order. 22 The firing of charges in

IS : 10081-1981 S Safety Distance a) Inside ( ISD ) - The distance between a building or stack containing explosives and other such building or stacks inside an enclosed explosive area which will prevent the immediate direct propagation of explosion or fire from one to the other by missile, flame or blast. b) Outside ( OSD ) - The distance between a building or stack containing explosives and other buildings, railways, waterways, and main roads outside an enclosed explosive area beyond which ignition or explosion of explosives or dangerous goods will not cause severe structural damage to the building, etc, or serious physical injury to persons. Safety Fuse - A fuse for blasting which burns and does not explode and which does not contain its own means of ignition, and which is of such strength and construction and contains an explosive in such quantity that the burning of such fuse would not communicate laterally with other like fuses. used to remove salaSalamander Blasting - A blasting technique mander or solidified slag from blast furnances. Sand Bomb Test ( Sand Test ) - A test to assess the strength of a detonator in terms of crushing of sand in a closed chamber. Secondary Blasting - A process of breaking, with explosives, boulders from an initial blast which are too large for immediate handling ( see ` BIaster shooting ' ). Seismic Explosives prospecting. Specially designed explosives used for seismic component

Sensitivity - Susceptibility to react to external stimuli.

of an explosive or pyrotechnic

Shaped Charges - An explosive charge designed to produce specific effects by the inclusion of a re-entrant conical or V-shape usually lined with metal. Sheet Explosive An explosive in the form of a sheet. during which an item will

Shelf Life - Length of time in storage remain in serviceable condition.

Shock Wave - A compression wave caused by sudden rise in pressure due to release of a large quantity of gaseous products at high temperature resulting from decomposition of the explosive material. 23

IS : 18881 - 1981 Short Firing The firing of explosive charges. A delay detonator \vith functioning time

Shot Delay ( Detonators ) of the order of milliseconds.

Shot Firer - A person who is authorized and licenced to prepare explosive charges and carry out blast operations ( same as ` Pojz-derman `, ` Powder monkey ' ). Shot Firing Cables ( Leads ) Side-cut seeunder `Cut'. A single shot pistol Propellant designed to project pyrotechnic only. See` Firing cable `.

Signal Pistol signals.

Single Base Propellant

based on nitrocelluiosc See` Blasting agents `.

Slurry Blasting Agents ( SBA ) -

Slurry Explosives ( SE ) - An explosive made by sensitizing a thickened slurry of oxidizing salts, fuels and other ingredients ( same as ' Water gel explosives ' ). Smooth Blasting - A method for firing holes in such a manner as to avoid excessive fracturing with the aim of preserving a smooth outline ( see also ECushion blasting `, ` Perimeter blasting ' ). Socket sive. A partially blasted shot hole containing undetonated explo-

Solid Blasting is available.
of rocks.

Blasting

any solid rock face when only one free face

NOTE- This method is not limited only to blasting of coal but applicv to all types See ` Acoustic warning `. ) inter-

Sound Signal -

Spacers - Non-explosive material ( for example, wood, ceramic posed between charges to extend the column of explosives. Spacing The linear distance between the collars of drill holes.

Spalling - The breaking off of a scab of material result of the reflection of shock waves. Spontaneous input. Ignition Ignition occurring

from a free face

as a

without external

energy

Sporting Powder cellulose propellant. Squib An electrically

Powder used for filling of cartridges fired igniter. 24

with a nitro-

IS : 18881 - 1981 Stamping - The process of filling up holes with after they have been charged with explosive.

sand,

clay,

soil, etc,

Star - A pyrotechnic light signal of short duration ( but not a flash ) that burn as a speck of light in the air. Steady State Velocity - Steady charge after an initial peak pressure.

velocity

attained

by an explosive

Stray Currents - The leakage currents from the electrically operated equipment, current conductors, etc, that may energize the electric shotfiring circuit resulting in accidental detonation. Strength Streaming See ` Power `, ` Weight strength `.

Velocity - The velocity of the products of detonation in the direction of travel of the detonation wave. Sympathetic Detonation - Detonation of an explosive charge by explosion of another charge not in contact. T Tamping TNT -

caused

The

act of consolidating

explosives

or stemming in the

drill hole.

Trinitrotoluene.
-

Toe Blasting

blasting.

A technique
Test -

of blasting to avoid-toe formation in bench
See ` Friction

Torpedo Train Trauzl Trunk -

Friction

test `.

see ' Delay `. Test See ` Lead block test `.

are connected.

Line -

The

main line of detonating fuse to which branch lines

Explosive - Generally refers to an explosive obtained by mixing two components, where neither of the two components is an explosive by itself ( also known as ` Binary Explosives ' ). Two-component U Under-Cut Underwater See under ` Cut `. Blasting -

Blasting of explosive under water. 25

Is :10081-1981 V Vacuum Stability-Test for determination of stability of explosives. In this test, the thermal decomposition of a sample is followed by observing the rise in pressure of the gases given off in vacuum. Verey Pistol - A popular but obsolete term for a pistol shaped firing device for pyrotechnic cartridges, now called ( Pyrotechnic pistol `. VOD Velocity of detonation ( See ` Detonation velocity ' ). W Watergel Explosives see` Slurry explosives `. done using water column in a bore-

Water Stemming hole. Wedge-Cut -

Stemming

Seeunder ` Cut `. See` Power of explosives `.

Weight Strength -

26

