IS 12743 : 1988 IEC Pub 81@ (1884)

Indian Standard GUIDE ON METHODS OF MEASUREMENT OF SHORT DURATION TRANSIENTS ON LOW VOLTAGE POWER AND SIGNAL LINES
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

UDC 621'3'015'3

0 BIS 1990

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

M A N A K B H A V A N , 9 B A H A D U R S H A H Z A F A R MARG NEW DELHI 110002 October I990 Price Group 14

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 (1984)

Indian Standard

GUIDEONMETHODSOFMEASUREMENTOFSHORT DURATIONTRANSIENTSONLOWVOLTAGEY'3WER ANDSIGNALLINES
NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical with IEC Pub 816 (1984) `Guide on methods of measurement of short duration transients on low voltage power and signal lines', issued by International Electrotechnical Commission @EC), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 21 March 1989, on the recommendation of the Electromagnetic Compatibility Sectional Committee (LTDC 22) and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical with those used in Indian Standards, attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words `International Standard' appear referring to this standard. they should be read as `Indian Standard'. b) Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards the current practice is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. CROSS REFERENCES The Electromagnetic Compatibility Sectional Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following lEC Publications and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this Indian Standard: IEC Rub 27: Letter symbols to be used in electrical technology KEC Pub 50: International electrotechnical vocabulary (IEV) IEC Pub 617: Graphical symbols for diagrams Only the English language text in the International Standard has been retained while adopting it in this Indian Standard. As a result of dropping the French text, the consequential changes in page numbers have been effected

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 (1984)

CONTENTS
Page

1.

scope ..................................................................................................................................................
Characteristics of transients ............................................................................................................... 2.1 Environment-produced transients ................................................................................................
2.2 Appliance-produced transients .................................................................................................... 2.3 Parameters to be measured ...........................................................................................................

2.

3.

Characteristics of mechanisms of coupling between transient sources and potentially susceptible devices ............................................................................................................................ 3.1 Propagation modes ....................................................................................................................... Susceptibility/Immunity ..................................................................................................................... 4.1 Damage effects ............................................................................................................................ 4.2 Malfunction effects ......................................................................................................................

7 8 9 9 10 11 11 12 12 13 13 18 19 22 ;2 23 30 31 45 49
54 55

4.

5.

Instrumentation.................................................................................................................................. 5.1 Obtaining statistical data on parameters of transients ................................................................. 5.2 Transient counter......................................................................................................................... 5.3 Peak voltmeter.. ........................................................................................................................... 5.4 Other parameters .......................................................................................................................... 5.5 Waveform recording and analysis ............................................................................................... 5.6 Transient energy measurements .................................................................................................. 5.7 Frequency domain measurement. ................................................................................................ 5.8 Special inexpensive devices ........................................................................................................

6.

Measurement techniques ................................................................................................................... 6.1 Measurement of conducted transients ......................................................................................... 6.2 Measurement of radiated transients .............................................................................................

FIGURES ....................................................................................................................................................

APPENDIX A-Method for measuring transient conducted emissions ..................................................... APPENDIX B-Equipment input impedance ............................................................................................. APPENDIX C-Example of a monitoring probe ....................................................................................... Bibliography and references ........................................................................................................................

2

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984)

INTRODUCTION

Transients appearing on power and signal lines are capable of producjng a variety of effects ranging from minor equipment performance degradation to catastrophic insulation breakdown. They have a wide variety of waveforms, which depend upon the mechanism of generation. Furthermore, those that originate from switching a.c. power on and off wil! have a form that depends upon the exact moment in the power cycle at which switching takes place, but in addition can have very complicated micro (detailed) and macro (overall) waveform characteristics. Because of this variety and the frequently random time of occurrence, there is considerable difficulty in making a suitable measurement of a transient. The advent of new technologies in device design and manufacture has increased concern for identifying more precisely the effects of transients. In particular, a solid-state device can be susceptible even to an overvoltage of very short (nanosecond) time duration. Furthermore, because of variations in the waveforms, to have a precise measurement of any given transient would require the measurement of a large number of parameters. Even if one measures the exact waveform of a transient, for control purposes, one must then describe the transient with a finite number of parameter values. The choice of these parameters and their expected range of values is still a matter of some speculation, and the proper method of measurement is stiB considered by some to be an open question. Modern types of test equipment provide measurement capabilities not available previously, but they must be used with particular care. Accordingly, there is a need for well-defined and accepted methods of measuring transients for two major reasons, namely so that:
a)

measurements made by different laboratories may be compared;

6) meaningful limits may be placed on transients generated by particular types of equipment and on the susceptibility of particular equipment to transients. This guide has been prepared to assist in meeting these requirements. Note that in this guide the concern is with transient phenomena which are not line-frequency related and are of duration no greater than 40 ms. It is also not concerned with sustained voltage changes or fluctuations.

1. scope This report is intended to give guidance on methods of measurement of short duration transients on low voltage power and signal lines.

( IEC page 7 >

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984)
2. Characteristics of transients

Transients may be classified according to their origin as follows: a) those produced by the environment, that is to say, by lightn.ing; b) those produced by electrical switching or faults; c) those produced internally within the circuits of particular equipment. 2. I Environment-produced transients These transients arise from lightning and are most severe on overhead and unscreened cable sections. At the point closest to the point at which the transient is generated, thk rise time can be short and the amplitude high. The rise time and fall time can be considerably lengthened and the amplitude reduced as the transient propagates along the network. Typically, ,such transients have rise times of the order of microseconds and fall times from 50 ps to 50 ms and may be oscillatory. The effects on inner conductors are reduced in the case of screened cables and cables buried in areas of low ground resistivity.

2.2 Appliance-produced transients Transients produced by appliances arise from three basic causes: a) the operation of a mechanical or semiconductor switch; b) turn-on currents associated with the saturation properties of an iron-core transformer or starting currents in motors; c) faults within equipment. The transient produced by a switch or fault can range from a simple surge or dip (sag) to a very complex waveform caused by repeated "restriking" of an arc as the contacts of a mechanical switch separate. The most serious transients usually arise as a result. of breaking an inductive circuit, for example, the blowing of a fuse. In many cases, special techniques, such as placing capacitors across the contacts, will reduce the magnitude of the transients generated, and in other cases suppression can be obtained by the use of semiconductor devices. The transients can have rise times of the order of a few nanoseconds in the immediate vicinity of the switch, that is to say, within a fraction of a metre; however, at distances of several metres from the switch, the rise time will be considerably increased due to attenuation of the line of the higher frequency components. Switching of transformers produces transients which may be of the order of se&al times the peak line voltage but will have rise times of the order of tens of microseconds.

2.3 Parameters to be measured Because of the complex and variable nature of transients, it is difficult to specify which parameters should be measured. Under such circumstances, it is useful to examine the susceptibility characteristics of the equipment under consideration and to divide these into several categories in order to determine the parameters to be measured (see Clause 4): (1; rhout: which are susceptible to a restricted band of frequencies, such as radio or c`rrrier frequency receivers:

( TEC page 9 )

4

IS 12743 : ED89 IEcPlIb 816(1!@4) b) those which are susceptible to a broad band of low radio frequencies (for example, a mains rectifier). For such devices the peak voltage is usually the critical parameter; but energy may also be an important parameter; c) those which are susceptible to a broad band of frequencies in the higher frequency bands. The critical quantity is the rate of rise of the pulse. Digital equipment is often susceptible to this parameter, and destruction of device3 may also occur.

Some general measurement capabilities can be desirable but one may not be able to measure all parameters with a single instrument. For convenience, these parameters may be classified according to whether they give information in the time or frequency domains. Figure I, page 62, illustrates the possible complex nature of a typical transient and some of the time domain parameters that may be used to describe it. In addition. effective pulse strength (voltage x time) and energy content may be significant. The most common frequency domain parameter used to describe a transient is the spectrum amplitude. The frequency vs. phase characteristic may also be important but is not usually measured because of difficulties in both measurement and use of the data. Where the interference is discontinuous in nature, time weighting techniques such as those used in the C.I.S.P.R. instrument may also be app!ied. The unweighted component is of interest .in any case. 2.3.1 Relation between time domain and jrequency domain parameters Figure 2 a), page 63, shows a representative waveform of one type of transient disturbance produced during a switching-off operation of a 220 V auxiliary conductor. Figure 2 b), page 63, shows a spectrum amplitude representation of such a waveform. The relationship between the spectrum amplitude plot and the time domain waveform is best explained by comparing the relevant characteristics for a trapezoidal pulse. The spectrum amplitude of a symmetrical trapezoidal pulse with the mean pulse time T is, in the frequency range below f = I/n 7: independent of frequency (this portion of the spectrum amplitude curve is parallel to the abscissa) and has a magnitude equal to the amplitude-time area of the pulse. Above the frequency j" = I/n T the envelope of the spectrum varies as l/j: If the trapezoidal pulse has rise and fall times t. the envelope of the spectrum amplitude above the frequency l/n I varies as I `,i.`.

Note that on Figure 2 b) the abscissa is marked in megahertz on a logarithmic scale and the ordinate is given in decibels with respect to I yVs. i I ~VS corresponds to IOh uV in I MHz.) The spectrum amplitude representation can be calculated using standard Fourier integral techniques. When the pulses ;Ire repeated iit rcaguiar iriterval5. ;i discrctc spectrum rather than a continuous spectrum is obtained. In that case, a representation corresponding to Figure 2 b) can be used. b u t t h e ~tir\e blown c o r r e s p o n d s ro the amplitude of the discrete components (envelope cur\`?) w h i c h a r c s p a c e d on the frequency scale at a distance corresponding to the repetition r:rte.

( IEC page 11 !

IS 12743:1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) Accordingly, the following interpretation can be placed on Figure 2 b), page 63: the low-frequency or flat portion of the curve is a level determined `by the effective area under the voltage-time' curve shown in Figure 2 a), page 63 ;

b) the high-frequency portion, above about 20 MHz, falls off at a rate inversely
proportional to the square of the frequency, and the points at which this rate of fall-off begins are determined by the rate of rise of the initial part of the waveform (that is to say to the amplitude U,);

C) the peak in the spectrum amplitude curve appears at a frequency equal to the
frequency of oscillation of the transient. Thus, if one is given a spectrum corresponding to that in Figure 2 b), om? can interpret it in terms of the important characteristics of the originating transient waveform. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 2 b), at point p which is the point of intersection of the actual curve with the low frequency (horizontal) portion of the curve, by extending from this point a line with slope proportional to l/f (shown dotted on Figure 2 b)) and one with a slope proportional to l/f2 (the actual spectrum curve shown in the solid line), one can obtain, from the scales shown on the right-hand portion of Figure 2 b) the actual maximum voltage dB(V) and the rate of rise dB(kV/us) [lo]*. Measuring practice sets limits on the viewing time in time domain measurements and on bandwidth in frequency domain measurements. Therefore, if transients of unknown characteristics (amplitude, rise time, duration, repetition frequency) are to be measured. the measurements should be performed both in the time domain and the frequency domain. In this way, maximum information about the' transients can be obtained.

2.3.2 Importance of various transient parameters a) Rise time The rise time characterizes the transient in its amplitude-frequency relation (see Fourier series development). The shorter the rise time, the more extensive is the disturbing action in the frequency spectrum, Normally one would expect the risks of performance degradation of a susceptible device to be dependent on its acceptance bandwidth, among other factors. It has been reported that, in practice, the rise time/amplitude relation shows that 5% of the disturbances have significant components a b o v e IO MHz and only I % a b o v e 3 0 M H z . ( H o w e v e r , e v e n v e r y l o w l e v e l components. at VHF may interfere with radio reception.) Amplitude The amplitude is especially significant for long transients (for example, > I ps). It can be the most significant quantity relating to performance degradation or semiconductor device destruction.

The energy of the transient, although related to the amplitude, is also dependent on the internal impedance of the disturbance source and is an important parameter with regard to component destruction.

( IEC I'"S" 1 3 )

6

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 f 1984) d) Duration

The importance of the parameter depends on the time constant of the susceptible equipment in question. For logic systems, the chances of release of the circuits controlled by the synchronization clock may be increased. e) Range of frequencies As mentioned in paragraph a), the spectrum of the disturbance may not be significant above 10 MHz to 30 MHz (maximum). fl Repetition frequency In general, a knowledge of the repetition frequency is important for estimating the disturbing effect of transients. For analogue systems, its importance depends .on the time constant of the susceptible equipment and can involve an integration phenomenon. For logic systems, the risks of failure may be most severe if the transient and control signal- are in phase.

3. Characteristics of mechanisms of coupling between transient sources and potentially susceptible
devices

The transients of concern there are assumed to be coupled to the susceptible device primarily by conduction. They are usually initiated by some switching action on the connected power line. The switching action could be at any point either locally (on the immediate low-voltage distribution circuit) or at a more remote point on a high-voltage transmission line. Transients may also originate from' atmospheric effects, for example, lightning, either as a direct strike on a high-voltage line or from a ground stroke by induction into a high-voltage or low-voltage distribution circuit. When the susceptible device is located close to the original disturbance, the coupling is primarily by induction.

In such a path, the effect of the coupling is described in terms of three basic parameters :
a) the attenuation characteristic as a function of frequency of the line; b) the nature of the loading on the line;

c) the geometry in relation to the ground plane. Since power lines are very rarely loaded in their characteristic impedance, one can expect multiple reflections to occur on the line at each discontinuity, for example, wherever a load is connected. Reflection characteristics are of considerable importance in shaping transients, especially those produced by switching operations. The consequence is ringing, at a frequency usually in the range of tens of kilohertz to tens of megahertz, which causes the spectrum amplitude of the transient to have a peak at that particular frequency. Similar ringing is also possible as a result of conducted transients produced by appliances; however, the separation between discontinuities is smaller and therefore the ringing frequency can be much higher. However, it should be noted that the attenuation of the line increases with frequency, so that the ringing would usually be observed only for transients which are measured at positions relatively close to the source.

( 1EC page 15 >

IS 12743:1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) The possibility of coupling as the result of induction (both inductive and capacitive coupling) between a power line and a communication line must also be considered. This is especially important in industrial plants where power cables and control or signal cables run side by side over relatively large distances. Generally, such coupling mechanisms can be reduced by using twisted pair or coaxial cables and by placing the cables in screwed metal conduits. Another source of coupling is a finite ground plarle *impedance. Many transients, for example, are propagated in common mode on transmission lines and the return current flows through the ground plane. If the ground return path is not of very low impedance or the points of connection to the ground return path are close to similar return points for a sensitive circuit, significant differences in potential can be produced. Balanced symmetrical circuits can be used to minimize the effects of common-mode coupling, but any small imbalance in the sensitive circuit may be critical. In the case of direct coupling along the power cable from one equipment to another, low-pass filters can often be used to suppress unwanted effects. 3.1 Propagation modes The four general modes of propagation for power lines are shown in Figure 3, page 64. Similar modes of propagation exist on signal lines. As shown in Figure 3, there are two main modes of conducted propagation: asymmetrical or common-mode (CM) and symmetrical or differential/balanced mode (DM). Nearly all commercial products have a protective conductor. In some domestic installations, a two-wire power system with no protective conductor is used. Most low-voltage installations have the protective conductor connected to earth at the service entrance. rul bume purposes, measurements are made from each phase to earth. The relations between phase A, B, common mode, UCM, and differential mode, UoM, open-circuit voltages are shown in Figure 4, page 65. If the phase voltages are, respectively, 4 and _B, then

uD M

=/j-g

Measured impedances between phase and earth are shown in Figure 5, page 66 [I]. This impedance plays a critical role in controlling the insertion loss between the transient source and the point of measurement. Consider the various paths as illustrated in Figure 6a). page 67, [2]. It has been found that the mean differential m o d e insertion loss shown in Figure 66). page 68, was controlled by the mismatch of the various impedances. The method of signal injection used a current probe technique shown in Figure 6~). page 69. Note that the differential mode loss is more or less independent of freqliency up to 30 MHz. The differential mode impedance has a well-defined value, for example, 50 R for a coaxial line and higher for a balanced line. In common mode, up to perhaps several tens of kiiohdz, the impedance can be expected to have a value approximately equal to the :,:.i~lance of a line (~I' equivalenr length and grounded by a low or zero impedance.

( IE(: page 17 1

8

IS 12743 : 1989

IEC Pub 816 ( 1984)
4. Susceptibility/Immunity

. Certain types of electrical equipment are potentially susceptible to transients unless suitable preventive measures have been incorporated to provide immunity in the environment. In general, long-term experience in the use of cables, connectors, capacitors, insulating materials, transformers, switches, etc., has established the margins required to enable transient overvoltages to be withstood, and for many components the appropriate overvoltage tests are specified. However, for equipment incorporating semiconductor devices there are various forms of susceptibility likely to occur, including catastrophic damage and temporary malfunction. Some of these effects are discussed below, in particular, because transient measuring and analysis equipment must not suffer these effects.

4. I

Damage `eifecrs Damage effects are largely confined to semiconductor devices although insulation failure of other components can occur because of particularly high amplitude transients. for example, nearby lightning strokes. Power semiconductor devices connected to the supply lines are subjected to the full transient voltage, but devices of adequate rating are selected for such applications based upon earlier experience of device failures. Semiconductor devices in low-level signal and control circuits are only coupled indirectly to the supply lines, but damage can occur since the devices in general have a fairly low voltage and/or current rating. These coupling mechanisms involve high frequency components of the transients and may be difficult to assess in many applications, so that preventive measures to protect the devices require some consideration. Examples of damage effects are given below.

4. I. I

Power semiconductor devices These devices can be damaged by voltage transients (spikes) with durations as short as about I ns. The likelihood of damage is a function of transient amplitude, duration, `polarity, rate of rise, position on the supply waveform, etc., as well as the device parameters. The initial breakdown of the device is likely to be followed by a high current discharge from the supply, which causes catastrophic damage. Typical devices which have been found liable to damage are rectifier diodes in electronic equipment and thyristors used for motor speed control.

.

1.12

Low-level signal and control circuits While these circuits are not generally directly connected to the low-voltage supply mains. there is coupling between them via the d.c. supply circuit and by induced effects in signal and control cables, so that transients of reduced amplitude can be injected into rhe circuits. Various semiconductor devices liable to damage by relatively low-level rranslents are incorporated in these circuits, for example, integrated circuits, certain discrete devices [such as field effect transistors and special purpose diodes (such as tunnel dIodesI.

( IEC page 1 3 )

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) 4.2 Malfunction effects Various forms of equipment malfunction can be caused by transients generated on low-voltage supply lines, which may or may not be coupled to signal lines, on a wide range of `types of equipment. Some of these effects could create safety hazards, for example, fire or explosion in chemical manufacturing plants or sudden changes in motor speed. However, the majority of the malfunctions likely to occur are relatively harmless, possibly producing only a temporary effect which is quite acceptable to the user, for example, a small transient change in a meter reading.

In practice, two different types of transients on the supply are found to be the cause of most of the observed malfunctions, that is to say voltage spikes with durations of the order of 1 ps and voltage dips or sags (reductions lasting for about 10 ms and longer). Yoltage dips are not covered in this guide, apart from the following note.
yofe. - Voltage dips (sags), that is to say reductions in the supply voltage to electronic equipment lasting for about IO ms or longer, can upset the operation of the equipment because of the effects of reduction in the internal stabilized d.c. voltage supply. The effects can be very drastic on certain types of equipmenr and examples are given as follows: a) Digiral systems Serious malfunctioning of digital systems will occur if the d.c. voltage supply is reduced significantly. The effects produced can include corruption of data system "lock-up", loss of programme, etc.

b) Control systems
These systems are liable to suffer serious malfunctioning, causing disruption bf the control function

C) Insfrumentation
Most types of instrumentation are

to

malfunction seriously as a result of voltage

(sags).

d) Alarm and rrip systems
False operation of these systems is likely to be caused by voltage dips (sags).

42.1 Effects of voltage spikes a) Digital systems Equipment which incorporates digital systems (such as computers, microprocessors, and instrumentation) can be affected by voltage spikes which are coupled info the logic circuits and corrupt the data. The effects may be overcome by various error correction techniques but in extreme cases the corruption may cause serious effects (for example, incorrect control function, systems "lock-up", unwanted change of programme, and feeding incorrect data into a store). b) Control systems Control equipment can be affected by induced voltage spikes causing a malfunction of
the system.

..,

c) Instrumentation Incorrect indication by some types of equipment can be produced by the effects o f spikes. d) Alarm and trip. systems Undesired operation or failure of operation of these systems can be triggered IL-J> voltage spikes.

( IEC page 2 1)

10

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) e) Equipment incorporating power semiconductor devices Motor speed control by semiconductors can be affected by voltage spikes and typicall> takes the form of a sudden transient increase in speed. Heating conrrols are not so drastically affected by single voltage spikes, but repetitive spikes could cause a large change in temperature.

5. Instrumentation In this clause various methods of measarement are described. In some cases t h e instruments are available commercially, in others' they have been constructed i n laboratories for particular experiments. The objective is to provide the user with guidance on' the significant characteristics of all such instruments. In general, an instrument can be considered to consist of four basic parts as follo\vs:
a) detector; b) processor;

c) output display;
d) control system.

These parts are related as shown in Figure 7, page 70. The basic type of instrument is determined by the type of detector. Instruments having similar detectors but produced by different manufacturers may differ principally in the ways in which other functions are performed. Indeed, in some cases these functions may be adjustable or in f&t performed to various extents by auxiliary apparatus under the control of the operator. The instruments are described in several categories. In each case, fundamental principles of operation are described along with the relationship between fundamental parameters and those frequently stated in commercial literature. 5.1
Obtaining statistical data on parameters of transients

The fact that transients are so -variable from one instance to the next, means that. except where some particular significance can be associated with a particular event, significance must be associated with a range of expected transient parameters. In . particular, it is of interest to know not only the maximum value of a particular parameter that may occur but also the mean value and the associated variance of that parameter. For many systems, there is a minimum repetition rate that can cause effective equipment performance degradation, so that unless a succession of transients can appear in a short period, those transients are of no consequence. This sub-clause identifies parameters that must be c o n s i d e r e d selected for gathering such data.
a) Required qualities
in the instrument\

Such an instrument should: - be portable;

11

IS 12743:1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) - operate automatically, for example, record very low occurrence interference (less than once a month); - not lose information when a power break occurs; - have external triggering facilities in order that only certain types of transients are recorded ; - record the time of occurrence (day, hour, minute, second); - enable setting of a known threshold level: - record direction of origin of transient; - be insensitive to conducted or radiated disturbances. b) Characteristics - Dead time: The dead time is the time during which the recorder is incapable of resolving separate transients. It may vary from 100 PLS to I 5. - Range of frequencies: Accuracy of 3 dB from 20 Hz to 50 MHz (in order to take into account paragraphs a ) and e) of Sub-clause 2.3.2). - Repetition frequency: From 10 times/millisecond to I/month. - Power supply: Battery floating (except where used for long test periods). 5.2 Transient counter These are generally fairly simple instruments designed to detect and count transients which exceed one or more preselected amplitudes. They may also incorporate facilities which respond to transient duration and indicate transient polarity. In some cases, the recorders are battery operated to maintain operation regardless of mains perturbations. Typically these counters respond to transients with durations longer than 0.1 us to 1 PLS. The accuracy is usually about 5% to 10%. The input resistance is typically 10 kfi to I MR. Various forms of readout are used: a) electromechanical counter; h,J printout; 1.1 pen recorder. The maximum rate at which transients can be recorded may be limited, for example, about 25 fiz with electromechanical counter readout.

These instruments, which are also referred to as peak-hold or memory voltmeters, measure the transient peak amplitude and store the data until reset. The response to short duration transients ICI determined by the effective charge time constant of the

( IEC page 2 5 >

12

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) measuring circuit which is typically in the range 0.02 ps to 0.3 ps. The accuracy is usually about 1% to 3%. The input resistance is generally in the range I MR to IO MQ. Furthermore, some instruments contain switchable broadband filters at the input which enable one to obtain also some frequency domain information. The readout can take various forms:: such as: a) meter reading or numerical dis&ay; b) strip chart recorder; c) printout; d) digital output; e) analogue output. The voltmeter stores the value of the peak voltage during a particular time period, and this period may be determined by an automatic or manual reset. Some designs incorporate an analogue to digital converter, and also possibly a microprocessor to provide sophisticated control and storage facilities. It is important that the voltmeter should indicate when overload has occurred. 5.4 Other parameters Many other time-domain parameters are recognized in addition to those mentioned in Sub-clauses 5.2 and 5.3, such as rise time, pulse duration, fall time, etc. However, there are no commercially available instruments that effectively measure these parameters. If they are to be measured they can best be observed using the techniques discussed in Sub-clause 5.5. Here, however, any value obtained is subject to subjective evaluation of observed values.

5.5 Waveform recording and analysis The devices most suitable for recording such transients are tape or paper recorders, oscilloscopes, and digital waveform recorders.

5.5.1 Waveform recording 5.5.1.1 Magnetic tape recording Magnetic recorders offer various possibilities for measuring transient phenomena. One of their advantages is the possibility of dissociating the recording process from the analysis of the transient. Recording of The recording can be carried out over a long period of time with a choice pass-bands. Using frequency modulation it is possibie to record over a range of frequencies extending down to zero. Systems of transient measurement using magnetic recorders have a rather limited pass-band. Attention should be paid to achieving the optimum signal-to-noise ratio by choice of tape speed.

13

( IEC page 2 7 )

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984)
Nevertheless, this type of recording has the following advantages: it records the complete waveform, provided the transient appears while the recorder is activated: it is possible to record a long duration disturbance with components having very different spectral contents; one can determine the duration of time intervals between related transients.

Reproduction

The recording is easily accessible and available from a low impedance thus a wide range of instruments can be connected. The. different speeds of playback permit adaptation to a range of analysis apparatus. For example, one can see the entire band on an oscilloscope, note precisely the timing of the transients, and obtain a good quality photograph, making use of the repetition of the phenomena. Another facility is the ability to recopy a single transient on a continuous loop. Once isolated, and properly filtered, it permits the transformation of a transient into a repetitive signal suitable for analysis using a spectrum analyzer.

5.5. I .2

Oscillograph recording

Direct recording of a transient is possible with recording oscillographs. Various types are differentiated for this purpose: - light-beam galvanometric recorders for very low frequency transients; - general purpose oscilloscopes with a 75 MHz bandwidth: - high performance osciiloscopes with a bandwidth of at least 250 MHz; I. _ storage oscilloscopes (&ith phosphorescent cathode-ray tube); - automatic surveillance oscilloscopes, designed for measurement of transients. Generally, the transient is used to trigger the oscilloscope. The trigger level can be preset: - by a positive or negative d.c. level; - by a rising or falling slope. The rccordlng can be stored photographically. The imp :`.III~ :idvantages of oscilloscopes are:
a) ease of u5c: b) wide bandwidth;

r) wide ~-an&c of input sensitivity;
d) high accuracy.

The most rmplrrtant disadvantages are: al empirical scliin,: ;)f ttr; ~.dililu15 (arnplitudz, tirnc baac and trigger) since the transient's characteristics arc unknown in advance;

( IEC page 29 >

14

IS 12743:198$ IEC Pub 816 ( 1984 ) b) the control-settings may not be compatible with all possible parameters of the transient to be analyzed or recorded.
Nore. - Attention has to be paid to the fact that most oscilloscopes are not sufficiently shtelded: however. specially modified oscilloscop& with additional shielding are available on request.

5.5.1.3 Digital waveform recorder The digital waveform recorder consists essentially of an analogue/digttal converter, a time base, and a memory. Most standard units have an analogue/digital converter of 6 bits to 8 bits, which offers an adequate measuring accuracy. Prestnt-day devices have s;~mpling rates of up to 500 MHz, thus permitting transients with rise times of 6 ns or more, ,>nd I`[-equencies of up to 100 MHz, to be recorded. In general, very fast transients tend to possess a short duration. while slower transients tend to have a longer duration. With a device memory of IOW words, it is possible to record a transient of up to 2 us duration by using a sampling interval of 2 ns. R\ selection of an appropriately longer sampling interval, transients of up to sevL>raI ceconds duration can be recorded. Devices with a memory capacity of 2000 and 4000 words are also available, which permit correspondingly longer transients to be measured. The greatest rates of change of voltage (and therefore the highest frequencies) often occur at the start of the transient, while the transient decay contains lower frequencies. These can be measured- by means of a digital waveform recorder with a suffrGent sampling rate and sample storage capacity or alternatively one with a dual time base with which the first part of the transient is observed at a high sampling rate and the remaining part at a iower sampling rate (for example, with a ratio 1 : IO). One type of` recorder records a sampled value only if it deviates from the previously recorded value by a defined quantity, thus reducing the memory loading. The latter techniques are not useful for further analysis with a fast Fourier transform for which a constant sampling ratio is required, or appropriate compensation is required.

One great advantage of the digital waveform recorder over the oscilloscope is its pre-triggering function. The device is continuously in operation and stores the measured values. When the trigger signal is received, the device continuct, to record and then switches itself off after an adjustable delay time. Thus, the memory also contains values recorded prior to the trigger signal being given. The triggering level cati be made relatively insensitive, so that the recorder is not triggered by spurious signals. The contents of the memory can be displayed on an oscilloscope, CRT display, or X/Y plotter. It is possible to feed the data into a computer. In this way, by means of a suitable interface, several transients which occur within a relatively short space of time can be re,corded. The computer also introduces the capability for automatic analysis of the transients, with the required parameters (maximum amplitude, rate of rise, frequency spectrum, etc.) being determined by a software programme. Statistical analysis (such as maximum voltage amplitudes or average amplitudes) can also hr. carried out in this manner. If two or more synchronized recorders are employed, various tr;lnhient modes can be recorded simultaneously (for example, common mode and differential mode transient

I5

( IEC page 3 1 )

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pob 816 ( 1984 1 voltages, transient currents). With two recorders, it is also possible, for example, to determine the energy content of a transient. 55.2 Waveform .analysis Once a waveform is recorded it may be analyzed in various ways,. either by observation or by automatic means. The peak voltage is easily defined and measured, as is usually the case with rise time. Obtaining other time-domain parameters such as duration, fall time, etc., for a waveform such as that shown in Figure 1, page 62, requires rather precise definitions of the parameters in order to be unequivocal, otherwise considerable judgement must be exercised. Much work remains to be done to identify which additional parameters are important and how thev should be defined. At the point of measurement the parameters of the transient may differ from those at the source. To calculate parameters of the transient at the source (which may not be accessible during the transient phenomenon) a quantitative description of the propagation phenomena, described in Clause 3, is needed.. .Frequency analyses can .be performed using analogue or digital methods on the total recorded waveform or a part of it. Repeated tests may or may not show that the spectrum is relatively stable from transient to transient. Because the fast Fourier transform is commonly used, its usefulness and limitations are discussed in the next sub-clause. 5.5.2.1 Fast Fourier transform (FFT) Fast Fourier transform (FFT) is an algorithm which can be used to transform a time-amplitude (TA) vector into a frequency-amplitude (FA) *vector. The TA vector contains the sampled time-function of the transient. In most cases, the amplitudes in the TA vector are digitized by an analogue/digital converter (ADC). Sampling, which can be interpreted as a kind of modulation of the transient signal with a pulse-train, and the non-linear digitizing process create their particular. errors. An FFT can be applied to a finite time-record of the transient only. Since even the TA vector is not an exact representation of the continuous analogue time-function, it will be clear that drawing conclusions from the FA vector (the spectral line vector) must be made with great caution. An error analysis has to be made in all cases. A summary is given below of the main error sources. Further information can, for example, be found in references [3 to 61. a) Aliasing Sufficient samples have to be taken in order to define the transient waveform with adequate accuracy. The sampling theorem or Shannon principle requires that the sampling rate, ./l. must be at least twice the highest frequency f,, present in the waveform, so that ./; > 2&. The multiplication-mechanism of the sampler, sampling a signal with frequency f;, always generates components at the sum and difference frequencies (k x 1: +-A), where k is an integer (be\: Figure 8, page 71). Aliasing (also called fold-over or mixing) occurs when this difference frequency falls within the frequency range studied. In this case an error signal is added to the wanted signal at ,f = ,f; - f;, due to the insufficient number of samples taken.

( IEC page 3 3 >

16

IS 12743 : 1989 IECPob 816(1984)

f, < J;/2 by a low-pass filter, placed between signal source and sampler. However, note
that such a filter might introduce phase-shifts which distort the time-function. In cases where oversampling takes place, a digital filter may take over (part of) the task of the analogue anti-alias filter. No aliasing problems arise when the filter attenuates the alias signals to a level below the (6m + 1.8 + 10 log (N)) dB level, discussed under "Quantization Noise'*.

kliasing can be avoided by limiting the frequency content of the waveform to

b) Leakage/ Windowing In the original Fourier transform the signal is considered to exist over the time-interval - m<t<+=. However, an FFT dan be applied to a finite time-record (data-window) only. In addition, the FFT algorithm is based upon the assumption that this time-record is repeated throughout time (as also required for Fourier series development of a signal). If the waveform falls completely within the finite window no problems arise. However, when the data-window cuts out a portion of the waveform, the FFT will be carried out on a signal consisting of that portion multiplied with a rectangular unit-amplitude pulse. The FA vector will then contain the convolution of the (repeated) waveform spectrum with the Fourier transform of the rectangular pulse, so with a sin(x)/x spectrum. This results in broadening of the spectral lines in a sin(x)/x way: there is leakage of energy from wanted lines to unwanted lines. The problem. of leakage can be solved to a large extent by leplacing the above-mentioned rectangular window by a window which forces the input signal to be zero at the beginning and end of the time record in a smoother way than the rectangular pulse does. Various windows are discussed in the literature, see for example, Reference [6]. An often used window is the so-called Hamming-window, which is a cosine-like window. The choice of window depends upon the application. c) Quantization noise Less predictable, when applying FFT techniques to transient analysis, is the influence of rounding-off errors generated in the ADC, the so-called "quantization noise". This noise results in components in the FA vector having a finite amplitude-to-noise ratio. In addition, noise can be introduced by the finite accuracy of the digital computation of the FFT, where the number of samples taken is large. In what follows it is assumed that effects of aliasing and leakage are made negligible. Assume an FFT is applied to N samples taken with an m-bit ADC, which has a fullamplitude range of A volts. If the r.m.s. amplitudes are normalized to this range A, it can be shown that the quantization noise level is, as a rule of thumb, between -6m dB (all noise is concentrated at one single frequency) and -(6m + 1.8 + 10 log (N)) dB (all noise is spread out equally, that is to say white noise). An illustrative example follows. Figure 9, page 71, shows the envelope of the FIT-spectrum of a 6-bit/l024-point sampled symmetrical trapezoidal pulse together with the envelope of the spectrum obtained with the Fourier integral. The dulse amplitude A has been taken equal to the full range of the ADC. The discrepancy (>40 dB) at ,f = J/3 is caused by a particular

17

(JEC page 75)

IS 12743:1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) combination of pulse rise time and sample rate. The combination is such that in each quantization level of the ADC exactly three samples are generated during the rise and fall of the pulse, see Figure 10, page 72. As a result, the spectrum of the quantization noise shows a peak at J/3 and, obviously, is not white at all. In Figure 9, page 71, the 6m and (6m + 1.8 + IO log (N)) dB levels are indicated. (In the example of Figure 9, normalization of the amplitudes puts the low-frequency asymptote of the spectrum at 2 A q/A T dB = 2 z,/T dB, where r, and T are indicated in the insert.) Note that the amplitude-to-noise ratio decreases when the ADC-range is not fully swept.

Although the example given may be somewhat exaggerated, it is generally true that in transient analysis the customary "white noise" models for the quantization are very inaccurate. Hence, it has to be concluded that components in the FFT-spectrum (the F A vector) having a normalized amplitude of less than -6m dB have to be mistrusted until additional information about the quantization noise is available. Normalized amplitudes below -(6m + 1.8 + 10 log (N)) dB are never correct. This noise-boundary, however, cannot be reduced at will by. increasing N, since this will lead to an increase of computation-generated noise, which has been ignored thus far.

5.6 Transient energy measurements The transient energy, within a selected frequency range, dissipated in a defined impedance, can be determined by a thermal method, or by calculation based on measured voltage and/or current waveforms and phase angle. The energy is a function of the value of the defined impedance and it is necessary to carry out several determinations of energy, with different impedances, in order to find the maximum value. A convenient impedance value in many applications is 50 fl resistive. Two methods are briefly described below. The accuracy of either method is critically dependent on instrumentation drift characteristics.

5.6. I Thermistor bridge One arm of a Wheatstone bridge comprises two negative temperature coefficient thermistors in series. The bridge is balanced by adjusting the supply voltage to a value such that the two thermistors in series have the same resistance as the other bridge arms. The transient is injected at the terminal common to the two thermistors. The other terminals of the thermistors are coupled to the reference earth terminal, and decoupled from the rest of the circuit, over the required range of frequencies. The impedance at the transient input terminal is defined by the two thermistors in parallel. For a 50 fi input impedance the thermistors are adjusted to 100 L! each and the bridge arms are 200 R each. The application of the transient raises the temperature of the thermistors which dccrcase in value and thus unbalance the bridge. The temperature rise is proportional to the input transient energy and over a range of temperatures the change in resistance is proportional to the increase in temperature. The thermal time constant of the thermistors is typically of the order of hundreds of milliseconds so that the output pulse has a waveform which differs considerably from that of the input transient. Various methods can oe used to measure the output pulse in order ICI dctcrmrne the transient energy.

( IEC page 3 7 )

18

IS 12743 :1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984 ) Using bead thermistors, transient energies applied to the bridge in the range 100 uJ to at least I mJ can readily be measured. Higher values of energy can be measured by inserting attenuation at the input. This type of thermistor is rated for use up to at least 1 GHz. To maintain the constant impedance at VHF and UHF requires the thermistors to be mounted coaxially in a metal tube, or preferably in cylindrical holes in a metal block to provide temperature stability. A typical circuit arrangement is shown in ,Figure 11, page 72. 5.6.2 Voltage-current techniques

In this technique one obtains the energy by measuring both the voltage and the current and using the mathematical relation: u.idt The current and voltage probes must both be connected at the point in the network where the energy measurement is desired, and must produce at the output levels voltage (or current) proportional to the circuit voltage and current without amplitude or phase distortion, at least over the portion of the frequency range in which the major portion of the energy is contained. The processes of multiplication and integration are usually achieved on computers. Thus, it is necessary to store the sensor outputs by analogue or digital means. Where transient waveforms are highly oscillatory, good amplitude and phase accuracies are required in the stored waveforms or serious errors can be obtained in the measured energy. 5.7 Frequency domain measurement It is the purpose of this discussion $0 summarize measurement techniques in the frequency domain and to show how the principal characteristics of transients can be related to a description in the frequency domain. 5.7.1 Spectrum analyzer The spectrum analyzer is the most common device used for frequency domain measurements. However, to be truly useful for measurement of the spectrum of a transient, the transient must be repeated frequently. Where the transient varies from one incident to another, the method gives data that must be interpreted in a statistical sense. Unless special precautions are taken, care is required in using a spectrum analyzer to avoid overloading its input circuits by transients of a broadband nature. Typically, this requires a tunable filter ahead of the first amplifier stage.

5.7.2

C. I.S. P. R. receiver The C.I.S.P.R. receiver provides a means of making frequency domain analysis, while, at the same time, giving time domain information. It has the same limitations as the spectrum analyzer with regard to transients of random nature. The C.I.S.P.R. receiver is only truly useful for repetitive transients. It has a relatively well defined bandwidth for each frequency range, and is tunable over the ranges 0.010 MHz to 0.150 MHz, 0.150 MHz to 30 MHz, and 30 MHz to I 000 MHz. In each frequency range, the quasi-

19

(IEC

Page 39)

IS 12743:1989 IECPub 816(1984)

peak detector circuit has defined values of charge time and discharge time which causes the response, for transients of a given amplitude, to increase with repetition rate. Some C.I.S.P.R. receivers also contain peak and/or average detector circuits. Thus, this device provides one way of obtaining time domain information over the tuned frequency range.

5.7.2.1

Particular application of a C.I.S.P. R. receiver This application is based on the fact that the peak value of the envelope of the receiver IF signal is directly proportional to the spectrum amplitude of the transient at the input of the receiver, at the tuned frequency of that receiver (see Appendix A). In addition, measurements can be made using the complete C.I.S.P.R. measuring set, using an arrangement which is also described in Appendix A. Measurements made with the latter are called "weighted voltage measurements". If both measured value curves are similar in shape, the measured emission arises from a single noise source (coherence): if they are not similar, there is more than one noise source responsible. With reference to periodic interference, if there are:

a) no discrete spectral lines, the repetition frequency is less than the bandwidth of the measuring set;
6) discrete spectral lines, the separation of the spectral lines is equal to the repetition

frequency of the interference or an integral multiple thereof and is greater than the bandwidth of the measuring set. For a 9 kHz bandwidth this will seldom occur. Where a series of events occur within the analyzing period (l/bandwidth), the spectrum values of all these events will be added. If the measurements show that rather than a continuous spectrum, one has a line spectrum, that is to say, one in which responses are obtained at discrete frequencies rather than continuously over the spectrum, then the instrumentation is calibrated in terms of sine wave frequencies impressed at the input. In the case of a continuous spectrum, the ordinate is calibrated in terms of volt seconds, and for discrete spectra, in volts. For the purpose of analysis, the peaks of the several measured components are connected by a line which then represents the envelope of the spectrum. The frequency spectrum description of the interference can be used to: a) evaluate the nature of the influence of the interference on narrow-band systems; b) calculate the interference acting within the coupled frequency band; c) design methods of suppressing the interference. The shape of the envelope curve of the spectrum can be approximated in its ranges through tangents with the slopes 0, l/f; l/f* in order to estimate the parameters of equivalent trapezoidal pulses. Generally, the following relationships exist: a) abrupt fall at high frequencies: small rate of rise, rounded edges; b) dominant peak (resonant point): oscillation' possibly with complex modulation;

( IEC page 4 1)

20

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984)

C) plot parallel to abscissa at low frequencies:
direct coupling in the measured frequency range;

d) fall at low frequencies:
inductive/capacitive coupling. The relationship between the unweighted and weighted measuring values gives information about the total shape of the interference beyond the viewing time of the bandwidth of the measuring instrument:
a)

for a large difference: single event; for a small difference: some comparable single events succeed one another; can be a pulse group or a non-periodic sequence of pulses;

bj

c), low or no difference: periodic or lasting interference. When carrying out the measurement it is necessary to consider every kind of interference which can occur under normal conditions. These measurement conditions are given by operating under normal conditions or, .if necessary, with artificial increase of repetition rate'.
Measurement

The test assembly shall be immune to interference emitted from various local sources or from the sample under test. The spectrum amplitude shall be measured over the whole frequency range. Therefore it is advisable to measure at frequency points which have logarithmic spacings. The unweighted and weighted spectrum amplitudes shall be obtained at the same time. The measuring frequencies must be chosen so as to be non-harmonically related to avoid measuring at zero points of the spectrum. The tollowing measuring frequencies are recommended! 15 150 1.5 15 25 250 2.5 25 40 400 4 60 600 6 100 1 000 10 kHz kHz MHz MHz

Where resonant frequencies or selective frequencies are detected, there shall be an additional measurement near these special frequencies. This is also true near zero points of the spectrum. At each test frequency sufficient samples shall be taken to ensure sufficient probability of measuring the highest value.

Evaluation

The measurement results are recorded in the diagram of the spectrum amplitude vs. frequency. This `is done with the results of the unweighted and weighted measurements. If the difference between the two curves is less than 3 dB, then it is also necessary to make a regular radio-frequency interference measurement according to C.I.S.P.R.

21

(lECpagc43)

IS 12743:1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) 5.8 Special inexpensive devices

These techniques are intended for the detection of current durations of at least 10 us and generally high amplitudes. 5.8.1 Magnetic links Magnetic links provide a means of measuring high amplitude currents produced by lightning discharges (that is to say greater than 1 000 A). They consist of small bundles of highly coercive steel strips or wires made from sintered material. When installed at right angles to, and at a short distance from, current-carrying straight conductors tw* become magnetized and the polarity and magnitude of the current ca,n be derived from the residual magnetism retained by the link. 5.8.2 Other magnetic techniques As an extension of the magnetic link technique, another method has been devised to provide greater sensitivity. Magnetic tape (as used in a domestic tape recorder) with a pre-recorded signal on it, is inserted axially in a coil through which the .current to be measured is passed. The coil winding is designed to produce a peak of flux in the centre of the coil and decreasing flux towards the ends. When the flux exceeds a certain value the pre-recorded signal is erased and the length of tape over which erasure occurs is an indication of the peak current amplitude. The tape may be moved through the coil so that information of time of occurrence can be obtained.

6. Measurement techniques

This clause outlines the measurement difficulties which arise because of the high frequency components of transients. Due to this, parts of the set-up may radiate and introduce error signals in another part of the set-up. For example, when the transient attenuation characteristic of a power supply is measured by injecting transients into the "* mains supply using a spike-generator the mains lead may radiate a signal which can couple into the measurement equipment at the output side of the power supply. This may be minimized by keeping the mains leads of the test sample as short as possible, for example, not more than 50 mm. Furthermore, in many cases a well-defined set-up is needed, in order to:
a) enable different experimenters to achieve comparable results; b) create, as far as possible, a worst case situation (this is of importance for ground-loop

coupling effects). Often this problem can be solved by placing the whole set-up on a large metal reference plane. This metal plane has to be used, for example, where mains-borne
transients are to be measured on a two-wire mains system (without a protective conductor). The plane then serves as the reference for the common mode (CM) part of the transient (and also has its influence on the common mode rejection [CMR] when

diffcrcntial mode [DM] signals have to be measured). An example of the use of the reference plane is given in reference [7]. All leads have to be kept as short as possihle.

( 1EC page 45jl

22

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) 6.1 Measurement of conducted transients 6.1.1 Basic set-up

In an equivalent cl'rcuit (see, Figure 12, page 73), the transient to be measured can be characterized by an open circuit voltage U,, and an internal impedance Z,,. Then the transient, present between A and B. (see Figure 12) has to be coupled in a well-defined way to the input G-H of the measuring instrument. Therefore, the measuring set-up will, in general, consist of the following parts (Figure .U):
a) coupling network (CN); b) cable (CA):

c) adaptor (AD);
d) measuring instrument (MI);

e) reference plane (RF). Furthermore, measures have to be taken in order to prevent the instrument from receiving unwanted signals. +.+;2 Coupling network In principle, the coupling network fulfils three functions:
a) it presents a defined load to the transient source, characterized by U,, and Z,,. In the

case of power lines, *the internal impedance Z,, is dependent upon the input impedance of equipment connected to them. Appendix B gives value of input impedance for typical equipment;
b) it transforms the incoming signal to a level acceptable to the measuring instrument;

c) it provides an output signal at an impedance level which matches the characteristic impedance of the cable. 6.1.2.1 nte load impedance
The choice of the impedance-characteristics of the coupling network is dependent upon the' purpose of the measurement. For example, for power line conducted emission measurements, an impedance of 150 Kl or 50 Q in parallel with (50 uH + 5 S2), may be chosen [7]. In immunity tests, where a transient simulator with well-defined internal impedance is connected to the device under test, the transients applied should be monitored by a relatively high-impedance coupling network (CN) in order not to affect the immunity test. If a transient has to be characterized in order to set immunity levels, U,, (Figure 12) is of, importance and the input impedance of CN shall be chosen in relation to Z,,.

When constructing a coupling network the . following points have to be taken into account:
a) A large range of frequencies is covered by the spectrum of the transients. Not only

are high frequencies important because of the parasitic properties of the components in the coupling network, but the low frequencies such as the line frequency are of relevance because of the need to suppress the line frequency from the measured wave.

23

( IEC page 4 7 >

iS 12743 : 1989 IECPnb 816(1984b b) The quality of the passive components must be such that the impedance is maintained during the transient. For example, in wire-wound resistors, breakdown can occur within the windings so that the current flows over a path where the impedance is, unknown. c) Attention should be paid to the shielding quality of the connectors used for the coupling network. In particular, the connector for the output cable is important (see also Sub-clause 6.1.3). d) The coupling network must be shielded in order to avoid variation of the value of the capacitances between the components of the coupling network. Moreover, the shielding must prevent radiation into the measuring system. e) For coupling networks which are designed to measure differential-mode signals, attention must be paid to the common-mode rejection factor of the coupling network over the entire frequency range. The common-mode rejection must be greater than that of the measuring instruments. ,$ Coupling networks having two (or more) inputs must have sufficient isolation between the various inputs. g) Attention must be paid to possible shock hazards, including possible accidental disconnection of the protective conductor. Furthermore, the mains current through the coupling network may cause earth-leakage circuit-breakers to operate and also power-dissipation problems. h) In the case of active coupling networks, there should be sufficient protection against overload and intermodulation. 6.1.2.2 Transformation and adaptation The amplitude of the transient may be so large that overloading of the input of the measuring instrument can occur. Therefore, an attenuator is required. Furthermore, it is `desirable for the output impedance of the coupling network to match the characteristic impedance of the cable in order to ensure reflection-free :signal transmission. The transfer properties to be chosen for the coupling network are determined by the main parameter of the transient of interest and by the dynamic range. of the appropriate measuring instrument. With respect to the mains frequency, one usually has a choice of three types of network: a) an all-pass network (no supply frequency rejection); b) a high-pass network (rejection of all frequencies below the "cut-off" frequency); or c) a supply frequency rejection network. For example, if a spectrum analyzer is used, the mains voltage can be filtered a CR network when the lowest frequency of interest is sufficiently greater than However, if a peak-hold instrument is used to determine the maximum amplitude time domain) of the transient voltage, the CR network may cause measuring because of phase shift and attenuation of the low frequency components. out by l/CR. (in the errors

At high frequencies, attention shall be paid to the parasitic elements in the probe. For example, the input parasitic capacitance may determine the maximum rate of rise which

(IEC page 49)

24

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pnb 816 ( 1984)

can be measured. Also parasitic wire inductances may influence the high-frequency part of the probe transfer characteristic. In general, all leads of resistors and capacitors have to be reduced to a minimum length, and special low-inductance connections have t& be used: To some extent, remaining inductive effects can be compensated by using small trimming capacitors.
' For the adaptor part of the probe, which adapts the signal to the impedance of the cable, care should be taken that any possible mismatch of the load with the probe (cable plus second adaptor plus measuring instrument), influences the input characteristics to a limited extent only.

6.1.2.3 Probe testing
The various aspects of probe testing, are illustrated for an example of a monitoring probe used for simultaneous connection between neutral and protective conductor and between phase and protective conductor. A probe, having two inputs which can be put directly into a wall-socket is considered (see Figure 15, page 74, and Appendix C). a) The probe-testing unit (Figure 13, page 73)

Since the probe is designed for measurements on a wall-socket, the probe-testing unit consists of a socket (mounted on a side of a metal box) coupling netwo,rk, switches, and a BNC-connector input. The circuit diagram of the unit is shown in Figure 14, page 74). As can be seen in Figure 13, four compartments are used in order to provide screening (shielding) between phase and neutral, and of the switches. By means of the switches the injected transient or sine wave signal can be connected to either the neutral or to phase output, or to both outputs together, so that various propagation modes can be simulated. The probe-testing unit has the following properties: - frequency range: d.c. up to 100 MHz; - attenuation input-output (between either phase or neutral and protection conductor connection): 26.2 f 0.2 dB; - maximum phase-error between the two outputs on the socket: 2";
- maximum amplitude-error between the two outputs: 0.2 dB;

- cross-talk between the two outputs: < -50 dB; - input impedance: 48 R to 53 SJ, depending on switch positions; - output impedance: 45 R to 48 0, depending on switch position&
b) Input impedance The input impedance shaI1 be determined with the outputs of the probe loaded with the impedance used in the measuring set-up. In many cases the load impedance shall be 5OsZ.

For the probe shown in Figures 15 and 16, pages 74 and 75, the input impedance is 6 kR ovef the range d.c. to 100 MHz.
c) Output impedance

Since the internal impedance of the transient source to be nieasured will be unknown, the network in the probe shall be designed in such a way that the output impedance

25

( IEC page 5 1)

IS 12743:1989 IEk Pub 816 ( 1984 1 of the probe is predominantly determined by this network. In addition, the input of the probe is loaded with some impedance. In the case `of the probe-testing unit, (see a)), this impedance is about 50 R. In principle, the probe shall be designed such that the output impedance is independent of the input impedance. The latter value is also more or less an average value of the modulus of the mains impedance at radio frequencies. For the probe shown in Figures 15-Bnd 16, pages 74 and 75, the output impedance is 49 R, and the frequency range is 0 to 100 MHz. As will be noted, ,the output impedance of the probe and the probe-testing unit is not exactly 50 IR (see a)). This is due to the fact that the low-inductance resistors used are only available in certain resistance values. These have been chosen because ,of their flat transfer characteristics and the small deviations from 50 n are acceptable.
d) Transfer function

The transfer function is the ratio of the output voltage to the input voltage, with input and output loaded as given in a) and c). The transfer function shall be determined for the amplitude as well as for the phase. The amplitude transfer function shall be flat within a given margin over the frequency range to be considered, while the phase shift from input to output shall be zero in the ideal case and smaller than a pre-determined (small) value in practice. Using the probe-testing unit described in a), and the monitoring Figures 15 and 16, the output voltage is 48.2 + 0.2 dB lower than of the probe (not of the unit), due to the insertion loss of both while the phase angle between input of the probe-testing unit and does not exceed 5". probe shown in the input voltage probes in series, the probe output

4 isolation between neutral and phase
If a transient is present between phase and protective conductor only (idealized case) then no signal should be measured on the output of the neutral to protective conductor. This can be `tested by using the probe testing unit, described in a), by putting a signal to the phase part of the probe only, using the appropriate switch on the unit. Then the signal coming from the neutral output is measured (and vice versa). The latter signal shall be 40 dB down at least. In one case >50 dB has been measured over the frequency range 0 to 100 MHz.

n

Common mode rejection (CMR) The CMR is of importance when transients between phase and neutral (differential mode transients) are to be measured. This property can be tested by putting the same signal on the phase input and the neutral input (both with respect to the protective conductor). Then the differential mode signal between the phase and neutral output is measured. In the ideal case, zero voltage should be measured, but it is expected that 40 dB down with respect to the voltage between either neutral or phase and the protective conductor will be sufficient.

In one case >40 dB has been measured over the frequency range 0 to 100 MHz. This value is determined by the accuracy of the actual resistance values used.

(IECpage53)

26

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984) It should be noted that in general commercially available single-probes, which have one plug to be put in the socket and a wire with clamp connector to be attached to the protective conductor, have a rather poor CMR and an undefined transfer function for transients because of this "long-wire" construction.

g) Shielding (screening)

It is of importance that radiated signals, either present permanently or those accompanying the transient, do not couple into the probe circuit, in particular not into the output part of the probe, where, in general, the transient to be measured has been reduced to a relatively low level. This is also of importance where active devices are used in the probe (see h)). Up to now, no shielding tests have been carried out on the probe described here, since the complete metal case is expected to provide adequate shielding.

h) Overload, distortion
Where active devices are used, tests shall be made to determine at which level gain-compression starts and whether distortion plays a role. Often this can be verified by putting an attenuator, for example, 6 dB, between probe input and (transient) source. Then the output level shall be 6 `dB lower over the whole frequency range of interest. (The attenuator used shall have a `flat characteristic over this frequency range.) In addition, the active device probe shall be tested for RF-induced malfunctioning of the active devices (sometimes called audio-rectification). This can be verified by applying RF conducted signals to the probe input, for example, 3 V over a frequency range up to at least 200 MHz, or using voltages at a frequency which has been found from measurements of the electromagnetic environment. These. measurements shall be carried out when it is known that nearby RF transmitters are present.

61.3 The c a b l e In order to have a distortion-free signal propagation, a cable with a well-defined characteristic impedance and propagation constant should be used. With a well-balanced input of measuring instrum&its, a balanced pair of coaxial cables or a video pair cable should be used. For unbalanced signals, a shielded triaxial cable has certain advantages over a single coaxial cable. A drawback of a coaxial cable is that its outer conductor is part of the wanted signal circuit. Hence, these cables are sensitive to earth currents as well as to mutual inductance coupling between separate cable lengths. The following types of coaxial cables are listed in order of decreasing sensitivity for unwanted signal coupling:
a) single-braided coaxial;

6) double-braided coaxial; c) foil coaxial ;
d) u-metal tape between two braids ("superscreened");

e) (semi-) rigid coaxial.

27

IS 12743 : 1989 IECPub 816(1P84)

There is also the possibility of using triaxial cables. However, in practice, these cables often cause problems due to standing waves in the dielectric between the two shields. If the length of the cable exceeds n/4: where iE `corresponds to the highest interference frequency involved, standing wave effects along the cable shield may occur, thus increasing the coupling of interference signals. To reduce this effect, the cable should run as close as possible to the reference plane and in some cases multipoint connections from the cable shield to reference plane may be necessary. Another effect which increases with the length is the dispersion. The usable `length is limited by the permissible waveform distortion of the signa Ferrite and absorbing materials can be placed around the cable. Ferrite increases the inductance of the interference loop; absorbing material increases the losses. These materials reduce the interference current in the cable ground loop, typical of star connections among equipment. It should be noted that the high screening efficiency of a cable can be nullified when poor quality connectors are used. In some cases, optical fibre transmission techniques can he used with advantage. 6.1.4 The adaptor
The adaptor (AD in Figure 12, Rage 73) between the cable and the measuring instrument is, in some cases, needed to match the input impedance of the measuring instrument to the characteristic impedance of the cable. For example, a peak-value memory voltmeter may have an input resistance (in parallel with some capacitance) of 1 M&I. In addition, the adaptor can include an attenuator. Good quality screw-type connectors (low surface transfer impedance) should be used throughout,

6.1.5

The. measuring instrument

The choice of measuring instrument is largely determined by the main transient parameter of interest (see Clause 2). Instruments to be used in transient measurement set-ups ,shall have sufficient immunity to ambient noise to prevent malfunctioning of the set-up. This malfunctioning can be a complete breakdown, a distorted record, or a false record if noise causes false triggering. The immunity of the instrument to unwanted signals, such as radiated signals entering the instrument via panel meters, and to conducted signals entering the instrument via the mains leads and auxiliary cables, is important. In many cases, the use of a battery-operated instrument is preferred in order to reduce ground loop coupling (eee- +&b&atrse-ti.6). An effective procedure is to place the measuring equipment entirely within a screened enclosure which will reduce or eliminate both radiated and earth current coupling to the instrument.

If the instrument is suitable for measuring di,fferential-mode signals, the CMR of the instrument should be checked over the whole frequency range of interest. The reference plane In order ((1 msk~ well-defined and reproducible measurements, in particular with respect to grouted loop coupling, it is necessary to create a well-defined reference plane.

6.1.6

(IECpage 57)

20

IS 12743 : 1989 IEChb 816(1!@4) '

.For example, a metal plate large enough to contain the complete measuring set-up should be used. The shield of the probe should be connected via a short lead to the metal plate reference plane. This should be the only galvanic connection of the measuti%g.set-up to that plane except where the measuring instrument (where this does not have a low-capacitance transformer) is connected to the mains. For this example, the instrument is connected to the mains without using the protective conductor, while the neutral and the phase enter the instrument via an LC filter (L to the mains-side) and the capacitor is connected ,to the reference plane. The reference plane can be connected to the protective conductor at the point where the `probe is connected to the plane.

6.1.7 Use of Faraday cage If the measuring instrument is susceptible to ambient noise or radiation from the transient source itself, the instrument shall be installed in a suitable screened enclosure. The following p&cautions should be observed:
a) All leads which penetrate the enclosure wall shall be suitably filtered and shielded.

The outermost conductor of coaxial cables shall be bonded to the wall.
b) Special attention shall be paid to doors or other apertures of the enclosure.

c) To reduce the possibility of shock hazard, power should be fed to the room through an isolating transformer. 61.8 Ground loop current Ground loop currents do not always cause errors; therefore preventive measures should only be adopted, where necessary. The measures include .the following:

4 Use of a transformer in the instrument power supplyt this is particularly effective at
low frequencies.

b) Use of common mode chokes obtained by winding the cable around ferromagnetic
material; this is particularly effective at high frequencies. 4 Diversion of ground loop currents to a reference plane, by direct connection or via capacitors in appropriate locations.

4 Careful design of the grounding arrangement of individual printed circuit boards with
proper insulation between boards. 6.1.9 Evaluation of the test set-up Evaluation of the system can itit: carried out initially using sine wave signals over the relevant frequency range including the interference frequency even though they may exceed the design bandwidth. Transient response should be tested with appropriate impulse waveform over the entire dynamic range, and the overload performance should also be tested. The common mode rejection of the system should be tested by connecting a short circuit at the input of the probe and connecting this point (when permissible) to measurement terminals and the local earth reference point in turn. The transient should be initiated or alternatively a suitable transient simulation may be used to test the system response.

29

(IEC page 59) . .

Iii4 12743:1989 IEC Pub 816 (.1984) 6.2 Measurement of radiated transients

There is no established technology for measurement of radiated transients other than to use conventional narrow-band techniques and to measure the peak value utilizing a peak detector or observing maximum meter deflection as in the case of a C.I.S.P.R. technique. A narrow-band technique is useful in measuring parameters which can cause interference to radio and television receivers of various types. Broadband antennas of either the electric or magnetic types can be used, as appropriate.

6.2.1 Broadband measurement techniques
It is possible to obtain broadband radiated transient measurements by using a broadband antenna such as a small loop, or a `rod having a length of about 1 m. The antenna is then coupled to an amplifier having a high input impedance and the desired bandwidth (for example, several megahertz). This technique is limited in its usefulness by the sensitivity obtainable in a broadband amplifier. A loop antenna has a frequency dependent characteristic, but this can be corrected by connecting a low value resistor in parallel with the loop. This technique is commonly employed with current probes in order to avoid distortion of the measured spectrum. Active broadband antennae j% and 91. are commercially available.

6.2.2 Frequency domain technique The usual method of measuring transients in the frequency domain is by the technique of the C.I.S.P.R. which utilizes a quasi-peak or other type of detector following a tunable receiver having a relatively narrow bandwidth. With the peak detector, such a method can measure the effective spectrum amplitude of an individual impulse as a function of frequency. It is possible to adapt the technique described in /Sub-clause 5.7.2.1 for radiated measurements when used with an appropriate antenna as described in Sub-clause 6.2.1.

( IRC page 611

30

IS 12743 : `1989 IECpPb 816(1944)

u,
4 T 4

- peak amplitude (if U, >( Q-U,)) - peak-to-peak voltage - peak voltage rise time - decay time of a single sub-burst - duration of the burst - highest oscillation frequency - oscillation frequency </; - sub-burst repetition' rate

U2/Tz - rate of rise in the range of the highest slope

G
/; /2 /;

FIG. 1. - Typical parameters of a transient (Sub-clauses 2.3, 5.5.2).

(IECpqe 6 2 )

31

IS 12743 : 1989 IECPub 816 (1984)

t
Amplitude

I

425/84

60 50 40 30
20

dB (VI
1 70
-60 -50

A

t

10 0 -10 -20 -30 -40 -50

-30 lJ
- 20

-40 t

- 10
-0 2000nslGtXl - 1 /(xf) 500

b)

T
200 100 50 20

f10 5

u-10 I 2
426/84

F I G. & ? . - Example of a transient disturbance (Sub-clause 2.3.1)
a) Waveform (time domain) b) Spectrum (frequency domain).

32

(XC: page 6 3 )

IS 12743 : 1989 IECF'ob 816(1984)

Protective conductor

Common mode (between conductors and earth)

_______________--_----------_---- - - - - Earth F T

rrorectlve conductor

, Common mode (between active and protective conductors)

Cable

\\ \ :
&

Phase

I
Differential mode (two wire)

Neutral

Terre I I ___--_________---Earth e

4

Cable `\

Phase JV

1\ I1 :

Neutral bifferential mode (multiple wire) Phase -9
427B4

w

I

1'

NOWS 1. - T h e v o l t a g e s o u r c e s h o w n r e p r e s e n t s a n applied disturbance. 2. - The 1 I5 V/230 V single-phase system is represented by Figure d) and a variation of Figure a).

I-IG. 3. - Propagation modes on power distribution systems (Sub-clause 3.1).

33

( IEC iw3e 64)

`IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984)

FIG. 4. - Relation between phase, CM and DM open-circuit voltages (Sub-clause 3.1).

IS 12743 : 1989 IECPub 816(1984)

loo0

I
_ - - United States data I European dat Maximum

ICC

Mean

/

1C

7"
1)

/ /'

/'

Minlmurr

,'

/ /`/'

/'

1 kHz

I& kHz

IHr

10MHz

3OMHz
429/84

The measurement is made between phase and protective conductor (low voltage distribution circuits) (after Malack and Engstrom [I]).

FIG. 5. -, power line measured impedance (Sub-clause 3.1).

for United States of America and Europe

35

(_ IEC page 6 6 1

IS 12743 : 1989 IECPmb 816(1984)

Meter Power distnbutlon M nand IPrIP\ r--..-. \` -' ,

Commercial site with more man one PDP - - - - -----7 -1 c PDP

POP

Main circuit-\ breaker

I

(O_(O
nT 0 6`

Outlet 0 R e c e p t a c l e (I 2 1
430/84

*

(1~) to :$ branch-to-branch, same urcuit-breaker 0 to (5) branch-to-branch. different circuit-breakers

FIG. 60).

- Illustration

of the v a r i o u s p r o p a g a t i o n t r a n s i e n t p a t h s f o r d i f f e r e n t c_wnditions (after Smith [2] (Sub-clause 3.1)).

(IECpage 67)

36

Is 12743: 1989 IEChb 816(1984)

Mean differential mode insertion loss 120
P

100 Sample size D z 60 Path ;60 C .o C P = 40 z d 20 Path Path 0
0

o= 16dB -

Path@ to @

@I to @

.

Paih

6 to @

@ to @ _ @ to @

_

.

n= 4

a-10 MHz Frequency

u= 2 d B

*

Path " @ to @

-20 400 kHz

k

1 MHz

100 MHz
43m4

Path definitions: @

to @ same outlet

@ to @ same branch @ to @ branch-to-branch, same circuit-breaker @ to @ branch-to-branch. different circuit-breakers @I to @ branch-to-branch, different PDPs @ to @I house-to-house

F I G. 66). - The insertion loss for the varibus paths described in Figure 6~) (after Smith [2]

(Sub-clause 3.1)).

37

( IEC page 68)

IS 12743:1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984 )

CALIBRATION. Injection cable Measurement cable

Current probe arranged tor

Current probe arranged for DM measurement

MEASUREMENT:

InjectIon current probe (DM)

Pick-up current probe
43x94

Flc;. 6c.. - Current probk technique for signal injection (Sub-clause 3.1).

( IEC page 69 >

38

IS 12743:1989 IEC Pub 816(1984)

Input t

Detector

I

I

I

Processor

I

I

t

I
(For example: amplitude rise-time duration)

I

Counter

---

Classifier

---

Analyzer

l--

I

Control system

t-

t

t

t

(For example: Indicating meter C.R.T. prmter@otter)

Output display

F I G. 7. - Relation Detween parts of measuring instruments (Clause 5).

39

(IEC page 70)

ss `I2743 : 1989 IECPub8t6(1984)

Range of interest

_--____

\ t--\ /

/

&has , signals !

,,,

1 \

J

.,

Frequency
434/84

F I G. 8. - Occurrence of aliasing (Sub-clause 5.512.1 a)).

..-._._
2 &IT

T 0 6m _.-.-.-.-.-.-I-._

FFT

m - 6 N = 1024 I Fourier Integral

0.1

I

I

I

0.3 Normahzed frequency flf,
435/84

F I G. 9. - FIT-spectrum and Fourier integral of a trapezoidal pulse (Sub-clause 5.5.2.1~)).

( IEC page 71)

40

ls 12743:1989
IECPub 816(1984)

;: : :. ; : i

i: : :. i : :

: : :

: i . : : i : : :: :. -I

FIG. 1 0 . - Quantization level of the ADC vs. time (Sub-clause 5.5.2.14). .

Balanced amplifier gain = 10

output 3

I.01 pF Input

L

0
43 7,8.

F I G. I I. - Thermistor bridge and x 10 amplifier (Sub-clause 5.6.1).

41

( IEC page 72)

`IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984)

A'

G

4
CN
AD M

I

( ! I

To matns

__I :I H -1 I

1 / _

438/84

F I G. 12. - Test arrangement for the measurement of conducted trinsients (Sub-clauses 6.1.1, 6.1.2.1, 6.1.4).

ctwe conductor

3

--fT----------

i

9

_-I1 \$, ,A-,Lz
I*/`*

r-

3
BNC Input . Ll

FIG. 13..-Physical layout of the probe testing unit (Sub-clause 6.1.2.3~)).

( IEC page 73)

42

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 ( 1984)

conductor

440B4

FIG. 14. - Circuit diagram of the probe testing unit (Sub-clause 6.1.2.3~)).

r Protectwe conductor

Mams plug
II---q

1

.

- - - - a

Metal

L Metal

screen

FIG. 1. - Physical layout of the high impedance monitoring probe (Sub-clauses 6.1.2.3h), c), di and Appendix C).

43

(IEC page 74)

IS 12743 : 1989 IFEJhb 816(1984)

Phase or neutral

Input

Prutective

conductor

442/84

F I G. 16. - Circuit diagram of the high impedance monitoring probe (Sub-clauses 6.1.2.3b). c), d) and Appendix C).

( WC

page- 7 5 1

44

IS 12743 : 1989 IECPub 816(19&d)

APPENDIX A
METHOD FOR MEASURING TRANSIENT CONDUCTED EMISSIONS

Al. Components of the measuring arrangement The most important component of the measuring set is a selective IF amplifier with defined bandwidth, sufficient overload factor, and a following quasi-peak detector (see Figure .At; page 80). The standard C.I.S.P.R. measuring set is suitable. In addition, two indicators are required (two storage oscilloscopes or two peak detectors with memory). One indicator is utilized to measure the spectrum amplitude and the other is for the weighted spectrum amplitude (quasi-peak). The bandwidth for the measuring set is given in Table AI.
T ABLE A I Bandwidth of the measuring set

Frequency range IO kHz to 150 kHz 150 kHz to 30 MHz

Bandwidth (6 dB) 200, Hz 9 kHz (according to C.I.S.P.R.)

The equipment arrangement is shown in Figure Al. The peak value of the IF voltage is a direct measure of the spectrum amplitude. The peak value at the plotter output is a direct measure of the weighted spectrum amplitude (quasi-peak detected noise). The calibration of the indicator for the weighted spectrum amplitude related to repeated pulses is defined by a repetition frequency of 100 Hz for the frequency range from 150 kHz to 30 MHz, and 2.5 Hz for the frequency range from, IO kHz to 150 kHz.

A 1.1

Calibration procedure ,for the measuring set

For the initial calibration, the measuring set is connected to a pulse generator which is capable of producing pulses with the following fundamental characteristics: - peak voltage: 10 v

- pulse width at half-height: 0.1 LLS rise-fail time: <lo ns

- repetition rate: 100 Hz for the frequency range 150 kHz to 30 MHz, 25 Hz for the frequency range IO kHz to I SO kHz.

45

(IEC page 77)

IS 12143 : 1989 IECPob 816(1984) For calibration, the radio interference measuring apparatus should be tuned to the frequency of 200 kHz for the frequency range from 150 kHz to 30 MHz, and to 50 kHz for the frequency range from 10 kHz to 150 kHz. The attenuator of the radio interference measuring apparatus should be set in such a way that the indication of the instrument in the measuring apparatus is in the middle of the indicator range. The position of the attenuator, u,, (dB), is noted, together with the peak values of the indicators. The value at the IF output is designated as CJ,,, and the value after the el,ectrical simulation (square 3 in Figure Al) is designated as IIowcighLcd.

Al.2 Measurement of the spectrum amplitude The unit under test shall be connected to the measuring set and put into operation. Then the attenuator of the measuring set will be adjusted in such a way that the peak values of the indicators can be observed. The new adjusted position of the attenuator is designated a,, the value at the IF output as U, and the value after the plotter output as Using the calibration factors, the final results are obtained: ~w.$qhted' Spectrum amplitude = A A = 20 log ; + (a, - 4) dB (PW
0

Weighted spectrum amplitude = Aweight&

Lighted = 20 log F + (a;- a,, - ak) MB (uVs)
0 wclghtcd

where:

ak - 6

dB for the frequency range 150 kHz to 30 MHz:

4 = 5 dB for the frequency range 10 kHz to 150 kHz.

(IEC Page791

46

IS 12743 : 1989 IEC Pub 816' t 1984 )

IN

IF

PO

3

--.

2

2

I

443184

I

1 2 3

- Radio interference measuring apparatus according to C.I.S.P.R. - Storage oscilloscope or peak detector with memory = Electrical simulation of the mechanical timeconstant of quasi-peak indicator (160 ms)

IN - Input IF - Intermediate frequency output PO = Plotter-output

FE. Al. - Measuring set (example).

47

( 1EC page 80 1

IS 12743 : 1989 IECprib 816(1984)

- Blank page -

( IEC page 8 1)

48

Is 12743 : 1989

lEcPRb816(1984) APPENDIX B
EQUIPMENT INPUT IMPEDANCE The equipment input impedance is not constant as a function of frequency. This is illustrated in Figures Bl to B4, pages 85 and 86, for frequencies above 10 kHz [I 11. The phase-to-neutral (PLN) impedance is usually lower than the impedance phase-to-ground. It can be as low as 4 R or up to IO 000 CI (Figure B4). Near the centre of the test ringing frequency, a high impedance value for any propagation mode (P-G, N-G, or P-N) facilitates testing but has a small insertion loss to the source of the transient. On the other hand, low equipment impedance requires an accurate source impedance to. be certain that the measured insertion loss is realistic.

All of the impedance values given in Figures BI to B4 are measured under normal operating conditions of the equipment.

49

!IS 12743 : 1989 IECPob 816(1984)

FIGURES Bl TO B4 impedance magnitudes measured The between phase and ground (P-G), neutral and ground (N-G) . and phase to neutral (P-N) (after Rhoades [ 111). In all cases, the full mains power is applied to the equipment and the impedance is a small signal impedance at the test frequency. The current (r.m.s.) flowing from the mains varied from 2 A to 30 A.

( IECpage 84)

50

IS 12743 : 1989 DZCPub 816(1984)
2 3 4 567 2 3 45676 2 3 4 5670 2 3

10 Ka

10 kliz

100 kHz

1 -MHz Frequency

10 MHz

1 IU IMHz
444/84

F IGURE Bl

2

3

456789

2

3 4 5676

2

3

4

56769

10K
--jib

1K

100

-_ 1.25 MHz

10 10 kHr 100 kHz 1 MHz Frequency 10 MHz 100 MHz
44M34

F IGURE B 2

51

( IEC page 85)

Is 12743:198!l
IECPmb 816(1984)
10K lzl

1K

100

10
10 ktiz 100 kHz

1 MHz Frequency

10 MHz

D MHz
446/84

FIGURE B3

i i
1.25 MHz

\

10 kHz

100 kliz

1 MHz

1U MHz

103 MHz
44 7,`h4

( IEC page 86)

52

IS 12143 : 1989 IEC Pub 816 (1984)

- Blank page -

53

( IEC page.87 )

IS 12743 : 1989 IECPub 816(1984)

APPENDIX C
EXAMPLE OF A MOkITORING PROBE (See Figure 15, page 74) The probe consists' of a metal box on which the plug is mounted. The protective conductor is connected directly to the metal box. Inside, the box is divided into two compartments (one for the neutral coupling network and one for the phase coupling network) by means of a metal screen, which is soldered to the walls of the box and, consequently, to the protective conductor. As a result, there is good cross-talk isolation, and the coupling networks have a very low impedance ground return path. Moreover, the cross-talk, in practice present between the two pits of the plug, is retained. The coupling network circuit diagram is shown in Figure 16, page 75. The specifications of the network will be met by the probe-testing arrangement according to Sub-clause 6.1.2.3. The output of the network is connected to a BNC connector, and the position of the connector is chosen such that low-inductance interconnections are possible.

(IEC page 89)

54

IS 12743 : 1989 IECPub 816(19?34)

BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES
[1] Malack, J. A. and Engstrom, J.,

"RF Impedance of United States and European Power Lines", IEEE Trans. EMC, Vol. EMC-18, No. I, February 1976, pp. 36-38.

[2] Smith, A. A., "Propagation of Interference Currents on Power Mains", Symposium on EMC, Rotterdam, 1979, pp. 465-470. [3] "The Fundamentals of Signal Analysis", Hewlett-Packard Application-Note 243. [4] Oppenheim, A. V. and Schafer, R. W., "Digital Signal Processing", Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 1975. [5] Ramirez, R. W., "The FFT errors are predictable, therefore manageable", Electronics, June 13, 1974. [6] "Windowing to control FFT leakage", Tektronix Application Note 47 Ll.0. [7] C.I.S.P.R. Publication 16. [8] Kanada, M., "The characteristics of broadband, isotopic electric and magnetic field probes", National Bureau of Standards Report NBSIR 77-868. [9] Coenen, M. J. and Jongepier, A., "Active broadband antennas in the 10 kHz-30 MHz range", Symposium on EMC, Zurich, 1983, pp. 271-274. [lo] Rehkopf, H. L., "Simplt~ed method of analyzing transients in interference prediction", IEEE Symposium on EMC, San Francisco, USA, 1966. [I I] Rhoades, W. T., "Designing commercial equipment for conducted susceptibility", IEEE Symposium on EMC, San Diego, USA, 1979, pp. 171-179.

55

(IECpage90)

-----

-~

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of/n&an Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS Revision of Indian Standards Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. LTD 22 (1180)

Amesdmeats Issued She Publication Amend NO.
Date of rssue

Text Affected

_*,.\ -x1 -.

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone [331 01 31 1331 13 75 37 86 62 2 18 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95 I

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR, ,& PATNA. TRIVANDRUM.
Printed at Simco Printino Press, Delhi. lndla

