97704777 Wad IS 16653 : 2017 
Indian Standard 


Geosynthetics — Needle Punched 
Nonwoven Geobags for Coastal and 
Waterways Protection — Specification 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM em 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM чач, 9 четте WAL AMT, ae І5ееП-110002 
игр ч a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in  www.standardsbis.in 


April 2017 Price Group 7 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


Geobags find wide usage in riverbank, beach protection and offshore breakwaters for costal and waterways 
protection. Geobags, a geosynthetic product made of polyester or polypropylene has been used worldwide for 
protecting riverbanks and hydraulic structures from severe scouring and erosion. Geobags have also been used as 
revetments, breakwaters, etc, to build structural erosion protection measures. Such bags provide stability and 
prevent soil/coastal erosion. Geobag technology possesses minimal impacts on fish resources and facilitates fishing 
activities. It facilitates the algal community to grow. The technology has been popular worldwide due to its easier 
installation, cost effectiveness, their technical efficiency and environmental friendliness in comparison to the 
conventional erosion protection work using cement concrete block, gravel, hard rock, etc. 


Worldwide it has been seen that erosion protection work using geobags requires less installation and maintenance 
cost, light weight equipment, less space for construction work, much less transportation cost and less energy 
requirement. The constructing materials (sand) of geobag are locally available and cost-effective compared to 
importing boulders from other sites. The geobags are lighter in weight than the traditional materials and their 
manufacturing and quality control are easy as compared to the cement concrete blocks and boulders. Geobags are 
filled with sand/dredged material and are generally used when sea shores or bunds adjacent to rivers are to be 
protected in case of an emergency. 


For best performance, geobags have to be filled to maximum volume and density with sand. These are installed in 
a pattern-placed arrangement that greatly improves their overall stability and performance. Filling task can be 
efficiently done by using water to compact the sand (hydraulically filling the sand into a bag). Filled density and 
volume are important from the view point of maximizing the stability, but it is also important from the view point 
of minimizing the effects of fill liquefaction and loss of shape of the geobags. To ensure that the contained fill is 
maintained in its dense state, the geo-textile fabric shall have adequate tensile strength. 


One major advantage of geobags is that these small volume units can be used to construct hydraulic and marine 
structures that require adherence to designed geometrical shape accurately. This makes them preferable to large 
volume units such as geocontainers when specific slope and height tolerances are to be attained. Another advantage 
of small volume units of geobags is that maintenance and remedial works can be carried out easily by replacing 
the failed bags. This is much simpler than carrying out remedial works on larger volume containment units. 


Geobags can be used for a range of hydraulic and marine applications as given below: 


a) Revetments — Geobags are used for revetments where their contained fill is used to provide stability and 
prevent erosion. Like geotubes, geobags have been used for both submerged and exposed revetments. 
Much of the details concerning geotube revetments also apply to the geobag revetments. To prevent 
erosion of the foundation soil at the toe of the revetment, it is common practice to extend the bottom 
layer of the geobags so that the main revetment cannot be undermined. 

b) Groynes — Geobags can be used to construct groynes to prevent the shoreline movement of sediments. 

c) Artificial reefs — Geobags can be used to construct artificial reefs. A major advantage of geobags is that, 
they can be installed to better geometric tolerances than relatively large volume geocontainers. Also 
being smaller in volume and having considerably better fill density, make the geobags less prone to 
volume changes than the relatively large volume geocontainers. Artificial reefs are normally required to 
dissipate wave energy and thus prevent erosion of the protected shoreline. Here the reef shall have 
desired height and area, with the geobags providing a mass gravity structure. Further as with geocontainers, 
geobags can be used for slope buttressing and for construction of protection dykes. 


Geobags are readily available and transportable (when empty) and can be easily filled with local sand and formed 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 16653 : 2017 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — NEEDLE PUNCHED NONWOVEN 
GEOBAGS FOR COASTAL AND WATERWAYS 
PROTECTION — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies requirements for three types 
of geobags made from needle punched non-woven 
fabric of polyester (PES) or polypropylene (PP), used 
for coastal and waterways protection applications such 
as revetments; river training; construction of groynes 
and artificial reefs; etc, in order to minimize soil 
erosion and control floods. 


NOTES 


1 The survivability/durability of geobag depends upon water 
pressure, soil condition, type of contents of geobag that is sand 
or gravels, water pH and temperature etc. 


2 Woven slit film geotextiles, that is, geotextiles made from 
yarns of a flat, tape-like character, shall not be used for the 
manufacture of geobags for permanent erosion control 
applications 


1.2 This standard does not apply to other types of geo- 
synthetic erosion control materials such as turf 
reinforcement mats. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated in Annex A. 


3 DEFINITIONS 


The definitions given in IS 13321 (Parts 1) and the 
following shall apply. 


3.1 Minimum Average Bag Value (MABV) - MABV 
is the minimum average value of geobags minus two 
standard deviations. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Material of Geobags 


4.1.1 Geobags shall be made from needle punched 
nonwoven fabric (Types 1 to 3) manufactured from 
ultra violet stabilized polyester or polypropylene and 
constituent fibre shall be identified by the microscopic 
and confirmatory tests as specified in IS 667; 
depending upon the end use requirements and shall 
conform to the requirements as specified in Table 1. 
The geobags shall be inert to commonly encountered 


chemicals, resistant to rot and mildew and shall have 
no tear or defects which adversely affect or alter its 
physical properties. 


4.1.2 All property values except apparent opening size in 
these specifications represent minimum average bag values 
(MABV). Average of test results from any sampled bag in 
alotshall meet or exceed the minimum values specified in 
this standard. In case ofapparent opening size, the MABV 
shall represent the maximum average bag value. 


4.1.3 Polymers used in the manufacture of geobags, shall 
consist of long chain synthetic polymers, composed of 
at least 95 percent by weight of virgin polypropylene or 
polyester. In any case recycled polyester shall not be 
permitted in view of its inherent non-uniformity and 
substandard quality as compared to virgin polyester 
fibre. The isophthalic acid content of the virgin polyester 
fiber shall be zero when tested by the method prescribed 
in Annex C. Polypropylene fiber generally used is virgin 
only as it is not recycled. 


4.2 Geobags shall be dimensionally stable and able to 
retain their geometry under manufacture, transport and 
installation. 


4.3 Prefabrication of Geobags 


Geobags shall be prefabricated using UV stabilized 
polyester/polypropylene thread. The geobags shall have 
seam with double line chain stitches along the edges on 
two sides with a stitch density of 20 + 2 stitches/dm. 
Number of stitches shall be chosen in such a way that 
seam strength is achieved at least 80 percent of fabric 
strength. If seam is intact then the strength of fabric broken 
shall be at least 80 percent of its original strength. The 
sewing shall be done at a minimum distance of 10 mm 
from edges by using a ring spun polyester/polypropylene 
thread, as the case may be, of linear density 1 500 - 2 500 
Denier (167 — 278 Tex) for bags up to 400 g/n and of 2 
500 - 3 500 Denier (278 - 389 Tex) for bags greater than 
400 g/m?. The distance between the two rows of stitches 
shall be 5 to 10 mm. Stitch lines on both sides ofthe bags 
shall continue beyond the bag's open mouth and end in 
a loose loop of thread of length 25 to 50 mm. The stitching 
shall be uniform without any loose thread or knot. 


5 MARKING AND LABELLING 


5.1 The geobags shall be marked with the following by 
attaching the printed labels: 


IS 16653 : 2017 


Table 1 Requirements of Needle Punched Nonwoven Geobags for 
Coastal / Waterways Protection 
(Clause 4.1.1) 


SI Characteristics(s) Requirement(s) Method of Test, Ref to 
No. M ——————— 
Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
A. Mechanical Properties: 
i) Wide with tensile strength, KN/m, Min: IS 13162 (Part 5) 
a) Machine direction 15 20 24 
b) Cross machine direction 15 20 24 
ii) Elongation, percent, Min: IS 13162 (Part 5) 
a) Machine direction 50 50 50 
b) Cross machine direction 50 50 50 
iii) Seam strength, Percent of actual fabric 80 80 80 IS 15060 
strength, Min 
iv) Abrasion resistance, Retained tensile 95 95 95 IS 14714 


strength in machine and cross machine 

direction, Min (see Note 1) 

OR 

Abrasion resistance, Retained tensile 80 80 80 Annex B 
strength in machine and cross machine 

direction, Min (see Note 1) 


v) Trapezoidal tear strength, N, Min: IS 14293 
a) Machine direction 340 450 600 
b) Cross machine direction 340 450 600 

vi) CBR puncture resistance, N, Min 3000 4000 4700 IS 16078 

B. Hydraulic Properties: 

i) Permittivity, 671, Min 1.25 1.10 1.00 IS 14324 

ii) Water permeability at 100 mm 60 40 30 IS 14324 
water head, 1/m?/see, Min 

iii) Apparent opening size (AOS), 75 75 75 IS 14294 


micrometer, Max 
C. Physical Properties: 


i) Thickness at 2 kPa, mm, Min 3.0 3.0 4.0 IS 13162 (Part 3) 
ii) Polymer Type; Polyester (PES) or PES/PP PES/PP PES/PP IS 667 
Polypropylene (PP) 
iii) Mass, g/m’, Min 300 400 600 IS 14716 
iv) Length of geobag, m, Min: IS 1954 
a) Small Size 1.00 1.00 1.00 
b) Large Size 2.00 2.00 2.00 
v) Width of geobag (Stich to stich), m, IS 1954 
Min: 
a) Small size bag 0.70 0.70 0.70 
b) Large size bag 1.50 1.50 1.50 
vi) Mass of sand filled geobag, kg, Min: Electronic weighing 
a) Small size bag 126 126 126 balance 
b) Large size bag 1350 1350 1350 
vii) Durability (see Note 2) Shall be durable for a minimum of 5 years in natural 
soil with 4 € pH x 9 and soil temperature between 
-209С to 25°C. 
viii) UV resistance after 500 h, Retained 80 80 80 IS 13162 (Part 2) 


tensile strength in machine and cross 
machine direction, percent, Min 


NOTES 

1 As per agreement between the buyer and the seller, abrasion resistance test is to be carried out either by test method specified in 
IS 14714 or as per Annex B. 

2 Manufacturer shall provide certificate for estimated durability of geobags. 


a) Identification ofthe geo-textile material as per 
manufacturer's recommendation, for example, 
polypropylene nonwoven geobags for coastal/ 
waterways protection; 

b) Туре of geobag/mass, in g/m’, of fabric used 
for manufacture of geobag; 

c) Dimensions (length and width) of bag; 

d) Lot number and date of manufacture; 

d) Manufacturer's name, initials or trade-mark; 

e) The Country of origin; and 

f) Any other information/instruction provided by 
the manufacturer/required under law. 


5.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The geobags may also be marked with the Standard 
Mark. 


5.2.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions ofthe Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 
and Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The details 
of conditions under which the license for the use ofthe 
Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or 
producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


6 PACKING 


Each bundle shall be labelled or tagged to provide 
product identification sufficient for field identification 
as well as inventory and quality control purpose. 
Bundles shall be stored in a manner which protects them 
from adverse impact of weather. If stored outdoors, they 
shall be elevated and protected with a waterproof cover. 
50 geobags are laid flat in a HDPE tube or wrapped in 
a HDPE film of minimum thickness of 60 microns and 
tied with a HDPE/PP tape so as to remove excess air 
and to prevent it from the adverse impact of heat and 
moisture, oil, grease, dirt, dust and other stains as well 
as to extended ultra-violet exposure during shipment 
and storage prior to deployment and placement. 


7 STORAGE AND HANDLING 


7.1 During storage, geobags shall be elevated off the 
ground and adequately protected from the following: 


a) Site construction damage; 


IS 16653 : 2017 


b) Excessive precipitation; 

c) Extended exposure to sunlight; 

d) Aggressive chemicals; 

e) Flames or temperatures in excess of 60°C; 

f) Excessive mud, wet concrete, epoxy, or other 
deleterious materials coming in contact with 
and affixing to the geo-textile material; 

g) Any other environmental condition that may 
damage the physical property values. 


7.2 The geobags shall be stored at temperatures above 
10°C and below 40°C 


7.3 The geobags shall be laid flat. 


7.4 The geobags shall not be directly exposed to 
sunlight for a period longer than the period 
recommended by the manufacturer. 


7.5 The geobags shall be kept dry until installation, 
and shall not be stored directly on the ground. 


8 SAMPLING AND CRITERIA 
CONFORMITY 


FOR 


8.1 Lot 


The number of geobags of the same size, type and 
quality delivered to a buyer against one dispatch note 
shall constitute a lot. 


8.2 The number of geobags to be selected at random 
shall be according to col 2 and col 3 of Table 2. To ensure 
the randomness of selection, IS 4905 may be followed. 


8.3 NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR 
CONFORMITY 


8.3.1 The number of geobags to be selected for length, 
width, mass, thickness, mass of sand to be filled and 
pre-fabrication requirements shall be in accordance 
with col 3 of Table 2. For wide width tensile strength, 
elongation, seam strength and trapezoidal tear strength, 
the number of geobags selected shall be in accordance 
with col 5 of Table 2. For all other tests, the number of 
geobags selected shall be as given in col 6 of Table 2. 

NOTE — If agreed to between the buyer and the seller, the 


sampling at the consumer/user end at site shall be carried out 
for deciding the conformity of the lot. 


Table 2 Sample Size 
(Clauses 8.2, 8.3.1 and 8.3.2) 


SI Lot Size (No. of Sample Size (No. of 
No. bundles of 50 Geobags) Geobags) 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Up to 100 5 
ii) 101 to 200 8 
ili) 201 to 300 13 
iv) 301 to 500 20 
v) 501 to 1000 32 


vi) 1 001 and above 50 


Permissible Number of 
Non-conforming Bags 


Sub-Sample Size — Sub-Sub-Sample Size 
(No. of Geobags) (No. of Geobags) 


(4) (5) (6) 


0 2 1 
1 4 2 
1 5 3 
2 8 4 
3 10 5 
3 10 6 


IS 16653 : 2017 


8.3.2 All the geobags selected from the lot shall be 
tested for various requirements as per methods specified 
in relevant standards as specified in Table 1 and 4.1.1, 
4.1.3, 4.2 and 4.3. A geobag shall be declared defective 
if it does not meet any of the requirements specified in 
Table 1 and in 4.1.1, 4.1.3, 4.2 and 4.3. The lot shall 
be declared conforming to this standard, if the average 
of test results from sampled bags in a lot shall meet or 
exceed the minimum values specified in this standard 


against each requirement; except in case of apparent 
opening size where the average value of test results 
shall not be more than the value specified in Table 1. 
The lot shall also be declared conforming to this 
standard, if the number of defective geobags does not 
exceed the values specified in col 4 of Table 2. In 
addition to above the lot shall meet the requirements 
of marking and labelling (see 5.1), packing (see 6) and 
storage and handling (see 7.1 to 7.5). 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 2) 
LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


IS No. Title 
667 : 1981 Methods for identification of textile 
fibres (with supplement) ( first 
revision ) 


1954 : 1990 Determination of length and width of 
woven fabrics — Methods (second 
revision) 

4905 : 2015 Random sampling and randomization 
procedures ( first revision ) 

13162 Geotextiles — Methods of test 


(Part 2): 1991 Determination of resistance to the 
exposure of ultraviolet light and water 
(Xenon-Arc type apparatus) 
Determination of thickness at 
specified pressures 

Determination of tensile properties 
using a wide width strip 

Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: 


(Part 3) : 1992 
(Part 5) : 1992 


13321 (Part 1): 


IS No. Title 
1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 

properties 

14293 : 1995 Geotextiles — Method of test for 
trapezoid tearing strength 

14294 : 1995 Geotextiles — Method for 
determination of apparent opening 
size by dry sieving technique 

14324 : 1995 Geotextiles — Methods of test for 
determination of water permeability- 
permittivity 

14714 : 1999 Geotextiles — Determination of 
abrasion resistance 

14716 : 1999 Geotextiles — Determination of mass 
per unit area 

15060 : 2001 Geotextiles — Tensile test for joints/ 
seams by wide-width method 

16078 : 2013 Geosynthetics — Static puncture test 


(CBR test) 


IS 16653 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
[Table 1, SI No. (iv)] 
ABRASION RESISTANCE TEST 


B-1 PRINCIPLE 


The test method simulates abrasion loads on geobags 
such as that caused by the movement of rocks in a 
revetment. A mixture of stone chippings and water 
passes over geobag samples installed in a rotating 
drum for 40 000 revolutions in an anti-clockwise 
direction and 40 000 revolutions in a clockwise 
direction. If the samples are not destroyed in the test 
their tensile strength, thickness and mass per unit area 
are subsequently determined. The changes in the test 
values during the test are used to assess the abrasion 
resistance. 


B-2 SAMPLING, NUMBER OF SAMPLES AND 
CONDITIONING 


Eight samples, each measuring 200 x 300 mm, are cut 
out of the laboratory sample (4 each in machine and 
cross machine direction). The samples are stored under 
water with a temperature of 20 + 5°C for a minimum 
of 24 h prior to the test. The samples are fastened onto 
steel plates for the test and installed in the abrasion 
sections of the test apparatus. The upper surface of the 
geobag sample shall be exposed to the abrasion loads. 


B-3 TEST APPARATUS 


B-3.1 The test apparatus (see Fig. 1) comprises an 
octagonal steel drum with eight test sections driven by 
a horizontal shaft, an adjustable drive motor, an 
electronic control system and a test frame. The direction 
of rotation can be changed and the number of 
revolutions per minute and the total number of 
revolutions can be set as required. 


B-3.2 The composition of the abrasive material shall 
be as follows: 


a) 2kgof8/11 mm angular-grained high-quality 
basalt chippings, 

b) 1 kg of 5/8 mm angular-grained high-quality 
basalt chippings, 

c) 1kg of 2/5 mm angular-grained high-quality 
basalt chippings, and 


d) 81 of water. 


B-3.3 Ifa different test set-up is used, the dimensions, 
geometry and rotational speed of the test drum and 
the type and quantities of abrasive material used shall 
be the same as those used for the test with given 
apparatus. 


B-3.4 Other particle sizes can be used for suitability 
tests, depending on the loads expected to occur on 
site. 


B-5 PROCEDURE 


B-5.1 The test comprises two abrasion phases of 40 000 
revolutions each. Set the drum speed at 16 rpm and 
reverse the direction of rotation every 5 000 revolutions. 
Examine the samples visually after the first 40 000 
revolutions. If the samples have not been destroyed 
renew the abrasion mixture and carry out the second 
phase. 


B-5.2 If the samples have not been destroyed after 
80 000 revolutions, take four samples from the centers 
of the abraded surfaces and test their tensile strength 
as per the method given in IS 13162 (Part 5). Before 
conducting the tensile strength test, prepare the 
samples by washing them thoroughly and air drying 
them. 


B-6 CALCULATION 


Determine the percent retention of tensile strength in 
machine direction (MD) and cross machine direction 
(CD) as follows: 


b 
Percent retention of tensile strength = 2 Х 100 


where 


а = tensile strength of the sample (MD or CD) 
before abrasion test, and 

b = tensile strength of the sample (MD or CD) 
after abrasion test. 


IS 16653 : 2017 


BELTS 


BAUER GEARBOX 
TYP D14V22V / 146K 
AND RULES GEARBOX 


CONTROL UNIT FOR 
THERMAL TRANSFORMATION 


INDUCTIVE 
TRAVELERS 


87 


CARTRIDGES 
FOR BASALT SPLIT 


GEOTEXTILE PROBE 290 x 200 
TEST AREA 280 x 170 


FiG. 1 TEST APPARATUS 


IS 16653 : 2017 


ANNEX C 
(Clause 4.1.3) 
METHOD OF TEST FOR ISOPHTHALIC ACID CONTENT OF THE VIRGIN POLYESTER FIBRE 


C-1 PRINCIPLE 


This method is applicable to measure isophthalic acid 
content in polyethylene terephthalate sample. The 
polymer sample is digested in benzyl alcohol, 
depolymerized then esterified to dibenzyl isophthalate, 
dibenzyl terephthalate and glycol's. Isopropyl titanate 
is added as a depolymerization catalyst. The sample is 
analyzed by gas chromatography and the peak areas of 
the two esters are used to estimate the weight percentage 
dimethyl isophthalate using an internal standard. 


C-2 POTENTIAL ENVIORNMENT ISSUE 


C-2.1 In case of spillage, it can lead to pollution near 
the workplace area and environment hazard. After 
analysis sample is disposed as per laid down procedure. 


C-2.2 Hydrogen, nitrogen and instrument air are used 
during analysis. The hydrogen gas has no adverse 
ecological effects are expected. Hydrogen does not 
contain any Class I or Class II ozone depleting 
chemicals. However, hydrogen is explosive. Gaseous 
nitrogen is an inert non-flammable gas. High 
concentration in air may cause deficiency of oxygen 
with the risk of unconsciousness and death. Chloroform 
in high concentration in air can kill most animals in 
few minutes. 


C-3 POTENTIAL SAFETY, OCCUPATIONAL 
HEALTH ISSUES 


C-3.1 Proper PPE’s like safety goggles, apron, surgical 
hand gloves to be used. 


C-3.2 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


C-3.3 Leak check to be carried out while handling of 
gas cylinder. 


C-3.4 Glassware is to be handled with care. 


C-3.5 Inhalation of chloroform causes dilation pupils 
with reduced reaction to light as well as reduced 
intraocculat pressure, Irritation of mucous membrane, 
conjunctiva. If contacted with skin and eyes cause 
irritation. Seek medical advice, if inhaled. 


C-3.6 Use leather hand gloves while handling hot 
apparatus and equipments. 


C-4 APPARATUS 


C-4.1 Gas Chromatograph (GC), with flame 
ionization detector. 


C-4.2 Capillary Column, 60 m length and 0.53 mm 
ID МХТ ® - 1 


C-4.3 Dispensette ог Pipette, 2 ml, 5 ml and 10 ml. 
C-4.4 Volumetric Flask, 100 ml, 500 ml. 

C-4.5 Beaker 

C-4.6 Funnel 

C-4.7 50 ml Flask 


C-4.8 Heating Mental, to maintain temperature of 
250°С. 


С-4.9 AR Grade Dimethyl Isopthalate (DMI) 
C-4.10 AR Grade Benzyl Alcohol 

C-4.11 AR Grade Chloroform 

C-4.12 AR Grade Isopropyl Titnate 

C-4.13 AR Grade Dimethyl Suburate 

C-5 PREPARATION OF STANDARD SOLUTIONS 
C-5.1 Stock Dibenzyl Suburate (Internal Standard) 


Solution 


Take 1.0 + 0.01 g of dimethyl suburate (DMS). Add 
100 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 
titnate and digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 500 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. 
Dimethyl suburate will get converted into dibenzyl 
suburate (DBS). Mark the stock solution as DBS per 
2ml = X-XXXX mg 


C-5.2 Stock Dimethyl! Isopthalate (DMI) Solution 


Take 0.2 + 0.01 g of dimethyl isopthalate (DMI). Add 
40 ml of benzyl alcohol and 6 to 7 drops of isopropyl 
titnate digest it for 2 h. Allow it to cool up to room 
temperature then make the volume to 100 ml by 
carefully rinsing the flask by isopropyl alcohol. This 
will be converted to dibenzyl isopthalate (DBI). Mark 
the stock solution as DBI per 2 ml = Х-ХХХХ mg. 


C-5.3 Standard Solution for Response Factor 


Take 2 ml of solution as prepared in C-5.1 and 2 ml of 
solution as prepared in C-5.2. Add 10 ml of chloroform. 


C-5.4 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Stock Solution 
Weigh out accurately 0.200 + 0.005 g of pure DMI 


IS 16653 : 2017 


powder into round bottom flask, add 30 ml of benzyl 
alcohol and 3 drops of isopropyl titante, reflux the 
solution for 5 h reagent and dilute to 100 g by isopropyl 
alcohol, calculate actual DMI concentration by 
considering its purity and label the flask with actual 
weight taken. Consider this weight during calculation 
of IPA by GC. 


C-5.5 2.0 Percent Standard IPA Solution for GC 
Injection 


Take 2.0 ml IPA stock solution and add 2 ml internal 
standard (see C-5.1) and further add 10 ml of 
chloroform, same bottle to be labelled as 2.0 percent 
IPA Inject 1 ul in GC. 


C-6 CALIBRATION FOR PERFORMANCE 
CHECK — TWICE /MONTH STANDARD CHIPS 


C-7 ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE 


Inject 1 ul of standard solution for response factor 
(see C-5.3) and calculate response factor. Inject 1 ul 
of 2 percent standard IPA solution. If value of 2.0 
percent standard IPA solution is varying in the range 
of 0.01 percent, then there is no need for change in 
response factor. If there is deviation in value then rerun 
standard solution for response factor (see C-5.3). 
Weigh 0.2 + 0.02 g of chips into the round bottom flask. 
Add 2 ml of benzyl alcohol. Add 3 drops of isopropyl 
titanate. Digest the solution for 1 h. Allow it to cool up 
to room temperature. Add 10 ml of chloroform. Add 
2 ml of internal standard solution that is solution as 


prepared in C-5.1 and shake vigorously. Inject 1 ul of 
sample solution into gas chromatograph. 


C-8 CHROMATOGRAPH SETTINGS 


Injector temperature 300°C 
Detector temperature 320°C 
Oven temperature 270°C 

Gas flow rates 
Nitrogen 20 psig 
Hydrogen : 30+ 10 ml/min 
Air : 300+ 20 ml/min 
Attenuation 1-4 
Range 2 

C-9 CALCULATION 

A, XW, 


Response factor (RF) = A, xW, 
where 
A, = area of dibenzyl suburate (DBS) (Internal 
standard) solution; 
W, = weight of DBS in solution, in mg; 
A, = area of DBI in standard solution; and 
W, = weight of DBI in standard solution, in mg. 


RF x mg Internal Standard х 

Area of IPA in sample x 100 

Weight of sample, in mg x 
Area of internal standard in sample 


Percent IPA = 


IS 16653 : 2017 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword) 


GUIDELINES FOR USE OF POLYESTER/POLYPROPYLENE RAW MATERIALS AND TYPE OF 
GEOBAG FOR MANUFACTURE OF GEOBAGS 


D-0 Polymeric materials like polypropylene and 
polyester are primarily used in the manufacture of geo- 
bags depending upon the end use properties required. 


D-1 POLYPROPYLENE (PP) 


Polypropylene is one ofthe raw materials used as fiber 
in geo-textiles and geo-bags. Polypropylene has 
advantage over other materials due to its lower density 
and higher chemical resistance to both acidic and 
alkaline environments. However, repetitive methyl 
groups attached along the backbone chain limit the 
chains’ mobility, leading to different material behavior. 
Overall, the lower mobility of PP chains reduces 
internal chain reorganization. PP has poor creep 
resistance compared to polyester due to structure of 
molecules. The chemical resistance of polyesters is in 
the pH range of 3.0-9.0 which is normally the case of 
river waters where as chemical resistance of 
polypropylene is in the pH range of 2.0 to 13.0. 
PPs are not sensitive to environmental stress cracking, 
but are more sensitive to oxidation due to the presence 
of weaker carbon-hydrogen bonds on the tertiary carbon 
atom. Adequate stabilization against oxidation (thermo 
and photo oxidation) is, therefore, required. In short, 
Polypropylene has the following properties: 


a) Polypropylene has excellent chemical 
resistance; 

b) Polypropylene is very much resistant to 
microbiological attacks; 

c) Polypropylene is not sensitive to 
environmental stress cracking; 

d) Polypropylene has a lesser resistance to 
internal chain reorganization (creep, etc) than 
polyesters, especially at low temperatures; and 

e) Polypropylene is very sensitive to oxidation 
and must also be stabilized with pigments, 
antioxidants and/or UV stabilizers to prevent 
degradation. 


D-2 POLYESTER 


D-2.1 Polyester (PET) 15 one of the main raw materials 
used in the manufacture of geobags, especially when 
high wettability is required (for example in geo-bags). 
PET fibres usually have a highly oriented semi- 
crystalline structure in order to reach the desired 
physical properties. Its chemical structure includes ester 


groups, which are the important polymeric links in terms 
of durability. PET fibres typically have an excellent 
chemical resistance to many products such as salts, 
organic solvents and hydrocarbons. However, under 
certain conditions (beyond pH of 11.0 or less than 3.0 
which is not the case in river waters), they may be 
sensitive to chemicals such as inorganic acids, 
halogenated organic acids, inorganic and organic bases, 
benzyl alcohol and halogenated phenols. Its molecular 
structure is overall less sensitive to oxidation than PPs. 
Some chemical bonds of PET can be oxidized under 
the action of heat (thermo oxidation) or radiation 
(photo-oxidation). However, these reactions can be 
prevented with appropriate stabilizers. The glass 
transition of PET is in the range of 70?C. Chain 
movements at ambient temperature are thus very 
limited. This gives PET fibers an excellent resistance 
to creep and other process involving internal chain 
reorganization especially at wide range of temperatures. 


D-2.2 In resume, the following durability concerns 
should be addressed for polyester geosynthetics: 


a) Good chemical resistance to several classes 
of chemicals; 

b) Hydrolysis potential (beyond pH range of 
3.0-9.0) in alkaline or acid environments 
should be considered as polyester can be 
susceptible to damage in high pH applications; 

c) Excellent resistance to internal chain 
reorganization (that is creep) at typical 
emperatures up to about 60°C; 

d) Polyester can also be susceptible to heightened 
degradation where there is lime treated soil, 
concrete or cement present; and 

e) Oxidation (especially thermo and photo 
oxidation) is also a concern, in lesser extent 
than PP, and requires material stabilization. 


D-3 TYPE OF GEO-BAG 


The survivability/durability of geo-bag depends on 
water pressure, soil condition, type of contents of geo- 
bag that is sand or gravels, water pH, and type of geobag 
that is woven, spun bonded nonwoven or needle 
punched nonwoven and is in the following descending 
order: 


Woven geobag < Spun bonded Nonwoven geobag < 
Needle punched nonwoven geobag’ 


IS 16653 : 2017 


ANNEX E 
(Foreword) 
GUIDELINES FOR INSTALLATION OF GEOBAGS 


E-1 PREAMBLE 


E-1.1 Geobags are extensively used for river channel 
bed and bank protection, coastal/beach protection, 
scour protection of bridge piers, abutments, hydraulic 
structures, etc and construction of offshore breakwaters. 
It facilitates the algal community to grow. The proven 
advantages of geobags include easy and fast installation 
even underwater, less transportation cost, less 
maintenance, facilitation of growth of algal community, 
low environmental impact, less maintenance, less 
energy input, etc. Geobags offer proven, durable, 
economic, eco-friendly and easy to construct solutions 
for a wide range of applications. 


E-1.2 Geobags are filled with sand/ dredged material 
and are used in planned structural erosion control and 
scour protection works. Geo-textile bags have also been 
used as revetments, breakwaters, etc to build structural 
erosion protection measures. 


E-1.3 For ensuring required performance and service 
life of geobag works proper care has to be exercised in 
selection of the geotextile material, dimensions of the 
bags, fabrication of bags, selection of fill material as 
per design. 


E-2 HANDLING AND STORAGE AT SITE 


E-2.1 Geobags are packed in bundle form with suitable 
packing material and transported by appropriate means 
to protect the geobags and avoid any type of damage. 
Rolls of geobags are loaded manually/with Forklift and 
can be unloaded in a similar manner at the destination. 
Use of hooks shall be avoided for loading and unloading 
of the packages of geobags at site 


E-2.2 The storage yard shall be located in a suitable- 
sized area depending on the quantity of materials 
required for the project. The layout of the storage yard 
shall be planned with due consideration to the 
movement of trucks and other heavy equipment that 
would be involved in the handling, that is loading and 
unloading. 


E-2.3 Geo-textile bags shall be stored in such locations 
where water shall not accumulate and the area shall be 
immune from conditions that may affect the properties 
or performance of the product. 


E-2.4 The geobags shall be stored so as to be protected 
from damage, dirt, grease, water, moisture, mud, 
mechanical abrasions, excessive heat or any other 
damage. The packages shall be stored on a prepared 


surface and to be stacked side by side or one upon the 
other. 


E-2.5 Fire can inflict huge loss and damages to the 
materials stored in the yard. Therefore, adequate 


numbers of fire extinguishers shall be available inside 
the warehouse 


E-2.6 The storage area shall be protected from theft, 
vandalism and any other source which could create 
potential damage to the geobags. 


E-2.7 Under no circumstances, the geobags shall be 
exposed to temperatures in excess of those 
recommended by the manufacturer or 60°C, whichever 
is less. 


E-3 SITE PREPARATIONS 


E-3.1 The site survey and bathymetric survey for the 
affected reach, where the geo-textile bag protection is 
proposed, shall be carried out. 


E-3.2 The surface upon which the geobags are to be 
placed shall be adequately leveled and shall be free of 
protrusions that may cause snag and tear the fabric. 
Protrusions could be like ruts, erosion rills, depressions 
or debris, or any obstruction greater than 150 mm in 
height. 


E-3.3 The surface which is to be protected by the 
geobags (stream bed/bank, shoreline, etc) shall be 
dressed/trimmed to the required grade/profile/slope as 
shown on the drawings or as directed by the engineer. 
Excavation may be mostly carried out by track mounted 
excavators. Lighter excavators may be employed, if 
required. 


E-3.4 The excavated earth may be disposed of by 
tippers/tractors to a suitable distance from the bank 
sides, so as to reduce the overburden on the existing 
bank. 


E-3.5 The loose earth residue remaining after the 
excavation by the machinery may be removed manually. 
The slope formation may be given necessary ramming 
to remove any undulations and corrected to the desired 
slope. At the bottom and top of the slope, anchor trench 
or key shall be prepared as per the required design. 


E-4 COMMENCEMENT OF INSTALLATION 
OF GEOBAGS 


E-4.1 The geo-textile bags shall be filled at a location 
which is preferably higher than the high flood level. 


This would ensure that the filling process of the bag 
remains unaffected by the rain and subsequent changes 
in the water levels. 


E-4.2 The sand used for filling may be transported to 
the site by dumpers and bulldozers or any other 
appropriate mode conducive to the local availability 
and geographical suitability. 


E-5 GEO-TEXTILE BAGS 
LAYING OPERATIONS 


E-5.1 The bags shall be filled with sand by suitable 
methods as approved by the engineer. It shall be ensured 
that the bags are not damaged or excessively distorted 
during filling. 


FILLING AND 


E-5.2 The sand used for filling shall meet the gradation 
and other requirements as specified in the drawings or 
technical specifications of the project or as approved 
by the engineer. 


E-5.3 After the sand filling is completed, the geo-textile 
bag shall be weighed to confirm the desired weight as 
per the specifications and technical requirements ofthe 
project. 


E-5.4 After confirmation of the weight, the geo-textile 
bag shall be stitched at the mouth by means of a bag 
closing machine. Stitching shall continue beyond the 


IS 16653 : 2017 


bag's end in a loose loop of thread of length 25 to 50 
mm. 


E-5.5 After filling, for easy counting and monitoring 
the geo-textile bags may be stored in batches of 100 
numbers or any suitable multiple as per the available 
space at site. 


E-5.6 The placement of geo-textile bags for launching 
apron may be carried out using the motor boat/barge. 
The motor boat/barge may be positioned at the required 
location with the help of Total station and anchored in 
position with the help of anchors. 


E-5.7 The placement of the geo-textile bags shall be 
continued up to the location of the key at the bottom of 
the slope near low water level. 


E-6 POST INSTALLATION PRECAUTIONS 


E-6.1 Immediately after installation, ensure the proper 
placement of geo-textile bags as per design and 
geometry of the site. If any abnormality observed, 
correction or re dumping shall be carried out. 


E-6.2 Proper care shall taken to avoid manual 
interference of civilians and animals which can cause 
damage to the material. 


The typical layout for installation of geobags is given 
below in Fig. 2. 


RIVER BED WHERE SCOUR TAKES 
P diii DURING FLOOD 
rcp 


DEEPEST OBSERVED 
SECTION 


sb 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL LAYOUT FOR INSTALLATION OF GEOBAGS 


IS 16653 : 2017 


ANNEX F 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The South India Textile Research Association Council, Coimbatore 


Ahmedabad Textile Industry’s Research Association, Ahmedabad 


Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati 


Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Department of Water Resources, Assam 
Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 
DKTE Centre of Excellence in Nonwovens, Ichalkaranji 


Flexituff International Limited, Mumbai 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Mills Association, Kolkatta 


Indian Technical Textile Association, Mumbai 


Int Fab, Mumbai 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 


National Institute of Research on Jute and 
Allied Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Office of the Jute Commissioner, Kolkatta 


Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 


Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 


Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


12 


Representative(s) 


Dr А. М. Desai (Chairman) 


Dr ANIL KUMAR SHARMA 
SHRIMATI SEEMA PATEL (Alternate) 


SHRI CHAMAN LAL 
SHRI DHRUBAJYOTI BORGOHAIN (Alternate) 


Dr D. Anita RAVINDRANATH 
Suri К. VasupEv (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri Jai BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Dn R. CHITRA 
ӛнкі ManisH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr SWAPAN GHOSH 
Pror (Dr) A. K. Samantha (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 
SHRI ANIKET S. BHUTE 


SHRI RAJEEVA UPADHYAY 
Suri Мімевн SHUKLA (Alternate) 


Suri А. K. SINHA 
Suri Manos Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
SHRI RAJENDRA GHADGE (Alternate) 


Dn. Manuya GHOSH 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


Suri 5. К. CHANDRA 
Suri J. К. ВЕНЕКА (Alternate) 


Dn Anup RaksHIT 
Surimati Rucuita Gupta (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI ARUNA LALL 


SHRI Y. К. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. К. TALukpar (Alternate) 


DR RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 


Suri P. К. CHOUDHURY 
Suri M. Dutta (Alternate) 


Dr GaurAM ВовЕ 
Dr Sanjoy DeBNATH (Alternate) 


Suri К. К. Roy 
Suri Soumyapipta Datta (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suri М. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEV K. VERMA 
SHRI HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suni М. S. VERMA 
SHRI V. RAVIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH Васи (Alternate) 


Organization 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


Teijin India Private Limited, Gurugram 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


UP State Irrigation Department, Lucknow 
Veermata JijabaiT echnological Institute, Mumbai 


In personal capacity |104, Kanchanban, A. W. Vartak Marg, 
Vile Parle (East), Mumbai 400 057] 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 16653 : 2017 


Representative(s) 


Suri ANANT KANOI 
ӛнкі SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


SHRI PANKAJ Das 


Dr ANJAN K. MUKHOPADHYAY 
Suri V. К. Pari (Alternate) 


Dr MANISHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI AsHWINI SUDAM (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
DR PRASHANT BHAVE 


SHRI V. N. GORE 


SHRI Амарн Кізновв, Scientist ‘Е’ and Head (TXD) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 


Suri J. К. Gupta 


Scientist ‘D’ (TXD), BIS 


13 


(Continued from second cover) 


with range of sizes to fit specific application. On the other hand it has the demerit of high sensitivity to UV 
radiations and highly alkaline or acidic water. Depending on its constituent strains properties, its life expectancy 
could be reduced by 15 percent to 75 percent in one year of exposure. Ageing due to UV radiation could be 
avoided and protected using UV resistant polyester or polypropylene. Similarly highly acidic and alkaline water 
could also significantly reduce geobags property through chemical degradation. However, in river training water 
mostly the soil is in the pH range of 6.0 to 8.5 for which both polyester or polypropylene are always stable. 


Survivability of geobags is very important from the viewpoint of their long term durability and is defined as 
resistance to mechanical damage during construction and initial operation. The ability of a geobag for permanent 
erosion control to survive installation and associated pressures during service shall be assured if it is to perform as 
designed. Selection of polymer and type of geobag is dependent upon survivability of geobags and information in 
this regard is given in Annex D for guidance only. Installation damage to a geobag is a function of the following: 


a) Type of polymeric material that is polyester or polypropylene and whether UV resistant or not; 
b) Geo-textile fabric thickness; 

c) Compacting effort and fill thickness; 

d) Grain size distribution of fill material; and 

e) Angularity of fill material. 


Guidelines for installation of geobags are given in Annex E for information only. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex F. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard 1s complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1195). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, Е9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


