RAT Alte IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


ET Aer ST TAT Oh Tee THAT ER TUT 
aie utero At tater 
ATT 1 THAT, Wheres atte Tea UAT 


ATANT 1 TAATA 


Methods of Sampling and Test for 
Oils and Fats 
Part 1 Sampling, Physical and Chemical Tests 


Section 1 Sampling 


ICS 67.200.10 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2021 Price Group 7 


Oils and Oilseeds Sectional Committee, FAD 13 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Oils and 
Oilseeds Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1954 covering the methods of sampling, physical, chemical and qualitative 
tests for oils and fats. Subsequently, the standard was revised in 1964 and split into 3 parts namely: 


Part 1 Methods of sampling, physical and chemical tests 
Part 2 Methods for purity tests 
Part 3 Methods of analysis of vegetable oils and fats by gas liquid chromatography (GLC) technique 


To incorporate latest analytical methods for the additional quality parameters and to make separate standard for 
sampling, IS 548 (Part 1) ‘Method of sampling and test for oils and fats: Part 1 Sampling, physical and chemical 
tests’ is being split into two sections: 


Section! Sampling 


Section 2 Physical and chemical tests 


This standard prescribes the methods of sampling of oils and fats and thus forms a necessary adjunct to the 
series of Indian Standard specifications for individual oils and fats. IS 548 (Part 1/ Sec 1 and 2) would supersede 
IS 548 (Part 1) : 1964 ‘Method of sampling and test for oils and fats: Part 1 Sampling, physical and chemical tests’. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from ISO 5555 : 2001 ‘Animal and 
vegetable fats and oils — Sampling’ and amendment no. | issued to ISO 5555 in 2004. Some of the text of 
ISO 5555 : 2001 has been deleted/modified to make the standard relevant in Indian context, an all level sampler 
has been added to the various types of sampling apparatus already prescribed in ISO 5555 : 2001. Table regarding 
suggested temperature for sampling of various types of fats and oils given in ISO 5555 : 2001 is not part of 
this standard as it is not practically feasible to maintain such temperature conditions in the tropical climate of 
our nation. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of the standard is given in Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF SAMPLING AND TEST 
FOR OILS AND FATS 


PART 1 SAMPLING, PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL TESTS 


Section 1 Sampling 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard (Part 1/Sec 1) describes methods 
of sampling crude or processed animal and vegetable 
fats and oils (individual as well as blended), fortified 
oils, fatty materials and co-products (referred to as fats 
hereafter), whatever the origin and whether liquid or 
solid. It also describes the apparatus used for sampling. 


NOTE — This standard does not cover methods of sampling of 
milk and milk products, including milk fats. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
2500 Sampling procedure for 
inspection by attributes 
(Part 1) : 2000/ Sampling schemes indexed 
ISO 2859-1: 1999 by acceptance quality 


limit (AQL) for lot-by-lot 
inspection (third revision) 

Attribute sampling plans 
indexed by limiting quality 
(LQ) for isolated lot inspection 


(Part 3) : 1995/ 
ISO 2859-2 : 1985 


(Part 4) : 2014/ 
ISO 2859-3 : 2005 


(Part 5) : 2014/ 
ISO 2859-4 : 2002 


(Part 6) : 2014/ 
ISO 2859-5 : 2005 


Skip-lot sampling procedures 


Procedures for assessment of 
declared quality levels 


System of sequential sampling 
plans indexed by acceptance 
quality limit (AQL) for 
lot-by-lot inspection 


IS/ISO 3951 Sampling procedures for 


inspection by variables 


IS No. Title 


(Part 1) : 2013 Specification for single 
sampling plans indexed by 
acceptance quality limit AQL 
for lot-by-lot inspection for a 
single quality characteristic 


and a single AQL 


General specification for 
single sampling plans indexed 
by acceptance quality limit 
AQL for lot-by-lot inspection 


(Part 2) : 2013 


of independent quality 
characteristics 

(Part 3) : 2007 Double sampling schemes 
indexed by acceptance quality 
limit AQL for  lot-by-lot 
inspection 


Procedures for assessment of 
declared quality levels 


(Part 4) : 2011 


(Part 5) : 2006 Sequential sampling plans 
indexed by acceptance quality 
limit (AQL) for inspection 
by variables (known standard 
deviation) 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this Indian Standard, the following 
terms and definitions apply. 


3.1 Consignment — Quantity of fat delivered at one 
time and covered by a particular contract or shipping 
document. 


NOTE — It may be composed of one or more lots or parts of 
lots. 


3.2 Lot — Identified quantity of fat, presumed to have 
uniform characteristics. 


3.3 Increment — Quantity of fat taken at one time 
from one place in a lot. 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


3.4 Bulk Sample — Quantity of fat obtained by 
combining the various increments from a lot in amounts 
proportional to the quantities they represent. 


NOTE — The bulk sample should be representative of the lot 
and should take account of any contractual requirements. 


3.5 Laboratory Sample — Quantity of fat, obtained 
from the bulk sample after suitable homogenization 
and reduction in size, which is representative of the lot 
and intended for laboratory examination. 


3.6 Conventional Mass Per Volume Sample 
(“litre weight in air”) Sample — Mass of the 
substance, divided by its volume, measured in air. 


NOTE — Mass is expressed in kilograms per litre while 
volume is expressed in litres. 


4 OBJECTIVES 


The object of sampling and of preparing samples is to 
obtain from a consignment (which may be in lots) a 
manageable quantity of the fat, the properties of which 
correspond as closely as possible to the properties of 
the consignment sampled. 


The methods of taking samples described below may 
be used for: 


a) consignments in bulk, for example, in land tanks, 
ships’ tanks, tank wagons, tank cars and tank 
containers; 


b) consignments consisting of a number of packages, 
for example, barrels, drums, cases, tins, bags and 
bottles; and 


c) in process samples. 
5 APPARATUS AND MATERIALS 


5.1 General 


For a particular purpose, the choice of sampling 
instruments and their suitability depend on the skill of 
the sampler in following the recommended procedures. 


In all circumstances, it shall be borne in mind whether 
the sample is intended for preliminary inspection, for 
analysis, or for the determination of conventional mass 
per volume (“litre weight in air”). 


5.2 Materials 


Sampling instruments, ancillary apparatus and sample 
containers shall be made of materials which are 
chemically inert to the fat being sampled and they shall 
not catalyse chemical reactions. 


For sampling instruments, stainless steel is the most 
suitable material. Aluminium may be used only when 
the acidity is low but not for the storage of samples. 


Only plastics which meet the requirements of the 
first paragraph above, at the operating temperature 
conditions, may be used; polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) satisfying food contact requirements is 
recommended. 


Copper and copper alloys shall not be used nor any 
toxic material. 
WARNING — If glass apparatus is used for a particular reason, 
great care shall be taken to avoid breakages. 
Under no circumstances is glass permitted inside 
tanks containing oils and fats. 


5.3 Examples of Types of Sampling Instruments 
5.3.1 General 


Many forms and types of sampling instruments exist, 
and the instruments described in this Indian Standard 
are only examples of those commonly used. 


The instruments are all simple, robust and easily 
cleaned. They may be used for all the sampling 
operations described in this Indian Standard with all 
types of fats commonly found in commerce. 


Certain basic requirements are common to all sampling 
instruments; for example they shall be capable of 
taking a representative sample from a required level or 
area, and of preserving the integrity of the sample until 
it can be transferred to a sample container. Ease of 
cleaning, practical size and ability to withstand rough 
usage are other essential characteristics. 


Alternative designs of instruments to those described 
in this Indian Standard may be used, for example to 
meet the needs of individual users. 


The instruments may be of various sizes according to 
the quantity of sample required and the accessibility 
of the fat. 

5.3.2 Sampling Instruments 

The following may be used: 


a) Simple weighted sample can, see A-1 and 


Fig. A-1. 

b) Weighted cage for sample bottle, see A-2 and 
Fig. A-2. 

c) Valve sampling cylinder (sinker sampler), 


see A-3 and Fig. A-3. 
d) Bottom samplers, see A-4 and Fig. A-4. 
e) Sampling tubes, see A-5 and Fig. A-5. 
f) Sampling scoops, see A-6 and Fig. A-6. 
g) All level sampler, see A-7 and Fig. A-7. 


5.4 Ancillary Apparatus 

The following may also be required: 
a) Water-finding rule, see A-8 and Fig. A-8. 
b) Ullage rule, see A.9 and Fig. A-9. 


c) Labels, adhesive or tie-on, and sealing apparatus; 
see also 7. 


d) Thermometers, see A-10. 
e) Measuring tape and weight, see A-11. 


5.5 Sample Containers 


Sample containers shall be made of the materials 
specified in 5.2. 


6 SAMPLING TECHNIQUE 


6.1 All sampling operations shall be performed by 
an operator with clean hands or wearing gloves 
(clean plastics or cotton gloves may be used). 


6.2 The apparatus and sample containers shall be clean 
and dry prior to use. 


6.3 Sampling shall be carried out in such a manner 
as to protect the samples, the fat being sampled, the 
sampling instruments and the sample containers from 
adventitious contamination with rain, dust, etc. 


6.4 All extraneous material shall be removed from 
the outside of the sampling instruments before the 
instruments are emptied. 


6.5 If heating is necessary to facilitate homogenizing 
and sampling, it is important that fats are heated 
slowly and not overheated. Care is required to prevent 
contamination of the fat by steam or water, in case 
heating is done by using steam. 


6.6 After samples have been taken as specified in 7.2 
to 7.7, as appropriate, laboratory samples shall be 
prepared as specified in 7.8. 


7 METHODS OF SAMPLING 


7.1 General 


7.1.1 Containers for Transport and Storage of Fats 


A distinction is made between the following types of 
containers from which samples are taken and which 
might affect the method of sampling to be used: 


a) vertical cylindrical land tanks (see 7.2); 
b) ships’ tanks (see 7.3); 
c) tank wagons or cars (see 7.4); 


d) horizontal cylindrical tanks 
containers (see 7.4); 


e) weigh tanks (see 7.4); 
f) pipelines during transfer (see 7.5); and 


including tank 


g) packages, for example, barrels, drums, cases, tins, 
bags and bottles (see 7.7). 


The procedure is also given for sampling for the 
determination of conventional mass per volume 
(“litre weight in air”) (see 7.6). 


7.1.2 Water 


Water may be present as free water at the bottom 
(that is, separated water), as an emulsion layer or as 
water in suspension in the fat in any of the containers 
described in 7.1.1. However, during usual operations, 
fat is unlikely to remain static for sufficient time in 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


weigh tanks and pipelines for the water to settle to the 
bottom. 


Measurement of water is mostly conducted in vertical 
storage tanks (see 7.2), but the same principles apply to 
the containers listed in 7.1.1 other than pipelines. 


The presence of water may be detected with a bottom 
sampler (A-4) and free water may be measured with 
a water-finding rule (A-8) and water-finding paste or 
paper, or by electronic means. 


Whichever method is used, accurate determination of 
water content is often difficult because of the indistinct 
separation of free water and the emulsion layer and 
water in suspension, in the lower layers of the fat. 


It can also be useful to determine whether the water is 
fresh or sea water. 


7.2 Sampling from Vertical Cylindrical Land Tanks 
7.2.1 Preliminary Operations 


7.2.1.1 Sediment, emulsion and free water 


Determine whether there is sediment or an emulsion 
layer or free water at the bottom of the tank by means 
of a bottom sampler and/or water detector as described 
in 7.1.2. 


The careful application of heat followed by standing 
assists the water in suspension to settle out (see 6.5). 


It is desirable, so far as possible, to run off free water 
before sampling, subject to contractual requirements 
and the agreement of contract parties, and to measure 
the amount removed. 


In case of free water or emulsion, three samples 
shall be drawn out separately (free water, emulsion 
and oil). Oil shall be tested as per the relevant Indian 
Standard/product specification. Samples of free water 
and emulsion shall be tested for sediments, oil and 
water content. Oil present in emulsion shall also be 
tested for its quality. Separate testing report for these 
shall be included in sampling report (see 10). 


7.2.1.2 Homogenizing 


Before sampling begins, it is essential that the whole 
of the product is as homogeneous and as nearly liquid 
as possible. 


Check the fat in the tank for uniformity by examining 
increments taken from various levels using a simple 
weighted sample can (A-1), a weighted cage for sample 
bottle (A-2) or a valve sampling cylinder (A-3), and 
from the bottom using a bottom sampler (A-4). 


If layers of different composition are present, 
homogeneity can, in most cases, be obtained by heating 
as described in 6.5. 


If heating is not permissible because of the nature of 
the fat, or if it is not necessary, or if heating has to be 
avoided for any other reason, the fat may be made 
homogeneous by blowing nitrogen through it. 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


7.2.2 Procedure 
7.2.2.1 General 


Sample each tank separately and consider as a lot. In 
case of compartmentalized tankers, sample should 
be drawn proportionally from each compartment 
(top, middle, bottom average) and made into a single 
composite sample. 


7.2.2.2 Inhomogeneous fats 


If the contents of the tank are not and cannot be made 
homogeneous, a simple weighted sample can (A-1), 
a weighted cage for sample bottle (A-2) or a valve 
sampling cylinder (A-3) is generally used for sampling, 
plus a bottom sampler (A-4). 


Divide the material height in the tank into 10 equal 
parts. Take 9 increments from these parts from top 
(A-1 or A-2 or A-3 or A-7) and 10" increment from 
bottom of tank by using bottom sampler (A-4). Mix 
appropriately all 10 equal portions of samples to prepare 
composite homogeneous bulk sample. Number of bulk 
samples against tank quantity to be taken from tank is 
given in Table 1 (prepare at least one bulk sample for 
each tank). 


Table 1 Number of Bulk ”Samples to be Taken 
from Each Ship’s Tank or Land Tank 


( Clauses 7.2.2.2, 7.2.2.3 and 7.3 ) 


Mass of Tank Contents Number of Bulk Samples for Each 


(tonnes) Tank 
1 000 1 
> 1000-5 000 2 
>5 000 3 to5 
7.2.2.3 Homogeneous fats 


If the contents of the tank are homogeneous, use one 
of the same sampling instruments as in 7.2.2.2, but in 
this case take at least three increments, “top”, “middle” 
and “bottom”. 


The “top” increment should be taken at a level of 
one-tenth of the total depth from the surface, the 
“middle” increment should be taken at a level of 
one-half of the total depth, and the “bottom” increment 
should be taken at a level of nine-tenths of the total 
depth. 


Prepare a bulk sample by mixing in the proportions 
of one part from each of the “top” and “bottom” 
increments and three parts from the “middle”. 


Prepare the number of bulk samples given in Table 1, 
preparing at least one bulk sample for each tank. 


7.3 Sampling from Ships’ Tanks 


The shape and disposition of ships’ tanks make 
sampling more difficult than in vertical cylindrical 
land tanks. Usually, sampling is carried out during 
transfer as described in 7.6. If samples are to be taken 


from ships’ tanks, use (as far as possible) the procedure 
described in 7.2, including the preliminary operations, 
such as heating. 


Sample each tank separately. Prepare the number 
of bulk samples indicated in Table 1. In preparing 
the bulk sample from increments taken from a tank, 
make allowance for the shape of the tank by mixing, 
as far as possible, the increments in the corresponding 
proportions. 


Barge tanks should preferably be sampled as soon as 
they have been filled. 


7.4 Sampling from Weigh Tanks 


Weigh tanks should be sampled immediately after they 
have been filled, before settling occurs. 


Take the sample by allowing a sampling instrument 
to sink to the middle and fill. If unavoidable delay 
occurs, which may result in the settling of sediment 
to the bottom of the tank, agitate the contents before 
sampling, or carry out sampling at depths of every 
300 mm. 


If the tank is closed, sample from a horizontal drip tap 
(as described in 7.5.2) immediately after filling. 


Prepare bulk samples from the increments in proportion 
to the cross sections of the tanks. 
NOTE — The same sampling method is applicable to tank 


wagons or cars and horizontal cylindrical tanks including tank 
containers. 


7.5 Sampling from Pipelines During Transfer 


7.5.1 General 


This method shall be used only if the fat is entirely 
liquid and contains no components which could block 
a tap or dripcock. Any water-containing emulsion 
(for example, fore-pump oil) shall be drawn off, stored, 
sampled and weighed separately. 


Samples from very large bulk quantities may be taken 
during transfer by means of frequent removal of 
increments from the flow at regular intervals while the 
tank is being emptied. This method is particularly easy 
to apply if the fat is transferred from a tank fitted with 
a weigh tank meter. 


Alternatively, sampling may be carried out by means 
of a side or secondary stream tapped from the main 
stream, but it is difficult to ensure accurate sampling 
by this method. 


7.5.2 Taps or Dripcocks 


The tap or dripcock shall be fed from a nozzle of 
diameter not less than 9.5 mm, capable of being 
inserted in the centre or at one-third diameter of the 
main discharge pipeline and facing the flow of liquid. 
Taps let into the side or bottom of the pipeline are not 
acceptable. The tap or dripcock shall be introduced, if 


possible, into a horizontal section of the main pipeline, 
as far from elbows and T-joints as possible, and 
preferably within 10 m to 50 m of the pressure side of 
the pump. A petcock is not recommended. The sampling 
line shall be of diameter not less than 9.5 mm and shall 
fall continuously to its outlet. The tap or dripcock shall 
be of such design as to be easily and quickly cleaned in 
case of blockage. 


To allow the clearing of a pipeline blockage and the 
pigging of the main flow line, a means of withdrawing 
the small bore pipes should be provided. 


Heating and insulation should be provided for fats of 
high viscosity or high melting point. 


7.5.3 Procedure 


Regulate the rate of flow in the main pipeline to ensure 
sufficient turbulence to mix completely the product in 
the pipeline. Maintain the rate of flow as constant as 
possible. 


A cover shall be fitted over the whole apparatus 
and the sample containers to prevent adventitious 
contamination. 


Carefully and immediately mix all the sample taken 
from the dripcock, after completion of the discharge, 
to form the bulk sample from which the laboratory 
samples are to be taken. 

In view of the possibility of blockage of the dripcock, 
etc. by pieces of dirt, and of variations that inevitably 
occur in the flow, it is essential that an experienced 
sampler be present constantly throughout the sampling 
operation. 


7.5.4 Minimum Size of Bulk Sample 


Prepare bulk samples during transfer from each tank of 
the minimum size specified in Table 2. 


Table 2 Minimum size of Bulk Sample when 
Sampling from Pipelines 


( Clause 7.5.4 ) 


Mass of Tank Contents Minimum Size of Bulk Sample 


(tonnes) (litres) 
20 1 
> 20 and 50 5 
> 50 and 500 10 


7.5.5 Sampling of Flexitanks 


“Flexitank” is the general term for a means of 
transporting fats using a flexible plastic/rubber bag 
inside a rigid steel/plastic container. A common format 
of the flexitank is a multilayer plastic bag fitted inside 
a 6.1 m (20 feet) general-purpose intermodal container 
as specified in IS 13282 (Part 1). The bag is laid out 
inside the container and filled by pumping oil into it 
from a land tank, while the bag is restrained inside 
the container by a bulk head. A heating pad may be 
included in the container if required. 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


It is not possible to sample a flexitank once it has been 
filled, and sampling shall take place during the process 
of filling or discharging. Thus, the method described 
in 7.5 shall be used. 


Where fat transfer facilities do not grant an appropriate 
point to draw representative samples, it is suggested 
that a length of pipe of about 0.3 m, with appropriate 
connections at each end and fitted with a suitable 
dripcock and valve, be manufactured. This pipe would 
then be attached between the flexitank valve and the 
discharge line prior to commencing loading/discharge 
in order to draw incremental samples throughout the 
process (see Fig. 1). 


Accordingly, incremental samples will be carefully 
mixed to form bulk representative samples of the 
whole cargo, which may then be subdivided to 
provide multiple samples. The minimum size of the 
bulk sample from a flexitank shall be 5 1, independent 
of the volume of fat in the tank. 


7.6 Sampling from Tanks for the Determination of 
Conventional Mass per Volume (“litre weight in 
air”) 


7.6.1 General 


The mass of the contents of the tank may be calculated 
from the product of the volume and the conventional 
mass per volume (“litre weight in air”) of the contents 
of the tank. 


Take a special sample for determining the conventional 
mass per volume (“litre weight in air”) as described in 
7.6.2 and 7.6.3. 


7.6.2 Pretreatment of Fats which are not Completely 
Liquid 

For fats which are not liquid, or are only partially 
liquid, slowly heat before measuring and sampling, so 
that the contents of the tank are uniformly heated and 
local overheating is avoided (see also 6.5). 


Continue heating until the fat has completely melted. 
However, avoid heating to too high a temperature, as 
this can impair the quality of the fat. 


In case heating is done, allow the contents of the tank 
to stand after heating until they are more or less free 
from air and there is very little or no scum floating on 
the surface. 


Once these requirements are fulfilled, the sample may 
be taken as described in 7.6.3. 


7.6.3 Procedure 


Take increments at three levels, “top”, “middle” and 
“bottom” (see 7.2.2.3), but not less than 100 mm 
from the bottom. Pour them into a sampling bucket 
in proportions one part “top”, three parts “middle” 
and one part “bottom”, and mix them to form the 
bulk sample. 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


a 


Key 
1 dripcock 
2 butterfly valve 


Fic. 1 COUPLING FOR FLEXITANK SAMPLING 


If there is a great deal of sediment in the contents of the 
tank, take the increments at depths of every 300 mm in 
accordance with 7.4. 


Measure the temperature at each of the three levels. 
Take the average of the values found as the temperature 
of the contents of the tank during sampling and 
measurement of volume. 


7.7 Sampling from Packages (Small Packing Units) 
Including Consumer Packs 


7.7.1 General 


If a consignment consists of a large number of separate 
units, for example, barrels, drums, cases, tins (separate 
or packed in cartons), bottles or bags or pouches, it 
will often be difficult, if not impossible, to sample each 
separate unit. 


In such cases, therefore, a suitable number of units shall 
be chosen entirely at random from the consignment to 
ensure, as far as possible, that together they represent 
the average properties of the consignment. 


It is impossible to give any hard and fast rule for the 
number of units to be sampled, as this depends to a 
large extent on the uniformity of the consignment. It 
is, therefore, desirable that the parties concerned first 
agree on the number of units to be sampled. 


It is recommended that representative sampling be 
carried out by agreement between contracting parties, 
particularly for fats processed and packed for retail. 


See, for example, the methods described in IS 2500 
(all parts) and IS 3951 (all parts). 


If there is no such prior agreement, a distinction shall 
be made between the following: 


a) consignments which may be assumed to be more 
of less uniform; 


b) consignments which are known not to be uniform; 


c) consignments about which nothing is known; 
and 


d) consignments whose quality is suspect owing to 
the possible presence of foreign bodies in one or 
more of the units. 


Treat each of these cases, respectively, as follows. 
For a): treat the consignment as one lot. 


For b): visually inspect the containers. Treat those 
that are visually similar (for example, in shape 
or marking) as one lot, noting the number of 
containers and mass of fat in each lot. If a single 
bulk sample from all the lots is required, mix 
increments from each lot in the same proportions 
as between the individual lots. 


For c): carry out a preliminary investigation and 

reclassify as a) or b). 

For d): carry out an inspection to isolate the 

suspect packages and deal with these individually. 
Ifa lot can be assumed to be reasonably homogeneous, 
the packages shall be sampled at random. 


Recommendations for the number of packages to be 
selected for sampling are given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Recommendations for Number of 
Packages to be Sampled 


( Clause 7.7.1 ) 


Size of Package Number of Number of 
Packages in the Packages to be 
Consignment Sampled 
20 kg, up to 5 tonnes 1 to5 all* 
maximum 6 to 50 6 
51 to 75 8 
76 to 100 10 
101 to 250 15 
251 to 500 20 
501 to 1 000 25 
> 1000 30 
5 kg to 20 kg 1 to 20 all? 
21 to 200 20 
201 to 800 25 
801 to 1 600 35 
1 601 to 3 200 45 
3 201 to 8 000 60 
8 001 to 16 000 72 
16 001 to 24 000 84 
24 001 to 32 000 96 
> 32 000 108 
5kg 1 to 20 all 
21 to 1 500 20 
1 501 to 5 000 25 
5 001 to 15 000 35 
15 001 to 35000 45 
35 001 to 60 000 60 
60 001 to 90 000 72 
90 001 to 130 000 84 
130 001 to 170 000 96 
> 170 000 108 


a See 7.7.1 for alternative treatments. 


7.7.2 Consignments in Small Tanks, Drums, Barrels 
and Other Small Packages 


7.7.2.1 Procedure for packages containing solid or 
semi-liquid fats 


If water is present, make a hole through the fat to 
the bottom of the container and remove the water by 
suitable means. 


For solid fat in drums, insert a sampling scoop 
(A-6) through the opening of the drum, probing the 
whole depth of the contents in as many directions as 
possible. Withdraw the scoop with a twisting motion, 
thus withdrawing a cylindrical increment of fat. Mix 
the increments taken from each drum thoroughly in 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


a bucket and transfer this mixed sample to sample 
containers. 


Sample soft pastes and semi-liquid products in drums 
in a similar manner, using a sampling scoop (A-6). 
Insert the scoop into the product and withdraw the 
increment. Prepare a mixed sample in the same manner 
as described above. 


7.7.2.2 Procedure for packages containing liquid fats 


Roll and turn over barrels and casks filled with liquid 
fat and stir the contents well, by hand or mechanically, 
with a paddle or stirrer. Take an increment from each 
container to be sampled by inserting a suitable sampling 
instrument (see, for example, A-5 and A-6), through the 
bunghole of a barrel or through a convenient opening in 
another container, in such a manner as to sample from 
as many parts of the contents as possible. Thoroughly 
mix equal portions of these increments to form the bulk 
sample. 


7.7.2.3 Procedure for packages containing loose solid 
fats 


Take sufficient amounts to form a representative sample 
of all sizes of lumps, broken into smaller pieces if 
necessary, from all different parts. Quarter the resultant 
sample to a suitable size. 


Knead the lumps until a homogeneous dough is 
obtained. Mix with a large spatula (for example, 
250 mm long), so that any particles of dirt and/or 
globules of moisture are evenly distributed throughout 
the mass. Reduce the resultant sample to the required 
size by quartering, using the spatula. 


If the increments of fat are too hard for hand kneading, 
allow them to stand in a warm place until sufficiently 
softened, without direct heat as this can cause loss of 
moisture by evaporation. 


The mixing and reduction of the increments to prepare 
the bulk sample may be carried out on a mixing table or 
bench at least 750 mm square, covered with a sheet of 
plate glass, white tile or stainless steel. 


7.8 Preparation of Laboratory Samples 


When analysis for contamination is required, a sample 
from each tank shall be submitted as a laboratory 
sample. Otherwise, according to agreement between 
the parties concerned, prepare laboratory samples from 
bulk samples (see 7.2 to 7.7), as follows: 


a) either after a weighted average sample has been 
prepared from the bulk samples; or 


b) using each of the bulk samples (if agreed between 
the parties concerned, the laboratory may prepare 
a weighted average sample from the laboratory 
samples). 


Whichever procedure [a) or b)] is followed, divide the 
prepared bulk samples in order to obtain at least four 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


laboratory samples each of at least 250 g, ensuring 
that continuous agitation has prevented any settling of 
sediment. 


NOTE — For certain purposes, a laboratory sample of at least 
500 g might be required. 


8 PACKING AND 
LABORATORY SAMPLES 


LABELLING OF 


8.1 Packing 


Pack the laboratory samples in clean, dry containers 
either of glass or of plastic which meets the requirements 
of 5.2. The containers shall be almost, but not quite, 
filled; a little air space shall be allowed at the top for 
expansion. This space shall not be too large, however, 
as air has a detrimental action on most fats. 


Unless otherwise agreed, the container shall be closed 
either with new cork stoppers or screw-caps of metal 
or plastic separated from contact with the oil or fat 
by a metalized wad free of copper, zinc or iron, or a 
wad of plastic which meets the requirements of 5.2. 
Closures shall be sealed so that the sample is not 
accessible without evidencing breakage or tampering 
with the seal. Where it is not possible adequately to 
security seal the closure on the container, the container 
should be placed within a plastic bag which itself can 
be satisfactorily security sealed. Sealing wax shall not 
be used for primary containers. 

WARNING — All samples shall be protected from light and 

heat. 
When the laboratory sample is intended for particular 
tests, it may be necessary to take certain additional 
precautions in the choice of the method of packing to 
be used. 


8.2 Information Concerning Laboratory Samples 


The full details of sampling, number of packages 
sampled, etc, shall be recorded, and a label bearing the 
particulars of the sample shall be securely attached to 
every sample container. 


8.2.1 The label shall carry all information necessary for 
identification of the sample, including the following: 


a) date of sampling; 

b) place and point of sampling; 

c) method and purpose of sampling; 

d) identification of sampling operator/authority; 
e) quantity represented, in kilograms or tonnes; 


f) whether in bulk, tank containers or packages; 
g) identification mark; 
h) order no. and date or bill of lading No. and date. 


j) name of organization responsible for the terms of 
the contract; and 


k) goods and origin. 


8.2.2 In case of ships or non-static vessels including 
imported consignments, the following additional 
declarations shall be made: 


a) identification of ship or vehicle; 
b) place of loading; 

c) place of discharge; and 

d) date of arrival. 


The information on the label shall be recorded with a 
permanent marker. 


If paper labels are used, they should be of a suitable 
quality and size for the purpose. The eyelet hole in a 
tie-on label should be reinforced. 


9 DISPATCH OF LABORATORY SAMPLES 


If the labelled container is not securely sealed, it shall 
be placed in a close-fitting plastics bag and securely 
sealed therein. 


Glass containers should be protected with a plastics 
foam sleeve surrounded by absorbent material sufficient 
to absorb the entire contents of the container and the 
whole placed in a strong rigid outer container. 


The packaging should meet the requirements of the 
postal authorities or other organization(s) concerned 
with the transport of the sample in the country or 
countries involved. 


Samples shall be dispatched as soon as possible, within 
48 h, non-business days excluded. 


The samples shall be kept cool and away from light as far 
as possible, unless only required for the determination 
of conventional mass per volume (“litre weight in air”). 


10 SAMPLING REPORT 


The sampling report shall give the information listed 
in 8.2 and shall make reference to the physical state 
of the fat sampled. It shall also describe the sampling 
procedure used, if this differs from that described in this 
Indian Standard, and give details of any circumstances 
that may have influenced sampling. 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Informative ) 
EXAMPLES OF SAMPLING INSTRUMENTS AND ANCILLARY APPARATUS 


A-1 SIMPLE WEIGHTED SAMPLE CAN 


The simple weighted sample can (see Fig. A-1) is 
suitable for sampling at varying depths in all sizes of 
tanks. It consists of a cylindrical container (of capacity 
about 500 ml) made of stainless steel with a weighted 
base in a separate compartment and a conical neck. 


Fitted to shoulders at the top is a wire loop with a ring 
at the apex through which a cord is passed which is 
then attached to a cork fitting the neck of the can. 


The empty sampler with the cork inserted is lowered 
into the liquid fat to the required depth. The cord is 
jerked to remove the cork and the can is allowed to fill 
with product. 


Fic. A-1 SIMPLE WEIGHTED SAMPLE CAN 


A-2 WEIGHTED CAGE FOR SAMPLE 
BOTTLE 


The weighted cage (see Fig. A-2) is designed to contain 
a suitable plastic sample bottle as indicated in 8.1 
(of capacity about 500 ml) and is suitable for sampling 
at varying depths in all sizes of tanks. It consists of 
a weighted base to which are attached three vertical 


straps with a retaining band at their upper end. Two of 
the straps are angled and to these is fixed a wire loop 
with a ring at the apex. 


Also attached to these straps is a wire hoop which is 
secured to the third strap to retain the bottle in the cage. 
A cord passes through the ring of the wire loop and is 
attached to a cork fitting the neck of the bottle. 


The sampler is operated in the same way as the weighted 
can (see A-1). 


Fic. A-2 WEIGHTED CAGE FOR SAMPLE BOTTLE 


A-3 VALVE SAMPLING CYLINDER (SINKER 
SAMPLER) 


The valve sampling cylinder (see Fig. A-3) consists 
of an open-headed upper section and a lower section 
within which is a light dead weight valve seating on the 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


base of the heavier outer screw-on unit, which secures 
the lower to the upper section of the sampler. The 
bottom valve remains open owing to the pressure of the 
fat on the valve whilst the instrument is being lowered 
through the liquid, ensuring that an even flow of fat 
passes through the cylinder. When lowering ceases, the 
valve closes and a sample of the fat is drawn from the 
depth reached by the instrument. 


Some samplers of this type and function incorporate a 
light flap valve at the head which closes off the cylinder 
when the filled sampler is raised. 


Fic. A-3 VALVE SAMPLING CYLINDER 
(SINKER SAMPLER) 


A-4 BOTTOM SAMPLER 


A-4.1 With Spring-loaded Valve 


This bottom sampler [see Fig. A-4 a)] is constructed 
of stainless steel. It comprises a cylindrical body 


10 


(of capacity about 500 ml) with a screw-on base 
incorporating a disc valve to permit entry of the 
product into the bottom of the sampler and a screw-on 
top also incorporating a disc valve to permit release of 
air from the sampler. Attached to the screw-on top is a 
fixed hoop which serves to suspend the sampler from 
a cord and provides a bridge guide and spring retainer 
for the central valve spindle. The valve spindle projects 
below the bottom of the sampler and when this grounds 
on the tank bottom the spindle is pushed up into the 
cylinder against the light spring, opening first the valve 
in the base, followed after a short delay by that at the 
top, this being effected by the small gap in the sleeve at 
the upper part of the cylinder. The purpose of this short 
delay between opening of the inlet and outlet valves is 
to ensure that the product first enters through the base 
thus causing a slight increase in pressure inside the 
vessel to prevent product entering at the top when the 
upper valve opens. 


Buoyancy may be overcome by adding weights in the 
form of stainless steel annular rings which are slipped 
over the body of the sampler and held in place by the 
screwed base. 


A-4.2 With Deadweight Valve 


This bottom sampler [see Fig. A-4 b)] is basically 
similar to the bottom sampler with spring-loaded valve 
(A-4.1) in design and operation, except that the lower 
valve is kept closed by deadweight and the release of 
air is through a reduced section of the valve spindle at 
its upper end. 


A-5 SAMPLING TUBES 


The sampling tube shown in Fig. A-5 a) is a 
stainless-steel instrument consisting of two concentric 
tubes closely fitted into each other throughout their 
entire length, so that one tube can be rotated within the 
other. Longitudinal openings are cut in each tube. In 
one position the tube is open and admits the oil and by 
turning the inner tube it becomes a sealed container. 


The inner tube is 20 mm to 40 mm in diameter and 
undivided in its length. The two tubes are provided with 
holes to be aligned when emptying, so placed that the 
oil contained in the instrument can be drained through 
them when the longitudinal openings are closed. 


The sampling tube shown in Fig. A-5 b) may be made 
of stainless steel or aluminium, or plastic which meets 
the requirements of 5.2. It is inserted either closed 
by the finger at the top or open, as desired. It is then 
allowed to fill, the finger being moved to open the top if 
necessary. It is then closed by the finger and withdrawn. 


It may be used for taking samples at various levels 
from drums by keeping the top closed until the depth to 
be sampled is reached. 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


Fic. 4(a) BOTTOM SAMPLERS WITH Fic. 4(b) BoTTOM SAMPLERS WITH 
SPRING-LOADED VALVE DEADWEIGHT VALVE 


A-6 SAMPLING SCOOPS 


Sampling scoops (see Fig. A-6) are intended for the 
sampling of hard fats. They are made of stainless steel 
and are of semicircular or C-shaped cross section. 
When inserted into fat with a twisting movement, a 
core of fat is obtained. 


A-7 ALL LEVEL SAMPLER 


This instrument is suitable for sampling large vessels, 
Tanks of liquid oil. It is made of stainless steel and is 
available in 500 ml (outer diameter size approx. width 
60 mm x length 302 mm) and 1 000 ml (outer diameter 
size approx. width 75 mm x length 372 mm) capacity. 


Design of this sampler is based on cylinder with top 
lid and non-return valve with stopper at bottom. This 
device lowered to the various depths with 2-3 times 
up-down movement lifted upward with the help of 
prefixed food grade plastic rope or stainless steel chain 
to draw sample (Fig. A-7 a and b). 
NOTE — It is recommended to adequately homogenize 
the contents of the tank by agitation or circulation if such 
facility of mixing is available in the tanks, prior to drawing a 
representative sample. Alternatively, homogenization can also 
be achieved by heating or by bubbling nitrogen (7.2.1.2). 


A-8 WATER-FINDING RULE 


The water-finding rule (see Fig. A-8) is a stainless-steel 
bar about 305 mm long and about 30 mm x 10 mm in 
cross section. It is calibrated from 0 mm to 300 mm in 
1 mm graduations, marked every 10 mm. It has two 
spring-loaded sliding clips to retain a water-finding 
paper strip. 


b) 


Fic. A-5 SAMPLING TUBES 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


a O 


a) 


Fic. A-6 SAMPLING SCOOPS 


Water-finding paste may be applied directly to the face 
of the rule. 


A water-finding rule (B) and an ullage rule (A-9) may 
be combined in a single rule with clips and calibrated 
on one side for water-finding and on the other side for 
ullaging. 


A-9 ULLAGE RULE 


The ullage rule (see Fig. A-9) is a stainless-steel bar 
about 305 mm long and about 30 mm x 10 mm in 
cross section. It is designed for use only with steel 
tapes which are combined with their dip weights and 
the zero graduation on the bar should be about its 
mid-point. From there the rule is calibrated down to its 
lower extremity 0 mm to 150 mm in | mm graduations, 
marked every 10 mm. See also A-8. 


12 


Fic. A-7 (B) ALL LEVEL SAMPLER ACCESSORY 
Rope/CHAIN 


A-10 THERMOMETERS 


Where liquid-in-glass thermometers are used, special 
attention must be paid to the WARNING in 5.2. A 
similar warning applies to the liquid contents of this 
type of thermometer. A suitable alternative is a digital 
thermometer with stainless-steel probe, which is 
recommended. 


A-11 MEASURING TAPE AND WEIGHT 


Measuring tapes should be made of steel fore-shortened 
to be integral with dipweights and are provided with 
a stainless-steel swivel hook to attach the weights or 
rules. 


The tape may be wound onto a frame winder or 
contained within a suitable case. Tapes should be of 


Fic. A-8 WATER-FINDING RULE 


the required length and graduated and marked to suit 
the calibration of the tanks in which products are to be 
measured. Weights should be made of stainless steel 
combined with the tape and graduated in the same way 
as the tape, to provide continuity of measurement from 
Zero. 


13 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


OOeN Dawn sao 


ee ee 
UNa 


Fic. A-9 ULLAGE RULE 


A-12 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 


The design of the sampling instruments and ancillary 
apparatus described in A-1 to A-9, which all comply 
with the criteria of 5.2, has been kept as simple as 
possible. In most cases the instruments can be made 
in any engineering workshop from easily available 
materials. In some countries there may be commercial 
suppliers. 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Oils and Oilseeds Sectional Committee, FAD 13 


Organization 


Harcourt Butler Technological University, Kanpur 


All India Food Processors’ Association (AIFPA), 
New Delhi 


Cargill India Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Center for Rural Development and Technology, IIT, 
Delhi 


CONCERT Trust, Chennai 
Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 


CSIR Central Food Technological Research Institute 
(CFTRI), Mysore 


Defence Food Research Laboratory, Mysore 
Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, Faridabad 


Directorate of Rapeseed - Mustard Research 
(DRMR), Bharatpur (Rajasthan) 


FARE Labs Pvt Ltd, Gurugram 


Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, 
New Delhi 


Harcourt Butler Technological University, Kanpur 
Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Oilseeds and Produce Export Promotion 
Council 


Indian Vanaspati Producers Association (IVPA), 
New Delhi 


Marico Ltd, Mumbai 


Mustard Research and Promotion Council, 
New Delhi 


National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad 


National Institute for Food Technology 
Enterpreneurship and Management, Sonipat 


National Oilseeds and Vegetable Oils Development 
Board (NOVOD), Gurugram 


Representative(s) 


Dr R. K. TRIVEDI (Chairman) 


Suri D. V. MALHAN 
Dr K. L. GaBa (Alternate) 


MR NEERAJ KUMAR SINGH 
Ms NIDHI BHATIWADA 


SHRI S. N. NAIK 
SHRI JATINDRA SAHU (Alternate) 


MR K. KRISHNAKUMAR 
MR M. R. KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
Dr M. S. Kamata (Alternate) 


DR R. SUBRAMANIAN 


DR AJAY WAMANRAO TUMANEY (Alternate) 


DR A. D. SEMWAL 
DR K. JAYATHILAKAN (Alternate) 


MR THANGRAJ 
SHRI S. K. SNGH (Alternate) 


DR ANUBHUTI SHARMA 
DR ARUN KUMAR (Alternate) 


MR D. MATHUR 
DR MEENAKSHI SHARMA (Alternate) 


Ms AIMAN ZAIDI 


Dr P. K. S. YADAV 
ProF R. D. KUKARNI 


Dr PRADOSH P. CHAKRABARTI 
DR SANJIT KANJILAL (Alternate) 


MR JITENDRA BHUSHAN MISRA 
MR KIsHoRreE TANNA (Alternate) 


SHRI S. P. KAMRAH 
Suri S. K. HANbu (Alternate) 


Ms MEENU YADAV 
Ms ReEsHMA POOTHATTA (Alternate) 


DR PRAGYA GUPTA 


DR M. JEYAKUMAR 
DR P. SURYANARAYANA (Alternate) 


DR SUNIL PAREEK 


SHRI SWAPAN KUMAR PAL 
SHRI DEVDUTT (Alternate) 


14 


Organization 


Oil Technologists’ Association of India (OTAI), 
Northern Zone, Delhi 


The Solvent Extractors Association of India, Mumbai 
VOICE, New Delhi 


In Personal Capacity 
In Personal Capacity 
In Personal Capacity 
In Personal Capacity 
BIS Directorate General 


IS 548 (Part 1/Sec 1) : 2021 


Representative(s) 


MR C. S. JosHi 
DRR. P. SNGH (Alternate) 


DR PRABODH HALDE 
MR Axsnay Mop (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KANCHAN 
SHRI H. WaDawa (Alternate) 


Dr Y. C. NIJHAWAN 
DR A. MADHAVAN 

DR JAYANTI ADHIKARI 
PROF AMIT P. PRATAP 


SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Dr BHAWANA 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (FAD), BIS 


15 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 13 (14786). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


