(Reaffirmed 2005)

IS : 10641- 1983

Indian Standard
RECOMMENDED METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF AROMA AND TASTE THRESHOLDS
Sensory Chnirman

Evaluation

Sectional

Committee,

AFDC 38
Research Institute

fDx G.

SADASIVAN

Indian Agricultural Statistics ( ICAR ), New Delhi

Representing

Members
MAXKETIN~ Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry AQXICULTUXAL ADVISER TO TEE GOVERNMENT of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad ox INDIA SEXI T. V. MATREW ( Alternate ) Protein Foods and Nutrition Development AssociaDX A. S. AIYAR tion of India, Bombay Defence Food Research Laboratory ( Ministry of DR BRAFKMA SINQH Defence ), Mysore SHRI N. SXINIVASALU ( Alternate ) Central Committee for Food Standards, New Delhi SHXI D. S. CHADHA ASSISTANT SECRETARY ( Alternate ) Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta SERI OY P. DHAMIJA Coffee Board, Bangalore D~ECTOX OF RESEARCH

CUPTASTER ( Alternate ) SMT HAXS~RAT KAUR GILL

The Punjab Dairy Chandigarh

Development

-

Corporation

Ltd.

SHXI B. M. L. GARB ( Alternate ) In personal capacity ( 2701 First Main Road, Mysore ) SHRI V. S. GOVINDARAJAN` Tea Board. Calcutta SHXI K. L. GUPTA National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal DR S. K. GUPTA Dx B. N. MATHUX ( Alternate ) Mohan Mcakin Ltd, Ghaziabad DR E. K. JAYANAXAYANAN Yezdi Distilleries, Mysore DR B. K. JHA United Breweries Ltd, Bangalore SHXI V~TTAL MALLYA SHXI N. J. MENON ( Alternate ) Brooke Bond India Ltd, Calcutta Sxxr R. MANSIN~R McDowell & Co Ltd, Shertally SRRI N. J. MENON Suman Food Consultants, New Delhi DR A. G. NAIK KURA~E *Dr. G. Sadasivan was the Chairman elected for the meeting in which this standard was finalized.

( Continuedon page 2 ) @ CopVright 1983 INDIAN STANDARDS INS'I'ITUTION ,This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10641- 1983 ( Continued from page I )
Members Representing

AII India Distillers' Association, New Delhi SKRI S. N. PANDEY SHRI B. L. KHANNA ( Alternate ) College of Home Science, Andhra Pradesh AgriculDR ( SMT ) P. PUSHPAWMA tural University, Hyderabad DR ( SMT ) P. GEERVANI ( Alternate ) Central Food Technological Research Institute DR K. G. RAGHIJVEER ( CSIR ), Mysore Technical Standardization Committee ( Ministry of BEro P. G. S. SACERA Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi DEPUTY TECHNICAL ADVISER ( Alternate ) Naarden ( India ) Ltd, Bombay SHRI S. B. SULE SHRI Y. G. ~AIJJYA ( Alternate ) uar ermaster Generals' Branch, Army HeadquarBRIG R. N. VARMA LT-COL S KArooE ( Alternate ) Q `,"" New De1hi Food Specialities Ltd, Moga SARI R. WALTER SHRI A. K. ROY ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficio Member ) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM, Director ( Agri & Food ) Secretary S. K. DAS GUPTA Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1
SRRI

Sensory

Evaluation

of Basic Standards
Comkmer

Subcommittee,

AFDC! 38 : 1

SHRI V. S. GOVINDARAJAN 2701 First Main Road, Mysore Members MARKETING Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of AGRICCLTURAL Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad ~s;;.;To THE GOVERNMENT SHRI T. V. MATHEW ( Ahrnafe SRRI S. K. GUPTA DR E. K. JAYANAR ~YANAN SHRI VITTAL MALLYA SHRT N. J. M~N~N ( Alternate ) SHRI R. MANSINGII DR K. G. RAGHUVEEE ) National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal Mohan Meakin Ltd, Ghaziabad United Breweries Ltd, Bangalore

Brooke Bond India Ltd, Calcutta Central Food Technological Research Institute ( CSIR ), Mysore Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute, DR G. SADAS~VAN ( ICAR ), New Delhi Technical Standardization Committee ( Ministry of BEIO P. G. S. SAOERA Agriculture & Irrigation ), New Delhi DEPUTY TECHNICAL ADVISER ( Altcrnafc )

1.

2

IS t

10641 - 1983

hkn

Standard

RECOMMENDED METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF AROMA AND TASTE THRESHOLDS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on' 30 August 1933, after the draft finalized by the Sensory Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council. 0.2 Threshold determinations are of value to (a) characterize panelists individually and form groups of homogenous sensitivity; (b) determine the threshold of a stimulus in the selected media; (c) determine the relative importance of component stimuli in a mixture; and (d) develop correlations between concentration of specific stimuli and the magnitude of the perceived sensory effect. 0.3 It is recognized that precise values for thresholds for a given stimulus cannot be given ( in the same sense as any ofphysico-chemical measures ) being influenced by a number of external factors as sample presentation parameters and internal factors as the panelists physiological and psychological effects and training. However, usable concentration ranges for thresholds for individual and groups can be determined for stimuli alone and in mixtures as per situations in use. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : `L-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes a method for determination or taste thresholds of any stimulus in a chosen medium. *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rruisad ). 3 of aroma and/

IS:10641-1983 1.1.1 The recommendations are limited to overall selection of a suitable range of concentrations of test solutions, selected method of testing and analysis of data. 1.1.2 Details of choice of sensorily neutral medium, use of compounds for dispersal of stimuli, equipment for preparation and presentation of stimuli and odourous compounds, which are individualistic are not They should be given in any report as thresholds may discussed here. vary with these parameters. 1.1.3 It is recognized that the threshold value for any stimulus for a group of panelists may require revision as the sensitivity is known to improve with training and lower the value of threshold concentration. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the terms given in the glossary of terms, IS : 5126 ( Parts 1 and 2 )-1969* shall apply. Additionally, the definitions of the following terms, shall apply. 2.1 Medium - Any material, liquid or solid, used to dissolve or disperse or absorb odour or taste stimuli whose threshold is to be determined. 2.2 Blanck Sample - A selected medium containing considered neutral in respects of odour and taste. no stimulus and

2.3 Test Sample - A quantity of the medium similar to the blank sample to which stipulated concentration of the stimulus under examination dispersed in the medium are added. - The lowest concentration of a stimulus 2.4 Detection Threshold in a medium which records a perceivable difference from the blank sample as determined by the maximum likelihood criterion. 2.5 Recognition Threshold - The lowest concentration of a stimulus in a medium which records a perceivable difference from the blank sample and additionally `recognised' as a particular stimulus. 2.6 Maximum Likelihood Threshold ( Individual ) ( MLT ) - An interpolated value ( of concentration ) but not necessarily a concentration value actually presented; this is obtained as the geometric mean of the 1a;t missed concentration and the next higher concentration. 2.7 Maximum
mean of the individual

Likelihood Threshold MLT's.

( Group

) -

The

geometric

*Glossary of general terms for sensory evaluation of foods:
Part 1 Methodology. part 2 Quality characteristics.

IS : 10641- 1983 concentrations medium.
2.8 Ascending Scale of Concentiatioxi-

of an aromatic

or tasteful

A series of increasing substance in a chosen neutral

3. PRINCIPLE the .multiple ascending 3.1 By using concentrations presented geometric series, and forced choice triangle test, the thresholds groups of panelists are determined. 3.2 The panelists are then grouped into sub-groups: in of

4 b)

a more sensitive subgroup whose threshold of the stimulus is at a concentration lower than the group MLT; and a less sensitive subgroup whose threshold of the stimulus is at a concentration higher than the group MLT so that they can be used to evaluate the different stimuli to required accuracy using an ascending series with closer concentration differences. OF CONCENTRATION. SERIES AND DETERMINING GROUP THRESHOLD OTHER

4. PREPARATION ASPECTS FOR

4.1 The test series should contain range of concentration levels of the test substance in the medium, beginning with below the level at which the most sensitive panelist is able to recognize the added stimulus and end at ( or above ) the concentration at which all panelists will give the correct response. 4.2 For preliminary testing for the group threshold a geometric series with a concentration difference factor which will allow the correct responses of a group of ten to fifteen panelists to distribute over three mean of the individual concentration steps is used. Th e geometiic panelists MLT's gives the group threshold value. 4.3 The increase in concentration may be 1.3 to 2.5 times the previous concentration for sapid substances and 2 to 3 times for aromatic Thus if x represents the approximate threshold concentsubstances. ration, then a concentration series will be x/27, x/9, x/3, x, 3x, 9x, 27x for aromatic substances. 4.4 At each concentration ( or dilution ), a triangle test set is set up with one test and two blank ( medium ) samples [ see 4.1.3 of IS : 6273 ( Part 2 )-1971* 1. 4.5 For triangle tests, the recommended practice for minimizing bias by optimal set ups, coding with 3-digit random numbers, rotating the positions
*Guide for sensory evaluation of foods: Part 2 Methods and evaluation cards.

5

IS

I

18641- 1983
blank sample, such that they occupy the three pox&k number Qf times during presentations, should be carefully 6273 ( Part 1 )-1971* 1. Further special care should be clearance to avoid carryover effects.

of the test and positions equal followed [ IS : taken for palate 5. TESTING

PROCEDURE

5.1 The panelists,

ten to fifteen begin the series with the triangle containing the lowest concentration ( highest dilution ) of the test stimulus and progressively proceed to higher concentrations ( ascending series ).

5.2 The panelist has to identify ( or guess in case of doubtful discrimination ) in each triangle set, the sample that is different ( odd ) for detection threshold ( forced choice ). 5.3 The panelist also indicates the set where he can identify the different aroma or taste response to the stimulus for recognition threshold. The testing is terminated after testing one higher concentration set when recognition is confirmed ( since a correct answer will occur by chance ). 6.. PRESENTATION

OF DATA

AND ANALYSIS

6.1 Each panelist's

judgement is written as `0' for an incorrect answer or `+' for a correct judgement against the samples arranged in increasing concentration. The tabulation is terminated with two or more consecutive ` f' signs.

6.2 The maximum likelihood threshold for each paneiist is the geometric mean of the concentrations at which the last incorrect decision marked by `0' and the next higher concentration marked by `+' occurred. 6.3 The group individuals. threshold is the geometric mean of the MLT's of

6.4 For more accurate work, the panelists, are grouped into those whose thresholds for a particular flavour response is at concentrations lower than the group mean concentration ( more sensitive ) and those whose thresholds are at concentrations higher than the group means ( less sensitive ).

OF CONCENTRATION 7. PREPARATION CLASSIFIED GROUPS OF PANELISTS 7.1 Since the

SERIES

TO

dosage-response curve is sigmoid, for more accurate threshold values, the experiment is repeated with a series of concentrations in arithmetic progression and diering in concentrations. by a `jnd' ( just noticeable difference ) which is nearly 10 percent of the threshold value.
*Guide for sensory evaluation of foods: Part 1 Optimum requirements.

6

IS : 10641- 1983 7.2 The arithmetic series of concentrations is established by dilution, or strengthening from a concentration at which all panelists are expected For example, if to identify and recognise correctIy the sensory response. x is the expected threshold the series is set up as:

(X-

*3x ), ( x -

*2x ), ( x -

`1% ), X, ( X + `IX ), ( X + `2X ), ( x -I- *3x )

Separate concentmaintaining a difference of 10 percent of X, the `jnd'. ration series are set up for the more sensitive and less sensitive groups obtained from preliminary tests. 7.3 The sampIes are presented in ascending order of concentrations. There should be one or more blank medium with similar composition except for the component whose threshold for response is being tested. These serve as a check on the alertness of the panelist, and bias from association. 7.4 The testing is done under the conditions recommended for bias free Additionally special care judgements [ IS : 6273 ( Part 1 )-1971* 1. should be taken for palate clearing to avoid carry over effects. 7.5 Each panelist tastes the dilutions from the lowest concentration ( or blank ) and identifies the sample at which there is a definite change from the medium ( detection threshold ) and continues the series to determine the sample at which the response ( aroma or taste ) is definitely recognized. when 7.6 The testing is terminated confirmed or higher intensity felt. 8. TEST REPORT shall include the method used and the threshold values recognition of the response is

8.1 The report given as:

a) Geometric

mean as a group threshold, and Standard deviation specifying sensitivity of

b) Arithmetic mean f the group.

*Guide for sensoryevaluation of foods: Part 1 Optimum requirtments. 7

INTERNATiONAL
Base Units Qu ANTITI Lengrh Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous Amount intensity of substance Units

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )
UNIT mctre kilkam second ampere kelvin candela mole
SYMBOL In kg !i A

K cd mol

Bopplemcntrry QUANWTI Plane angle Solid angle Derived Unit8 QIIAWTITY
Force En-w

UNIT radian rteradiao

~YMISOL

rad sr

UNIT newton joule watt weber

SYMBOL N I 1 N = J = 1 kg.m/s' 1 N.m

J
W Wb T HZ S V Pa

Power
FIUX Flux

1 W = lWb=

I J/s
1v.s

density

tesl a hertz siemens volt pasIX1

Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stres force

1 T = 1 Wb/m* I Hz = 1 c/s (s")
1 1 s V = 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 N/m'

1 Pa -

