атт Ah IS 18380 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Siet Siet Tals deer RU AI FETA 
are Haren ergu — farts 


Domestic Ethanol Cookstove with 
Fixed and Removable Canister Type 
— Specification 


ICS 97.040.20 


© BIS 2023 


“тй gr OAT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
COP ey uer чач, 9 aerer BS HK AMT, 4$ echt - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2023 Price Group 9 


Oil Burning Appliances Sectional Committee, MED 26 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Oil Burning 
Appliances Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


In vastly populated and energy deficit nations, due considerations in cooking sector is important in achieving 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). One of the vital goals in sustainable development is the Sustainable 
Development Goal 7 (SDG 7): ‘Clean and Affordable Energy’ as per which is to ensure the usage of clean 
cooking fuel to 100 percent in households by 2030. Therefore, the Government of India is planning to use 
ethanol as cooking fuel for household, commercial and institutional cooking applications. It is understood that 
ethanol is a much cleaner fuel and use of this fuel can provide a cleaner alternative in rural areas for those 
families, which are not covered under the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojna (LPG). 


This standard on domestic ethanol cookstove with fixed and removable canister type has been formulated with 
the objective to provide consumers with domestic cookstoves, which provide quality workmanship, testing 
protocol, performance of the stove in terms of thermal efficiency and emissions and safety features. This 
standard also covers the allowable leakage level of ethanol fuel used in the cookstoves. 


In the formulation of this standard, considerable assistance has been provided by Prof P. Muthukumar and 
research scholar Ms Pratibha Maurya from Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati (IIT Guwahati) based on 
the work done at the institute. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex G. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18380 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


DOMESTIC ETHANOL COOKSTOVE WITH FIXED AND 
REMOVABLE CANISTER TYPE — SPECIFICATION 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies construction, operation, 
safety requirements and tests for canister based 
domestic ethanol cookstove (fixed and removable 
canister type) with metallic bodies intended for use 
with ethanol at normal atmospheric pressure. 


1.2 This standard also specify the characteristics of 
ethanol to be used as a fuel in the domestic ethanol 
cookstoves and various safety precautions to be 
followed while operating the stove and storing the 
canister. It also highlights the permissible limits of 
ethanol vapour during operation/non-operation of 
the stove and storage of the canister. 


1.3 For convenience, this standard has been divided 
into four sections, which are as follows: 


Section 1 Construction 
Section 2 Performance 
Section 3 General 


Section 4 Safety precaution 
2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex А, contain 
provisions which, through their reference in this 
text, constitute provisions of this standard. At the 
time of publication, the editions indicated were 
valid. All standards are subject to revision and 
parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of 
applying the most recent edition of these standards. 


SECTION 1 CONSTRUCTION 
3 TERMINOLOGY 
3.1 Fixed Canister Type 
3.1.1 For the purpose of this standard, the 


nomenclature of the different parts of the canister 
based ethanol domestic cookstove that is, fixed 
canister type and removable canister type shall be 
as indicated in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. 


31.2 Canister — A canister is a volumetric 
container used for storing ethanol. Lateral surface 
of the canister is termed as the cassette and the 
cover over top surface as the cassette cover. 


3.1.3 Ethanol Tank — An ethanol tank is provided 
to fill the ethanol inside the canister. The filling of 
ethanol in canister through ethanol tank shall make 
in such a way that there is no overflow of fuel from 
canister, once the fuel gets filled in canister from 
the ethanol tank. The quantity of ethanol filled 
inside the fuel tank shall be visible from the outside 
of fuel tank. Fuel tank shall have a measuring scale. 


3.1.4 Body — The design of the frame of the 
cookstove is termed as body of the cookstove. The 
frame shall consist of non-detachable parts, that is, 
ethanol filling mechanism, canister and lever 
assembly. The pan supports can be made as 
removable for cleaning purpose. 


3.2 Removable Canister Type 
3.2.1 Canister — Same as 3.1.2. 


3.2.2 Canister Lid — A canister lid is provided to 
close the open top surface of removable canister to 
avoid the leakage of ethanol vapour. 


3.2.3 Body — The design of the frame of the 
cookstove is termed as body of the cookstove. The 
frame shall be consisting of detachable parts that is, 
canister and pan support and non-detachable part 
that is, lever assembly. 


IS 18380 : 2023 


Wire mesh 


Mineral wool 
Ethanol 


tank 


casste cover 


OH 
KL xX? 


da 
e 


casste 


502092090955 
SE 
SC 


al 


Lever assembly 


Pan support 


FIG. 1 TYPICAL ETHANOL FIXED CANISTER TYPE COOKSTOVE 


IS 18380 : 2023 


Wire mesh Canister lid 


Mineral wool 


casste cover 


casste 


Canister 


Lever assembly 


Pan support 


FIG. 2 TYPICAL ETHANOL REMOVABLE CANISTER TYPE COOKSTOVE 


IS 18380 : 2023 


4 FUEL CAPACITY 


For both the cookstoves, that is, fixed canister type 
and removable canister type, the canister height 
shall be below 70 mm to reduce the quantity of 
unused fuel (residual fuel left out). 


4.1 Fixed Canister Type 


4.1.1 The canister shall be made to have a nominal 
capacity of less than 2 litres. The capacity shall be 
measured by filling ethanol to the maximum 
capacity of the canister without spillage. There 
shall be no leakage of liquid fuel even if canister is 
tilted to 180° (as fuel is adsorbed on the surface of 
the mineral wool). 


4.1.2 The fuel tank shall be made to have a nominal 
capacity of up to 5 litres to store the ethanol. 


4.1.3 The canister shall be able to sustain the stable 
flame for cooking from 100 percent to 15 percent 
of the fuel capacity. 


4.1.4 The amount of fuel left out in the canister 
after the operation (when no sustainable flame is 
observed) shall be less than 15 percent. 


4.2 Removable Canister Type 


4.2.1 The canister shall be made to have a nominal 
capacity of less than 2 litres. The capacity shall be 
measured by filling ethanol to the maximum 
capacity of the canister without spillage. There 
shall be no leakage of liquid fuel even if canister is 
tilted to 180° (as fuel is adsorbed on the surface of 
the mineral wool). 


4.2.2 The canister shall be able to sustain the stable 
flame during its entire combustion, that is, from 
100 percent to 15 percent of the fuel capacity and 
in the entire range of specified power level. 


5 GENERAL 


5.1 The construction of all the parts of the 
cookstove shall be sound and of high standard of 
workmanship and appropriate finishing. The 
construction shall ensure durability and shall 
comply with the safety requirements. 


5.2 Seating arrangement of the canister should be 
made such that, the gap between the canister’s open 
surface and the canister opening lever should be 
less than 0.5 mm to minimise the leakage of 
ethanol. Preferably an O-ring made up of soft metal 
or high temperature rubber can be used for 
preventing the leakage of ethanol from the gap. 


5.3 The overall design and construction of the 
canister based cookstove shall be such that ethanol 
concentration of below the recommended limit 
1 000 ppm results in its usage in the measured in 


the kitchen size of range of 5 m? to 100 m? with an 
air exchange rate of 5 to 45 per h with cookstove 
burn time of 8 h. 


5.4 Press joining process shall be used for 
manufacturing of canisters. 


6 MATERIALS 


6.1 The materials shall comply with the specified 
relevant Indian Standard (see Annex A) and shall 
be appropriate with the conditions arising in the 
part of the cookstove in which they are used. The 
cookstove shall be free from swarf, grit and other 
foreign matters. Material used in the manufacture 
of different parts shall be such that they would 
ensure safe handling and good performance of the 
cookstove throughout its reasonable life. 


6.2 Fuel Canister 


6.2.1 Canister cassette and the cassette cover shall 
be made of stainless steel as per IS 6911. Canister 
lid shall be made up either of rubber or any flexible 
material, which can withstand up to 100 °C 
temperature and shall not allow the leakage of 
ethanol vapour. Mineral wool (preferably the 
combination of rock wool and ceramic wool) shall 
be used inside the canister for the storage of 
ethanol fuel as per IS 3144. 


6.2.2 For obtaining the desired power output, 
mineral wool inside the canister shall be packed in 
such a way that the normal evaporation rate 
(without combustion) of ethanol at atmospheric 
pressure shall be less than 10 g/h for both fixed 
canister type and removable canister type ethanol 
cookstove when the canister is completely opened 
to the atmosphere. The measurement of the normal 
evaporation rate shall be conducted in a closed 
room with no movement of wind at a temperature 
range of (30 + 5) °C. 


6.3 Plastic components which are liable to get 
heated (for example, lever handle etc) shall be free 
of fissures, distortion, blemishes and discoloration 
and shall not show signs of ageing when tested as 
per Annex B of IS 5116. 


6.4 The material used in the construction of the 
cookstoves body shall be resistant to wear and 
deterioration during its normal usage. 


6.5 Holding part/handle of the lever shall be made 
up of heat resistant material to avoid the unwanted 
heating of the handle when the stove is in 
operation. 


6.6 The material used in the construction of the fuel 
tank shall be resistant to corrosion. 


7 SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 


7.1 Common shapes of a canister based ethanol 
domestic cookstove are shown in Fig. | and Fig. 2. 
The general construction may be of single-canister 
or double canister type. 


7.2 The cookstove shall be made in sizes according 
to its capacity as given in 4.1. The overall 
dimensions of the canister, the frame and 
cookstove shall be as agreed between the purchaser 
and the manufacturer. However, the cookstoves so 
manufactured shall satisfy all the performance 
requirements. 


7.3 Canister material which is in direct contact 
with ethanol must be anti-corrosive stainless steel. 
The minimum sheet thickness of the fuel canister 
shall be 0.4 mm when measured at any point. The 
minimum frame thickness shall be 0.6 mm. 


8 CONSTRUCTION 
8.1 Fixed Canister Type 


8.1.1 The frame of the cookstove shall be so made 
as to be firm on its base. The fuel canister shall not 
be detachable from the cookstove body. 


8.1.2 The opening of the ethanol tank shall be 
completely fitted to the opening inside the ethanol 
filling space. The engagement of ethanol tank with 
cookstove should be reliable, secure and leak-proof 
such that no fuel leak can happen at the time of fuel 
transfer. The design should ensure user gets a clear 
feedback or indication of the ethanol tank being 
locked correctly with cookstove. 


8.1.3 The fuel tank and fuel filling space dimension 
shall be fixed for all the manufacturers. 


8.1.4 There shall be no overflow of fuel from the 
canister or the other filling components of the stove 
once the filling is completed. 


8.1.5 The ethanol shall not be filled inside the 
canister through the ethanol tank during the 
burning condition of the cookstove. 


8.1.6 Cookstove shall be capable of being tilted in 
any direction from the vertical position, to an angle 
of at least 15?, without overturning at that 
inclination or on its release after that. 


8.1.7 The fuel shall not come out of the canister 
from the cookstove body when fully filled under 
atmospheric pressure and tilted to an angle up to 
180°. Accordingly, the mineral wool packing shall 
be done. 


8.1.8 Construction of the lever shall be in such a 
manner, while switching off the canister, the lever 


IS 18380 : 2023 


should completely close the opening part of the 
canister and the flame should turn off immediately. 


8.2 Removable Canister Type 


8.2.1 The frame of the cookstove shall be so made 
as to be firm on its base. The fuel canister shall be 
detachable. Canister shall slide freely inside the 
housing slot given in the stove and shall take its 
position on its own. Accordingly, stopper slots 
shall be provided underneath the stove. 


8.2.2 The fuel canister inside the stove's body 
during working operation of the stove shall be firm 
on its base. The stopper slots provided underneath 
the stove shall provide support in operation too. 


8.2.3 Cookstove shall be capable of being tilted in 
any direction from the vertical position, to an angle 
of at least 15?, without overturning at that 
inclination or on its release after that. 


8.2.4 The fuel shall not come out of the canister 
when fully filled under atmospheric pressure and 
tilted to 180°. Accordingly, the mineral wool 
packing shall be done. 


8.2.5 Construction of the lever shall be in such a 
manner, while switching off the canister, the lever 
should completely close the opening part of the 
canister and the flame should turn off immediately. 


9 DESIGN FOR MAINTENANCE 


9.1 The cookstove, including all the components, 
shall be easy to clean and maintain in good 
working order. There shall be easy access to the 
control and accessories for the maintenance and 
adjustment. 


9.2 The parts of the cookstove shall not be 
disconnected during operation. The canisters shall 
be so spaced that the relative distance between the 
centres and that of the adjoining canisters shall not 
be less than 180 mm. 


9.3 Canisters of the same rating, model and make, 
shall be interchangeable or replaceable without 
affecting the overall performance. 


9.4 Parts, which are intended to be removable by 
the user, shall be easy to replace correctly, and 
impossible to assemble incorrectly. 


9.5 All nuts, bolts and fittings having spanner flats 
shall be capable of being removed by suitable 
spanner or be readily accessible to an adjustable 
spanner. 


9.6 While turning the lever of the stove in ‘OFF’ 
position, the flame from the canister should turn off 
immediately. If not, it is required to operate the 
lever for several times from ‘ON’ to ‘OFF’ position 


IS 18380 : 2023 


until the canister flame turns off. In such a case, 
there shall be an urgent need of maintenance of 
(lever assembly) stove body for proper working of 
the stove. 


10 WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 


10.1 The finishing of exposed parts shall be 
durable, without any sharp edges, easy to clean and 
not subject to excessive deterioration in normal 
use. Parts, which will come in contact with the 
foodstuff, shall be capable of being hygienically 
cleaned. All the finishing, on visual examination, 
shall show no defects, such as pin-holes, blisters 
and roughness or exposed areas of metal, which 
give rise to unduly rapid deterioration in use. The 
finished components shall meet the requirements 
covered in 10.2 to 10.4. 


10.2 Vitreous enamelled components shall meet the 
requirements as given in Annex E of IS 5116. The 
test shall be carried out on a specimen measuring 
40 mm x 75 mm prepared from the same base 
metal and enamel, as the components, and fired 
along with the components to ensure identical 
conditions. 


A separate specimen shall be used for each test. 


10.3 If the body of the stove is electroplated, the 
top flat surface shall have a coating of a minimum 
of 10 microns of nickel followed by minimum 
0.2 microns of chromium. The coating shall be 
tested as per the requirements given in 10.3.1, 
10.3.2 and 10.3.3. 


10.3.1 The thickness of nickel plating shall be 
determined by BNF jet method or any other 
method, such as the coulometric method as 
specified in IS 3203. 


10.3.2 Adhesion Test 


Cut a piece of a plated article. Hold it in a vice and 
apply a coarse file to the cut edges in such a 
manner as to raise the deposit. There shall be no 
separation between the coating and the base metal 
and the coating shall remain adherent to the base 
metal. 


10.3.3 Corrosion Resistance Test 


The plated article shall be subjected to a 12 h test 
as per IS 6910. The rating shall be assigned using 
the methods described in IS 6009. 


10.4 Paints or Similar Finishes for Cookstove 
Body 


Surfaces finished with paints or powder coating shall 


shall conform to the following requirements: 
10.4.1 Resistance to Abrasion 


10.4.1.1 The painted surface shall be tested for 
resistance to scratching as described below: 


10.4.1.2 The apparatus required for this test shall 
be as per Fig. 3, with a 1 mm diameter steel ball 
fixed at the end of the counterpoised arm which is 
kept horizontal. 


10.4.2 Method of Test 


Apply the apparatus to the surface under test and 
move the ball after loading with not less than 
1.5 kg with a travel rate of 3 cm/s to 4 cm/s relative 
to the surface. If the indicator bulb lights, the 
surface is deemed to have been penetrated. 
Additionally, for metallic paints, a visual 
examination of the scratch is necessary in order to 
determine whether the film has been penetrated. 
The finish is deemed to have failed, if the scratch 
has jagged edges with width greater than 1 mm or 
penetration of the entire film. Clean the ball after 
each test. The ball shall be inspected frequently to 
verify its diameter, that is, 1 mm sphere. 


10.4.3 Resistance to Heating 


When the appliance is operated at its normal 
working pressure for a continuous period of 4 h 
with a pan filled with water placed on the pan 
support, there shall be no appreciable change of 
colour of any part of the stove and the finish shall 
not become tacky or show other signs of 
deterioration. This does not apply to parts, which 
come in direct contact with the flame. 


10.5 The external finished surfaces shall be easily 
cleanable. 


11 STOVE LEVER 


11.1 The appliance shall have at least one lever for 
each canister. Handle of the lever shall not have 
any sharp edges. Preferably, the levers operating 
end shall be covered with a heat resistant material 
for easy handling. 


11.2 The ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ status of the stove in 
terms of the lever position shall be clearly and 
durably indicated. In case of multiple canisters, 
indication of the lever and the respective canister 
operated by it shall be clearly demarcated. All 
levers shall close in the same direction. 


11.3 Levers shall not lead into vapour passage. 


SADDLE 


PIVOTED 
ARM 


COUNTER 
BALANCE 


CHANNEL 


@15 INSULATING fl 
WASHER 


@15 INSULATING 


@1 STEEL BALL 
SOLDERED TO SMALL 
LENGTH OF TUBE 


Loc 
BUSH H^ 
8 3 


IS 18380 : 2023 


TO BE FIXED TO 

BARE METAL OF 
COMPONENT ON TEST 
SADDLE TO SLIDE 

FREELY IN GUIDE 
CHANNEL 


60 3 
16 
10 
Y "` zb 


SECTION AT А-А 


CIRCUIT DIAGRAM 


MINIMUM STROKE OR 
1mm BALL 65mm 


All dimensions in millimetres 


FIG. 3 PAINT SCRATCH TEST APPARATUS 


12 PAN SUPPORTS 


12.1 The design of the pan supports shall be such 
that a pan of minimum 100 mm diameter over at 
least one canister without the use of loose rings and 
such that a minimum 125 mm diameter vessel 
remains stable over each pan support. Prongs of the 
support shall have suitable taper to accommodate 
round bottom pans. 


12.1.1 Loose pan support shall be so designed that 
it is not possible to place them firmly in other than 
proper position. 


12.1.2 The material of the pan support shall be 
metallic preferably with high corrosion resistance. 


13 STRENGTH AND RIGIDITY OF BODY OF 
THE COOKSTOVE 


When tested as per Annex B, the vertical resultant 
deflection of the top surface measured at the centre 
along the length of the body, shall not exceed 2 mm 
and the distance between the opposite sides 
(lengthwise and width wise) shall not change by 
more than 5 mm. 


SECTION 2 PERFORMANCE 
14 GENERAL CONDITIONS OF TEST 


14.1 During the tests, the initial adjustment of 
the cookstove shall not be altered unless specifically 


IS 18380 : 2023 


required in the test procedure. The cookstove shall 
be adjusted and operated in accordance with the 
instructions given on or issued with the cookstove. 
Before any test is made, the cookstove shall be 
operated at its full working capacity for a sufficient 
period to remove any temporary protective coating, 
which might interfere with observations. The 
ethanol canister shall be examined for leaks before 
and after the test. The performance test results shall 
not be valid unless the system is sound. The 
cookstove shall be at room temperature at the start 
of each test unless or otherwise stated. 


14.2 The room in which tests are conducted shall 
be adequately ventilated but free from perceptible 
draughts. 


14.3 Except where otherwise stated, the cookstove 
shall satisfy the performance requirements using 
ethanol. Wherever the combustion characteristics 
of canisters are concerned, each canister shall be 
tested separately and in all possible combinations 
with other canisters. This procedure shall be used 
for a cookstove with up to four canisters. For a 
cookstove with a larger number of canisters, the 
test procedure becomes impossibly long and 
discretion shall be exercised to eliminate tests on 
combinations of widely separated canisters. 
Canisters, which are fitted in cookstoves of open 
construction, are unlikely to interfere with the 
combustion of each other. 


15 FUEL CONSUMPTION 
15.1 Fixed/Removable Canister Type 


15.1.1 The range of fuel consumption shall be 
between 200 g/h to 400 g/h (for the first continuous 
one hour of operation of cookstove) with fuel 
purity of 93 percent (ethanol 93 percent and water 
7 percent) at fully charged condition. 


15.1.2 Each cookstove shall give а fuel 
consumption in g/h within + 5 percent of the 
manufacturer’s specified value when tested as per 
Annex С. 


16 THERMAL EFFICIENCY 


When tested as per Annex C, the thermal efficiency 
of the cookstove shall be not less than 56 percent 
considering a purity of the fuel of 93 percent and 
packing density (porosity) of the mineral wool 
inside the canister shall be evaluated from the mass 
of the mineral wool and the volume of the canister. 


16.1 Fixed Canister Type 


Thermal efficiency may be declared, if it is 
62 percent or more for the cookstove. 


16.2 Removable Canister Type 


Thermal efficiency may be declared, if it is 
65 percent or more for the cookstove. 


17 SURFACE TEMPERATURE 


Temperature of any part of the cookstove that may 
be necessary to touch during its operation as well 
as the maximum canister surface temperature 
attained during three hours continuous operation of 
the cookstove shall not exceed 60 °C, when tested 
as per Annex D. Temperature of the mineral wool 
surface (where the combustion of ethanol vapour 
and air takes place) immediately after switching off 
canister, should lie in the range of 40 °C to 50 °C. 


18 COMBUSTION EFFICIENCY 


When tested according to the method laid down in 
Annex E, on no account the carbon monoxide to 
carbon dioxide ratio of the exhaust gases of any 
burner shall not exceed 0.02. 


19 RESISTANCE TO DRAUGHT 


There shall be no extinction of the flame on the 
canister while operating at atmospheric pressure 
when the cookstove is placed in a normal (not 
localised) current of air with a velocity of 2 m/s, as 
measured with a rotating vane anemometer. The 
location of the cookstove relative to neighbouring 
walls and the direction of the draught shall be 
varied to correspond to likely conditions of 
appliance installation. 


20 FUEL CREEP 


When operated under normal conditions, there shall 
be no spreading of fuel over any part of the 
cookstove to cause undesirable odour or any 
increase in flame size. 


21 SAMPLING 


If required, sampling and acceptance criteria for 
ethanol cookstoves may be as agreed between the 
purchaser and the supplier. 


SECTION 3 GENERAL 
22 INSTRUCTIONS 
22.1 Fixed Canister Type 


Instructions for the safe use of the cookstove shall 
be supplied with the cookstove in hindi, english 
and other regional languages along with pictorial 
representations. The instruction for safe use shall 
include the following: 


a) Prior to lighting the cookstove, ensure that 
all the components are undamaged and 


р) 


q) 


r) 


properly assembled in accordance with the 
design; 

Strict prohibition of filling/refilling of 
ethanol in the cookstove when cookstove 
is in operating condition; 

Maximum ethanol consumption rate in g/h; 
Expected thermal efficiency; 

Ethanol filled capacity in litre; 

Do not place the fuel tank near flammable 
items; 

Do not carry or move a cookstove when it 
is in burning condition; 

Do not use a cookstove as a heating 
appliance; 

Do not breathe in fuel vapours, it may be 
injurious to health; 

Do not consume the fuel, it may be fatal; 
Cookstove's lever shall be always in 
closed position when the stove is not in 
operation; 

The instructions and warnings shall 
include an illustration of the assembled 
appliance or how it shall be assembled; 
The instruction of filling the ethanol from 
the tank to the canister of cookstove shall 
be illustrated by pictures; 

Place the appliance on a reasonably level 
and stable surface; and 

Appliances should be used in an 
adequately ventilated area to ensure 
satisfactory removal of smoke and fumes 
due to combustion and to allow circulation 
of air. 


22.2 Removable Canister Type 


a) 


b) 


с) 


Prior to lighting the cookstove, ensure that 
all the components are undamaged and 
properly assembled in accordance with the 
design; 

Strict prohibition of removing the canister 
from the cookstove when cookstove is in 
operating condition; 

The filling/refilling of ethanol in the 
canister shall be done only by the 
designated agency/dealers (frequency of 
refilling cannot be defined, as it is solely 
depending on the usage); 

Maximum ethanol consumption rate in g/h; 
Expected thermal efficiency; 

Ethanol filled capacity in litres; 

Do not place the canister near flammable 
items; 

Do not carry or move a cookstove when it 
is in burning condition; 

Do not use a cookstove as a heating 
appliance; 


IS 18380 : 2023 


k) Do not breathe in fuel vapours, it may be 
injurious to health; 


m) Do not consume the fuel, it may be fatal; 


n) Cookstove's lever shall be always in 
closed position when the stove is not in 
operation; 

p) Remove the canister from the stove 
immediately after 10 min of switching off 
the stove; 

q) Canister should be covered with lid when 
it is kept/stored outside or when not in use; 

r) The instructions and warnings shall 
include an illustration of the assembled 
appliance or how it shall be assembled; 

S) Place the appliance on a reasonably level 
and stable surface; and 

t) Appliances should be used in an 
adequately ventilated area to ensure 
satisfactory removal of smoke and fumes 
due to combustion and to allow circulation 
of air. 


23 MARKING 
23.1 Fixed Canister Type 


23.1.4 Ethanol tank shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked with the following: 


a) Capacity of ethanol tank in litre (1); 

b) Marking of ethanol filling quantity in litre; 

c) The words ‘USE LIQUID ETHANOL 
ONLY’ on tank; 

d) Rotation direction of fuel tank for filling 
the fuel; and 

e) Insertion and removal of ethanol tank 


from ethanol filing space in pictorial 
form. 


23.2 Removable Canister Type 


23.2.1 Ethanol canister shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked with the following: 


a) Capacity of ethanol in litre (1); 

b) The words ‘USE LIQUID ETHANOL 
ONLY’ on canister; and 

c) Refill only with the designated agency. 


23.3 In addition to the above, following 
information should also be legibly and indelibly 
marked in red on each stove body for both fixed 
and removable canister type: 


a) The user must strictly adhere to standard 
operating procedure (SOP) for safe usage 
of cookstove; 

b) Manufacturer's name and/or initials or 
registered trade-mark; 


IS 18380 : 2023 


c) Insertion and removal of ethanol tank 
from ethanol filling space; 

d) Country of origin; 

e) On and off marking on the lever; and 

f) Expected thermal efficiency. 


23.4 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the 
Rules and Regulations framed thereunder, and the 
product(s) may be marked with the Standard Mark. 


24 PACKING 


The ethanol cookstoves shall be packed as agreed 
to between the purchaser and the supplier, taking 
care of safety requirements as such during handling 
and transit to protect against damages. 


SECTION 4 SAFETY PRECAUTION 
25 SAFETY 
25.1 Fixed Canister Type 


25.1.1 Safety Instructions to be Followed when the 
Cookstove is in Operation: 


a) Do not breathe vapours (in case the flame 
goes off, during lightening of the stove 
avoid breathing of ethanol vapour); 

b) The cookstove shall be placed on even 
surface; 

c) The cookstove shall be operated in well 
ventilated space; 

d) The standard kitchen volume shall be 
between 5 m? to 100 m3; 

e) The standard air exchange rate in the 
kitchen 5 to 45 per h; 

f) Maximum permitted continuous operation 
hours is 4 h; and 

g) Avoid the usage of cookstove in presence 
of direct wind. 


25.1.2 First-Aid Measure in Case of Inhalation of 
Ethanol Vapour 


a) Move the person away for the availability 
of fresh air and keep him/her comfortable 
for breathing; and 

b) Ifrequired, administer oxygen, in case the 
victim is not breathing provide artificial 
respiration and get medical attention. 


25.1.3 First-Aid Measure After Direct 
Exposure to Ethanol Vapour 


Eye 


Immediately rinse with water for at least 15 min. 
Remove contact lenses, if any. Continue rinsing the 
eyes with water. Immediately consult a poison 
centre or doctor/physician. 


25.1.4 First-Aid Measure in Case of Ingestion of 
Ethanol Vapour 


Do not induce vomiting unless directed to do so by 
medical personnel. If vomiting occurs, keep head 
low so that vomit does not enter lungs. Never give 
anything by mouth to an unconscious person. Get 
medical attention immediately. 


25.2 Removable Canister Type 


Safety precautions as specified in 25.1 shall be 
followed along with the following: 


25.2.1 Safety instructions to be followed while 
taking out the canister from the stove's body: 


a) Canister shall be left for minimum 10 min 
inside the body of the stove after 
switching off the stove that is, closing the 
lever in ‘OFF’ position. The canister shall 
be removed only after Ше stipulated 
period; 

b) Inthe case, if the stove is not switched off 
by operating the lever in ‘OFF’ position. 
Operate the lever of stove body from ‘ON’ 
to ‘OFF’ position several times until the 
flame from the canister turn off; 

c) If the lever is still not able to turn off the 
flame, it is required to remove the canister 
from stove body by using protective 
gloves and turn off the flame by putting 
wet woollen clothes or sprinkle the water 
on the canister opening without removing 
the canister; 

d) Avoid direct eye contact from canister’s 
opening while taking it out from the body; 
and 


e) Keep the canister (fresh/used) within the 
closed cover and store in a well-ventilated 
place. 


25.2.2 First-Aid Measures After Skin Contact 


a) Wash affected area with plenty of water 
for at least 15 min; 

b) Remove contaminated clothing and shoes; 

c) Wash clothing before reuse; and 

d) Get medical attention if any symptoms 
occur. 


25.2.3 First-Aid Measures After Eye Contact 


a) Check for and remove contact lenses; 


b) Immediately flush eyes with gentle but 
large stream of water for at least 15 min, 
lifting lower and upper eyelids 
occasionally; and 


c) Get medical attention. 
25.2.4 First-Aid Measures in General 


a) In the case of accident or if you feel 
unwell, seek medical advice immediately 
(show the label where possible); 


b) Ensure that medical personnel are aware 
of the material(s) involved, and take 
precautions to protect themselves; and 


c) Show this safety data sheet to the doctor in 
attendance. 


25.2.5 Safety Instruction to be Followed for 
Storing/Disposal of the Canister: 


a) Handle empty canister with care because 
residual vapours are flammable; 


b) Keep the canister (fresh/used) within the 
closed cover and store in a well-ventilated 
place; 

c) Keep canister away from heat, hot 
surfaces, sparks, open flames and other 
ignition sources; 


d) Do not store the canister with 
incompatible products such as strong 
oxidizers that is, barium, perchlorate, 
bromine, chlorine, chloroform, sodium 
methoxide, diethyl zinc, acetyl bromide, 
sodium hypochlorite etc or metals such as 
aluminium, magnesium and potassium; 


e) Keep/store away from direct sunlight, 
extremely high or low temperatures and 
incompatible material; 

f) The canister shall not be racked at height 
to avoid any sudden fall; 

g) Disposal of | used canister is 
manufacturer’s responsibility; and 

h) After every use of the stove detach the 
canister from the stove and close the 
cap/lid of the canister. 


26 FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES 
26.1 Extinguishing Media 


Use suitable fire extinguishing media that is, 
dry chemical powder, alcohol resistant foam, 


IS 18380 : 2023 


carbon dioxide (CO2), water spray and fog. 
26.2 Fire Fighting Instruction 


Do not breathe fumes from fires or vapour from 
decomposition. Use water spray or fog for cooling. 


27 EXPOSURE LIMITS VALUES OR 
THRESHOLD LIMIT VALUE 


The threshold limit value (TLV) of ethanol is 
1 000 ppm and immediately dangerous to life or 
health (IDLH) value is 3 300 ppm. The leakage of 
ethanol from a closed canister during non-burning 
condition, when it is closed with lid or burning 
condition, shall be less than 2 g/h, in order to avoid 
the crossing of the TLV of ethanol which is 1 000 ppm 
for safe operation. The exposure limit shall be 
evaluated as per who guidelines, that is, for the 
kitchen size in the range of 5 m? to 100 m? with the 
standard air exchange rate in the kitchen 5 to 45 per h. 


NOTE — The exposure limit shall be evaluated as per 
WHO, Indoor air quality guidelines: Household fuel 
combustion, World Health Organization (2014) 1—172. 


27.1 Exposure to Gaseous Emission on 


Combustion 


27.1.1 When tested in accordance with the method 
described in Annex E, the emission level of CO, 
CO», NO,, and SO, shall not be more than the 
levels tabled below: 


CO « 400 ppm 
CO» > 15 000 ppm 
NOx <5 ppm 

SOx < 10 ppm 


27.1.2 On no account the carbon monoxide (CO) to 
carbon dioxide (CO2) ratio of the exhaust gases of 
any burner shall exceed 0.02. 


27.2 Exposure to Ethanol Vapour 


Ethanol vapour concentrations shall be measured 
using (see Annex F) direct reading gas detection 
tubes such as colorimetric detection tubes, or with 
electronic instruments such as portable gas 
monitors. Gas monitors shall provide continuous 
readings of ethanol concentrations, and alarms can 
also be set at specified concentrations. time 
weighted average (TWA) personal exposure 
concentrations shall also be measured using an air 
sampling pump. The amount of ethanol vapour in 
confined space with a single unit of stove 
(consisting of single or multiple canisters as the 


IS 18380 : 2023 


case may be) with unsealed cassette/cassettes shall Short term exposure | < 1 000 

be less than 1 000 ppm. The purity level of ethanol р limit (STEL)! ppm 

for this safe limit (1 000 ppm) shall be 93 percent Occupational Time weighted 

(93 percent ethanol and 7 percent water). exposure limits average (TWA) < 1 000 

: 1 ppm 

NOTE — Currently, the Occupational Safety and Health Continuous exposure 
Administration (OSHA), permissible exposure limit (PEL) P I limits! < 1 000 
and the American Conference of Governmental Industrial €HIDISSIDIe eX poOSUTe- MULS ppm 
Hygienists (ACGIH), threshold limit value (TLV) for 
ethanol are set at 1 000 ppm!. Both values are based on an ! American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 
8 hours’ time weighted average (TW A) exposure. 2001. Ethanol — Documentation for the threshold limit value. 


12 


IS No. 


IS 1070 


IS 3144 


IS 3203 


IS 5116 


IS 6009 


: 2023 


: 1992 


: 1982 


: 2020 


: 1970 


ANNEX A 


(Clauses 2 and 6.1) 
LIST OF REFERRED STANDARDS 


Title 
Reagent grade water — 
Specification (fourth 
revision) 
Mineral wool thermal 
insulation materials — 
Method of test (second 
revision) 


Methods for testing local 
thickness of electroplated 
coatings (first revision) 


Domestic and commercial 
equipment for use with 


LPG m General 
requirements (fourth 
revision) 


Method for evaluation of 
results of accelerated 
corrosion tests 


IS No. 
IS 6910 : 1985 


IS 6911 : 2017 


IS 15464 : 2022 


IS 18380 : 2023 


Title 


Method of testing 
corrosion resistance of 
electroplated and anodized 
aluminium coatings by 
acetic acid salt spray test 
(first revision) 


Stainless steel plate, sheet 
and strip — Specification 
(second revision) 


Anhydrous ethanol for use 
as blending component in 


motor gasoline — 
Specification (first 
revision) 


IS 18380 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Clauses 6.3 and 13) 
STRENGTH AND RIGIDITY TEST 


B-1 PROCEDURE 


B-1.1 The rubber support (grommet) if any, shall 
be removed and replaced with identical metal 
supports. The pan support and canister shall be 
removed and the distance between the sides of the 
cookstove body being tested shall be measured. A 
reference reading of the top surface of the body and 
the centre of the width shall be taken. A load of 
250 М (25 kg) per canister shall be applied at the 
top surface subject to a minimum load of 500 N 
(50 kg) for a single canister stove. The load shall be 


applied without impact to a strip of steel having 
20 mm thickness, 100 mm width along the length 
of the appliance (see Fig. 4). This strip shall be 
placed in the centre of the top surface of the 
cookstove and its length shall be parallel to the 
front. The load shall be maintained for 5 min after 
which the measurement for deflection at the top 
surface of the body (at the centre of the width just 
in front of the strip) shall be taken with the load in 
position. 


FIG. 4 STRENGTH TEST 


ANNEX C 
(Clauses 15.1.2 and 16) 
TEST FOR THERMAL EFFICIENCY 


C-1 THERMAL EFFICIENCY 


Thermal efficiency of a cookstove may be defined 
as the ratio of the heat actually utilised to the heat 
theoretically produced by complete combustion of 
a given quantity of fuel (which is based on the low 
calorific value of the fuel). 


C-2 CONDITIONS FOR CARRYING OUT 
THERMAL EFFICIENCY TEST 


C-2.1 Test Room Conditions 


The air of the test room shall be free from draught, 
likely to affect the performance of the cookstove. 


The room temperature shall be maintained in the 
range of (30 + 5) °C. At the start of the test, the 
cookstove and the ethanol in its canister shall be at 
room temperature. 


C-2.2 Ethanol 

The ethanol to be used in conducting the test shall 
conform to IS 15464 which can be diluted by 
adding 7 percent distilled water. 


C-2.3 Setting of the Cookstove 


C-2.3.1 The cookstove whose efficiency is to be 
determined shall be filled with the ethanol upto its 


maximum capacity. Prior to the test, the cookstove 
shall be checked and examined to ensure that all 
components are undamaged апа properly 
assembled according to the manufacturer's 
instructions. The cookstove shall be lighted and 
allowed to burn for 5 min at normal atmospheric 
pressure during which a stable flame shall be 
obtained. Now a vessel containing water shall be 
placed on the cookstove. 


C-2.3.2 In the manner prescribed above, the 
cookstove shall be operated for a period of 
approximately two hours during which it shall be 
observed for any abnormal performance or leakage 
(this test should be done in a draught-free room). 


C-3 METHOD OF TEST 
C-3.1 Normal Evaporation Test 


Mineral wool packing should be done in such a 
way that the normal evaporation rate of ethanol 
shall be less than 10 g/h, when the canister is open 
to atmosphere or inside the stove body with on 
position of lever without burning. The 
measurement of the normal evaporation rate shall 
be conducted in a closed room with no movement 
of wind at a temperature range of (30 + 5) °C. 


C-3.2 Fuel Consumption Test 


The cookstove, whose efficiency is to be 
determined, canister shall be filled upto 
100 percent of its nominal capacity. The cookstove 
shall be lighted with one burner at a time and 
brought to work within five minutes. After burning 
for 5 min, the lighted cookstove shall be weighed 
on a sensitive balance with an accuracy of one 
gram and the initial weight shall be noted. The 
cookstove shall be allowed to burn for one hour 
with an aluminium pan having sufficient water in 
it. At the end of one hour, the weight of the burning 
cookstove shall be noted after removing the 
aluminium pan. The difference in the initial and 
final weights of the burning cookstove shall give 
the ethanol consumption rate in gram per hour. A 
suitable pan for the cookstove under test shall be in 
accordance with Table 1. 


IS 18380 : 2023 


C-3.3 A cylindrical flat-bottomed aluminium pan 
provided with an aluminium lid shall be used for 
this purpose. The lid shall have three holes, one for 
inserting the cork for holding a thermocouple and 
the other two for the stirrers (made of aluminium 
wire) required for stirring the water. 


C-3.4 Thermal Efficiency Test 


Canister selected for the thermal efficiency test 
shall be fully charged with ethanol. The ethanol 
cookstove shall be allowed to run for 5 min to 
obtain the steady flame height. Then, the stove 
along with two filled canisters shall be placed on 
the weighing balance of accuracy + 1 g for 
measuring the initial weight of the stove. After 
measuring the weight, the stove shall be placed on 
the even surface. The aluminium pan filled with the 
required amount of water (4 kg) along with the lid 
and the stirrer are kept on the stove. Initial 
temperature of the water shall be noted. The initial 
temperature of water shall be kept within + 2 °C 
from the actual room temperature. Water is heated 
and once the water temperature reaches 80 ?C, for 
uniformity in temperature, stirring shall be started 
and continued until the end of the test when the 
temperature of the water reaches to (90 + 0.5) °C. 
As soon as the temperature of the water reaches 
(90 + 0.5) °C, the stove shall be switched off and 
the pan along with the lid and the stirrer is taken 
out of the stove. The final weight of the stove along 
with two canisters is measured. The difference 
between the initial and the final weights of the 
cookstove along with two canisters gives the fuel 
consumption. The pan shall be covered with a lid 
fitted with a calibrated T-type thermocouple probe 
inserted into the cork in such a way that the probe 
of the thermocouple is immersed completely in the 
water of the vessel. The thermometer shall be 
digital, with T-type thermocouple probe suitable 
for immersion in liquids with an accuracy of 
+ 0.5 °C. The free end of the stirrer shall come out 
of the lid. 


NOTES 


1 The water stirred gently during heating. 

2 Distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be used for test. 

3 The pan shall be cylindrical with flat bottom. 

4 The finish of the pan bottom from the inside shall always 
be bright. 


IS 18380 : 2023 


Table 1 Aluminium Vessels for Thermal Efficiency Test 
(Clause C-3.2) 


SI No. Consumption Pan Diameter Pan Height Total Pan Mass Mass of Water 
Rate (external) (external) With Lid in Pan 
g/h mm + 5 percent mm + 5 percent g + 10 percent kg 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
1) 200 to 400 260 140 750 6 
C-4 CALCULATION m = mass of water in pan, in kg; 
C, = specific heat of water, in kJ/kg-K; 
Thermal efficiency of the cookstove shall be W = fuel consumed, in kg; and 
calculated as follows: CV = low calorific value of fuel, in kJ/kg. 
Heat gained by vessel NOTES 


=M x C,(T2 – T1), kJ 
Heat utilised for heating water 
=m X C,(T2 — T1), kJ 
Total heat utilised 
= (M x Cp +m x Cw)(Tz — Т), KJ 
Heat produced by fuel 


=W x CV,kJ 


Thermal efficiency 


Total Heat utilised 
~ Heat produced by fuel 


_ (M x Cp+ m x Cw)(T2- T1) S 


100 
W x CV 
where 

M = mass of the vessel with lid and 
stirrer, in kg; 

C, = specific heat of aluminium, in 
kJ/kg-K; 

T, = final temperature of water in pan, in 
?C; 

T, = initial temperature of water in pan, 
in ?C; 


1 Specific heat of aluminium is 0.895 kJ/kg-K. 
2 Low calorific value of ethanol should be measured at 
actual condition using a bomb calorimeter. 


C-5 SHUTTING OFF THE COOKSTOVE 
TEST 


Fill the canister to its full capacity and light the 
burner and adjust the flame to the highest level. 
Place the pot filled with 8 litres of water on the 
cooking surface of the cookstove. After burning the 
cookstove for 1 h, turn the lever to the ‘OFF’ 
position and simultaneously start a stopwatch. 
After 5 s, turn the flame regulator to the ‘ON’ 
position and check that the flame has been 
extinguished. The stove shall be tested for 
minimum 2 000 on/off cycles of operation. 


C-6 DURABILITY TEST 


Ignite the cookstove and adjust the flame to its 
highest level. Allow each canister inside the stove 
body to burn at this rate for 2 h. After this period, 
allow the canister to cool down to room 
temperature. Repeat this procedure for 5 times. 
Leave the canister for 1 h to cool down, thereafter, 
inspect the cookstove and its components for any 
damages. 


ANNEX D 
(Clause 17) 
METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF SURFACE TEMPERATURE 


D-1 PREPARATION OF COOKSTOVE 


The cookstove shall be tested with the fully filled 
canister. The cookstove shall be lit and run at the 
full output (at normal atmospheric pressure) for one 
hour with the vessel containing water placed over it 
before measuring the temperature. 


D-2 PROCEDURE 


D-2.1 The temperature of all parts of the cookstove 
which may be needed to be touched during its 
operation shall be measured by using a calibrated 
T-type thermocouple or RTD having accuracy 
+ 0.5 °C. The temperature of each such part shall be 


measured thrice for every 30 min to get three 
concordant readings. While measuring Ше 
temperature, T-type thermocouple/RTD’s measuring 
bead should be in perfect contact with the specific 
part for a sufficient period of time, until maximum 
temperature is reached. 


D-2.2 During the operation of the cookstove under 
D-2.1, the maximum temperature of the canister 


IS 18380 : 2023 


shall also be recorded. The final reading shall be 
taken at the end of three hours of running or 
operation of the cookstove. 


D-2.3 The temperature of mineral wool surface 
temperature shall be measured by calibrated T-type 
thermocouple of accuracy + 0.5 °C immediately 
after switching off the canister. 


ANNEX E 
(Clauses 10.2, 18 and 27.1.1) 
TEST FOR COMBUSTION EFFICIENCY 


E-1 EQUIPMENT 


E-1.1 The cookstove shall be tested with its fuel 
canister fully filled with ethanol. Before starting 
the test, a pan of the type and size as described in 


DAMPER REGULATOR 
WITH FRICTION SPRING 


#8 SAMPLING TUBE 


STEAM VENT 


ANNULAR RING 


910 TUBES 


C-3.2 and containing water sufficient for the test 
shall be placed over the canister. In addition, a 
collecting hood (see Fig. 5) suitable for a cookstove 
under examination shall be used. 


500 APRROX 


All dimensions are in millimetres. 


FIG. 5 HOOD FOR ETHANOL COOKSTOVE, FIXED CANISTER TYPE AND REMOVABLE CANISTER TYPE 


IS 18380 : 2023 


E-1.1.1 The hood shall be so designed that, while 
not interfering in any way with the normal 
combustion of the canister, it collects a fairly high 
proportion of the flue gases. Also, it shall be such 
that the sample collected represents the whole of 
combustion gases and not those from one particular 
point. When using hood, the damper provided shall 
be set, or an additional flue pipe added, so that 
spillage of the flue gases around the skirt is 
minimised. 


E-2 PROCEDURE 


E-2.1 With the hood in position over the cookstove 
under investigation, the cookstove shall be lit 
and run for a few minutes till a stable flame is 
achieved. Then, a sufficient number of samples 


shall be collected. 


E-2.2 The flue gas shall be analysed by using any 
of the recognized methods. For carbon monoxide, it 
is recommended that a co-indicator of prescribed 
accuracy or iodine pentoxide method or catalytic 
method, for example, drager method, the katz 
method or infra-red analysis method may be used. 
Carbon dioxide may be tested by using orsat 
apparatus, or haldane apparatus, or by infra-red 
analysis. 


E-2.3 The carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide 
content of the product of combustion shall be 
determined by the methods capable of an accuracy 
of 0.001 percent and 0.5 percent of the volume of 
the sample respectively. 


ANNEX F 
(Clause 27.2) 


METHOD OF MEASUREMENT OF ETHANOL VAPOUR CONCENTRATION (WITH GAS 
CHROMATOGRAPHY TECHNIQUE) 


F-1 METHOD NUMBER 


1400* 


NOTE — Test method has been derived from NIOSH 1400. 
F-2 VALIDATED ANALYTE 
Ethyl alcohol 
F-3 REAGENTS AND EQUIPMENT 


F-3.1 Reagents 


a) Eluent: Carbon disulfide (chromatographic 
grade) with 1 percent (v/v) 2-butanol and 
0.2 percent (v/v) n-undecane, 0.1 percent 
(v/v) ethyl benzene, or other suitable 
internal standard; 


b) Analyte, reagent grade; 
c) Nitrogen, purified; 
d) Hydrogen, prepurified; and 


e) Air-compressed filtered. 
F-3.2 Equipment 


a) Sampler: glass tube, 7 cm long, 6 mm OD, 
4 mm ID, flame-sealed ends, containing 
two sections of activated (600 °C) coconut 
shell charcoal (front = 100 mg and back 
= 50 mg) separated by a 2 mm urethane 
foam plug. A silylated glass wool plug 
precedes the front section and a 3 mm 
urethane foam plug follows the back 
section. Pressure drop across the tube at 


1/min airflow must be less than 3.4 kPa. 
Tubes are commercially available; 

b) Personal sampling pump, 0.01 litres/min 
to 0.2 litres/min, with flexible connecting 
tubing; 

c) Refrigerant, 
equivalent); 


bagged (blue ice, or 


d) Gas chromatograph, FID, integrator and 
column; 

e) Vials, glass, 2 ml, PTFE-lined crimp caps; 

f) Syringe, 10 ul, readable to 0.1 ul; and 

g) Volumetric flasks, 10ml. 


F-4 SAMPLING PROCEDURE 


Collect air samples by drawing workplace air 
through sampler sorbent tube (coconut shell 
charcoal, 100 mg/50 mg). 


F-4.1 Sampling 


a) Calibrate each personal sampling pump 
with a representative sampler in line; 


b) Break the ends of the sampler immediately 
before sampling. Attach a sampler to a 
personal sampling pump with flexible 
tubing; 

c) Sample at an accurately known flow rate 
between 0.01 litres/min and 0.2 litres/min 
for a total sample size of 0.1 litres to 
1 litres (ethanol), 0.3 litres to 3 litres 
(isopropyl alcohol) or 1.0 litres to 10 litres 
(t-butyl alcohol); and 


d) Cap the samplers with plastic (not rubber) 
caps and pack securely with bagged 
refrigerant for shipment. 


The following condition is requiring for sampling 
of ethanol: 


Sampler Solid sorbent tube 
(coconut shell charcoal, 100 mg/50 mg) 
Flow rate 0.01 litre/min to 0.2 litre/min 
Vol- Min 1 litre < 16 ppm to 1 000 ppm 
Vol- Max З litre > 4 ppm to 400 ppm 
Shipment cooled 
Sample Unknown, store in freezer 
stability 
Blank 2 to 10 field blanks per set 


F-4.2 Sample Preparation 


a) Place front (include glass wool plug) and 
back sorbent sections of the sampler tube 
in separate vials. Discard foam plugs; 

b) Add 1.0 ml eluent to each vial. Attach a 
crimp cap to each vial; and 

c) Allow to stand 30 min with occasional 
agitation. 


F-4.3 Calibration and Quality Control 


Calibrate daily with at least 
standards over the range of interest. 


three working 


a) Add known amounts of analyte to eluent 
in 10 ml volumetric flasks and dilute to 
the mark; 

b) Analyse together with samples and blanks; 

c) Prepare calibration graph (ratio of peak 
area of analyte to peak area of internal 
standard vs mg analyte); and 


d) Determine desorption efficiency (DE) at 
least once, for each lot of silica gel tubes 
used for sampling in the calibration range. 
Prepare three samplers at each of six 
levels plus three media blanks. 


1) Remove and discard back sorbent 
sections of samplers and media 
blanks. 


2) Inject a known amount of calibration 
stock solution directly into the front 
sorbent bed of each silica gel tube. 


3) Allow the tubes to air-equilibrate for 
several min, then cap the ends of the 
tubes and allow to stand overnight. 


IS 18380 : 2023 


4) Desorb the samples and analyse them 
together with working standards and 


blanks; and 

5) Prepare a graph of DE vs ug analyte 
recovered. 
1 Analyse three quality control 


blind spikes and three analyst 
spikes to ensure that the 
calibration graph and DE graphs 
are in control. 


F-5 MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUE 


Technique Gas chromatography, 
FID 

Analyte Ethanol 

Desorption 1 ml 1 percent 
2-butanol in CS; 

Injection volume Sul 

Temperature - Injection 200 °C 

Temperature - Detector 250 °C to 300 °C 


Temperature - Column 


Carrier gas 


Column 


Calibration 


Range 


Estimated load 


Precision 


65 °C to 70 °C (8 °C/min) 
(split ratio 10 : 1) 
М» or He, 30 ml/min 


Glass, 2 m x 4 mm ID, 
0.2 percent carbowax 
1 500 on 60/80 carbopack 
C or equivalent 


Solutions of analyte in 
eluent (internal standard 
optional) 


900 mg to 3 300 mg per 
sample 


0.01 mg per sample 
0.065 


F-5.1 Set gas chromatograph according to the 
above-mentioned conditions. Inject a 1 ul sample 
aliquot manually using solvent flush technique or 
with an auto-sampler and measure peak areas. 


NOTE — If peak area is above the linear range of the 
working standards, dilute with water/IPA (95/5), reanalyse 
and apply the appropriate dilution factor in the 


calculations. 


F-6 CALCULATIONS 


F-6.1 Determine the mass, mg (corrected for DE), 
for ethanol found in the sample front (Wẹ) and 
back (Wy) sorbent sections, and in the average media 


IS 18380 : 2023 


blank front (Вг) and back (Bp) sorbent sections. 
NOTE — If W, > W,/10, report breakthrough and possible 


sample loss. 


F-6.2 Calculate concentration, C (mg/m?) of 
ethanol in the air volume samples, V (L). 


OW; +W, = By — By 


C 
V 


20 


F-7 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS 


Ethanol is flammable and dangerous, it has a risk 
of fire and explosion. It is moderately toxic on 
ingestion and inhalation. Iso-propanol is flammable 
and is a fire risk. Wear appropriate protective 
clothing and work with these compounds in a well 
ventilated hood. 


IS 18380 : 2023 


ANNEX G 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Oil Burning Appliances Committee, MED 26 


Organization 
CSIR - Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, Mumbai 
Bombay Light and Stove Merchants Association, 
Mumbai 


Consumer Research, Education, Action, Training 
and Empowerment, Paramakudi 


CSIR - Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 
Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, Kanpur 


Directorate General of Quality Assurance, Ministry 
of Defence, New Delhi 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals 
(Quality Assurance Wing), New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati 


Indian Oil Corporation (R and D Centre), Faridabad 


LPG Equipment Research Centre, Bengaluru 


Office of Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Petroleum Conservation Research Association, 


New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
DR G. D. THAKRE (Chairperson) 


SHRIRAHUL GARG 
SHRI CHITHRA V. (Alternate) 


SHRIMAHESH D. BAKHAI 


DR P. DURAISINGAM 


SHRIPANKAJ KUMAR ARYA 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRIR. K. BORUAH 


SHRI M. V. KUMBHALKAR 
SHRIS. J. KOLARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. RAI 


SHRI MUTHU KUMAR 
MS PRATIBHA MAURYA (Alternate) 


DR S. P. SINGH 
SHRI R. MAHAPATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. BERA 
SHRI P. R. DEODHAR (Alternate I) 
SHRI RAHUL SHARMA (Alternate П) 


SHRISUSANTA KUMAR SOM 
MS MAITREYEE TALAPATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMESHWAR K. SHARMA 
SHRI SUNIL BAHL (Alternate) 


SHRI NAVINDRA GAUTAM SCIENTIST ‘E’/DIRECTOR 
AND HEAD (MECHANICAL ` ENGINEERING) 
[REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SHRI AMAN DHANAWAT 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MECHANICAL ENGINEERING), BIS 


21 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 26 (22061). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


