TRATT HTT IS 4906 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


ifeurekfuüene wae — 
Tg ufea 


(VE JOT ) 


Radiochemical Laboratory — 
Code of Safety 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 541.28.006.2.614.8 


© BIS 2017 


ma res equ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAF FH, 9 JER AHL BÉ as fWeei-110002 
=” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 10 


Occupational Health and Safety and Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Occupational Health and Safety and Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical 
Division Council. 


Radioisotopes are increasingly employed in medicines, agriculture and industry and in research laboratories. The 
maximum permissible concentrations of radionuclides in air and water are in almost all cases, excepting natural 
uranium, of orders of magnitude lower than the maximum allowable concentrations of non-active chemical isotopes. 
This, coupled with the characteristic radiotoxicity and difficulties of detection by conventional methods, makes it 
necessary that elaborate precautions are taken in the design and layout of radiochemical laboratories and in the 
handling, storage and disposal of radioactive materials. 


The potential injuries due to radiation may be reduced to a minimum, if all the safety instructions prescribed for 
the purpose are followed to the fullest extent. This is only possible, if the characteristic of the radioactive material, 
nature of the hazards involved, purpose underlying the safety instruction and the function and uses of protective 
equipment are fully understood. 


Radiation science is a very highly specialized field and a considerable amount of sustained research is being 
carried out throughout the world. As such concept and definitions change rather rapidly. Subject to this limitation, 
this Code is based on best current opinion available on the subject. Considerable assistance has been taken from 
the following literature while formulating this standard: 


a) 1990 Recommendations ofthe International Commission on Radiological Protection — ICRP Publication 
60 

b) The 2007 Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection — ICRP 
Publication 103 

c) Safe Handling of Radionuclides, IAEA Safety Standards, Safety Series No.1, 1973 

d) International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of 
Radiation Sources, IAEA Safety Standards, Safety Series No. 115 

e) Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 

f) Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal of Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987 

g) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Safety Manual on Radiation Protection for Nuclear Facilities, AERB/ 
NF/SM/O-2 (Rev.4), 2005 

h) Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, Safety Code for the Transport of Radioactive Materials, AERB/SC/ 
TR-1, 1986 


For prevention of chemical accidents, which may also occur in a radiochemical laboratory or which may lead to 
exposure due to radiation, Indian Standard Code of Safety for Chemical Laboratories, IS 4209 : 2013 ‘Chemical 
laboratories — Code of safety’ may be consulted. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result ofa test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Indian Standard 
RADIOCHEMICAL LABORATORY — CODE OF SAFETY 
( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This Code recommends measures that should be 
adopted to prevent or minimize the exposure to ionizing 
radiation in a radiochemical laboratory handling small 
amounts of radioactive materials. It describes important 
characteristics of radioactive materials, nature of 
hazards, design requirements of laboratories and other 
essential information for protection against radiation. 


2 MODES OF RADIATION EXPOSURE 


2.1 In work places, exposure to radiation is by two 
modes: 


(a) External exposure, and 
(b) Internal exposure. 


2.1.1 External exposure is attributed to the sources that 
are external to the body. Alpha and low energy beta 
radiation do not cause any external exposure hazards 
whereas gamma radiation and neutron are mainly 
external exposure hazards. Examples of external 
exposures are exposure from a Co-60 gamma source 
and exposures due to cosmic radiations. 


2.1.2 Internal exposure results from irradiation by 
sources inside the body. The pathways of internal 
exposure are: inhalation or ingestion of a radioactive 
material or absorption of radioactivity through skin and 
cuts/wounds. Inhalation of radon, thoron or tritiated 
vapours and exposure from radio nuclides deposited 
inside the body are examples of internal exposure. 
Alpha emitters are considered most toxic under this 
class of exposure. 


3 BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF IONISING 
RADIATION 


3.1 The process of ionization necessarily changes 
atoms, at least transiently and may thus alter the 
structure of the molecules containing them. Molecular 
changes may also be caused by the excitation of atoms 
and molecules, if the excitation energy exceeds the 
binding energy between atoms. If the affected molecules 
are in a living cell, the cell itself may sometimes be 
damaged, either directly, if the molecule is critical to 
the cell’s function or indirectly by causing chemical 
changes in adjacent molecules, for example the 
production of free radicals. Of the various forms of 
damage that radiation can cause in cells, the most 


important is that in the DNA. Damage in the DNA may 
prevent the survival or reproduction of the cell, but 
frequently the damage is repaired by the cell. If that 
repair is not perfect, it may result in a viable but 
modified cell. The occurrence and proliferation of a 
modified cell may well be influenced by other changes 
in the cell caused either before or after the exposure to 
radiation. Such influences are common and may include 
exposure to other carcinogens or mutagens. 


3.2 If enough cells in an organ or tissue are killed or 
prevented from reproducing and functioning normally, 
there will be a loss of organ function — this effect is 
called deterministic effect. The loss of function become 
more serious as the number of affected cells is 
increased. 


3.3 A modified somatic cell may still retain its 
reproductive capacity and may give rise to a clone of 
modified cells that may eventually result in a cancer. A 
modified germ cell in the gonads, with the functioning 
of transmitting genetic information to the descendants 
of an exposed individual, may transmit incorrect 
hereditary information and may cause severe harm to 
some of those descendants. These somatic and 
hereditary effects, which may start from a single 
modified cell are called stochastic effects. 


3.4 The fundamental dosimetric quantity in 
radiological protection is the absorbed dose, D. This is 
the energy absorbed per unit mass. And its unit is the 
joule per kilogram which is given the special name gray 
(Gy). 


3.5 The absorbed dose (energy absorbed per unit mass) 
is to be multiplied by radiation weighting factor, W, as 
given in Table 1 to account for the relative effectiveness 
of different types of radiation in inducing health effects 


Table 1 Radiation Weighting Factors 
(Clause 3.5) 


SI Radiation Type Radiation Weighting 
No. Factor, We 

(1) (2) (3) 

i) Photons 1 

ii) Electrons and muons 1 

iii) Protons and charged pions 2 

iv) Alpha particles, fission 20 


fragments, heavy ions 
v) Neutrons A continuous function of 


neutron energy 


IS 4906 : 2017 


and is selected for the type and energy of the radiation 
incident on the body or, in the case of sources within 
the body, emitted by the source. This weighted absorbed 
dose is called equivalent dose. The unit is joule per 
kilogram with the special name sievert (Sv). 


3.6 The effect of radiation also depends on the organ 
or tissue irradiated. The factor by which the equivalent 
dose in tissue or organ is weighted is called tissue 
weighting factor, W; and the weighted equivalent dose 
is called effective dose. The unit is joule per kilogram 
with the special name sievert (Sv). 


Table 2 Tissue Weighting Factors 
(Clause 3.6) 


SI Tissue or Organ Tissue YXW 
No. Weighting 
Factor Wr 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Bone marrow (red), Colon 0.12 0.72 
Lung, stomach, breast, remainder! 
ii) Gonad 0.08 0.08 
iii) Bladder, oesophagus, liver, thyroid 0.04 0.16 
iv) Bone surface, brain, salivary glands, 0.01 0.04 
skin 
Total 1.00 


D Remainder tissues: Adrenals, extrathoracic region, gall bladder, 
heart, lymphatic nodes, small intestine, kidney, muscle, oral 
mucosa, pancreas, spleen, thymus, prostate, uterus/cervix. 


4 RADIATION DOSE LIMIT 


4.1 The system of radiological protection aims at 
achieving the following objectives: 


a) Prevention of detrimental deterministic 
effects, and 


b) Limiting the probability of stochastic effects. 
It is based on the following three basic principles 


1) No practice shall be adopted unless its 
introduction produces a positive net benefit 
to society (Justification of a practice); 

2) All exposures shall be kept as low as 

reasonably achievable (ALARA), economic 

and social factors being taken into account 


(optimization of protection); and 


3) The normal exposure of individuals resulting 
from all relevant practices should be such that 
neither the total effective dose nor the 
equivalent dose to relevant organs or tissues 
exceed the relevant dose limits to ensure that 
no individual is exposed to a risk that is judged 
to be unacceptable (dose limitation). 


4.2 The exposures due to natural background radiation 
and medical procedures are excluded from the dose 
limits. The dose limits stipulated by Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board (AERB) for the occupational 
exposure and general public are given in Table 3. 


4.3 For pregnant woman 2 mSv equivalent dose to 
abdomen for remainder of pregnancy and the limit on 
intake of radionuclides shall be 1/20 ofthe annual limit 
on intake. 


4.4 Medical review when the cumulative occupational 
effective dose reaches 0.5 Sv 


4.5 Internal exposures are to be controlled by applying 
the secondary limit called annual limit on intakes. This 
would correspond to an intake, which would result in a 
committed effective dose of 20 mSv. The limit on intake 
for individual radionuclides shall be 1 ALI for each 
year. The ALI values for important radionuclides are 
given in the Annex A. 


4.6 Derived air concentration values of individual 
radionuclides are used for controlling the internal 
exposures due to inhalation. DAC of a radionuclide in 
Bq m? of air is given by: 


. ALI of the radionuclide (for inhalation) 


DAC 
2.4x10? 


where 2.4x10? m? is the volume of air inhaled by 
International Commission on Radiological Protection 
(ICRP) reference man in a year during working hours. 


5 CLASSIFICATION OF RADIOISOTOPES 


Radionuclides are classified into four groups according 
to relative radiotoxicity per unit activity. Annex A gives 
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) 
classification of radioisotopes into Group I (Very high 


Table 3 Dose Limit 


(Clause 4.2) 
SI Category Annual Annual Equivalent Limit (mSv) For Lifetime Effective 
No. Effective Dose - TE Consecutive 5 Dose Limit 
Limit Lens of Skin Extremities Years Sv 
mSv Eye (Hand and Feet) mSv 
a) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) 
i) Radiation worker 30 150 500 500 100 1 
il) Apprentices and trainees 6 50 150 150 — — 
iii) Temporary workers 15 75 250 250 = = 
iv) Members of public 1 15 50 — — — 


radiotoxicity), Group II (High radiotoxicity), Group III 
(Moderate radiotoxicity) and Group IV (Low 
radiotoxicity). 


6 RADIATION SOURCES 
6.1 The radiation sources in use may be classified as: 


a) Sealed sources — Which do not contribute to 
contamination or internal hazard, and remain 
a primary source. 

b) Opensources — Which are used for secondary 
preparations through dilutions, labelling, etc. 


6.1.1 Sealed Sources 


Sealed sources are employed in a number of fields, such 
as teletherapy, interstitial therapy, industrial gamma 
radiography, thickness gauging, static eliminators and 
for calibration purposes. Co-60, Ir-192, Cs-137, Sr-90, 
T1-204, etc, are some of the more common sources 
which are industrially used. Such sources are normally 
sealed in capsules to prevent the escape of the 
radioactive material and should be ensured against 
breakage or defective sealing. In case of properly sealed 
sources, the hazard arises only through external 
exposure, and against this the greatest precaution should 
be used. 


6.1.1.1 Choice of sealed sources 


The activity of the source should be as low as possible 
and not in very much excess of the requirements, with 
due regard to its half life and duration of use. The 
radioactive material inside the sealed container should 
be of low toxicity, and in such chemical and physical 
form as to minimize dispersion or ingestion, in case of 
rupture of the container. Sealed sources should have 
clear markings indicating the nature and quantity of 
the source activity. These sources should be periodically 
checked up for any contamination or leakage, 
particularly in case of radium whose daughter product 
radon is a gas which could be quite hazardous when 
inhaled. A recommended test 1s to scrub the dry 
container with a dry filter paper sponge and to count 
the activity. Mechanically damaged or corroded sources 
should be immediately placed in suitable containers 
and sealed. Appropriate procedure for disposal of these 
sources should be practiced. 


6.1.1.2 Precautions in the use of sealed sources 


The basic objective of all radiation protection measures 
is based on ALARA principle. Measures should be 
taken to prevent personnel handling sources from 
receiving radiation doses in excess of the prescribed 
regulatory limits. All efforts should be made to prevent 
inadvertent radiation exposures. This is achieved by a 
suitable combination of the following factors: 


a) Time — By limiting the time of exposure, 


IS 4906 : 2017 


while handling the sealed source; 

b) Shielding — By the use of adequate shielding 
in between the active source and the worker; 
and 

c) Distance—By maintaining a maximum 
possible distance between the source and the 
worker, by using long forceps and remote 
handling equipment. 


By making use of these factors in appropriate 
combination, radiation exposure to personnel not only 
engaged on actual work, but in the surroundings also, 
could be reduced to the minimum. 


6.1.1.3 It is very important that while working with any 
sealed radiation source, adequate shielding should be 
provided and the adequacy should always be tested by 
direct measurements. Precautions should be taken to 
guard against any scattered radiation around the primary 
protective shielding. The eyes, face and body may be 
protected from beta rays by transparent plates of 
perspex of moderate thickness. Protection against 
gamma rays should be achieved by screening the source 
with adequate shielding of lead which should be as near 
the source as possible. The lead bricks used for 
shielding sources should overlap to prevent penetration 
of radiation through gaps. In addition to lead, concrete 
and marble also offer adequate protection against 
gamma radiation, but lead is the most convenient. 


6.1.1.4 Forceps used for handling these sources should 
be as long as practicable and should grip the source 
with minimum force exerted by the fingers. These 
forceps should be light in weight and should have grips 
notched or grooved in a way to hold the sources 
securely. Transparent plastic hand shields of sufficient 
thickness attached to the forceps would be an added 
protection against the most energetic betas, if 
unshielded beta emitters are being used. The time of 
handling these sources should be minimum possible, if 
unshielded radiation sources are being used. For 
pipetting solutions of very high activity and presenting 
over exposure hazards in handling, remote handling 
pipette should be utilized over the shielding wall. 


6.1.1.5 Vices, chucks or similar arrangement should 
be provided at the protective barriers, to facilitate 
handling of sources. They should be designed against 
excessive clamping pressure which will lead to 
damaging the sources. A spring loaded ratchet or 
slipping clutch mechanism would prove useful. 


6.1.1.6 Some of the regulations to be observed in the 
application of the sealed sources are given briefly 
below: 


a) Industrial gamma radiography — The 
controlled area should be clearly marked with 
instructions restricting entry to unauthorised 


IS 4906 : 2017 


personnel. Light or audible signals or both 
should, be provided during irradiation. The 
radiographic set-up should be completed 
before starting the irradiation. Any 
radiographic work requiring removal of the 
sealed source from shielding container should 
be preceded by adjustments with a dummy 
capsule. The removal of the source from the 
shielding container should be done by 
automatic means or by remote handling. After 
return of the source to the container, the 
shielding should be verified by monitoring. 

b) Thickness, gauges, static eliminators and 
similar devices using sealed sources — 
Wherever, possible sealed sources should be 
installed or shielded in such a way that 
radiation exposure to the personnel installing 
or maintaining it is within the stipulated dose 
limit and should be ensured ALARA. 
Radioactive symbols should be put up 
permanently on such devices. In case of loss 
or breakage of the source, the Radiological 
Safety Officer (RSO) should be notified 
immediately. 


NOTE — As per the Atomic Energy Radiation 
Protection Rules, 2004 every employer shall designate 
a person having appropriate qualification as RSO with 
the written approval of the Competent Authority 


6.1.1.7 Teletherapy and interstitial therapy installations 
in medical departments need elaborate planning and 
form a separate subject altogether. 


6.1.1.8 Method of use of sealed sources 


Source should be properly stored and inventories 
maintained. If any person has reason to believe that a 
source has been lost he should report immediately to 
the RSO for initiating proper actions. All sources should 
be manipulated in such a way as to minimize exposure 
of personnel and people in adjacent area. Area of 
particular hazard should be cordoned off. Any semi- 
shielded beam or scattered beam should be clearly 
indicated, and area monitored to assess the radiation 
fields. Sealed sources, when practicable, should be used 
in enclosed installations and should never be touched 
with hand. In addition to adequate shielding, limiting 
the working time also helps to minimise the exposure 
as possible and for this dummy runs should be 
performed beforehand. These protection measures 
require careful planning and proper application of 
radiation protection principles. 


6.1.2 Unsealed or Open Sources 


The open sources offer a comparatively larger scope 
of work and are employed in tracer studies and 
preparation of labelled compounds. They present 
problems of safety in handling and are a potential source 


of contamination in the laboratories. In manipulating 
an unsealed or open radioactive source great care 
should be exercized towards minimizing the chances 
of entry into the body as a result of ingestion and 
inhalation of air-borne particles and absorption through 
skin. The hazards will arise in general through 
contaminated hands, smoking and mouth pipetting, 
glass blowing, etc, or from inhalation of air-borne 
radioactivity. When the hazards due to ingestion and 
inhalation are negligible (as in the case of well sealed 
sources ) the risks in handling radioisotopes will depend 
essentially upon the effects of external beta and gamma 
radiation. 


6.2 Authorization 


Radioisotopes can be procured and handled only by 
the users duly authorized by the regulatory body. Lay 
out of the radiochemical lab should be approved by 
the regulatory body. The transportation of the source 
shall also be subject to the requirements of the 
regulatory body with due applicable procedures for safe 
transport of radioactive materials. Qualified experts 
should be appointed for the safe handling of the sources 
as per the qualification procedures prescribed by 
AERB. 


6.3 Safety Aspects 


a) All the radioactive sources should be kept 
secured so as to prevent theft or damage and 
to prevent any unauthorized handling; 

b) All radioactive sources (wherever, applicable) 
should be incorporated with safety devices such 
that the magnitude of likelihood of individual 
and collective exposure are ALARA; 

c) Suitable arrangement shall be made for any 
source or practice, 

1) to prevent, as far as possible, any 
accident, occurrence or incident that 
could be reasonably foreseen in 
connection with the source or the practice. 

2) to limit the consequences of any accident, 
occurrence or incident that does occur. 

3) to provide workers with the information, 
training and equipment necessary to 
restrict their potential exposures. 

4) toensure that there be adequate procedure 
for the control of the source and of any 
potential accident that could reasonably 
be foreseen. 

d) Anaccountability system shall be maintained 
that includes records of, 

1) the location and description of the 
sources, and 


2) the activity form of each radioactive 
substance. 


7 CLASSIFICATION OF LABORATORIES 


7.1 The laboratories have been classified as Types A, 
B and C based on the safety requirements for handling 
different quantities of open sources in a wide range of 
operation and facilities available. For low level 
radiochemical work Type C laboratory is quite 
adequate. Depending upon the toxicity, one can handle 
up to 0.37 GBq (10 mCi) of radioactive material in such 
a facility. For larger amounts, facilities must 
be upgraded to meet the requirements of Type B or 
Type A laboratories. The quantities of radionuclides 
that can be handled with reasonable safety in different 
types of laboratories will also depend on whether 
operations are normal chemical, complex wet, simple 
dry or dry and dusty. 


7.1.1 The quantities of radioactive materials of 
different toxicity groups that can be handled in the three 
types of laboratories mentioned above are given in 
Table 4. These figures provide general guidelines. They 
are subject to modification depending on the complexity 
of operations involved. Depending upon the nature of 
operation carried out, modifying factors are used to 
arrive at the maximum amount of activity that can be 
handled in given handling facility. These modifying 
factors are given in Table 5. 


7.1.2 At the present stage of development and 
utilization of the radioisotopes in the country, Type A 


IS 4906 : 2017 


laboratories are not likely to come up in outside the 
Department of Atomic Energy or its allied units. 
However, there are a couple of laboratories which can 
be classified as Type B or Type C laboratories, which 
are common in medical and agriculture institutions, 
industrial establishments and universities. 


7.2 Design Features of the Laboratories 
7.2.1 Type C Labs 


This type of laboratory is adequate for radiochemistry 
experiments at the university level and for low level 
radiochemical work in research institution. Any college 
laboratory, with minimal effort and investment, can 
become a Type C laboratory by making following 
provisions. Judicious consideration should be given to 
(a) Radiation safety, (b) Efficiency of the operations, 
(c) Convenience, and (d) Economy. 


1) Layout — As far as possible, active 
laboratories should be designed in such a way 
as to segregate from other inactive 
laboratories. Working space in this type of 
laboratory should be allotted on generous 
scale as compared to a normal chemical 
laboratory. Sufficient storage space should be 
provided for stocking radioactive solutions. 
Washing facilities in general are adequately 
complied with by use of the ordinary 
laboratory sinks with a smooth white glass 
finish without cracks. The discharge of liquid 
radioactive waste, with proper authorization, 


Table 4 Quantities of Radioisotopes Permitted for Handling in Different Types of Laboratories 
(Clause 7.1.1) 


SI Radiotoxicity of Type C Type B Type A 
No. Radionuclides 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
i) Very high 0.37 MBq or less 0.37 MBq-0.37 GBq 0.37 GBq or more 
(10 pCi) (10 pCi-10 mCi) (10 mCi) 
ii) High 3.7 MBq or less 3.7 MBq-3.7 GBq 3.7 GBq or more 
(100 pCi) (100 i Ci-100 mCi) (100 mCi) 
lii) Moderate 37 MBq or less 37 MBq-37 GBq 37 GBq or more 
(1mCi) (1 mCi-1Ci) (1Ci) 
iv) Low 0.37 GBq or less 0.37 GBq-370 GBq 370 GBq or more 
(10 mCi) (10 mCi-10 Ci) (10 Ci) 
Table 5 Modifying Factors Applicable to Various Operations 
(Clause 7.1.1) 
SI No. Nature of Operation Modifying Factor 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Simple storage (say of stock solution) x 100 
11) Very simple wet operations (dilution, ion exchange, etc) x 10 
iii) Normal chemical operations x] 
iv) Complex wet operations (with risk of spillage) or simple dry operations x 0.1 
v) Dry and dusty operations x 0.01 


IS 4906 : 2017 


2) 


3) 


4) 


3) 


should be limited to one or two drains, if 
possible and should be properly planned to 
pass through areas away from work places. 
These drains should be of plastic or 
polyethylene pipe that could be easily repaired 
and should lead to sewers or collecting 
carboys or tanks. 

Floors, walls, ceilings and surfaces — These 
should be amenable for easy decontamination, 
These should have a smooth and as far 
possible joint free finish, for example floor 
can be covered with linoleum or PVC tiles; 
walls and ceilings can be painted with 
washable paint. Smooth panels should cover 
electrical conduits and other piping work or 
else they too should be painted with washable 
paint. Similarly wooden furniture will be 
replaced by painted steel furniture. Where this 
is not possible, exposed wooden surfaces shall 
be given ‘sunmica’ type finish. All working 
surfaces including fume hoods should be 
strong enough to support the gamma shields, 
namely lead bricks. Floors should be cleaned 
by wet mopping and should not be swept dry. 
Walls and ceilings should be finished with a 
non-porous washable surface, such as a good 
hard gloss paint. 

Decontamination/Washing facility — Each 
laboratory shall be provided with a stainless 
steel sink. In its absence, porcelain sink is 
considered acceptable. The taps should be 
elbow / foot operated so as not to contaminate 
them by hands or gloves. 

Laboratory liquid effluent — The average 
radioactivity content of the effluent from 
these laboratories is generally quite low 
(«0.37 MBq or 10.0uCi/m°) and the waste 
volume is also small. It can therefore be 
allowed to mix with general building effluent 
from the locality. These other effluents easily 
provide a dilution factor of 100 or more, thus 
rendering it inactive for all practical purposes. 
Separate waste management arrangements are 
not required. 

Forced ventilation — The laboratory should 
be provided with 3 or more air changes per 
hour. This air should be exhausted through the 
fume hood(s), which should have an exhaust 
fan with adequate capacity to provide a 
minimum linear velocity of 30 m/min when the 
sash front has a standard opening of 30 cm. 
The fume hoods should be preferably located 
near the external wall of the building with 
adjoining open space. It is sufficient to 
discharge the exhaust air through ducting to 


6) 


7) 


8) 


the outside of the building at a point above 
roof level or at least not immediately adjacent 
to windows or air intakes. 

The exhaust from fumehood(s) is thus 
discharged directly to the atmosphere. The 
average radioactivity level in the discharged 
air is generally quite low (< 3.7 Bq/m*) and 
filtration of this air is not called for. Due care 
should be given when considering the design 
and erection of the exhaust duct towards ease 
of replacement as well as minimizing the 
spread of contamination within building 
during dismantling operations. For example 
the duct length could be as short as possible 
and the single piece and the exhaust fan should 
be mounted on the outside of the ducting to 
reduce contamination of the motor and to 
make it more accessible for maintenance 
purpose. Fume hoods should produce a regular 
flow without any eddies. The speed of the 
airflow should be such that there can be no 
escapes of air into the work place from the 
fume hood under typical operating conditions. 
Counting room facility —A separate room for 
housing counting equipment is preferred to 
avoid any cross contaminations. In the absence 
of this, a portion of the laboratory should be 
segregated by partitions and converted into a 
counting room. 

Storage facility — If several radioisotopes are 
involved in radiochemical work, a separate 
storage place (in one corner of the room) 
should be created. Further, if the storage area 
becomes a source of radiation (giving a dose 
of 10 uSvh" or more at 10 cm distance) some 
provision for lead shielding should be made. 
This will be all the more necessary, if a part 
of the laboratory has been converted into a 
counting room, to suppress counter 
background 

Monitoring instruments — In any radioactive 
laboratory, incidents of personnel, equipment 
or surface contamination do occur once in a 
while. To tackle such situations and bring them 
under control, provision of suitable moni- 
toring instruments must be made. The list 
includes a Geiger Muller (G.M.) survey meter 
and an alpha/ beta-gamma contamination 
monitor as minimum instruments required. 
More instruments can be added to the list to 
suit local requirements such as area 
monitoring for beta gamma radiation. 
Personnel may be provided with Thermo 
Luminescent Dosimeter (TLD)/Film badges 
depending on the advice of the RSO. 


9) Provision of simple handling equipment — It 
is necessary to carry out the jobs properly and 
quickly but at the same time ensuring that the 
possibility of contamination is reduced. The 
list includes capping/recapping tool, tweezers, 
small tongs, syringes, pro-pipettes, etc. 


7.2.2. Type B Laboratories 


This type of facility becomes essential when the 
quantities ofradioactive materials being handled exceed 
frequently the limits prescribed for Type C laboratories. 
If the limits exceed by factors less than an order of 
magnitude, the Type B laboratory will be a simple 
modified version of a Type C laboratory. For larger 
amounts, a separate facility coming under Type B 
laboratory must be designed. 


Type B laboratory meets all the specifications of a 
Type C laboratory. In addition the following points need 
careful evaluation for upgradation/incorporation: 


a) Ventilation system — The ventilation system 
for the active area must be independent of the 
other ventilation systems in the building. It 
may also be necessary to provide for the 
filtration of the fume hood exhaust air before 
it is released into the atmosphere. This exhaust 
air should be released at the tallest point of 
the building or a few meters above it through 
a small stack. Siting of exhaust and supply 
points should be so chosen to prevent 
recirculation of exhausted air under the 
prevailing conditions of local terrain. The 
degree of filtration ofthe exhaust air will have 
to be worked out in advance and suitable 
filtration system installed accordingly. The 
capacity of the ventilation system should be 
adequate to provide 5-7 air changes/h in the 
laboratories. 

b) Use of gloves boxes — Radioactive operations 
are shifted from fume hoods to gloves boxes 
whenever, the quantities of radioactive 
materials involved exceed the limits set for 
operations in fume hood or wherever, 
materials are handled in dry form. Glove boxes 
are discussed under containment systems. 

c) Gamma shielding — This may be necessary 
for creating a regular storage facility or 
providing shielding in a fume hood or glove 
box, if the radiation fields for personnel 
working in operating areas exceed the derived 
working limits. For the storage area the floor 
loading capacity should be adequate to 
support the weight of lead or mild steel, which 
are commonly used for gamma shielding. This 
requirement should be considered while 
facility is under construction. Similarly, the 


IS 4906 : 2017 


fume hood/glove box floor or the tables used 
to support them should be strong enough to 
support the weight of the lead bricks used to 
make shielded enclosures within these 
handling facilities. Areas requiring heavy 
gamma shielding are always located on the 
ground floor. 

d) Provision of a change room — Type B 
laboratories require provision of a change 
room at the entrance of the active area, which 
is delineated by providing a physical barrier. 
Shoe covers must be worn beyond the barrier 
and laboratory coats must be picked up from 
the change room before proceeding to the 
laboratories. Washbasins and contamination 
monitors are also installed in the change room. 

e) Laboratory liquid effluents — The activity 
content of the waste arising from these 
laboratories may be high enough to prohibit 
its discharge directly into the public sewer. 
This problem is tackled by taking following 
steps: (a) Efforts are to be made to collect high 
active liquid waste into separate plastic 
carboys or glass bottles instead of discharging 
it directly into the sink. Such waste is then 
allowed to decay by storage or handed over 
to a centralized waste management facility, 
and (b) By providing a separate liquid effluent 
delay/holdup tank can be analyzed for its 
activity level and then discharged into public 
sewer directly, if the activity level is within 
limits or after dilution if the activity level is 
high. 

f) Provision of additional monitoring 
instruments/protective equipments — The 
first and foremost in this case is providing 
hand, foot and clothing monitors. Provision 
for routine air monitoring in critical laboratory 
areas should also be made. Respiratory 
protective equipment, that is, dust respirators 
should also be made available in the change 
room for use when required. TLD/Film badges 
may also become necessary for all individuals 
in the laboratory. 


For Type B facilities outside Department of Atomic 
Energy (DAE), a constant interaction may be necessary 
between operating agency and the regulatory agency 
(AERB) to deal with situations not clearly spelt out 
otherwise. 


7.2.3 Type A Laboratory 


Type A laboratories require careful planning and design, 
as there is virtually no upper limit on the materials that 
can be handled there. Each project work is therefore 
examined separately and the largest quantities of 


IS 4906 : 2017 


materials likely to be encountered are identified. 
Necessary facilities are then built accordingly taking 
into account the operational requirements. 


Thus all the specifications discussed above in the case 
of Type C and Type B facilities must be met in this 
case. In addition the following points require careful 
consideration: 


a) Layout of the laboratory area — From 
consideration of safety and operational 
efficiency, the design of overall laboratory 
should be in such a way to group together areas 
according to the degree of contamination 
hazard posed by them. Such grouping involves 
classification of areas into various zones as 
described below: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


4) 


White (inactive) area — It consists of 
unrestricted areas of the laboratory 
facility for example office room, 
reception room, workshop, etc. No 
radioactive material is kept, stored or 
handled here. Probability of 
contamination is nil in this area except 
under accidental conditions. 

Green (Potentially active) area — No 
radioactive materials are handled in this 
area but small quantities in sealed 
containers may be stored. Possibility of 
contamination in this area (which is 
otherwise clean) can not be ruled out by 
virtue of its proximity to active areas. 
Counting room, health physics room, 
personnel corridors, etc, constitute this 
zone. Access to this and other areas 
described below is restricted to laboratory 
staff and the supporting staff only. 


The boundary between white and green 
zones is not sharp but the laboratory is so 
designed that a barrier can be located to 
indicate the beginning of green area, if 
the need arises. 

Amber (low active) area — It is the actual 
laboratory area where workbenches, fume 
hoods, glove boxes, etc, are located. It 
also includes the active personnel 
corridors and the change room. 
Possibility of contamination in this area 
always exists by virtue of its proximity 
to red zone. A physical barrier separates 
it from the green zone. 

Red (active) area — The area where the 
radioactive material is actually present 
and handled, that is, interior of a 
fumehood, glove box or shielded cell. 
This zone is always highly contaminated 


and personnel standing in amber area 
manipulate operations here. Entry in this 
area is forbidden except under special 
circumstances and with proper 
authorization in the form of special work 
permits. 

The zoning in Type B and Type C labs 
are also same. While red zone gets really 
demarcated, boundaries of other zones 
are less rigid. 


b) Containment system — The spread of activity 
or contamination from red zone to amber zone 
is prevented /minimized by designing the red 
zone as containment system. It consists ofthe 
following: 


1) 


2) 


3) 


Fumehood — Fume hood is a partial 
enclosure and the opening of the panel 
provides an access to the material being 
handled. Directional air movement 
through the panel opening maintained at 
30 cm from the bottom prevents the 
materials from reaching operators' 
environment. Operations are carried out 
in fume hood when the amounts of 
radioactive materials being handled are 
limited, nature of operation is simple and 
contamination hazard is not significant. 


Glove box — A glove box is a miniature 
laboratory within a laboratory. It provides 
for total containment of material being 
manipulated. It is leak tight assembly, 
which completely isolates the hazardous 
material from the operator's environment. 
It is operated at a negative pressure of 
12-25 mm water gauge. The manipulation 
is effected through gauntlet gloves fixed 
on the viewing panels of glove box. 
Transfer ports and bagging ports are 
provided on glove boxes for taking the 
materials in or out without affecting 
containment’s integrity. Glove boxes are 
used when the activities handled exceed 
the limits prescribed for fume hoods or 
when the nature of operation is hazardous. 


Shielded glove boxes and hot cells are 
essentially extended versions of glove 
boxes. Thus they provide not only total 
containment of materials being handled 
but also provide shielding to personnel 
when radiation levels encountered are 
high. The high radiation levels in these 
cases preclude operations by hands 
through gauntlet gloves. The operations 
are then carried out by tongs and master 
slave manipulators in shielded glove 
boxes and hot cells, respectively. 


c) 


Ventilation system — The ventilation system 
is the most important and expensive part of the 
entire radioactive laboratory system. The 
general ventilation system in a laboratory 
consists of a balanced air supply and exhaust, 
such that the air always flows from potentially 
less active to high active area. The quantum of 
air supply and exhaust (number of air changes) 
is governed primarily by the number of fume 
hoods provided in the laboratory. The inlet air 
is filtered to avoid large dust loads. Filtration 
of the exhaust air is determined on the basis of 
likely release ofmaterials into the atmosphere. 
Separate systems are provided for laboratory 
areas (which include fume hoods), glove boxes 
(including shielded boxes) and hot cells. 

The ventilation system in a Class A laboratory 
has a once through conditioned air supply 
system. The general laboratory ventilation 
system consists of a balanced supply and 
exhaust. The airflow always follows the 
pattern: from white area to green area to amber 
area to red area. This tends to prevent spread 
of air borne contamination. The capacity of 
the ventilation system should be adequate to 
provide about 3, 5 and 10 air changes in white, 
green and amber areas respectively. This large 
air volume can pose dust problems in the 
active laboratories. The supply air is therefore 
filtered through coarse filters which removes 
85 to 95 percent of the atmospheric dust load. 
This air is exhausted through fume hoods. 
Since the quantities of activities handled in 
fume hoods are relatively large (as compared 
to those in Type B or Type C laboratories), 
the exhausted air is filtered through a bank of 
high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters 
which has a filtration/retention efficiency of 
greater than 99.5 per cent (for the bank as a 
whole) for particles of 0.3 mm size (for 
individual filters the efficiency is 2 99.98 
percent). The filtered air 1s released to the 
atmosphere through a stack, which should be 
taller than the tallest building in that area. 
The glove box and hot cell exhaust systems 
has no separate air supply. They draw air from 
the surrounding areas through leakages and 
in certain cases, through designed air inlet 
points. Since the activities handled in these 
enclosures are very high, the exhausted air 
undergoes filtration through HEPA filters 
twice: first while leaving the enclosure and 
second before discharging to stack. The stack 
height is decided based on dilution needed for 
the exhausted air by the time it reaches ground 
level. 


d) 


e) 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Because the Type A laboratories are very 
expensive facilities, their continuous operation 
and utilization is very essential. For this 
purpose, the ventilation systems generally 
have 50 percent to 100 percent standby 
capacities to take care of any breakdowns/ 
shutdowns. The glove box and hot cell 
ventilation system also have standby diesel 
power supply, which takes over, if and when 
normal power supply fails. 

Liquid effluent system — From Type A 
laboratories, no effluent is discharged directly 
into the public sewers or into the sea or river. 
These laboratories have their low liquid waste 
systems, which consist of waste lines and 
storage tanks. The collected effluents are 
monitored for their activity content and then 
pumped to effluent treatment plant for further 
treatment and discharge. This waste contains 
both alpha and beta gamma activities. 

AII the high level liquid waste which can not 
be directly put into the sinks are taken in 
carboys and separately handed over to waste 
management facility for further treatment. 
Alpha bearing waste is collected separately. 


Solid radioactive wastes — All the waste 
arising from red and amber zones is treated 
as active waste. It consists of gloves, tissue 
paper, polyethylene sheets, glassware and 
anything else in the laboratory that has been 
used for active work and is no longer required. 
Waste is segregated in two categories: 
(1) compressible waste consisting of paper, 
rubber, PVC, etc; and (2) non-compressible 
waste consisting of glass, metal, etc. A further 
categorization is also made based on radiation 
levels that is < 2, 2-20 and > 20 mSv/h for 
beta-gamma waste. Alpha bearing waste is 
collected separately. 

The waste is doubly sealed in polyethylene 
bags to withstand rough handling during 
transportation. All non-compressible waste 
requires further packing in cardboard boxes. 
Each waste bag must have a proper transit tag 
that shows the waste category and the level of 
radiation field on its surface. The waste from 
Type A laboratories is always handed over to 
a centralized waste management facility for 
further treatment. 

Waste management, should be in accordance 
with the regulatory requirements stipulated for 
various types of laboratories. 


7.3 Laboratory Techniques and Equipment 
7.3.1 Choice of Process 


IS 4906 : 2017 


The quantity of radioactive material chosen for any 
specific purpose should not be greater than the 
minimum dictated by experimental needs. It 1s 
preferable to work with solutions rather than dry 
powdery materials. The manipulation processes 
selected should be those which avoid excessive 
transfers from one vessel to another. 


7.3.2. Equipment 


Special equipment consisting of tongs, forceps, trays 
and for the higher levels of gamma-activity apparatus, 
with adequate shielding should be provided. All 
equipment used or handling radioactive materials 
should be confined to the activity area and should be 
treated as contaminated. 


7.3.3 Containers for active materials should as far as 
possible incorporate necessary shielding close to the 
source. Pipetting of solutions and operation of wash 
bottles should never be performed by mouth, but by 
means of compression bulbs and by remote handling 
equipment wherever necessary. Glass blowing on 
contaminated apparatus shall be done with special 
techniques which do not involve mouth operations. 
Squeeze type wash bottles and propipettes are useful 
for those operations. 


7.3.4 Storage Cell 


In addition to active areas, the laboratory should have 
provision for a well designed cubicle for storing 
radioactive sources. The area should be designed with 
some understanding of utilization of sources. 


7.3.5 Decontamination Procedures 


In any establishment using radioisotopes, 
contamination either direct or indirect is unavoidable 
in spite of the stringent measures adopted to prevent it. 
The types of contaminations which are common to any 
radioisotope laboratory are of three types: 


a) Personnel contamination, 
b) Equipment contamination, and 
c) Work area contamination. 


Decontamination of each type mentioned above may 
be achieved by careful manipulation of a set of 
procedures outlined below. 


7.3.5.1 Personnel decontamination 


Personal cleanliness should be watched in all operations 
where there is a likelihood of even the slightest 
contamination; persons working with radioisotopes 
(including those of low toxicity) should wash their 
hands thoroughly with detergents before leaving the 
work area, either temporarily or at the end of the 
working period. Particular attention should be paid to 
the finger nails. After washing, the contaminated parts 


10 


should be checked rigorously for any fixed residual 
contamination. Table 6 specifies the permissible levels 
of surface contamination. For instance, if washing with 
detergents and water fails to bring down the level of 
contamination below permissible level, say in the case 
of hand, other methods should be tried. One may resort 
to treatment with suitable chemicals, such as potassium 
permanganate and sodium bisulphite or EDTA solution. 
However, chemical treatment should be conducted 
carefully because this will enhance chances of uptake 
through porous skin. Even mild abrasions or scrubbing 
shall be done with soft nylon brush in such a way as 
not to injure the skin. However, treatment with 
chemicals shall always be done with utmost discretion 
depending upon the site of contamination and only 
under medical supervision. For example, any 
contamination in the eye or near the eye should be 
removed only with water and not chemicals. Similarly 
treatment of face and other sensitive organs should be 
conducted with greatest caution and on proper 
supervision of the authorized physician. Care shall be 
taken to avoid contamination of abrasions, cuts and 
puncture wounds and any person with any of these 
handicaps shall not be allowed to work with 
radioisotope, without proper sealing ofthe open wound. 
If skin break or cut occurs while working in an active 
area, the authorities concerned shall be informed 
immediately for contamination check-up and further 
decontamination. Needless to say, a medical officer 
should be consulted in all cases of contamination of 
cuts and sores. 


Table 6 Maximum Permissible Levels of 
Surface Contamination 


(Clause 7.3.5.1) 


SI Surface Beta Emitters Alpha Emitters 
No. Bq/cm* Bq/cm? 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Skin 1:5 1.0 
ii) Hands 350 250 
iii) Clothes: 

a) Plant 6 2 

b) Personal 2 0.5 
iv) Shoes: 

a) Plant 37 3.7 

b) Personal 0.37 0.037 
v) Floor 3.7 0.37 


NOTE — Derived Working Levels (DWL) for radioactive 
contamination. Limits apply to fixed contamination on skin 
and personal clothing. 


7.3.5.2 Decontamination of laboratory equipment and 
work areas 


Any equipment which has been used in connection with 
any radioactive work should be treated as contaminated 
unless proved otherwise by a careful survey. The types 


of decontamination treatment will depend upon the 
nature of contaminant and upon the type of surface 
contaminated: 


a) Glassware may be cleaned on a routine basis 
with chromic acid solution. If unsuccessful, 
other cleaning agents, such as concentrated 
nitric acid, ammonium citrate, penta sodium 
triphosphate and ammonium bifluoride should 
be tried. The solutions used for cleaning 
should be disposed off adequately as active 
waste (see 8). 

b) All metal objects may be cleaned by washing 
with a detergent solution followed, if 
necessary, with dilute nitric acid or a 
10 percent solution of sodium citrate or 
ammonium bifluoride. In the case of stainless 
steel hydrochloric acid should be avoided as 
this will result in corrosion leading to greater 
difficulty in future decontamination work. 
Brass polish for brass, oxalic acid for rusty 
surfaces, ammonium citrate, dilute acids and 
organic solvents are also recommended for 
decontamination purposes. 

c) Though plastic paint surfaces may be 
decontaminated often successfully by using 
acetone, trichloroethylene or a 10 percent 
hydrochloric acid solution, it is advisable to 
strip off the paint and replace with new 
coatings. 

d) The above mentioned procedures are mostly 
for wet spillage on various surfaces. However, 
if a dry contamination occurs on any surface, 
as a first step in the process of decontamination 
a vacuum cleaner with a high efficiency filter 
should be used followed by suitable methods 
mentioned above. 

e) Protective apparel and personal clothing of 
staff or clothing, bedding of hospital patients 
who are being treated with radioisotopes shall 
be monitored regularly. If there is any 
significant contamination, they should be 
segregated and stored until the activity has 
fallen below the safe level as recommended 
in Table 2, failing which they should be 
laundered in a special laundering facility or 
discarded. 


7.3.6 Wash Room and Change Rooms 


Every facility handling radioactivity should be equipped 
with change rooms at entry and wash room near the 
working place. The change room is a place where on 
entry into the building the worker changes into company 
clothing or overalls as required and goes into the hot 
areas. At the time of Ieaving working area, he passes 


IS 4906 : 2017 


through the change rooms, is monitored and then wears 
his personal clothing. Change room is also equipped 
with showers as well as decontamination solution. A 
change room acts as a barrier against movement of 
radioactive contamination outside working areas. 
Washrooms equipped with showers should be installed 
in a facility. These would facilitate immediate cleanup 
in case of sudden spills, or suspected contamination. 


8 RADIOACTIVE WASTE DISPOSAL 


8.1 Operations in a radiochemical laboratory result in 
the generation of radioactive wastes. All the operations 
should be carried out in such a way that the amount of 
waste is minimized by appropriate use of methods and 
management procedures. 


8.1.1 Solid Wastes 


The solid wastes may comprise of mops/gloves, filter 
paper containing precipitates, tissue papers, 
contaminated glass apparatus, cotton, etc. These 
are segregated as inflammables/compressible or non- 
compressible. The wastes are collected in 
polyethylene/PVC bags and packed in suitable 
containers and monitored for its radioactivity. It is then 
properly tagged. The waste packets should be 
characterized with respect to its contents and activity 
to ensure compliance with regulatory requirements. 


The wastes should not be disposed off to the 
environment directly. The disposal should be in 
accordance with the regulatory stipulations as 
mentioned before. Authorization from the regulatory 
body should be obtained before disposal/transfer of 
radioactive wastes under the Atomic Energy (Safe 
Disposal of radioactive Wastes Rules), 1987, 
G.S.R. 125. 


8.1.2 Liquid Wastes 


Radiochemical laboratories should be properly 
designed to handle liquid waste so as to have no leakage 
to environment and contamination in the facility. Very 
low levels ofradioactive liquid effluents can be directly 
discharged to the sink which drains to liquid waste hold 
up tank or delay tank which after activity assessment 
can either be discharged to the environment directly or 
transferred to the waste management facility. The 
disposal limit for the discharges should conform to 
those prescribed by the regulatory body. 


8.1.3 Gaseous Effluents 


The gaseous effluents from the laboratory are exhausted 
through a suitable ventilation system to the 
environment. The gaseous radioactive effluents evolved 
from the fume hood and glove boxes should be 
monitored before discharge to the environment. 
Adequate gas cleaning system should be provided to 


IS 4906 : 2017 


ensure that the discharges of airborne releases are within 
the authorized limits of AERB. 


8.2 In order to ensure safe transport, relevant 
regulations in ‘Safety Code for the Transport of 
Radioactive Materials, AERB/SC/TR-1, 1986’ should 
be followed for properly packing the radioactive waste 
to be transported. For any major problems connected 
with the safety of handling and disposal of radioactive 
materials, advice may be sought from Atomic Energy 
Regulatory Board, Mumbai. 


9 RADIATION MONITORING INSTRUMENTS 


9.1 Radiation monitoring includes various radiological 
measurements and also the interpretation of these so 
as to achieve controls in internal and external exposure 
of personnel. 


9.2 Workplace monitoring consisting of external 
radiation field monitoring and surface contamination 
monitoring should be done regularly to evaluate the 
radiological conditions and also to have an assessment 
of personnel exposure. Routine personnel monitoring 
for external and internal exposures as applicable should 
be carried out and personnel dose records should be 
maintained 


9.3 Radiation monitoring is provided by persons/ 
institutions approved by the regulatory body. 


9.4 External exposure of radiation workers 1s 
monitored routinely for all types of radiation which can 
cause exposure using appropriate dosimeters. Any 
internal exposures can be measured by bioassay or by 
whole body counting. Details of these monitoring 
services can be obtained from Health, Safety and 
Environment Group, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, 
Mumbai. 


9.5 Workplace monitoring for external radiation is 
carried out using a portable or fixed beta gamma 
monitors. Monitoring of airborne contamination is 
carried out by sampling radioactivity using a high 
capacity air sampling vacuum pump ( 500 - 1 000 Ipm). 
The filter paper is then counted for gross beta or alpha 
activity. Air concentration is then assessed by applying 
proper efficiency correction. Proper respirators like half 
mask, full face mask, etc, is used ifthe air concentration 
is above the prescribed DAC values. External 
contamination of workers is assessed using suitable 
contamination monitors. Proper decontamination 
procedures have to be followed, if loose contamination 
is observed on clothing, hands, or on person. 


10 GENERAL SAFETY RULES 


10.1 A good safety culture in the laboratory would help 
control radiation exposure and contamination control. 
Good working practices are summarized below: 


a) Laboratory coats should be worn in laboratory. 

b) Unnecessary materials should not be 
accumulated in the laboratory. 

c) The movement and storage of radioactive 
material shall be under the control of a 
responsible person acquainted with safety 
procedures and regulations. 

d) The maintenance of an inventory of 
radioactive sources is very necessary. 

e) Eating, smoking and drinking are prohibited 
in the laboratory. 

f) Nomouth operation are allowed, for example, 
pipettes, wash bottles and labels shall not be 
put in the mouth. 

g) Solid and liquid waste materials shall be 
monitored and segregated properly. 

h) When wearing gloves disposable tissues 
should be used for handling taps, switches, 
etc. 

j) Gloves, clothing, apparatus and benches shall 
be monitored after work with radioactive 
materials. 

k) Radioactive work should not be undertaken 
by a person having open cuts/wounds. 

m) TLD badges/dosimeters shall be worn on 
person and a record of the external dose 
received by the person shall be maintained. 

n) Radiation symbols shall be posted, wherever 
active sources are handled. 

p) Contaminated areas should be cordoned off. 

q) Aradiochemical laboratory should not be used 


as a normal sitting place. 


10.2 Health Surveillance 


Health surveillance programme shall be based on the 
general principles of occupational health and designed 
to assess the initial and continuing fitness ofthe worker 
for the tasks 


10.2.1 Pre-employment Medical Examination 


This shall be done for all the radiation workers. The 
medical records shall include family and personal 
history, previous occupational history and previous 
X-ray diagnostic examination or radiation therapy and 
clinical investigations. 


10.2.2 Periodic Medical Examination 


All radiation workers shall be medically examined at 
least once in five years. Individuals who would require 
a change or restriction in the job allocation, on the basis 
of their health status, will be indicated in the medical 
report submitted to the lab-in-charge with a copy to 
the radiological safety officer. The relevant information 
on the restrictions should also be given to the individual 


worker concerned, whenever required so that the 
Worker is aware of it. 


11 TRAINING, INDOCTRINATION AND 
SAFETY SUPERVISION 


11.1 An important contributory factor in safety 1s the 
training and indoctrination given to the worker in 
radiation hazards and safety code of practice. For any 
new installation it 1s important that the staff should be 
given lectures and demonstration in the use of personnel 
monitoring equipment and good housekeeping methods 
by a trained health physicist. There are regular training 
facilities with the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, 
Trombay, Mumbai for imparting the necessary 
knowledge and practical experience. The trained health 
physicist or the health supervisor should conduct in turn 
periodical refresher courses and maintain a record of 
personal exposures. 


11.2 Safety Supervision 


The authority incharge of radiochemical laboratory 
shall identify a technically competent person or persons 
to provide advice on all relevant aspects of radiation 
protection and to provide such technical services as 
required in the application of appropriate 
recommendation for radiation protection and maintain 
exposure records as required by the safety code and 
national radiation safety practices. 


12 PROTECTIVE MEASURES 


12.1 Equipment 


External radiation hazards may be minimized by 
making use of special equipment, such as long handled 
forceps, tongs, etc, while manipulating active sources 
from a distance of 15 to 100 cm. In its simplest form 
the long handled tongs will have a pistol grip together 
with a trigger mechanism operating a ‘grip’ which may 
be used to hold 'the active source'. An additional 
improvement over the latter one is the provision of a 
threaded screw which may be screwed up so that the 
grip remains securely fastened to the radioactive source. 
Drip trays of stainless steel or plastic, lined with 
absorbent paper, help to minimize the spread of 
contamination in case of spills. The tray should be 
without rough surfaces, or sharp corners, to facilitate 
easy decontamination. For higher levels of gamma 
activity, adequate shielding should be provided for 
containers of active materials and as far as possible 
incorporate necessary shielding close to the source. All 
manipulation should be done in a drip tray or in some 
form of double containers. 


12.2 Pipetting of solutions and operations of wash 
bottles should never be performed by mouth, but by 
means of compression bulbs, remote handling pipettes, 


IS 4906 : 2017 


squeeze type wash bottles, etc. Never look down into a 
beaker or test-tube containing several millicuries of a 
strong beta emitter. Glassblowing on contaminated 
apparatus shall be done with techniques which do not 
involve mouth operation. 


12.3 Placards bearing radiation symbols are required 
in the laboratory. The placards should also bear health 
safety instructions and should be put up, wherever 
radioactive sources are being manipulated or stored. 


12.4 Equipment used for handling radioactive 
materials should be confined to the active area of 
laboratory. 


12.5 Protective Clothing 


In any radioisotope laboratory, the type of protective 
clothing required will depend upon the nature of work. 
For usual laboratory work (Type C) the ordinary 
laboratory coats are quite adequate. If work involves 
decontamination of equipment, a change of shoes in 
addition is advisable. Overshoes made of plastic or 
rubber material may be used. 


12.6 Work shall not be carried out with radioactive 
materials or materials suspected to be carrying 
contamination without wearing rubber gloves. Rubber 
gloves used for handling active materials should not 
be used for handling other items, even in the active 
laboratory. Contaminated gloves should be thoroughly 
washed before taking off. The wearing and removal of 
the gloves should be in the same way as that of the 
surgical technique to minimize the contamination of 
hands. It is necessary to point out here, that while these 
gloves might provide adequate protection against soft 
beta rays, they are not adequate against hard beta rays. 
Heavier rubber gloves are more robust and give some 
measure of protection against beta radiation; they may 
be made more comfortable to wear by lining with cotton 
fabric. 


12.7 Respirators 


When the concentration of air-borne activity in working 
atmosphere goes above the maximum permissible levels 
during any major or minor operation, special 
precautions have to be taken. These include the wearing 
of a fully impervious clothing made up of a full rubber 
suit with boots, gloves and helmet and fresh air 1s 
supplied through an airline. Before donning such a 
wear, a full change of clothing is recommended. 
However, where the contamination level is not so high 
and is only occasional, lighter type of suit made ofthin 
plastic material may be used with a simple airline hood. 
During short periods of emergency a high efficiency 
respirator is used along with a hood to cover the head. 
The body as a whole is covered with plastic overalls. 
In a radioisotope laboratory an accident, such as even 


IS 4906 : 2017 
a spillage might warrant use of respirators and 13 HAZARD CHARACTERISTICS OF SOME 
protective apparel. COMMON RADIONUCLIDES 


12.8 Itis necessary to ensure the periodic check-up of | The radiation and hazard characteristics of some 
handling equipment and examination at frequent commonly used radionuclides are given in Annex B. 
intervals of respirators and protective clothing. This All values of ALI quoted are for occupational exposure 
would help in keeping them ready for any emergency only. 

work. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 13) 
HAZARD CHARACTERISTICS OF SOME RADIONUCLIDES 
A-1 BARIUM 140 (.,Ba!^) 
Occurrence or production: A fission product (parent of La-140). 
Production Process Activation Other Activities 


Cross-Section 


U(a, f) Ba-140 La-140 (daughter) 
40.2 h 
Radioactive Beta: 0.48 Mev (40 percent) 
emission 1.02 Mev (60 percent) 
Gamma: 0.03 Mev*, 0.16 Mev, 


0.30 Mev, 0.54 Mev* 


(La!% activity always present) 


Critical organ: Bone 

Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
12.8d 65d 10.7d 


Hazard characteristics: K Factor (Ba - 140 + La- 140) 15 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 


Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
F 2 x 107 Bq 1 x 107 Bq 0.100 8 x 10°Bq 
n M & S - Default lung absorption types Fast, Moderate and Slow | 
f, — gut transfer factors ie proportion of the intake transferred to body fluids in the gut 


*Most abundant gammas. 


A-2 BERYLIUM 7 (,Be’) 


Occurrence or production: Cyclotron production; cosmic ray production. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
C" (p3, p3n) Be’ Not known 
Li’ (p, n) Be? 0.51 b 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Radioactive Gamma: 0.48 Mev (approximately 
emission 12 percent) EC*: 100 percent 
Critical organ: Total body 
Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
53.6 d 180 d 41d 
Hazard characteristics: K Factor 0.3 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation 

1 um 5 um f, 
M 4 x 105 Bq 5 x 10° Bq 0.005 
S 4 x 105 Bq 4 x 105 Bq 


A-3 BROMINE 82 (4;Br??) 


Occurrence or production: Irradiation of ammonium bromide and potassium bromide. 


Activation Cross-Section 


3.1 barns 


Production Process 
Br?!(n, y) Bi? 
*Emits characteristic Li X-rays 0.052 Kev. 


Radioactive Beta: 
emission 


0.44 Mev (100 percent) 


Gamma: 0.55 Mev (70 percent) 
062 Mev (43 percent) 
0.70 Mev (29 percent) 
0.78 Mev (87 percent) 
0.83 Mev (26 percent) 
I.04 Mev (30 percent) 
1.32 Mev (28 percent) 


1.48 Mev (18 percent) 


Critical organ: Total body 


Other Activities 
Br8om Br?? CH 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
1.5 d 8d 1.3 d 
Hazard characteristics: K Factor 14.7 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 

Inhalation ingestion 

1 um 5 um f, 

F 5x 107 Bq 3 x 107 Bq 1.0 4x 107 Bq 
M 3 x 107 Bq 2 x 107 Bq 


A-4 CAESIUM 137 (,;Cs!37) 


Occurrence or production: A fission product. 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
U (n, f) Cs? BEEN Cs 134 
Radioactive Beta: 0.61 Mev (92 percent) 
emission 1.17 Mev (8 percent) 

Gamma: 0.662 Mev (82 percent via 2.6 min Bam) 

IC: 10 percent (characteristic Ba X-rays 32 Kev) 


Critical organ: Total body 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
1.1 x 10* d 70 d 70 d 


Hazard characteristics: K Factor 3.1 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
F 4 x 105 Bq 3 x 105 Bq 1.0 1.5 x 105 Bq 
A-5 CALCIUM 45 („Cat“) 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of CaCO, 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
Ca“ (n, y) Ca? 0.67 barns Ca" 
Ca? 
S c^? 
S c? 
Radioactive Beta: 0.25 Mev 
emission 


Critical Organ: Bone 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
164 d 1.80 x 104 d 162d 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
M 7 x 106 Bq 9 x 106 Bq 0.3 3x 107 Bq 
A-6 CARBON 14 (,C'^) 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of aluminium nitride. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
NH (n, p) C^ 1.75 barns Negligible 
Radioactive Beta: 0.155 Mev 

emission 


Critical organ: Fat 


IS 4906 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half Life Half-Life Half-Life 
2 x 106d 12d 12d 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Ingestion 

f; 1.0 3 x 107 Bq 
A-7 CHROMIUM 51 (,,CR°*!) 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of chromium or potassium chromate. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
CP (n, y) Cr ?! 13.5 barns K“ 
Radioactive EC (100 percent) emits 

emission characteristic V X-ray of 5 Kev, Gamma: 


0.323 Mev (approximately 8 percent) 
Critical organ: Total body 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
27.8 d 616 d 26.6 d 


Hazard characteristics: K Factor 0.18 r/h at 1 cm/mCi 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALT) 


Inhalation ingestion 

1 um 5 um f, 
F 1x 10? Bq 7 x 10° Bq 0.1 5x 108 Bq 
M 6 x 105 Bq 6 x 105 Bq 0.01 5x 108 Bq 


S 6 x 105 Bq 
A-8 COBALT 60 (,,Co9?) 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of cobalt or cobalt chloride in a reactor. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 

Co” (n, y) Co? 36.30 barns Com 

Radioactive Beta: 0.306 Mev (100 percent) 

emission 1.48 Mev (approximately 0.15 percent) 
Gamma: 1.17 Mev (100 percent) 


1.33 Mev (100 percent) 
Critical organ: Total body 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
1.9 x 10° d 9.5 d 9.5 d 


Hazard characteristics: K Factor 13.0 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALT) 


: 2017 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
M 2x 106 Bq 3 x 106 Bq 0.1 6x 106 Bq 
S 7 x 106 Bq 1 x 105 Bq 0.05 8x 106 Bq 
A-9 GOLD 198 (,,Au!*®) 
Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of gold. 
Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
Au!” (n, y) Aul?8 96 barns Au? 
Radioactive Beta: 0.29 Mev (1 percent) 
emission 0.96 Mev (99 percent) 
1.37 Mev (0.025 percent) 
Gamma: 0.41 Mev (96.1 percent) 
0.68 Mev (1.1 percent) 
1.09 Mev (0.26 percent) 
IC: 3.6 percent 
Critical organ: Kidney 
Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
2.7 d 280 d 2.7d 
Hazard characteristics: K Factor 2.3 r/h at 1 cm/mCi, 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
F 9 x 107 Bq 5x 107 Bq 0.1 2 x 107 Bq 
M 3 x 107 Bq 2 x 107 Bq 
S 2x 107 Bq 2 x 107 Bq 


A-10 IODINE 131 (,,I?!) 


Occurrence or production: Iodine-131 is obtained by the irradiation of Te-130 in a reactor as also in the products 


of nuclear fission of uranium. 


Production Process Activation cross-section Other Activities 
Te! (n, y) Te? !m — 1131 0.22 barns Te-121m Te-123 Te-125 
B (Te-127m) (Te-129) 
Xe-131m Te-131m (30 h) 
Radioactive Beta: 0.25 Mev (3 percent) 
emission 0.33 Mev (9 percent) 


0.61 Mev (87 percent) 

0.81 Mev (1 percent) 
Gamma: 0.08 Mev (2 percent) 

0.28 Mev (5 percent) 

0.36 Mev (80 percent) 

0.64 Mev (9 percent) 

0.72 Mev (3 percent) 
IC: 4 percent 


18 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Critical organ: Thyroid 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
8.0 d 138 d 7.6 d 


Hazard characteristics: K Factor 2.18 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
F 3x 10°Bq 2 x 105 Bq 0.1 9x 105 Bq 
A-11 IRON 59 (Fe?) 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of iron or Fe,O, leads to the formation of iron-59. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
Fe-58 (n, y) Fe-59 0.98 barns Fe”! 
Radioactive Beta: 0.27 Mev (46 percent) 
emission 0.46 Mev (54 percent) 
1.56 Mev (0.3 percent) 
Gamma: 0.1919 Mev (2.5 percent) 


1.10 Mev (56 percent) 
1.29 Mev (44 percent) 
Critical organ : Spleen 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
45.1 d 600 d 41.9 d 


Hazard characteristics : K Factor 6.2 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 


Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
F 9 x 105 Bq 7 x 10°Bq 0.1 1 x 107 Bq 
M 6 x 105 Bq 6 x 10°Bq 


A-12 PHOSPHORUS 32 (,,P2) 


Occurrence or production: Produced in reactors by irradiation of red phosphorus or KH,PO, 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
P?! (n, y) P? 0.19 barns K” 
S? (n p p2 E p? s35 s37 
Radioactive Beta: 1.71 Mev 
emission 


Critical organ: Bone 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
14.3 d 1.155 d 14.1 d 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
F 3 x 107 Bq 2 x 10’Bq 0.8 8 x 10°Bq 
M 6 x 10°Bq 7 x 10°Bq 


19 


IS 4906 : 2017 


A-13 PLUTONIUM 239 (,,PU) 


Occurrence or production: The target is not a specified one. Various chemical forms of uranium may be employed. 


Production Process 


U238 (n, y» U9 — b , Np?? — P y 


Activation Other Activities 


Cross-Section 


23.5 m 23d ” Pu” 2.74 barns Not known 
Radioactive Alpha: 5.09 Mev (10.7 percent) 
Emission 5.13 Mev (16.8 percent) 
5.14 Mev (72.5 percent) 

Critical organ: Bone 

Physical Biological Effective 

Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 

8.9 x 106 d 7.3 x 10* d 7.2 x 10^ d 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALT) 

Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 

M 4 x 10°Bq 6 x 10? Bq 5.0x 10^ 8 x 10* Bq 
S 1 x 10 Bq 2x 10? Bq 1.0x 105 2 x 106 Bq 


A-14 POLONIUM 210 (,,PO?'? RAF) 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of bismuth oxide leads to the formation of polonium-210. 


Production Process 


1209 1210 210 
Bi (n, y) Bi — 685p ^ Po 
Radioactive Alpha: 
Emission Gamma: 
Critical organ: Spleen 
Physical 
Half-Life 
138.4 d 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALT) 
Inhalation 
1 um 
F 3 x 10*Bq 
M 7 x 10°Bq 


A-15 POTASSIUM 42 (K^?) 


Activation Cross-Section 


Other Activities 


0.0 19 barns None 


5.305 Mev (100 percent) 
0.8 Mev (0.001 2 percent) 


Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life 
60d 42 d 

Ingestion 
5 um f, 
3 x 10* Bq 0.1 8 x 10 Bq 
9 x 10° Bq 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of potassium carbonate or potassium chloride in a reactor. 


Production Process 


K“ (n, y) K? 
Radioactive Beta: 
emission 
Gamma: 


Critical organ: Total body 
Physical 
Half-Life 
0.52 d 


Activation Cross-Section 


Other Activities 


1.1 barns p? S5 CP CI 


2.0 Mev (18 percent) 
3.6 Mev (82 percent) 
1.53 Mev (18 percent) 


Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life 
58 d 0.52 d 


20 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Hazard characteristics: K Factor 1.37 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
F 2 x 105 Bq 1 x 105Bq 1.0 5 x 10" Bq 
A-16 RADIUM 226 (,,Ra?6) 


Occurrence or production: It is a naturally occurring radioisotope available in significant quantities in pitchblende. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
Natural radioisotope Daughter products of 
the U-Ra series 
Radioactive Alpha: 4.589 (5.7 percent) 
Emission 4.7T1 (94.3 percent) 
Gamma: 0.188 (approximately 4 percent) 
IC: 2 percent 


Activity due to Radon and daughters present 
Critical organ: Bone 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
5.9 x 10° d 1.64 x 10^ d 1.64 x 10* d 


Hazard characteristics: K Factor 8.25 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 


Inhalation ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 
M 6 x 106 Bq 9 x 10° Bq 0.2 7 x 10* Bq 


A-17 SILVER 110 m (,,Ag!!°") 


Occurrence or production: Irradiation of silver in a reactor leads to the formation of Ag-110. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
Ag!” (n, y) Ag! m 3.2 barns None 
Radioactive Beta: 0.087 Mev (55 percent) 
emission 0.53 Mev (43 percent) 
2.87 Mev (2 percent via 24 sec Ag-110) 
Gamma: 0.66 Mev (94 percent) 


0.68 Mev (12 percent) 
0.71 Mev (17 percent) 
0.74 Mev (5 percent) 
0.76 Mev (21 percent) 
0.81 Mev (8 percent) 
0.88 Mev (69 percent) 
0.94 Mev (29 percent) 
1.38 Mev (26 percent) 
1.48 Mev (5 percent) 
1.51 Mev (14 percent) 
IT: [ 0.116 Mev (approximately 0 percent) ] 
(IC : 2 percent to 24 sec Ag-110) 


21 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Critical organ: Kidney 
Physical 
Half-Life 
270 d 
Hazard characteristics: Nil. 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALT) 


1 um 
F 4 x 10°Bq 
M 3 x 10°Bq 
S 2 x 10°Bq 


A-18 SODIUM 24 (i,Na?^) 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of sodium carbonate, sodium chloride or sodium bicarbonate yields 


sodium-24 


Production Process 
Na? (n, y) Na” 
Radioactive 
emission 


Critical organ: 


Biological 
Half-Life 
10d 


Inhalation 


5 um f, 
3 x 1065 Bq 0.05 
3 x 10°Bq 
3 x 10°Bq 


Activation Cross-Section 
0.536 barns 


Beta: 
Gamma: 


Total body 


Maximum permissible body burden: 7 uCi 


Physical 
Half-Life 
0.63 d 


Biological 
Half-Life 
lld 


Hazard characteristics : K Factor 18.4 r/h at 1 cm/mlCi. 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 


Inhalation 
1 um 
F 7 x 107 Bq 


5 um f, 
4 x 10' Bq 1.0 


A-19 STRONTIUM 90 (4,51?) 


Occurrence or production: Strontium-90 is a fission product. 


Production Process 
U (n, f) Sr? 

Radioactive 
emission 
Critical organ: Bone 

Physical 

Half-Life 

10* d 


Activation Cross-Section 


Beta: 0.54 Mev 

Y? -p 2.26 Mev 
Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life 
1.8 x 10* d 6.4 x 10° d 


Effective 
Half-Life 
10d 


ingestion 


7 x 10°Bq 


Other Activities 
cpr cp p2 S5 
1.39 Mev (100 percent) 
1.37 Mev (100 percent) 
2.76 Mev (100 percent) 


Effective 
Half-Life 
0.6d 


Ingestion 


5x 107 Bq 


Other Activities 
Sr 89 yn 


Hazard characteristics: Mostly in equilibrium with Y°° (T- 1/2 64.4 h - Mev B 2.2). 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALT) 


] um 
F 8 x 105 Bq 
S 1 x 10° Bq 


Inhalation 
5 um f, 
7 x 105 Bq 0.3 
3 x 105 Bq 0.01 


22 


Ingestion 


7 x 105 Bq 
7 x 1065 Bq 


IS 4906 : 2017 


A-20 SULPHUR 35 (,,S°5) 


Occurrence or production: Obtained by irradiation of sulphur or potassium chloride in a reactor. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
S* (n, y) S? 0.26 barns PS” 
CI? (n, p) S% 0.19 barns CI’: p? Na? 
Radioactive Beta: 0.167 Mev 
emission 


Critical organ: Testis 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
87.1 d 623 d 76.4 d 
Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 

Inorganic F 4 x 10" Bq 3 x 105 Bq 0.8 1 x 105 Bq 
M 2 x 10" Bq 2 x 10’Bq 0.1 1 x 105 Bq 

Organic 1.0 3x 10 Bq 


A-21 THORIUM 232, NATURAL 


Occurrence or production: This is a naturally occurring radioisotope abundantly available in monazite. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
Natural radioisotope MsThI (Ra ?*) and daughter 
Radioactive Alpha: 4.007 Mev (100 percent) 

emission MsThII (Ac?) 6.13 h 


IC:24 percent 
Critical organ: Bone 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life (Th??) Half-Life Half-Life 

5.1 x 10? d 7.3 x 10* d 7.3 x 10* d 

Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation Ingestion 
1 um 5 um f, 

M 5 x 10? Bq 7 x 10 Bq 5.0 x 107 
S 9 x 10? Bq 2x 10? Bq 2.0 x 104 


A-22 TRITIUM (1H?) 


Occurrence or production: Activation of lithium leads to the formation of tritium. 


Production Process Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
LÝ (n, œ) H? 0.028 barns None 
Radioactive Beta: 0.018 Mev 
emission 


Critical organ: (HTO or H?50) body tissue 


Physical Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life Half-Life 
4.5 x 10” d 12d 12d 


23 


9 x 10* Bq 
2 x 105 Bq 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 
Inhalation 
1 um 
1 x 10°Bq 


A-23 URANIUM, NATURAL 


Occurrence or production: Occurs naturally 


Production Process 
Natural radioisotope 
U’ (99.24 percent) 
U* (0.071 4 percent) 
U?* (0.040 percent) 


Radioactive 
Emission 


Critical organ: Kidney 


Physical 
Half-Life (U^) 
1.6 x 10? d 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 


1 um 
F 4 x 10 Bq 
M 8 x 10° Bq 
S 3 x 10° Bq 


A-24 ZINC 65 (,)Zn®) 


Ingestion 
f, 
1.0 1 x 10? Bq 
Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 


Decay products 


Alpha: 4.2 Mev (100 percent) 
IC: 23 percent 


Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life 
15 d 15d 
Inhalation Ingestion 
5 um f, 
3 x 10* Bq 0.02 5x 105 Bq 
1 x 10* Bq 0.002 3 x 10°Bq 
4 x 10°Bq 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of zinc leads to formation of zinc-65. 


Production Process 
Zn“ (n, y) Zn 


Radioactive 
emission 


Critical crgan: Total body 
Physical 
Half-Life 
245 d 


Activation Cross-Section Other Activities 
0.44 barns Zn? Zpn$9?n 


EC Beta: EC (98.5 percent) 

B + 0.325 Mev (1.5 percent) 

Gamma: I.1 1 Mev (45 percent) 

Emits characteristics Cu X-rays 8.0 Kev 

2.5 Mev gamma rays emitted when a positron is emitted. 


Biological Effective 
Half-Life Half-Life 
933 d 194 d 


Hazard characteristics: K Factor 2.7 r/h at 1 cm/mCi. 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 


1 um 
S 7 x 10° Bq 


Inhalation Ingestion 
5 um fi 
7 x 10° Bq 0.5 5 x 10° Bq 


24 


A-25 ZIRCONIUM 95 (Zr) 


IS 4906 : 2017 


Occurrence or production: Reactor irradiation of zirconium dioxide in a reactor yields Zr-95 besides occurring in 


the fission products. 


Production Process 
Zr? (n, y) Zr" 


Radioactive 
Emission 


Critical organ: Total body 


Physical 
Half-Life 
63.3 d 


Annual Limit on Intake (ALI) 


1 um 
8 x 10°Bq 
4 x 10°Bq 
4 x 10°Bq 


V < H 


Activation Cross-Section 


Beta: 


Gamma: 


IC: 


Inhalation 


0.09 barns 


Other Activities 
Zr? Nb” Nb” daughter 
Hf!” Hf *' (from impurities) 
0.360 Mev (approximately 43 percent) 


0.40 Mev (approximately 35 percent) 


0.88 Mev (2 percent) 


0.72 Mev (approximately 55 percent) 


0.75 Mev (approximately 48 percent) 
0.23 Mev (0 percent via 90 h Nb-95m) 


2 percent 


Biological 
Half-Life 
450 d 


5 um 
7 x 105 Bq 
6 x 105 Bq 
5 x 1065 Bq 


ANNEX B 
(Clause 5) 


0.002 


Effective 
Half-Life 
55.5 d 


Ingestion 


2 x 10 Bq 


CLASSIFICATION OF RADIOISOTOPES ACCORDING TO RELATIVE 


B-1 GROUP I: VERY HIGH RADIOTOXICITY 


(1) (2) (3) 
210pb 210pg 23Ra 
2300 2320 233U 
241 Am 243 Am 242Cm 


(4) 
26Ra 
234[ J 
243Cm 


(5) (6) 

28Ra 274C 
2337Np 238 Py 
24Cm 24m 


B-2 GROUP II: HIGH RADIOTOXICITY 


2Na 36C] 5Ca 

95 Zr 106R y HOA g | 
126] 131] 133] 
VoTm 181 Hf 182T 
228 AC 230pq 234 Th 


Sc 
Ii5Cd 
m 
B4Cg 
192]r 
2360] 


55Mn 56C o 
1 l4jn 124Sb 
137 C s 14058 a 
204T] 207B1 
29Bk 


25 


(7) 
22"Th 
239pu 
24600 


Co 
12584 
144Ce 
210 Bi 


RADIOTOXICITY PER UNIT ACTIVITY 


(8) 

2S8Th 
240Pu 
2499Cf 


89 Sr 
127Te 
m 
12Eu 
211 At 


(9) (10) 
230Th 23 Ip a 
241 Pu 242Py 
250C f 22Cf 
Sr 9 ly 
129 Te 1247 
ISR 160'Tb 
2 12Pþ 224R q 


IS 4906 : 2017 


B-3 GROUP III: MODERATE RADIOTOXICITY 


(1) 
Be 
BK 
Fe 
74 AS 
WY 
TC 
115Cd 
130] 
13Ce 
155Ey 
Ty 
190 
28H 
233P q 


(2) 
o 
"Ca 
5Co 
TAS 
92 
Ru 
H5In 
132] 
1422pr 
153 Gd 
181W 
194 Ir 
200T] 
?39Np 


(3) 
18F 
47Sc 
8Co 
TAS 
BY 
103R y 
113Sn 
134] 
143 Pr 
159 Gd 
185W 
191p t 
201T] 


(4) 
24N a 
488 c 
NI 
75 S e 
7r 
105R y 
125 Sn 
135] 
1N d 
16Dy 
187W 
D3pt 
207T] 


(5) 
38C] 


B-4 GROUP IV: LOW RADIOTOXICITY 


3H 
Ny 
134, 
Cs. 
238UJ 


150 
37r 
135C g 
Natl 


26 


(6) 

31 Si 

51 Cr 
Cu 
TET 
"Nb 
103p d 
125Te 
131 C S 
147Pm 
16H, o 
186Re 
196 Au 
206Bi 


67n 

103 

M 
Pt, 


(8) 
35S 
56Mn 
S Zn 
Rb 
XTE 
105 A g 
129Te 
3!Ba 
151Sm 
Rr 
1850s 
199 Au 
220Rn 


Skr 


1297 


22Th 


(10) 
2K 
SFe 
BAs 
"Sr 
"Te 
1097d 
132Te 
141Ce 
12Ey 
175Yb 
1930s 
Hg 
231Th 


SVRb 
Xe 
zY 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (1823). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central |: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western  : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


