NAT Ta IS 17752 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


maah Weg uste laeti INE 
atracar — fa aféar 


Testing and Evaluation of 
Chemical Warfare Agent 
Detectors — Code of Practice 


ICS 13.320 


O BIS 2021 


anda HIS A 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, ay freh — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2021 Price Group 8 


Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Chemical 
Hazards Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Among the Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD), Chemical Warfare Agents (CWAs) are probably one of the 
most brutal created by mankind. CWAs are extremely toxic synthetic chemicals that can be dispersed as a gas, 
liquid, aerosol or adsorbed to particles to become a powder. These CWAs have either lethal or incapacitating effects 
on humans. Thousands of toxic substances are known, but only some of them are considered as CWAs based on 
their characteristics, namely, high toxicity, imperceptibility to sense and rapidity of action after dissemination, 
and persistency are listed as scheduled chemicals in the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).The CW agents 
possess different characteristics and belong to various classes of compounds with pronounced physicochemical, 
physiological and chemical properties. Thus, they are classified in many ways. Based on their volatility, they are 
classified as persistent or non-persistent agents. The more volatile an agent, the quicker it evaporates and disperses. 
The more volatile agents like chlorine, phosgene and hydrogen cyanide are non-persistent agents whereas the less 
volatile agents like sulfur mustard and VX are persistent agents. Based on their chemical structure, they can be 
classified as organophosphorus (OP), organosulfur and organo fluorine compounds and arsenicals. In general, 
classification in terms of physiological effects produced on humans by the CW agents is used for many decades. 
Thus, the CW agents used in warfare are classified as follows: 


a) Nerve agents; 

b) Vesicants (blistering agents); 

c) Bloods agents (cyanogenic agents); 
d) Choking agents (pulmonary agents); 
e) Riot-control agents (tear gases); 

f) Psychomimetic agents; and 

g) Toxins. 


The purpose of detection and alarm system is to detect CWAs at the earliest practicable manner and to give an 
alarm so that appropriate protection and medical counter measures can be taken up. The general principles given 
below are for guidance to design and develop detection and alarm system. The CWAs detection system should 
have following characteristics; 


a) Detect quickly enough to fulfill its intended functions. 

b) Detect, semi-quantify and warn personnel of the presence of vapor or gas phase CWAs. 
c) Visual and audible indicators and alarms. 

d) Display the class of CWA. 


e) Reliably transmit the detection signal and made available locally and for transmission to a remote 
location to a certain range. 


Testing and evaluation of chemical detectors for detection of CWAs and its simulant is a very sensitive and 
specialized subject. Performance evaluation of Chemical Warfare Agent Detectors (CWADs) is carried out by 
assessment of the performance of the detector in the simulated test environment which is created by CWAs vapor 
generation. In the laboratory conditions, the test environment for the test and evaluation of detector is created by 
generation of definite concentration of a particular agent under specified temperature and humidity conditions. The 
outcome ofthe testing will ensure the performance of a chemical detector in the field conditions. The considerable 
assistance has been provided by DRDE, Gwalior in the development of this standard. 


This standard describes about the test and evaluation procedure for chemical warfare agent detectors. It includes 
the procedure for CWA vapor generation, sampling, quantitative analysis and testing at various combinations of 
humidity and temperature. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 17752 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


TESTING AND EVALUATION OF CHEMICAL WARFARE 
AGENT DETECTORS — CODE OF PRACTICE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This Indian Standard covers the detailed procedures 
for the testing and evaluation of point and stand-alone 
Chemical Warfare Agent Detectors (CWADs). 


1.2 This standard covers testing and evaluation of 
CWAD with selected live CWAs at Joint Service 
Qualitative Requirement (JSQR)/Acceptance Test 
Procedure (ATP)/Trial Directive specified challenge 
concentrations. The list of selected live CWAs and their 
JSQR specified challenge concentration as specified in 
Table 1. Other live CWAs will not fall under the scope 
of this standard. 


Table 1 Chemical Warfare Agents and their JSQR 
Specified Concentrations 


( Clause 1.2 ) 


SI No. Agents Concentration, 


mg/m? (Tolerance 
Upto + 25 Percent) 


(1) Q) (3) 
i). Nerve Agents 

i) Tabun (GA), 

ii) Sarin (GB), 

iii) Soman (GD), 

iv) Cyclosarin (GF); and 

v) VX. 


0.05 mg/m? 


ii) Blister Agents 
i) Sulphur mustard (HD); and 
ii) Lewisite(L). 
iii) Choking Agents 
1) Phosgene (CG) 
iv) Blood Agents(AC) 
i) Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) 


0.5 mg/m? 


20 mg/m? 
20 mg/m? 


1.3 This standard also covers vapor generation 
procedure of selected live CWAs (as stated above) 
which will be used for the performance evaluation 
of Chemical Agent Monitor (CAM) and Automatic 
Chemical Agent Detector and Alarm (ACADA) 
CWAD, detailed procedures for sampling of generated 
CWAs vapor and their quantification. 


1.4 This standard shall be used for the test and evaluation 
of CWAD at different combination of humidity and 
temperature at applicable JSQR/ATP/Trial directive 
level of CWA challenge concentration. 


1.5 It also describes about the potential interferents of 
various category to be tested in the test and evaluation 
of CWAD. 


1.6 This standard does not cover any information 
regarding Toxic Industrial Chemicals (TICs) and Toxic 
Industrial Materials (TIMs). 


1.7 This standard does not cover all the associated 
safety concerns for handling and generation of toxic 
CWA. It is the responsibility of the user of this standard 
to establish appropriate safety and health practices and 
to determine the applicability of regulatory limitations 
prior to use. 


1.8 Nothing in this standard prevents to have higher 
level of protection for handling of CWAs. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following definition 
shall apply. 


2.1 Adsorption — A surface phenomenon in which 
atoms, ions or molecules are concentrated on a surface 
by chemical or physical forces, or combination of both. 


2.2 Challenge — The process of exposure of Chemical 
Warfare Agent Detector (CWAD) at outlet of vapor 
generator for testing. 


2.3 Chemical Warfare Agents (CWAs) — The CWA 
is achemical substance whose toxic properties are used 
to kill, injure or incapacitate human beings at a very 
low level of dose. 


2.4 Chemical Warfare Agent Detector (CWAD) — 
The CWAD is a device to detect and warn the concern 
personnel about the presence of CWAs in form of vapor 
and aerosol. 


2.5 Calibration — The set of operations that establish, 
under specific conditions, the relationship between 
values indicated by a measuring instrument or system 
and the true values. 


2.6 Chromatography — A technique for the separation 
of a mixture of components. Mixture passed through 
a medium in which the components move at different 
rates. 


2.7 Confidence Check — It is a functional test with 
confidence sample (given by company) or with simulant 
to ensure its functionality prior to actual challenge. 


IS 17752 : 2021 


2.8 Decontamination — The process of making any 
person, object, or area safe by removing contamination 
by physical or chemical means. 


2.9 Desorption — It is reverse process of adsorption 
i.e. elimination of adsorbed species from the surface of 
adsorbent. 


2.10 Detection — The act of sensing ofthe surrounding 
atmosphere specifically to identify the presence of CWA 
vapors, aerosol or gas. 


2.11 Failure — The event in which detector does not 
perform one or more of its required functions. 


2.12 False Alarm — The condition in which the CWAD 
indicates the presence of CWA or simulant when none is 
present (false positive) or a condition in which CWAD 
indicates the absence of CWA or simulant when the live 
CWA or simulant is present (false negative). 


2.13 Functional Acceptance Tests — Tests performed 
to determine that an instrument is operational and 
capable of performing its intended function. 


2.14 Interferents — Any substance whose presence 
interferes with an analytical procedures and generates 
incorrect results. 


2.15 Linearity — Itis defined as the concentration range 
over which the CWAD response is linearly proportional 
to the concentration of the CWA in the sample. 


2.16 Operational Mode — The state of the detector 
after power up and initialization when air sampling, 
analysis and detection are possible. 


2.17 Peak Area — The area of a peak is proportional to 
amount of the compound that is present. The size of the 
peak area is nearly equal to the quantity of the substance 
present in the mixture. 


2.18 Range — It is the analyte concentration values 
between the lowest (limit of quantification) and high 
limits (limit of linearity) within the assay range, 
linearity, accuracy and precision are acceptable. 


2.19 Response Time — Time taken by CWAD in order 
to respond and indicate an alarm after exposing to CWA. 


2.20 Recovery Time — Recovery time is defined as 
the time required for the output signal of the detector 
to return to a zero baseline after exposure to the CWAs. 


2.21 Retention Time — It is a measure ofthe time taken 
for a solute to pass through a chromatography column 
in GC analysis. 


2.22 Sensitivity — It is measure of CWAD ability to 
determine the lowest concentration of chemical agent 
with certain confidence level. 


2.23 Simulant — Chemical compound that contains 
similar physico-chemical properties of CWA, often 
used to safely challenge a detector and verify or test 
detection capability or accuracy, or both. 


2.24 Specificity — Specificity is the ability of CWAD 
to assess unequivocally the targeted chemicals in 
a sample containing components which might be 
expected to be interfering. 


3 SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 


3.1 Operational Concept 


3.1.1 The CWAD will provide emergency response to 
the personnel and may be based on various principles 
and configurations. They can be configurable into 
four operational modes: personal, fixed installation, 
vehicle-mounted and chemical survey detector. 


3.1.2 The CWAD will be used by the first responders 
for monitoring interior or exterior spaces, vehicles, 
and other appropriate structures to determine the 
contamination. 


3.1.3 Since, CWAD is a vapor detector, it may not 
detect chemical agents in solid/liquid form below their 
vaporization level. However, once the solid/liquid 
agent reaches its vaporization level, CWAD will be 
able to detect the agent (at designated concentrations). 


3.2 Functional Characteristics 


The CWAD will accommodate each of the functional 
modes as specified in Table 2. 


4 SAFE HANDLING AND 
DISPOSAL/DECONTAMINATION OF CWAS 


Chemical warfare agents are extremely hazardous 
and lethal compounds. They should only be used in 
designated laboratories by personnel trained in safe- 
handling and decontamination procedures and with 
immediate access to medical support. Safety and 
standard operating procedures must be developed 
and approved before any chemical warfare agents are 
handled. Chemical warfare agents can only be safely 
handled in laboratory chemical hoods with a minimum 
face velocity of 100 linear ft/min equipped with emission 
control devices that limit exhaust concentration to below 
0.0001 mg/m’. Individual Protective Equipments (IPE) 
( Nuclear Biological Chemical (NBC) suit, gloves, 
over-boots, NBC respiratory mask, NBC canister) 
must be worn for protecting against chemical hazards. 
Sufficient decontaminant to destroy all chemical 
warfare agents being handled must be on hand before 
commencing operations. It is responsibility of all users 
to follow the good laboratory practices while handling 
the CWAs in the laboratory. 


IS 17752 : 2021 


Table 2 Functional Modes 
( Clause 3.2 ) 


Description of Functional Modes 


6) 


The CWAD is mounted in the position from which it will operate. 
The initialization mode is comprised of warm-up and self-test and diagnostics. 


The operator activates the CWAD. The CWAD responds to and acknowledge the 
operator commands. This will continue till its stabilization. 


The self-test and diagnostic functions are automatically performed. If the CWAD passes, 
it proceeds to the operational mode. If it fails, the failure shall be identified either on the 
display or within the data stream. If possible, the operator or maintainer will perform 
corrective maintenance or repair, or submit the CWAD for repair at a maintenance 


In the operation mode, self-test and diagnostic is performed periodically. 


In the operation mode, the operator may conduct a confidence check using a simulant 
to verify detector operation. After a successful initialization, the system automatically 
samples the surrounding air to detect CWA class at concentration specified in respective 
JSQR as mentioned in Table 3. If agent is detected, the system will alarm. When the agent 
concentration falls below the detector alarm thresholds, the system will automatically 


The CWAD is controlled through the data port by an external system: software updates 
may be uploaded, stored data downloaded, and functions identified. 


In the off mode, the CWAD is inactive and requires further action by the operator to 
proceed into another mode. Recharging of the internal power source from an external 
power source is permitted in the off mode. 


The CWAD is powered down, power source removed, with all of its external connections 
for communications, and is detached from other accessories. The system is not 
operational and is in its transport case. 


SI No. Functional Modes 
(1) (2) 
1) Setup 
ii) Initialization 
iii) Warm-up 
iv) Self-test and diagnostic 
facility. 
v) Operation 
stop alarming. 
vi) Upload/query 
vii) Off 
viii) Transport and long-term storage 
(non-operational) 
ix) Storage (short-term, operational or less 


than three months, nonoperational) 


The CWAD is powered down and power source and required accessories installed. 


Blister and nerve agents can be destroyed using saturated 
methanolic solutions of sodium or potassium hydroxide. 
HCN waste shall be disposed of into waste containers 
specifically designated for HCN. Waste materials may 
include used gloves, pipette tips, paper towels that have 
been contaminated with HCN. All waste containing 
cyanide should be collected and kept at a basic pH 
(= pH 10) to prevent the generation of hydrogen cyanide. 


Ammonia cylinder shall be readily available for the 
neutralization of phosgene gas if any. 


5 PROCEDURE FOR CWAS VAPOR 
GENERATION 
The generation of CWA vapor depends on 


physico-chemical properties of the CWAs. Hence, 
the conditions for the generation of CWAs vapors at 
various combinations of temperature and humidity will 
be different. 


5.1 Reagents 


5.1.1 All CWAs, shall be of > 95 percent purity (purity 
determined with 'H-NMR or GC-MS), sodium cyanide 


(NaCN) > 97 percent purity and sulphuric acid (H,SO,) 
7 95 percent purity 


5.1.2 Silica Gel Blue (Indicating Type) 


5.1.3 Activated Granular Carbon 
> 200 m/e. 


Surface Area 


5.1.4 Ammonia Solution (28 - 30 Percent). 


5.1.5 Electrochemical/Metal 
Detector. 


Oxide/MS/PI/FP/IMS 


5.2 Apparatus 


5.2.1 Test Setup for the Generation of Nerve and Blister 
Agents 


The set up comprised of the following components: 


5.2.1.1 Activated carbon filter — Filtering material 
10 kg, filtering capacity 500 1/h. 


5.2.1.2 Liquid injection unit — Comprising calibrated 
1/10 ul syringe or as applicable, calibrated syringe pump 
with 0.1 ul/h or as applicable injecting capacity, agent 
vaporization interface and heater rod with control unit. 


IS 17752 : 2021 


5.2.1.3 Gas dilution unit — With calibrated mass flow 
controllers/flow meters of various ranges, humidifying, 
dilution units and three-way magnetic valves. 


5.2.1.4 Pressurized air source (zero air, hydrocarbon 
contamination < 0.1 ppm) — An oil-less piston air 
compressor or pressurized synthetic air cylinder with 
suitable pressure reducers and air humidity dryers. 


5.2.1.5 A shut-off and pressure control valve from a 
compressed air source. 


5.2.1.6 The schematic representation of nerve and 
blister agents generation assembly is given in Fig 1. 


Agent Rotameter 


Compressed air 


valve & purification A 


Silica Gel € 
activated carbon 
backup filter 


Dilution line rotameter 
0-10 Ipm 


Humidifier point 


1 Compressed air valves and purification filter 
system 


2 Silica gel/activated carbon backup filters 
3 Agent line Rota meter 


4 Heater rod and temp. controller unit for agent 
flow heating 


5 Digital syringe pump and syringe 
6 Magnetic 3-way valve 


D1 and D2 are Detector attached to exposure point. 


Detector exposure ‘ E _——— 


5.2.2 Generation of CWA Nerve/Blister Agent Vapors 


Syringe drive vapor generation system is used to 
generate the vapors of Nerve/Blister agents. The vapor 
generation assembly comprises of different components 
as mentioned above. The syringe drive system is 
operated by using compressed and purified/pre-filtered 
air which is divided into two parts: 


a) agent, and 


b) dilution lines, both having their own Rota meters 
(Agent R1, Dilution R2 as shown Fig. 1). 


The compressed air line pressure is controlled with the 
air filtration unit's (or pressurized air cylinder) pressure 


Heating rod & 
temperature controller 


Valve 


Syringe Pump System 


(———» Agent & dilution line 
———+ Humidification 


Detector exposure 
point 


7 Vent out to fume hood 


8 Agent and dilution line mixing point 
9 Humidity sensor 


10 Humidification by-pass valve 


11 Humidification valve and 


12 Dilution line Rotameter 


FIG. 1 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF NERVE AND BLISTER AGENTS GENERATION ASSEMBLY 


control valve. The nerve/blister agent is injected slowly 
from the syringe into the agent vaporization interface. 
The syringe is pushed through the glass joint into a 
thin capillary tube inside the interface. The calculated 
quantity of nerve/blister agent is dispensed by 
motorized pump driven calibrated micro-syringe which 
diffuses/evaporates from the tip of the syringe needle 
into the air stream. The air with nerve/blister agent can 
be further diluted with a secondary air dilution line 
or as per requirement. The syringe flow airline, that 
is, agent line, should also be heated with a separate 
heating rod to improve evaporation rate from the tip 
of the syringe needle and to stop the condensation of 
nerve/blister agent. Final theoretical nerve/blister agent 
vapor concentration is merely based on the dilutent air 
flow rate, compound's density, molecular mass and 
syringe pump speed. The concentration of the nerve/ 
blister agent is determined by offline sampling using 
sorbent tubes followed by GC-MS analysis. 


Detailed parameters for applicable JSQR/ATP/Trial 
Directive defined CWA concentration is specified in 
Table 3. 


5.2.3 Test Set up for the HCN Generation 


The set up comprised of the following components: 


5.2.3.1 Pressurized air source (zero air, hydrocarbon 
contamination < 0.1 ppm) — For example, an 
oil-less piston air compressor or pressurized synthetic 
air cylinder with suitable pressure reducers and air 
humidity dryers. 


5.2.3.2 Dosing pump for feeding of sodium cyanide 
(NaCN) and sulphuric acid (H,SO, ). 


5.2.3.3 Gas dilution unit — With calibrated mass flow 
controllers/flow meters, humidifying and dilution units 
and valves. 


IS 17752 : 2021 


5.2.3.4 Glass reservoir 

5.2.4.5 Flow meter 

5.2.3.6 Reservoir with glass wool 

5.2.3.7 Humidity traps 

5.2.3.8 Silicon/rubber/teflon tubings 

5.2.3.9 Calibrated hygrometer and thermometer. 


5.2.3.10 Calibrated 
detector/metal oxide. 


electrochemical HCN 


5.2.3.11 Stop watch 
5.2.3.12 Glass column filled with glass beads 


5.2.3.13 Mixing chamber with stirrer and stirring 
magnetic bar. 


The schematic representation of HCN test assembly is 
given in Fig. 2. 


5.2.4 Generation of Hydrogen Cyanide (HCN) 


HCN gas is generated by the reaction of sodium cyanide 
(NaCN) and sulphuric acid (H,SO,) in solution phase 
at room temperature. Evolution of hydrogen cyanide 
takes place on the simultaneous addition of the NaCN 
and H,SO,. With the help of air, the produced HCN 
will be carried to the challenge point of detector. By 
adjusting the flow of feeding solutions the rate of HCN 
evolution is easily controlled. The required challenged 
concentration of the HCN gas shall be achieved by 
controlling the flow rate of the reactants and air. 
Relative humidity of HCN gas is controlled by passing 
the HCN containing air through water/H, SO, chamber 
as per the requirement. The generated concentration of 
the HCN gas is validated using electrochemical/metal 
oxide HCN detector. 


Table 3 Parameters for Requisite Concentration Generation 
( Clause 5.2.2 ) 


SI No. Agents Concentration, mg/ m? Volatility mg/n? Temperature °C for Agent Flow (uL/h) 
Heating 

a) (2) 6) (4) (5) (6) 

1) Cyclohexyl sarin (GF) 0.05 438 100 0.01 

ii) Mustard (HD) 0.50 610 180 0.1 

111) Sarin (GB) 0.05 16100 Not required 0.01 

iv) Soman (GD) 0.05 3:9 200 0.01 

v) VX 0.05 10.5 250 0.01 

v) Lewisite(L) 0.50 4480 180 0.1 
Vi) Tabun 0.05 328 100 0.01 


NOTE — Flow of primary and secondary dilution as per required concentration of CWAs. 


IS 17752 : 2021 


RESERVOIR 


"| RESERVOIR 


SODIUM CYANIDE SOLUTION SULPHURIC ACID 


MICRO PUMP 


MICRO PUMP SYSTEM FOR 
CHEMICAL INJECTION 


SCRUBBER 
FLOW METRE 
18 


CONTROL VALVE 
CONTROL VALVE 14 
17 


FLOW METRE 
20 


TB MIXING AND GAS 
GENERATION CHAMBER 


AIR BLOWER 
22 


CONTROL VALVE 


MAGNETIC STIRRER 


DILUTION CHAMBER 


1 Air blower 10 mixing and gas generation chamber 

2 Sulphuric acid Trap 11 magnetic stirrer 

3 Water Trap 12 sodium cyanide reservoir 

4 Glass wool chamber 13 dosing pump for sodium cyanide 

5 Control valve to control the flow  14,15,17and21 control valve for generated HCN gas 

6 Flow meter 16, 18 and 20 Flow meter of required flow capacity 

7 Glass column with glass bead 22 Air blow for dilution of generated HCN 
8 sulphuric acid reservoir 23 Dilution chamber 

9 


dosing pump for Sulphuric acid 


FIG. 2 ScHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF HCN TEST ASSEMBLY 


5.2.5 Test Set Up for the Phosgene Gas Generation — 
The set up comprised of the following components. 


5.2.5.1 Pressurized air source, for example, an 
oil-less piston air compressor or pressurized synthetic 
air cylinder with suitable pressure reducers and air 
humidity dryers. 


5.2.5.2 Phosgene gas cylinder 


5.2.5.3 Gas dilution unit, with calibrated mass flow 
controllers/flow meters, humidifying and dilution units 
and valves. 


5.2.5.4 Control valves 

5.2.5.5 Flow meters 

5.2.5.6 Humidity traps 

5.2.5.7 Silicon/rubber/teflon tubings 

5.2.5.8 Calibrated hygrometer and thermometer 


5.2.5.9 Calibrated photoionization detector (PID) 
electrochemical sensor 


0-300 cu ml/min 


EM 
- 


IS 17752 : 2021 


5.2.5.10 Mixing chamber 


The schematic representation of phosgene test 
assembly is given in Fig. 3. 


5.2.6 Generation of Phosgene Gas 


Phosgene gas of the required concentration is 
generated by taking required amount of the phosgene 
gas from calibrated phosgene gas cylinder through 
calibrated flow meter. The phosgene gas will be 
diluted using air from air blower through calibrated 
flow meter with control valves and mixed them in a 
mixing chamber. The mixed air-phosgene mixture 
gas is further diluted (secondary dilution based 
on the required concentration) with air in another 
mixing chamber using calibrated flow meters. One 
portion of the generated phosgene gas is used for the 
evaluation of the CWA detector and other portion is 
passed to impregnated carbon for its neutralization. 
The generated concentration of phosgene is 
detected and measured using photo ionization 
(PID)/ electrochemical detector. 


ii 
> P4 
; 7 


AIR BLOWER 


0-300 cu ml/min 


CONTROL VALVE 


CANISTER 


0-100 cu ml/min 0-250 cu ml/min 
19 


FLOW METER 


PID 
DETECTOR 
20 


/ MIXING MIXING 
| CHAMBER CHAMBER | 
NU NP 
, 
PHOSGENE GAS CYLINDER 
1 Phosgene gas cylinder 12,16 Mixing chamber 
2&3 Air blower 20 Phosgene detector 
4, 5,6, 7,8,13 and 18 control valve, 21 Sulfuric acid trap 
9,10, 11, 15 and 19 Flow meter 22 water trap. 


FIG. 3 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION OF PHOSGENE TEST ASSEMBLY 


7 


IS 17752 : 2021 


6 GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR VAPOR 
GENERATION OF CWAS 


Before vapor generation of CWAs ensure the following 
points: 


6.1 Connection of flow meter should be duly inspected 
carefully in order to avoid any leakage. 


6.2 All the tube connections shall be checked for its 
fitting and the exhaust tubes are directed properly 
into the fume hood ventilation. For safety reasons, it 
is recommended to place the whole vapor generation 
system inside the fume hood. 


6.3 The fume hood ventilation should be on and all the 
system electrical connections should be checked. 


6.4 There is enough clean, preferably de-ionized or 
distilled water inside the moisturizing system gas 
washing bottle ((30 — 40) percent ofthe bottle's volume 
Is sufficient amount; do not overfill, because that may 
lead water droplet formation into the dilution line). 


6.5 The filtration cartridges for the final cleaning and 
drying of the compressed air should have fresh silica 
gel and activated carbon (change if required). 


6.6 The syringe should be clean and functional (clean 
with suitable solvent). Phosgene cylinder along with 
regulator shall be checked thoroughly for any leakage 
and shall be kept in separate fume hood. 


Agent 
challenge 
fume hood 


Detector 1 Detector 2 


XAD-2 sorbent 
tube 


Dilution flow 


Agent flow from- 
syringe 


3-way valve 


Syringe line 
overflow to 
fume hood 


7 SAMPLING OF CWA VAPORS 


7.1 Sampling of Nerve/Blister Agent Vapors 
7.1.1 Apparatus 


Apparatus for sampling of nerve and blister agent vapor 
comprised the following components. 


7.1.1.1 Tygon/silicon/teflon tube fitting 
7.1.1.2 Sealed sorbent tube (XAD-2) 

7.1.1.3 Sampling pump 

7.1.1.4 Vortex mixture for solvent extraction 


7.1.2 Procedure for Nerve/Blister Agent Sampling 


Air sample from vapor generator is collected through 
a sorbent tube by using air sampling pump. Air flow 
through the sampling tube is adjusted/maintained 
stable during the sampling procedure and suitable 
sampling time is predetermined based on theoretical 
concentration inside the vapor generation system as 
shown in Fig. 4. The sorbent tube resin adsorbs CWA 
from the sample stream and after sampling the sorbent 
material is taken in a test tube for solvent extraction. 
The sampling steps include preparations, set up and 
sampling of vapor as given below: 


7.1.2.1 Fill the trap with silica-gel/activated carbon 
mixture in order to purify the ambient air which will be 
used for the dilution of nerve/blister agents. 


SKC Sampling Pump 


Midget impinger trap 
(Charcoal/Silicagel) 


Fic. 4 SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATION FOR SAMPLING OF CWA 


7.1.2.2 Take the sampling pump. Sampling pump 
should be checked for its operational performance prior 
to sampling of nerve/blister agents vapors. 


7.1.2.3 Connect the inlet of sampling pump to the trap 
outlet by using silicon/teflon tubing. 


7.1.2.4 Both the ends of sorbent tube should be broken 
using tip cutter. Fit the outlet end (that is, the arrow 
side) of the sorbent tube tightly into the sorbent trap 
side using silicon/teflon tubing. 


7.1.2.5 Try to minimize the length between sorbent tube 
and Polytetrafluroethylene (PTFE) tubing by avoiding 
too long tubing in this position, because tubing may 
adsorb Nerve/Blister agents thus reducing the vapor 
sample recovery rate and accuracy. 


7.1.2.6 Attach a screw cap with an hole septum to the 
vapor generator end of the PTFE tubing. 


7.1.2.7 The system is now mechanically built-up for air 
sampling. 


7.1.3 Sample Pump Flow Setting 


7.1.3.1 Sampling pump shall be checked for its optimal 
flow. 


7.1.3.2. As per requirement of sampling, sampling 
pump can be switched on/off. 


7.1.3.3 Adjust the air flow using the flow adjustment 
control. 


7.1.3.4 Use calibrated flow meter and connects its outlet 
tightly into the inlet PTFE tubing of the previously 
mentioned sampling system. 


7.1.3.5 Switch on the sampling pump, for higher 
concentrations smaller sampling flow rates may be 
required to keep sampling times within minutes. Small 
variations may occur depending on the sample media 
post-sampling and analysis techniques. 


7.1.4 Air Sample Collection 


7.1.4.1 Connect the air sampling system with its PTFE 
tubing and screw cap into the side branch of the syringe 
drive vapor generation system. 


7.1.4.2 Check that the vapor generator agent manifold 
valve is at “OFF” position. 


7.1.4.3 Start the vapor generation with the syringe drive 
system and wait until the concentration of the agents 
should be stabilized. The stabilization time may vary 
depending on the physicochemical properties of the 
CWAs. 


7.1.4.4 When the system is stabilized, switch the 
agent manifold valve into “ON” position and wait 
1-2 minutes before starting the sampling procedure. 


IS 17752 : 2021 


7.1.4.5 Start the sampling, press "START/HOLD" 
button and the pump starts. 


7.1.4.6 A fter the sampling period has elapsed, the pump 
stops and the text "SAMPLE OVER" will be appeared 
on the screen. 


7.1.4.7 Switch the agent manifold valve into *OFF" 
position and remove the PTFE tubing from the vapor 
generator and then subsequently close the same using 
screw cap. 


7.1.4.8 Remove the sorbent tube from tube fittings and 
immediately extraction and analysis can be performed. 
If the sorbent resin is not immediately extracted and 
analyzed, both ends should be capped carefully 
with plastic caps and wrap in parafilm for storage or 
transportation. 


7.1.4.9 Attach a new sorbent tube into the sampling 
system and same procedure should be adopted in 
order to get the reproducibility and consistency in the 
concentration of generated live CWAs. 
NOTE — The pump period is the actual running time of the 
pump. If intermittent sampling is not desired, set the pump 
period to equal the sampling period. If pump period time is less 
than sampling period, the pump will automatically calculate 
and control on/off cycling to complete the pump run time 
during the sampling period. 


7.1.5 Equipments/ Accessories for Sample Preparation 


7.1.5.1 Extraction solvents (High Performance Liquid 
Chromatography (HPLC) grade). 


7.1.5.2 Calibrants for calibration standard preparation, 
at least 98 percent purity. 


7.1.5.3 Calibrated micropipettes with tips. 
7.1.5.4 Calibrated glassware. 

7.1.5.5 Calibrated weighing microbalance. 
7.1.5.6 Calibrated microlitre syringe. 
7.1.6 Preparation of Sample and Blank 


7.1.6.1 Sorbent tube contains 2 beds of adsorbent 
material, one 1s having large bed length and another 
is having small bed length. The purpose of small bed 
length is to observe any possible breakthrough of CWA 
from large bed section due to saturation. In case if any 
CWA will come in small bed, it reflects the adsorption of 
CWA 1n large bed section is saturated and subsequently 
another sorbent tube should be added in series. 


7.1.6.2 Pipette out 1.0 ml of appropriate solvent having 
purity > 99.8 percent, into a septum vial of suitable 
capacity and cap the vial immediately in order to 
reduce the evaporation of solvents. Take the sorbent 
tube containing CWA vapor sample and then remove 
the glass wool and discard it. Open the vial and transfer 


IS 17752 : 2021 


the large bed length of sorbent into the desorption 
solvent and re-cap the vial. 


NOTE — Complete transfer of sorbent should be ensured 
while transferring the material in to the solvent containing vial. 


7.1.6.3 Agitate the capped CWA vapor sample vial over 
a period of 15 min to ensure desorption of adsorbed 
CWA vapor in solvent. Repeat the same procedure for 
3 times in order to get maximum extraction efficiency. 


7.1.6.4 Repeat the same procedure for second bed of 
adsorbent tube using a different vial. 


7.1.6.5 Desorb the blank sample (sample does not 
contain CWA) in the same way as it is done in case of 
CWA vapor containing samples. 


7.1.7 Preparation of Calibration Standards 


7.1.7.1 Prepare multiple points standards to cover the 
range of applicability. 


7.1.7.2 In air concentration (mg/m), this range will 
vary with the relevant exposure limit. With a limit value 
of 0.05 + 0.005 mg/m? and 0.5 + 0.05 mg/m’, a 10 L 
air volume sample collected and desorbed in 1 ml will 
result in a solution of 0.0005 mg/ml and 0.005 mg/ml 
respectively. To cover a typical range of 0.1-2 times the 
limit value, solutions in the range 0.00005-0.001 and 
0.0005-0.01mg/ml respectively will be needed. 


7.1.7.3 Standard solutions of the respective CWA in 
the elution solvent may be prepared, using either a 
calibrated micro-syringe or pipette, by adding standard 
CWA and this will be denoted as first solution. Further 
standard solutions to cover the range of interest can 
be prepared by serial dilution of the first solution. The 
concentration range of the standard solutions should 
exceed the concentration range of the desorbed CWA 
samples. For each calibration fresh standard solutions 
of CWA should be made. 


7.1.7.4 A fixed amount of internal standard should be 
added in the all CWA prepared samples (including 
standard and testing samples) before the analysis to 
avoid the manual errors. 


7.2 Sampling of HCN/Phosgene Vapors 


7.2.1 Equipments and Apparatus, apparatus for 
sampling of HCN/Phosgene gas comprised the 
following components: 


7.2.1.1 Flow meter 
7.2.1.2 Detector housing unit 


7.2.1.3 RH meter 


10 


7.2.1.4 Stop watch 
7.2.2 Procedure for HCN/ Phosgene gas Sampling 


7.2.2.1 The sample of generated gas shall be passed 
from calibrated flow meter/mass flow controller. 


7.2.2.2 The measurement/verification of generated 
concentration shall be determined only after attaining 
the required specified RH. 


7.2.2.3 A sample of the dilution air is taken at a constant 
flow-rate near the ambient air inlet. 


7.2.2.4 Flow control valves and flow-meters are 
calibrated in order to obtain the flow rates required for 
sampling. 


7.2.2.5 Quick fastening gas-tight connections may be 
used between the three-way valves/solenoid valve and 
the sampling point. 


7.2.2.6 Detector shall be place in detector housing unit. 
This unit shall be free from contaminants. 


7.2.2.7 After stabilization of required concentration, 
the response of detector shall be verified intermittently 
during the challenging of detectors. 


8 METHOD FOR QUANTIFICATION OF 
GENERATED CWA 


8.1 Quantification of Nerve/Blistering Agent 


A measured volume of sample air is drawn through 
sorbent tubes. The collected vapor shall be desorbed 
by a solvent, and the solution is analysed with a gas 
chromatograph equipped with a mass spectrometer 
(GC-MS). A calibration plot shall be made for 
quantification of respective CWA. 


8.1.1 Calibration Plot using GC-MS Analysis 


8.1.1.1 Standard solutions of GB, GF, GA, GD, 
VX and HD, L in appropriate solvent were prepared 
in the concentration range 0.050-1.00 ug/ml and 
0.50-10.00 ug/ml, respectively. 


8.1.1.2 Inject a 0.20-0.50 ul volume of each standard 
solution mixed with internal standard into GC-MS in 
Selected Ion Monitoring (SIM) mode analysis. 


8.1.1.3 Prepare a calibration graph by plotting areas 
counts of the CWA peaks corrected for blank levels on 
the vertical scale against the concentration of the CWA, 
in pg/ml, in the injected aliquot of the calibration 
solutions as specified in Table 4. 


Table 4 Concentration Range for Calibrations 
( Clause 8.1.1.3 ) 


SI Agents Calibration Ion 
No. Range pg/ml  Chromatogram 
M/Z 
Q) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Tabun (GA) 0.05-1 162,43 
ii) Soman (GD) 0.05-1 99,126 
ii VX 0.05-1 114 
iv) Sarin (GB) 0.05-1 99 
v) Cyclosarin (GF) 0.05-1 99 
vi) Sulphur mustard (HD) 0.5-10 109 
vii  Lewisite (L) 0.5-10 145 


8.1.2 Quantification of Nerve and Blister Agent Vapors 


Calibrated GC-MS shall be used for the determining 
the challenge concentration of CWA. 


8.1.2.1 Make a known conc. range of CWA in order to 
make standard calibration plot. Add internal standard 
(IS) of known concentration in each known conc. of 
CWA in order to avoid human/manual error. 


8.1.2.2 Inject CWA solutions with internal standard of 
known concentrations (one sample shall be injected in 
triplicate manner in orderto get reproducible results) into 
GC-MS, note down the ratio of peak area of respective 
CWA and internal standard for every injection and take 
average for each of the concentrations. 


8.1.2.3 Plot standard calibration curve using ratio of 
average peak area of different concentrations against 
CWA concentration in ug. 


8.1.2.4 Now inject the extracted test sample spiked 
with internal standard of known concentration, one 
sample shall be injected 3 to 4 times in order to get 
reproducible results into GC-MS, note down the ratio 
peak area for every injection and take average for each 
of the concentrations and determine concentration of 
CWA using standard calibration plot. 


8.1.3 Nerve and Blister Agent Samples Analysis 


8.1.3.1 Inject the fixed volume of extracted test 
sample (same volume injected for standards) into the 
gas chromatograph. Repeated injection up to 6 times 
carried out in order to measure standard deviation and 
concentration of test samples (desorbed sample) can be 
calculated using standard calibration graph. 


8.1.3.2 Analyze the blank sample and the extracted 
samples with respect to standard calibration graph. If 


11 


IS 17752 : 2021 


the test samples concentration falls beyond the upper 
limit of calibration plot, dilute the sample solutions 
with same solvent to bring the concentration back 
within the calibration range. 


8.1.3.3 Repeat the analysis and record the dilution 
factor. 


8.1.4 Vapor Concentration Calculations for Nerve and 
Blister Agent 


Using the syringe, the syringe pump and the rotameter 
parameters as well as taking advantage of the physical 
and chemical characteristics ofthe compound of interest, 
it 1s possible to calculate a desired concentration of a 
vapor (C. ~, ) using the following formula: 


FINAL 
Cinal (mg/m?) i EE sss 5 1000 S d ums d A-%) 
HE, ¡p X 60 x 100) 
where 

Fogh = Injection rate of the compound 
from the syringe pump, in ul/h; 

deompp = Compound density, in g/cm’ at 
(27 x= 2) °C; 

A = Percent is assay (that is, 
purity-percent) of the compound, 
usually quite close to 100 percent; 

Tm = Sum of air flow through rotameters 
R1 and R2 (lpm); 

60 = conversion constant for l/min to 
l/h; and 

100 — conversion constant for 


percent-value to decimal value). 
The desired concentration can also be stated in ppm 
using the following formula: 
Cinar (PPM) = [Cina (mg/m?) x 24.46] / M 


where 


2446 = the molar volume (dm?/mol) of ideal 
gas, calculated from V/n = RT/P, 

T = 298.15 K (25 *C) and P = 101.325 
kPa, and 

M = the compound molecular mass 


(g/mol). 


8.1.5 Quantitation of Test Nerve and Blister Agent 
Samples 


Calculate the weight, in ug, of respective agent in the 
sample by using the calibration graph prepared for the 
standard solutions. Also calculate the conc. of CWA in 
the blank sample (sample without CWAs) 


IS 17752 : 2021 


C (mg/m) = (M, + M,-M,,,,,)/ Dx V 
where 

c — concentration of analyte, in air 
(mg/m); 

M, = concentraion (ug) of CWA in large 
bed section; 

M, = concentration (ug) of CWA in small 
bed section; 

Mink ^ concentration (ug) of CWA in blank 
sample; 

D — extraction efficiency, as read from 
the extraction efficiency curve; and 

V = volume of air sampled (1). 


8.2 Quantification of HCN/Phosgene 


The quantitation of generated HCN and phosgene gas 
at the challenge point of CWAD is directly confirmed 
using calibrated electrochemical/metal oxide HCN 
detector and photo ionization (PID)/electrochemical 
detector, respectively by multiplying response factor 
(in case of PID) if any. Before challenging detector, 
concentration determination shall be carried out. 


9 TESTING OF DETECTOR AT 
TEMPERATURE CONDITIONS 


VARIOUS 


Performance evaluation of chemical detector shall be 
conducted at ambient, sub-ambient and above ambient 
conditions by the following procedures. 


9.1 Testing at Sub-ambient Temperature (from-10 
to -20 °C) 


9.1.1 Place the detectors in environment chamber at 
(from -10 to -20 °C) and store them for 4 h of time as 
per ATP (accepted test procedure)/trial directive. 


9.1.2 After conditioning, the detector will be kept in 
testing chamber in switched ON mode. 


9.1.3 Prior to switch on the detector, it shall be flushed 
by the clean air for 20 min. 


9.1.4 Desired concentration of agent vapors shall be 
generated followed by its stabilization. 


9.1.5 Determine the concentration of agent by GC-MS 
method (nerve and blister agent). For the confirmation 
of HCN concentration online detector will be used. 


9.1.6 Expose the detector for at least 60 s to clean air 
with the same condition as going to be challenged with 
the agent. 


9.1.7 Expose the detector to the agent at t = 0 sec and 
response time measurement will be started. 


12 


9.1.8 The response time and the readout of the detector 
will be recorded on the basis of audio and visual alarms 
which shall be stable. 


9.1.9 The maximum exposure time to the detector will 
be 60 s, if there is no audio and visual alarm up to 60 s, 
the exposure shall be stopped. 


9.1.10 Once the detector is exposed to the clean air, the 
recovery time starts. 


9.1.11 Recovery time shall not exceed 3 min (180 s). 
This shall also be monitored with each exposure. 


9.1.12 When the detector alarm goes off, the recovery 
time shall be recorded. 


9.1.13 Each test shall be performed in triplicate. 


NOTE —tThe experiment at sub ambient condition shall be 
performed at (-10 to —20 *C) in environmental chamber. 
Generation of vapor shall be at ambient temperature and 
detector challenge shall be carried out in environmental 
chamber at — 10 to -20 *C 


9.2 Testing at Ambient Temperature (25 + 2 °C) 


9.2.1 Place the detector at ambient temperature and 
store them for 4 h of time as per ATP/trial directive. 


9.2.2 After conditioning, detector shall be switched 
ON. 


9.2.3 Desired concentration of agent vapors shall be 
generated followed by its stabilization. 


9.2.4 Set the required humidity as per ATP/trial 
directive. 


9.2.5 Determination of agent concentration by online 
methods/detector (if available) or by offline sampling 
using sorbent tubes followed by GC-MS analysis. 


9.2.6 Expose the detector for at least 60 s to clean air 
with the same condition as the challenge with the agent. 


9.2.7 Expose the detector to the agent (at t — 0) and 
response time measurement shall be started. 


9.2.8 The response time and the readout of the detector 
will be recorded on the basis of audio and visual alarms 
which shall be stable. 


9.2.9 The maximum exposure time to the detector shall 
be 60 s, if there is no audio and visual alarm up to 60 s, 
the exposure shall be stopped. 


9.2.10 Once the detector 1s exposed to the clean air, the 
recovery time starts. 


9.2.11 Recovery time shall not exceed 3 min (180 s). 
This is also monitored with each exposure. 


9.2.12 When the detector alarm goes off, the recovery 
time shall be recorded. 


9.2.13 Each test shall be performed in triplicate. 


9.2.14 Repeat the test procedure with other humidity 
(see 8.2.4). 


NOTE — The experiment at ambient condition shall be 
performed at 25 + 2 ?C in environmental chamber. Vapor 
generation and detector challenge shall be carried out in 
environmental chamber. 


9.3 Testing at Above Ambient Temperature (from 
+ 42 to + 45 °C) 


9.3.1 Place the detector in environment chamber at 
(+ 42 to + 45 °C) and store them for a 4 h of time as per 
ATP/trial directive. 


9.3.2 Desired concentration of agent vapors shall be 
generated followed by its stabilization. 


9.3.3 Determination of agent concentration by online 
methods/detector (if available) or by offline sampling 
using sorbent tubes followed by GC-MS analysis. 


9.3.4 As per ATP/trial directive, conditioning of 
challenge detector shall be performed. After completion, 
the detector shall be taken out from the environmental 
chamber and switched ON. 


9.3.5 Expose the detector for at least 60 s to clean air 
with the same condition as going to be challenged with 
the agent. 


9.3.6 Expose the detector to the agent (at t — 0) and 
response time measurement shall be started. 


9.3.7 The response time and the readout of the detector 
shall be recorded on the basis of audio and visual 
alarms which shall be stable. 


9.3.8 The maximum exposure time to the detector will 
be 60 s, if there is no audio and visual alarm up to 60 s, 
the exposure shall be stopped. 


9.3.9 Once the detector is exposed to the clean air, the 
recovery time starts. 


9.3.10 Recovery time shall not exceed 3 min (180 s). 
This is also monitored with each exposure. 


9.3.11 When the detector alarm goes off, the recovery 
time shall be recorded. 


13 


IS 17752 : 2021 


9.3.12 Each test shall be performed in triplicate. 


NOTE — The experiment at above ambient condition shall 
be performed (+ 42 to + 45 *C) in environmental chamber. 
Generation of vapor shall be at ambient temperature and 
detector challenge shall be carried out in environmental 
chamber. 


10 DETECTOR EVALUATION 


CWAD will be challenged against the concentration 
defined for each type of agents in combinations of 
temperature and RH as specified in Table 5. 


11 SATURATION TEST 


The equipment is exposed to natural vapor of sulphur 
mustard (HD) produced by taking 100 ul of neat agent 
in vial or test tube of size (8 + 4) cm at (27 + 5) °C and 
RH of (50 + 20) percent. 


Than check recovery time is < 3min or not. 


12 FALSE 
STUDIES 


ALARM AND INTERFERENCE 


CWAD may give false positive or false negative alarm. 
False positive occur if a detector responds when a CWA 
is not present. False negative when a detector fails to 
respond to a CWA that is present. 


False positive alarms are usually observed when the 
targeted compound is in the presence of an interferent, 
which may be a chemical molecularly similar to a 
CWA, or a substance which may contain elements 
that are also present in CWA. For example, pesticides 
containing sulfur or phosphorus would generate a false 
positive CWA alarm when an FPD-based detector is 
used. 


False negative alarms are more problematic than false 
positive alarms because the failure to produce an 
alarm may lead to dangerous situations. The failure of 
a detector to alarm to a CWA that is present may be 
due to any number of reasons including operator error, 
changing environmental conditions, humidity effects, 
detector malfunction such as software quirks, and the 
presence of chemical interferents which may mask 
normal detection capabilities. 


The effects of potential interference will be assessed, 
by challenging the detectors with the pollutants. A 
representative set of potentially interfering compounds 
for testing false positive are mentioned in Table 6. The 
false positive alarm rate should not exceed 10 percent. 


IS 17752 : 2021 


Table 5 Detectors Challenged Against CWAs at Various Combinations of Temperature and Humidity 
( Clause 10 ) 


SI No Agent Concentration Threshold Relative Temperature Recovery 
(Tolerance + 25%) | Exposure Response Humidity (°C) Time (s) 
mg/m? Time Max, (s) (percent RH) 
Range 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
i) Nerve agents: Tabun (GA), 0.05 < 60 15 + 5 percent, 2542°C < 180 
Sarin (GB), Soman(GD), 50 + 5 percent and 
Cyclosarin (GF) and VX 80 + 5 percent 
ii) Nerve agents: Tabun (GA), 0.05 < 60 see NOTE Between < 180 
Sarin (GB), Soman(GD), +42 to +45 °C 
Cyclosarin (GF) and VX 
ili) Nerve agents: Tabun (GA), 0.05 < 60 see NOTE Between < 180 
Sarin (GB), Soman(GD), —10 to -20 °C 
Cyclosarin (GF) 
iv) Blister agents: Sulphur 0.5 < 60 15 + 5 percent 252€ < 180 
mustard (HD) and 50 + 5 percent and 
Lewisite(L) 80 + 5 percent 
v) Blister agents: Sulphur 0.5 < 60 see NOTE Between < 180 
mustard (HD) and +42 to+ 45°C 
Lewisite(L) 
vi) Choking agents: Phosgene 20 < 60 15 +5 percent 2542 °C, < 180 
(CG) 50 + 5 percent 
vii) Choking agents: Phosgene 20 < 60 see NOTE Between < 180 
(CG) + 42 to+ 45°C 
vii) Choking agents: Phosgene 20 < 60 see NOTE Between < 180 
(CG) -10 to —20 °C 
ix) Blood agents (AC): 20 <60 15 + 5 percent 252°C < 180 
Hydrogen cyanide(HCN) 50 + 5 percent and 
80 5 percent 
x Blood agents (AC): 20 <60 see NOTE Between < 180 
Hydrogen cyanide(HCN) +42 to +45 °C 
xi) Blood agents(AC): 20 <60 see NOTE Between < 180 
Hydrogen cyanide(HCN) —10 to —20 °C 


NOTE — RH will not be maintained externally, it will be recorded as such in the given temperature in the test chamber. 


14 


Table 6 List of Interferents 
( Clause 12 ) 


SI No. Category Interferents 
(Q) (2) (3) 
1) Category | vaporand Diesel, kerosene, petrol and 
burning/exhaust vehicle exhaust 
11) Category 2 Burning tire, menthol and 
cigarette 
11) Category 3 Methanol/ethanol, bleach, CW 


decontamination solutions 


(DS2) 


NOTE — One interferent at a time shall be used to check the 
false alarm. 


12.1 Interferents Test Method 


Preferably, fumes of interference agents shall 
be produced in the open air environment. Each 
detector unit shall be exposed at a certain distance 
(0.5-2 meter) (distance based on wind speed and the 


15 


IS 17752 : 2021 


nature of dissemination of the interferents) for 60 s to 
each interferent and three consecutive trials shall be 
recorded. The system should be clear down time at least 
3 min. The laboratory tests for the interferents such as 
kerosene, petrol, diesel, methanol and ethanol shall be 
conducted in laboratory. Each detector unit shall be 
tested against the headspace concentrations of vapors. 
Air stream carries the headspace vapor of the substance 
by sweeping it over the liquid in a tube or through 
the liquid in a bubbler to prepare the interferents gas 
mixture of sufficient volume in air. Each detector 
unit shall be exposed for 60 s to each interferents gas 
mixture and three consecutive trials shall be recorded. 
Testing shall continue with the next challenge after the 
detector was completely recovered in 180 s from prior 
exposure. 


13 TEST REPORT 


A sample format for the reporting of the testing of 
CWADs are given in Annex A. 


IS 17752 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 13) 


3. Equipment under evaluation with serial number................. esses eene 
4. lest performed DY oa ea 
S: Test UII Inc rer 
6. Period of testi iii aio din iaa 
gei sr ls ie 
8. Report prepared by: AA epus seek pte e doce dugad ob a od ope EEE EEE de aces 
O REPO TEVI WedlDy nia nidad ais diia 
10. Report approved: Dicc Adria 
11. Testing team 

ER Representative: ue Lc —————————E ERR 
11.2 Represemtative TT P—————————————— 
11.3 Representatives. iris oe eer ERR is iaa adidas KE ER IP IR pe RR ERIT 
IL: Testine co-ordinators.:. is oes todo dae do iia 
11.5 Testing METTE 
11.6 CWA synthesis. .: 1: ds e EGER IR RE as ias ita 
11.7 Equipment bandin ssie eto ret di dibetelo eroe aeons 
11.8 Nerve /blister/blood/choking agent testing.............. cece eee eee ee e memes memes 
11:9 Data recording: or cs.cs03 si EE 
11.10 Techmcal facility «uoo t A A AA A A A AAA 


TM ic 


14. Equipment under eyalüation.... adeo iode tet radiata saandamienssiesdemmaunad dees 
I5. Test platisszss NAS dues Ne eu AA 
15.1 Room temperature... over eee rp XE EE AR YR EE T AERE NT ERIERRTETRERNRS MEAS E anatase bee ERERTM RT IEEE AERE 
1522 Relative nina PET" 
15.3 JSOR specified concentration, i A pissed peram E SURE uetus MC Ne MN 
15.4 JSOR specified response timé. ii e ehe re RH doen ots awed FEN TAY E PR P seed X ERAT REY IR IRE 
15.5 JSQR specified TeCOVety UMC se. avenues idi ue Te DESEE dto 


16 


16. Executive Summary of the test 


IS 17752 : 2021 


Chemical Warfare Detector 


Measurement Error 


Agent (CWAs) 1 2 


3 


Response Response 


Response 


17. Outcome ofthe test and eval atin dde 
18. Detailed test report: eor o Rr ERE ERR EAS RR TERREA EE UIN RR Re Race andes 


18.1 Name of chemical warfare aged. ..oooooocccncncnccncocncncnncnnncncnnnnnno no memes heme eee ee e nene rehenes 


18.2 Observed concentration. ..........ccccccccescccecevecccecssscceecessceeesssceeesessceeeesssaeeecesseeecesesseseeseseeeness 


18:3 Observed room temperature: .. 4. rtr e ret sea T DERE EUR S AERE RARE E RP Ea RERO Tete d e e eaa 
18.4 Observed relative humidity. iaa or RR de RENI REST Rd 


Equipment Number : 


SI No. | Response Time (sec) Recovery Time(sec) 


Remark 


19. Any remarks: 12e v e roa arcet utu tere ete TM 


17 


IS 17752 : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Chemical Hazards Sectional Committee, CHD 07 


Organization 


In Personal Capacity 


Alkali Manufacturers Association of India, Mumbai 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 


Centre for Fire, Explosives and Environmental 
Science, Gol, Min of Def, 


Central Food Technological Research Institute, 
Mysore 


Century Rayon, Thane 
Crop Care Federation of India, New Delhi 


Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, GoI 


Department of Space(ISRO), Bengaluru 
Directorate General Factory Advice Service & 


Labour Institutes, Mumbai 
Defence Research and Establishment, (DRDO), 


Gwalior 

Hindustan Unilever Limited, Mumbai 

Gas Industries Association 

Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 

Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, 
Kalpakkam 

Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 


Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai 
Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 
Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 


In Personal Capacity 


Representative(s) 


SHRI K. S. RAMPRASAD (Chairman) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
Suri H. S. Das (Alternate) 


Ms GARIMA SINGH 
SHRI NISHITH GOSH (Alternate) 


DR M. SURIYANARAYANAN 


SHRI S. P. DOBHAL 
Dr Aart! BHATT (Alternate) 


DR DANDAMUDI USHARANI 
DR PRASANNA Vasu (Alternate) 


DR.SANDEEP R. NAIK 


MR P. N. KARLEKAR 
DR J. C. MAJUMDAR (Alternate) 


DR VISHAL CHOUDHARY 


SHRI MURALEEKRISHNAN R. 
Ms Laksumi VW (Alternate) 


Suri H. M. BHANDARI 
SHRI P. G. SATPUTE (Alternate) 


DR PRABHAT GARG 
DRVIRENDRA VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY HARLAKA 
SHRI RAKESH WADALKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI SUNIL KHER 
SHRI ANOOP TANDON (Alternate) 


Dr C. NANDI 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Dr K. K. SATPATHY 


DR BANKUPALLI SATYAVATHI 
DR SRIPADI PRABHAKARC (Alternate) 


DR NEERAJ ATRAY 
DR PANKAJ KUMAR KANUJIA (Alternate) 


PROF SANDIP Rov 
DR SACHIN GUNTE 


DR D. K. PATEL 
Dr SHEELENDRA PRATAP SINGH (Alternate) 


ProF DR G. D. YADAV 
Dr B. M. BHANAGE (Alternate) 


SHRI VIPIN DOSHI 


18 


Organization 
Ministry of Environment and Forest, New Delhi 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 
National Institute of Occupational Health, 


Ahmedabad 
National Safety Council, Navi Mumbai 


Oil Industry Safety Directorate (Min of Pet & Natural 
Gas), Delhi 


Pesticides Manufacturer and Formulators Association 
of India 


Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation, 
Nagpur 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 


Safety Appliances Manufacturers Association, 
Mumbai 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 
Tata Chemicals Ltd, Mithapur, Distt, Jamnagar 


In personal capacity (1-4/2/6, Parijat C H S, 
Spaghetti, Sector 15, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 
410210) 


National Institute of Technology, Thrichi 


BIS Director General 


IS 17752 : 2021 


Representative(s) 


SHRI VED PRAKASH MISHRA 
Dr DINESH RUNIWAL (Alternate) 


Dr Viray V. BOKADE 
Dr M. MUTHUKRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Dr B. RAVICHANDRAN 


SHRI A. Y. SUNDKAR 
Suni K. D. PariL (Alternate) 


SHRI DEVENDAR M. MAHAJAN 


DR ARCHANA KUMARI 
Dn SANDIP SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri M. K. JHALA 
Dr YOGESH KHARE (Alternate) 


Ms GEETA SINGH 
SHRIARVIND N. KUMAR (Alternate) 


SHRI MOHAMMAD 
SHRI DEVANG MEHTA (Alternate) 


DR JAGDISH KUMAR 
Dr DEEP SHANKAR CHATTERJEE (Alternate) 


SHRI SNEHASHISH A. CHAKRABORTY 
Suri D. K. THAKUR (Alternate) 


SHRI S. SOUNDARARAJAN 


PROF S. P. SIVAPIRAKASAM 
Dr SREEJITH MOHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY K Lar, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


Ms SHUBHANJALI UMRAO 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (CHD), BIS 


19 


(Continued from second cover) 


In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been derived from Joint Service Qualitative 
Requirement (JSQR) for CAM: 6665-008 : 2008 (Revised in 2018) and for ACADA: 66657-007: 2008 (Revised in 
2018), published by the Inter Services Equipment Policy Committee, Directorate of Standardization, Department 
of Defense Production. 


The composition of the Committee, responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex B. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised y. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 07 (16079). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


