Vda Wah IS 8414 : 2014 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


fagt an Yafa & i & few 
fara Frat & feast & 
aries fast 


(Fe FRAT ) 


Guidelines for Design of Under- 
Seepage Control Measures for 
Earth and Rockfill Dams 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2014 


ada Aah oat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM Tt, 9 aee BHC At, ae feeei-110002 
ark am MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2014 Price Group 6 


Foundations and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee, WRD 08 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Foundations and Foundation Treatment Sectional Committee, WRD 8 had been approved by the Water 
Resources Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1977. The revision of this standard was taken up for general updation and to 
incorporate five figures for better understanding of the mechanism/processes. 


Seepage control measures are required to protect a dam from any undesirable or dangerous effects of seepage, 
occurring through the dam itself or through the foundations, abutments and junctions with the masonry/concrete 
portions and outlet or spillway structures. The measures adopted may or may not reduce seepage quantities 
significantly, but foremost, the measures should minimize the risk of failure from instability of slopes, from 
foundation heave or from piping by erosion or by a combination of these. 


Although the control of seepage through and underneath embankments are treated separately, it should be realized 
that effective treatment of seepage requires consideration of the embankment, its foundation and the abutting or 
adjoining structures as a unit. 


Internally, most earth and rockfill embankments require some form of seepage control, either to improve stability 
or to control piping or both and/or to reduce the quantum of seepage. In earth embankments, progressive zoning, 
horizontal drainage/filter mats, inclined or vertical (chimney) drains and toe drains provide seepage control in 
the body of the dam. 


The measures of under-seepage control to common usage are the following: 


a) Positive cut-off formed in an open excavation to an impervious stratum which is backfilled with compacted 
impervious material; 


b) Concrete cut-off walls; 

c) Grout curtains; 

d) Slurry trench cut-offs (earth backfilled); 

e) Sheet piles; 

f) Upstream impervious blankets; and 

g) Vertical drains or relief wells and filter trenches. 


The measures best suited for any particular project depend upon many factors, but in general, the safety of the 
embankment shall be insured and, in addition, the type of treatment should be justified on the basis of economic 
considerations. In many instances, consideration of the various requirements leads to adoption of not one, but 
several types of seepage control measures. 


Designing and detailing of the drainage system for the embankment should be closely co-ordinated with the 
designing and detailing of the under-seepage control system. Dimensions and layout of drainage gallery, vertical 
drainage trenches, drain holes and relief wells should be carefully dovetailed into corresponding features of the 
embankment, to ensure the most positive control of seepage. Design and detailing of the core and impervious 
zones of the embankment should also be similarly coordinated with the arrangement and dimensions of the 
impervious elements of the under-seepage control system, such as cut-off trench, grout curtain, blanket, etc. 


In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the 
standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in 
this country. 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 8414 : 2014 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN OF UNDER-SEEPAGE 
CONTROL MEASURES FOR EARTH AND 
ROCKFILL DAMS 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the general guidelines for design 
of under-seepage control measures for earth and 
rockfill dams. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards listed below contain 
provisions which through reference in this text 
constitute provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision and parties to 
agreements based on this standard is encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below. 


IS No. Title 

4999 : 1991 Recommendations for grouting of 
pervious soils (first revision) 

5050 : 1992 Code of practice for design, 
construction and maintenance of 
relief wells (first revision) 

8826 : 1978 Guidelines for design of large earth 
and rockfill dams 

11973 : 1986 Code of practice for treatment of rock 


foundations, core and abutment, 
contacts with rock for embankment 
dams 


3 GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR DESIGN OF 
UNDER-SEEPAGE CONTROL MEASURES 


3.1 Provisions for under-seepage control have two 
independent functions: namely, reduction of the loss 
of water to an amount compatible with the purpose of 
the project, and elimination of the possibility of a 
failure of the structure by piping. Many dams have been 
in successful service for decades in spite of losses of 
water. Therefore the first step in rational design of 
under-seepage control measures is to estimate the 
largest quantity of water that may escape if no attempt 
is made to intercept percolation. In many instances it 
would be found that interception of the most 
conspicuously pervious zones would be sufficient and 
cost of further reducing the loss of water would not be 
justified in terms of value of water retained. 


3.2 The quantity of seepage can be reduced by 
interception of pervious zones by means of impervious 
barriers, such as grout curtains, cut-off trenches, 
diaphragms or by lengthening the path of seepage by 
providing an upstream blanket of impervious soil. 


3.3 The safety of a dam with respect to a failure by 
piping is not necessarily related to the amount of water 
that escapes from the reservoir. Large losses of water 
may be associated with a high degree of safety against 
piping. Hence, the means for eliminating the danger 
of piping require independent consideration. The 
danger of failure of a dam by piping increases rapidly 
with increasing values of the hydraulic gradient at 
which the water percolates through the ‘impervious’ 
portion of the dam and along the contact between this 
portion and the natural ground. 


3.4 Junction of earthfill with rigid structures, such as 
envelop junctions of earth and masonry dams, retaining 
wall junctions, intersection of outlet conduits and cut- 
off trench are particularly vulnerable to piping. Apart 
from the paths of preferential seepage provided by such 
junctions, cracking due to differential settlement is 
another major cause of internal erosion. Abutment 
contacts where the foundation profile is irregular and/ 
or steep are also vulnerable to piping. 


3.5 In certain cases piping can be prevented by 
providing properly designed relief wells and drainage 
trenches in conjunction with filter/drainage mats and 
inclined filters. If the subsoil is fairly homogeneous 
and well graded, the installation of these features is a 
routine operation. Entrainment of soil particles by 
seepage flows can be prevented without much difficulty 
by adopting accepted practices for dimensioning and 
detailing of the drainage system. However, if the subsoil 
contains strata of very fine uniform sand or rock flour 
overlying strata of clean sand or gravel subsurface, 
erosion may develop along the boundary between the 
two types of materials. The most difficult and 
unfavourable conditions are encountered in ice or 
water-laid sediments having an erratic pattern of 
stratification and containing layers and lenses of very 
fine sand or rock flour in direct contact with coarse- 
grained and very pervious materials. Similarly, 


IS 8414 : 2014 


vulnerable areas arise when hill talus and boulders 
occur in proximity of unconsolidated deposits. 


3.6 Filter trenches in combination with inclined or 
vertical filters and horizontal filter mats constitute a 
means of arresting internal erosion. The filter trench, 
the horizontal drainage blanket as well as inclined and 
vertical filters through the embankment should be 
detailed carefully to constitute a continuous system for 
interception of possible paths of internal erosion. 


3.7 Whatever the subsoil conditions may be, the means 
for prevention of piping should be fully and 
permanently adequate. Otherwise, sooner or later a 
catastrophic failure may ensue. Therefore, the efforts 
to stop subsurface erosion should be continued until 
they are successful. In some instances, observations 
during the first filling of the reservoir may show that 
minor additions to the original drainage provisions will 
satisfy all essential safety requirements. At other sites, 
on geologically similar formations, severe difficulties 
may be encountered. 


3.8 If during filling of the reservoir, occurrence of 
springs, boils and sediment entrainment is noticed, 
corrective measures would have to be taken which 
generally consist of placement of a filter mat of well 
graded pervious material over the zones where 
excessive seepage is observed, followed by placement 
of a loading berm over the filter mat. Generally the 
material which can be most easily obtained and 
transported is used for the loading berm. Entrainment 
of particles and boils can be retarded temporarily by 
enclosing the boils by a ring bund of sand bags. The 
diameter of ring bund should be large enough, that is, 
at least ten times the diameter of the boil, to avoid blow 
ups in the adjacent areas and its height should be 
sufficient to create enough head to reduce flow through 
boils. Such ring bunds are a purely temporary measure 
and may often be helpful in creating suitable working 
condition for placement of the filter mat and the loading 
berm. When it is not possible to obtain material capable 
of satisfying the filter criteria as well as of adequately 
high permeability, gravel and rubble drains may be 
interposed within the filter mat or placed over the filter 
mat. 


3.9 Control of seepage through pervious foundation 
is thus a feature of major uncertainty in the design of 
an earth dam. However, in many geological situations 
the depth of an extensive impervious stratum can be 
established by adopting simple methods of exploration, 
such as bore holes and trial pits. If depth of impervious 
stratum is not excessive, a positive cut-off trench would 
be preferred in such cases. A positive cut-off trench 
formed in an open excavation into the impervious 
stratum and backfilled by a compacted impervious 
earthfill is comparatively free from uncertainty and 


requires little observation to ensure satisfactory 
performance. 


3.10 When the depth of the impervious stratum is 
known but excavation of positive cut-off trench is not 
feasible due to excessive depth of the impervious 
stratum or construction difficulties like heavy 
dewatering requirements, instability of sides of 
excavation, etc, other measures of forming a cut-off 
may be considered. These consist of concrete cut-off 
walls placed in slurry trenches, grout curtains or sheet 
piles. 


3.11 When the investigations do not provide definite 
indications of the depth and continuity of the 
impervious stratum or the depth of cut-off is excessive, 
consideration should be given to use of an impervious 
blanket. Blankets of adequate length in conjunction 
with relief wells or filter trenches have been 
successfully used on major projects. Adoption of a 
blanket-cum-relief well system imposes the obligation 
of maintaining continuous observation and exercising 
adequate control in installation of the drainage system. 
Inadequacies and uncertainties described in 4.6.3 on 
limitations of blankets should be considered before 
making the selection of the blanket as the primary 
measure of seepage control. 


3.12 Partial cut-offs can only be considered as a 
supplementary means of seepage control since their 
efficacy is very small both for reducing the rate of 
seepage or for reducing the pore water pressure (uplift) 
in the downstream areas of the foundation. However, 
a partial cutoff in the form of grout curtain may be 
effective in blocking internal erosion in the vulnerable 
zones like pockets of open gravel and boulders in 
proximity of fine grained soil. Sheet pile may also be 
used as a means of blocking erosion in sandy and silty 
strata. 


4 MEASURES OF UNDER-SEEPAGE CONTROL 


4.1 Positive Cut-off Trench 


4.1.1 The positive cut-off trench consists of an 
impervious fill placed in a trench formed by open 
excavation into an impervious stratum. Grouting of the 
contact zone of the fill and the underlying strata 
constitutes an integral part of the positive cut-off. 
Pockets of such size where compaction equipment 
cannot be operated and pot holes with overhangs should 
be filled with concrete. 


4.1.2 The depth of the positive cut-off trench is 
governed by the geological features influencing the 
configuration of the impervious substratum and the 
profile of unweathered mass of bed rock. The width 
and side slopes are generally selected according to 
convenience of construction and to ensure stability of 


excavated slopes. Detailing of the positive cutoff near 
abutments and junctions with structures needs careful 
consideration, since the efficacy and continuity of the 
impervious filling (both in the cutoff trench and in the 
core) are compromised by differential settlement cracks 
developed near junctions, abutments and foundation 
irregularities. 


4.1.3 In view of the hazard of transverse cracking and 
consequent internal erosion at junctions with rigid 
structures or next to steeply rising faces of abutments, 
an inclined or vertical filter should necessarily be 
incorporated in the embankment section for the 
junction zones, irrespective of the need for such a filter 
on the embankment section for the entire dam. When 
combined with a filter trench provided in the junction 
zone, the inclined filter and the horizontal drainage 
blanket should constitute a complete and continuous 
interception system blocking all possible paths of 
internal erosion. The filter trench should be extended 
deep enough up to the upper surface of foundation 
strata, sufficiently resistant to internal erosion by virtue 
of its low compressibility, low permeability and 
cohesive strength. 


4.1.4 Special attention should be given to backfilling 
of narrow trenches formed by excavation for the walls, 
outlet structures, masonry dams, etc. The contact of 
such backfill with the surrounding natural soil or rigid 
structure is likely to be poor due to the arching action 
arising from higher compressibility of the fill relative 
to the surrounding subsoil and the rigid structure. These 
difficulties can be overcome by use of plastic concrete 
backfill comprising coarse and fine aggregate, clay and 
a small quantity of cement. 


4.1.5 Plastic concrete may also be used in narrow or 


IS 8414 : 2014 


deep trenches, excavated by manual labour where 
compaction equipment cannot be operated. 


4.1.6 The cut-off trench should be keyed sufficiently 
into the flanks if the depth of pervious overburden 
below the reservoir level is significant at the ends of 
the dam at the flank. Guidelines regarding this aspect 
are provided in IS 8826. A typical earth dam with 
inclined core and partial cut-off is given at Fig.1. 


4.2 Concrete Diaphragm 


4.2.1 A single diaphragm or a double diaphragm may 
also be used for under-seepage control. Concrete cut- 
off walls placed in slurry trench are not subject to visual 
inspection during construction, therefore require 
special knowledge, equipment and skilled workmen 
to achieve a satisfactory construction. 


4.2.2 Deformation behaviour of the diaphragm should 
be analyzed to ascertain the extent of risk of rupture of 
diaphragm due to upstream and down-stream 
horizontal movements combined with buckling due to 
down drag. Special design features would be necessary 
where such risk is serious, namely, replacing upper 
portions of the diaphragm by a positive cut-off trench, 
introduction of joints and use of plastic concrete. 


4.2.3 By providing two lines of diaphragms and 
grouting the alluvium contained between them by tubes 
with sleeves, the element of uncertainty regarding the 
gaps and discontinuities in placement of concrete in 
slurry trench and defects in the joints can be minimized. 
Grouting of the pervious soil within the diaphragms 
could be carried out effectively because of the 
confinement provided by the diaphragms. 


4.2.4 Limitations of the diaphragm technique can be 


€ TOP WIDTH 


RIPRAP 
WITH FILTER 


UP STREAM 
CASING 


IMPERVIOUS BLANKET 
INCLINED IMPERVIOUS CORE 


PERVIOUS FOUNDATION 


IMPERVIOUS STRATUM 


TAN 


j TURFING 
LA 
AZ 


PARTIAL CUT OFF 


CATCH WATER DRAIN 


ROCK TOE AND 
1:50 € TOE DRAIN 


DEPTH VARIES 
RELIEF WELL 


Fic. 1 EARTH DAM WITH INCLINED CORE AND PARTIAL CUT-OFF 


IS 8414 : 2014 


overcome by installing precast elements within slurry 
trenches filled with plastic concrete. 


4.3 Grout Curtain 
4.3.1 Grout Curtain in Pervious Soils 


4.3.1.1 Grouted cut-offs are produced by injection, 
within the zone assigned to the cut-off, of the voids of 
the sediments with cement, clay, chemicals, or a 
combination of these materials. 


4.3.1.2 An essential feature of all grouting procedures 
is successive injection, of progressively finer pockets 
in the deposit. In as much as grout cannot be made to 
penetrate the finer materials as long as more pervious 
pockets are available, the coarser materials are treated 
first, usually with the less expensive and thicker grouts, 
whereupon the finer portions are penetrated with less 
viscous fluids. 


4.3.1.3 Grouted cut-offs are generally effective when 
seepage occurs primarily through pockets, zones or 
layers of coarse materials (gravel, boulders and talus). 
Coarse sediments with in-situ permeability of 10-! cm/s 
or above and D,, exceeding 0.6 mm can generally be 
treated effectively with low cost grouts, namely, clay 
cement grout. The response of soils with permeability 
of the order of 10°? cm/s and lower and D,, of 0.3 mm 
to 0.5 mm to grouting is uncertain. Silicate grouting 
has been effective in some cases for soils of initial 
permeability ranging from 10~ to 10-3 cm/s. Close 
spacing of holes and expensive chemical grouts are 
required for grouting of soils of initial permeability of 
10° cm/s and lower. Reference should be made to 
IS 4999 for assessment of groutability of foundation 
materials in terms of the grain size distribution. 


4.3.1.4 For soil of initial permeability 10-'! cm/s or 
higher, the final coefficient of permeability of 
sediments grouted by use of low cost clay cement 
grouts lies in the range 10% cm/s to 10> cm/s. On the 
other hand the difference in pre-grouting and post- 
grouting permeability of soils having an initial 
permeability of 10° cm/s would be insufficient for the 
cut-off to be effective. The width of curtain is another 
factor which shall be considered. Wide multiple line 
curtains would be required for soils with initial 
permeability of 10? cm/s, while a relatively narrow 
three line curtain may be adequate for soil of initial 
permeability of 10-! cm/s or higher. 


4.3.1.5 If soil deposits which may disintegrate in 
presence of water is encountered below the base of the 
embankment then the same shall be grouted with 
multiple lines of grout holes. 


4.3.1.6 The sizes and locations of portions of the 
sediments not penetrated by the grout are unknown. 


Yet, if a layer of very fine untreated sand, for instance, 
crosses the grout curtain, water percolates through it 
at high gradients and may erode a gap. Most chemical 
grouts are extremely compressible; and some of them 
are vulnerable to leaching. Grout curtains with 
chemical grout which can withstand seepage pressure 
over a long period of time are relatively expensive and 
the grout materials are sometimes difficult to procure. 


4.3.1.7 In the interest of safety and economy it is 
generally advisable to adopt multiple row grouting 
wherein the outer rows are treated with cement - clay - 
bentonite grouts, so that in the inner rows expensive 
grout treatment starting with stable grout mixes and 
ending in chemical mixes can be adopted which not 
only forms an effective grout curtain but also resist 
erosion and leaching. 


4.3.1.8 The result of grouting operations also depends 
to a large extent on the skill and experience of the 
grouting personnel as well as the understanding and 
care with which supervision is carried out. The width 
of grout curtains should be adequate to contain stray 
pockets of fine sand which is not groutable and to 
ensure that the gradient across the grout curtain is low 
enough to ensure that the grout injected is not eroded 
or leached by seepage. 


4.3.1.9 In view of the above limitations of grout 
curtains, it may be necessary to examine the need to 
provide a second line of defence, such as blanket plus 
relief wells. It may often be possible to obtain a 
blanketing effect by suitable adaption of the zoning of 
the dam near the base. A typical grout curtain in 
pervious soil is shown at Fig. 2. 


4.3.2 Grout Curtain in Rock 


4.3.2.1 Grout curtain in rock allow the routinized 
treatment if the purpose is only to block the most 
pervious zones. These can be treated by cement grout 
with suitable admixtures. 


4.3.2.2 Concentrated seepage would generally develop 
at the base of the positive cut-off. This zone is 
particularly vulnerable when a narrow base width is 
used for the cut-off trench in relation to the height of 
the dam. The depth of the grouted zone would be 
dependent on the nature of the substrata and their 
vulnerability to subsurface erosion. 


4.3.2.3 The installation of grout curtains in the 
abutments and foundations of the dams result in 
significant improvements only if these curtains are tied 
into more impervious rock members at a reasonable 
depths. It will lengthen the seepage path and offer 
increased resistance to seepage, which some times may 
not essentially alter the seepage quantity. The primary 
function of the grout curtains is to intercept and fill 


MAXIMUM STORAGE 
WATER LEVEL 


D/3 OR H/3 
WHICHEVER IS LARGER 


IS 8414 : 2014 


DAM CREST 


MAXIMUM TAIL H 
WATER LEVEL 


RECOMMENDED MAXIMUM CURTAIN WIDTH 


W, = H/3 to H/5 for stable grouts clay cement, Bentonite Cement 


= 
1 


H/7 Sodium Silicate — Aluminate, Acrylamide 


Fic. 2 GROUT CURTAINS IN PERVIOUS SOILS 


water passages such as, solution channels and fissures; 
they seldom provide an impervious barrier. Wherever 
the joint filler contains erodible material, a wide, and 
multiple line curtains should be employed in all cases 
regardless of the grout takes. Grouting will not be much 
effective if take of cement falls below 30 kg/m. In these 
cases the grouted area will correspond to 2 to 8 times 
of the borehole size. So as to achieve effective grouting, 
the spacing of grout holes is to be reduced and 5 rows 
of boreholes are to be grouted. The purpose of a 
reasonable borehole arrangement is to achieve a 
coherent grouting zone. The establishment of a wide 
grouting zone also minimizes the risk of insufficient 
effectiveness. 


4.3.2.4 The type of dam exerts a strong influence on 
the position of the row of grout holes. The standard 
positions for grout curtains are at the central line of 
core or slightly upstream of it for earthen dam and near 
the upstream heel for concrete/masonry dams. The 
grout curtain is usually inclined upstream to get as clear 
of the drainage holes as feasible. This means that the 
grout holes frequently need to be doubly inclined; with 
one of the directions of the inclination suiting this and 
other direction suitably intercepting optimum joints, 
bedding planes etc. The grout curtain is often presumed 
to be the location at which uplift pressure reduction 
commences. The typical profile of grout curtain holes 
is shown in Fig. 3. 


4.3.2.5 Tentative designs will usually specify a single 
line of holes drilled at 3 m centre to centre, although 
wider or closer spacing may be required depending on 


the rock condition. To permit application of high 
pressures without causing displacement in the rock or 
loss of grout through surface cracks, curtain grouting 
is carried out subsequent to consolidation grouting and 
after some of the concrete/masonry has been placed. 
Usually, it is done from galleries within the dam and 
from tunnels driven into the abutments especially for 
this purpose. 


4.3.2.6 To facilitate drilling, 50 mm to 75 mm diameter 
pipes are embedded in the masonry from foundation 
to the floor of gallery. When the structure has reached 
an elevation that is sufficient to prevent upheaval, the 
grout holes are drilled through these pipes and into the 
foundation rocks. Although the tentative grouting plan 
may indicate holes to be drilled on 3 m centre to centre, 
the usual procedure will be first drill and grout holes 
approximately 12 m apart, or as far apart as necessary 
to prevent grout from on hole looking into another 
drilled but un grouted hole. Intermediate holes, located 
midway between the first holes, will then be drilled 
and grouted. Drilling and grouting of additional 
intermediate holes, splitting the spaces between 
completed holes, will continue until the desired spacing 
is reached or until the amount of grout accepted by the 
last group of intermediate holes indicates no further 
grouting is necessary. 


4.4 Slurry Trench Cut-off Walls 


4.4.1 A backhoe or dragline excavates a trench through 
the pervious deposits down to suitable impervious 
materials. A bentonite slurry, retained in the trench 


IS 8414 : 2014 


TOP OF DAM 


U 
; Ipe 
S is SUE 
SQ Tiz 
“Lb ia 


{ 
FIRM oe Sola oy ae 


THIRD ZONE 
SECOND ZONE 
FIRST ZONE 


CONCRETE PAD 
OPTIONAL 


ALTERNATE CURTAIN 
FOR DAM LESS | 
THAN 60 m HIGH i 

| 


ee’ 


INSPECTION, GROUTING AND 


ORIGINAL GROUND 
SURFACE 


1 VERTICAL DRAIN HOLES 
I~ WITH ALTERNATE 
UPSTREAM CURTAIN 


GROUT CURTAIN 


SECTION XX 


NOTE — Angling of holes depends on jointing and steepness of abutment. 


Fic. 3 TYPICAL PROFILE OF GROUT CURTAIN HOLES 


above the existing ground-water level, prevents the 
trench walls from caving. After a sufficient length of 
trench has been excavated and the bottom suitably 
prepared, back filling begins. The physical 
characteristics of the backfill are specially controlled; 
in general, the backfill should be well-graded, 


impermeable in place, and sufficiently coarse to 
minimize post construction settlements. A selected 
amount of bentonite slurry may be blended with the 
backfill to improve its properties. The embankment 
should be suitably designed to resist cracking by 
differential settlement due to the slurry trench. 


4.4.2 If the foundation materials are fine grained and 
overlie well-graded gravels, the hazards of piping are 
minimum. Piping may however occur into open work 
gravels. It may therefore be desirable to grout the 
alluvium in the immediate vicinity of the slurry trench. 
However, the slurry trench method is yet to be adopted 
in India and no Indian experience is available. 


4.5 Steel Sheet Piles 


4.5.1 Sheet piles are useful as barrier to arrest internal 
erosion. But they have proved to be rather ineffective 
as a positive means of controlling seepage through 
pervious deposits. 


4.5.2 Even if sheet pile cut-offs are intact they are not 
water-tight because of leakage across the interlocks. 
In addition, the locks may break because of defects in 
the steel or when a pile hits an obstacle. Once the lock 
is split, the width of the gap increases rapidly with 
increasing depth and may assume dimensions of a few 
metres. 


4.5.3 If steel sheet piles are driven to hard rock with a 
very uneven surface, a continuous row of triangular 
gaps may be present between their lower edges and 
the rock, or the piles may curl if they are driven too 
hard. 


4.5.4 It appears difficult to justify the use of sheet 
piling as a means of controlling seepage, particularly 
when other less expensive means are available which 
provide the same if not more positive results. Some 
methods may be perfected to improve the operating 
characteristics of sheet pile cut-offs, such as using 
vibrating pile driving hammers to reduce the 
probability of driving out of interlock and the use of 
bentonite mud to seal the interlocks; however, until 
such time that these techniques are perfected and 


IS 8414 : 2014 


become routine, sheet pile walls should be considered 
no more effective than partial cut-offs. 


4.5.5 In barrages the efficacy of sheet piles is primarily 
due to their ability to prevent excessive exit gradients 
in down stream zones vulnerable to scour. Sheet piles 
may also be effective in blocking the path of direct 
seepage at the contact of alluvium and rigid concrete 
floors of barrages. They also serve as an interception 
device against internal migration of soil particles. 


4.6 Upstream Impervious Blankets and Relief Wells 
4.6.1 Upstream Impervious Blanket 


4.6.1.1 If a positive cut-off is not required, or is too 
costly, an upstream impervious blanket combined with 
relief wells in the downstream section may be used 
(see Fig.4). Filter trenches supplement relief wells in 
heterogeneous deposits and in zones of seepage 
concentrations. An upstream blanket may result in 
major project economies, particularly if the only 
alternative consists of deep grout curtains or concrete 
cut-off walls. Since alluvial deposits in river valleys 
are often overlain by a surface layer of relatively 
impervious soils, it is advantageous if this natural 
impervious blanket can be incorporated into the overall 
scheme of seepage control. 


4.6.1.2 Material shall be of such types, which are 
economical and readily available such as single or 
multiple clay blankets or a combination of clay and 
geosynthetic materials. 


4.6.1.3 Feasibility studies for blankets should take into 
consideration the increase in the effectiveness of 
blankets with time as a result of additional 
sedimentation in the reservoir. This would be 
particularly important for dams across rivers which 
carry relatively large amount of sediment. 


LEDGE 


hae 


PERVIOUS FOUNDATION 


Fic. 4 UPSTREAM IMPERVIOUS BLANKET 


IS 8414 : 2014 


4.6.1.4 Following basic requirements should be 
satisfied while selecting the length and thickness of 
the blanket: 


a) Reduction of the quantity of under-seepage 
to the desired extent; and 

b) Limiting the exit gradients to the allowable 
limits for the substrata encountered. 


Subsurface erosion shall also be controlled which may 
require supplementary measures in some cases. 


4.6.1.5 The allowable seepage depends on economic 
considerations; therefore design decisions are governed 
by the estimate of seepage which is in turn dependent 
on the degree of precision achieved in determination 
of permeability. It is advisable to check the 
permeability values measured in tests conducted in bore 
holes or on samples by large scale pumping tests with 
piezometric measurements. 


4.6.1.6 Effective control of exit gradients can generally 
be achieved by a blanket length of about 5 times the 
head, combined with relief wells and drainage trenches. 
A longer length of blanket is generally required for 
control of subsurface erosion and for reducing seepage 
to desirable limits. It should, however, be noted that 
there is a limit to the length of the blanket beyond which 
it may not be useful. Apart from the length of the 
blanket, the effectiveness of upstream impervious 
blankets depends upon thickness and vertical 
permeability of impervious blanket and on stratification 
and permeability of soils on which they are placed. 


4.6.1.7 Blanket length required to control subsurface 
erosion is a matter of considerable uncertainty. In 
uniform alluvial deposit without open gravel pockets 
or irregularities giving rise to paths of preferential 
seepage, blanket lengths of 10 times head have been 
found to be adequate. On important dams blanket 
lengths should be related to past practice under similar 
conditions and where possible provisions should be 
made for controlled filling of reservoir in stages. When 
past experience is inadequate or knowledge of geology 
indicates possible hazard of open zones in proximity 
with soils vulnerable to subsurface erosion, 
supplementary measures of seepage control shall be 
provided along with the blankets and relief wells. While 
selecting the length of the blanket the progressive 
reduction in efficacy of the increments to he blanket 
length, especially when the blanket length is large 
relative to thickness should be considered. 


4.6.2 Relief Wells (see IS 5050) 


Relief wells are an important adjunct to most of the 
preceding basic schemes for seepage control. They are 
used not only in nearly all cases with upstream 
impervious blankets, but also alongwith other schemes, 


to provide in the downstream portion of the dam, which 
could lead to piping. They also reduce the quantity of 
uncontrolled seepage flowing downstream of the dam 
and, hence, they control to some extent the occurrence 
and/or discharge of springs. Relief wells should be 
extended deep enough into the foundation so that the 
effects of minor geological details on performance are 
minimized. It is necessary to note the importance of 
continuous observation and maintenance of relief 
wells, if they are essential to the overall system of 
seepage control. A typical relief well is given at Fig. 5. 


4.6.3 Limitation of Blankets and Relief Wells 


4.6.3.1 Sometimes unfavourable site conditions make 
it difficult and expensive to place the blanket properly, 
to ensure its continuity and to protect it from erosion. 
The following considerations would influence the 
blanket layout and costs: 


a) Presence of a deep pool in the river requiring 
placement of blanket under water or 
dewatering of a large area after extensive 
coffer-damming operations; 

b) River diversion layout and schedule requiring 
construction of blanket in sections. This 
makes it difficult to ensure satisfactory 
junctions of various sections of the blanket 
especially in the zone of intersection of the 
blanket with the diversion cut; 

c) Unfavourable topography and geological 
features, such as abrupt steps in the hill sides, 
presence of talus and other pervious deposits 
of large extent on the abutment and flanks; 
and 

d) Possibility of erosion of the blanket by high 
velocity flow near entry and exit zones of the 
diversion cut or tunnel. 


4.6.3.2 When blanket is considered as a measure of 
seepage control a complete layout plan should be 
prepared showing the outlet (including inlet and exit 
cuts) spillway approach and tail channels. The layout 
should be examined with regard to the ratio of shortest 
length of seepage path to the head, that is, the maximum 
overall gradient for the under seepage. Considerations 
should be given to addition of cut-off trenches to 
impervious bed rock near abutment flanks and junction 
zones. Supplementary measures, such as cut-off wall 
of concrete depending upon feasibility should be 
provided where efficacy of the blanket is liable to be 
compromised. Sheet piles may be used for protection 
of blanket in vulnerable areas. 


4.6.3.3 Open gravel and talus deposits may cause paths 
of preferential seepage to be formed giving rise to sub- 
surface erosion. In such strata it may be impossible to 
prevent continuous and excessive discharge of silt into 


METAL WELL GUARD 


PLASTIC STAND PIPE 


508 mm 


LL 


Gs 


101.6mm 


VY 


WATER TABLE 


RISER PIPE 


-TO TOP OF MIN 


VARIABLE 


IS 8414 : 2014 


V-NOTCH WEIR 


CHECK VALVE 
25.4mm WIRE MESH(1") 


(Pe 


RUBBER GASKET 
CAST IRON TENON 


CONCRETE BACKFILL 


SAND BACKFILL 
ea 


TOP OF GRAVEL FILTER 


TOP OF WELL SCREEN 


101.6mm 
(4") min. 


BLANK PIPE THROUGH VERY 
FINE SAND OR SILT STRATA 


FILTER PACK 


PERFORATED OR 
SLOTTED SCREEN 


BOTTOM PLUG 


Fic. 5 TypIcAL RELIEF WELL 


at least some of the filter wells. Furthermore, while 
the reservoir is being filled for the first time, large 
springs discharging silt laden water may emerge 
downstream from the row of filter wells. Prevention of 
the silt discharge from such springs may require patient 
experimentation in the field because the pattern of 
seepage toward the springs is and will remain unknown 
regardless of the number of observation wells, in as 
much as the well records always leave a wide margin 
for interpretation. Difficulties also arise in installations 
and operation of relief wells if alternate layers of coarse 
and fine material exist. 


4.6.3.4 If a filter stretching across the boundary of 
coarse and fine layers has everywhere the same 
composition, it is either too coarse to prevent the 
washing out of the fine particles or too fine to permit 
free discharge of the water out of the coarse stratum. 
If such a boundary or boundaries are encountered in 
filter wells, the lengths of the pervious sections of the 


wall of the wells should be limited to the central portion 
of the outcrops of the coarse grained strata. The 
thickness and elevation of the strata may change from 
well to well; therefore, a detailed record should be kept 
of the sequence of the strata that were encountered in 
each well while it was being drilled, and the specific 
procedures for the installation of each well shall be 
decided on the job. 


4.6.3.5 The discharge from the relief wells may 
decrease with passage of time for one of several 
reasons: the reservoir may be silting up; the wells may 
be plugging with silt; or the well screens may be 
becoming obstructed by chemical deposits or products 
of corrosion. If the decrease in the discharge is due to 
silting of the reservoir, the water levels in the 
observation wells at full reservoir go down; in all other 
circumstances they go up. Excessive discharge of silt 
should be prevented by sealing off any silt layers or 
lenses during installation of the wells. Minor 


IS 8414 : 2014 


accumulations of silt should be flushed out periodically. 
For this reason, and to permit replacement of 
deteriorated screens, the heads of the wells should be 
readily accessible. 


5 SELECTION OF SEEPAGE CONTROL 
MEASURES 


5.1 The selection of seepage control measures is 
dependent on the nature of foundation strata, the degree 
of heterogeneity and uncertainty in foundation 
characteristics, the economic value of the water stored, 
the risk element as influenced by the height of the dam, 
reservoir volume and potential damage to important 
properties, lines of communication, and important 
towns. The choice of the seepage control system would 
also depend on the feasibility of testing the field 
performance by observations in the initial stages of 
construction or operation and the scope for taking 
corrective action before serious damage occurs. As 
seepage control is not amenable to routinization in 
design, the guidelines given are only an indication of 
preferred systems which have generally performed 
satisfactorily under similar conditions. 


5.2 The most dependable measures of seepage control 
should be adopted commensurate with cost. Wherever 
feasible, a positive cut-off should therefore be used 
either in the form of a trench backfilled by compacted 
impervious soil or double line of diaphragm combined 
with grouting of the intervening soil or a multiple line 
grout curtain. Further, if depth of the impervious 
stratum is moderate and can be established with 
reasonable certainty, the choice would be a positive 
cut-off trench. Problems do, however, arise even in 
relatively simple geology (for example, igneous or 
metamorphic rocks or sedimentary rocks with thick 
beds) due to faults, shear zone dykes and similar 
discontinuities. These would require extensive grouting 
treatment beyond the zone intercepted by the cutoff. 


5.3 When deep and extensive but fairly uniform 
pervious strata of permeability ranging between 107 
cm/s to 107! cm/s are encountered, blankets combined 
with relief wells and drainage trenches have often been 
found to be adequate. Problems however, arise due to 
presence of open gravel pockets, zones of talus slide 
areas, contacts of formations of different geological 
age, folds, faults and fractured zones. Such features 
would call for supplementary measures, such as partial 
cut-off formed by a grout curtain. When permeability 
of the overburden is of the order of 10° cm/s or less, 
the quantity of seepage would be small and blankets 
of moderate length (about 5 times the head) would be 
adequate. However, such materials can be vulnerable 
to internal erosion. Close observation would therefore 
be required over a prolonged period since erosion 
channels are known to have developed 20 years or more 


10 


after construction. Such cases call for continuous 
monitoring and evaluation of the performance of the 
seepage control system. Supplementary grouting 
treatment may be necessary initially or as a corrective 
measure. 


5.4 When permeability is high, that is, of the order of 
107! cm/s or higher, recourse to grout curtains and 
diaphragms is generally necessary. Grouting can be 
economical in such cases except where problems arise 
due to presence of boulders, blocks and talus with 
irregular rock profile which make it difficult to establish 
the depth of the curtain. Presence of pockets of material 
of permeability of the order of 10° cm/s embedded in 
the highly pervious mass would compromise the 
efficacy of treatment by grouting and untreated pockets 
may be vulnerable to internal erosion. In such cases 
blankets may have to be combined with grout curtain. 
Diaphragms would generally be preferred when such 
pockets of fine sand and silt are extensive and the 
average permeability is 10-* cm/s or lower provided 
boulders do not make trenching operation impractical. 


5.5 When the irregularities and heterogeneities are 
extensive, it is advisable to plan for checking of the 
performance of the seepage control system at various 
stages of filling of the reservoir. At the design stage, 
consideration may be given to provide features that 
would help in raising the reservoir level in stages and 
control rise of water level until the performance of the 
seepage control system is verified and corrective action 
is taken, wherever required. This may entail 
introduction of special features in the spillway and 
outlet structures. Where controlled filling on the basis 
of observations is not possible, the under seepage 
design features shall be positive. All these should be 
considered to be a part of the design for seepage 
control. On projects where the risk of failure is high 
due to the large height of the dam and capacity of the 
reservoir, and existence of important properties 
downstream or the geological conditions are subject 
to a high degree of uncertainty, the designer should 
make the worst assumptions compatible to the 
geological conditions it may have also to be assumed 
that the worst condition would be developed during 
construction. Depending on the degree of uncertainty 
and the element of risk a second or sometimes a third 
line of defence may have to be used. This aspect has 
been further elaborated under 5.6. 


5.6 Combination of Measures to Provide Multiple 
Lines of Defence 


5.6.1 An element of uncertainty always exists in respect 
of under-seepage control for earth dams except where 
geology and topography exclude the possibility of 
unfavourable local features, for example where a 
positive cut-off is provided up to compact and 


impervious bedrock and the cut-off extends sufficiently 
into the flanks. When a positive cut-off is not feasible 
from a cost and construction point of view or due to 
presence of geological discontinuities a second or third 
line of defence may be required. 


5.6.2 Relief wells could be valuable adjunct to a 
seepage-control system comprising impervious 
blanket, filter mat and toe drains. A partial cut-off could 
also be used with advantage to intercept an upper 
stratum of relatively high permeability especially if the 
upper stratum contains open gravel, boulders, and talus 
in proximity of fine sand and silt. A grout curtain of 
sufficient width may also constitute a partial cut-off 
where the alluvium is deep and contains pockets of 
fine sand which are not amenable to grouting. The grout 
curtain would then be used in conjunction with a 
blanket and relief well system. In such cases the grout 
curtain would be designed to block the most pervious 
zones rather than provide a compact cut-off. 


5.6.3 In this standard, the term partial cut-off is used 
for imperfect curtains as well as cut-offs penetrating 
only a part of the depth of the principal pervious 
stratum. It should be recognized that a partial cut-off 
will generally bring about only a small reduction in 
the quantity of seepage and hydrostatic pressures in 
areas downstream of the curtain may not be lowered 
significantly. A partial cut-off is essentially a 
supplementary measure of control. For example, in a 
seepage control system consisting of blanket plus relief 
wells, if doubt arises regarding the presence of soil 
vulnerable to internal erosion in contact with open 
gravel pockets, partial cut-off formed by a grout curtain 
may be helpful in blocking such critical areas. A partial 
cut-off may also be helpful in intercepting zones of 
cracks and fissures existing up to a shallow depth in 
the foundation soils. 


5.6.4 Deep drainage trenches filled with filter materials 
may constitute a second line of defence in conjunction 
with relief wells if it is apprehended that relief wells 
may not intercept all the probable paths of preferential 
seepage. 


5.6.5 Grouting between concrete diaphragm wall or 
in the vicinity of slurry trenches would also constitute 
a second line of defence. 


5.6.6 The necessity for a second or third line of defence 


11 


IS 8414 : 2014 


would be decided on considerations of safety when 
the reservoir is large and also in view of the degree of 
uncertainty in design as determined by the geology as 
well as inherent limitations of techniques of exploration 
and construction. 


5.7 Dependability of performance should take 
precedence over cost considerations for major dams. 
When the choice is made on grounds of economy, 
possible variations from preliminary estimates should 
be given due consideration. Large variations may occur 
in estimates of diaphragms in respect of cost of 
chiselling through boulders and obstructions and in 
grout curtains in respect of spacing of grout holes, 
number of grout rows and grout consumption. The 
construction schedule for coffer dam, river diversions 
and dewatering should also be critically reviewed 
before opting for the positive cutoff trench. 


6 EVALUATION OF CUT-OFF EFFICIENCY 


When there is no hazard of subsurface erosion, cut-off 
efficiency can be judged in terms of the reduction in 
the quantity of seepage. In practice, however, reduction 
of excess hydrostatic pressures in the downstream part 
of the foundation would be an important consideration. 
Therefore cut-off efficiency would best be judged in 
terms of hydraulic gradients obtaining in the 
downstream part of the foundation as well as the head 
loss across the curtain, as compared to the total 
reservoir head. For reliable evaluation of cut-off 
efficiency, it is necessary to examine the downstream 
gradient by installing atleast two lines of piezometers 
downstream of the cut-off and the upstream The 
upstream piezometer line should be placed as close to 
the cut-off as possible while avoiding the risk of 
blockage by grouting. Study of the reservoir level in 
relation to the upstream piezometer would serve to 
isolate the effect of natural blanket or artificial blankets. 
Alongwith a study of seepage gradients across the dam 
and its foundation, groundwater contours before and 
after filling of the dam and during various stages of 
filling should be examined. Reliable interpretation of 
piezometric data and groundwater contours requires 
considerable study as the water surface contours reflect 
the combined effect of seepage flows across the dam 
and general seepage phenomena governed by the 
topographical and geo-hydrological features of the dam 
site. 


(Continued from second cover) 


Certain aspects of under-seepage control measures are also covered by the following standards: 


IS No. 


4999 : 1991 
5050 : 1992 
6066 : 1994 
8826 : 1978 
11293 

(Part 1) : 1985 

(Part 2) : 1993 
11973 : 1986 


14344 : 1996 


Title 


Recommendations for grouting of pervious soils 

Code of practice for design, construction and maintenance of relief wells 
Recommendations for pressure grouting of rock foundations in river valley projects 
Guidelines for design of large earth and rockfill dams 

Guidelines for the design of grout curtains: 

Earth and rockfill dams 

Masonry and concrete dams 

Code of practice for treatment of rock foundations, core and abutment contacts with 
rock, for embankment dams 

Design and construction of diaphragms for under-seepage control — Code of practice 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 08 (0551). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


