IS 7236 : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


IRRA HAF (Reaffirmed 2023) 
lt AN lat sa — aae 
(Ye FRITT) 


Indian Standard 
COFFEE AND COFFEE PRODUCTS — VOCABULARY 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 65.120 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 3 


Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee, FAD 06 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Stimulant Foods Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Division Council. 


This standard was formulated in order to achieve uniformity in the use of terms and their precise interpretation, 
especially in trade, both at the national and international levels. The terms in this glossary have been classified 
under three categories, namely, coffee, green coffee and process descriptions. 


This standard was first published in 1974. In this revision, the terminology has been aligned with the ISO Standard 
on the subject, ISO 3509 : 2005 ‘Coffee and coffee products — Vocabulary’. At the same time certain varieties of 
coffee which are used in India have been included and certain terms have been modified to make them relevant 
in the Indian context. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 7236 : 2013 


Indian Standard 
COFFEE AND COFFEE PRODUCTS — VOCABULARY 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard defines the most commonly used terms 
relating to coffee and its products. 


2 GENERAL TERMS FOR COFFEE 


2.1 Coffee 


Fruits and seeds of plants of the genus Coffea, usually 
of the cultivated species and the products from these 
fruits and seeds, in different stages of processing and 
use, intended for human consumption. 


NOTE — This term applies to products such as cherry coffee, 
parchment coffee, green coffee, polished coffee, decaffeinated 
coffee, roasted coffee as beans or ground, coffee extract, instant 
coffee and coffee brew. 


2.2 Normal Coffee 


Homogeneous lot of coffee seeds, excluding the six 
categories of materials defined as ‘defects’, namely: 


a) Foreign materials of non-coffee origin; 
b) Foreign materials of non-bean origin; 
c) Irregularly formed beans; 

d) Beans of irregular visual appearance; 
e) Insect damaged beans; and 

f) Off-taste coffees. 


NOTE — This definition of a sound coffee was 
developed with the ultimate goal of producing a coffee 
beverage cup that meets with consumers’ satisfaction 
and is in agreement with good trade practice. 


2.2.1 Arabica Coffee 


Coffee of the botanical species Coffea arabica L. 


NOTE — For example, varieties of arabica coffees are: 


a) Bourbon — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L., traditional varieties in East Africa and 
Brazil; 

b) Typica — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea arabica 
L., selected varieties in Indonesia and mainly cultivated 
varieties in Central and South America [also called 
Arabica (Brazil), Blue Mountain (Jamaica)]; 

c) Mundo Novo — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L., derived from a cross between Bourbon and 
Typica; 

d) Mokka — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L., not much cultivated; 

e) Caturra — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L. mutant variety (dwarf) from Bourbon; 

f) Timor Hybrid — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L. derived from natural inter-specific 


hybridization between C. canephora and C. arabica, 
found in East Timor; 

g) Catimor — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L., derived from cross between Caturra and 
Timor Hybrid; 

h) Catuai — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L., resulting from cross between Mundo Novo 
and Caturra, selected in Brazil; 

j) Icatu — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea arabica 
L., derived from hybridization with C. canephora and 
backcross to C. arabica; 

k) Colombia — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L., Catimor type selected in Colombia; 

m) CR95 — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea arabica 
L, Catimor type selected in Costa Rica; 

n) Ruiru II — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
arabica L., resulting from cross between C. arabica 
and Catimor (CBD resistant coffee); 

p) 5.795 (Sln.3) — A hybrid derived from the cross 
between a natural hybrid of C. arabica and C.liberica 
and Kents variety; 

q) Devamachy hybrids (SIn.5A and Sln.5B) — Coffee of 
the botanical species Coffea arabica L. derived from a 
cross between a spontaneous hybrid of C. arabica and 
C. canephora and Rume Sudan (SIn.5A) and Doobla 
hybrid (SIn.5B) respectively; 

r) Sln.6. — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea arabica 
L. derived from a cross between robusta cv.S.274 and 
arabica selection Kents through back cross breeding; 
and 

s) Sin. 9 — Coffee of the botanical species of Coffea 
arabica L. derived from a cross of a natural hybrid from 
Timor and Ethiopian arabica Tafarikela. 


2.2.2 Robusta Coffee 


Coffee of the botanical species Coffea canephora Pierre 
ex A. Froehner, with some varieties and cultivars of 
these species. 


NOTES 
1 For example, varieties of Robusta coffees are: 

a) S. 274 (Sin.1R) — Coffee of the botanical species Coffea 
canephora Pierre ex Froehner selected for high yield 
and bold beans. 

b) CXR — Coffee of botanical species Coffea canephora 
Pierre ex Froehner robusta variety derived from an 
interspecific cross involving C. congensis and 
C.canephora 

2 Conillon is coffee of the botanical species Coffea canephora 
Pierre ex A. Froehner, Kouillou or Kouilou variety, cultivated 
in Brazil and Madagascar. 


2.2.3 Liberica Coffee 


Coffee of the botanical species Coffea liberica Hiern. 


NOTE — The volume of international transactions for this 
coffee is not significant. 


IS 7236 : 2013 


2.2.4 Excelsa Coffee 


Coffee of the botanical species Coffea dewevrei De 
Wild and Durand var. excelsa Chevalier. 


NOTE — The volume of international transactions for this 
coffee is not significant. 


2.2.5 Arabusta Coffee 


Hybrid interspecific coffee Coffea arabica x Coffea 
canephora Capot and Ake Assi. 


2.2.6 Monsooned Malabar Coffee 


It is prepared from both whole Arabica and Robusta 
cherries by monsooning in the Malabar region of Indian 
peninsula. 


3 COFFEE-RELATED MATERIALS 


3.1 Coffee Berries 


Fruits on the Coffea plants. 


3.2 Cherry Coffee 


Aggregate of dried cherries (fruits) of Coffea plants 
after harvesting. 


3.3 Husk Coffee/Coffee in Pod 
Dried cherry coffee. 


3.4 Parchment Coffee/Coffee in Parchment 


Coffee beans wrapped in the endocarp (parchment). 


3.5 Green Coffee/Raw Coffee/Coffee Beans 
Dried coffee beans without endocarp. 


NOTE — So-called green coffee is not necessarily green in 
colour. 


3.6 Wet-Processed Coffee 


Green coffee prepared by wet processing of the fruit 
(see 8.3). 


3.6.1 Washed Coffee 
Wet processed coffee where the mucilage is removed. 
3.6.2 Semi-Washed Coffee 


Wet processed coffee where the mucilage remains 
adherent to the dried parchment. 


3.7 Mild Coffee 
Washed arabica coffee 


3.8 Dry-Processed Coffee 


Green coffee prepared by dry processing of the fruit 
(see 8.2). 


NOTE — The term ‘natural coffee’ is also used for this product. 


3.9 Polished Coffee 


Green coffee from which the silver skin has been 
removed by a mechanical operation to give a gloss and 
a better appearance. 


3.10 Washed-and-Cleaned Coffee 


Coffee beans prepared by wet processing and silverskin 
is removed by mechanical means after drying. 


3.11 Triage Residue/Screenings 


Foreign matter, other impurities originating in the 
cherry and defective beans separated by sorting. 


3.12 Roasted Coffee 


Product obtained by roasting green coffee. 


3.13 Ground Coffee/R&G Coffee 


Product obtained by grinding roasted coffee. 


3.14 Coffee Extract 


Product obtained exclusively from roasted coffee by 
physical methods, using water as the only carrying 
agent that is not derived from coffee. 


3.15 Instant Coffee/Soluble Coffee/Dried Coffee 
Extract 


Dried, water-soluble product, obtained exclusively from 
roasted coffee by physical methods using water as the 
only carrying agent that is not derived from coffee. 


3.15.1 Spray-Dried Instant Coffee 


Instant coffee obtained by a process in which the coffee 
extract in the liquid state is sprayed into a hot atmosphere 
to form dried particles by evaporation of the water. 


3.15.2 Agglomerated Instant Coffee 


Instant coffee obtained by a process in which the spray- 
dried particles of instant coffee are fused together to 
form larger particles. 


3.15.3 Freeze-Dried Instant Coffee/Freeze-Dried 
Coffee Extract/Freeze-Dried Coffee/Freeze-Dried 
Soluble Coffee 


Instant coffee obtained by a process in which the 
product in the liquid state is frozen and the ice is 
removed by sublimation. 


3.16 Decaffeinated Coffee 


Coffee from which caffeine has been removed by 
extraction. 


3.17 Coffee Brew 


Beverage obtained either by treatment of ground 


roasted coffee with water, or by the addition of water 
to a coffee extract or an instant coffee. 


4 PARTS OF THE COFFEE FRUIT (UNDRIED) 


4.1 Coffee Cherry 


Fresh, complete fruit of the coffee tree. 


4.2 Pulp 


Part of the coffee cherry composed of the external 
exocarp and most of the internal mesocarp 
(mucilaginous tissue). 


NOTE — Pulp is eliminated during the pulping and 
fermentation processes (see 8.3.1). 


4.3 Parchment 


Endocarp of the coffee fruit. 


4.4 Bean/Fresh Bean 
Endosperm (seed) of the coffee fruit. 


NOTE — There are generally two beans per fruit. 


5 PARTS OF THE COFFEE FRUIT (DRIED) 


5.1 Dried Coffee Cherry/Coco 


Dried fruit of the coffee tree, comprising its external 
envelopes and one or more beans. 


5.2 Husk/Dried Cherry Pulp 


Assembled external envelopes (pericarp) of the dried 
coffee fruit. 


5.3 Bean in Parchment 


Coffee bean entirely or partially enclosed in its 
parchment (endocarp). 


5.4 Hull/Dried Parchment 
Dried endocarp of the coffee fruit. 


5.5 Silverskin/Dried Testa/Dried Seed Perisperm 
Coat of the coffee bean. 

NOTE — It has generally a silvery or coppery appearance. 
5.6 Coffee Bean 


Commercial term designating the dried seed of the 
coffee plant. 


6 GREEN COFFEE 
6.1 Geometrical Characteristics 


6.1.1 Bean Diameter 


Diameter of the smallest circular hole through which 
the coffee bean can pass. 


IS 7236 : 2013 


NOTES 


1 It applies usually to holes in the sieves used for bean size 
classification. 


2 Specific definitions may apply for the classification of 
peaberry beans (see 6.1.3). 


6.1.2 Flat Bean 
Coffee bean with one perceptibly flat face. 
6.1.3 Peaberry Bean/Caracolito 


Coffee bean of nearly ovaloid form, resulting from the 
development of a single seed in the fruit. 


6.1.4 Elephant Bean/Elephant 


Assembly of beans (usually two, sometimes more) 
resulting from false polyembryony (see 6.4.3). 


6.2 Foreign Matter 
6.2.1 Foreign Matter 


Mineral, animal or vegetal matter not originating in 
the coffee cherry. 


6.2.2 Stone 

Stone of any size. 

6.2.3 Stick 

Twig of any size. 

6.2.4 Clod 

Granulated lump of aggregated soil particles. 
6.2.5 Metallic Matter 


Metallic particles of any size. 


NOTE — These can be particles found after drying the coffee 
in the drying area and/or after degradation of industrial 
equipment in contact with the coffee. 


6.2.6 Animal Matter 


Particles of any size comprising impurities of animal 
origin, such as dead insects, fragments or remains of 
insects, faeces and urine of animals. 


NOTE — These can be particles found after drying the coffee 
in the drying area. 


6.2.7 Other Foreign Matter 


Particles of any size not originating from the coffee 
process. 


Examples: Cigarette stumps, plastic particles, bag 
particles, strings, glass, mineral particles and other 
types of bean such as corn, wheat, etc. 


6.3 Defects Originating from the Coffee Fruit 
6.3.1 Dried Cherry 


Dried fruit (pod) of the coffee tree, comprising its 
external envelopes and one or more beans. 


IS 7236 : 2013 


6.3.2 Husk Fragment 


Fragment of the dried external envelope of the cherry 
(pericarp). 


6.3.3 Bean in Parchment 


Coffee bean entirely or partially enclosed in its 
parchment (endocarp). 


6.3.4 Piece of Parchment 


Fragment of the dried parchment (endocarp). 


6.4 Irregularly Formed Beans 
6.4.1 Malformed Bean 


Coffee bean whose abnormal shape makes it clearly 
distinguishable. 


6.4.2 Shell Bean/Shell 


Malformed bean whose abnormally shaped shell, 
presenting a cavity, makes it clearly distinguishable. 


NOTE — Shell beans are usually found with ear beans 
(see 6.4.3). Both originate from the splitting of an elephant 
bean (see 6.1.4). 


6.4.3 Ear Bean/Shell Core 


Malformed bean whose peculiar crumpled abnormal 
shape makes it clearly distinguishable. 


NOTE — Ear beans are usually found with shell beans 
(see 6.4.2). Both originate from the splitting of an elephant 
bean (see 6.1.4). 


6.4.4 Bean Fragment 
Fragment of a coffee bean, of volume less than half a bean. 
6.4.5 Broken Bean 


Fragment of a coffee bean, of volume equal to or larger 
than half a bean. 


6.4.6 Pulper-Nipped Bean/Pulper-Cut Bean 


Wet-processed coffee bean that has been cut or bruised 
during pulping, often with brown or blackish marks. 


6.4.7 Insect-Damaged Bean 


Coffee bean damaged internally or externally by insect 
attack. 


NOTE — The term ‘fève scolytée’ or ‘broca’ is used in French 
for an insect-damaged bean when the attack is due to 
Hypothenemus hampei Ferr. 


6.4.8 Insect-Infested Bean 


Coffee bean harbouring one or more insects at any stage 
of development. 


6.4.9 Live-Insect-Infested Bean 


Coffee bean harbouring one or more live insects at any 
stage of development. 


6.4.10 Dead-Insect-Infested Bean 


Coffee bean containing one or more dead insects or 
insect fragments. 


6.5 Beans of Irregular Visual Appearance 
6.5.1 Black Bean 


Coffee bean of which more than one-half of the external 
surface and interior is black (endosperm). 


6.5.2 Partly Black Bean 


Coffee bean of which half or less than one-half of the 
external surface and interior is black (endosperm). 


NOTE — The term ‘semi-black bean’ is often used. 


6.5.3 Black-Green Bean 


Unripe coffee bean, often with a wrinkled surface, with 
a dark green almost black colour and a glossy 
silverskin. 


6.5.4 Immature Bean/Guaker Bean 


Unripe coffee bean, often with a wrinkled surface. 


NOTES 


1 Such beans have a greenish or metallic green silverskin 
colour. Cell walls and internal structure are not fully developed. 


2 After roasting, immature beans are of a lighter brown colour 
than normal mature beans. 


6.5.5 Brown Bean/Ardido 


Coffee bean having a range of colours, such as very 
light reddish brown, brown-black, yellowish green to 
dark reddish brown and a dark brown internal colour 
(endosperm). 


NOTES 


1 When roasted and infused, such beans produce an unpleasant 
sour taste (stinker). 


2 Such beans are not to be confused with the foxy silverskin 
beans (see 6.5.6), which have a normal green internal colour 
revealed by gentle scratching of the surface, and which produce 
no off-flavour in the cup. 


6.5.6 Foxy Silverskin Bean/Melado 


Coffee bean with a coloured silverskin (perisperm), 
ranging from yellowish pink to dark reddish brown. 


NOTES 


1 After removal of the silverskin, no unusual shade remains on 
the naked bean. 


2 Such beans are not to be confused with brown beans 
(see 6.5.5). 


6.5.7 Dark Brown Bean 


Coffee bean with a wrinkled appearance and a complete 
dark brown colour, due to attack by Antestia bugs or 
blight on the cherry whilst immature. 


NOTE — This defect can also be caused by over-ripe berries 
and faulty pulping. 


6.5.8 Waxy Bean 


Coffee bean with translucent waxy appearance, usually 
ranging in colour from yellowish green to dark reddish 
brown. 


NOTE — The cell and surface have a decayed fibrous 
appearance. 


6.5.9 Amber Bean 


Coffee bean with yellow amber colour, usually 
semi-transparent, due to a nutrient deficiency in the soil. 


6.5.10 White Bean 


Coffee bean with a whitish colour, ranging from pale 
green to light ivory, sometimes with a variegated pattern. 


NOTE — This defect can also be caused by rewetting after 
drying. 


6.5.11 Blotchy Bean/Spotted Bean 


Coffee bean showing irregular greenish, whitish or 
sometimes yellow patches. 


6.5.12 Withered Bean 
Coffee bean that is wrinkled and light in mass. 
6.5.13 Spongy Bean 


Coffee bean of consistency analogous to that of cork 
and generally whitish in colour. 


NOTE — The tissues may be indented by pressure of the 
fingernail. 


6.5.14 White Low-Density Bean/Floater Bean 


Coffee bean that is white in colour and very light in 
mass, with a density well below that of a healthy bean. 


6.5.15 Mouldy Bean 


Coffee bean showing mould growth or evidence of 
attack by mould visible to the naked eye. 


6.6 Off-Taste Coffees 
6.6.1 Sour Bean/Fermented Bean 


Coffee bean deteriorated by excess fermentation, with 
a range of colours from light brown to dark brown 
internally (endosperm) and a waxy aspect, producing 
a sour taste when roasted and infused. 


6.6.2 Stinker Bean 


Coffee bean giving off a very unpleasant odour on 
being freshly cut and giving a very unpleasant flavour 
in the cup, like fermented, sour or rotten fish. 

NOTE — The bean may be light brown or brownish, or have 


occasionally a waxy appearance, or even present a normal 
appearance. 


6.6.3 Dirty Bean/Untidy Bean 


Coffee bean imparting an unpleasant musty, foul, dirty, 


IS 7236 : 2013 


earthy, woody, Rioy, phenolic or jute-bag-like flavour 
to the cup. 


7 ROASTED COFFEE 


7.1 Carbonized Bean 


Blackish roasted coffee bean, of texture analogous to 
that of charcoal, easily crushed into fine particles by 
finger pressure. 


7.2 Blotchy Bean/Spotted Bean 


Roasted coffee bean showing irregular colour patches. 


7.3 Pale Bean 


Roasted coffee bean having a colour substantially 
lighter than that of the other roasted beans. 


7.4 Vile-Smelling Bean 


Roasted coffee bean that gives off an unpleasant odour, 
usually resulting from a stinker bean (see 6.6.2) or sour 
bean (see 6.6.1). 


8 PROCESSES 


8.1 Selection 


Technological operation intended to eliminate foreign 
matter (for example stones, twigs, leaves) and to sort 
coffee cherries according to size, density and degree 
of maturity. 


8.2 Dry Process 


Treatment of coffee cherries consisting in drying them, 
either under sunlight or in drying machines, to give 
husk coffee (see 3.3). 


NOTE — This is usually followed by mechanical removal of the 
dried pericarp (husk) to produce ‘natural’ green coffee (see 3.8). 


8.2.1 Drying of Cherry Coffee 


Technological operation intended to reduce the 
moisture content of the coffee cherries in order to allow 
their dehusking and good keeping. 


8.2.2 Dehusking 


Mechanical removal of the husks (pericarp) from dry 
coffee cherries. 


8.3 Wet Process 


Treatment of coffee cherries consisting of the 
mechanical removal of the exocarp (pulp) in the 
presence of water, alternatively followed by either 
removal of the mucilage (mesocarp) by fermentation 
or other methods, followed by washing to give 
parchment coffee, or direct drying of the pulped beans 
within their mucilaginous parchment, followed by 
hulling to produce “‘semi-washed’ green coffee. 


IS 7236 : 2013 


NOTE — Removal of the mucilage is usually followed by 
drying and hulling to produce ‘washed green coffee’ (see 3.6). 


8.3.1 Pulping 


Technological operation used in the wet process to 
remove the pulp (exocarp) and as much as possible of 
the mucilage (mesocarp) by mechanical means. 


NOTE — A portion of the mucilaginous mesocarp usually 
remains adhering to the parchment (endocarp). 


8.3.2 Fermentation Process 


Treatment intended to digest the mucilaginous 
mesocarp adhering to the parchment of the pulped 
coffee, allowing its elimination by washing. 


NOTE — The fermentation process can be replaced by a 
mechanical demucilaging system to remove the mucilage by 
friction. 


8.3.3 Washing 


Technological operation intended to remove by water 
all traces of the mucilaginous mesocarp from the 
surface of the parchment. 


8.3.4 Drying of Parchment Coffee 


Technological operation intended to reduce the 
moisture content of parchment coffee to a level that 
allows hulling under satisfactory technical conditions 
and that will not be detrimental to further storage of 
the coffee. 


8.3.5 Hulling 


Removal of the dried endocarp of parchment coffee to 
produce green coffee. 


8.4 Polishing 


Technological operation to remove the residual 
silverskin (perisperm) from green coffee by purely 
mechanical means. 


NOTE — Polishing can be executed after rewetting the green 
coffee. 


8.5 Sorting 


Technological operation intended to remove foreign 
matter, fragments of coffee and defective beans from 
green coffee. 


8.6 Roasting 


Heat treatment that produces fundamental chemical 
and physical changes in the structure and composition 
of green coffee, bringing about darkening of the beans 
and the development of the characteristic flavour of 
roasted coffee. 


8.7 Grinding 


Mechanical operation intended to produce 
fragmentation of roasted coffee beans, resulting in 
ground coffee. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 6 (2221). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.-T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


