( Reaffirmed 2001 )

IS : 11793- 1986

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN OF FLOAT DRIVEN HOISTING MECHANISM FOR AUTOMATIC GATED CONTROL
Hydraulic Gate's and Valves Sectional Committee, BDC 56 Chairman
Y. ADIUA~~AYA~A SAS~RI 26 Park Area, Karol Bagh, New Delhi
SHRI

Represeniing Irrigation Department. Nangal Workshops, Government of Punjab, Nangal Township SIIRI BALWA~~ SINOH ( Alternafe ) SHRI G. S. ANNIG~RI Tungbhadra Steel Products Ltd, P. 0. Tungbhadra Dam Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar SHI~IDHARMI~II~RCIIARA~ Pradesh, Lucknow Irrigation Works, Government of Punjab, CIIIEP ENGINEZ Chandigarh Dr~i CroR ( M & E ) ( Alternate ) SHRt R. C. CHUPRA Texmaco Ltd, Calcutta SHIU R. BHATT,I~HARYA ( Alternate ) &RI H. C. DWNGKA Haryana State Minor Irrigations ( Tubewells ) Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh SH!<IR. S. CHAUHAN ( Alternate ) DIRFCTOK Central Water & Power Research Station, Pune SHRI A. V. GOPALAKRISAI\~A ( Alternate ) Central Water Commission, New Delhi DIRWTCIR ( GA.I~S 8.1D~s!ars 1 ) SHKI C. L. VERMA ( Alternate ) Beas Project, Talwara BBMB, Chandigarh &RI K. K. JULKA SHRI V. P. KAUSHAL( Alrernare ) Triveni Structurals Ltd, Naini Srm K. V. S. MURTHY SHRI M. K. V. SARhiA ( Allernnfe ) Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad SHRI RAJ KUMAI~ Sun: N. Y. NAKAsrMtr.AN ( Afrernarc ) Public Works Department, Government of SHRI P. RAMAKRISHNAK Tamil Nadu. Madras SI~RI P. ARUN WHALAM ( Alternate )
SHRI D.

Members S. AHUJA

( Continued on page 2 ) Copyright 1987 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS This publicatton is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:11793-

1986

( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members
SHRI S. K. SADHU

Representing Jessop & Co Ltd, Calcutta Irrigation & Power Department, Government of Maharashtra, Nasik Central India Machinery Manufacturing Co Ltd, Bharatpur ( Rajasthan )

SHRI S. NAG ( A~fernate )
SUPERINTENDINO ENGINEERCDO,

NASIK SHRI R. SWARUP

SHRI K. C. BAHETY ( Alternate ) Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board, GovernSHRI M. C. `&WAR1 ment of Himachal Pradesh Natio;;lhyydro-Electric Power Corporation, New SHRI N. VISWANATH~N

SHRI G. S. SHARMA( Alternate ) Director SHRI G. RAMAN, Director ( Civ Engg )

General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member )

Secretary
SHRI HIZMANT KUMAR

Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), ISI

Is : 11793- 1986

Indian

Standard

GUIDELINES FOR DESIGN OF FLOAT DRIVEN HOISTING MECHANISM FOR AUTOMATIC GATED CONTROL
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards

Institution on 30 June 1986, after the draft finalized by the Hydraulic Gates and Valves Sectional Committee had been approved by the C&l Engineering Division Council.

0.2 Hoisting mechanism of gated-control may be driven by a `float' instead of an electric motor. The float possesses twin self-opposing forces of gravity and bouyancy, one due to its weight and the other due to its submergence in water in a float-well. It may be considered as a hydraulic counterweight. With no submergence, full weight of the float acts as a counterweight to operate the gate in one direction. With submergence, upthrust exerted by bouyancy decreases the effective weight of this counterweight ( float ). With increase in submergence, the counterweight effect of the float is decreased to the extent that the gategets operated in the opposite direction. When gravity and bouyancy are balanced, the gate stops in its position and gated opening does not change. Thus operation of the gate is effected by adjusting the water-level in the float-well. It is done by admitting water to or draining water from the float-well through suitable flowcontrol devices such as weirs, orifices or valves. By making operation of these flow-control devices automatic, the gated-control is made automatic. 0.3 An automatic mechanism is a self regulating arrangement to keep the controlled-variable in a balanced equilibrium state within certain predetermined-limits without involving any external manual intervention. It comprises of the following main components: a) Regulator - It provides control-action controlled-variable b) Operator - It provides control-power c) Sensor - It provides control-selection. tween actual and predetermined-limits, 3 to regulate variations in the to operate the regulator. It detects the difference bethat is the deviation of the

IS: 11793-1986 controlled-variable from its predetermined-limits of the balanced state of equilibrium, and selects control to operate the regulator to restore the lost balance by bringing the controlled variable nearer possible to its predetermined limits. 0.4 In case of an automatic gated-control, the regulator is the gate, the operator is the float-driven hoistmg-mechanism and the sensor is the flowcontrol device admitting water to or draining water from the float-well in response to deviation of the controlled-variables from its predeterminedlimits of balanced equilibrium state. 0.5 In case water-level in a hydro-electric channel is to be kept constant within the predetermined-limits, water-level responsive sensors may be a control-weir and a pilot float operated drain valve. When water-level lises in the channel, water is admitted to the float-well through the control-weir to open the gate and thereby lowering the water-level in the channel to its predetermined-limit. When water level falls in the channel, water is drained from the float-well through a pilot-float operated drain valve to close the gate and thereby raising the water-level in the channel to its predeterminedlimit. With water-level in the channel within the predetermined-limits, neither inflow to nor outflow from the float-well takes place and gatedopening remains constant. 0.6 In case it is desired to close a forebay gate automatically in a power channel feeding a hydro-electric power house when a sudden load-tripping takes place and hydraulic turbines are endangered by run-away speed, the sensor may be a solenoid-valve which opens by an electric-signal responsive to load-tripping or run-away speed of the hydraulic turbine and drains water from the float well to close the gate. To obtain quicker gate closure, the solenoid-valve may be used as a pilot to open a larger float-operated drain valve to drain water from the float-well at a higher rate. 0.7 Sometims an additional-drive such as an electric-motor may also be provided to operate the gate when float-drive is under maintenance or out of order or otherwise fails to meet any emergent requirements. Normally, the additional-drive is kept declutched or unoperative and gated-control is done by float-drive only. However, when the additional drive is brought into operation, the gated-control may entirely be done by the additionaldrive alone or may be done together with the float-drike by suitable arrangements of the hoisting mechanism as shown in Fig. 4. 0.8 The description given in 0.2 to 0.7, the float-driven hoisting-mechanism for the automatic gated-control, is adaptable for a wide range of applications with wide range of arrangements due to a variety of types of gates and a variety of hoisting-mechanisms, as also a variety of a automatic flowcontrol devices ( sensors ) which admit water to or drain water from the float-we]]. However, float-well has its limitations also due to practicable 4

IS : 11793- 1986

size of the float-well and in genera!, its hoisting effort may be limited to 20 tonnes unless float-well for larger size of float is conveniently practicable on the given project.

1. SCOPE

1.1 This standard lays down guidelines for design of a float-driven hoistingmechanism for automatic gated-control. 1.2 This standard includes only typical arrangements commonly used, since possible arrangements are numerous due to a variety of types of gates, hoisting-mechanisms, float-drives and automatic flow-control devices ( sensors ). This may be used to admit water to or drain water from the, float-well in response to deviation of the controlled-variable from its predetermined-limits. Design guidelines are therefore limited accordingly ( see Fig. 1 to 11 ).

I

r INTAKE

WELL

ORAIN PIPE,

I ----___--- ____
FLOAT WELL

INLET

\

DRAW PIPE

NOTE -

In the

arrangemsnts shown, float is moving

up, gated-opening

increases

suitable to control water surface at U/S side of the gate. FIG.

1 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FORFLOAT DRIVEN HOISTINGMECHANISM
FOR

AUTOMATIC GATED CONTROL

IS:11793 - 1986

WEIR H4ND

ADJUSTING WHEEL1u

-55
\FLOAT TRASH RACK DRAIN FLOAT REGULATING DRAIN

SILL

PLATE

.ow
DRAIN (MAIN) (RE,GULATED) ORIFICE

Nope 1 - Tn the arrangements shown, float is moving up, gated-opening suitable to control water surface at U/S side of the gate.

increases

N~TR 2 - Float drain has been shown as controlled by an orifice for better sensitivity and stability of operation. Automatic drain valves may be provided.

FIG. 2 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR FLOAT DRIVEN HOISTING MECHANISM ( WITH COUNTERWEIGHI SUPPORTED ON EXTENDED PART OF GATE ARM ) FOR AUTOMATIC GATED CONTROL 1.3 This standard includes typical arrangements to keep water-level constant in a hydro-electric and other locations channel at the upstream or downstream side of the gate. 1.4 This standard includes typical arrangement for emergency closure of a power channel feeding a hydro-electric power-house, to prevent damage to the hydraulic turbine and generators by run-away speed conditions when sudden load-tripping takes place at the power house. 1.5 This standard does not include the structural design of the gate, the hoisting-mechanism and the other components, for which relevant Indian Standards may be referred to. However, outlines of the structural arrangements of certain components, where considered necessary in the interest of functional reliability, are included.

6

IS:11793 - 1986

`$ OF

WATER

INLET AND

TRASHRACK

SLUICE FLOAT

GATE WELL INLET

w
IIRAIN DIPF . ..

WELL?

II I I I

III
GATES

j kJRAII;`blPE SLUICE

HI iND

RAIL

GUIDE

PULLEY *

FIG. 3

FLOAT

DRIVEN HOISTING MECHANISM FOR AUTOMATIC GATBD
CONTROL OF FLOW THROUGH BY PASS CHANNEL

7

PLAN

WORM F

GEAR WATER LEVEL IN ALL FLOAT WELLS

ELECTRO CONTROL \D WEL

MAGNETIC

---_)

TO ALL WELLS

FLOP J

f OF MECHANICAL
LINE SHAFT

HOIST 6 DRUMS

COIJNTERWEI

COUNTERWEIGHT

iBALANCING PIPE

L CONTROL

WELL

FLOAT

WEL;

ELEVATION

LONGITUDINAL

SECTION

NOTE-

Hydraulic function is same as Fig. 3.
I

FIG. 5

FLOAT-DRIVEN HOISTING MECHANISMFOR AUTOMATICGATED CONTROL PROVIDED ACROSS THE MAIN HYDEL CHANKEL

g 8

i", /

GEAR rPlLOT COUNTERWEIGHT

REDUCER

7
MOTOR BRAKE

A.:.

I

I 1
RAOIAL fFFiF%?

CONTROL

PANEL

I

c :: . ;:. . .. ., .(
.-IS b:
.`:

L.

_':
`..
..a

..' :i .
..I

i:

:A. :
`..i. -

NATE - Instead of pilot-float controlled auxiliary hoist. FIG. 6

switches, non-float type swiiches

may be provided for automatic pated control by

SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM OF PILOT-FLOAT CONTROLLEDELECTRICMOTOR DRIVEN AUTOMATIC GATED CONTROL

TO TORQUE SHAFT 7 WEIR ADJUSTING HAND WHEEL

/,

AUXILIARY HOIST

I

COUNTER-

n

w

ClRCUL4R

WEIR

hOSS SCREEN OR TRASHRACK INTAKE TO WEIR WELL

IFLOAT

WELL

DRAIN

\

L FLOAT PEDESTAL
FIG. 7 SCHEMATICDIAGRAM OF AUTOMATIC FLOAT OPERATEDRADIAL GATE ( TORQUETYPE )

s w
I s %?

I

TO PILOT FLOAT

.

TO PILOT FLOAT

FIG. 8 DOUBLE SEAT BALANCED TYPE DRAIN VALVE ( OUTFLOW AT TOP AND BOTTOM )

A-FIG. 9

SECTION

AA

RADIAL TYPE DRAIN VALVE ( OUTFLOW HORIZONTAL )

LEVER LEVER ARM

ARMY INSIDE VALVE

t; G. I. PIPE VALVE BEriD SEAT L RADIAL VALVE LEAF

OUTSIDE VALVE

VALVE FIG. 10

LEAF-/ FIG. I1 RADIAL TYPE DRAIN VALVE ( OUTFLOW AT AN ANGLE )

RADIAL TYPE DRAIN VALVE ( OUTFLOW VERTICAL )

G aCI 5 23

IS:11793-1986 2. MAIN COMPONENTS 2.1 A typical gated-control a) Gate, b) Counterweight, c) Float, d) Float-well and control-piping, e) Control-well and common-header, f) Intake-tank and feed pipe/channel, g) Flow-control/sensors, h) Float-driven hoisting-mechanism, and j) Additional electric-drive. 2.2 Gate 2.2.1 Type of gate may be selected to make best use of the limited hoisting effort available from a float-driven mechanism and also to ensure good reliability of the automatic-operation. The following factors shall be considered: a) Minimum frictional resistance hoisting effort requirement; b) Minimum chances of jamming; c) Minimum variation in its effective weight due to uplift, downpull, bouyancy and silt deposit on its horizontal surfaces during operation or submergence; d) Simplicity in construction and easy accessibility; and at partial gate opening. e) Good hydraulic performance during operation to minimize the arrangement of float-driven hoisting mechanism for automatic may comprise of the following components:

2.2.2 A radial gate satisfies the considerations outlined in 2.2.1 to a sufficient extent and may, therefore, be preferred for an automatic gatedcontrol by float driven hoisting-mechanism. 2.2.3 Gate of any other type may be provided where it is preferred due to other factors. Thus a vertical lift gate may be provided where available pier length is shorter than that required for a radial gate due to its long arms and deep anchorage. A fish belly type gate may be preferred, where

14

IS :11793-

1986

excessive floating debris is to be passed above the top of the gate. However, in such cases, it may be kept in view that vertical lift gate of slide type has excessive frictionai resistance, vertical lift gate of fixed wheel type has greater chances of jamming of its wheel-bearings, and the bearings of a fish belly gate remain submerged and are not easily accessible. Such factors necessitate hoisting effort requirement of greater value than that for a radial gate and therefore the size of float and float-well may be suitably increased to have sufficient reserve capacity to overcome the additional worst possible conditions during the automatic gated-operation. 2.3 Counterweight 2.3.1 The various types of counterweight provided for gated-control are:

a) Balancing Counrerweight - It is provided to balance the effective weight of the gate to the extent that the counterweight gate remains self-closing type. Its provision reduces the hoisting effect requirement and therefore decreases the size of the float and the float-well. b) Hoisting Counterweight - It is provided to overcome the effective weight of the gate completely and to make the counterweighted gate self-opening type. In this case, weight of the float lifts the hoisting counterweight instead of the gate so that with float going down, the hoisting counterweight goes up and the gate goes down. In other words, the gate goes down as float goes down and gate goes up as the float goes up. c) Extended Counterweight - It is provided in case of radial gate with extended portion of gate arms beyond trunnion centre in such a way that it does not obstruct the flow for any gate opening to support the counterweight. Its effect is determined by the principle of levers with fulcrum considered at trunnion centre. d) Suspended Counterweight - It is kept suspended and is connected to the gate or the float through a rope or a chain. 2.3.2 Counterweight may generally be of a steel frame or box containing slabs of cast iron or concrete or any other high density filling material. Suitable provision shall be made to vary the weight of the counterweight for field adjustments to meet the actual requirements. 2.4 Float 2.4.1 As given in 0.2, the float is a hydraulic counterweight possessing twin self-opposing forces of gravity due to its weight and bouyancy due to the upthrust by its submergence in water in a float-well. After its full submergency, its bouyancy is more than its gravity and it floats when left to
15

IS : 11793 - 1986 itself.' In case its bouyancy remains less than its gravity even after full submergence, it does not float when left to itself and such a hydraulic counterweight may be called a displacer instead of a float. 2.4.2 Weight of the float ( or displacer ) may be so provided that under no submergence, it serves as a counterweight to operate the gate in one direction ( open or close) according to the hoisting arrangement provided. Volume of the float ( or displacer ) may be so provided that under its 90 percent submergence, its upthrust ( bouyancy ) reduces the effective weight of the counterweight ( float or displacer ) to the extent that gate gets operated in the opposite direction ( closes or opens respectively ). 2.4.3 Generally, float may be made of a hollow leak-proof steel box with its surfaces protected by water resistant paint conforming to relevant Indian As the float is a very critical item in the automatic functioning Standards. of the gate, design of float shall be such that it is leak-proof to ensure its intended functioning. 2.4.4 If provided with a removable top cover, joints between the top cover and the hollow box may be made water-tight so that water does not enter the hollow space in case of full submergence. 2.4.5 Provision may be made to change its weight to suit the actual operational requirements in the field. 2.4.6 Guide rollers may be provided at all the four top edges of the float or on the float-cover to facilitate easy movement of the float in the floatwell. 2.5 Float-Well and Control Piping 2.5.1 The float shall be installed in the float-well. Area of the float-well may correspond to the area of the float with a little clearance all around to facilitate easy movement of the float in it. Depth of the float-well may be so designed that the top of the float-well shall be above the maximum water level to be controlled and its bottom remains clear of the bottom of the float in its lowermost position to the extent that the silt deposit and direct flow from the control pipe may not interfere with the float travel such that there is effective water pressure at the bottom to ensure floating action. 2.5.2 Quantity of water to be changed in the float-well for gate operation by the float-drive may be determined as: Qr -= Af x Sf where Qr Quantity of water to be changed in the float-well, 16

IS : 11793 - 1986 Ar = Area of the float-well, Sr -= Travel of the float. and

Generally, gate is operated at a speed of 0.3 to 0.6 metre/minute so that Qr may vary from 300 to 600 litres/minute for every square metre area of the float-well when speed of float is the same as that of the gate. Depending on the hoisting arrangement, the speed of float may differ from the speed of the gate and Qp is varied accordingly. 2.53 Size of control-piping at inlet to and outlet from the float-well be determined to suit Qr using principles of hydraulics. Thus Qi == Qr + Q0 for increase and where Qr ;rdw through control-piping control-piping at the inlet at the outlet to the float-well, Q0 = Qf + Qi for decrease of water level in the float-well, of water level in the float-well. may

Q0 = Flow through

of the float-well.

Where Qr and Q0 do not take place simultaneously, the arrangement becomes more sensitive, since Qi and Q0 are not required to exceed Qr as required in the case under simultaneous flow conditions. 2.5.4 Opening for inlet and outlet from the float-well may be located a little above the bottom of the float-well to account for any silt-deposit but these may be located a Iittle beiow the bottom of the float in its lowermost position, to prevent interference of float travel with direct flow through control-piping. Additional dewatering pipe may be provided at the bottom of the float-well to enable complete dewatering of the float-well to facilitate silt-clearance. 2.5.5 Location of the float-well may be so selected that a deeper ffoatwell may be made, keeping its drain outlet level above the maximum level of the available drain to prevent backflow of water from the drain to the float-well. Lesser the value of Qr, quicker is the float-travel for the same flow through the control-piping or, in other words lesser is the flow required through the control-piping for the same float-travel. 2.5.6 Top of float-well may be provided with removable unwanted object may not fall into it which may interfere travel. 17 cover so that any with the float-

IS : 11793 - 1986 2.6 Control-Well and Common-Header

2.6.1 In case, a number of gates are operated simultaneously by floatdrives, all the float-wells may be connected to control-well through a common-header so that water admitted to or drained from the control-well changes water-level in all the connected float-wells simultaneously.

2.6.2 The quantity of water to be admitted to or drained from the controlwell through the flow-control-sensors provided for it, may be determined by the combined requirement of all the float-wells connected to it. 2.6.3 Shut-off valves may be provided between the common-header and the float-wells to enable isolation of any float-well, when required, for maintenance/silt-clearance. 2.7 Intake-Tank
and Feed Pipe/Channel

2.7.1 An intake-tank may be provided to serve as stilling well for installation of flow control sensors and a storage tank to feed water to the control-well through inlet-sensor.

2.7.2 The intake tank may be connected to a hydro-electric channel ( or reservoir ) through grating at its inlet and to prevent entry of trash with a shut-off device for its closure to facilitate

water source such as the a feed pipe/channel having into it and also provided maintenance/silt-clearance.

2.7.3 A drain outlet may be provided at the bottom of the intake tank which may normally be kept closed by a shut-off val\e and opened to facilitate silt-clearance. 2.8 Flow-Control-Sensors
2.8.1 Flow-control-sensors for inflow and outflow are provided for automatic control of water to be admitted to or drained from control-well.

2.8.2 The typical flow-control-sensors a) Crest-level controlled

generally employed are:

inlet-weir/orifice,

b) Pilot-float operated drain valve, and c) Electric-signal controlled solenoid valve. 2.8.2.1 Crest-level controlled inlet-weir/orifice - An inlet-weir may be a rectangular opening in a vertical plane with its crest-level controlled by top edge of an adjustable plate mounted over a steel-frame fixed around the rectangular opening. An inlet-orifice may be a circular opening in a horizontal plane with its crest-level controlled by an adjustable telescopic piping having rubber seals at the telescopic surfaces. Either of these may be
18

lS:11793 - 1986

installed in the intake tank with the crest-level adjusted to the predetermined-limit of water-level to be controlled in the hydro-electric channel (or reservoir) at upstream or downstream side of the gate as required, to which the intake tank feed pipe/channel inlet end is connected making water-level in the intake tank to correspond to the water level being controlled. Where water level in the intake tank rises above the crest level, water is admitted to the control well so that the float moves up. In case, the water level at upstream of the gate is to be controlled, the float moving up operates the hoisting-mechanism to increase gated-opening so that greater discharge through it begins to lower the controlled water-level towards the crest level of the inlet-weir/orifice. In case, the water level at downstream of the gate is to be controlled, the float moving up operates the hoisting-mechanism to decrease gate opening so that lesser discharge through it begins to lower the controlled water-level towards the crest-level of the inlet-weir/orifice. With water level in the intake tank at or below the crest level, water is not admitted to thecontrol well so that the float no longer moves up. Under this condition, the float stops moving or begins moving down according to closure or opening of the drain sensor so that gated-opening keeps unchanged or operated in the reverse direction respectively. 2.8.2.2 Pilot-float operated drain valve - It is a drain sensor with the drain valve installed in out flow control piping and the pilot float installed in the intake tank. If water level in the intake tank is within or above the predetermined-limit, the pilot float keeps the drain valve closed. If water level in the intake tank is below the predetermined-limit, the pilot-float opens the drain valve and the float begins moving down. In case, the water level at the upstream of the gate is to be controlled, the float moving down operates the hoisting-mechanism to decrease gated opening so that lesser discharge through it begins to increase the controlled water level towards In case, the water level at the downstream of the the predetermined-limit. gate is to be controlled, the float moving down operates the hoistingmechanism to increase gated-opening so that greater discharge through it begins to increase the controlled water level towards the predetermined-limit. In either case, the opening of the drain valve raises the controlled water level towards the predetermined-limit by suitable arrangement of the hoisting mechanism operating the gate.
2.8.2.3 Electric-signal controlled by solenoid valve - It is a valve operated by a solenoid which is energized by an electric current controlled by electric signals from a switching device. It may be provided for inlet sensor or drain sensor as per control function. Switching devices may be `No Aote' or static type electrodes or pilot-float operated switching contacts installed in the intake tank, with their operation so adjusted that the solenoid valves serving as inlet sensor and drain sensor are energized and the gate is operated to keep the controlled water level within predeterminedlimits. In case, the gated-control is required to be made automatic for any

19

IS : 11793 - 1986

requirement other than keeping the water level constant, the switching Thus, for emergency closure of the devices may be provided accordingly. gate of a power channel, in the event of load trippi.ng in a hydro-electric power house, the switching device may be selected responsive to the load tripping so as to energize or de-energize, the inlet sensor and the drain sensor as to control the float drain hoisting mechanism for closing the gate. 2.9 Float Driven Hoisting-Mechanism
2.9.1 Float driven hoisting-mechanism may be considered as the mechanical and functional arrangement through which the force of gravity/ bouyancy of the float ( hydraulic counterweight or displacer ) is processed to operate the gate.

2.9.2 Mechanical mission such as:

Arrangements

-

It is provided for force/torque

trans-

a) Directly coupled arrangement, b) Lever arm arrangement, c) Ropes and pulleys arrangement, d) Rope drum and line shaft arrangement, e) Chain-sprockets and

and line shaft arrangement.

Any or a combination of these arrangements may generally be provided keeping in view that it is made as simple as practicable for the given project layout and frictional resistances at the moving surfaces are kept to the minimum. 2.9.3 Functional Arrangements -- It is provided to suit the required gate operation by the float-drive such as: a) Gate lifted by weight qf float and Iowered by bouyancy offoat - It may be termed as arrangement `A'. In this arrangement, weight of the float serves as hoisting counterweight to lift the gate. When its effect is neutralized by upthrust due to the bouyancy of float under its submergence, the gate lowers under its own weight. The following operating condilions may be considered: i) Tg - TbC = 1.5 T, or more, ii) Tr = (Tp where
Tg := Effective torque or tension due to weight of the gate including TtJ + 1.5 T, or more,

blast, if any, added to it; 20

IS : 11793 - 1986 Tbc = Effective

torque

or tension due to the balancing counter-

weight;

-

Tf = Effective torque or tension due to weight of the float; and Tr= Effective torque or tension due to all the frictional resistances
and other forces opposing the gate operation. In case, Tbc= Tg - 1.5 T,, Tfrequirement reduces to 3 T, which indicates that reducing the frictional resistances to the minimum, the size of the float may be greatly reduced.

b)

Gate lowered by weight ofjloat and lifted by bouyancy of float - It may be termed as arrangement `B'. In this arrangement, a separate hoisting-counterweight is provided to lift the gate and weight of Thus float movfloat is applied to lift the hoisting-counterweight. ing down hfts the hoisting-counterweight and gate moves down under its own weight. When the effect of float-weight is neutralized by upthrust due to the bouyancy of float under its submergence, the float moves up, the hoisting counterweight moves down and the gate is lifted up. The following operating conditions may, therefore, be considered:

0

T, = Tbc = 1.5 Tr
Tbc) +

ii) Tiw= (Tgwhere

1.5 Tror more,

- (T,- Tbc) + 1.5 T,or more, iii) Tf -- The The= Effective torque
weight. In case, The= (Tg--Tbc) + 1.5 T,, reqUirement of Tfreduces to 3 Tr which, as in the case of arrangement `A' indicates that reducing the frictional resistance to the minimum, the size of the float may be greatly reduced. 2.10 Additional Drive 2.10.1 An additional drive electrically and/or manually operated shall be provided for the hoisting mechanism to operate the gate when the float drive is under maintenance or out of order, or otherwise fails to meet any emergent requirement. Normally, the additional drive may be declutched or be unoperative, so that the gated control is done by the float drive only. However, additional drive or the float drive can be operated independently or in conjunction with each other for controlling the gate movement. 21 or tension due to the hoisting-counter-

IS:11793 - 1986 2.10.2 The electric control system of the electric-drive may be provided with a selector switch for manual-control selection or automatic control selection, as required. Generally, where automatic-control is provided for electric-drive as well, the hoisting mechanism with mechanical arrangement of a line-shaft type may be provided with electromagnetic clutch of suitable rating to have automatic-control for clutching and declutching of the electric-drive of the hoisting-mechanism.
2.10.3 The electric control-circut may be provided as generally for a mechanical hoist with electric-drive. provided

2.10.4 In case no flote or static electrodes of submerged type (that is having normally closed switching) are provided, gated control is activated when water level lowers below the electrodes. The chances of gated-control getting wrongly activated by break of control-wiring, may be taken care by suitable design of electric-control-circuit. 2.10.5 Where, simultaneous operation of electric-drive together with floatdrive is to be provided, arrangement using ropes and pulleys may be so designed, instead of a line-shaft type requiring electromagnetic-clutch.

22

