Waa HTA IS 8593 (Part 1) : 2017 
Indian Standard 


wie Ud ai A an T 
Atapa AET T Ai 


a 1 da Aga 
( Ye FRAT ) 


Recommendations for Centralised 
Lubrication as Applied to Plant and 
Machinery 


Part 1 Oil Lubrication 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 75.100 


© BIS 2017 


Rds AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM Te, 9 aeee SL Art, ae feeet-110002 
Vesela” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 4 


Lubrication Equipment Sectional Committee, PGD 19 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Lubrication Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Production and General 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1977 by taking assistance from BS 4807 : 1972 ‘Recommendation for centralized 
lubrication as applied to plant and machinery’, issued by the British Standards Institute. The experience gained in 
implementation of this standard has necessitated this revision. 


This standard is only a general guide and do not lay down the specific design requirements. It is, therefore, 
recommended that while designing new system consultation shall take place between user, equipment designer 
and lubricant supplier. 


This standard is published in three parts. The other parts in the series are: 


Part 2 Grease lubrication 
Part 3 Aerosol lubrication 


IS $593 (Part 1) : 2017 


Indian Standard 


RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CENTRALISED 
LUBRICATION AS APPLIED TO PLANT AND 
MACHINERY 
PART 1 OIL LUBRICATION 


(First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) lays down the recommendations for 
centralised oil lubrication system for plant and machinery 
with respect to installation practice, system pipe work and 
ancillary equipment for light and heavy industries. 


2 REFERENCES 


The below mentioned standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this 
standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties 
to agreements based on this standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most recent 
editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


2062 : 2011 Hot rolled medium and high tensile 
structural steel — Specification 
(seventh revision) 
6392 : 1971 Specification for steel pipe flanges 
6630 : 1985 Seamless ferritic alloy steel pipes for 
high temperature steam services (first 
revision) 
9466 : 1980 Viscosity classification for industrial 
liquid lubricants 
11428 Specification for wrought carbon 
steel butt-welding pipe fittings 
(Part 1 : 1985) General 
(Part 2 : 1985) Shapes and dimensions 
(Part 3 : 1985) Tolerances 
3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Centralized Lubrication System 


A system in which two or more lubrication points on a 
machine or group of machines are served with the same 
lubricant from a common source. 


3.2 Total Equivalent Length of Pipe 


The total lengths of straight pipe plus the total of the 
pipe length equivalent of associated fittings in the 
relevant part of the system. This term is used in the 


calculation of pressure drop. 


3.3 Pressure Drop 


The difference in pressure of a medium before and after 
an event, that is, the medium having flowed through a 
length of pipe. 


3.4 Laminar Flow (Stream Line, Viscous of Straight 
Line Flow) 

A type of flow in which there is a continuous steady 
motion of the particles, the motion at a fixed point 
always remaining constant. 

3.5 Turbulent Flow 


A type of fluid flow in which there is unsteady motion 
of the particles, the motion at a fixed point varying in 
no definite manner. 


3.6 Rheological Properties 


Properties relating to rheology, the science of the 
deformation and flow of matter. 


3.6.1 Newtonian Behaviour 


The property of simple liquids by which the rate of shear 
is proportional to the shearing stress. This constant of 
proportion is called the viscosity of the liquid. 


3.6.2 Non-Newtonian Behaviour 

The property assessed by some fluids of having a variable 
relationship between shear stress and rate of shear. 

3.7 Strainer 


A device for removing coarse and impure particles from 
a lubricant. 


3.8 Filter 


A device for fine filtration of a lubricant in order to 
obtain the required degree of cleanliness in the system. 


4 CLASSIFICATION OF OIL LUBRICATION 
SYSTEMS 


4.1 Circulating Oil System 


System in which lubricant medium, after use is collected 
and returned to the reservoir. 


IS 8593 (Part 1) : 2017 


4.1.1 Circulating oil system is a continuous type of system 
and can be either volumetric or proportionate. The 
volumetric systems are applicable to only small capacity 
systems. 


4.2 Total Loss Oil System 


System in which the lubricant once fed to lubrication 


point is not returned to the system. 


4.2.1 Total loss oil systems can be sub-classified into 
intermittent and continuous type of systems. 
Intermittent type of system can be either volumetric or 
proportionate while continuous type of system can be 
proportionate only. 


SECTION 1 CIRCULATING OIL SYSTEM 


5 PUMPS 


5.1 Types and Selection of Pumps 


5.1.1 Lubricating oil is generally supplied to plant and 
machinery by positive displacement rotary pumps. 
Selection of the pump is based on the inherent 
advantages of one type over the other. 


5.1.2 Positive displacement rotary pumps have delivery 
rate less sensitive to discharge pressure. Of the positive 
displacement pumps spur gear, helical gear and screw 
type pumps find the widest use. 


5.1.3 The positive displacement rotary pumps shall have 
in-built safety valve or relief valve which shall be a 
part of the system. 


5.1.4 Capacity of Pumps 


Capacity of lubricating oil pumps shall be selected so 
as to meet overall pressure and flow requirements for 
all bearings, gears and machine elements in the system. 


5.1.5 In centralized oil circulating systems, the system 
is operated at 0.4 MPa to 1 MPa finally delivering the 
oil at 0.07 MPa to 0.15 MPa. For this purpose the 
discharge pressure of the pump shall be as agreed 
between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 


5.2 Mounting of Pumps 


5.2.1 Pumps shall be mounted either inside or outside 
the reservoir and in both cases shall be readily 
accessible for maintenance. 


5.2.2 Pumps and drive mechanisms shall be mounted 
at a place where they are adequately protected from 
damage whilst allowing for adequate operation, 
maintenance and safety requirements. 


5.2.3 Direct coupled pumps shall be securely mounted 
in a manner to ensure alignment under normal operating 
conditions. 


5.2.4 The coupling, rigid or flexible, shall have 
adequate capacity to transmit the power required and 
shall be so fitted that it is easy to replace it. 


5.2.5 The mounting surface provided for the pump and 
motor shall be rigid and able to prevent coupling 
misalignment due to work load and temperature variations. 


5.2.6 All the moving parts shall be adequately guarded. 


5.3 Name Plates of Pumps 
5.3.1 The following information shall be indicated on 
each lubricating pump: 
a) Manufacturer’s name and address; 
b) Manufacturer’s part, model and serial number; 
c) Capacity in terms of litres per min; 
d) Nominal operating, rev/min; 
e) Rated maximum pressure; 
f) Power; and 
g) Direction of rotation of pump. 
5.3.2 The direction of rotation of the pump shall be 
clearly indicated on the pump for installation and 


maintenance purposes. In the case of integral pump and 
motor units, the marking may be done on the motor. 


6 OIL RESERVOIRS 
6.1 Reservoir Capacity 


6.1.1 Reservoir size shall be large enough to allow oil 
to dwell long enough to separate air entrained as foam 
and for water and solid impurities to settle by gravity. 


6.1.1.1 Dwell time for various equipments are as 
follows: 


Equipment Dwell Time 
Min 
Steam turbine 5 to 10 
Gas turbine 5 
Electric motors 5 to 10 
Gear oil systems in steel rolling mills 15 to 40 


motors equipment 
Morgoil oil film systems in steel rolling mills 50 
Paper mill and other industrial machinery 40 to 60 


6.1.2 For the design of reservoir, the following typical 
proportions are recommended and shall normally be 
adopted: 

Width = Height, Length = 2 x width 
6.1.2.1 The reservoir of special shape, such as circular 
reservoir may have different proportions. 


6.1.2.2 Low oil depth permits faster escape of entrained 
air and quicker settlement of water and solids. A long 


tank desirably places the pump suction farther from 
the oil return to give the largest possible oil path. 


6.1.2.3 The normal oil level in the reservoir shall be 
kept at 80 percent of the tank capacity. 


6.1.3 The capacity of the oil reservoir shall be sufficient 
to dissipate excess heat absorbed by the lubricant during 
normal operation of the relevant equipment unless heat 
exchangers are provided. 


6.1.4 Having taken all other design parameters into 
account, the capacity of the fluid reservoir shall be 
sufficient to contain all of the fluid that might be 
returned from the system at any time. 


6.1.5 Capacity of the fluid reservoir shall be sufficient 
to maintain the fluid level within adequate working 
height during the operating cycle. 


6.2 Reservoir bottom shall slope about 1 in 12 from 
the oil entrance towards the drain at the other end. This 
will facilitate removal of solid contaminants and water 
to the purification system. 


6.3 To facilitate return of oil by gravity, reservoir shall 
generally be located at a level below the equipment for 
which oil is fed. In the large systems, oil cellar depth 
may be to the extent of 5 to 8 m below ground level. 
Location of reservoir in cellars isolates it from heat 
and dirt. 


6.4 Material 


6.4.1 The oil reservoirs shall be fabricated by welding 
steel plates preferably conforming to IS 2062. 
Reservoirs may be fabricated from suitable grade of 
stainless steel. 


6.4.2 Thickness of plates is governed by various factors, 
such as size, oil depth stiffener adequacy and internal 
pressure or vacuum and shall have following values: 


Capacity of Thickness of 
Reservoir Plates, Min 
litre mm 
Up to 100 3 
Over 100 and up to 2 000 5 
Over 2 000 and up to 4 500 3 to 6 
Over 4 500 and up to 125 000 6 to 10 


6.5 Baffling 


Internal baffles shall be provided in large tanks to 
lengthen the path of the oil to the pump. Baffles 
promotes better separation of impurities between return 
and suction. 


6.5.1 A simple baffle plate shall consist of a vertical 
plate dividing the reservoir into the two compartments. 
Its height shall be about two-thirds the normal oil level. 
A small opening in the bottom of the baffle plate may 


IS 8593 (Part 1) : 2017 


be kept to equalize oil levels and to provide 
compartment drainage. 


6.6 Pump suction opening shall be placed above tank 
bottom to prevent dirt or water pick-up. Lowest level 
of the oil level shall be well above the suction opening 
so as to prevent sucking of air. In systems which are 
subjected to gross contamination from outside sources, 
floating suction shall be incorporated. These shall be 
arranged to draw oil from approximately 300 mm below 
the oil level in tank. 


6.7 The discharge end of the return pipe shall be placed 
below the normal oil level of the reservoir to minimize 
aeration and shall be sited as far away as possible from 
the suction point of the pump to minimize the risk of 
drawing aerated oil into the system. Return line may 
be terminated over decanting plates, if provided to 
release entrapped air in the oil returning from the 
equipment lubricated. 


6.8 The reservoir shall be designed and constructed to 
prevent entry of foreign matter including water and shall 
be adequately protected against internal corrosion. Such 
protection shall be impervious to the action of lubricant. 


6.9 The reservoir shall have a strainer of adequate size 
to permit viscosity of the lubricant. Precautions shall 
be taken to ensure that the strainer remains in use at all 
times. Strainers shall be removable for cleaning. 


6.10 All the reservoirs shall have means of eliminating 
pressure build-up with filling, if a vent is provided, it 
shall be protected by an air cleaner (air breather) of 
sufficient capacity to maintain approximate 
atmospheric pressure at all times. 


6.11 The reservoirs shall be equipped with a protected 
sight glass or other fluid level indicator. 


6.12 A well protected and accessible means shall be 
provided to drain off water and sludge and to empty 
the reservoir without spillage. The reservoir interior 
shall be designed to facilitate emptying and cleaning 
with adequate means of access. 


7 HEATERS AND COOLERS 
7.1 Heaters 


If necessary heaters shall be provided in the tank for 
heating the oil to designed temperature conditions in order 
to maintain proper flow conditions in the system and to 
aid initial circulation under cold start up conditions. 


7.1.1 If necessary heaters shall be provided in the tank 
for heating the oil either by steam heating or by electric 
heating. Depending on the requirement and available 
facilities, particular heating method shall be chosen. 
7.1.1.1 While selecting the method of heating, 
following points shall be taken into consideration: 


a) Heat transfer is relatively low with viscous oils. 


IS 8593 (Part 1) : 2017 


b) Although oil layer immediately around the 
heater coils will quickly reach the steam 
temperature, it will not attain a temperature 
higher than the steam temperature. 


c) As the oil begins to rise in temperature, it 
becomes less viscous convection currents 
become faster and heat dissipation will 
proceed at a faster rate until equilibrium 
conditions are reached. 


d) When electric heaters are used, excessive 
heating shall be avoided for additive oils. 


NOTE — During equipment breakdown period, as the 
convection currents are hampered, it is possible for higher 
temperature to be built-up around the heaters than that indicated 
at the thermostat. This high localized heating of oil give rise to 
the cracking of oil. 


7.1.2 The oil temperature in the reservoir shall be 
limited to 70°C. In any case the oil temperature shall 
be maintained at least 20°C below the flash point of 
the oil. 


7.1.3 If electric heating is adopted heating intensity 
shall be limited to the values specified below depending 
on the viscosity and the type of the oils: 


ISO Viscosity Grade Maximum Rating of 
Heating Surface 
Mineral Oils Mineral Oils 
without E.P. With E.P. 
Additives Additives 
kW/m? kW/m? 
Up to ISO VG 150 15 11 
ISO VG 200 to 680 11 8 
Over ISO VG 680 8 5 
7.2 Coolers 


7.2.1 Bearing performance, oil life, rate of oil flow, 
ease of purification and desertions are several factors 
which are directly depending on oil temperature. In 
order to maintain correct temperature, coolers are 
arranged in the oil circulation system to remove heat 
from the oil. Heat is picked up from bearings, pumps, 
scales, gears, etc. 


7.2.2 While plate, fin and tube cooling arrangements 
are recommended, circulating systems, plate type heat 
exchangers offer more flexibility. 


8 FILTRATION 


8.1 Three basic forms of removing ‘foreign bodies’ shall 
be generally used in lubrication systems are: 


a) Coarse strainers — Coarse strainers are used 
to prevent large pieces of debris from getting 
into the system. In the larger oil storage tanks, 
coarse strainers shall usually be positioned 


below the filler connection. strainers are 
provided on suction side to protect the pumps. 

b) Magnetic flow strainers — The use of these 
strainers is independent of system design. 
Strainers shall be fitted in the return line to 
the tank and in some cases in supply line, in 
order to remove ferrous particles. These are 
especially used in systems feeding large gear 
boxes. 

c) Line filters — In oil circulation systems a filter 
comprises a major component. Following 
three basic types of filters are recommended. 


1) Manually operated self cleaning 
filters — This type of filter is 
recommended for use on smaller systems. 
The pipe work shall normally be fitted 
with a bypass, so that the filter can be 
removed for maintenance. 

2) Duplex filters — This type of filter allow 
each element to be manually cleaned in 
turn. No bypass is necessary. 

3) Automatic self cleaning filters — This 
type will clean themselves when the 
pressure drop across the element reaches 
a predesigned value. For maintenance 
purposes, a full flow bypass arrangement 
shall be provided. 


9 PRESSURE TANKS 


Pressure tanks may be incorporated in the systems to 
take care of following events. Pressure tanks must be 
designed, manufactured in accordance with codes 
applicable. Material of construction shall be suitable 
grade of carbon steel or stainless steel: 


a) Pressure surges in the system, and 

b) To protect the equipment by supplying oil for 
a certain period, for example, 3 to 4 min in 
the case of power failures or sudden pressure 
drops. 


10 OIL PURIFIERS 


10.1 Purification of oil is needed as it picks up 
contaminants while in circulation. Contaminants which 
are commonly arising in industrial oil circulation 
systems are as follows: 


a) Water which may ingress into the system from 
the equipment being lubricated or occur due 
to condensation, etc. 

b) Dirt, dust and solid contaminants which find 
their way from surrounding atmosphere into 
the system as well as rust and wear products 
from bearings and gears. 

c) Oxidation products which form sludge 


especially, if oil is operating at higher 
temperatures. 


10.2 For purification of the above mentioned 
contaminants arrangements for centrifuging shall be 
provided in the system to recondition the oil by 
separating the water and solid impurities. 


11 PIPES AND FITTINGS 


11.1 Pipes used in the system shall comply with required 
pressure ranges and conforming to IS 6630 or a suitable 
grade of stainless steel. 


11.2 Fittings 


Care shall be taken in the selection of the fittings to be 
used with pipes specified in 11.1 and shall conform to 
IS 11428 (Parts 1 to 3). Butt welding fittings of stainless 
steel to be used with stainless steel pipes. Flanges shall 
be according to IS 6392. 


11.3 Suction Pipe Work 


Suction pipes shall be so designed that the summation 
of the frictional and static suction lift losses is kept 
within the guaranteed lift capability of the selected 
pump. Once the total losses have been established and 
a pipe size elected, the oil velocity shall be checked to 
ensure a laminar flow condition. 


11.3.1 In order to keep pressure losses low, the pipe 
run shall be as short and direct as possible, tight right- 
angle bends and T-pieces being kept to a minimum. 
The use of plain branch T-pieces directly before the 
pump inlet shall, when possible, be avoided, The 
suction pipe bore shall generally be larger than the pump 
inlet connection. 


11.4 Pressure Pipe Work 


Size selection shall have a compromise between 
economy (size and cost) and pressure losses demanding 
adequate bores. Velocity of oil in feed pipe line shall 
be in the range of 1.2 m/s to 3.5 m/s. 


11.5 Return Pipe Work 


The overall available head between the machinery drain 
connections and oil reservoir is the deciding factor in 
designing gravity return oil pipe lines. 


11.5.1 It is recommended that the return pipes are sized 
to run not more than half full so as to encourage the 
escape of entrained air, provide space for any foam 
and to give a margin of safety. 


Flow rate, slope and the greatest viscosity envisaged 
govern their size. A slope of 1 in 40 is a good starting 
point for design. However, where practicable, use shall 
be made of maximum slope which can be obtained. 


IS $593 (Part 1) : 2017 


11.5.2 In return pipe lines the velocity of oil shall be 
maintained in the range of 0.2 m/s to 0.65 m/s. 


11.6 Metering Elements 


Metering elements shall be provided in oil pipes to 
control the feed rate to individual bearings and other 
lubrication points and shall be located at inlets to the 
bearings. 


11.6.1 Selection of metering elements depends on 
upstream and downstream pressure and required flow. 
Orifices are usually circular in shape but other shapes 
may also be adopted depending on advantages that can 
be utilized. 


12 COMPATIBILITY OF EQUIPMENT 


12.1 With Lubricants 


Due to ever increasing use of lubrication dispensing 
equipment, the suitability of lubricant for use in such 
equipment shall also be taken into consideration. 
Further the temperature conditions under which 
lubrication system will be operating shall also be taken 
into account and oil viscosities shall always be related 
to working temperature. 


12.2 Materials 


The material used in the manufacture lubrication system 
shall be compatible with lubricant to be used. In this 
respect following precautions shall be taken: 


a) Galvanized component shall be avoided in 
case of lubricants which react with zinc when 
heated. 

b) Metal combinations giving size to galvanic 
currents shall be avoided. 

c) Special paint shall be used for reservoirs in 
case of certain synthetic lubricants. 

d) Special rubber seals, sealing compounds and 
gaskets shall be used when synthetic lubricants 
are to be dispersed. Appropriate manufacturer 
shall be constituted for guidance in this respect. 


12.3 Environment 


12.3.1 Piping shall not be run in places where local 
high temperatures are likely to be encountered, as this 
may cause the lubricant to deteriorate and result 
eventually in the pipe work becoming blocked. 


12.3.2 Where pipe work comes into contact with other 
lubricants or with process material, care shall be taken 
to ensure that no adverse interaction can occur. For 
example piping on machine tool lubrication system 
frequently comes into contact with cutting oils and 
where these are likely to contain ‘active ‘or uncombined 
sulphur, copper pipe shall not be used. 


IS 8593 (Part 1) : 2017 


13 INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROL 


13.1 If agreed to between the user and the manufacturer 
instruments as required by 13.2, 13.3 and 13.4 shall be 
installed on the system. 


13.2 Different instruments, such as thermometers, 
pressure gauges, level indicators, thermostats, contact 
gauges, pressure switches, flow switches, upstream 
pressure control valves, downstream pressure control 
valves, pressure transmitters, temperature transmitters, 
level, etc, shall be used for indicating the system 
conditions and also for controlling the conditions within 
the required limits. 


13.3 Methods of Warning of System Failure 


Lights and audible alarms shall be installed on the 
system to indicate the failure of the lubrication system. 


13.3.1 Initiation of Warning 


Flow switches, level switches, pressure switches, etc, 
shall be used to initiate the warning of the system 
failure. 


13.3.2 The use of audible alarms is recommended to 
indicate the following: 


a) Lubricant levels in reservoir and tanks; 
b) High and low pressures in system; 

c) Low flow rate; 

d) High and low temperature; and 


e) Special warning requirements, such as the 
pressure drop across filter. 


13.4 Interlocks shall be provided in systems so that 
any variation in the system condition will bring the 
running equipment to a standstill in order to save the 
equipment from severe damages. 


14 INSTALLATION METHODS AND SAFETY 


14.1 Equipment 


14.1.1 All items of functional equipment shall be 
positioned to give adequate and safe access for 
inspection and maintenance. 


14.1.2 Serious consideration shall be given to the fire 
hazard involved with the storage of lubricants. 


14.1.3 Lubrication equipment shall be sited so that to 
lubricate a component, personnel are not required to 
reach past control equipment or moving parts of 
machinery, such as revolving spindles, moving tools, etc. 


14.1.4 Identification numbers and name pates likely 
to be use in obtaining spares and carrying out servicing 
shall not be removed. Alternatively identification 
numbers or the information contained punched or 
embossed on the equipment. 


14.2 Pipe Work 


14.2.1 Large bore main pipe work shall be securely 
clamped at suitable intervals and small bore feeder pipe 
or tube work shall be clipped. 


14.2.2 Suction pipe work connections shall be airtight. 
Pipelines shall be run in protected positions or if this is 
not possible, they shall be adequately guarded. 


14.2.3 Pipes shall not be buried in concrete or cemented 
into position when passing through walls. Trenches 
shall be provided with lifting covers or proper openings 
to facilitate inspection and, if with lifting covers or 
proper openings to facilitate inspection and, if 
necessary, replacement of pipe runs. 


14.2.4 Pipe work for oil circulation systems shall be 
designed so as to effect drainage to a given point for 
maintenance purposes. Means shall be provided to 
present inadvertent drainage of supply or feed lines 
between operations. 


15 COMMISSIONING 


15.1 To ensure the proper commissioning of system, 
following operations shall be carried out: 


a) Cleaning of pipes — Pipes and tubes shall be 
internally cleaned and made free from sale. If 
conditions like corrosive atmosphere exists, 
pipes shall be suitably protected on the 
exterior. For oil circulation systems where 
fabricated pipe work is to be used, pipes shall 
be shot-blasted or pickled before fabrication 
is recommended. After fabrication, the 
prepared pipes shall be pickled or cleaned 
again. 

b) Checking the main items of equipment and 
control devices, 


c) Flushing as required, 

d) Filling of system, 

e) Setting of operating conditions, 
f) Running tests to prove the system, 
g) Checking for leaks, 


h) All filter elements shall be finally cleaned or 
replaced where required before final handling 
over to the purchaser of the system. 


15.2 Flushing of Circulating Oil Systems 
15.2.1 Initial Flushing 


The system shall be thoroughly flushed with appropriate 
grade of flushing oil as recommended by the lubricant 
supplier. The oil used for flushing shall be at a 
temperature of approximately 70 to 80°C and shall be 
of ISO viscosity grade ISO VG 22 or ISO VG 32 (see 


IS 9466) approximately. Time taken for flushing 
depends on the cleanliness level required. 


15.2.1.1 Throughout this period, all bearings and any 
other items included in the system or serving equipment 
that may be damaged shall be temporarily isolated. 


15.2.1.2 Where basket type filters and/or line strainers 
are fitted, the basket and elements shall be removed. 


15.2.1.3 Ferrous pipe work shall be lightly hammered 
to remove internal scale during this initial flushing 
period. 


15.2.1.4 The piping in the gearings, roller table, etc, 
shall be disconnected by means of a by-pass piping 
during the initial flushing baskets period to prevent the 
coarse dirt coming from the delivery piping from 
entering the already cleaned pipes. 


IS 8593 (Part 1) : 2017 


15.2.2 Final Flushing 


This stage of flushing shall continue for at least 24 h or 
until required cleanliness is achieved using only 
International heating and with filter baskets and line 
strainer replaced. After flushing, the system shall be 
completely emptied of flushing oil and reservoir 
drained and thoroughly cleaned internally, Filters and 
the strainers shall be inspected and cleaned as necessary. 


15.2.3 After final flushing bearing and any other items 
previously isolated shall be reconnected. Finally, a 
check shall be made to ascertain that, with the system 
fully operational, the discharge of lubricants to the 
points of applications is as specified. 


15.3 The flushing procedure as specified in 15.2 shall 
not apply to morgoil systems where procedure 
recommended by supplier shall be followed strictly. 


SECTION II TOTAL LOSS OIL SYSTEM 


16 TYPES 


16.1 Two Line (Intermittent Volumetric) System 


Consisting of two supply lines connected to a pumping 
until through which a manually or automatically 
operated reversing valve pressurizes and relieves each 
line in turn Piston type metering valves connected 
across the supply lines are actuated by the difference 
of pressure in the two lines. 


16.2 Single Line Progressive (Intermittent 
Volumetric) System 


Consisting of a single supply line from a pumping unit 
through which a series of piston type metering valves 
are pressure actuated consecutively. 


16.3 Single Line Spring Reset (Intermittent 
Volumetric) System 


Consisting of a single line from a pumping until 
connected to injectors which are operated by line 
pressure whenever the line is pressurized. After each 
operation, the line is relieved of pressure and a spring 
in the injector resets the measuring piston ready for 
next cycle. 


16.4 Single Line Spring Actuated (Intermittent 
Volumetric) System 


Consisting ofa single line from pumping unit supplying 
lubricant under pressure. When the pressure is relieved 
from the line the spring pressure injects lubricant into 
the bearing. 


16.5 Single Line Incorporating Restrictors 
(Continuous or Intermittent Proportionate) System 


Consisting of a single line connected to calibrated or 
adjustable restrictors which become proportionately 


effective when the line is pressurized by a given volume 
of lubricant. 


16.6 Direct Feed (Intermittent Volumetric) 


Consisting of a pumping unit having one or more 
pumping elements from which a separate line is run to 
individual bearings. Sequential or semi continuous feed 
can be obtained by this system. 


17 PIPE SIZING 


17.1 System pipe work shall be such that a lubricant is 
supplied to the lubrication points with sufficient 
injection pressure after overcoming the pressure drop 
due to frictional losses in the pipelines. 


17.2 In the single line (Intermittent volumetric) systems, 
the size of the pipes shall be such that residual pressure 
during the relief phase will permit metering elements 
to reset or inject. 


18 BLEEDING OF TOTAL LOSS OIL SYSTEMS 


18.1 Normally, total loss systems are bled whereas 
circulating oil systems are flushed. 


18.2 Before bleeding operation is started, the pipe work 
shall be cleaned by blowing clean and dry compressed 
air. The pipe work shall then be bled by pumping the 
lubricant under pressure either with the systems pump 
unit or with any other suitable pump. During this 
process all dead points in the system shall be left open 
and connections to bearings, gears, etc, shall be 
disconnected unit clean lubricant comes out. Ensuring 
the flow of clean lubricant from the systems pipe work, 
all the dead points shall be sealed and lines feeding the 
bearings, gears, etc, shall be reconnected. 


18.3 After the system is put in operation, the pipe work 
shall be checked periodically for leaks. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: PGD 19 (1388). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


