Indian Standard
PART I OPERATIONS ( Third Reprint AND

IS:2338( PartI)( Reaffirmed 2000 )

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FINISHING OF WOOD AND WOOD-BASED MATERIALS
WORKMANSHIP

AUGUST

1990 )

UDC

698.12:667.64:69,001.3

@ Copyrightlb67 BUWAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 4

Augusr

1967

.

ISt2338(PartI)-1967

CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FINISHING OF WOOD AND WOOD-BASED MATERIALS
PART I Painting,
ctimlan

OPERATIONS

AND

WORKMANSHIP Committee,

Varnishing

and Allied Finishes Sectional BDC 34

Rsprssenting
Cole Paints & Contracts Blundell National Privaie Ltd, Bombay Eomite Paints Ltd, Bombay Test House, Calcutta

Smu B. SHIRAZI

SHR~ E. K. RANACHANDRAN ( Al&mu~) Engineer-in-Chief's Branch, Army Headquarters SHRI u. R. CIUDDHA Directorate General of Sbpplies & Disposals SHRI P. K. CHAKRAVARTI SHRI G. S. SAVKAR ( Altemate ) Public Works Department, Government of West &SRIK. P. CHATTOP~DWUAYA Bengal DEPUTY DfRECTOR ( CIU3HICALs), Ministry of Railways RESEARCH, DE~IQN~ & STANDARDSORGANIZATION Indian Lac Research Institute ( CSIR ), Ranchi DIRECTOR &RI Y. SANKARANARAYAIUN ( Alterna& ) Institution of Engineers ( India), Calcutta DR V. M. DOKRAS Central Builders Association. New Delhi SHRI HAZARILAL MARWAH Forest Reseafch Institute & -College?, Dehra Dun SHRI N. C. JAIN CenparfeTlding Research Institute ( CSIR ), DR JOSEPH GEOROS SHRI S. M. SmaH ( Al&ma& ) SHRX K. P. MUKHEIUEB SHRl H. N. RAMACHAR SHRI M. N. RAO SHRI T. K. S. MANI ( Al&mate) SHRI C. SSSHACHALAM SHRI P. B. SI-IAH DR R. K. SUD SV;PE;~F ENGINEER, ZND SURVEYOR OF WORKS I SSW III ( Alternate) SHRI Y. S. SWAMY SHRI R. NAGARAJAN, Director ( Civ Engg ) TO Imperial Chemickd Industries ( India) Private Calcutta Director General, IS1 ( &-o&cio Member ) Ltd_ National. Metallmxical Laboratory . I . CSIR 1. I, Jamshedpur Goodlass Nero& Paints Private Ltd, Bombay The Indian Paints Association, Calcutta Cunon & Co, Madras Asian Paints (I) Private Ltd, Bombay Nagrath Paints Private Ltd, Kanpur Central Public Works Department

Secretary SHRI L. RAMACHANDRARAO Deputy Director ( Civ Engg ), IS1

BUREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN-

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC;

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

ISr233S(PartI)-1!367

.

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR FINISHING OF WOOD AND WOOD-BASED MATERIALS
PaRT I OPERATIONS AND WORkMANSHIP

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 28 June 1967, after the draft finalized by the Painting, Varnishing and Allied Finishes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. 0.2 With a view to provide guidance with regard to the finishing work of wood and wood-based materials the Indian Standards Institution is bringing out the Indian Standard code of practice for finishing of wood and woodbased materials ( IS : 2338 ) which is being published in two parts. This part [ IS : 2338 ( Part I )-1967 J -deals with operations and workmanship in finishing of wood and wood-based materials. The second part deals with the ,painting schedules. 0.3 Wood and wood-based materials are finished for decoration and for protection. The finishes used are of two types, namely, opaque and transparent. Opaque `( pigmented ) coatings or paints conceal the grain and colour of the substrate and substitute in their place a surface of an entirely different colour and texture. Transparent finishes, on the other hand, bring out the grain and colour of the substrate, thereby enhancing its inherent beauty. 0.3.1 Protection furnished by wood finishes is mainly a matter of retarding the absorption and subsequent drying out of moisture from the finished surfaces. By retarding the passage of moisture into the wood, the finish minimizes changes `In dimensions *and often in shape. The durable film of a surface finish may also provide protection against spotting and disTo a limited extent colouration caused by dust, gases, grease or handling. it take up abrasion resulting from hard usage. 0.3.2 Finishes as a rule do not protect wood from biological decay. Oviposition by some wood boring insects is prevented by a continuous film of the finish. 0.4 In the formulation of this standard due weightage has been given to international co-ordination among the standards and practices prevailing in different countries in addition to relating it to the practices in the field in this country. This has been met by deriving assistance from the following 2

IS:233S(PartI)-1967 publications: N.Z : S.S.CP 5 Code of practice for painting. Institute. B.S. CP 231 : 1952 Painting. New Zealand Standards

British Standards Institution.

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part I ) deals with operations -and workmanship for the finishing of wood and wood-based materials with the pigmented and clear finishes. 1.1.1 `In this .standard clear finishes, such as nitro-cellulose, polyester, polyurethene, acid catalysed cold cure amino-plast and similar. type of finishes are not covered. 2. TERMINOLOGY 2.1 For made to 2.2 For be made terms relating to paints and allied materials reference may be IS : 1303- 1963t. terms relating to wood and wood-based materials reference may to IS : 707-1958$. INFORMATION

3. NECESSARY

3.1 For the efficient application of finishes on wood and wood-based materials the following information is necessary and shall be furnished to the person in-charge of the work: a) The type of wood and wood-based materials; the nature of their pretteatment, namely, preservation, seasoning, etc; b) The location of the member to give an idea of the extent of exposure to weather; c) The type of finish to be applied, pigmented, clear, ete; d) Information on the nature of previous finish would be desirable for re-decoration; and e) Atmospheric conditions in the locality, namely, temperature, humidity, incidence of sunlight, etc.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). tGlossary of terms relating to paints ( wvised). $Glotsary of terms applicable to timber, plywood and jbinery.

3

IS I 2338 ( Part I ) - 1967 3.2 Necessary drawings and instructions person in-charge of the work. shall also be furnished to the

3.3 Arrangement shall be made for proper exchange of information between those engaged in wood finishing work and those whose work will affect or will be affected. 4. GENERAL CHARACTFJUSTICS WOOD-BASED MATERIALS OF WOOD AND influenced are several panel proThey may

4.1 The decorative and protective value of a finish may be by the nature of the surface on which it is applied. There species of wood and an increasingly large number of wood-based ducts often differing from each other in surface characteristics. be hard, soft, resinous or porous in varying degrees.

4.1.1 Wood is a hygroscopic material and tries to reach a state of equilibrium with the atmosphere in so far as its moisture content is concerned. Changes in moisture content are accompanied by swelling and shrinkage, which is most pronounced across the grain of the wood. Due to moisture movement the summerwoods swell to a greater extent than springwoods and this sets up stress-concentration at the sharply defined junctions between one year's summer growth and the next year's spring and the failure commences about this region. The resulting stresses on the film of finishing material are such as to cause fissures to develop along the grain under adverse circumstances. 4.1.2 Before painting, wood shall be properly seasoned and the moisture content `shall be brought as near as possible to the equilibrium moisture content as given in IS : 287-1960* SO as to.prevent uneven shrinkage during drying which may result in distortion or even in cracks in the paint finish. It is also advisable not to finish excessively dry wqod. 4.1.3 The cellular structure of wood has a strong influence on the absorption of liquid components of finishes. Non-uniform absorption of vehicle by the wood upsets pigment-binder ratio, impairing the appearance and life of the coating. 4.1.4 Plywood, blockboard, hardboard and particle board have greater dimensional stability than solid wood and provide more uniform surface for finishing. 4.1.5 The trade and botanical names of different Indian timbers are given in IS : 399-1963t. The painting characteristics of some of the soft and hardwoods are given in Appendix A.
*Recommendations for maximum permissible moisture coqtent of timber dierent purposes for different climatic zones ( rcviscd ) . tclassification of commercial timbers and their zonal distrihtion ( rmired ). 4 used for

IS : 2338 ( Part I ) -. 1967, 5. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS

,

5.1 Desigri and Detailing of Joinery Timber - Since water can find access through unpainted surface or joints and may encourage decay, in all cases where the wood surface is in contact with surfaces which are likely to get wet, such as brickwork or concrete, one or two priming coats shall be ,applied to wood surfaces before fixing. to minimize absorption of water. Special attention is drawn to the following:

4

Window and door frames, flush with the wall face may allow ingress of moisture between the structural walling and the woodwork, and the paint is then likely to fail unless two prime coats are applied to the surface and allowed to dry before fixing. The rails of gates shall preferably be bevelled to shed water help to prevent it from entering the joints between vertical horizontal members. and and

b) 4

Door posts and sash frames resting on steps or sills are liable to absorb water unless the steps or ~111sare so designed and built as to drain away water. Door posts, sash frames and similar joinery shall be adequately primed all over, taking special care to prime any cut surfaces before fixing. Wherever required, in joinery exposed to weather, tenons and other concealed surfaces shall be primed before assembly. Members shall be assembled while the paint is wet. When surfaces are to be glued, priming/may not be possible and hence the use of waterproof glue is recommended. Any painted beads or stops shall be primed on the underside and fixed in position while the paint is wet. In design, consideration shall always be given to the grain direction and the effects of shrinkage, swelling and warping which may tend to open joints and break the paint film. Wide boards shall be fixed centrally or at one edge only, bearing in mind that movement may be sufficient to rupture the paint film or may cause the board, and with it the paint to split if the movement is unduly restrained in fixing. End grain shall receive special care in painting. of Coating Materials

4

4

5.2

Selection 5.2.1

wood primer shall adhere firmly to the surface, form a sound foundation for further coating and fulfil special functions, such as acting as a sealer on porous wood and hardboard. 5.2.1.2 Wherever the timber has large pores, a preliminary priming with a quick drying varnish of the gold size type conforming to IS : 198-1952* *Specification for gold size varnish.

Prime Coat 5.2.1.1 A suitable

5

IS : 2338 ( Part I ) - 1967 The varnish shall be forced with a brush well into the pores is desirable. so that the pores are completely filled. This filling of the pores shall not be regarded as a substitute for normal priming and shall be followed by a coat of the primer. 5.2.1.3 Pink wood primer ( see IS : 3536 -1966* ) or the mixture of white and red lead primer may be used in painting structures containing a slight excess of moisture as they allow minute quantities of moisture to pass through without disrupting it. 5.2.1.4 Aluminium primer may be used for priming wood having The primer prevents the resin of the wood from knots and resinous matter. bleeding. 5.2.2 Stojbers and Fillers - For deep holes, plastic wood conforming to IS : 423-19617 shall be used. Stopping may be generally confined Shallow indentations shall be made up with the to large holes or cavities. For high class work filling operapaste filler conforming to IS : 426-1961:. tion shall be done over the whole surface by using the filler conforming to IS : 1 lo-1950s. For clear finishes, filler conforming to IS : 345-195211 shall be used. 5.2.3 Undercoat and Finishing Coat Materials - Before considering the application of undercoat and finishing coat it shall be made sure that those If a non-elastic finishing coat is selected are compatible with each other. applied over an elastic primer coat it may lead to cracking or alligatoring of the finishing and the primer coat may become visible through cracks in the finishing coat. Similarly, if the finishing coat contains a strong solvent, it may attack the primer coat and lead to shrivelling ( wrinkling ) of the entire paint structure. It is, therefore, essential to specify and ensure that the various types of paints to be used are compatible with each other, and as Indian Standard specifications on paints allow enough latitude for the manufacturer to adjust his materials, it is advisable to consult the paint manufacturer and obtain his guarantee that the paints purchased not only satisfy the specified requirements but are also compatible with each other. As a general rule, it is safer to use primer and finishing paints made by the same manufacturer. 6. PAINTING NEW WOOD WORK

6.1 Surface Preparation 6.1.1 Wood that is to be painted should be well seasoned and free from discoloured sapwood and from large resinous or loose knots. If the wood is *Specificationfor ready mixed paint, brushing,wood primer, pink. $+&fication for plaatic woodfor joiners filler ( revised). $Specificationfor paste filler for eolourcoats (-fmisrd). &Specification for ready mixed paint, bmsbing, grey filler, for enamels for use over pliRlel3. HSpcciiicadon fat woodfiller,.transparent,liquid. 6

.

IS:2338(PartI)-1967

not properly seasoned, the surface may become uneven on drying and cracks may also develop. Paint applied over discoloured sapwood is liable to become discoloured; resin from knots tends to exude through the paint. Any such unsound portions should, therefore, be cut out and replaced with sound wood. 6.1.2 Nails should be punched well below the surface to provide i firm key for stopping. 6.1.3 Mouldings should be carefully smoothed with abrasive paper and projecting fibres left after machining should be removed. Quirks need particular attention since paint collects on any rough projections and the finished appearance is then marred. 6.1.4 Flat portions should be smoothed off with abrasive paper used across the grain prior to painting and with the grain prior to staining or if the wood is to be left in its natural colour. Woodwork which is to be stained is sometimes smoothed by scraping instead of by glass papering. 6.1.5 Any knots, resinous streaks or bluish sapwood that are not large enough to justify cutting out should be treated with two coats of pure shellac knotting, applied thinly and extended about 25 mm beyond the actual area requiring treatment. Aluminium primer may be used in the place of shellac If the area is small and the wood is not highly resinous, it is knotting. permissible instead of applying two coats of knotting, to apply one coat slightly pigmented with aluminium powder. 6.2 Priming

6.2.1 If there is dirt or any other extraneous material this shall be removed, If the wood work is not already primed, a priming coat shall be applied. In case there is already a primer coat but an unsatisfactory one, it shall be rubbed down to bare .wood and the surface reprimed. Primer shall be applied by brushing.
6.2.2 Care shall be taken to prime not only the surface of the wood that will be visible after fixing but also any surface which will be in contact with materials, such as brickwork or concrete from which the wood may absorb It would be an advantage to give such surfaces a further coat of moisture. primer, before fixing. 6.2.3 Unless specified otherwise, all joinery work which is intended to be painted shall receive at least two piiming coats. It is particularly important that end grains be so treated and, if it is necessary to cut the joinery before fitting, all cut ends shall be painted with two priming coats. 6.3 Stopping and Filling - Stopping and filling should be done after If,the surface is not first primed, the filler or stopping may shrink primirig. and fall away, owing to absorption of some of the binder. 7

ISr2338(PartI)-1967 6.3.1 Stopping is made to the consistency of stiff paste and is used to 6ll holes and cracks, while the function of the filler is to level up slight irregularities of surface. Filler is usually applied with a putty knife and is subsequently rubbed down to a level surface with abrasive paper, pumice stone or other suitable abrasive. For certain work, fillers are mixed to the consistency of thick paint and applied with a brush. 6.3.2 The filler coat should be of an optimum thickness and should be allowed to fully harden and flatten before subsequent coat is applied. Apply as many layers as necessary allowing the coats to harden and flatten between coats. 6.4 Application of Undercoat-Undercoat shall be applied after the surface has been primed, stopped, filled and rubbed down to a smooth surface. Undercoat may be brushed or sprayed. After drying the coat shall be carefully rubbed down and wiped clean before the next coat is applied. 6.3 Finishing -- The application of finishing paint varies according to the Cleanliness is essential and as far as possible the type of paint employed. The finishing application should be carried out in normal dry conditions. coat may be applied either with the brush or sprayed. 7. APPLICATION OF CLEAR FINISHES

7.0 General - Clear finishes for wood are generally used for interior surfaces as their durability when used on external surfaces is less than that of This is mainly because of the destructive action on the pigmented coating. clear finishes by the ultraviolet rays present in the sunlight. The ultraviolet radiation is to a great extent absorbed by the pigments present in the coatings while it may cause considerable damage to clear finishes. 7.1 For the application generally be adopted: a) Filling, b) Staining, c) Sealing, and d) Finishing. 7.2 Filling The primary function'of fillers is to fill the opened cells of the wood This is necessary to prevent the excessive penetration of the finish, that is, subsequently applied and to level off the surface of a porous wood to make a smooth top finish possible.
in the surface layer.

of clear

finishes the following procedure .

shall

*

7.2.1

8

.

IS:2338(PartI)-1967 7.2.2 On hardwood with large to IS : 345-1959* may be used.
7.2.3 For special stain effects open vessels a suitable filler conforming

coloured

fillers shall be used.

7.2.4 A combination of filler and stain may be used for reasons of cost, that is, to eliminate a separate staining operation. However, the result lacks the grain and colour contrast characteristic of wood stains. 7.2.5 On fine-textured woods having minute pores that do not require filling, unfilled drying oils, thin varnishes, lacquer or shellac may be used. 7?2.6 Filler or stain filler shall be heavily applied to the wood surface by hand, using hessian or jute rag across the grain. It may be rubbed After 5 to 10 minutes it shall when still wet to get better penetration. be wiped o#F by hand across the grain followed by a light wipe with the Picking out of corners and carvings may be done with a rag wrapgrain. ped around the end of a sharpened wood dowel. The filled surface shall be dried preferably overnight, and smoothened with abrasive paper. Wipe with a clean soft rag to remove dust and nibs. 7.3

Staining

7.3.1 Staining of wood may be resorted for indoor fittings and even The object of staining wood is to then only for subsequent clear finishes. If skilfully carried out, staining darken it as part of a decorative scheme. may be used with good effect to enhance the natural grain or figuring of the wood. ,
of colour produced by staining will depend not only of the stain but also on the extent to which it is absorbed Stain is readily absorbed by soft porous spring-wood by the surface. but comparatively little by the harder and denser summerwood. Hardwoods, being less absorbent, will present less difficulty; the stain may be applied liberally and allowed to remain until sufficient quantity is absorbed, the excess being then wiped off, if necessary. The effects produced by knots, resinous portions and other markings may be similarly accentuated. The different types of stains as water, spirit and oil stains have different penetrating properties and, therefore, shall be selected to suit the performance required.
on the concentration

7.3.2

The

depth

7.3.2.1 Water stains-Water stains are made with water soluble dyes. They emphasize the grain, especially that of softwoods, since they are readily absorbed by the porous portions but less readily by the denser, more resinous portions. They will raise the grain of the wood thus spoiling the smoothness of the finish if a highly polished effect is required; this difficulty can be overcome by first wetting the surface with water to raise the grain and then, after drying, smoothing it with abrasive paper before staining.
*Specification for wood filler, transparent, liquid.

9

IS:2338(PartI)-1967
Where it is necessary to provide a temporary staining treatment on wood, that is, damp or unseasoned, water stain is preferable to other types of stain. stains are solutions of spirit soluble dyes in industrial methylated spirit. Lie water stains, spirit stains penetrate more into the softer portions of the wood and so accentuate the grain but They will dry very they do not cause the fibres to swell nor raise the grain. quickly and shall be applied quickly and skilfully to avoid patchy effects. If applied to damp wood the dyes in the stains are liable to be thrown out of solution. The surface after staining with spirit stains may be finished in the same way as after treating with water stains. 7.3.2.3 Oil stains - Oil stains may be solutions of oil soluble dyes in linseed oil but usually, to give a wider range of coIours, they consist of insoluble, semi-transparent pigments ground in linseed oil and thinned with turpentine or other solvent. Sometimes wax is added to make the stainless penetrating. Oil stains will give a softer effect than water stains or spirit stains. Generally they may be finished with gloss or flat oil varnish. If applied If wax polished, the stain shall first be given time to dry hard. The applito damp wood they are likely to develop a milky effect or bloom. cation of oil stains and varnish will retard the drying of the wood. Oil stains will not take well on certain resinous or oily woods, such as teak. Sometimes, these woods are pretreated with solvents to remove the greasy matter from the surface prior to oil staining or varnishing. 7.3.3 Wash Coating - If grain raising stains have been employed or if it is desired to reduce to a minimum the risk of stain bleeding into top coats and to prevent.discolouration of wood by absorption of oil and stains from the filler, a thin coat of shellac or lacquer shall be applied on the stained surfaces before sanding. 7.3.4 The stain may also be mixed with varnish to produce the combined effect in one operation; the result will; however, not be as satisfactory as when Alternatively, the ` finishing ' follows as a separate operation after staining. the stain may also be mixed with wax so that after application in one operaHere again the results will not be as satistion the wax may be polished; factory as in a two stage system. 7.3.5
Preparation of Wood for Staining 7.3.5.1 Surface intended for staining shall be kept scrupulously clean and free from greasy finger marks. It shall be prepared by careful smoothing with fine abrasive paper, used in the direction of the graim, scratches across the grain are likely to become stained darker than the rest of the surface and so spoil the finished appearance. If water stain is to be used, the surface of the wood shall be wetted with water to raise the grain and then be allowed to dry before finally smoothing. 7.3.5.2 Small cracks or nail holes imay be stopped with plastic wood, fine plaster of Paris or other suitable stbpplng, if water stain or spirit stain

,

7.3.2.2 S'irit stains -Spirit

10

,

IS:2338(PartI)-1967

is to be used. The stopping shall be rubbed down with fine abrasive paper when hard and touched with a little thinned knotting before staining. Where oil stain is to be used, stopping shall preferably be done after staining, using tinted putty or wood filler. 7.3.5.3 If necessary, softwood may be treated with hot weak size before staining to prevent undue absorption of stain, but an exciss of size should be avoided. To a certain extent the degree'of penetration.of a stain may be controlled by pretreatment of the absorbent surface with a hot weak size of thinned shellac varnish. Size shqll preferably be not used where the stained surfaces are likely to come J&o contact with water, which may smear it. To control the depth of olour, however, diluted stain may be made to soak well into the wood. %Gc here size-is used, the surface shall be allowed to dry thoroughly before aining. In general, flat surfaces shall be treated first and mouldings and ges last, that is, reversing the order / recommended when applying paint, the object being to avoid double staining along the edges. 7.3.6 Ajjdication of Staim 7.3.6.1 Stains may be applied by brushing, and wiping or by spraying. The stain shall be so thinned that.it can be applied, fairly liberally without over-staining. Care shall be taken, especially on absorbent softwoods, to apply the stain evenly and without overlapping. Spirit stains, in partlcular require careful and quick application as they dry very quickly. 7.3.6.2 The stained surface shall be varnished, wax-polished or french polished as required after it has dried. For reasons of economy, the surface shall be sized before varnishing, in which case it is important to allow the Where a more durable finish is required two or size to dry thoroughly. three coats of finishing clear varnish is recommended. 7.4 Sealing i A suitable sealer shall be applied on the filled and sanded surface to prevent absorption by the wood of the succeeding coats of finish and to seal stain and filler and thus preclude their, bleeding into the finish coat. 7.4.1 Sealer may be sprayed on taking care not to flood the surface. It is allowed to dry hard. 7.4.2 A stain ( toner ) may be incorporated with the sealer for special colour effects. 7.4.3 When fully dry the surface shall be sanded taking care not to cut through at corners and edges. Dust `shall be blown off and surface wiped with a clean rag. 7.5 Varnishing 7.5.1 Surfaces to be varnished should be prepared to produce a smooth, Previous coats of paint or stain, if any, should be dry, matt surface. \* allowed to dry and be rubbed down lightly, wiped off and allowed to dry. \ 11

IS : 2338 ( Part

I ) - 1967

7.5.1.1 The operation of varnishing calls for careful attention to cleanliness. All dust and dirt should be removed ,f?om the surface to be varnished and also from the neighbourhood. Jf the surfaces are dampened to avoid raising of the dust, they should btz allowed to dry thoroughly Damp atmosphere and draughts should before varnishing is commenced. be avoided. For exterior work, a normal dry day should be chosen. Exposure to extremes of heat or cold or to a damp atmosphere will spoil the work.
7.5.1.2 In handling and applying varnish care should be taken to Brushes and containers should be kept avoid forming froth or air bubbles. scrupulously clean. 7.5.2 A@lication - The varnish should be applied liberally with a brush and spread evenly over a portion of the surface with short light strokes tv avoid frothing. It should be allowed to flow out while the next section is being laid-in. Excess varnish should then be scraped out of the brush and the first section be crossed, recrossed and then laid off lightly. Too much or too little varnish left on the surface will mar the appearance of the finish. If a mistake The varnish, once it has begun to set, should not be retouched. is made, the varnish should be removed and the work started afresh. 7.5.2.1 Where two coats of varnish are specified, the first should be a hard-drying undercoating or flatting varnish; this should be allowed to If dry hard and then be flatted down before applying the finishing coat. two coats are applied, sufficient time should be allowed between coats. 7.5.2.2 When flat varnish is used for finishing, a preparatory coat of hard drying undercoating or flatting varnish should first be applied and It should then be lightly rubbed should be allowed to harden thoroughly. Sections of the work, such as panels, down before the flat varnish is applied. should be cut in clearly, `so as to atioid any overlapping during application, as this is likely td impart some measure of gloss to partially dried areas, worked up in lapping. On larger areas, the flat varnish should be applied rapidly, and the edges of each patch applied should not be allowed to set, bbt should be followed up whilst in free working condition. 8. FRENCH POLISH

8.1 Pure shellac varying from `pale orange to lemon yellow colour, free from resin or dirt should be dissolved in methylated spirit at the rate of ( see IS : 348-1952* ). Suitable 0.15 kg of shellac per litre of spirit pigment should be added to get the required colour. 8.2 Preparation of Surface -All unevenness should be rubbed down to smoothness with sand paper and the surface should be well dusted. Fill up the pores in the wood with a filler made of a paste of whiting in water or methylated spirit ( with a suitable pigment like burnt seinna or umber, *Specification for french polish.

.

12

IS : 2338 ( Part I ) - 1967 if required ) otherwise the french polish will get absorbed and a good gloss will be difficult to obtain. 8.3 Application of Polish - A pad of woollen cloth covered by a fine cloth should be used to apply the polish. The pad should be moistened with polish and rubbed hard on the surface in a series of overlapping circles applying the polish sparingly but uniformly over the entire area to give an even surface. A trace of linseed oil on the face of the pad facilitates this operation. The surface should be allowed to dry and the remaining coats applied in the same way. To finish off, the pad should be covered with a fresh piece of clean fine cloth, slightly damped with methylated spirit and rubbed lightly and quickly with circular motions. The finished surface should have a uniform texture and high gloss. 9. FINISHING OF WOOD-BASED 9.1 Plywood teristics. 9.2 Hard Board 9.2.1 Painting Characteristics - Hard board is made up of fibres which are capable of swelling under the influence of oil paints. Tempered hard board may be varnished or painted; if required. 9.2.2 Treatment--A suitable treatment to prevent swelling under the influence of oil paints is necessary; one such treatment is to use plastic emulsion paint thinned with water, another is shellac varnish as the first coat and when dry rub down with fine grade glass paper and follow with required undercoating, and finishing coats as for solid wood. 9.3 Particle Board -The surface filler and finished as for solid wood. 9.4 Insulation Board -Two applied by spraying. shall be filled with a thin brushable paints shall be MATERIALS

Plywood is similar to solid wood in its finishing charac-

thin coats of water-based

9.5 Wood Treated with Preservative 9.5.1 Painting Characteristics - Wood treated with the commonly used water soluble preservatives may be painted satisfactorily after it is dried. The life of the coating may, in some instances, be slightly less than it would have been on untreated wood, but the loss in durability is not such as to offer any practical objection to the use of treated wood for purposes where preservation against decay is necessary and the appearance of painted wood and protection against weathering are desired. Coal-tar creosote' or other dark oily preservatives tend to bleed through paint unless the treated wood has been exposed to the weather for many months before it is painted. 13

IS : 2338( Part I ) - 1967 9.5.2 `i>en/tnetrt - Fairly satisfactory results may be obtained on creosoted god nit11 rou$~ surfaces ( sawed or weather-beaten surfaces ) by applying c..?lcrior \~;\ter tllirlncd paints, such as case-in paints or resin emulsion paints. 9.5.2.1 Crcosotc-treated wood shall not be painted with ordinary paint as discolouratiou of the latter may result. One or two sealing coats (11` aluminium paint or shellac knotting clear or pigmented with aluminium [~~~lcr shall 1~; applied before it is finished with other paints.
9.5.2.2 Tn the cast of wood treated with other preservatives, such AS copper naphthcuate, chloro$henol and zinc silica fluoride, a high quality aluminium primer is desirable. 9.5.2.3 Alternatively, advice may also be sought of the manufacturers of these prcscrvativcs for iuformation as to the suitable primer that may be applied over these. 10. INSPECTION

10.1 While the finishing is iti progress, inspection shall be made to ascertain that the right type of linishing material is being used, and the number of coats and the sequence of operation are carried out as specified. The points as laid down in 10.1.1 to 10.1.4 shall be specially noted. 10.1.1 As the first signs of failure of paint may not appear until some time after the work has been completed, inspection of work can only be directed towards ascertaining as far as possible that the types of paints and number of coats applied are as specified, and that the standard of work is satisfactory.
be judged

10.1.2 The chief points on which the general quality of paint work should
by visual inspection and are as follows:

4 b) c)

Uniformity Uniform

of finish and colour; complete obscuration of the ground;

Freedom from blemishes ( for example, rums, sags, wrinkling, fat edges, entrained paint skins, dust, bare or starved patches and cracks ) ; from tackiness; from brush marks and ladders; cleanliness and neatness of finish. and

4 Freedom e) Freedom f ) General
responsible:

10.1.3 Should the paint appear faulty during application any defects iu the following properties should be noted and'the matter reported to those

4 b) cl 4

Colour, Consistency, Drying General time, quality or of finish. 14

IS:2334(PartI)-1967
10.1.4 Since it is the final coat of paint which claims attention it is a common error to blame the paint or workmanship for any defects. These are by IIO means the only factors which may influence the final result. In attempting to diagnose a paint failure the following details should be ascertained and taken into consideration: a) Nature, b) Materials c) Climatic d) Technical history and condition used; conditions correctness before, during and after painting; and of work in relation to conditions; of the painted surface;

e) Workmanship. 11. MAINTENANCE 11.1 The principle given in Table 3 of IS : 2338 ( Part II )-1967* shall generally be adopted for maintenance work. All unsound work should be burnt off or otherwise removed and brought forward as for new work. 11.2 The surface should be cleaned and rubbed down with pumice stone or abrasive paper. All holes and cracks should be prepared for stopping by touching them up with primer paint, with undercoat paint; when dry, the stopping should be completed with a suitable filler and the appropriate paint as given in IS : 2338 ( Part II )-1967* should then be applied.

APPENDIX A ( Clause 4.1.5 )
PAINTING CH-ARACTERISTICS OF #TIMBERS A-I. Some of the soft and hard woods $ven in A-l.1 and A-l.2 are resinous or show oily exudation occasionally and hence they require special treatment. In general, hardwoods are porous and require filling. However, some of the hardwoods given in A-l.3 do not require filling as their pores are less than about lCK)-microns in diameter or are filled with gum. A-l.1 The following softwoods are resinous and may exude resin through paint films:
TRADE NAME BOTANICAL

NAME

Chir Cypress Deodar Kail Spruce
*Code of practice for finishing of wood

Piltus roxburghii Sargerlt

Cbpressus towlosn Don C&us ~eo&rn Loudoll
Pinus wallichiana A. H. Jacks Picea stnithiana Boiss

and wood-based materials: Part II SrheduIe5. 15

IS:2338(PartI)-1967 A-l.2 The following Gnrjan Hollong Piney White cedar hardwoods may show oily exudation occasionally:

TRADE NAME

BOTANICALNAME
Dipterocarpus sp. Diptcrocarpus macrocarpus Vesque Kingiodendron pinnatum (Roxb.) Harms. Dysoxylum malabaricum Bcdd.

A-l.3 The following hardwoods do not require filling because their pores arc less than about IOO-microns in diameter or are filled with gum:

TRADENAME
Axlewood Birch Boxwood Gardenia Haidu Red sanders Satinwood Betula sp,

BOTANICALNAME
Anogeissus latifolia wall. Buzus sp. Gardenia sp.. Adina cordiflia Hook. F. Mitragyna parvijXa (Roxb.) Korth. Pterocarpus santalinus Linn. $ Chloroxylon swietenia DC.

16

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

i

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 Telegrams: Manaksanstha Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all Offices )
R8giOn8i

OffiCeS:

Telephone

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 *Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P: Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

331 01 31 I 331 1376 36 24 99

21843 I 3 16 41 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 25 19 ( 41 2916 tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 2 63 63 49 49 67 48 49 55 56 16

Branch Offices:

`Pushpak'. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD 380001 $Peenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore Tumkur Road BANGALORE 560058 Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 PlotNo. 82/83. Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 53/5. Ward No. 29, R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 S-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally Station Road ), HYDERABAD 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005

I 2 (38 138 \ 6

5 36 27 3 31 77 23 1083 6 34 I 6 98 `21 68 / 21 82 `-62305 16 21 16 21 71 32 76 92 04 17

;

Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam TRIVANDRUM 695035 Inspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali, First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, Shankar Naaar Sauare, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engine&s ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005
Street. *Sales Calcutta Office 700072 in Calcutta is al 6 Chowringhre tSales Office Bombay 400007 $Sales Office Bangalore 560002 Approach,

2 5171 5 24 35

P. 0. Princep 27 68 00 Grant Road, 89 66 28

in Bombay is at Novelty Chimbers,

in Bangaloreis at Unity Building, Narasimharaja Reprography Unit, BIS,

Square, 22 36 71

New Delhi,

India

