IS 3612 : 1994
(Reaffirmed 2005)

Indian Standard

CRUSHING AND GRINDING EQUIPMENTCLASSIFICATION AND METHODSFOR b MEASURINGCAPACITY
( First Revision )

UDC

621*925/*926 : 66.012~4

@ BIS 1994

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

September

1994

Price Group2

Chemical

Engineering

Plants and Related

Equipment

Sectional

Committee,

HMD 17

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Engineering Plants and Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. Size reduction is an important unit operation which finds application in almost all fields of industrial activity. A uniform terminology, classification and methods for measuring capacity will be helpful to the trade, user and manufacturer. This standard was first issued in 1966. The various advancements that have taken place over these years and the experience gained by the industry in this sector necessitated the revision of Some of the important changes made in the standard are as follows: this standard. a) b) c) d) Various definitions modified and some added; Ultrafine grinding mills like pin mill, attritor and jet mill included; Method of specifying capacity modified; and Capacity determination of ball, pebble and rod mills included.

In reporting the results of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `RuIes,for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`.

IS 3612: 1994

Indian Standard

CRUSHING AND GRINDING EQUIPMENTCLASSIFICATION AND METHODSFOR MEASURINGCAPACITY ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE 1.1 This Indian Standard covers definition of nomenclature, classification, various terms, sizes and methods of measuring capacity of crushing and grinding equipment. 2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard: IS No. 4&)8\Part 1) :
Title

3.3 Size Reduction Process 3.3.1 Crushing Process of dividing rock by slow compressing it between two hard faces so that it breaks into fragments. 3.3.2 Breaking Process of dividing rock into pieces by application of impact, bending and shear force. 3.3.2.1 Impact breakage Process of breaking of rock by dynamic impact between the rock and the hammer/impact surface. 3.3.2.2 Shear breakage Process of breaking due to shearing between two surfaces. 3.3.3 Grinding Process of reducing the size of and dividing rock by means of mutual frictional contacts between fragments of rock or between fragments of rock and foreign bodies introduced in the process. This includes size reduction by abrasion, shear and impact. 3.4 Classification of Machines 3.4.1 Crusher A machine employing crushing ( see 3.3.1 ) for size reduction in which the product size is governed largely by a specific opening between two surfaces and rock characteristics. 3.4.2 Breaker A machine employing breaking ( see 3.3.2 ) for size reduction in which the product size is governed mainly by the force of the blow and rock characteristics. 3.4.3 Grinder A machine employing grinding ( see 3.3.3 ) for size reduction in which the product size is governed mainly by the quantity of material charged per unit time and rock characteristics. of rock

Specification for test sieves: Part 1 Wire cloth test seives ( third revision ) Specification for test sieves : Part 2 Perforated plate test sieves ( third revision ) Specification for test sieves: Part 3 Method of examination of apertures of test sieves ( third revision )

4:58(gPart 2 ) :

4;O&Part

3):

3 DEFINITION For the purpose of this standard, definitions shall apply. 3.1 Rock A rock is an aggregate of minerals such as natural rock, ore, and may include other similar materials like coke, slag, etc. Rock structure may be of friable, abrasive or sandy nature. 3.1.1 The rock may be classified as hard ( more than 800 kgf/cma ), medium hard ( 300 - 800 kgf/cma ) and soft ( less than 300 kgf/cm* ). The rock may also be classified on the basis of work index and abrasive index. 3.2 Crushability The force require& to break the rock into pieces, by application of a direct, gradually compressive force ( see Annex A increasing, for method of measurement of crushability ). the following

IS 3612 : 1994 3.4.4 Ultrafine Grinder 4.2 Breaker

A machine for reducing finer size rocks ultrafine sizes ( less than 10 microns ). 3.5 Stages in Size-reduction

to

4.2.1 Impact Breaker

Number of stages in size reduction is determined by maximum size of feed, maximum size of product, receiving ability and allowable reduction ratio for particular machine in each stage. 3.5.1 Primary The crushing deployed to break run-of-mine/ excavated rock received directly for first processing. 3.5.2 Secondary/Tertiary
Crushing

A machine of similar form to the hammer mill except, that the outlet is unrestricted, so that breaking is by free impact only and the hammers may be rigidly attached/hinged to the rotor. 4.2.2 Hammer Mill A machine for breaking rock by free and restricted impact. It comprises a rotor carrying number of discs and hammers revolving inside a box-like chamber lined with or without plates or bars in order to obtain predetermined sizes. 4.3 Grinding
4.3.1 Ball Mill Mill

The breaking of rock that has been subjected to primary/secondary breaking in a machine and is to be subjected to further breaking. 3.6 Reduction Ratio The ratio between the 80 percent passing size of feed and the 80 percent passing size of the crushed product. 4 NOMENCLATURE
4.1 Crushers 4.1.1 Jaw Crusher OP MACHINES

A grinding mill which rotates round a horizontal axis and uses balls of steel or other suitable material to reduce the size of charged materials. 4.3.2 Rod Mill A grinding mill which rotates round a horizontal axis and uses rods of steel or other suitable material to reduce the size of charged materials. 4.3.3 Tube Mill A grinding mill which rotates round a horizontal axis and has the shape of a tube of which the length to diameter ratio is greater than two. 4.3.4 Autogenous Mill A grinding mill which rotates round a horizontal axis and uses suitable sizes of charged material with or without steel balls as grinding media to reduce the size of feed material. 4.4 Ultra Fine Grinding'Mills 4.4.1 Pin Mill A grinding mill where a plate with pin rotates, meshed with stationary plate with pins to produce fine particles continuously. 4.4.2 Attritor A mill consisting of a steel vessel filled with steel balls of 5 to 10 mm and material. A central shaft with rods attached the particles to sub-micron size. 4.4.3 Jet Mill A high pressure air jet is used for grinding. Solid particles are introduced into the jet area organiaed such a way that particles are always thrown towards the jet and fine material is continuously separated after classification. 2

A machine for crushing rock mainly by compression betwen two rectangular surfaces or jaws, one of which ( rarely both ) alternately approaches and recedes from the other. 4.1.2 Gyratory Crushers A machine for breaking rock or similar material, mainly by compression between a bell shaped crushing head and a bowl of tapering crossasection within which the head moves with a 7 he head is supported at top gyratory motion. spider and these types of crushers are normally deployed for primary crushing. 4.1.3 Cone Crushers A machine for breaking rock or similar material, mainly by compression between a crushing head which has more flared bell with bottom/intermediate support on spherical bearings and a bowl of tapering cross section within which the crushing head moves with an eccentric motion. These type of crushers are mainly deployed for secondary and subsequent stages of crushing. 4.1.4 Roller Crusher A crushing machine consisting of one or more cylindric rollers revolving on their horizontal axes. The peripheral faces of rollers may be smooth, corrugated or toothed.

IS 3612 : 1994 5 METHOD OF SPECIFYING CAPACITY

stated the capacity of a crusher shall be defined as integrated weight in tonnes per hour of the material passing through discharge opening per unit of time based on average operating conditions, when handling dry friable material of medium hardness having bulk density of l-6 tonnes/m8 and soft material having bulk density of 0.8 tonnes/ms and assuming that 100 percent of feed is larger than discharge opening of crusher with maximum size in feed 80 percent of crusher feed opening ( setting ) which can be reduced to product sizes as specified. 5.1 Jaw, Gyratory and Cone Crushers The capacity shall be expressed in terms of total product of which 80 percent passes through IS Sieve [ see IS 460 ( Part 1,2 and 3 ) : 1985 ] corresponding to operating discharge opening of the crushers.
NOTE - It is recommended that supplier should provide a table of capacities for a specific feed size and a graph of the sieve analysis of the product at various discharge openings.

5.0 Unless otherwise

product of which 80 percent passes through IS Sieve [see TS 460 ( Part 1, 2 and 3 ) : 1985 ] corresponding to operating discharge opening and type of rollers.
NOTE - It is recommended that the supplier should provide a table of capacities for a specific feed size and a graph of the sieve analysis of the product at various discharge openings.

5.3 Grinding Mill, Pulverisers Rod Mill

and Ball/Pebbles/

The capacity shall be expressed in tonnes/day for specific feed and product size of which 80 percent passes through IS Sieve [ see IS 460 ( Part 1, 2 and 3 ) : 1985 ]
NOTE - The manufacturer shall furnish the following informatio,r while defining the capacity of mills: volume a) Ball loading -Percentage pied by the grinding media. of mill occuof volume occupied by the

b) Material loading -Percentage/fraction
of voids available material. between balls

5.2 Roller Crushers The capacity shall be expressed in term of total

volume of mill occuC) Mill loading - Percentage pied by both material and grinding media.

4 Grinding

media size, size distribution

and weight.

ANNEX A ( Clause 3.2 )
METHOD A-l GENERAL OF MEASURING CRUSHABJLITY OF ROCKS mately half of the original

A-1.0 Crushability of the rock is the force required to break the rock into pieces by application of a direct gradually increasing compressive force. A-l.1 Rocks as obtained in nature are always hetrogenous bodies showing weak planes. If the rock chips under pressure, this chipping may be due to any one of several internal zones of weakness which may not necessarily be a stable characteristic of the rock. It is therefore, necessary to ensure that the breakage is not due to an occasional weak spot. In a cnmpletely homogenous body subject to a normal compressive stress the breakage should occur in direction diagonal to the body undergoing the crushing, yielding approximately equal sized pieces, with some fines. Therefore, when the material breaks into sixes smaller than approxi-

size, the indication is that the rock has broken not because of an occasional weak plane, but due to general failure. The breakage should not be taken as to represent a complete failure of the rock against the imposed crushing force, if only chipping occurs. A-l.2 The rock usually has cleavage planes or stratifications, which generally represents weak spots. Rocks, therefore, could show different crushing resistance in different directions. In determining crushing strength, therefore, it is very necessary to determine these variations and take the weakest resistance as the crushing strength of the rock. A-2 PROCEDURE A-2.1 A suitable prepared rock specimen is taken and placed on a platform and pressure is

3

IS 3612 : 1994

applied hydraulically or by any other means capable of gradually increasing the force, with provision made for measuring the compressive force that comes to play on the rock. The gradually application of pressure may be achieved by a hydraulic press with a ram having a surface area of 10 cm* and the dial recording the pressure caIibrated in terms of kgf/cm%. The rock should be prepared so as to present a contact surface both on the platform and to the ram, the area of which should be at least 1.25 times of that of the ram and should fully cover the ram. The pressure is gradually increased until such time that a rupture takes place, nothing down the value

of pressure at the time of rupture. The broken pieces are examined for their sizes. If the broken pieces are smalIer than half the size of the original piece, the pressure at which the rupture took place, reduced to pressure per unit surface area of contact between the rock and the pressure applying ram, is taken as the crushing strength. If the rock chips on the sides and does not break into pieces less than half the original size, the value may be the disregarded and a fresh sample taken for test. In case of rocks showing definite directional stratifications or foliations, the pressure may be applied in different directions representing the direction of stratification and a direction at right angles to it. The maximum value obtained is taken as the crushing strength.

4

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmoious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Addition'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. HMD 17 ( ME Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected ).

BUREAU OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones
: 331 01 31,

331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, NEW DELHI 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 110002 Maniktola 160022 f37 84 99, I 37 86 26,

{ 331 01 31 331 13 7s 37 85 61 37 86 62

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VIII M, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH

160 f60 38 43, 20 25, t-235 02 16, I 235 15 19, l-632 92 95, 1632 78 91; 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Southern

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 Andheri ( East )

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, BOMBAY 400093

Branch : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers. Aligarh. India

