URNA Wah IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


g (Superseding IS 13028 : 1991) 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


qA nA A ra Fase, fara 
Ua vi ch fe frfa 
wT 1 wan fans 
(Wn FRAT) 


Guidelines for Integrated Planning, 
Development and Management of 
River Basins 
Part 1 Overall Planning 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.160 


© BIS 2014 


ada AM SR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
© HAF Fat, 9 eea Wat At, ae feeeit-110002 
al Sec a MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2014 Price Group 5 


Water Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee, WRD 6 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Water Resources Planning, Management and Evaluation Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Water Resource Division Council. 


A basin development is a coordinated programme to develop the use of water and of a river basin to obtain a 
greater efficiency of use than that would be possible, if they were uncoordinated multipurpose projects or a series 
of uncoordinated single purpose projects. 


This standard was first published in 1991. This revision addresses the imperative need for covering planning 
aspects in tandem with development and management aspects in all river basins. 


This standard has two parts, namely: 
a) (Part 1) Overall planning, and 
b) (Part 2) Development and management. 
This Part 1 of the standard deals with the overall planning aspects and is divided into two sections: 
a) Section 1 Basin characteristics and inventory of resources, and 
b) Section 2 Overall planning of the basin. 


This revision addresses the subject in the light of advances made from the time of the first publication. Various 
clauses in this Part of the standard have been made more elaborate and additions have been made so as they may 
closely resemble the current practices being followed by river basin planners. 


With the publication of this standard, IS 13028 : 1991 “Guidelines for overall planning of river basin’ shall stand 
withdrawn. 


The proposed second part, which would deal with the development and management aspects, is currently under 
preparation. 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


Indian Standard 


GUIDELINES FOR INTEGRATED PLANNING, 
DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF 
RIVER BASINS 


PART 1 OVERALL PLANNING 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) covers the guidelines for 
Integrated Planning, Development and Management 
of River Basins. Section | of the standard specifies the 
characteristics and resources of basin, present status 
of resources utilization and anticipated utilization. 
Section 2 of the standard specifies the future trends of 
development of basin and resources utilization within 
the constraints, water resources accounting and 
developmental plan of the basin. 


Section 1 
Basin Characteristics and Inventory 
of Resources 


2 INTRODUCTION 


2.1 The introductory section in river basin planning 
report includes the information on the following: 


a) Physical features of the basin, 
b) Plan of the basin, 


c) Brief description of climate, precipitation, run 
off and availability of ground water, 


d) Irrigable land area, 


e) Economics of the basin including the 
population trends, agriculture, forests, mining 
and industrial raw materials, industry 
transportation and power needs; 


f) Priority of water use; and 


g) Aerial photographs, land use details, brief 
mention of projects (completed, on-going, 
under consideration and contemplated). 


3 BASIN CHARACTERISTICS 
3.1 Basin Setting 
This includes the information on the following: 


a) Basin boundaries with longitude and latitude, 
b) Area covered under the basin, 
c) The percentage of the area of the basin 


compared to the total geographical area of the 
state and the country, 


d) Political sub-division with respect to inter- 
state basin, 


e) State-wise distribution of the drainage areas 
and their total, and 


f) Description of physical and economic sub- 
regions. 


3.2 Physiography 
Brief description of the following should be given: 


a) Various ranges and ridges; 

b) Topography, its plateau, the general shape of 
the basin and its delta; 

c) Glaciers; 

d) Lakes; and 


e) Places of importance from tourist, historical, 
and religious point of view. 


3.3 River System 
Brief description of the following should be given: 


a) The main river, its main tributaries and the 
sub-basins; 

b) Drainage areas of the sub-basins, their 
identification and their percentage as 
compared to the main basin and their total; 
and 


c) Origin of the river, its course, places touched 
etc. 


3.4 Climatic Characteristics 
a) Climate — This should cover commencement 
and duration of the following: 
1) Winter Season; 
2) Summer Season; and 
3) Rainy Season. 


b) Rainfall — This should cover the information 
on the following: 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


c) 


d) 


g) 


1) Mean annual rainfall, 


2) Seasonal, weighted average rainfall in 
various sub-basins and the standard 
deviation, 


3) Rainfall variations during different 
months and periods, and 


4) Intensity and frequency of rainfall. 


Temperature — This should cover the 
following: 


1) Mean annual temperature in various parts 
of the basin and the sub-basins, and 


2) Average minimum and maximum 
monthly temperature in various parts of 
the basin and the sub-basins. 


Evaporation and evapo-transpiration 
standards for various important stations of the 
basin; 

Humidity; 

Wind velocity; and 

Cloudy, sunny days and sunshine hours. 


3.5 Physiography Geology 


This should include the information on the following: 


a) Detailed description of the topography, 
b) Geology of the area dealing with stratigraphy 
and description of various formations, 
c) Geological structures and their characteristics, 
and 
d) Location of folds and faults, if any. 
3.6 Soils 


This should cover the information on the following: 


a) 
b) 


General; 

Principal soil type and their location/ 
distribution; 

Drainage characteristics of soil; 

Effect of rainfall on soil formation; 
Behaviour of different soil types under 
irrigation conditions; 

Crops grown in relation to soil type; and 


Soil survey report covering physical 
properties (colour, texture etc) and chemical 
properties (pH, soluble salts, salinity, 
alkalinity etc). 


4 RESOURCES OF THE BASIN 
4.1 Land 


This should include information on the state-wise and 
total area of the following along with their proportions: 


a) 


Gross area, 


b) Reporting area, 

c) Area under different types of forests, 
d) Area not available for cultivation, 

e) Culturable areas, 

f) Uncultivated culturable area, 

g) Net area sown, 

h) Area sown more than once, 

j) Total cropped area, 

k) Net area irrigated, 

m) Gross area irrigated, 

n) Percentage of net area sown to culturable area, 


p) Percentage of net area irrigated to culturable 
area, 


q) Percentage of net area irrigated to net area 
sown, and 
r) Area requiring drainage, areas that can be 
reclaimed for cultivation, topographical maps 
(1:25 000) scale along with the data on 
existing land-use pattern. 
NOTE — The area shown under forests is not necessarily all 


wooded as some areas classified as forests were denuded and 
have not been replanted. 


4.1.1 Land Holding Patterns — Analysis of Trends 


4.2 Water Resources 
4.2.1 Surface Water 
The following data should be collected: 


a) Description of catchment; 
b) Raingauge stations and rainfall data; 
c) Historical stream flow; 


d) A report giving the details of the sites in the 
basin where gauge, discharge, and sediment 
observations are made and their reliability 
along with the observed data; 

e) Average annual run off of the basin and its 
method of determination; 

f) Whether gauging and discharge sites are 
evenly distributed over the catchment for 
proper assessment of water resources and 
whether more gauge and discharge sites be 
set up so that more representative discharge 
data is available; 


g) Key gauge discharge sites at all important 
projects in operation as well as for planned 
projects; 

h) A report giving the details of the sites 
measuring discharge on each important 
tributary of the river; 

j) Existing established rights and committed 
utilization; 


k) Snow data, watershed characteristics, 
sediment inflow rate, duration of flooding for 
various water reaches; and 


m) Water quality data including sources of 
pollution, water quality standards for various 
uses, probable cost of treatment. 


NOTE — Reconstructed flows, in case stream flow data is 
affected by diversions, storage, or other regulations should be 
given. 


4.2.2 Ground Water 


This should include the information on the following 
to describe geology with respect to the availability of 
water. Systematic geo-hydrological studies of the 
basins and the sub-basins if made with a view to assess 
the ground water resources should be reported in detail: 


a) Statistics of existing number of government 
or private tubewells and their use with details 
of areas irrigated by them; 

b) Existing usages and rights; 

c) Sub-surface exploration carried out so far to 
determine extent, thickness, capacity, 
hydraulic characteristics, economics and 
dependable yield of the aquifer; 


d) Results of the test wells; 
e) Description of the area for further exploration; 


f) Brief description about activities in the basin 
with regard to minor irrigation such as 
improvement of wells and digging of new 
wells; 


g) Recharge statistics; 
h) Water quality details of groundwater; and 


j) Ground water potential and existing 
utilization. 


4.3 Mineral 
Brief description of the following should be given: 
a) Principal minerals found in the basin with 
state-wise location, 


b) Minerals found in small quantities in different 
parts of the basin compared to the total area 
of the basin, and 


c) Mineral related industries. 


4.4 Forests and Resources 


a) Type of forests and their distribution, 

b) Description of forest and its exploitation, 
c) Communication in the forest area, and 
d) Flora and fauna. 


4.5 Demography 


Information of the following may be collected: 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


a) On the basis of the latest census, district- wise 
population of the basin; 

b) Names of the cities with population of more 
than one lakh persons; 

c) Variation of density of population from 
densely populated areas to thinly populated 
area; 

d) Rate of increase/decrease in population; 

e) Density of population of basin in terms of 
persons/km’; 

f) Percentage of population belonging to 
scheduled tribes and their social, economic 
conditions and mode of cultivation adopted 
by them; 

g) Percentage of population living in the rural 
areas in the basin and the remaining 
percentage living in cities and towns; 

h) Percentage of working force (comprising the 
census categories of self-supporting per-sons 
and earning dependents of the population); 

j) Percentage of working force engaged in 
cultivation, agriculture and mining, cottage 
industries, manufacturing and tertiary 
activities; 

k) Grouping of population by sex and age, birth 
rate, death rate, average life span, population 
growth rate, immigration/emigration from the 
basin; and 

m) Livestock population. 


5 PRESENT STATUS OF RESOURCE 
UTILIZATION 


5.1 Agriculture 
This should include information on the following: 


a) Cultivable area; 
b) Areas under crops; 


c) Description of general grouping pattern of 
irrigated areas, state-wise; 


d) Agriculture practices; 

e) Land suitability areas under irrigated 
agriculture; 

f) Dry land farming; 

g) Irrigation practices and their limitations; 

h) Irrigation facilities from various sources like 
canals, tanks, tubewells, wells, etc and areas 
irrigated by each source; 

j) Chemical and bacteriological analysis of 
available water; 

k) State-wise description about the major and 
medium schemes taken up during the plans 
and areas irrigated by each scheme; 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


m) Brief description of minor schemes such as 


n) 
p) 
q) 


r) 


tanks, wells and tubewells in operation, and 
under construction and the areas irrigated 
there from and which would be developed; 
Water requirements of crops; 

Crop yields, food habits, living standards; 


Appraisal of important problems faced by the 
agriculture sector, trend of development of the 
sector in relation to the National Planning 
Network; and 

Existing marketing facilities, alternate 
employment opportunities. 


5.2 Drainage 


Description of existing surface drainage system, 
drainage of irrigable area and sanitary problem, if any, 
should be given. It should also include information on 
the following: 


a) 


b) 


Drainage works executed, evaluation of the 
works; and 

Data on drainage congestion problems 
including near the confluence point of 
tributary/ sub-tributaries with main river, back 
of the embankment system due to continuous 
high stage of main river. 


5.3 Industry 


Description of the following should be given: 


a) 
b) 


Industrial potential in the basin; 


Existing heavy cottage and agro-based 
industries with their location, estimation of 
their water utilization and sources of supply; 


Mining of ores; 
Export potential of raw and finished materials; 


Average water use per unit of production for 
various industrial units; 

Amount, quality, location of effluent 
discharge; 

Availability of cheap raw material and 
labour; 

Availability of transportation facility; and 
Regional industrial growth. 


5.4 Power Generation 


Description of the following should be given: 


a) 


b) 
c) 


Installed capacity of hydro, thermal, gas based 
and nuclear power generating plants in 
operation and under construction and their 
water requirements; 

Steps for harnessing solar and wind energy; 

Temporal distribution of power demands; 


d) 


e) 


f) 


Availability of fossil fuels (quantity and 
quality); 

Power demand distribution (base and peak 
load); and 


Possibility of recycling of water. 


5.5 Municipal and Domestic Water Supply 


Information on the following should be given: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Location of urban centres, source of water 
supply and its utilization; 

Sources of water supply and utilization by 
rural population; 

Per capita water use (urban, rural, livestock, 
public utilities); 

Present population (human, livestock) (urban, 
rural); and 

Existing water tariffs. 


5.6 Navigation 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 


b) 


c) 
d) 


Present status of inland navigation giving 
details of navigable water base and areas 
served, 

Maximum capacity of country boats and its 
barges which ply in the navigable areas, 


Water required for navigation, and 
Navigation load. 


5.7 Recreation and Fishery 


This should include the information on the following: 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 


e) 


Existing recreation facilities in the region; 
State of fishery in the region; 
Water requirements; 


Existing operational adjustments for such 
uses; and 

Potential of water bodies for fisheries 
development, available local market demand 
for fish and export facilities. 


5.8 Flood Moderation 


Description of the following should be given: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Analysis of hydrological data to determine 
flood potential; 

History of floods in the basin with their 
causes, history and economic study of the past 
and potential flood damages, trends in the 
affected area; 

Existing flood control works such as: 

1) Improvement of river channel, 

2) River diversions, 


3) Constructing dikes, 
4) Reservoirs, and 
5) Flood protection regulation. 


d) Design flood for various dams/barrages/ 
reservoirs [Probable Maximum Flood (PMF), 
Standard Project Flood (SPF) etc]; 


e) Reservoir operation policy and available flood 
cushion; 


f) Flood zone mapping; 

g) Encroachments in the flood-plains (if any); 
h) Downstream safe discharge carrying capacity; 
j) Flood forecasting network; and 

k) Emergency action plan in case of disasters. 


5.9 Watershed Management 
The information of the following should be given: 


a) Extent and gravity of erosion problem, 
b) Silting of reservoirs and drainage, 


c) Existing soil conservation practices and their 
efficiency, and 


d) Design and actual siltation rate in reservoir. 


5.10 Environmental Management 
This should include information on the following: 


a) Changes in the water regime of the river; 

b) Pollution of river water from industry and 
watershed; 

c) Major steps to check pollution; 

d) Waterlogged and saline affected areas 
including steps taken such as surface drains, 
providing pumps and tubewells as anti-water- 
logging measures be indicated; and 

e) Salt water intrusion in the coastal ground 
water resources. 


5.11 Soil Conservation 


A brief description of the topography slopes, rainfall 
intensity and erosion of soil of the basin should be 
given. It may be reported, if any of the following steps 
are being taken for conservation of the storage 
capacities of reservoirs: 


a) Afforestation, 
b) Terracing and contour bunding, 


c) Pasture development and development of 
marginal and submarginal lands, 


d) Stream control measures including fringe 
afforestation and stream bank control, and 


e) Desilting works like check dam, etc. 


Specific steps taken for soil and water conservation 
measures in the basin should be dealt with. 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


Sedimentation survey of the reservoirs under operation 
should be reported. It may be stated if the loss of 
reservoir capacity is in accordance with the loss 
stipulated or is excessive. If loss of storage capacity is 
excessive, steps proposed to arrest soil erosion in the 
catchment area should be dealt with. 


6 PROBLEMS OF BASIN 
This should include; 


a) history of famines, drought and flood in the 
basin; 

b) information on chronically flood, drought and 
flood prone area and salinity should be given; 

c) water quality issues; 

d) environmental issues, water conflicts (if any), 
Inter sectoral conflicts; 


e) constraints in harnessing the water resources 
potential; and 


f) rehabilitation-resettlement problems (if any). 


Section 2 
Overall Planning of the Basin 


7 FUTURE TRENDS OF RESOURCES 
UTILIZATION 


7.1 Economic Base 


Economic base projection for the future should extend 
at least over the useful life of the projects that are 
considered, that is, for a period of 50-100 years. It is 
obvious that any extrapolations of population based 
on past trends, over such a long future period of say 
100 years, is of a highly speculative character and 
would lead to completely erroneous results. It should 
be kept in mind that the population growth is related 
to economic activity, which in turn is related to 
resource development. Due allowance should be made 
for the likely increase in the standard of living of the 
backward and poverty stricken area, which are under- 
developed. 


It may be possible to develop an ultimate water plan 
by a different approach. Instead of estimating the size 
of the future population with their economic base, and 
then preparing a resource development plan to suit their 
needs, apprise first all available resources in the region 
and then estimate how many people and what economic 
activity could be supported by these resources. If such 
an approach is successful, it should be taking into 
consideration not only the available water resources, 
but also the resources of the region, including space 
for living and recreation. After having developed a 
tentative plan to make the most effective and continued 
use of available resources, then roughly determine how 
many people could live in the area without competing 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


with one another for the use of the same resources. 
The last step would be to prepare a water development 
plan that would meet the demands of such a regional 
development. 


7.2 Agriculture 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 


b) 
c) 


d) 


Soil and moisture condition of the areas 
proposed for irrigation, 


Actual development, 


Change in cropping pattern from the existing 
pattern, 


Use of fertilizers and high yielding varieties 
of crops, 


Crop rotation, 
Proposals for development of irrigation, 
Scientific management of irrigation supplies, 


Estimation of proposed water requirements 
of crops and total water requirements for 
irrigation, 

Total output of various crops expected, 


Marketing facilities and development of roads 
in commanded areas, 


Integrated operation of reservoirs, 


Development of salinity resistant crop 
varieties, 


Virtual water trade, and 


Estimation of return flows. 


7.3 Industrial Development 


This should include brief description of the following: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Factors influencing industrial development 
like space for industry, supply of raw materials, 
finance, power, marketing facilities, etc; 
General scope of development in the region; 
and 


Projected water needs. 


7.4 Municipal and Domestic Water Supply 


This should include brief description of the following: 


a) 


b) 


c) 
d) 


Anticipated growth of urban and rural 
population, 

Per-capita requirements of water for 
household use in urban and rural population 
depending upon standard of living, 


Projected needs of urban and rural population, 


Water required for dilution of municipal 
industrial effluent so that adequate sanitary 
river conditions are maintained, 


e) 


f) 


Identification of additional sources of water 
supply, and 
Cost recovery from water tariffs. 


7.5 Power Generation 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 
b) 


c) 


Power supply position, 

Future needs and proposals for generating 
additional power, and 

Projected water requirements for additional 
power generation. 


7.6 Navigation 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 
b) 
c) 


d) 


Scope of development of navigation, 
Proposed development, 


Estimated water requirements for navigation, 
and 

River training works needed for maintaining 
a defined navigation channel and possible 
effect of such works on floods in the river. 


7.7 Recreation and Fishery Development 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 


b) 
c) 
d) 


Potentiality of utilizing reservoir for public 
recreation, 


Problems of fish conservation, 
Prospects of fishery development, and 


Operational adjustment to mitigate adverse 
effect of pisciculture. 


7.8 Flood Moderation 


This should include brief description of the following: 


a) 


b) 


c) 
d) 


Whether comprehensive plan of flood 
management for the particular river system 
has been prepared or not; 


Recent approaches to the problem of the flood 
control; 


Needs of the region; and 


Proposals for new flood management works, 
such as: 


1) Improvement of river channel, 
2) River diversions, 

3) Constructing dikes, 

4) Reservoir, 

5) Flood plain regulation, and 


6) Evaluation/assessment report on 
performance of some completed schemes 
and improvements suggested in such 
reports. 


e) Modernization of flood forecasting Network; 
f) Disaster management mechanism; 
g) Adequate flood cushion; 


h) Strict regulation of economic activities in 
flood-plains; and 
j) Integrated real time operation of reservoirs. 


7.9 Watershed Management 
This should include information on the following: 


a) Recognition of watershed management as a 
pre-requisite in river basin plan; and 

b) Proposals for conservation like soil 
improvement, run off retardation etc. 


7.10 Environment Management 
This should include description of the following: 


a) Dangers of environment pollution and 
identification of sources and nature of possible 
pollution, 


b) Proposals for controlling and protection of 
land, water storages and drainage channels 
against pollution, and 

c) Mitigative measures. 


8 WATER RESOURCES ACCOUNTING 


8.1 Availability of Water 
8.1.1 Surface Water 
This should include brief description of the following: 


a) Criteria for irrigation, power generation, 
industrial uses, etc; 


b) Dependable surface water availability for 
various performances of water; 


c) Rate of availability of water at various project 
sites at particular time within a year; 


d) Distribution of available water in a river basin; 
e) Water use priorities; and 
f) Water quality (chemical and bacteriological). 


8.1.2 Ground Water 
This should include the information on the following: 


a) Estimation of economic and dependable yield 
of ground water for future use, 


b) Distribution of ground water in the basin, and 


c) Chemical and bacteriological analysis of 
ground water. 


8.2 Utilization of Water in the Basin 
This should include information on the following: 


a) Existing consumptive uses of water like 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


irrigation, industrial, domestic and other uses; 
b) Non-consumptive uses of water like hydro 
power, navigation, etc; 
c) Requirements of water in the basin; and 
d) Requirements at various times and pattern of 
demand. 
8.3 Water Losses 


This should include the information on the following: 


a) Losses occurring in the basin and its 
estimation like evaporation from water bodies, 
deep percolation, leakage from reservoirs; and 


b) Return flow from irrigated areas, sewages and 
industries. 


8.4 Projected Utilization 
This should include information on the following: 


a) Future requirements for consumptive uses, 
b) Non-consumptive uses, 

c) Requirements of water in the basin, and 

d) Requirements at various times. 


8.5 Surpluses and Shortages 
This should include information on the following: 


a) Comparison of present demand with the 
available supply at various locations; 


b) Surpluses and shortages, during various 
periods of the year; 


c) Comparison of future demand with available 
supply at various location; 


d) Diversion of water from one sub-basin to 
another sub-basin to meet shortages; and 


e) Possibility of virtual water exchange. 


9 PROBLEMS AND RESTRAINTS IN WATER 
RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT 


9.1 Constitutional Aspects 
This should include description of the following: 


a) Constitutional provisions with regard to 
industry, power, transport, etc; 

b) Protection of established water rights and uses; 

c) Special interest of existing works and plans 
envisaged by different state governments 
under various sectors in the basin; 

d) Need for coordination between conflicting 
interests; 

e) Existing riparian use and quantum of water 
presently used; 

f) Commitments for identified projects such as 
those included in the Tribunal award; 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


g) 


h) 


Proposed utilization under development of 
overall river basin with break up of utilization 
under each state; and 


Water sharing agreements. 


9.2 Projection Assumption and Their Limitation 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 


e) 


Availability and authenticity of the basin data; 
Assumed trends in economic growth; 
Employment opportunity; 

Life of project and period considered for basin 
planning; and 

Character, sequence and rate of development 
and distribution of benefit. 


9.3 Technological Aspects 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 
b) 
c) 


d) 
e) 


Unified operation of water resources projects; 
Inter agency cooperation; 

Need for augmenting water resources and its 
scope; 

Schemes for inter basin transfer of water; 
Scientific advancement in water utilization 
like pumped storage use of sprinklers, reuse 
of industrial and domestic waste water, etc; 
and 

Development of high yielding variety of 
crops, salinity resistant crops, crop rotation, 
cropping patterns. 


9.4 Submergence of Land, Habitats, Etc 


This should include flood inundation maps and flood 
plain zoning. 


9.5 Environmental Aspects 


This should include description of the following: 


a) 
b) 


Preservation of cultural heritage, 

Problem of land conservation and control, 
Problem of floods, 

Protection of basic resources, 


Disposal of pollutants and pollution of water 
bodies, 


Problem of water logging, and 
Water quality. 


10 DEVELOPMENTAL PLAN OF THE BASIN 


10.1 Priority Uses of Water 


This should include description of the following: 


a) 


Immediate needs of the region, 


g) 


Priority of the immediate needs, 

Long range needs and reservation of water 
for such uses, 

Types of structures required, 

Alternative proposals for immediate and long 
needs, 

Alternative proposals for rehabilitation of 
population and environs, and 

Sequencing of projects. 


10.2 Multiple Reuse/Recycling of Water 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 
b) 
c) 


d) 


Possibility of integrating various uses of 
water; 

Resolution of conflicts between competitive 
uses like space allocation, time, discharge; 
Adjustment of local and state water utilization 
plans; and 

Reuse/recycling of non-consumptively used 
resource. 


10.3 Project Economics and Financial Feasibility 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 


b) 


c) 
d) 


e) 
f) 


Identification and evaluation of costs of 
various projects, 

Identification and evaluation of benefits and 
pattern of occurrence with respect to various 
projects, 

Conversion of costs and benefits to a common 
time data, 

Computation of benefit costs ratio including 
intangible benefits, 

Allocation of costs to various purposes, and 
Costs reimbursement policy. 


10.4 Optimum Water Plan of the Basin 


This should include information on the following: 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
e) 
f) 


g) 


Inventory of selected water control and 
utilization works, 

Co-relation of existing projects in a basin, 
Co-ordination of system reservoirs, 
Co-ordination of ground water and surface 
water projects, 

Co-ordination of water plan with other 
developments, 

Outline of a phased programme of water 
resources development, and 

Short-term action plan. 


10.5 Rehabilitation and Resettlement 


This should include information regarding the 
rehabilitation policy. 


10.6 Use of system engineering techniques and 
development of decision support system with 
Geographic Information System (GIS) interface. 


10.7 Identification of flood and drought prone areas 
and mitigation measures. 


10.8 Capacity building and training. 


IS 13028 (Part 1) : 2014 


10.9 Institutional framework, river basin organizations 
10.10 Monitoring of projects. 


10.11 Participatory approach to water resources 
management and involvement of stakeholders at all 
stages of planning. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: WRD 06 (0494). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.IL.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


