NAT HIAF IS 17862 : 2022 
Indian Standard 


S-Are HAT VSNU, Hag, FHT six 
yrim — RAAT 


Storage, Collection, Dismantling and 
Recycling of E-Waste — Guidelines 


ICS 13.030.10 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AMT, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2022 Price Group 3 


Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Solid Waste 
Management Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


Electronic waste or e-waste is a highly varied stream of hazardous waste. This waste stream is comprised of any 
electronic items that a consumer or business intends to dispose of, or is no longer useful for its original purpose. 
E-waste has generated a considerable amount of public interest due to a confluence of factors, including: the 
exponential rise in the generation of e-waste, the potential value of recycling the waste in order to recover precious 
metals and other elements, and the environmental and human health risks associated with improperly storing, 
disposing of, and recycling e-waste. 


Hence, need has been felt to develop standard for providing guidelines for storage, collection dismantling and 
recycling of E-waste. 


This standard describes guidelines for storage, collection dismantling and recycling of E-waste which should be 
implemented in conjunction with relevant notifications of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF & CC) and Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB). 


The composition of technical committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


IS 17862 : 2022 


Indian Standard 


STORAGE, COLLECTION, DISMANTLING AND 
RECYCLING OF E-WASTE — GUIDELINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies guidelines for the storage, 
collection, dismantling and recycling of E Waste by the 
producer of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE), 
the dismantler and/or recycler to: 


a) demonstrate its ability to consistently carrying 
out storage, collection, dismantling and recycling 
activities of e-waste meeting applicable statutory 
and regulatory requirements; and 


b 


wm 


satisfy the requirements of society, customer 
of recycled products, and waste management 
hierarchy and resource conservation through 
the effective application updated technologies, 
systems including processes for improvement. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated. 


IS No Title 


IS/ISO 14001: 2015 Environmental management 


systems — Requirements 
with guidance for use 
IS/ISO 45001: 2018 Occupational health and 


safety management systems 
requirements with guidance 
for use 


2 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purposes of this document, the terms and 
definitions given in E-waste (Management) Rules, 
2016 and Implementation Guidelines for E-waste 
(Management) Rules, 2016 and following shall apply. 


2.1 Channelization — ‘Channelization’ means 
to direct the path for movement of e-wastes from 
collection onwards to authorised dismantler or recycler. 
In case of fluorescent and other mercury containing 
lamps, where recyclers are not available, this means 
path for movement from collection centre to authorised 
treatment, storage and disposal facility; 


2.2 Collection Centre — Collection centre means 
a centre or a collection point or both established 
by producer individually or as association jointly 
to collect e-waste for channelising the e-waste to 
authorised recycler and play such role as indicated in 
the authorisation for extended producer responsibility 
granted to the producer and having facilities as per the 
guidelines of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), 
including the collection centre established by the 
dismantler or refurbisher or recycler which should be a 
part of their authorisation issued by the State Pollution 
Control Board where the facility exists. 


2.3 Consumer — Consumer means any person using 
electrical and electronic equipment. 


2.4 Dismantler — Dismantler means any person or 
organisation engaged in dismantling of used electrical 
and electronic equipment into their components 
and having facilities as per the guidelines of Central 
Pollution Control Board and having authorisation from 
concerned State Pollution Control Board. 


2.5 EEE — Electrical and electronic equipment means 
equipment which are dependent on electric current or 
electro-magnetic field in order to become functional. 


2.6 EEE Code — Code numbering is given to each of 
the electrical and electronic equipment under different 
categories to be used by the producers in the schedule I 
serial number I and II in the E- waste Management 
Rules, 2016 amended in 2018. 


2.7 End-of-Life — End-of-life of the product means 
the time when the product is intended to be discarded 
by the user . 


2.8 Environmentally Sound Management of 
E-Waste — Environmentally sound management of 
e-waste means taking all steps required to ensure that 
e-waste is managed in a manner which shall protect 
health and environment against any adverse effects, 
which may result from such e-waste. 


2.9 E-Waste — E-waste means electrical and 
electronic equipment (EEE), whole or in part discarded 
as waste by the consumer or bulk consumer as well as 
rejects from manufacturing, refurbishment and repair 
processes. 


2.10 E-Waste Generators — E-waste generators 
includes the individual who generates e-wastes at the 


IS 17862 : 2022 


end of life of the used EEE (Electrical and Electronic 
Equipment) and/or the organisations who are the 
manufacturer, producer, bulk consumer, collection 
centre, dealer, refurbisher, dismantler and recycler who 
need to store the e-waste. 


2.11 Extended Producer Responsibility — Extended 
producer responsibility means responsibility of any 
producer of electrical or electronic equipment, for 
channelisation of e-waste to ensure environmentally 
sound management of such waste. Extended producer 
responsibility may comprise of implementing take back 
system or setting up of collection centres or both and 
having agreed arrangements with authorised dismantler 
or recycler either individually or collectively through 
a producer responsibility organisation recognised 
by producer or producers in their extended producer 
responsibility authorisation. 


2.12 Historical E-Waste — ‘Historical e-waste’ 
means e-waste generated from electrical and electronic 
equipment as specified in schedule I of E-waste 
Management Rules, 2016 , which was available on the 
date from which these rules come into force. 


2.13 Orphaned Products — Orphaned products means 
non-branded or assembled electrical and electronic 
equipment as specified in schedule I or those produced 
by a company, which has closed its operations. 


2.14 PRO (Producer Responsibility Organisation) — 
‘Producer responsibility organisation? means a 
professional organisation authorised or financed 
collectively or individually by producers, which can 
take the responsibility for collection and channelisation 
of e-waste generated from the ‘end-of-life’ of their 
products to ensure environmentally sound management 
of such e-waste; 


2.15 Producers — ‘Producer’ means any person who, 
irrespective of the selling technique used, such as 
dealer, retailer, e-retailer, etc.; manufactures and offers 
to sell: 


a) electrical and electronic equipment and their 


components , consumables , parts or spares under 
its own brand; 


b 


wm 


under its own brand, assembled electrical and 
electronic equipment and their components, 
consumables, parts or spares produced by other 
manufacturers or suppliers; or 


c 


wa 


imported electrical and electronic equipment and 
their components, consumables, parts or spares. 


2.16 Recyclers — Recycler means any person who 
is engaged in recycling and reprocessing of waste 
electrical and electronic equipment or assemblies or 
their components and having facilities as elaborated 
in the guidelines of Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB). 


2.17 Refurbishment — _ Refurbishment means 
repairing of used electrical and electronic equipment 
(EEE) listed in schedule I of E-waste Management 
Rules, 2016 extending its working life for its originally 
intended use and selling the same in the market or 
returning to owner. 


2.18 Refurbisher — Refurbisher as per E-waste 
Management Rules, 2016 means any company or 
undertaking registered under the Factories Act, 1948 or 
the Companies Act, 1956 or both or district industries 
centre (DIC) engaged in refurbishment of used 
electrical and electronic equipment. 


3 E-WASTE STORAGE, COLLECTION, 
DISMANTLING AND RECYCLING SYSTEMS 


The producer, dismantler, PRO, refurbisher and 
recyclers of E-waste shall establish and maintain 
the system of storage, collection, dismantling and 
recycling as described below. A risk-based thinking 
is essential for achieving an effective management 
system. Business risk analysis and exploring 
opportunities for improvement may help achieving 
organisational and process sustainability. Categories 
of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) including 
their components, consumables, parts and spares shall 
use the applicable EEE codes as per schedule I serial 
number I and II of E-waste Management Rules, 2016. 


3.1 E-Waste Storage 


The e-waste shall be stored, collected, transported, 
dismantled, refurbished and recycled. The procedure 
shall be established by the manufacturers and PROs. 


E-waste generated shall be stored by the waste 
generator/s in such a way that no damage is caused to 
the environment during storage is ensured. The storage 
facility shall establish a suitable method of segregation 
of non-recyclable or non-recoverable components. 
Every e-waste generator shall comply with the national 
legislation with respect to storage duration of e-waste. 


A procedure for handling and storage of hazardous 
constituents within the e-waste shall be established 
and maintained. Storage of hazardous constituents of 
the e-waste shall be made separately and records shall 
be maintained. Information on hazards of improper 
handling, disposal, accidental breakage, damage or 
improper recycling of e-waste shall be maintained and 
communicated to the people for proper actions. 


Record shall be maintained of the e-waste generated 
and stored in a standard format. 


Reference — The form-2, form for maintaining records 
of e-waste handled or generated [See rules 4(4), 5(4), 
6(5), 8(7), 9(2), 10(7), 11(8), 13 (1) (x1), 13(2)(v), 13(3) 
(vii) and 13 (4)(v) of the e-waste management Rules 
2016] may be used. 


3.2 E-Waste Collection 


The producer of electrical and electronic equipment 
(EEE), the dismantler and/or recycler shall establish and 
maintain procedure of tracking, collection, channelising 
and transportation of the e-waste generated from the 
‘end-of-life’ of their products or ‘end-of-life’ products 
with same electrical and electronic equipment code and 
historical waste (orphaned Products) available. The 
producer shall establish and maintain a procedure for 
the activities of any professional agency like Producer 
Responsible Organisation (PRO) if appointed on his 
behalf for collection of e-waste by involving relevant 
stakeholders, such as consumer, bulk consumer, informal 
sector, resident associations, retailers and dealers, etc. 
In collective system, producers may tie-up as a member 
with a Producer Responsibility Organisation (PRO) or 
with e-waste exchange or both. 


The producer of EEE shall prepare and submit the annual 
collection plan as per the EPR (Extended Producer 
Responsibility) system in the country and comply with 
the system requirements. 


The e-waste collection centres and/or TSDF (Treatment, 
Storage and Disposal Facility) shall establish and maintain 
a procedure for collection of mercury containing lamps 
including fluorescent lamps and other items where the 
recycling facilities are not available. 


Producer and/or PRO shall establish and maintain a 
procedure for handling and collection of hazardous 
constituents within the e-waste. Information on hazards 
of improper handling, disposal, accidental breakage, 
damage or improper recycling of e-waste shall be 
maintained and communicated to the people for proper 
actions. 


The collector of e-waste shall ensure that no damage 
is caused to the environment during collection and 
transportation of e-waste to authorised collection centres 
or dismantlers or recyclers. 


Record shall be maintained of the e-waste collected in a 
standard format. 


Reference — The Form-2, form for maintaining records 
of e-waste handled or generated [See rules 4(4), 5(4), 
6(5), 8(7), 9(2), 10(7), 11(8), 13 (1) (xi), 13(2)(v), 13(3) 
(vii) and 13 (4)(v) of the e-waste management Rules 
2016] may be used. 


3.3 E-waste Dismantling and Refurbishing 


The dismantler/s shall establish and maintain procedure 
of dismantling and refurbishing systems and techniques 
of the collected and stored e-waste including orphaned 
Products at the facility of dismantling processes. 


The dismantler/s shall ensure that no damage is caused 
to the environment and have no adverse effect of 
environment and employee health during the dismantling 
activities of e-waste at the facility. 


IS 17862 : 2022 


Dismantled e-waste shall be segregated, identified and 
sent to the authorised recycling facilities for recovery 
of materials. It shall have a system of quarantining 
non-recyclable or non-recoverable components for 
sending to authorised TSDF. 


Record shall be maintained of the e-waste dismantled and 
refurbished in a standard format. 


Reference — The form-2, form for maintaining records 
of e-waste handled or generated [see rules 4(4), 5(4), 
6(5), 8(7), 9(2), 10(7), 11(8), 13 (1) (xi), 13(2)(v), 13(3) 
(vii) and 13 (4)(v) of the e-waste management Rules 
2016] may be used. 


3.4 E-Waste Recycling 


The producer of EEE, the dismantler and/or recycler 
shall establish and maintain safe procedure of recycling, 
recovery or reuse and including any physico-chemical 
or biological treatment, incineration and deposition in 
secured landfill. 


Procedure including formulation sheet for operation 
of processes including process parameters involving 
recycling/recovery/reuse/physico-chemical/biological 
treatment/incineration/deposition in secured landfill 
shall be established, communicated and practised for 
respective operations. 


Process equipment and calibrated measuring equipment/ 
instruments shall be maintained. Process safety 
requirements shall be communicated and maintained 
during e-waste recycling. Deviation in the process should 
be recorded and analysed and corrective/preventive 
actions shall be taken for improvement. The trained 
and competent personnel shall be involved in recycling 
process. 


Record shall be maintained of the e-waste recycling in a 
standard format. 


Reference : The Form-2, form for maintaining records of 
e-waste recycling [See rules 4(4), 5(4), 6(5), 8(7), 9(2), 
10(7), 11(8), 13 (1) (xi), 13(2)(v), 13(3)(vii) and 13 (4) 
(v) of the e-waste management Rules 2016] may be used. 


4 SUPPORT SYSTEMS 


4.1 Legislative Compliance 


The producer of electrical and electronic equipment 
(EEE), the authorised dismantler and/or recycler shall 
establish and maintain procedure for identification of 
applicable legislative and regulatory requirement and 
the system for compliance and monitoring. Record of 
legislative compliances shall be kept. 


4.2 Training of the Personnel 


The producer of EEE, the authorised dismantler, 
refurbisher and recycler shall ensure that trained and 
competent workers are involved in storage, collection, 
dismantling, refurbishing and recycling process. Periodic 
training and competence monitoring shall be carried out. 


IS 17862 : 2022 


4.3 Transportation 


The producer of EEE, the authorised dismantler, 
refurbisher and recycler shall ensure that appropriate 
transportation systems including legislative, regulatory, 
safety and environmental compliances for transportation 
of respective e-wastes. 


4.4 Documents and Record 


The producer of EEE, the authorised dismantler, 
refurbisher and recycler shall ensure development of 
required documents at the facility. Updated authenticated 
documents shall be made available at respective functions. 
Outdated documents shall be withdrawn immediately 
after the same is outdated and the updated document/s 
shall be made available. 


Record shall be maintained of the e-waste generated, 
stored, collected, recycles, refurbished and final disposal 
in a standard format by responsible organisation/s and 
individuals. The Form-2, form for maintaining records of 
e-waste handled or generated [see rules 4(4), 5(4), 6(5), 
8(7), 9(2), 10(7), 11(8), 13 (1) (xi), 13(@2)(v), 13(3)(vii) 
and 13 (4)(v) of the e-waste management Rules 2016] 
may be used. 


Records shall be analysed on regular basis for 
improvement. 


4.5 Safety and Environmental Aspects Including 
Emergency Preparedness and Response 


The producer of EEE, the authorised dismantler, 
refurbisher and recycler shall establish and maintain 
a procedure to ensure safety and health of workers 
involved in dismantling and recycling considering the 
Occupational safety and health aspects and monitoring 
which includes use of proper personal protective gear for 
all the personal coming in the facility as per need. 


The producers shall ensure the capacity and capability 
of its authorised dismantlers/recyclers/PROs to ensure 
environmentally sound management of e-waste 
according to IS/ISO 14001 and shall ensure minimum or 
zero environmental consequences of hazards associated 
with its operations including transportation according to 
IS/ISO 45001. 


The health monitoring of the employees engaged in 
the e-waste recycling process will be governed by the 
national/local rules and regulations. Record of such 
monitoring will be kept. 


The authorised dismantlers/recyclers/PROs shall establish 
and maintain the procedure for emergency preparedness 
and response. Trained personnel in each shift should be 
present who are capable of handling emergency situation 
and respond effectively. Records of accidents and near 
miss cases shall be kept for analysis for taking corrective 
and preventive actions for improvement. 


4.6 Equipment Health Monitoring 


The producer of EEE, the authorised dismantler, 
refurbisher and recycler shall establish and maintain a 


4 


procedures for the health monitoring of the machineries, 
equipment, measuring instruments. 


Right equipment shall be made available for the 
operation. Appropriate equipment shall be calibrated, 
monitored and maintained on specified periodicity. 


4.7 Communication 


4.7.1 The producers of EEE shall provide following 
details of take back system: 


a) Appropriate media, namely website, toll free 
number, link of their web site where information 
pertaining to take back system is available for 
consumers/bulk consumers; 

b) Details of their dealers, retailers, collection 

points/bins/pick up vans linked to collection 

centres for depositing of e-waste by the 
consumer/bulk consumers if they are part of the 
take back system; 


Details of any incentive 
consumers/bulk consumer for 
e-waste; 


scheme for 
returning of 


wm 


c 


d) Phone number/mobile numbers of grievance 
redressal in case, toll free number is not working; 


and 


e 


wm 


Details of authorised dismantlers/recyclers who 
can take back e-waste on behalf of the producer if 
dismantlers/recyclers are part of take back system. 


4.7.2 The producer of EEE, the authorised dismantler, 
refurbisher and recycler shall establish and 
communicate the documented procedures followed 
for storage, collection, transportation, dismantling, 
handling of hazardous wastes, recycling and final 
disposal, emergency situation arising out of any 
accident/incident/near miss events, standard operating 
procedures (SOP) and operation control procedures 
(OCP) to internal management as well as to the relevant 
stakeholders. 


4.8 Data Security 


Procedure for complete data wiping and/or data 
destruction from the electrical and electronic 
equipment (EEE) of e-waste stream, with data memory 
card/devices like computer/laptops/desktops/ 
mobile phones or any other such equipment, shall 
be established and maintained by the authorised 
dismantlers/refurbisher/recyclers to prevent potential 
data leaking. The authorised dismantlers and/or 
recyclers shall identify and comply with national 
rules/regulations pertaining to the data wiping or 
data destruction from the e-waste components, if any. 
Record of data wiping and/or data destruction have to 
be maintained. Provision of issuance of certificates of 
data wiping/destruction upon request by the identified 
owner of the device/s should be established by the 
authorised dismantlers/refurbisher recyclers. 


IS 17862 : 2022 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Solid Waste Management Sectional Committee, CHD 33 


Organization 


Central Road Research Institute 


Alkali Manufacturers’ Association of India 


Cement Manufacturers Association, New Delhi 


Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi 
Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi 


Delhi Technological University, Delhi 


Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of 
Science, GOI 


Development Alternative 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, New Delhi 


Hindalco Industries 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


In personal capacity 
In personal capacity 


Indian Centre for Plastics in the Environment, 
Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council, Mumbai 


Indian Oil Corporation Ltd, Faridabad 
ITC Limited 

Jadavpur University 

Ministry of Defence, DRDO, New Delhi 


Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 


Representative(s) 


Ms ANURADHA SHUKLA (Chairman) 


SHRI K. SRINIVASAN 
Dr H. S. Das (Alternate) 


SHRI ANIL KUMAR TRIVEDI 
SHRI GOPAL GUPTA (Alternate I) 
DR RACHNA SHARMA (Alternate ID 


SHRI J. S. KAMYOTRA 


DR SHIKHA SWAROOP KAR 
DR RINA SINGH (Alternate) 


MRs SEEMA ARORA 
SHRI KAMAL SHARMA (Alternate) 


Dr (SHRIMATI) ANUBHA MANDAL (Alternate) 
DRR. K. Josut 


DR K. VIJAYA LAKSHMI 
DR PALAS KUMAR HALDAR (Alternate) 


SHRI R. S. PRASAD 
SHRI VIKRAM SINGH (Alternate) 


Ms ARCHANA DATTA 
Ms SucuHIsMITA MUKHOPADHYAY (Alternate) 


SHRI PRADIP KUMAR BANERJEE 
SHRI SOUBHAGYA KUMAR TRIPATHY (Alternate I) 
Ms Rasumi Gupta (Alternate II) 


DRN. B. MAZUMDAR 
DR VIMAL KUMAR 


Ms SANCHITA JINDAL, FORMER ADVISOR 
(ScænTIsT G), MOEF & CC 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR KHANDELWAL 
(RETD CHIEF ENGINEER, EDMC) 


SHRI T. K. BANDOPADHYAY 
SHRI GOPAL JHA (Alternate) 


Dr N. J. SINGH 
SHRI A. A. PANJWANI (Alternate) 


DR M. P. SINGH 
SHRI SANJIB BEZBAROA 
DR SADAN K. GHOSH 


SHRI M. PANDIT 
Dr S. Mary CELIN (Alternate) 


SHRI SATYENDRA KUMAR 
SHRI AMIT Love (Alternate) 


IS 17862 : 2022 


Organization 


Ministry of Urban Development, New Delhi 


New Delhi 


National Solid Waste Association of India 


NTPC Limited, New Delhi 


PHD Chamber of Commerce 
Steel Authority of India Limited, New Delhi 


Steps Pvt Ltd 
Sulabh International Social Service Organization 


The Energy and Resources Institute, New Delhi 
The Fertilizer Association of India, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


National Council for Cement and Building Material, 


Representative(s) 


SHRI UDIT RATNA 
Suri P. K. Durta (Alternate) 


SHRI ANUPAM 
SHRI PRATEEK SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI AMIYA KUMAR SAHU 
Capt Mansu Minuas (Alternate) 


SHRI SHIV CHARAN MEENA 
SHRI K. KARTHIKEYAN (Alternate) 


NOMINATION AWAITED 


SHRI RAJNISH KUMAR GUPTA 
SHRI INDERPAL DHULL (Alternate) 


SHRI T. RAGHAVENDRA RAO 
AWAITED 


DR SUNEEL PANDEY 

SHRI KAUSHIK CHANDRASHEKHAR (Alternate) 
SHRI MANISH GOSWAMI 

Suri G. M. PaTEL (Alternate) 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CHD) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRISHTI DIXIT 
ScIENTIST ‘D’ (CHD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 33 (17536). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6" Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8" Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


f 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western s Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


