**************** 


*■  fe^K 


Disclosure  to  Promote  the  Right  To  Information 

Whereas  the  Parliament  of  India  has  set  out  to  provide  a  practical  regime  of  right  to 
information  for  citizens  to  secure  access  to  information  under  the  control  of  public  authorities, 
in  order  to  promote  transparency  and  accountability  in  the  working  of  every  public  authority, 
and  whereas  the  attached  publication  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  is  of  particular  interest 
to  the  public,  particularly  disadvantaged  communities  and  those  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of 
education  and  knowledge,  the  attached  public  safety  standard  is  made  available  to  promote  the 
timely  dissemination  of  this  information  in  an  accurate  manner  to  the  public. 


Mazdoor  Kisan  Shakti  Sangathan 
"The  Right  to  Information,  The  Right  to  Live" 


IS  7884  (2004):  Shampoo,  Surfactant  based  [PCD  19: 
Cosmetics] 


Jawaharlal  Nehru 
'Step  Out  From  the  Old  to  the  New' 


■K^y  / 1  juaaaws^fea  rs^^TTF^ 


2*S<  W I  *>S*V2^NK^ 


^frcvvv^ 


Satyanarayan  Gangaram  Pitroda 
Invent  a  New  India  Using  Knowledge 


?TR  TJ^  ^TT  teMHI  |  ^t  ^Tift  ^FTT  ^f  ^TT  ^T^?TT  \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge  is  such  a  treasure  which  cannot  be  stolen" 


.^^_ 


• 


BLANK  PAGE 


*rt*2V^ 


PROTECTED  BY  COPYRIGHT 


IS  7884 :  2004 

(  tfhm  tpfftsm ) 

Indian  Standard 
SHAMPOO,  SURFACTANT  BASED  —  SPECIFICATION 

(Third  Revision) 


ICS  71.100.70 


©  BIS  2004 


BUREAU    OF    INDIAN    STANDARDS 

MANAK    BHAVAN,    9    BAHADUR    SHAH    ZAFAR   MARG 
feJEW  DELHI  110002 

November  2004  Price  G  rou  p  5 


Cosmetics  Sectional  Committee,  PCD  19 


FOREWORD 

This  Indian  Standard  (Third  Revision)  was  adopted  by  the  Bureau  oflndian  Standards,  after  the  draft  finalized 
by  the  Cosmetics  Sectional  Committee  had  been  approved  by  the  Petroleum,  Coal  and  Related  Products  Division 
Council. 

This  standard  was  published  in  1975  and  first  revised  in  1978,  Second  revision  of  the  standard  was  carried  out  in 
1992  when  minimum  limit  for  total  active  detergent  content  as  total  non-volatile  alcohol  soluble  matter  was 
prescribed  and  minimum  requirement  limit  for  anionic  detergent  content  was  also  fixed.  Besides,  requirements 
for  volatile  matter  and  inorganic  salts  were  deleted,  as  these  were  not  serving  any  meaningful  purpose.  An 
additional  requirement  for  lather  was  included  from  consumer's  satisfaction  point  of  view.  Many  of  the  surfactants 
which  are  frequently  used  in  shampoos  as  cleansing  agents  develop  abundance  lacy  foam  in  soft  water  but  this 
lather  drops  drastically  in  presence  of  oily  soils,  therefore,  ingredients  commonly,  known  as  foam  boosters  are 
added  in  shampoos  to  improve  quality  volume  and  characteristics  of  lather.  Minimum  foam  height  was  specified 
to  quantify  this  requirement.  The  requirement  of  active  detergent  as  SLES  or  its  equivalent,  percent  by  mass, 
minimum  was  subsequently  deleted  from  the  second  revision  of  the  standard  through  an  amendment.  This  was 
done  to  allow  the  manufacturers  to  use  cationic,  anionic  and  amphoteric  type  of  detergents  alone  or  in  combinations 
in  place  of  limiting  the  concentration  of  one  kind  of  detergents. 

Furthermore,  information  about  various  attributes  of  an  acceptable  shampoo  which  were  not  adequate  for 
standardization  were  included  in  Annex  E  to  the  standard  so  that  the  formulators  may  try  to  attain  as  many 
qualities  as  possible  in  their  products  to  have  consumer  acceptance. 

Subsequently  through  another  amendment^  the  title  of  the  standard  was  changed  from  shampoo,  synthetic  detergent 
based  to  shampoo,  surfactants  based.  This  was  done,  since  there  could  be  shampoos  with  combination  of  detergent 
base  and  soap  having  detergent  as  the  major  component  As  the  word,  surfactant  covers  both  detergent  as  well  as 
soap,  the  change  in  title  depicted  the  correct  nomenclature.  Moreover,  the  consumers  often  associate  the  term 
detergent  with  laundry  products  and  the  earlier  tenninology  on  the  packs  was  sending  out  a  negative  impression, 
hence  the  change  has  been  carried  out.  Besides,  procedure  for  determination  of  non-volatile  alcohol  soluble 
matter  has  been  rectified/modified  in  this  revision. 

Two  new  requirements  namely  'Best  use  before'  and  list  of  key  ingredients  have  been  included  in  marking 
clause  to  safeguard  consumer  interest. 

Shampoos,  which  contain  ingredients  that  have  an  effect  on  the  physiological  functions  of  the  body,  or  for  which 
therapeutic  claims  are  made,  are  not  included  in  this  standard. 

No  stipulations  have  been  made  in  this  standard  regarding  the  composition  of  the  shampoo.  However,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  raw  materials  used  are  such  that  in  the  concentrations  in  which  they  would  be  present  in  the 
finished  shampoo,  after  interaction  with  the  other  raw  materials  used  in  the  formulation,  are  free  from  any 
harmful  effects.  For  determining  the  suitability  of  a  new  formulation  or  of  a  new  raw  material  used  in  an  old 
formulation,  on  the  skin  and  in  respect  of  eye  irritation,  reference  may  be  made  to  IS  401 1  :  1997  'Methods  of 
test  for  safety  evaluation  of  cosmetics  {second  revision)*.  It  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  the  manufacturers  of 
shampoo,  to  satisfy  themselves  of  the  derm ato logical  safety  of  their  formulation  according  to  that  standard 
before  releasing  the  product  for  sale. 

A  scheme  for  labelling  environment  friendly  products  known  as  ECO  Mark  (optional)  has  been  introduced  at  the 
instance  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Forests  (MEF),  Government  of  India.  The  ECO  Mark  is  being 
administered  by  the  Bureau  oflndian  Standards  Act,  1986  as  per  the  Resolution  No.  7 1  dated  2 1  February  1 991 
and  No.768  dated  24  August  1992  published  in  the  Gazette  of  the  Government  of  India.  For  a  product  to  be 
eligible  for  marking  with  ECO  logo,  it  shall  also  carry  the  Standard  Mark  of  BIS  besides  meeting  additional 

{Continued  on  third  cover) 


IS  7884  :  2004 


Indian  Standard 
SHAMPOO,  SURFACTANT  BASED  - 

(Third  Revision) 


SPECIFICATION 


1  SCOPE 

This  standard  prescribes  the  requirements  and  methods 
of  sampling  and  test  for  shampoo  based  on  surfactants. 

2  REFERENCES 

The  following  standards  contain  provisions  which 
through  reference  in  this  text,  constitute  provisions  of 
this  standard.  At  the  time  of  publication,  the  editions 
indicated  were  valid.  All  standards  are  subject  to 
revision,  and  parties  to  agreements  based  on  this 
standard  are  encouraged  to  investigate  the  possibility 
of  applying  the  most  recent  editions  of  the  standards 
indicated  below: 


IS  No. 
321  :  1964 
1070  :  1992 
3958  ;  1984 

4011  :  1997 

4707 

(Part  1):  2001 
(Part  2):  2001 


Title 
Absolute  alcohol  (revised) 
Reagent  grade  water  (thirdrevision) 
Methods  of  sampling  cosmetics  (first 
revision) 

Methods  of  test  for  safety  evaluation 
of  cosmetics  (second  revision) 
Classification  of  cosmetic  raw 
materials  and  adjuncts: 
Dyes,  colours  and  pigments  (second 
revision) 

List  of  raw  materials  generally  not 
recognized  as  safe  for  use  in  cosmetics 
(second  revision) 


3  REQUIREMENTS 

3.1  Description 

The  shampoo  shall  be  in  the  form  of  a  liquid,  emulsion 
or  paste.  It  may  be  coloured  and  perfumed, 

3.2  Physical  Characteristics 

The  clear/transparent  liquid  shampoo,  when  examined 
visually,  shall  be  free  from  any  sediment.  If  in  the  form 
of  an  emulsion,  it  shall  be  homogeneous  and  there  shall 
be  no  visible  signs  of  the  emulsion  having  broken. 
Shampoo  in  the  form  of  a  paste  shall  be  free  from  any 
agglomerated  particles. 

3*3  Ingredients 

Unless  specified  otherwise,  all  the  raw  materials  used 
in  the  manufacture  of  shampoo  shall  conform  to  the 


requirements  prescribed  in  the  relevant  Indian 
Standards  where  such  standards  exist. 

3.34  Dyes 

The  dyes  used,  if  any,  shall  comply  with  the  provisions 
of  IS  4707  (Part  1),  subject  to  the  provision  of  Schedule 
Q  of  the  Drugs  and  Cosmetics  Act,  issued  by  the 
Government  of  India. 

3.3.2  Other  Ingredients 

Other  ingredients  used,  if  any,  shall  comply  with  the 
provisions  of  IS  4707  (Part  2). 

3.3.3  A  list  of  ingredients  conventionally  used  in 
formulation  of  shampoos  is  given,  for  guidance,  in 
Annex  A. 

3.4  The  shampoo  shall  comply  with  the  requirements 
given  in  Table  1  when  tested  according  to  methods 
prescribed  in  Annexes.  Reference  to  relevant  Annex 
is  given  in  col  4  of  Table  1. 

Table  1  Requirements  for  Shampoo, 
Surfactant  Based 


SI 

Characteristic 

Requirement 

Method  of  Test, 

No. 

Ref  to  Annex 

0) 

(2) 

O) 

(4) 

i) 

Non-volatile  alcohol 
soluble  matter; 
percent  by  mass,  Min 

10 

B 

» 

pH 

4.0  to  9.0 

C 

iii) 

Foam  height  for  two 
percent  solution,  Min 

150  mm 

D 

3*5  Additional  Requirements  for  ECO  Mark 
(Optional) 

3.5.1  General  Requirements 

3.5. 1.1  The  product  shall  conform  to  the  requirements 
for  quality,  safety  and  performance  given  in  3.5. 1 .2  to 
3.5.1.5. 

3.5.1.2  All  the  ingredients  that  go  into  formulation  of 
cosmetics  shall  comply  with  the  provisions  of  IS  4707 
(Part  1)  and  IS  4707  (Part  2).The  product  shall  also 
meet  specific  requirements  as  given  in  the  standard. 

3.5.1.3  The  product  package  shall  display  a  list  of  key 
ingredients  in  descending  order  of  quantity  present. 

3.5.1.4  The  product  shall  not  be  manufactured  from 
any  carcinogenic  ingredients. 


IS  7884  :  2004 


3,5.1.5  The  manufacturer  shall  produce  to  BIS 
environmental  consent  clearance  from  the  concerned 
State  Pollution  Control  Board  as  per  the  provisions  of 
the  Water  (Prevention  and  Control  of  Pollution)  Cess 
Act,  1977  and  the  Air  (Prevention  and  Control  of 
Pollution)  Act,  1981  along  with  the  authorization,  if 
required  under  the  Environment  (Protection)  Act,  1986 
and  the  Rules  made  there  under,  while  applying  for 
ECO  Mark.  Additionally,  provisions  of  the  Drugs  and 
Cosmetics  Act,  1940  and  the  Rules  thereunder  shall 
also  be  complied  with. 

3.6  Specific  Requirements 

3.6.1  Product  shall  be  dermatologically  safe  when 
tested  as  per  IS  4011; 

3.6.2  Biodegradable  agents  wherever  used  in  cosmetic 
formulations  shall  be  as  per  their  limit  finalized  for 
synthetic  detergents  for  ECO  Mark  by  the  technical 
committee. 

3.6.3  Heavy  metals  calculated  as  lead  (Pb)  and  arsenic 
(As203)  shall  not  exceed  20  and  2  ppm,  respectively 
when  tested  by  the  respective  method  prescribed  in 
relevant  Indian  Standards. 

3.6.4  The  material  for  product  packaging  shall  meet 
the  parameters  evolved  under  the  scheme  oT  labelling 
environment  friendly  packaging/packaging  materials. 

4  PACKING  AND  MARKING 

4.1  Shampoo  shall  be  packed  in  glass  or  plastic 
containers  or  any  other  suitable  containers. 

4.2  The  containers  shall  be  legibly  marked  with  the 
following  information: 

a)  Name  of  the  material, 

b)  Manufacturer's  name  and/or  his  recognized 
trade-mark,  if  any; 

c)  Net  content  in  volume  for  liquids  and 
emulsions  and  in  mass  for  pastes; 

d)  Month  and  year  of  manufacturing/packing; 

e)  Batch  or  Lot  number,  in  code  or  otherwise. 

f)  'Best  use  before *  (month  and  year  to  be 

declared  by  the  manufacturer); 

NOTES  —  This  requirement  is  exempted; 


1  In  case  of  pack  sizes  of  10  g/25  ml  or  less,  and 

2  If  the  shelf  life  of  the  product  is  more  than  24  months. 

g)    List  of  key  ingredients;  and 

NOTE  —  This  is  exempted  in  case  of  pack  sizes  of 
30g/60mlorless. 

h)    Any  other  information  required  by  statutory 
authorities. 

4.2.1  BIS  Certification  Marking 

The  containers  may  also  be  marked  with  the  Standard 
Mark. 

4.2.1.1  The  use  of  the  Standard  Mark  is  governed  by 
the  provisions  of  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act, 
1986  and  the  Rules  and  Regulations  made  thereunder. 
The  details  of  conditions  under  which  the  licence 
for  the  use  of  Standard  Mark  may  be  granted  to 
manufacturers  or  producers  may  be  obtained  from  the 
Bureau  of  Indian  Standards. 

4.2.2  If  the  product  is  covered  under  ECO  Mark 
(optional),  it  shall  be  suitably  marked  with  ECO 
Mark  logo  besides  Standard  Mark.  The  label  may 
clearly  specify  that  ECO  Mark  is  applicable  to  the 
contents  or  the  package  or  both,  as  case  may  be.  If 
the  product  package  is  not  separately  covered  under 
ECO  Mark  Scheme,  it  shall  be  clearly  mentioned 
on  the  product  that  ECO  Mark  label  is  applicable  to 
contents  only. 

5  SAMPLING 

5.1  Representative  samples  of  the  material  shall  be 
drawn  as  prescribed  in  IS  3958. 

5.2  Tests  for  all  the  requirements  shall  be  carried  out 
on  a  composite  sample. 

5.3  The  shampoo  shall  be  taken  to  have  conformed  to 
this  standard  if  the  composite  sample  passes  all  the 
tests. 

6  QUALITY  OF  REAGENTS 

Unless  specified  otherwise;  pure  chemicals  and 
distilled  water  (see  IS  1070)  shall  be  employed  in  tests. 

NOTE  —  'Pure  chemicals*  shall  mean  chemicals  that  do  not 
contain  impurities  which  affect  the  results  of  analysis. 


IS  7884  :  2004 


ANNEX  A 

(Clause  3.3  J) 

LIST  OF  RAW  MATERIAL  CONVENTIONALLY  USED  IN  FORMULATION  OF 
SURFACTANT  BASED  SHAMPOOS 


A-l  DETERGENTS 

a)  Sodium  or  potassium  or  ethanolamine  salts 
of  lauryl  sulphonic  acid, 

b)  Lauryl  ether  sulphates, 

c)  Sulphated  monoglycerides, 

d)  Sodium  alky]  sulpho-acetate, 

e)  AlkyI  benzene  polyoxyethyl  sulphonalcs, 
0     Sodium  n-lauryl  sarcosinate, 

g)    Sodium  alpha  olefin  sulphonates,  and 
h)    Other  synthetic  detergents. 

A  2  FOAM  STABILIZERS 

a)  Ethanolamides  or  isopropanolamides  of  fatty 
acids, 

b)  Amine  oxides, 

c)  Cocobetaines,  and 

d)  Cocoamidopropyl  betaines. 

A-3  CHELATING  AGENTS 

a)  Sodium  polyphosphates,  and 

b)  Sodium  salts  of  ethylenediam  ine  tetra-acetic 
acid. 

A-4  SOLUBILIZING  AGENTS 

a)  Urea, 

b)  Aliphatic  alcohols, 

c)  Sodium  toluene  sulphonate,  and 

d)  Sodium  xylene  sulphonate. 


A-5  PRESERVATIVES 

a) 

Alcohols, 

b) 

Formaldehyde, 

c) 

Esters  of  phydroxybenzoic 

acid, 

d) 

Sorbic  acid,  and 

e) 

Imidozolidiny]  urea. 

A-6  OPACIFYING  AGENTS 

a)  Higher  fatty  alcohols, 

b)  Ethylene/Propylene  glycol  stearates, 

c)  Mono  and  di-stearates  of  glycerol, 

d)  Zinc,  calcium  and  magnesium  salts  of  fatty 
acids, 

e)  PEG-distearate  6000,  and 

f)  Polyacryiates. 

A-7  INORGANIC  SALTS 

a)  Sodium  chloride, 

b)  Sodium  sulphate, 

c)  Sodium  phosphate, 

d)  Ammonium  sulphate, 

e)  Ammonium  phosphate,  and 

f)  Ammonium  chloride, 

A-8  EMOLLIENTS 

Lanolin  and  its  derivatives. 
A-9  THICKENING  AGENTS 

a)  Sodium  carboxymethyl  cellulose, 

b)  Methyl  cellulose, 

c)  Methyl  isopropyl  cellulose,  and 

d)  Guar  gum. 

A-10  OTHER  GROUPS  OF  INGREDIENTS 

a)  Perfumes, 

b)  Dyes, 

c)  Conditioning  agents, 

d)  Quatenary  compounds, 

e)  Vitamins, 

f)  Vegetable  oils, 

g)  Silicones, 

h)    Proteins,  and 
j)     Sunscreens,  etc. 


IS  7884  :  2004 


ANNEXE 

[Table  I,  SI  No.  (i)] 

DETERMINATION  OF  NON- VOLATILE  ALCOHOL  SOLUBLE  MATTER 


B-l  GENERAL 

This  method  determines  the  amount  of  non-volatile 
alcohol  soluble  matter  in  surfactant  based  shampoos. 

B-2  REAGENTS 

B-2. 1  Ethyl  Alcohol — Neutral,  conforming  to  IS  32 1 . 

B-2.2  Methyl  Red  Indicator  Solution  —  Dissolve 
0.1  g  of  methyl  red  in  300  ml  of  ethyl  alcohol  and 
200  ml  of  water. 

B-2.3  Potassium  Chromate  Solution  —  10  percent 
solution. 

B-2.4  Nitric  Acid  Dilute  —1:4  (v/v). 
B-2.5  Silver  Nitrate  Solution  —  0. 1  M. 
B-3  PROCEDURE 

B-3.1  Weigh  accurately  about  10  g  of  the  sample  into 
a  1 50  ml  beaker.  Evaporate  on  a  steam-bath  to  almost 
complete  dryness.  Digest  with  50  ml  of  96  percent  ethyl 
alcohol  by  heating  on  a  steam  bath  for  about  2  min. 
Filter  the  hot  alcoholic  solution  through  a  sintered  glass 
filter  funnel  fitted  to  a  Buchner  flask  to  which  suction 
is  applied.  Wash  the  beaker  and  the  residue  in  the 
sintered  glass  funnel  5  times  with  30  ml  portions  of 
hot  ethyl  alcohol. 

B-3*2  Transfer  the  filtrate  in  the  Buchner  flask  to  a 
weighed  wide  mouth  flat-bottomed  flask.  Evaporate 
nearly  to  dryness  on  a  water  bath  and  drive  off  the 
remaining  alcohol  by  directing  a  gentle  stream  of  dry 
air  into  the  flask  whilst  continuously  rotating  the  latter 
in  the  water  bath.  Heat  the  flask  in  an  air  oven  at  a 
temperature  of  105°C  until  constant  mass.  Calculate 
mass  percent  of  residue  obtained. 


Mass,  percent  Mass  ofresidue  obtained  x  i  oo 

of  residue  (1)  «  — : — r~r~t — ;: 

Mass,  in  g,  of  the  material  taken  for  tes 

B-3,3  Dissolve  the  residue  in  50  ml  of  distilled  water 
and  add  to  it  2  drops  of  methyl  red  indicator  solution. 
If  the  solution  is  yellow  in  colour,  neutralize  it  by 
adding  dilute  nitric  acid  drop  by  drop  to  get  pink  colour. 
Titrate  the  solution  with  silver  nitrate  solution  using 
2.5  ml  of  potassium  chromate  solution  as  indicator, 
till  a  brown  colour  is  obtained.  Carry  out  a  blank 
determination  using  the  same  quantity  of  all  reagents 
except  the  sample. 

B-3*4  Calculate  the  chloride  content  in  shampoo  in 
terms  of  molecular  mass  of  sodium  chloride  (X)  in 
percent  by  the  formula: 


Sodium  chloride  in  percent  (X)  - 


V  x  0.584  4 
M 


where 


K=  volume,  in  ml,  of  standard  silver  nitrate 
solution  required  for  the  material  minus 
volume,  in  ml,  of  standard  silver  nitrate 
solution  required  for  the  blank;  and 

M = mass,  in  g,  of  the  material  taken  for  test. 
B-3»5  Calculation 

To  calculate  percent  non-volatile  alcohol  soluble 
matter,  subtract  the  mass  percent  of  sodium  chloride 
as  determined  in  B-3.4  as  (X)  from  the  mass  percent  of 
the  residue  (Y)  obtained  in  R-3.2. 

Percent  non-volatile  alcohol  soluble  matter  = 
Y-X 


ANNEX C 

[Table  I,  SI  No.  (ii)] 

DETERMINATION  OF/>H 


C-1  APPARATUS 

pH  meter  equipped  with  glass  electrode. 

C-2  PROCEDURE 

Determ  ine  the  pH  at  a  temperature  of  27  ±  2°C.  In  the 


case  of  liquid  shampoo,  read  the  ptt  directly  in  the 
sample  in  the/?H  meter.  In  the  case  of  a  shampoo  in 
the  form  of  a  powder  or  paste,  mix  lg  of  the  sample 
with  9  ml  of  water  and  determine  the  pH  of  the  resulting 
solution. 


IS  7884  :  2004 


ANNEX  D 

[Table  U  SI  No.  (in)] 
DETERMINATION  OF  FOAM  HEIGHT 


D-l  OUTLINE  OF  THE  METHOD 

In  order  to  check  the  ability  of  a  shampoo  to  produce 
lather,  the  volume  of  foam  obtained  under  specific 
experimental  conditions  is  determined, 

D-2  APPARATUS 
D-24  Pipette 

The  pipette  shown  in  Fig.  1  shall  be  constructed  from 
standard-wall  chemically  resistant  glass  tubing  having 
the  following  dimensions: 

a)  For  the  bulb,  45.0  ±  1 .5  mm  outside  diameter; 
and 

b)  For  the  lower  stem,  7.0  ±  0.5  mm  outside 
diameter. 


c^JO 


20Oml 


-45  OD- 


2.9  ID  ORIFICE 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 
Fig.  1   Foam  Pipette 


The  upper  stem  shall  be  constructed  to  contain  a  solid- 
stopper,  straight  bore,  No.  2,  standard  taper  stopcock 
having  a  2-mm  bore  and  stems  8  mm  in"  outside 
diameter.  Both  the  upper  and  lower  seals  of  the  bulb 
to  the  stems  shall  be  hemispherical  in  shape.  The  lower 
stem  shall  be  60  ±  2  mm  in  length  from  the  point  of 
attachment  to  the  bulb  and  shall  contain  an  orifice 
sealed  into  the  lower  end.  The  orifice  shall  be 
constructed  from  precision  bore  tubing  having  an  inside 
diameter  of  2.90  ±  0.02  mm  and  a  length  of  10.00  ± 
0.05  mm,  with  both  ends  ground  square.  The  orifice 
shall  have  an  outside  diameter  so  as  to  fit  snugly  into 
the  lower  stem  and  form  a  secure  seal  to  the  stem  when 
heated  with  a  sharp  pointed  flame  in  the  blow  torch. 
The  pipette  shall  be  calibrated  to  contain  200.0  ± 
0.2  ml  at  20°C.  The  calibration  mark  shall  be  on  the 
upper  stem  at  least  15  mm  below  the  barrel  of  the 
stopcock  and  shall  completely  encircle  the  stem. 

D-2.2  Receiver 

The  receiver  shown  in  Fig.  2  shall  be  constructed  from 
standard-wall,  chemically  resistant  glass  tubing  having 
an  internal  diameter  of  50.0  ±  0.8  mm,  with  one  end 
constricted  and  sealed  to  a  straight-bore,  solid-plug, 
standard-taper  No.  6  stopcock  having  a  6-mm  bore  and 
12-mm  stems.  The  receiver  shall  have  three  calibration 
marks  which  shall  completely  encircle  the  tube.  The 
first  mark  shall  be  at  the  50-ml  point,  shall  be  measured 
with  the  stopcock  closed,  and  shall  not  be  on  any  curved 
portion  of  the  constriction.  The  second  mark  shall  be 
at  the  250-ml  point,  and  the  third  mark  at  a  distance  of 
90.0  ±  0.5  cm  above  the  50-ml  mark.  The  receiver  tube 
shall  be  mounted  in  a  standard-wall  tubular  water 
jacket,  having  an  external  diameter  of  not  less  than 
70  mm,  fitted  with  inlet  and  outlet  connections.  The 
jacket  may  be  attached  to  the  receiver  with  rubber . 
stoppers  or  may  be  sealed  at  the  top  and  bottom.  The* 
seal  at  the  bottom  shall  be  as  close  to  the  barrel  of  the 
stopcock  as  practicable.  The  assembled  receiver  and 
jacket  shall  be  mounted  securely  in  a  plumb  position 
and  the  jacket  connected  to  a  source  of  water 
thermostatically  maintained  at  48.0  ±  0.5°C  for 
circulating  through  the  jacket.  At  the  top  of  the  receiver 
there  shall:  be  a  platform,  flush  with  the  top  of  the 
assembly,  having  a  metal  plate  in  which  is  drilled  three 
indexing  holes  circumferentially  placed  around  the 
receiver  and  having  an  angular  displacement  of  120° 
from  each  other.  A  clamp  which  may  be  securely 
attached  to  the  upper  part  of  the  pipette,  shall  fit  into 
the  holes.  The  clamp  shall  have  three  levelling  screws 


IS  7884  :  2004 


and  lock  nuts  and  when  properly  mounted  shall  exactly 
centre  the  pipette  in  the  receiver  and  bring  the  lower 
tip  of  the  pipette  level  with  the  upper  calibration  mark 
on  the  receiver.  A  metre  stick  shall  be  fastened  to  the 
side  or  behind  the  receiver  with  the  zero  point  level 
with  the  250  ml  calibration  point  on  the  receiver. 


-  50  id  - 
■  70  OD 


900 


250  ml 


50  ml 


All  dimensions  in  millimetres. 

Fig.  2  Foam  Receiver 
D-3  PREPARATION  OF  SAMPLE  SOLUTION 

Distilled  water,  or  water  hardness  100  expressed  in 
parts  per  million  of  calcium  carbonate  shall  be  taken 


for  test  Preheat  the  water  to  a  temperature  of  30  ±  2°C 
Add  500  ml  of  water  to  10  g  of  shampoo  solution  while 
stirring  vigorously.  Continue  stirring  in  such  a  manner 
until  miscibility  of  shampoo  with  water  is  complete. 
Age  the  solution  at  a  temperature  of  30  ±  2°C  for  a 
total  period  of  30  min  counting  the  time  when  the 
shampoo  is  first  added  to  the  water. 

D-4  PROCEDURE 

While  the  shampoo  solution  is  aging,  circulate  water 
at  30  ±  2°C  through  the  water  jacket  of  the  receiver 
so  as  to  bring  it  to  the  proper  temperature.  Rinse  down 
the  walls  of  the  receiver  with  distilled  water  and,  as 
an  indication  of  cleanliness,  observe  whether  the 
water  drains  down  the  walls  in  an  unbroken  film.  At 
the  completion  of  the  aging  period  close  the  stopcock 
at  the  bottom  of  the  receiver.  Rinse  the  walls  of  the 
receiver  with  50  ml  of  the  solution,  using  a  pipette, 
and  after  draining  to  the  bottom  of  the  receiver,  adjust 
the  stopcocks  so  that  the  level  of  the  solution  in  the 
receiver  is  exactly  at  the  50  ml  mark.  Fill  the  pipette 
with  the  solution  to  the  200  ml  mark,  using  a  slight 
suction  for  the  purpose.  Immediately  place  it  in 
position  at  the  top  of  the  receiver  and  open  the 
stopcock.  When  all  of  the  solution  has  run  out  of  the 
pipette,  start  a  stop-watch,  take  a  reading  of  the  foam 
height  and  take  a  second  reading  at  the  end  of  5  min. 
Take  the  reading  by  measuring  the  foam  production 
at  the  top  of  the  foam  column  at  the  highest  average 
height  to  which  the  rim  of  the  foam  has  reached.  This 
height  is  proportional  to  the  volume  of  air  remaining 
in  the  foam. 

D-5  REPORTING 

a)  Concentration,  in  g/1; 

b)  Temperature  of  the  test; 

c)  Degree  of  hardness  of  water; 

d)  Initial  foam  height;  and 

e)  Foam  height  after  5  min. 

D-5J  The  foam  height  of  two  percent  shampoo  solution 
shall  not  be  less  than  the  specified  limit  in  Table  1 . 


IS  7884 :  2004 


ANNEXE 

(Foreword) 

IDEAL  PROPERTIES  OF  A  SHAMPOO 


E-l  EASE  OF  APPLICATION 

The  shampoo  should  be  viscous  enough  to  stay  in  the 
hand  before  application  to  the  hair  and  scalp,  yet  during 
application  the  shampoo  must  spread  easily  and 
disperse  quickly  over  the  head  and  hair. 

E-2  RINSING 

The  shampoo  should  rinse  out  easily  and  should  not 
leave  a  residua!  tackiness  or  stickiness.  It  should  not 
precipitate  in  hard  water  since  insoluble  calcium  and 
magnesium  salts  form  a  dulling  film  on  the  hair. 

E-3  EASY  WET  COMBING 

After  rinsing  the  hair  should  comb  through  easily 
without  tangling. 

E-4  MANAGEABILITY 

The  hair  should  be  left  in  a  manageable  condition 
when  combed  dry.  There  should  be  no  fly-away  or 
frizziness. 

E-5  LUSTER 

The  hair  should  be  left  in  a  lustrous  condition. 
E-6  BODY 

The  hair  should  have  body  when  dry,  that  is  hair  should 
not  be  limp  or  over  conditioned. 


E-7  FRAGRANCE 

A  fragrance  should  be  used  that  not  only  covers  any 
objectionable  odour  due  to  components  used  to 
formulate  the  shampoo  but  which  develops  a  clean 
refreshing  scent  during  shampooing  and  leaves  a  clean 
residual  scent  on  the  hair.  This  could  be  a  major  factor 
in  consumer  acceptance  of  the  product. 

E-8  LOW  LEVEL  OF  IRRITATION 

The  formulator  should  try  to  accomplish  all  of  the 
above  qualities  while  keeping  the  irritation  level  as 
low  as  possible. 

E-9  WELL  PRESERVED 

The  product  must  be  properly  preserved  against 
bacterial  and  fungal  contamination. 

E-10  GOOD  STABILITY 

The  product  should  have  good  stability  for  at  least  two 
or  three  years  at  room  temperature  as  well  as  when 
stored  in  daylight  or  in  warehouses  with  low  or  high 
ambient  temperatures. 

E-Il  ECONOMICAL 

The  product  should  not  be  over- formulated.  The 
formulation  should  be  as  simple  as  possible  using  only 
those  raw  materials  that  are  necessary  to  accomplish 
the  desired  goal. 


IS  7884  :  2004 


ANNEX F 

(Foreword) 

COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION 

Cosmetics  Sectional  Committee,  PCD  19 


Organization 
Directorate  General  of  Health  Services,  New  Delhi 
All  India  Small  Scale  Cosmetic  Manufacturer's  Association, 
Mumbai 

Bengal  Chemicals  &  Pharmaceuticals  Ltd,  Kolkata 

Central  Drugs  Laboratory,  Kolkata 

Central  India  Pharmacopoeia  Laboratory,  Ghaziabad 

Consumer  education  and  Research  Centre,  Ahmedabad 

Consumer  Guidance  Society,  Mumbai 

Colgate-Palmolive  (India)  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Commissioner,  Food  &  Drugs  Administration,  Mumbai 

Dabur  Research  Foundation,  Sahibabad 

Food  &  Drugs  Control  Administration  Gujarat  State, 

Gandhi  nagar 
Godrej  Soaps  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Hindustan  Lever  Research  Centre,  Mumbai 

Hygienic  Research  Institute,  Mumbai 

Indian  Soaps  and  Toiletries  Members  Association,  Mumbai 
Johnson  &  Johnson  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Lady  Irwin  College,  New  Delhi 
Lady  Amrilbai  Doga  College,  Nagpur 
Maharishi  Ayurved  Products,  Noida  (U.P.) 

Procter  &  Gamble,  Mumbai 

Bajaj  Sevashram.  Udaipur 

Shingar  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Le'Oreal  India  Pvt  Ltd,  Umbergaon,  Gujarat 
Balsara  Home  Products,  Mumbai 
Kmami  Limited,  Kolkata 


Representative(s) 

Shri  Ashwini  Kumar  {Chairman) 

Shri  M.  B.  Desai 

Shri  B.  M.  Chopra  (Alternate  I) 
Shri  S.  Chatterjee  {Alternate  II) 

Dr  Sajal  K.  Roy  Chowdhury 
Dr.  A.  K.  Mandal  (Alternate) 

Dr  M.  K.  Mazumder 

Dr  A.  C.  Das  Gupta  (Alternate) 

Dr  Santosh  K  Talwar 

Dr  Sukomal  Das  (Alternate) 

Dr  C.  J.  Shishoo 

Shri  Y,  S.  Yellore  (Alternate) 

Shri  N.  G.  Wagle 

Dr  S.  G.  Bhat  (Alternate) 

Dr  Raj  Kohu 

Shri  Sunil  Agcarwal  (Alternate  X) 
Dr  Neena  Sharma  (Alternate  11) 

Shri  K.  B.  Shende 

Dr  N.  M.  Sunder 

Dr  B.  N.  Patel 

Shrimati  R.  B.  Desai  (Alternate) 

Shri  A.  Rangarajan 

Dr  (Shrimati)  Rohini  Thakkar  (Alternate) 

Shri  V.  R,  Dhanuka, 

Shri  N.  S.  Bulani  (Alternate) 

Shri  M.  B.  Desai 

Shri  Manish  K.  Chhabra  (Alternate) 

Shri  R.  Hariharan 

Dr  Prashakt  Abhyankar 

Dr  V.  R.  Bambulkar  (Alternate) 

The  Principal 

Dr  (Shrimati)  S.  B.  Kulkarni 

Dr  S.  C.  Saxena 

Shri  D.  K  Shrivastava  (Alternate) 

Dr  Arun  Viswanath 

Shrimati  Shweta  Purandare  (Alternate) 

Shri  R.  F.  Hinger 

Dr.  S.  Adhikari  (Alternate) 

Shri  V.  K.  Singh 

Shrimati  Swati  Singh  {Alternate) 

Dr  Archana  Shekher 

Dr  K,  C.  Gounden 

Prof  B.  K.  Gupta 


IS  7884  :*2004 


Organization 
Marieo  India  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Cavinkare  Ltd,  Chennai 

BIS  Directorate  General 


Representative  (s) 

SHRI   R.   MOHILE 

Shri  Benedict  M  (Alternate) 

Dr  M.  P.  Prasad 

Dr  G.  V,  Rao  (Alternative) 

Shri  Anjan  Kar,  Director  and  Head  (PCD) 
[Representing  Director  General  (Ex-officio)] 


Member  Secretary 

Dr  (Shrimati)  Vijay  Malik 

Director  (PCD),  BIS 


Composition  of  Hair  Care  Products  Subcommittee,  PCD  19  :  2 


Godrej  Soaps  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Bengal  Chemicals  &  Pharmaceuticals  Ltd,  Kolkata 

Cavin  Kare  Ltd,  Chennai 

Consumer  Guidance  Society,  Mumbai 

l?ood  &  Drugs  Administration,  Mumbai 
Food  &  Drugs  Control  Admn,  Gandhi nagar 

M/s  Wyeth  Lederle  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Hindustan  Lever  Research  Centre,  Mumbai 

Hygienic  Research  Institute,  Mumbai 

Impression  Cosmetics,  Faridabad 

Johnson  &  Johnson  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Marieo  Indusrties  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Procter  &  Gamble  India  Ltd,  Mumbai 

Lady  Amritbai  Doga  College,  Nagpur 
Le'Oreal  India  Pvt  Ltd,  Gujarat 
Mayar  India  Ltd,  Delhi 


Dr  (Shrimati)  Rohini  Thakkar  (Convener) 
Shrj  A.  Rangarajan  (Alternate) 

Dr  S,  K.  Roy  Chowdhury 

Dr  A.  K.  Mandal  (Alternate) 

Dr  M.  P.  Prasad 

Dr  G.  V.  Rao  (Alternate) 

Shri  N.  G.  Wagle 

Dr  S.  G.  Bhat  (Alternate) 
Shri  K.  B.    Shende 

Dr  B.  N.    Patel 

Shrimati  R.  B.  Desai  (Alternate) 

Shri  M.  V,  Bulbule 

Shri  S.  R.  Kulshreshtha  (Alternate) 

Shri  V.  R.  Dhanuka 

Shri  K  S,  Bijlani  (Alternate) 

Shri  M,  B.  Desai 

Shri  Manish  K,  Chhabra  (Alternate) 

Shrimati  Shashi  Gupta 

Shri  M.  K.  Gupta  (Alternate) 

Dr  Prashant  Abhyankar 

Dr  V.  R.  Bambulkar  (Alternate) 

Shri  R.  B.  Mohile 

Shri  Benedict  M.  (Alternate) 

Dr  Arun  Viswanath 

Shrimati  Shweta  Purandarh  (Alternate) 
Dr  (Shrimati)  S.  B.  Kulkarni 
Dr  Archana  Shekher 
Dr  S.  Adhikari 


AMENDMENT  NO.  1  AUGUST  2008 

TO 

IS  7884  :  2004  SHAMPOO,  SURFACTANT  BASED  — 

SPECIFICATION 

(  Third  Revision  ) 

(Page  2,  clause  3.6)  —  Read  this  clause  as  '3.5.2  Specific  Requirements'. 
(Page  2,  clause  3.6.1)  —  Renumber  this  clause  as  3.5.2.1. 
(Page  2,  clause  3.6.2)  —  Renumber  this  clause  as  3.5.2.2. 
(Page  2,  clause  3.6.3)  —  Renumber  this  clause  as  3.5.2.3. 
(Page  2,  clause  3.6.4)  —  Renumber  this  clause  as  3.5.2.4. 


(PCD  19) 


Reprography  Unit,  BIS,  New  Delhi,  India 


{Continued  from  second  cover) 

environment  friendly  requirements.  For  this  purpose,  the  Standard  Mark  of  BIS  would  be  a  single  mark  being  a 
combination  of  the  BIS  monogram  ED  and  the  ECO  logo.  Requirements  for  the  ECO  friendliness  will  be  additional, 
manufacturing  units  will  be  free  to  opt  for  Standard  Mark  alone  also. 

The  Committee  responsible  for  the  formulation  of  this  standard  is  given  in  Annex  F. 

For  the  purpose  of  deciding  whether  a  particular  requirement  of  this  standard  is  complied  with,  the  final  value, 
observed  or  calculated,  expressing  the  result  of  a  test  or  analysis,  shall  be  rounded  off  in  accordance  with  IS  2  :  1 960 
1  Rules  for  rounding  off  numerical  values  (revised)'.  The  number  of  significant  places  retained  in  the  rounded  off 
value  should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  specified  value  in  this  standard. 


Bureau  of  Indian  Standards 

BIS  is  a  statutory  institution  established  under  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  Act,  1986  to  promote 
harmonious  development  of  the  activities  of  standardization,  marking  and  quality  certification  of  goods  and 
attending  to  connected  matters  in  the  country. 

Copyright 

BIS  has  the  copyright  of  all  its  publications.  No  part  of  these  publications  may  be  reproduced  in  any  form 
without  the  prior  permission  in  writing  of  BIS.  This  does  not  preclude  the  free  use,  in  the  course  of  implementing 
the  standard,  of  necessary  details,  such  as  symbols  and  sizes,  type  or  grade  designations.  Enquiries  relating  to 
copyright  be  addressed  to  the  Director  (Publications),  BIS. 

Review  of  Indian  Standards 

Amendments  are  issued  to  standards  as  the  need  arises  on  the  basis  of  comments.  Standards  are  also  reviewed 
periodically;  a  standard  along  with  amendments  is  reaffirmed  when  such  review  indicates  that  no  changes  are 
needed;  if  the  review  indicates  that  changes  are  needed,  it  is  taken  up  for  revision.  Users  of  Indian  Standards 
should  ascertain  that  they  are  in  possession  of  the  latest  amendments  or  edition  by  referring  to  the  latest  issue  of 
'BIS  Catalogue'  and  'Standards:  Monthly  Additions'. 

This  Indian  Standard  has  been  developed  from  Doc:  No.  PCD  19  (2226). 

Amendments  Issued  Since  Publication 
Amend  No.  Date  of  Issue  Text  Affected 


BUREAU  OF  INDIAN  STANDARDS 
Headquarters: 

Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg,  New  Delhi  1 10002 

Telephones:  2323  0131,  2323  3375,  2323  9402  website  :  www.bis.org.in 

Regional  Offices:  Telephones 

Central       :  Manak  Bhavan,  9  Bahadur  Shah  Zafar  Marg  r  2323  7617 

NEW  DELHI  1 10002  12323  3841 

Eastern       :  1/14  C.I.T.  Scheme  VII  M,  V.I.P.  Road,  Kankurgachi  r2337  8499,  2337  8561 

KOLKATA  700054  12337  8626,  2337  9120 

Northern     :  SCO  335-336,  Sector  34-A,  CHANDIGARH  160022  r  260  3843 

1260  9285 

Southern     :  C.I.T.  Campus,  IV  Cross  Road,  CHENNAI  6001 13  f  2254  1216,  2254  1442 

12254  2519,2254  2315 

Western      :  Manakalaya,  E9  MIDC,  Marol,  Andheri  (East)  r  2832  9295,  2832  7858 

MUMBAI  400093  12832  7891,  2832  7892 

Branches  :  AHMEDABAD.  BANGALORE.  BHOPAL.  BHUBANESHWAR.  COIMBATORE.  FARIDABAD. 
GHAZIABAD.  GUWAHATL  HYDERABAD.  JAIPUR.  KANPUR.  LUCKNOW.  NAGPUR. 
NALAGARH.  PATNA.  PUNE.  RAJKOT.  THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.  VISAKHAPATNAM, 


Printed  at  Simco  Printing  Press,  Delhi 


