( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS:9865-1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR LABORATORY WEIGHTS
Educational Instruments and Equipment Sectional Committee, EDC 77
Chairman DR B. SHARAN Members SHRI C. L. BATRA SHRI R. K. BATRA( Alternate > SHRI K. S. BHANDARI SKRI P. K. BHATTACHARYA SHRI S. R. CHOPRA SHRI K. M. DARGAR PROF N. R. DAVE DR K. GOPALAN DR R. G. KUMBLE SHRI LAKSHMISAGAR SHR~S. P. TUTEIA ( Alternate ) SHRI M. L. MADAN SHRI S. N. DHAWAN ( Alternate ) SHRI K. MANIVANNAN SHRI P. K. JAIN ( Alternate) SHRI H. L. MEHANURU SHRI B. P. MITTAL Representing National Council of Educational Training, New Delhi Research and

Towa Optics ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi National Council of Educational Research and Training ( Deptt of Education in Science & Mathematics !, New Delhi Planning Commrssion ( Education Division ), New Delhi Ministry of Industry and Industrial Development Directorate of Technical Education, Government of Gujarat, Ahmadabad Ministry of Education & Social Welfare Department of Science & Technology, New Delhi The Scientific Instruments Manufacturers' & Dealers' Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt Ambala Scientific Instruments ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt Director of Industries, Chandigarh Mfrs Association of Haryana,

Government

Directorate of Industries, Delhi Delhi Scientific Instrument Central ( CSIR ), Chandigarh

Administration, Organization

SHRI D. S. PATHANIA( Alternate , ) University Grants Commission, New Delhi PROF A. V. PATANKAR Ministry of Defence ( NHQ ) COMMANDER PREMSAGAR LT CDR Y. N. SRIVASTA~A ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

@ Copyright 1981 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infrigement of copyright under the said Act.

IS:9865-

1981

( Continued from page 1 ) Members DR R. SADANANDA All Representing India Federation of University Teachers' Organizations, Calcutta &

College

PROP M. BHAT~ACHARYYA ( Alternate ) The Scientific Instrument Co Ltd, Allahabad SHRI B. N. SINHA DR A. S. RAJPUT ( Alternate ) Modern Equipment Co, Ambala Cantt SHRI VED PRAKASH All India Instrument Manufacturers and Dealers SHRI H. C. VERMA Association, Bombay All India Science Teachers' Association, New PROP V. N. WANCH~~ Delhi SHRI R. K. MOHTA ( Akernate ) Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) SHRI S. P. BATTOO, Director ( Mech Engg )
Secretary

SHRI S. P. ABBEY Deputy Director ( Mech Engg ), ISI

Physical Sciences Subcommittee,
Convener PROF N. R. DAVE Members SHRI R. K. BATRA SHRI C. L. BATRA( Alternate ) SHRI LAKSHMISAGAR

EDC 77 : 1
Government

Directorate of Technical Education, of Gujarat, Ahmadabad

Towa Optics ( India ) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi The

Scientific Instruments Manufacturers and Dealers' Association (Regd ); and The Oriental Science Aooaratus Workshov. Ambala Cantt h8anufacturers and SHRI S. P. TUTEIA ( Alternate I ) The Scientifii - Instruments Dealers' Association ( Regd ), Ambala Cantt Workshop, Science Apparatus SHRI K. S. GUPTA ( Alternate II ) The Oriental Ambala Cantt SHRI K. MANIVANNAN Director of Industries, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh SHRI P. K. JAIN( Alternate ) The Scientific Instrument Co Ltd, Allahabad SHRI B. N. SINHA DR A. S. RAJPUT ( Akernate ) Organization Central Scientific Instruments SHRI H. S. THIARA ( CSIR ), Chandigarh SHRI H. C. ASIJA ( Alternate ) Modern Equivment Co, Ambala Cantt SHRI VED PRAKASH _ _ SHRI NEERAJPRAKASH( Alternate )

IS : 9865 - 1981

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR LABORATORY WEIG-HTS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution

on 30 June 1981, after the draft finalized by the Educational Instruments and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Laboratory weights, commonly known as analytical, chemical and physical weights, are used for weighing substances in educational laboratories. 0.3 This standard deals with the requirements of laboratory weights and is one of the series of Indian Standards on educational instruments and equipment. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960". The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the general requirements, for laboratory weights from 1 mg to 200 g.

tolerances and tests

2. CLASSIFICATION
2.1 The laboratory

weights shall be classified as under: Grade A Analytical weights for use in high precision work Grade B Chemical weights for medium accuracy work Grade C Physical weights for ordinary work -.______~~_ *Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 3

IS : 9865 - 1981 3. MATERIAL 3.1 Weights from 1 to 200 g shall be made from any of the following materials: i) Gun metal or plain brass or brass plated with rhodium, platinum or chromium. ii) Non-magnetic stainless steel ( 25 % Cr and 20 % Ni ). iii) Non-magnetic nickel-chromium alloy ( 80 % Ni and 20 % Cr ). 3.2 Weights from 1 to 500 mg shall be made materials: Grade A i) Platinum or platinum iridium i) ii) ii) Non-magnetic stainless steel iii) Tantalum iii) iv) Aluminium ( for weights of 10 mg and less ) from any of the following Grades B and C Brass ( chromium plated ) Non-magnetic stainless steel Aluminium

3.2.1 The rider shall be made of platinum, aluminium stainless steel wire. 3.3 Materials for Adjustment Weights

or non-magnetic

3.3.1 Tin, brass, stainless steel or a non-magnetic nickel-chromium alloy shall be used for adjustment weights. Lead shall not be used for this purpose. 4. DESIGN AND WORKMANSHIP 4.1 Weights shall be as compact as possible, consistent with ease of All weights shall be thoroughly clean and manipulation and identification. free from extraneous matter both externally and within cavity. In the case of plated weights, the thickness of plating shall not be less than 0.015 mm. All traces of salts and moisture after plating, specially from the cavity and screw threads of the weights and knob, shall be removed. The weights shall be polished bright. 4.2 The design of stems and knobs shall be such as to facilitate the use of forceps. 4.3 The weights may be slightly relieved at the centre of the base, but the rim shall not be unduly narrow or convex. 4.4 Fractional weight shall be made from sheet metal in different shapes for ease of identification. 4

IS : 9865 - 1981 5. WElGHT 5.1 Box SET

The weights shall be placed in appropriate recesses in a box or case made of plastic or bakeiite or well seasoned wood, free from visible defects such as knots, cracks, shakes, insect attack, etc. No animal or vegetable glue shall be used for fixing the lining material. The fractional weights shall be safely secured in places and a cover plate of glass or transparent plastic material with a knob in the centre, capable of being easily removed, shall be provided. ~The fractional weights may also be placed in a single container kept in a recess for the purpose in the box. The lid of the box shall be secured to the lower part by means of brass hinges and hooks. The wooden case shall be smooth, highly polished and shall have a velvet or any other soft lining. The box shall also be provided with a pair of forceps ( see 5.3 ). 5.1.1 A rider of 10 mg or 5 mg shall be supplied along with fractional weights. 5.2 Constitution of Set - The set of weights shall be constituted on the series 5, 2, 2, 1. brass, non-magnetic 5.3 Forceps - They shall be of nickel-plated stainless steel or any other corrosion resisting material, having spring action. In the case of Grade A weight box, the metal jaws of the forceps shall be ivory tipped or tipped with plastic or nylon. The forceps shall be sufficiently strong to pick up the heavier weigthts in the box without distortion. The edges of the forceps shall be smooth and rounded off. The forceps shall be 9 cm long, either curved or straight.
6. TOLERANCES 6.1 Tolerances on weights shall be as given in Table 1.

7. TESTS
7.1 Preliminary - Weights shall be inspected for quality and Inspection finish of surfaces and edges, freedom from extraneous matter and closeness of fit of the screw knob. No weight shall be magnetic. Fractional weights shall be quickly identifiable and shall not be punctured.

7.2 Dessication Test - This test is intended only for plated weights. The weights are weighed against stable standard weights before and after a period of 24 hours in an enclosure with a drying agent such as flaked caustic soda. On transfer to the balance a period of 15 minutes is allowed before weighing, and the loads on the pans are interchanged at least twice to 5

1s:9865 -1981
TABLE

1 TOLERANCES

ON LABORATORY

WEIGHTS

( Clauses 6.1 and 7.3 ) DENOMINATION r----Grade A TOLERANCE f mg ----_----_____ Grade B 3.0 l-5 1.0 0.8 0'6 0.5 0.4 o-3 0.25 o-20 0.15 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.06 0.06

Grade C 10 5 3-o 2.5 2'0 1'5 l-2 1.0 0.8 0.6 O-5 0.4 0.3 0.25 0.20 0'20 O-20

2oog

100 g

1.0 0.5 0.30 0.25 0.20 0.15 0.12 0.10 0.08 0.06 0.05 0.04 O-03 0.025 0.020 0.020 0.020

50 83
20 g

10g
5g 2g lg
500 mg 200 mg 100 mg 50 mg 20 mg 10 mg 5 mg 2 mg 1 mg

secure fully reliable results. The change in weight due to dessication shall not exceed the specified accuracy of the weight under normal condition. 7.3Determination of Error in Weights - The weights shall be compared on `weight in air basis', on a balance of suitable capacity and capable of giving accuracy of weighing as given in Table I, against standards of known mass and same density calibrated by the National Physical Laboratory. Fractional weights of whatever material shall be treated as if they have the same density as the larger weights. Comparison can be done either by substitution method or by double weighing method and the errors of the standards shall be taken into account. Before taking up the calibration, it shall be ascertained that the balance is levelled and supported on a rigid vibration-free table, the temperature of the room is not rapidly changing and there is no air draught. The balance and the weights shall be checked for their cleanliness. Value of mass of each weight shall be determined twice using two different standards. Mean of the two values shall be reported if the two values tally within the limits of~accuracy of weighing given in Table 1. 6

IS : 9865 - 1981 8. IDENTIFICATION 8.1 Every AND MARKING

weight except weights made of wire shall be stamped with numeral/numerals indicating its denomination in an indelible manner, with the symbols `g' and `VT.' for gram and `mg' and `fir. rrt.' for milligram. These symbols need not be stamped on weights of 50 mg and lower denominations. 8.2 The weight box shall be marked with the grade of weights, the manufacturer's name or trade-mark, if any, serial number and the year of manufacture. 8.2.1 The weight box shall be marked weight contained in the box. 8.2.1.1 The laboratory Certification Mark. with the highest denomination of

weight set may also be marked with the IS1

NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The IS1 Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control, which is devised and supervised by IS1 and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are aiso continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units

SYSTEM
Unit
metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

OF UNITS
Symbol k: if
K cd mol

( SI UNITS)

Quantity
Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance Supplementary Units

Quantity
Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units

Unit
radian steradian

Symbol
rad sr

Quantity
Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens

Symbol N w" Wb T HZ S V Pa

Deflnlilon N J W Wb T Hz S V Pa = = = = = 1 kg.m/sa 1 N.m 1 J/s 1 V.s 1 Wblms 1 c/s ( s-l ) 1 A/V 1 W/A 1 NJ/m2

volt
Pascal

