IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


(Reaffirmed 2018) 


WRG Wh 
Pam oars use — fesm-frués 


AMT 5 Tey q Ala Was 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT — GUIDELINES 
PART 5 HEALTH AND SAFETY MANAGEMENT 


ICS 03.100.40; 91.010.01;13.100 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


December 2013 Price Group 7 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 5) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A construction project is an endeavor undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create a built 
facility suited to the defined functional objectives. From inception to commissioning, the project goes through 
various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage involves specific 
inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a project from 
commencement to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 

b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 
procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 


c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off; 


d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation, if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the built 
facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time overruns, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal 
is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial 
and other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and 
technical processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top 
management commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of 
the public domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through 
appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 “Guidelines for construction project management’. Part 1 General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management 
and Part 2 Time management published as IS 15883 (Part 2) : 2013, covers guidelines for completing the project 
within the allocated time through provisions on time planning, time monitoring and time control as part of the 
time management process. The other parts of the standard are under formulation which will cover functions such 
as scope management, procurement management, cost management, quality management, risk management, 
communication management, human resources management, health and safety management, sustainability 
management and integration management. 


This standard (Part 5) on health and safety management has been formulated with the aim to provide guidelines 
for completing the project in a safe manner and without harm to safety and health of the employees and others 


(Continued on third cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT — GUIDELINES 
PART 5 HEALTH AND SAFETY MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 5) covers guidelines for health 
and safety management aspects of construction project 
management. 


1.2 The health and safety management aspects to be 
considered during project formulation and appraisal 
up to the stage of preparation of preliminary proposals 
for financial approval are not covered in this standard. 
This standard, therefore, covers the stages subsequent 
to the stage of approval (when a decision to implement 
the project including its financing is taken) till 
commissioning and handing over of the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Part 1). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


3786 : 1983 Method for computation of 
frequency and severity rates for 
industrial injuries and classification 
of industrial accidents (first revision) 
Managing environment, occupational 
health and safety legal compliance — 
Requirements of good practices 

Guidelines for construction project 


15793 : 2007 


15883 (Part 1) : 


2009 management: Part 1 General 
18001 : 2007 Occupational health and safety 

management system — 
Requirements with guidance for use 
(first revision) 

SP 7 (Part 7): National building code of India 2005: 

2005 Part 7 Constructional practices and 
safety 

SP 70: 2001 Handbook on construction safety 
practices 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS 18001 and IS 3786 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


4.1 Every construction project has an impact on health 
and safety during the project execution and its use 
subsequently. Construction projects have significant 
health and safety hazards which need to be managed 
systematically from the pre-construction stage of the 
project to achieve adverse incident free completion. 


The activities under health and safety management may 
be grouped under the following stages: 


a) Pre-construction stage: 
1) Project development, 
2) Planning for construction, and 
3) Tender action. 
b) Construction stage. 
c) Commissioning and handing over stage. 


4.2 Detailed requirements of health and safety 
management system are given in IS 18001. 
Requirements of good practices for managing 
environment, occupational health and safety legal 
compliance are covered in IS 15793. This standard 
prescribes requirements in addition to IS 18001 and 
IS 15793 and gives guidelines on implementing these 
requirements specific to a construction project. 


4.3 The requirements prescribed in various central and 
state regulations including Building and other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and 
Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 and Rules framed 
thereunder with respect to managing health and safety 
in construction projects, shall be complied with. 


4.4 Organizational Structure for Health and Safety 
Management 


4.4.1 Organizational structure depends on the project 
delivery model. As an example, a typical organizational 
chart for health and safety management in a design- 
bid-build model is given in Fig. 1. 


4.4.2. Health and safety team shall directly report to 
the project manager. 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


4.4.3 Health and Safety Organizational Structure in b) Construction — This is carried out generally 
Various Stages of Construction through one or more contractors. Each 
contractor may engage sub-contractors, 
although the main contractor remains 
responsible for the overall performance of the 


During the stages of a construction project, activities 
may be undertaken as follows: 


a) Pre-construction — Health and safety contract. Typical health and safety 
management during this stage may be carried organizational structure of a construction 
out in-house and/or through a consultant. agency is given in Fig. 2. 


OWNER/CLIENT 
OR 
HIS REPRESENTATIVE 


PROJECT 
MANAGER 


CONSULTANTS 


pA Iu, =, = INDIVIDUAL 
CONSTRUCTION AGENCY 


HEALTH AND 
SAFETY | |PLANNING | | DESIGN DUET SERVICES 


NOTE — ‘Consultants’ may cover in-house teams or outside consultants. 


OTHER HEALTH AND SAFETY 
CONSULTANTS DIVISION 


Fic. 1 TYPICAL ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE FOR HEALTH AND SAFETY MANAGEMENT IN DESIGN-BID-BUILD MODEL 


PROJECT MANAGER OF 
CONSTRUCTION AGENCY CORPORATE HEALTH & SAFETY 
| 


CONSTRUCTION PLANT AND 
MANAGER MACHINERY ey AND ACCTS 
CIVIL MANAGER 


PLANNING 
MANAGER 


FUNCTIONAL REPORTING SSS SS 
ADMINISTRATIVE REPORTING 


Fic. 2 TypicAL HEALTH AND SAFETY ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE OF A CONSTRUCTION AGENCY 


2 


c) Commissioning and handing over — While 
the construction agency or agencies may hand 
over the project or the concerned component, 
owner may also be involved in commissioning 
and subsequent operation of the project 


The organizational structure for health and safety 
management process may vary from project to project 
depending on size of the project, delivery model and 
construction methodologies. On large and medium 
value projects, it may be necessary to have a separate 
health and safety team for each sub-contractor who in 
turn shall report to health and safety team of the main 
construction agency. In small value projects, this role 
may be merged with some other functions. 


5 MANAGEMENT OF HEALTH AND SAFETY 
IN DIFFERENT STAGES OF THE PROJECT 


5.1 Pre-construction Stage 


Pre-construction stage activities of the project shall be 
required to be reviewed before the project management 
processes are initiated for the construction stage. It is 
desirable to assess decisions of the briefing and 
feasibility stage outputs such as overall planning and 
construction methods affecting health and safety, which 
may have bearing on construction stage. 


While the project documents and proposals are 
reviewed for the adequacy of health and safety 
measures, it is essential to ascertain time frames and 
budgets relating to health and safety measures, 
including extent of management systems proposed to 
be employed during construction. 


5.1.1 Health and Safety Management System of 
Construction Agency 


The health and safety management system of 
construction agency shall be planned from the pre- 
construction stage itself. The tender documents of the 
project shall clearly communicate the health and safety 
requirements of the project to the prospective 
contractors. This may include, 


a) project specific objectives and targets; 


b) project specific health and safety requirements 
(technical as well as management systems); 


c) requirement of posting safety officers; 


d) coordination among owner/client, project 
manager, consultants and construction agency; 


e) welfare facilities at the project for workmen; 


f) reward system for good health and safety 
performance; 


g) penalty system for non-compliances, violation 
and adverse incidents; 


h) health and safety monitoring measures; and 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


j) health and safety reports and frequency 
thereof. 


The construction agencies may be asked to submit a 
project specific health and safety plan proposing the 
methodology for managing health and safety and 
indicating their capability in completing the project in 
a safe manner. 


The proposed health and safety plans of the 
construction agencies and their past health and safety 
performance shall be considered as one of the criteria 
during pre-qualification and selection of construction 
agencies. 


It is also desirable to review and assess the need for 
enhancing the coordination amongst the owner/client, 
design and other consultants and construction agencies 
for taking appropriate actions for health and safety. 


5.2 Construction Stage 


Prior to the start of construction work, detailed planning 
shall be carried out which may include, 


a) identifying aspects of design that have bearing 
on health and safety during construction stage. 

b) while scheduling the various activities of the 
construction, making adequate time 
allowance to carry work in accordance with 
health and safety requirements. 

C) reviewing the proposed method statements of 
various activities, identifying health and 
safety hazards of activities in the project and 
assessment of the risk level. 

d) when the risk level is unacceptable, taking 
additional control measures including revision 
of the work methodology so that all identified 
risks are at ALARP (As low as reasonably 
practicable) level. 


e) planning and establishing the facilities for 
implementation of health and safety such as 
workmen training facility, health centre for 
medical checkup and first aid, access control 
of employees, etc. 

f) ensuring that the temporary establishments at 
project site such as site offices, workmen 
camps, toilets, canteens and rest sheds, etc, 
are created meeting the requirements of the 
relevant statutes and standards. 


Project manager shall ensure that the construction 
agency has understood the challenges and has planned 
to meet the project specific health and safety 
requirement through appropriate competencies. 


Health and safety measures need proper coordination 
by the construction agency and such efforts of the 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


construction agency shall be reviewed, monitored and 
appropriately guided by the owner/client and 
consultants. 


In respect of sub-contractors, project manager of the 
construction agency shall ensure that the sub- 
contractors meet the health and safety requirements of 
the project. Health and safety control and monitoring 
shall be established specific to the needs of the project. 


5.3 Commissioning and Handing Over Stage 


During completion and handing over of the project, 
effectiveness of health and safety measures and 
management system shall be reviewed for future 
planning. Health and safety related records shall be 
handed over to the client/owner. 


6 HEALTH AND SAFETY MANAGEMENT 
REQUIREMENTS 


6.1 Health and Safety Policy 


The agencies involved in the project development such 
as the owner, consultant and contractor jointly or 
separately shall have a written statement prescribing 
the health and safety policy of the organization. 


The health and safety policy conveys the management 
commitment and intent of the organization towards 
health and safety, its organization and arrangements 
to ensure that the set objectives are met. It also provides 
a framework for establishing, maintaining and 
periodically reviewing health and safety objectives and 
targets. 


Health and safety policy shall meet the requirements 
of Building and other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996 and Rules framed thereunder, and IS 18001. 


The policy shall be communicated to all stakeholders 
through display and other means. It shall also be 
displayed in local language(s) which may be 
understood by majority of the workmen. 


6.2 Project Specific Health and Safety Planning 


A project specific health and safety plan shall be 
developed by the construction agency and submitted 
to owner/client and the consultants for approval. On 
approval, the project health and safety plan shall be 
the reference document for implementation, control 
and monitoring of health and safety aspects of the 
project by the construction agency, owner/client, 
consultants and other parties concerned. 


Project health and safety plan shall describe how the 
project specific health and safety objectives and targets 
shall be achieved. It shall define the road map for 
achieving the standards that an organization lays down 


for itself so that efforts can be coordinated, synergized 
and monitored. 


Health and safety plan shall explain the means of 
establishing a positive health and safety culture at the 
project site. Health and safety plan shall identify and 
enumerate the control measures to mitigate the risks 
to the project completion arising out of health and 
safety issues so that the project is allowed to proceed 
without interruption and executed as per schedule. 


The following salient aspects may be covered in the 
project health and safety plan: 


1) Project specific health and safety objectives, 
targets and programmes in line with health 
and safety policy; 


2) Hazard identification and risk assessment; 
3) Meeting legal and other requirements; 
4) Health and safety organization; 


5) Occupational health monitoring plan for 
employees and medical services; 


6) Resources, roles, responsibility and authority; 
7) General health and safety rules; 


8) Health and safety requirements to be followed 
by sub-contractors; 


9) Operation control procedure; 


10) Activities requiring work permit system and 
its procedure; 


11) Management of traffic safety inside the 
project; 

12) Access control of employees; 

13) Safety of visitors; 

14) Management of critical activities such as work 
at height, material handling, working with 
plant and machinery, and electrical works; 


15) Ensuring the competency and awareness of 
the workmen; 


16) Fire prevention and fire fighting plan; 

17) Emergency preparedness and response plan; 
18) Traffic management plan; 

19) Training matrix; 

20) Personal protective equipment matrix; 


21) Health and safety performance monitoring 
measures such as inspection, audit; 


22) Incident reporting and investigation 
procedure; 


23) Proactive and reactive indicators of health and 
safety; 


24) Reward and reprimand for health and safety 
performance; and 


25) Checklist and formats 


The risk control measures identified shall meet the 


provisions of Building and other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996 and rules framed thereunder, and other 
legislations. Provisions of various safety related 
standards (see Annex A), SP 7 (Part 7) and SP 70 shall 
also be referred to while identifying the control 
measures for ensuring compliance of the same. 


6.3 Resources, Roles, Responsibility and Authority 


Project manager shall define, document and 
communicate the roles, responsibilities and authorities 
of all personnel who manage, perform and verify 
activities having an effect on health and safety risks. It 
shall also include sub-contractors and visitors. 


Ultimate responsibility for health and safety shall rest 
with top management of the respective organization, be 
it the owner/client, consultants or construction agency. 
The line management personnel who are responsible 
for execution of activities are directly responsible for 
health and safety in the work under their control. 


Health and safety department/function and health and 
safety officers are responsible for guiding the top 
management on health and safety issues and facilitating 
the implementation of health and safety in the project 
site. For qualification, duties and responsibilities of 
health and safety officers, reference shall be made to 
Building and other Construction Workers (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996 
and rules framed thereunder. 


Health and safety officers shall administratively report 
to the project manager and functionally report to the 
senior health and safety representative of the 
organization. 


Health and safety officers and health and safety 
department shall be empowered by the project manager 
for stopping any unsafe practices which is of imminent 
danger to employees. Health and safety department 
shall directly report to the head of the project. 


Health and safety supervisors shall be engaged to assist 
the health and safety officers in performing their duties. 


Management shall provide adequate resources essential 
to effectively manage the health and safety 
management system requirements of the project. The 
resources shall include human resources, 
organizational infrastructure, technology and financial 
resources. 


6.4 Competence, Training and Awareness 


It shall be ensured that all employees of all agencies 
are competent to perform the assigned work safely on 
the basis of appropriate education, training or 
experience. 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


The competency requirements of different categories 
of employees shall be mapped and procedures shall be 
implemented to ensure that those deployed meet the 
competence requirements. 


Training needs of the different category of employees 
shall be identified at the beginning of the project and a 
training matrix and training plan shall be prepared for 
implementation. 


6.4.1 The objective of health and safety training shall 
be, 


a) to equip the employee with necessary 
knowledge and skill to perform the work 
assigned to him in a safe manner; 

b) to foster continual improvement; and 

c) toimbibe safety culture. 


6.4.2. Preferably, the training should be carried out 
away from the working place of the participants to 
ensure focused attention on the training for both trainer 
as well as trainees. 


6.4.3 Attributes of trainer shall include the following: 


a) Trainer should be a technical person well 
versed with project specific health and safety 
requirements of the work site, statutory 
compliances and health and safety 
management systems. 

b) He should possess effective communication 
skills and ability to sensitize the employees 
on behavioral aspects. 


c) He should assess and analyze extent and 
content of training based on the technical 
understanding of trainees. 

d) He should have formulated required training 
module in advance. 

e) He should be able to communicate in a 
language understandable by majority of 
workmen. 


6.4.4 Training Effectiveness Assessment 


After completion of training due procedure shall be 
followed for obtaining the feedback from the 
participants on the effectiveness of the training. 
Effectiveness of training imparted shall be monitored 
for continual improvement and necessary corrections 
in implementation. 


6.5 Health and Safety Communication 


Procedures shall be established to communicate 
significant hazards and risks to and from employees 
and other interested parties. The health and safety 
hazards and risks may be communicated in the 
following ways: 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


a) Sharing of accident case studies which 
occurred in the project site as well as in other 
similar projects, 

b) Health and safety posters and displays, 

c) Health and safety campaigns and competition 
involving the employees, 

d) Sharing of results of the audits, inspections 
and other monitoring systems, 

e) Establishing a system for collecting feedback 
on health and safety from employees and 
other interested parties, 

f) Tool box meeting, and 

g) Safety signage. 


Health and safety communications addressed to 
workmen shall preferably be in local language(s) 
understandable by majority of the workmen. 


6.6 Health and Safety Reporting 


Procedures shall be established for timely recording 
and reporting of information required for continual 
improvement of health and safety performance. 
Internal reporting procedures shall cover, 


a) incident reporting; 

b) non-conformance reporting; 

C) health and safety performance reporting; and 
d) hazard Identification reporting. 

External reporting shall cover, 

1) Statutory reporting requirements, and 

2) Stakeholder reporting 


The recording of reporting of health and safety 
performance shall be clearly documented in the project 
health and safety plan. 


6.7 Operation Control 


The hazards identified during the planning process and 
the control measures identified therein shall be 
incorporated with the work method statement and 
operational control procedures shall be developed. 
These procedures shall form single point guideline for 
the frontline employees in executing the job in a safe 
manner. 


These procedures shall include the legal and other 
requirements, control measures identified to bring 
down the risk level as low as reasonably practicable 
and the measures to meet the project objectives and 
targets. 


6.8 Permit to Work Systems 


Activities requiring permit to work shall be decided 
before starting the construction and shall be suitably 
documented in the project health and safety plan. Some 


of the activities which may require permit to work may 
include: 


a) Excavation; 

b) Entry into confined spaces; 

c) Hlectrical work (HV/LV); 

d) Opening manholes, covers and grills; 

e) Blasting operation; 

f) Hot work; 

g) Industrial radiography; 

h) Work on plant, machinery and other power 
driven equipment; 

j) Working at height; 

k) Working at night; 

m) Working in water; 

n) Working in close proximity to overhead power 
lines and telecommunication cables; and 

p) Heavy lifting operations. 

The project team may establish a permit to work system 


for any other hazardous activity which they feel need 
to be controlled administratively for safe execution. 


6.9 Design and Engineering 


Design drawings, construction methodology and plans 
shall be reviewed to determine whether any additional 
risks may arise during the construction due to the 
features in the design or methodology. 


Attention shall be paid to, 


a) providing permanent hooks and loops for 
tying safety slings; 

b) providing holes or such arrangements to the 
structure to which safe working platforms and 
safety nets can be connected; 

c) laying permanent slings, grab rails/bars to be 
used by the workers; 


d) permanent provision for attaching railings; 


e) provision for alternative access to the trapped 
or distressed workers; 


f) provision for communication; 

g) design facilitating barricading of the area 
around work site without causing hindrance 
to building functional activities; 

h) durability of such safety related permanent 
design integrated elements; and 

j) other safety practices required for the type of 
woks involved. 


Analysis of design and integration of safety measures, 
as described above, should be undertaken as value 
engineering through multi-stakeholder consultation, 
necessarily involving designers, owner/client, operation/ 
maintenance management and construction agency. 


While need for special work methodology and enabling 
infrastructure is considered to make conditions safe 
for construction, attention shall also be drawn to the 
safety during maintenance operations (including 
inspections which may be necessary before project 
commissioning as well as maintenance). 


Itshall also be ascertained whether it would be feasible 
(within the time and cost considerations) to erect 
necessary temporary enabling infrastructure. If, in the 
due assessment of the project manager, itis established 
that the design, as proposed, would continue to be 
unsafe during construction and maintenance operations 
unless special enabling infrastructure is created and 
work procedures specifically drawn, the design shall 
be reviewed. 


6.10 Certification of Plant and Machinery, Lifting 
Tools and Tackles 


Lifting appliances such as crane, hoist, derrick, winch, 
gin pole, sheer legs, jack, pulley block and other 
equipment used for lifting materials, objects or building 
worker; lifting gear such as ropes, chains, hooks and 
slings; and other accessories of a lifting appliance shall 
be tested and examined by a competent person for the 
first time. These shall thereafter be tested and examined 
by a competent person once every year as per the 
provision of Building and other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996 and rules framed thereunder, and other 
relevant central and state rules and regulations. 


Apart from the above statutory testing and examination, 
project specific procedures shall be established to 
ensure the fitness of machinery and equipments being 
deployed at the project for the first time. Regular 
Inspections shall be carried out to ensure that 
machinery and equipments continue to be in safe 
condition. 


6.11 Sub-contractor Management 


Past health and safety performance and capability of 
sub-contractors to complete the job safely shall be 
given due consideration during selection of sub- 
contractors. The project specific health and safety 
requirements shall be clearly communicated to the sub- 
contractors and a commitment obtained from them on 
meeting the requirements. 


The health and safety performance of sub-contractors 
shall be monitored on a regular basis and necessary 
directive and support shall be given to achieve the set 
health and safety objectives and targets. 


6.12 Fire Prevention and Control 


Hazard identification and risk assessment conducted 
during the initial stage of the project shall identify the 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


fire hazards from various activities and the appropriate 
control measures. 


As per the identified risk, fire prevention measures such 
as controlling the ignition source and segregation of 
flammable materials shall be implemented to prevent 
fire. Appropriate signages to help evacuation should 
be planned and provided as per the requirement. 


Adequate fire fighting facilities such as portable first 
aid fire extinguishers, fire buckets filled with water and 
sand, water pipelines and hoses shall be established 
and maintained regularly. Fire fighting arrangements 
provided shall be suitable to fight the possible type of 
fire that may occur. 


Fire protection facilities shall be placed strategically 
such that they are accessible from any location of the 
site without travelling for long distances. Employees 
shall be trained on fire prevention and firefighting 
measures on a regular basis. 


6.13 Access Control 


It is advisable to establish access control measures at 
the construction project to control movement of 
workmen and visitors. Access control may be achieved 
by entry pass, bar-coded cards and biometric systems 
or other suitable means. Implementation of access 
control system helps in the following manner: 


a) It ensures that only competent and trained 
workmen are deployed for work. 

b) It helps in monitoring of working hours of 
employees so that working hours do not 
exceed the statutory limits. 


c) Head count in case of emergencies becomes 
easy as it is known how many employees are 
at work at any point of time. 


6.14 Safety of Visitors 


Visitors for the project shall be given health and safety 
induction before they are allowed in to the construction 
project. It shall include the minimum personal 
protection equipment (PPE) to be used, hazards and 
risks at the work area, restricted areas of entry, 
emergency response arrangements, etc. 


Visitors shall always be accompanied by one of the 
employees of the project site. Visitors shall not be 
allowed in the hazardous areas unless they are 
competent and trained to work in such areas. 


6.15 Traffic and Logistics Management 


Traffic management plan shall be prepared as a part of 
the project health and safety plan at the initial stage of 
the project to manage the traffic inside the project site. 
Traffic management plan shall include, 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


a) measures for segregating pedestrian and 
vehicular traffic; 

b) establish project specific traffic rules such as 
speed limit and one-way routes, etc; 

c) managing the flow of traffic such that blind 
zones and hazardous junctions are not present; 


d) managing the flow of traffic such that reversing 
can be avoided as far as possible; and 

e) use of traffic control devices such as road 
humps, convex mirrors, delineators traffic 
signals and barriers. 


It shall be planned to deploy flag men, security 
personnel and traffic marshals at critical areas to 
regulate traffic. 


6.16 Performance Monitoring and Improvement 


The health and safety performance monitoring and 
measurement procedures shall provide for, 


a) both qualitative and quantitative measures 
appropriate to the project; 

b) monitoring the extent to which project health 
and safety objectives are met; 

C) proactive measures of compliance that 
measures compliance with health and safety 
plan, operational control procedures and 
legislation; 

d) reactive measures of performance to monitor 
accidents, ill health, near misses and non- 
conformances; and 


e) health and safety audit, the details being as 
given in health and safety plans. 


6.16.1 Proactive Monitoring Measures 
6.16.1.1 Health and safety management audit 


Health and safety audit is a systematic and independent 
examination to estimate, if planned arrangements and 
activities are effectively fulfilling organization's health 
and safety policy, plan and objectives. Its purpose is to 
find out, 


a) whether the organization has adequate 
procedures for identifying specific health and 
safety requirements; 

b) whether such laid down procedures are 
followed and specific health and safety 
responsibilities are understood; 

c) whether health and safety policies and risk 
assessment procedures identify the measures 
needed to avoid risks to employees and other 
interested parties; 

d) whether the company has adequate 
procedures for devising, reviewing its health 
and safety standards; 


e) whether the company's health and safety 
standard identifies measurable targets; and 

f) whether the company has established 
adequate procedures for planning, 
implementing, controlling, monitoring and 
reviewing the health and safety measures. 


Project health and safety management audits provide 
the method for monitoring and controlling health and 
safety activities and procedures throughout the life of 
the project. Audits can be internal or external. Internal 
audit can be conducted by the persons from the same 
organization who are not directly connected with the 
work site to be audited. The external audits are 
performed through external professional experts. 


6.16.1.2 Health and safety inspection 


Health and safety inspections shall be preferably 
conducted by a team of the concerned engineer, health 
and safety officer and area in-charge. Project manager 
and other senior personnel shall also join in some of 
the health and safety inspections. 


The type of inspections that shall be carried out and 
the frequency shall be decided during the planning 
stage and documented in the project health and safety 
plan. The health and safety inspections may include, 


a) general site health and safety inspection; 
b) electrical safety inspection; 

c) plant and machinery inspection; 

d) health and hygiene inspection; 

e) scaffolding safety inspection; and 

f) fire equipment inspection. 


6.16.1.3 Project health and safety committee 


Project health and safety committee shall be constituted 
with project manager as the chairman, health and safety 
head as the secretary and representatives from various 
departments and functions including workmen 
representatives as the members. The constitution and 
functioning of the committee shall meet the provisions 
of Building and other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1996 and rules framed thereunder. 


This Committee shall review the status of 
implementation of project health and safety plan, audit 
reports, health and safety objectives and targets. Health 
and safety indicators and findings of the walk down 
by the Committee members shall also be discussed and 
action plan derived. 


6.16.1.4 Other proactive health and safety indicators 


Status of health and safety implementation shall be 
measured and monitored by several proactive indicators 
which include the following: 


a) Compliance level of project health and safety 
plan, 

b) Compliance level of health and safety 
observations with in the target date, 

c) Implementation status of training plan, 


d) Implementation status of corrective and 
preventive actions, 


e) Compliance level of pre-employment medical 
checks and periodic medical checkups, 


f) Compliance level of legal and other 
requirements, and 


g) Percentage of activities for which detailed 
project specific risk assessment is conducted. 


6.16.2 Reactive Monitoring Measures 
6.16.2.1 Incident reporting and investigation 


Procedures shall be established to report, investigate 
and analyze incidents. The procedures shall involve, 


a) members of the incident investigation team; 
b) agencies to be reported in case of incidents; 


c) time period within which incidents need to 
be reported; and 


d) methodology for investigation and 
determining the root cause of accidents. 


These procedures shall form a part of the project health 
and safety plan and monitored on a regular basis for 
its effectiveness. 


6.16.2.2 Analysis of incidents 


All incidents including near miss cases, accidents and 
dangerous occurrences shall be thoroughly 
investigated, direct and root causes determined and 
corrective action planned. Incidents may be analyzed 
covering the following aspects to prepare and 
implement an effective prevention plan: 


a) Body parts injured; 
b) Age of the victim(s); 
c) Time of accident; 
d) Causes of accident; and 
e) Nature of injury. 
For detailed guidelines on analysis of incidents and 


computation of injury rate reference shall be made to 
IS 3786. 


6.16.3 Reactive Health and Safety Indicators 


The following reactive health and safety indicators may 
be used to measure and monitor the health and safety 
performance of the project site: 


a) Number of near miss cases; 
b) Number of first aid cases; 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


c) Lost time injury frequency rate; and 
d) Lost time injury severity rate. 


6.17 Reward and Reprimand 


It is important to acknowledge and encourage good 
health and safety performance and suitably reprimand 
repeated violations, non-conformances and poor health 
and safety performances. Project specific reward and 
reprimand system shall be prepared as a part of the 
project health and safety plan. 


6.17.1 Reward for Good Health and Safety 
Performance 


To motivate the employees and organization to work 
safely the following measures can be implemented 
based on the suitability: 


a) Selection and rewarding on a periodic basis, 
the best safety performance, as: 
1) Safe-workmen, 

2) Safe-supervisor, 
3) Safe-area, 
4) Safe-subcontractor, etc. 

b) Sub-contractors and employees may be 
rewarded, when the project achieves 
significant million man-hours without any lost 
time-injury. 


6.17.2. Reprimand for Poor Health and Safety 
Performance 


Poor health and safety performance in the form of 
repeated violations, frequent adverse incidents and 
accidents shall be dealt with firmly. Depending on the 
seriousness of the violation the following options shall 
be considered: 


a) Issueof violation memorandum and obtaining 
written commitment for safe working, 


b) Suspension or termination of the employee, 


c) Suspension or termination of contract in case 
of construction agency/sub-contractor, and 


d) Imposition of penalty. 


When penalties are imposed due records shall be 
maintained in a transparent manner. The funds thus 
accrued may be spent transparently in the form of 
rewarding employees for their sincere efforts towards 
improving the health and safety performance. 


6.18 Promoting a Positive Health and Safety 
Culture 


The owner/client, consultant and construction agency 
shall jointly endeavor to promote a positive health and 
safety culture at the project. 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


Top management of the organizations should exhibit a 
visible management commitment and leadership 
towards health and safety. This shall be achieved by 
participating in health and safety programmes such as, 


a) Project health and safety committee meeting; 

b) Health and safety walk down; 

c) Including health and safety in all performance 
review meetings; and 

d) Exhibiting a safe behaviour while at site. 


The top management should clearly communicate that 


it considers safety as core value and it shall not allow 
it to get compromised. Such messages when it reaches 
down the level in the organization enable to create a 
positive health and safety culture. 


6.19 Integration with Other Management System 


In order to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of 
the organization, the health and safety management 
system established and implemented at the project shall 
be in coherence with other management systems 
implemented for the project. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 6.2) 
INDIAN STANDARDS ON SAFETY IN CONSTRUCTION 
A-1 Listed below are the relevant Indian Standards IS No. Title 
relating to safety in construction. All standards are 5121 : 2013 Safety code for piling and other deep 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on foundations 
this standard are encouraged to investigate the — 5916 : 2013 Safety code for construction involving 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the use of hot bituminous materials 
standards indicated below: 7293 : 1974 Safety code for working with 
; construction machinery 
L ] Titl 
SNo di 7969 : 1975 Safety code for handling and storage 
3696 Safety code of scaffolds and ladders: of building materials 
(Part 1) : 1987 Scaffolds (first revision) 8989 : 1978 Safety code for erection of concrete 
(Part 2): 1991 Ladders (first revision) framed structures 
3764 : 1992 Code of safety for excavation work 10067:1982 Material constants in building works 
(first revision) 10291 : 1982 Safety code for dress divers in civil 
4014 (Part 2): Code of practice for steel tubular engineering works 
2013 scaffolding: Part 2 Safety regulations 13415 : 1992 ^ Code of safety for protective barriers 
for scaffolding in and around 
4081 : 2013 Safety code for blasting and related 13416 Recommendations for preventive 
drilling operations (first revision) measures against hazards at 
4130: 1991 Safety code for demolition of workplaces 
buildings (second revision) (Part 1): 1992 Falling material hazards prevention 
4138 : 1977 Safety code for working in (Part 2): 1992 Fall prevention 
compressed air (first revision) (Part 3) : 1994 Disposal of debris 
4756 : 1978 Safety code for tunneling work (first (Part 4) : 1994 Part 4 Timber structure 
revision) (Part 5) : 1994 Part 5 Fire protection 
4912 : 1978 Safety requirements for floor and 13430 : 1992 Code of practice for safety during 


wall openings, railings and toe boards 
(first revision) 


10 


additional construction and alteration 
to existing buildings 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 
Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Consulting Engineering Services (India) Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 
Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 

Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 

M.N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 

Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, Army 
Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Railways, Govt of India, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, New Delhi 
National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 

National Institute of Construction Management and Research, 


Mumbai 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


11 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KRISHNAN (Chairman) 


Suri A. K. PATHAK 
SHRI ANUPAM VERMA (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri SANJAY SONI (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KR AGRAWAL 


Suri S. G. Dave 
Suri AJAY SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Sarı MANU AmitaBH (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi Jain (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. DATTA 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI ANKuR Due (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHIEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


SHRI JosE KURIAN 
Suri B. K. Smaa (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. BATRA 
Suri M. K. GarG (Alternate) 


SHRI JAIVEER SRIVASTAVAA 
Suni RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. Cuapna (Alternate) 


ProF B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dn K. N. Jua (Alternate) 


Suri M. P.NAIDU 
Suri R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. K. GUHA 
SHRI GoBINDA PAL CuoupHURY (Alternate) 


Bric AMAR KRISHNA 
Cot SuNIL Kumar (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. RAJESH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. DHAWAN (Alternate) 


Suri S. S. NAHAR 
Suri P. C. Arya (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


Ms BiNA BUDHWAR 
Suri ANIL Kapoor (Alternate) 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


Organization 
Planning Commission, New Delhi 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture (Deptt of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


Spectral Services Consultants Pvt Ltd, New Delhi 
The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, Delhi) 


In personal capacity (W-12/34, Western Avenue, Sainik Farm, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother Dairy 
Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI S. S. GANAPATHY 


SMT LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS Sura (Alternate) 


Suri ViPUL KUMAR 
Suri JITENDRA Kumar (Alternate) 


DR V. K. PAUL 


Sarı MANOJ Kumar MITTAL 


SHRI SANDEEP GOEL 
SHRI Sanyay Kausuik (Alternate) 


Lr Gen HARI UNIYAL (RETD) 
SHRI O. P. Gort (Alternate) 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


Suri R. P. LAHIRI 


SHRI ANIL SAWHNEY 


DR V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Suri A. K. Saini, Scientist ‘G? & Head (Civil Engg) 
[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SANJAY PANT 
Scientist ‘E’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


and 


Suri S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist ‘C’ (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Halcrow Consulting India Pvt Ltd, Noida 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


School of Planning and Architecture (Deptt of Building Engineering 
and Management), New Delhi 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Sector A, Pocket-C, Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, I.P. Extension, 
Delhi) 


12 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Convener) 


Suri A. K. GARG 
Sarı MANU AmitaBH (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI JosE KURIAN 
Suri B. K. Smaa (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


SHRI S. MUKHERJEE 
SHRI BHASKAR CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


SHRI IFrIKAR A. DRABU 


Suri M. P.NAIDU 
Suri S. VENKATESH (Alternate) 


SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 


DR V. K. PAUL 


Sarı MANOJ KUMAR MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


SHRI KRISHNA KANT 


Dr S. N. MANDAL 


IS 15883 (Part 5) : 2013 


Organization Representative(s) 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324,Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) SHRI CHANDRA PAL 
In personal capacity (W-12/34D, Western Avenue, Sainik Farm, Suri ANIL SAWHNEY 
New Delhi) 
In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Mother Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Dairy Road, Patparganj, Delhi) 


Working Group on Health and Safety Management, CED 29/P1/WG4 


Organization Representative(s) 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai Suri M.P.Naipu (Convener) 
Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad SHRI AMAN DEEP 
EH and S Cares, New Delhi Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI BHASKAR CHAKRABORTY 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi SHRI S. MUKHERJEE 
Larsen and Toubro Limited, ECC Division, Chennai Suri M. NACHIAPPAN 


School of Planning and Architecture (Deptt of Building Engineering Dn V. K. PAUL 
and Management), New Delhi 


13 


(Continued from second cover) 


associated. This standard is intended to cover aspects on health and safety management as part of construction 
project management and information regarding the management system requirements. It gives guidelines on 
project health and safety planning, implementation, operation and measurement, and monitoring of health and 
safety performance. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However, for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


Nothing stated in this standard shall be construed to nullify any rules, regulations, safety standards or statutes of 
the state governments or those contained in the various acts of the government of India. The specific acts, rules 
and regulations pertaining to the protection of the public or workmen from health and other hazards wherever 
specified by the local/state authority or central government take precedence over whatever is specified herein. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised) . The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7778). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern. : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.L T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. KOCHI. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


