IS/IS0

4412-1 : 1991

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard
HYDRAULIC FLUID POWER -TEST CODE FOR DETERMINATION Ok AIRBORNE NOISE LEVELS
PART 1 PUMPS

UDC 621.65 : 621.22 : 534.835.46

0 BIS 1995

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

August 1995

Price Group 8

Hydraulic

Fluid Power Systems Sectional Committee,

PE 15

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 4412-l : 1991 `Hydraulic fluid power - Test code for determination of airborne noise levels - Part 1: Pumps', issued by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Hydraulic Fluid Power Systems Sectional Committee and approval of the Production Engineering Division Council. The text of the IS0 standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. Certain conventions are however not identical to those used in Indian Standards. Attention is particularly drawn to the following: a) b) Wherever the words `International read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' appear referring to this standard, they should be while in Indian

Comma (J has been used as a decimal marker in the International Standard Standards, the current practice is to use point (.) as the decimal marker.

In the adopted standard reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their respective place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard IS 9876 : 1981 Guide to measurement of airborne acoustical noise and evaluation of its effects on man IS 9466 :1980 Viscosity industrial sification of lubricants clasliquid Degree of Correspondence Not equivalent

IS0 2204 : 1979 Acoustics-Guide to International Standards on the measurement of airborne acoustical noise and evaluation of its effects on human beings IS0 3448 : 1975 Industrial liquid lubricants - IS0 viscosity classification IS0 5598 : 1985 Fluid power systems and components - Vocabulary IEC Pub 651 : 1979 Sound level meters

Technically equivalent Identical

IS 10416 : 1992 Fluid power systems and components Vocabulary (first revision) IS 9779 : 1981 Sound level meters

Technically equivalent

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of following IS0 standards and has decided that they are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard: IS0 3744 : 1981 Acoustics - Determination of sound power levels of noise sources - Engineering methods for free-field conditions over a reflecting plane Acoustics - Sound power levels of noise sources methods for anechoic and semi-anechoic rooms Precision Classifica-

IS0 3745 : 1977 IS0 6743-4 : 1982

Lubricants, industrial oil and related products ( class L ) tion - Part 4 : Family H ( Hydraulic systems ) International electrotechnical and electro-acoustics vocabulary -

IEC 50 (801) : 1984

Chapter 801 : Acoustics

IS/IS0 4412-1:1991

Indian Standard
HYDRAULIC FLUID POWER -TEST CODE FOR DETERMINATION OF AIRBORNE NOISE LEVELS
PART 1 PUMPS

1

Scope

This part of IS0 4412 establishes a test code describing procedures, based on IS0 2204, for the determination of the sound power levels of a hydraulic fluid power pump, under controlled conditions of installation and operation, suitable for providing a basis for comparing the noise levels of pumps in terms
OT: -

on this part of IS0 4412 are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the standards indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards. IS0 3448:1975, Industrial liquid cosity classification.

lubricants - IS0 vis-

A-weighted octave band

sound sound

power power

level; levels.

IS0 3744:1981, Acoustics - Determination of sound power levels of noise sources - Engineering methods for free-field conditions over a renecting plane.
IS0 374511977, Acoustics - Determination power levels of noise sources - Precision for anechoic and semi-anechoic rooms. IS0 5598:1985, - Vocabulary. Fluid power systems of sound methods

-

From these sound power levels, if required, reference sound pressure levels may be calculated for reporting purposes in accordance with annex A. For general purposes, the frequency range of interest includes the octave bands with centre frequencies between 125 Hz and 8000 Hz.`). Guidelines are given for the application in annex C. of this part of IS0 4412

and components

IS0 6743-4:1982, Lubricants, industrial oils and related products (class L) - Classification - Part 4: Family H (Hydraulic systems). IEC 50(801):1984, international Electrotechnical Vocabulary Chapter 801: Acoustics and electroacoustics. IEC 651:1979, Sound level meters.

This part of IS0 4412 is applicable to all types of hydraulic fluid power pumps operating under steady-state conditions, irrespective of size, except for any limitations imposed by the size of the test environment (see clause 5).

2

Normative

references

3

Definitions

The following standards contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this part of IS0 4412. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 1) 1 Hz = 1 s-1

For the purposes of this part of IS0 4412, the definitions given in IS0 5598, IEC 50 and the following definitions apply. It is accepted that the latter definitions may differ from those in other speciRc International Standards.

1

~iS/ISO

4412-l

: 1991

3.1 free sound field: Sound field in a homogeneous, isotropic medium free of boundaries. NOTE 1 In practice, it is a field in which the effects of the boundaries are negligible over the frequency range of interest. 3.2 iree field over a reflecting plane: Field produced by a source in the presence of one reflecting plane on which the source is located. 3.3 reverberant sound field: That portion of the sound field in a test room over which the influence of sound received directly from the source is negligible. 3.4 anechoic room: Test room having boundaries which absorb essentially all of the incident sound energy over the frequency range of interest, thereby affording free-field conditions over the measurement surface. 3.5 mean-square pressure averaged square basis: sound pressure: The sound in space and time on a mean-

Table

1 -

Standard deviation of sound power level determinations Standard deviation, dB, for octave bands centred on:

125 Hz

250 Hz

500 Hz

1000 Hz to 4000 Hz 2,O

8 000 Hz

590

3,O

2.0

3.0

The standard deviations given in table 1 include the effects of allowable variations in the positioning,of the measurement points and in the selection of any prescribed measurement surface, but exclude variations in the sound power output of the source from test to test.
NOTE 5 The A-weighted sound power level will in most practical cases be determined with a standard deviation of approximately 2 dB.

5

Test environment

NOTE 2 In practice, this is estimated by space and time averaging over a finite path length or over a number of fixed microphone positions. 3.6 mean sound pressure level: Ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the mean-square sound pressure to the square of the reference sound pressure, in decibels (dB). NOTE 3 The weighting network or the width of the frequency band used should always be indicated; for example, A-weighted sound pressure level, octave band sound pressure level. The reference sound pressure is 20 ,IPa*l. 3.7 sound power level: Ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of a given sound power to the reference sound power, in decibels. NOTE 4 The weighting network or the width of the frequency band used should always be indicated. The reference sound power is 1 pW3). 3.8 volume of source under test: Volume velope of the whole pump under test. of the en-

Tests shall be conducted in an environment which provides "free-field over a reflecting plane" conditions which meet the environmental qualification requirements described in IS0 3744:1981, clause 4 and annex A. For more precise measurements, accordance with IS0 3745. conduct tests in

6

Instrumentation

6.1 The instrumentation used to measure fluid flow, fluid pressure, pump speed and fluid temperature shall be in accordance with the recommendations for "industrial class" accuracy of testing; i.e. class C given in annex B. 6.2 The instrumentation used for acoustical measurements shall be in accordance with IEC 851. This instrumentation shall be in accordance with IS0 3744 for both performance and calibration; i.e. type 2 instruments for engineering (grade 2) measurements.

7 4 Measurement uncertainty
7.1 The with face fied

Installation
Pump

conditions

location

Methods of measurement should be used which tend to result in standard deviations which are equal to or less than those specified in tablel. Methods given in IS0 3744 meet this requirement.

pump may be located in any position consistent the source installation and measurement sur(or microphone traverse) requirements speciin IS0 3744 for the test environment being used.

2)

1 PPa -

10--s N/m*

3)

1 pw -

lo-`*

w 2

ISAS

4412-1

: 1991

7.2

Pump mounting
so the

least 15 m of hose quirement.

shall

be used

to mezt

this

re-

7.2.1 The pump mouniing shall be constructed that it will minimize the noise radiated by mounting as a result of pump vibrations.

7.4.6

A stable

load

valve

shall

be used.

7.2.2 The mounting bracket shall be constructed of high-damping material or with sound-damping and sound-insulating material applied to the bracket as required. 7.2.3 Vibration isolation shall be used even if the mounted. techniques, if needed, pump is usually securely

Unstable load .valves in the discharge line can NOTE 6 generate and transmit noise through the fluid and piping which can emerge as airborne sound at the pump.

7.4.7 The load valve shall be positioned far from the pump, preferably outside the test room, to minimize the interaction. The load valve shall be located close to the pump only when adequate control of its acoustic performance can be provided. 7.4.6 All fluid lines and load valves in the test space shall be wrapped with sound-isolating materials, if required (see 10.1). Material having a sound-transmission loss of at'least 10 dB at 125 Hz, and a greater loss at higher frequencies, shall be used.

7.2.4 Flange mountings that are as small as practical shall be used so as to minimize interference with radiation of sound towards the shaft end of the pump.

7.3

Pump drive

The drive motor shall be located outside the test space and the pump shall be driven through flexible couplings and an intermediate shaft, or the motor shall be isolated in an acoustic enclosure.

8

Operating

conditions

7.4

Hydraulic

circuit

7.4.1 The circuit shall include all oil filters, oil coolers, reservoirs and restrictor valves as required to meet the pump hydraulic operating conditions (see clause 8). 7.4.2 The test fluid and degree in accordance with the pump ommendations. of filtration shall be manufacturer's rec-

8.1 Determine the sound power levels of the pump (see annex A) for any desired sel of operating conditions (see 11.3.7).

8.2 These test conditions shall throughout the test within the limits

be maintained given in table 2.

Table

2 -

Allowable variations of mean indicated values of controlled parameters
Allowable $2 variation %

7.4.3 Inlet and discharge lines shall be installed with diameters in accordance with the manufacturers' recommended practice. Extra care shall be exercised when assembling inlet lines to prevent air
leaking into the circuit.

Test parameter Flow Pressure
Speed Temperature

5-2 %
12 _f2 % "C

7.4.4 The inlet pressure gauge shall be mounted at the same height as the inlet fittings or it shall be calibrated for any height difference. 7.4.5 The length of line between the pump and the load valve shall be selected in order to minimize the effect of standing waves in the discharge line which can increase the sound radiated from the pump. At The pump shall be tested in the "as-delivered" condition with any ancillary pumps and valves operating normally during the test, so as to include their noise contributions to the airborne noise level of the pump.

8.3

IS/IS0

4412~1 : 1991

9 Location and number measurement points

of sound

Measure

the following

for each test:

a) pump speed and flow rate; b) fluid temperature
and pressure at pump inlet and fluid pressure at discharge fittings or at the test point provided by the pump manufacturer; levels at each measurement point over the frequency range of interest; sound point. pressure level at each

The location and number of measurement points shall be as required by IS0 3744 for the method of measurement selected for the pump noise test.

IO
10.1

Test procedure
Background noise measurements
of interest test which

cl band sound pressure

d)

10.1.1 Measure the background noise that is present during the pump noise does not emanate from the pump itself.

A-weighted measurement

10.2.2

New or rebuilt pumps

Over the frequency range of interest, the band sound pressure levels of this background noise shall be at least 6 dB below the pump band sound pressure levels at each measurement point. 10.1.2 Correct for this background noise, if evidenced by these measurements, by applying the corrections for this purpose given in IS0 3744. 10.1.3 When ground noise ground sound be at least 6 level. Correct ground NOTES 7 Easing the requirements for background can lead to an overestimate of the pump pressure levels.
noise levels band sound

test 10.2.2.1 Repeat the initial pump measurement of the series at the end of a test series or after 1 h of testing. 10.2.2.2 If the A-weighted sound level at any selected measurement point does not duplicate that of the first test within 2 dB (A), the whole test series shall be invalidated.

measurement of band levels of backis not practical, the A-weighted backlevel of each measurement point shall dB below the pump A-weighted sound

11
11 .l

Information
Specifications

to be recorded

these noise.

A-weighted

measurements

for back-

The information given in 11.2 and 11.3 shall be compiled and recorded for all measurements made according to the requirements of this part of IS0 4412.

11.2

General

information
pump manufacturer

8 The A-weighted background sound level at each measurement point may be checked by covering the pump with sound-insulating materials capable of a transmission loss of at least 10 dB over the frequency range which is "determining" the A-weighted sound level of the pump.

4 b)

name and address of the and, if applicable, the user; reference pump; and responsible number(s) for

identification

of

the

cl name
10.1.4 If the background level is found to be too high, check for further noise control of the pump mounting, drive or hydraulic circuit, as indicated. 10.1.5 Ensure that the orientation phone and the period of observation in IS0 3744. 10.2 10.2.1 Pump measurements sequence of the microare as specified

address of persons or organization for the acoustic tests on the pump; of acoustic tests;

d)

date and place

e) statement

that the sound power levels of the pump have been obtained in full conformance with this part of IS0 4412 and IS0 3744 for the determination of sound power levels of noise sources (see also clause 13).

Measurement

11.3
11.3.1

Pump under test
Description of pump or piston), including an-

Prior to commencement of a series of tests, operate the pump for a sufficient time to purge air from the system and to stabilize all variables, including fluid condition, to within the limits specified in table 2.
4

a) type of pump (e.g. gear cillary equipment:

iS/tSo

4412-l

: 1991

W type of displacement cl pump overall
necessary); linear

(e.g. fixed or variable); dimensions (with sketch if

11.3.5.2 Show on this sketch the location of other reflecting or absorbing screens and noise sources which can influence measurements. 11.36 Instrumentation

4 pump maximum diqplacement; e) type of displacement
11.32 Acoustic controller and setting.

a) details of equipment

environment

for tests

used to monitor pump operating conditions (see 11.3.7), including type, serial number and manufacturer;

4 Internal dimensions of the test room and the type
of acoustic field for the measurements fleld over a reflecting plane): (e.g. free

b) details of equipment used for acoustic measurements including manufacturer; name, type, serial number and

b) the acoustical treatment of the test room; (-4 the date of measurement; (9 ambient
air temperature (in degrees Celsius), relative humidity (in percentage) and barometric pressure (in pascals*r); qualification by clause 5. of test environ-

cl bandwidth of frequency analyser; d) overall
frequency response of instrumentation system and date and method of calibration; of microphones and date

e) method of calibration
and place of calibration. 11.3.7 Pump operating

e) results of acoustical
ments as required 11.33

conditions

Include the following Reference sound source (when applicable) type and serial number; data, including and date of calia) manufacturer,

details for each test: classification in

4 full description
accordance

of fluid, including with IS0 6743-4;

b) sound power level calibration name of calibrating laboratory bration. 11.3.4 Mounting and Installation

b) fluid viscosity

classification in accordance with IS0 3448, in centistokes or in square millimetres per second"`; per minute; (bars@); (bars); or calcu-

conditions conditions:

of pump

cl shaft speed, in revolutions

a) description

of pump mounting

d) inlet pressure, in megapascals

b) nature and characteristics of the hydraulic circuit and details of any acoustic insulation treatment; c) nature and description of other machines being used `which could have an influence on the measured sound pressure levels of the pump. 11.3.5 Locatfon of pump In test environment

e) outlet pressure, in megapascals 9 pump delivery
8) temperature
Celsius. 11.3.8 Acoustical data (flow) either lated, in litres per minute; of fluid

measured

at pump inlet,

in degrees

11.3.5.1 Include a sketch showing the location of the pump In relation to walls, floor ar!d ceiling of the test room.

Include all data as required

by IS0 3744.

4) 1 Pa - IO-5 bar 5) 1 cst - 1 mm% 6) 1 bar - 105 N/m* - 105 Pa - 0,l MPa

IS/SO

4412-l : 1991

12

Test report
report shall contain the following infor-

paragraphs of IS0 3744 for the determination sound power levels of noise sources.

of

The test mation:

13
this

Identification

statement

(Reference

to

a) the A-weighted

sound power level and octave band sound power levels for each frequency band of interest for each set of operating condltlons; that the sound power levels have beenobtained in full conformance with the procedures of this part of IS0 4412 and specific

part of IS0 4412)

Use the following statement in test reports, catalogues and sales literature when electing to comply with this part of IS0 4412: "Airborne noise levels determined in accordance with IS0 4412-1, Hydraulic iluid power - Test code for determination of airborne noise levels - Part 1: Pumps"

W a statement

6

wlso

.4412-1:1991

Annex A (normative) Calculation A.1 Calculation of pump mean sound pressure levels and sound power levels
A.l.1
Refer to IS0 3744 for information regarding corrections to be applied and the method of calculating the mean levels and the pump sound power levels.

of sound levels A.2 Calculation of mean sound pressure level at a reference distance
The mean sound pressure level at a distance r, in metres, from the equivalent point sdurce radiating into a free field over a reflecting plane (hemispherical radiation) from `the calculated pump sound power level is evaluated as follows: I; where r; is the mean sound pressure level, Aweighted or in bands, in decibels (reference: 20 pPa); is the A-weighted the pump under ence: 1 pW); or band power test, in decibels level of (refer= L, - lolog[27rr'/s,]

Correct the measured band sound pressure levels (and A-weighted sound levels, where appropriate) at each measurement position for the measured background noise (background noise corrections). Use these corrected pump mean band sound weighted sound level.

A.1.2

A.1.3

levels levels

to calculate and mean

the A1 `JY

A.1.4

Calculate the pump sound power level from these mean sound pressure levels, taking into account any correction for unwanted environmental reflections (environmental correction factor).

2zr2

is the area of the hemisphere, metres. of radius r;
=

in square

c LO

1 m*.

For calculation purposes, choose a reference distance of I = 1 m, in which case the numerical value of ,$, is obtained by subtracting 8 dB from the numertcal value of the calculated sound power level,
LW.

IS/IS0

4412-1

: 1991

Annex B (normative) Errors and classes of measurement 6.1 Classes of measurement

Depending on the .accuracy required, the tests may be carried out to one of three classes of measurement, A, B or C. The, Glasses of measurement shall be agreed between the parties concerned. The use of class A and B is restricted to special cases when there is a need to have the performance more precisely defined. Class A and B tests require more accurate apparatus and methods, which may increase the costs of such tests.

Table B.l - Permissible systematic errors of measuring instruments as determined during call bration
Class of

measurement Input signal
Flow Pressure Temperature

Units % % %
"C %

*18

C
f1.5 *1,5 f 1,5 3Il.O * 18

8.2

Errors

Speed

Any device or method which by calibration or comparison with International Standards has been demonstrated to be capable of measuring with systematic errors not exceeding the limits given in table B.1 may be used.

NOTE - The percentage limits given are of the value of the quantity being measured and not of the maximum values of the test or the maximum reading of the instrument.

I
f&5 kg,5 +0,5 f0,5 rto.5

f 23
f 2,5 *2,5 f 2,o f 28

8

IS/IS0

4412-1

: 1991

Annex

C

(informative)
Guidelines for ttie application of this part of IS0
but not an performance. exact

4412
of its overall acoustic

C.l

Introduction

measure,

This annex describes a..series of @commended techniques that are designed to enable reliable measurements of hydraulic pump airborne noise to be taken, using an anechoic chamber, in accordance with this part of IS0 4412.

Pressure llne
Bell houslng

C.2

General
read in conjunction with

This annex should be IS0 2204 and IS0 3744.

The principie of this part of IS0 4412 is based on measurements taken over a hemispherical surface centred over the pump unit under test. It does, however, present certain operational difficulties. The methods outlined in this annex represent a practical solution to these problems and allow compliance with the requirements of this pat-l of IS0 4412. In a hydraulic installation, the vibrational energy of the pump becomes distributed among other components in the system, such as the connecting pipework, the pump mounting, the drive shaft and the prime mover. This distribution of energy is a characteristic of the particular installation and is not inherently a measure of pump noise. The pump, however, produces sound energy which can cause the installation as a whole to emit noise. Figure C.l illustrates the mechanism. It is the objective of this annex to ensure that the measured noise is that radiated by the external casing of the pump and nothing else. This component of noise will then be genuinely a characteristic of the pump and as little affected as possible by the particular installation. The total airborne noise of a practical installation includes radiation from all the components of the hydraulic system. These are excited, in the main, by pump-generated fluid-borne noise (pressure ripple) present in the cirbuit and by structural transmission of vibration from the pump to attached components. These mechanisms may well predominate in the gengration of total system noise. It is found, however, that low airborne noise radiation from the pump casing tends to be associated with low fluidborne and structural noise generation. The values obtained for airborne noise radiation from the casing of a pump may thus be taken as an indication, 9

Return the Key --M Alrborne noise Fluld-borne noise Structure-borne noise

Figure

C.l

-

Transmission paths of sound energy from pump9

C.3
This

Choice of measurement
part of IS0 4412 permits

environment

measurement in a The anechoic room may take the form of a fully free-field environment or a free field over a single reflecting plane, termed a "semi-anechoic chamber"

reverberant

or an anechoic

room.

An anechoic or semi-anechoic room is normally preferable for pump testing work because there are fewer measurement I:ncertainties associated with the strongly periodic noise typically radiated by pumps. Anechoic or semi-anechoic environments

IS/IS0

4412-1

: 1991

also allow directivity information to be obtained which, though not required by this part of IS0 4412, can provide valuable assistance when setting up a system or diagnosing pump acoustic output. Although a reverberant room is the least affected by accidental oil spillage, the acoustic advantages of an anechoic or semi-anechoic room are frequently more important. Oil spillage in a semi-anechoic room is less serious than in a fully anechoic room if the floor is used as the reflecting plane. The following discussion anechoic or semi-anechoic relates only to the use of test environments.

C.4.2

Number

and

position

of microphones

In order to obtain a valid estimate of the mean sound pressure, the sound field has to be sampled at several points over the measurement surface. A basic array of 10 points is called for, but this number may be reduced if experience shows that the sound field is sufficiently symmetrical for the resultant loss in accuracy not to give errors greater than 1 dB when compared with data obtained using the full array. As a guide, use at least as many microphones as there is difference between the lowest and highest sound pressure levels, in decibels, recorded on the individual microphones. Each sampling point should be associated with an equal area of the measurement surface and should be placed in a sequence that minimizes the effect of interference patterns. IS0 3744 gives relative coordinates and preferred radii for suitable hemispherical arrays. Sources with the dimensions of a normal fluid power pump usually require a measurement radius of 1 m. Avoid microphone positions close to necessary ancillary equipment such as the pump drive shaft and fluid lines, and ensure that, as far as possible, each microphone has a clear "line of sight" to the pump under test. It is possible to use a single microphone, moving it to each sampling point in sequence, but it is usually more economic to invest in one microphone channel per measurement point.

(2.4
C.4.1

Measurement
Microphones

techniques

High-quality condenser microphones, complying with the requirements of the appropriate International Standards listed in IS0 3744 are required to measure the sound pressure levels in the anechoic chamber. The profile of the microphones, connecting leads and support frame should be minimized to reduce interference with the sound field. The sound level meter is placed outside the chamber, and is connected to the microphone via a pre-amplifier and extension lead. A typical set-up, with two microphones connected via a common power supply, is shown in figureC.2.

Extension

c~lbh

Figure

C.2 -

Instrumentation

for manual

data logging

10

IS/IS0 4412-l :1991

C.4.3

Calculation

of mean

sound

pressure from

The mean sound pressure can be calculated equations 1 and 2 in IS0 3744:1981. C.4.4 Recording instruments

from an eight-microphone array covering the range 100 Hz to 10 kHz. If directivity information is not required, it is possible to multiplex the channels into a time-integrating r.m.s. meter. The maximum scan speed is limited by the lowest frequency of interest. Normally a scan speed of 10 channels per second is satisfactory for frequencies of 100 Hz and above. The scanning device has to operate with very low level switching transients if the background electronic noise is not to influence the sound signal. A typical set-up is shown in tigureC.3. This arrangement can be used in conjunction with octave or one-third octave filter sets as well as the weighting networks built into the sound level meter. Comparisons between individually logged data channels and scanned data using the equipment shown in figureC.3 show very good agreement above the 100 Hz one-third octave band.

The microphones may be directly connected to individual sound level meters, but this is a rather uneconomic use of expensive equipment. Used in conjunction with microphone power supplies, which allow individual microphone gain adjustment, each channel may be fed into a single meter via a manual selector switch. Either technique involves a consroerable amount of manual data logging. For example, 168 data records are required to obtain a one-third octave spectrum

r

Slgnal generator

Soundlevel meter

Fltcr eet

L

tllcrophonc power supplks

Hlcrephoncr

Figure

C.3 -

Multiple

microphone

scanning

instrumentation

11

lsjlso

4412-1 : 1991

C.4.5

Calculation

of sound power

level from

The sound power level can equation 3 in IS0 3744:1981.

be calculated

additional noise becomes insignificant if this ground level is more than 10 dB below the ured total noise. If the *difference is less than but more than 6 dB, corrections can be made measured level to take this into account.

backmeas10 dB to the

Assuming a measurement radius of 1 m, the correction for free-field conditions (i.e. fully anechoic) is t 11 dB. The correction for a free field over a reflecting p!ane, as required by this part of IS0 4412, is i- 8 dB It is recommended that, whenever possible, the sound field be calibrated by placing a stan dard sound sourc.e at the position normally occupied by the pump, with pump drive shaft and fluid lines in position. Significant variation from the + 8 dB correction may indicate excessive distortion of the sound field by pump ancillaries, inadequate reflecting plane, or some other problem. C.4.6 Frequency analysis

In the case .where the background noise is 6 dB or less below the measured total noise, the requirements of this part of IS0 4412 are not satisfied, although an estimate of the pump noise can still be made. FigureC.4 shows the relationship between the correction and the background noise margin.

Correctkm

nqukd by
klrUf?lcknt
backpwnd

thh partof
marprn IS0b&72

No ractlone

I I-

I_

rquhd by thh prtot1504b12
J

The response of the human ear is very dependent on the frequency as well as the amplitude of sound. Microphones complying with the requirements of IEC 561 have a linear response to sound pressure from 10 Hz to 20 kHz. In order to model the physiological effect of sound, a frequency-weighting filter is built into sound level meters. This weighting is termed the "A scale" and overall sound levels are measured in terms of decibels (A). This single figure rating is the common basis for rating sound levels. If more information is required about the spectral content of the sound, octave or one-third octave filters are used to give low resolution frequency analysis. For diagnostic and development work, a higher resolution frequency analysis may be required to help identify particular noise sources or pathways. The two basic forms of narrow-band frequency analysers are analog filters or digital Fourier analysers. The analog filters are rapidly becoming obsolete with the availability of hard-wired dedicated digital Fourier analysers, made possible by advances in microelectronics. An alternative to the dedicated digital analyser is a minicomputer which, although slower in operation, retains the high degree of flexibility of its associated software. A detailed description of this equipment the scope of this part of IS0 4412. C.4.7 Background noise is outside

Figure C.4 -

Corrections for background noise

The airborne noise from the pump under test has to be the dominant component of the noise reaching the microphones. Other noise sources, from both inside and outside the chamber, cannot be completely eliminated but the effect of the unwanted

The background noise level may be determined by running the pump under test conditions and measuring the noise level. An acoustic cover is then placed over the pump and the noise measurements repeated. The performance of the cover has to be sufficient to attenuate substantially the noise emitted by the pump itself, so that the measured noise with the cover in place is dominated by background noise sources. The cover should mask only the pump itself, and not cover the cladding over the drive shaft or fluid lines, as these might be contributing to the unwanted background noise. It is normally difficult to devise a pump cover that shrouds the entire pump when mounted according to this part of IS0 4412 without also partially covering the pump mount. This is acceptable only if the mount is known to produce a negligible contribution to overall sound level (see C.5.2 ).

12

IS/IS0 4412-1:1991

Adequate backgrounds are particularly difficult to achieve in the lower frequency ranges due to the reduced performance of acoustic cladding. Difficulty may also be experienced when testing a small or quiet pump when the ,emitted noise is low. Cladding techniques that can help to overcome these problems are described in C.5.5.

C.5
C.5.1

Installation
Test layaut

and test layout

drive arrangements. It is important that the pump, the drive shaft, the fluid lines and the drive motor, etc. are all structurally isolated from the floor to prevent vibrations exciting the whole building. The pump and drive shaft support bearing are therefore mounted on massive concrete blocks and flexible mountings placed bettieen the concrete blocks and the chamber floor. The mass of the concrete blocks allows a considerable degree of isolation to be incorporated while preventing excessive movement of the pump mounting or shaft bearing due to torque reaction. A reflecting plane of sealed concrete slabs is built up above the floor to a level just below the pump. This sealing may be achieved by applying a suitable oil-proofing compound to the concrete. It has been found that, provided the slabs are carefully aligned and levelled, no special treatment of the joints between adjacent slabs is required.

The following arrangement has been used successfully for pump noise measurements in accordance with this part of IS0 4412. FigureC.5 shows the basic arrangement in which the pump is placed at the centre of the reflecting plane. FigureC.6 shows details of the mounting and

Retlecthg

plam

Figure

C.5 -

Pump noise test configuration

with hemispherical

measurlng

array

13

IS/IS0 '4412-1:lQQl

Flexible mount

Isolated concrete blocks

L-

lntermedlote suppor

bearfng

Figure

C.6 -

Mounting

and driveline

arrangement

for hemispherical

measurement

C.5.2

Pump

mounting

This part of IS0 4412 requires that the pump mounting be so constructed that it creates minimum disturbance to the sound field at the shaft end of the pump. This can be achieved if the mounting flange does not extend beyond the pump flange. The test method also requires the mount to be acoustically shielded to prevent it emitting a significant level of sound. These two requirements can cause problems, as any acoustic cladding will add to the bulk of the mount. A solution may be to use a close fitting, but free-standing, glass fibre moulding over the mount. The mount would have to be profiled to facilitate sealing with this cover. An alternative is available, however. The test method specifically allows the use of flexible isolators to be used at the interface between the pump and its mount although it recognizes that this does not represent current commercial practice. This arrangement offers several advantages. First, the transmission of structure-borne noise into the mount is attenuated. This reduces the airborne noise radiated by the mount and thereby eliminates the need for acoustic cladding. Secondly, the mount can be constructed to allow the shaft face of the

pump to contribute to the overall measured sound level. Most forms of commercial mount only partially cover this face, so the sound radiation characteristics of this area should logically be included in the measurement, although this part of IS0 4412 is not specific in this respect. Thirdly, the structural impedance mismatch between the pump and its mount attenuates interactive dynamic responses. This ensures the pump casing noise is unaffected by the mount's characteristics, resulting in a higher degree of system independence. The mounting devised is shown in figureC.7, and consists of two vertical hollow steel columns so spaced as to coincide with the pump mounting bolts. The pump is carried on isolation bushes at the top of each pillar. Versions have been designed for the two-bolt and four-bolt flange mounting conggurations which are the subject of IS0 3019-2. The vertical columns create minimum disturbance to the sound field. The use of adapter flanges to enable pumps of different sizes to be mounted on the same mount is not recommended. Development work has shown that these can significantly affect the measured sound level.

14

IS/IS0

4412-1

: 1991

r

leolatlng tlexlblc mountporltloned at punphomt Interface

Vrrtkal columnr to mtnlmlrcInterference wlth soundrleld

Attached to maerlvc concrete eupport

Approxlmatc poeltlon ot retlcctlng plane

Figure

C.7 -

"Mlnlmired"

pump mount (two-bolt

flange mounting

configuration)

C.5.3

Drlve

shaft

Drive is carried to the pump via a cardan shaft, having a Hooke joint at the pump end and a polymeric ring ("doughnut") coupling at the other end. The polymeric coupling provides structural isolation between the prime mover and the drive shaft, while the Hooke joint, being ,small in diameter, minimizes interference with the sound field. A centring bush is required at the polymeric coupling end to prevent shaft whirl at high speed. Ideally, a single shaft should be used between prime mover and pump. If, however, chamber dimensions and required running speed prevent this, an intermediate bearing is required. This bearing should be placed outside the measurement hemisphere. A suitable layout uses a- self-aligning rolling contact bearing mounted on a concrete block just inside the anechoic chamber, within the "wedge depth". A second shaft passes through this bearing and connects with the prime mover via a Hooke joint outside the chamber wall. FigureC.6 shows the arrangement.

The side and end loadings imposed by this form of drive can be very low if the shafts are well balanced. Careful shalt alignment is not required. C.5.4 Hydraulic lines

Fluid inlet, outlet and, when applicable, leakage return lines need to be routed to the pump. It is possible for these lines to approach the pump from under the reflecting plane, but this causes problems of adaptability when testing different configurations of pumps. It is operationally much simpler to run the lines above the reflecting plane. This allows direct access and eliminates the need for tight bends close to the pump. The noise radiation from these lines has to be prevented from reaching the microphones by acoustic cladding. It is essential to use hose for these fluid lines as it has been found that pump structural vibrations cause rigid lines to emit very high airborne noise levels, thus making them more difficult to clad effectively. Avoid curved hose runs as these are also awkward to cover. An efficient solution is to use short stub hoses incorporating

IS~ISO 4412-1 : 1991

90" swept bends and fittings as shown in tigureC.8. This arrangement can be simply covered with straight acoustic ducts. The rigid fittings between the pump and the hose should be minimized. The inlet fitting incorporates a pressure tapping which should be connected to the inlet pressure gauge by a length of small-bore flexible plastics tube. Care should be taken to ensure that the plastics tube is properly sealed as air leakage in, or oil leakage out, is highly undesirable. This tube can be taped to the inlet hose and led out to the motor room. The gauge should be set at the same height as the pressure tapping and the connecting line purged of air to prevent air locks that cause false readings of the relatively low pressure.

pedance mismatch. This may be achieved most effectively by use of a dense impervious layer separated from the radiating surface by an air gap. Sound-absorbent material is also required in this air gap to prevent the build-up of high levels of reflected sound. The absorbent material may be used to support the barrier layer on the source, but the amount of material used should be minimized to prevent structural transmission. Fluid lines should be enclosed in a massive, welldamped duct, such as a rigid PVC water pipe. Rings of polyurethane foam can be placed at 1 m intervals and at bends to support the fiuid line -away from the duct wall and to prevent the build-up of reverberant' sound. if the fluid lines are hose, they can be strapped to lengths of light-gauge steel angle section to prevent sagging. The ends of the duct should be sealed with rings of foam. The outside dimensions of the duct should be kept as small as possible to minimize interference with the sound field around the pump. Normally, an air gap of 20 mm to 25 mm surrounded by a duct of approximately 6 mm wall thickness will sufficiently reduce sound.

C.5.5

Acoustic

cladding

All the pump ancillaries, such as drive shaft and fluid lines, have to be covered in acoustic cladding to prevent their noise radiation being included in the pump's measured noise output. The function of the cladding is to act as a sound transmission im-

r

FlwlMs

mount
Chamber llntng 7

Acousticclarkllng~

used as support

Figure C.8 -

Diagrammatic view of the hemispherical layout showing fluid line cladding

16

isjlso

4412-l

: 1991

Little deterioration in acoustic performance has been found if the PVC duct is split lengthways to facilitate assembly, providing the gaps are closed with heavy tape. FigureC.8 illustrates the cladding technique. The PVC duct may, if required, be solidly mounted to the reflecting plane or chamber wall since it provides an effective isolated support for the fluid line inside. The drive shaft should be enclosed in an acoustically lined duct. PVC water pipe is again a suitable material, split lengthways for ease of assembly and sealed with heavy tape. In order to minimize the external diameter of the duct, it is recommended that it be lined along the length of the cardan shaft only, and not over the couplings at either end. It may prove necessary to cover the Hooke joint at the pump end, in which case a light unlined cover of glass reinforced plastic or similar material is recommended, shaped to give minimum masking at the shaft face of the pump. The shaft cover should be carefully aligned and rigidly mounted to the reflecting plane to ensure that it cannot foul the rotating shaft.

The intermediate bearing, if used, may be covered with a free-standing acoustically lined box, constructed of glass reinforced plastic or 19 mm plywood. In the installation illustrated, this box is mounted and sealed between the chamber wall and the reflecting plane (figureC.6) and forms the support for one end of the shaft cover. The bearing and shaft covers thus form an acoustic duct to attenuate airborne noise passing through from the drive unit. C.5.6 Hydraulic test circuit

An open-loop system is usually employed, incorporating design techniques to minimize entrained air. An example of a suitable test circuit is shown in figureC.9. It is recommended that the inlet pressure to the pump be maintained at about 0,l MPa (1 bar) absolute unless the pump manufacturers give specific guidance. An appropriate hydraulic load should be applied to the pump. A pressure-relief valve that is stable throughout its operating range is suitable for this purpose. Contamination protection and temperature control are also required. The boost pump, if required, should not generate pressure ripple in the same frequency range as the pump under test. Screw or helical rotor pumps are suitable for the boost duty.

2

3a

3b

6

1
1

4

5 !M I I I 1 1

I

I I I !.______I

Alternatlve

posltlon

1 2 3a 3b 4 5 6 7

Fllter Temperature transducer Pressure gnuge Pressuregaugewlthsnubber Pump under test lntegrotlng flow meter Pressure control volve Temperature controller

Figure

C.9 -

Example of test circuit

17

IS/IS0

4412-1 : 1991

Oil temperature and inlet pressure should be measured at the test pump inlet fitting. The outlet line from the pump should consist of at least 15 m of hose. The use of shorter lengths can give rise to intense fluid-borne noise resonances which can affect pump casing noise. Outlet pressure should be measured on a calibrated Bourdon tube gauge incorporating a pressure ripple snubber. A shut-off valve is not recommended as a snubber because a non-return action can occur at small openings, causing the gauge to indicate peak rather than mean line pressures.

1508 r/min, ample: 1008 r/min, 2 200 r/min and 3 000 r/min.

1800 r/min,

cl The pump is then covered
closure ground and test levels. a) repeated

with an acoustic ento establish back-

4

One-third octave or octave measurements are taken, with the pump still covered, at the speeds used in b). octave or octave measurements with the pump exposed. are

e) One-third
repeated

C.5.7

Running-in

of test pumps

The noise characteristics of some pumps have been found to change markedly in the first few hours of running. Therefore new pumps should be run-in before testing. C.5.8

Safety precautions

Finally, the effect cf pressure may be obtained by measuring A-weighted levels, in decibels (A), for at least five pressures evenly spaced throughout the rated operating range. For example: 25 MPa, 16 MPa, 10 MPa, 6,3 MPa and 4 MPa (250 bar, 160 bar, 100 bar, 63 bar and 40 bar) at each standard rotational speed given in b). This test sequence minimizes the effort required in changing cladding and instrumentation, whilst highlighting measurement problems at an early stage. C.6.2

The presence of a long drive shaft in the anechoic chamber necessitates certain precautions. The acoustic cladding of the shaft should cover all rotating parts and be of sufficient strength to act as a safety guard. It is also recommended that a strong steel hoop be placed over the shaft cladding near the pump end and firmly attached to the chamber floor to guard against coupling or pump-mounting failure.

Interpretation

of check data

C.6 C.6.1

Results Test ranges

It is often useful to obtain a standard set of data for each pump which allows assessment of the noise output throughout the operating range, as well as taking measurements at specific operating conditions relating to a particular application. This standard set of data aids both with comparison between pumps and in studying the effect of modifications or wear. The validity of the measurements in terms of spatial averaging and background levels is also checked. It has been found convenient to carry out measurements as follows. a) A-weighted sound power, in decibels (A), versus pump shaft rotational speed for small increments over the pump's permissible speed range at the maximum continuous rated pressure. b) Directivity measurements, for at least five commonly in decibels (A), taken used speeds. For ex-

If a strong resonance exists in the pump mounting or driveline, it can show up as a sharp peak in the run speed versus A-weighted levels, in decibels (A). The background noise checks of overall A-weighted levels, in decibels (A), and one-third octave plots will show up weaknesses in the structural isolation or acoustic cladding of the ancillaries in the chamber. The directivity measurements will indicate whether a sufficient number of microphone measurement points is being used. This test sequence does not give the full checks called for in this part of IS0 4412. These represent an unrealistic work load for every set of measurements. After the initial commissioning of the facility, and once a degree of confidence in the measurements has been built up, periodic checks have been found to be adequate. C.6.3 011 temperature

Only the temperature tolerance (+ 2 "C) is specified in this part of IS0 4412. Obviously, it is up to the individual manufacturer or user to specify the test temperature. The normal test temperature for many pumps is 50 "C.

18

IS/IS0

4412-1 : 1991

C.6.4

Presentation

of results
noise levels to be sound pressure or picowatts respectliterature specifies

This part of IS0 4412 permits presented in the form of either sound power, in decibels or in ively. In practice, most sales

noise levels in terms of sound pressure measured at 1 m radius in a free field over a single reflecting plane, which gives a value numerically 8 dB less than the sound power value. The argument is that the sound pressure value relates more directly to the sound field encountered in practice than the more abstract concept of sound power.

19

IS/IS0 4412-1:1991

Annex D (informative) Bibliography
[1] IS0 2204:1979, Acoustics - Guide to International Standards noise and evalualion of its effects on human beings. IS0 3019-2:1986, Hydraulic nuid power identification code for mounting flanges - Metric series. on the measurement of airborne acoustical

[2]

- Positive displacement pumps and motors - Dimensions and and shaf! ends -- Part 2: Two- and four-hole flanges and shaft ends

20

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau @Z&an Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are iu possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from DOC : NO. PE Is (00x I )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 33101 31,331 13 75 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHl 1Loo02 : l/14 C. IT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 3310131 { 331 13 75 37 84 99,37 85 61 37 86 26,37 86 62 60 38 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 632 92 95,632 78 58 { 632 78 91,632 78 92

Eastern

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH 160022

{

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 4uoO93

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

