SP : 39 - 1987

Indian Standard
GUIDE INSULATION WiTHIN FOR

( Reaffirmed 2001 )

CO-ORDINATION SYSTEMS
1988 )

LOW-VOLTAGE

( First Reprint NOVEMBER

UDC

621'316'91'048 ( 026 )

@I Copyright 1988 BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 10

January

1988

SPr39-1987

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR INSULATION CO-ORDlNATlON WITHIN LOW-VOLTAGE SYSTEMS
High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee, ETDC
Chairman PROSB. I. GUWJRAJ Members
DR G. R. NA~ABHUSH~~A ( AW Prof B. I. Gururaj ) SH~I A. K. BA~DZAH

19

Refiesenting
Indian to Institute of Science, Bangalore

-

Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, Cslcutta SHRI S. MUKHOPADHYAY ( Al&sate ) Siemens India Ltd, Bombay DE S. C. BHATIA SHRI M. M. SBETHNA ( A&r& ) Mshxrsshtra State Electricity Board, Bombay Cams ENGINEER ( TBA~S PLY ) SUPERII~TENDINO ENQIN~EB (PLo4OOkVLxmrs)(ti&) Voltas Ltd, Bombay SHBI B. V. R. DAS SHRI K. N. RAO ( Ahmate ) Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara SEW V. B. DESAI Dn V. N. MALLET ( Al&mate ) Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi DIUECTOH ( EHV ) DIHECTOS ( SUB-STATION ) ( Altisata ) Nati;;nadlW~b~;mal Power Corporation Ltd, SHRI P. K. DWIVEDI Y SARI L. V. RAO (Alternate) U. P. Government Pottery Development Centre, ENOINEEB SUPEBINT~WDENT Khurja Bhsrat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Hyderabad Sam B. N. GHOSH SHBI P. C. MAEAJAN ( Aftmcolr I ) SHRI K. NATABAJAN ( AltaMkII ) Kirlosksr Electric Co Ltd, Bangalore Saar B. N. JAYABAY SUSI P. RAN~ABAJAN ( Al&ma& ) JOWT DIRECTOR ST AN D AB DB Reaearcb, Designs ik Standards Organization ( Ministry of Railways ), Lucknow { PSI ; DEPUTY D I B E c T o B ST~DABDS ( TI/ORE ) ( Altrmotr ) ( Centinwd on #aga 2 )

BtTREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS
ir protected under the Isdiun wright Acl ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in port by any mesns except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be M infringement of copyright under the said Act.

Thir publlcstion

%P.a. 99 - 1987
( CWinued

from #ago1 )

ac)n#nting Mombrr W. S. Insulatora of India Ltd, Madraa SEEI K. KASTUBI SEEI S. RAJAEP ( Altmuir ) Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madraa SEBI K. KBI~H~~ASW~YY RAO SHBI V. TULEIBAYAN( AIianrrrr) Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board, Jabalpur SIZ~IR. S. MALVIYA SEBI A. C. BEDICEAB( Altit4 Tata Hpdro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, SmsrV.N. MA~OHAI% Bomlmy SEBI G. K. V~~KA?A RAO (Altma~ ) Bombay Electric Supply 8~Transport UndertakSEW V. H. NAVXU ing, Bombay Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala 55-1 NAOI~~ Sraro~ Saax J. S. GBEWAL ( Aftnnofr ) National Test House, Calcutta SEE1 P. c. PBADEAw SEBI R. N. M~~H~BJEE ( 4ltma:~) U. P. State Electricity Board, Lucknow SHBI B. D. PAMDXY SEBI S. C. A~ABWAL ( Alkrnofr ) Electrical Research & Development Association, DB K. V. N. RAO Vad& SEBZP. K. Jos~l ( Al&ma& ) Cen;tcM~e.r Research Institute ( CSIR ), SEE1 v. B. RAM MOEAXZ

Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore SHsl R. SBrrrlv SHBI H. H. RAYAPPA (Al&ma& ) Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Vadodara SEBIP. SAT~A#ABAYABTA SHEI A. S. UDHALIXAB ( Alkrnotr 1 Crompton Greare, Ltd, Bombay S~BI c. R. VAEI=B DE G. PABTHAIABATEY( Alrnn& ) Director General, BIS ( &-&cio Mnnbn ) SEBI S. P. SAOEDEV, Director ( Elec tech ) *-

Indian Standard
GUIDE FOR INSULATION CO-ORDINATION WITHIN LOW-VOLTAGE SYSTEMS
0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Special Publication was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 23 February 1987, after the draft finalized by the High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee had been approved by the Elcctrotechnical Division Council. b.2 This guide deals with the principles which govern insulation cur ordination in low voltage installations. It also provides guidance for specifying creepage distances and clearances in air for low-voltage equip ment in such a manner that insulation coordination in the installation becomes possible, and that coordination between different apparatus used in the same or different situations is rationalized. Further, the standard also provides data to the relevant equipment committees dealing with low voltage equipment to specify internal insulation. 03 Overvoltages in LV systems originate from the following and faults, and causes:

a) load fluctuations, b) switching operations, resonances c) lightening discharges.

In the past, adequate attention was not given to the nature and effects of these over-voltages. However increased application of miniaturized electronics in consumer and industrial products has focussed attention on the need to study overvoltage phenomena in LV systems. These overvoltages also affect common LV consumer installations and equipment therein such as motors, switchgear, appliances, lamps, energy meters and hnninaires. 0.4 Within the country, the various utilities and manufacturers have come across failures of LV equipment identified above, altributable to overvoltages. Even though exhaustive studies as would be required on an issue like this have not been carried out, experts are of the view that there is 3

SE 4 99

-

1987

a need for proving through tests, the adequacy of design of, these equipment to withstand over-voltages. Unless all the issues involved in insulation coordination are adequately considered and systematically dealt with, it is likely that over-insulated designs, would result thus making the equip ment expensive and not necessarily reliable. 0.5 Insulation co-ordination can only be achieved if transient over-voltages are controlled to specified levels. Numerous types of overvoltage control means are available, but in addition to the special devices for this purpose, many of the existing clearances actually serve as voltage limiting means by flashing over without consequential fault current, when the energy in the transient overvoltage wave is too low to ionize the gap sufficiently to initiate a fault current. In this Guide it was assumed that such means exist in the system, and therefore, controlled voltage systems are the basis for the standardized values of impulse withstand voltage. For the purpose of insulation co-ordination it is, therefore, absolutely essential to establish standardized impulse voltage levels. 0.6 The High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee, ETDC 19, which bad prepared this Guide has taken cognizance of the following facts:

4

The issue of LV insulation co-ordination and associated reqirements are primarily recent in origin and are yet to be time tested. Considerable amount of data is required on ascertaining actual system overvoltages and the adequacy of any dielectric tests specified to verify equipment design meeting the system disturbances, and LV insulation co-ordination implies the inclusion of an impulse tests even for LV equipment, covering a wide range of products manufactured under different sectors of the industry. It is not at present evident whether existing designs would be adequate to withstand the impulse ranges proposed or would involve major design changes. ETDC 19 had decided to prepare this Guide on the basis of , guidelines on account of the following reasons:

b)

6.7 However international

a) The Guide would serve as a common basis in this emerging field for various technical committees who would like to take advantage of the information contained for determining requirements for insulation co-ordination for a specific product; b) The Guide would serve as an impetus for several experts who are engaged in collection of data pertaining to the issue and to designers to test the adequacy of their designs against acceptable reference overvoltage levels until comprehensive guidance could be worked out by individual groupr; and

4

SP:39-1987 c) The Guide with proposed impulse levels and clearances would definitely rationalize the dimensions in a useful manner. 0.8 Therefore, the object of this Guide is to guide the relevant technical committees that have to specify creepage distance and clearances iti air for low voltage equipment in such a manner that insulation c+rdination in the installation becomes possible, and that co-ordination between different apparatus used in the same or different situation is rationalized. It also provides the necessary data to give guidance on. specifying internal insulation. 0.9 In recommending this Guide, it is stressed that it is tentative in nature. In would be periodically updated as more knowledge is gained and as comprehensive data collection would be complete. This Guide would also be supported by necessary supplementary Guides on issues where a more comprehensive treatment is necessary. Additional guidelines are being prepared on safety requirements for dimensioning of equipment, isolating distances, dielectric testing and interfaces for overvoltage categories. This Guide should also be read in conjunction with rules concerning surge protection in LV installations being prepared by Electrical Installation Sectional Committee, ETDC 20. of this Guide is the prerogative of individual technical committees preparing specification for LV equipment. In the first instance, this guide is recommended in areas where failures of LV equipment wag significant. In areas whele guidelines for dimensioning already exist, these could be verified in line with this Guide. For areas where technical committees are engaged in preparation of requirements for insulation co-ordination for the first time, this Guide could be used as the starting point. design guide. However, it is believed that application of the guidelines given would lead to an economical and good design. Moreover, even though little data is available on actual system overvoltages and the adequacy of coordination of insulation to meet them in actual practice, the contents of this publication is intended to generate discussions on all relevant matters as well as streamline the collection of needed data in an organized manner. New materials developed indigenously could also be got verified in line with the available information. 0.12 It should be pointed out that this Guide adequately lays stress on the need for use of surge arresters for LV systems thereby controlling overvoltages and hence reducing the cost of equipment designed for operation downstream in the network. This is a matter of installation practice and had to be veiwed in the proper and larger perspective of current practices in the country. Detailed guidelines on this matter are outside the purview of this Guide.

0.10The degree of adoption and implementation

0.11It is clarified that this publication should not be construed as a

5

6P : 39 - 1987 0.13 In the preparation of this Guide assistance has been derived from the following publications issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission: IEC Pub 664-1980 Insulation Co-ordination within Low-Voltage Systems including Clearances and Creepagt Distances for Equipment. IEC Pub 664A-1980 Insulation Co-ordination within Low-Voltage Systems, Including Clearances and Creepage Distance for Equip ment ( First supplement to Publication 664 (1980). 9.14 Since the issue of the IEC Publications given in 0.13, several develop ments have taken place at the International level leading to further debate on this subject. This had led to possibilities of preparing supplementary guides and explanatory notes on the provisions on LV insulation coordination. The need for and contents of supplements are being actively debated by the High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee, ETDC 19. Such developments as and when ready,in the final form would in due course form part of this Guide.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This Guide deals with the coordination of installations including clearances and creepage bearing a rated voltage up to 1 200 V dc or up frequencies up to 30 kHz and for use up to 2 000 insulation in low-voltage distances for equipment, to 1 000 V ac with rated m above mean sea level.

1.2 The minimum clearances indicated in this Guide do not apply where ionized gases ( such as flames or arcs ) occur, Special requirements for such situations may be specified in the relevant standard. 1.3 This Guide does not deal explicitly with distances through solid or liquid insulation, with gases other than air or with compressed gases. However, it is recommended that any solid insulation be so dimensioned that a clearance will flashover at a value of voltage so low that no damage will be done to the solid insulation.
NOTB 1 - The rated voltaxes 1 000 V ac and I 200 V dc are traditional limits for low-voltage equipment aa gccepted for national'rtandardixat~on work and only represent the formal limitation of the scope. Higher voltages may exist in circuits internal to the equipment.
of 2 000 m above mean sea level is the traditional NOTE 2 - The altitude highest altitude for low-voltage equipment covered by :tandards. Requirementr for altitudes exceeding 2 000 m can be derived from Appeodix A.

.

6

SP r 39 - 1987

SECTlOW 1
2. TERMINOLOGY

DEFINITIONS

2.0 For the purposes of this Guide the followin& definitions shall apply. 2.1 Clearance parts. The shortest distance in air between two conductive

NOTE- For the purpose of determining a clearance to accessible parts, the accessible surface of an insulating enclosure shall be considered conductive as if it was covered by a metal foil wherever it can be touched by a hand or a standard test finger.

2.2 Creepage Distance - The shortest distance along the surface of an insulating material between two conductive parts.
a creepage distance to accessible parts, NOTE - For the purpose of determining the accessible surface of an insulating enclosure shall be considered conductive as ifit was covered by a metal foil wherever it can be touched by a hand or a test finger.

2.3 Rated Voltage - The value of vo!tage, assigned by the manufacturer to a component, device or equipment, to'which operation and performance characteristics are referred.
NOTE - Certain types of equipment may have a rated voltage range. may have more than one rated voltage or

2.4 Rated Insulation Voltage - The voltage of a component, device or piece of equipment to which dielectric voltage tests and creepage distances are referred.
NOTE 1,- Technical committees are recommended insulation voltages for their equipment. to specify a series of rated

not having a specified rated insulation voltage. the NOTE'2 - For equipment highest value of any rated voltage shall be considered to be the rated insulation voltage.

2.5 Rated Impulse Withstand Voltage - The peak value of .an impulse voltage, of prescribed form and polarity which the equipment is capable of withstanding without breakdown under specified conditions of test and to which the value of the clearances is referred.
NOTE 1 - Preferred valuer of rated impulse withstand voltage are those given in Table 1. NOTE 2 - Technical committees are recommended to specify a series of rated impulse withstand voltages for their equipment.

2.6 Rated Insulation .Level - The value of rated insulation voltage and rated:impulse withstand voltage which characterize the insulation of equipment with regard to its ability to withstand dielectric stress.

7

SP I 39 - 1987 2.7 Working Voltage - The highest rms value of the ac or dc voltage which may occur ( locally ) across any insulation at rated supply volts, transients being disregarded, in open circuit conditions or under normal operating conditions. 2.8 Temporary Overvoltage - The phase-to-earth, phase-to-neutral or phase-to-phase overvoltage at a given location and of relatively long duration ( several seconds ). 2.9 Transient Overvoltage this report are the following. The transient overvoltages in the sense of

2&l Switching Overvoltage - The transient overvoltage at a given location on a system due to a specific switching operation of fault. 2.9.2 Lightning Ovmoltage - The transient overvoltage at a given location on a system due to a specific lightning-discharge. 2.9.3 Functional Overvoltage - Deliberately imposed overvoltages necessary for the function of a device. 2.10 Impulse Withstand Voltage - The highest peak value of impulse voltages of prescribed form and polarity, which does not cause breakdown under specified conditions of test. 2.11 Power-Frequency Withstand Voltage The rms value of a power-frequency sinusoidal voltage which does not cause breakdown under specified conditions of test. 2.12 Pollution - Any addition of foreign matter, solid, liquid or gaseous ( ionized gases ), that may produce a reduction of dielectric strength or surface resistivity. -The ambient conditions which surround the 2.13 Micro-environment clearance or creepage distance under consideration.
of the creepage distance or clearance and not NOTE - The micro-environment the environment of the equipment determines the effect on the insulation. The micro-environment might be better or worse than the environment of the equipment. It includes all factors influencing the insulation, such as climatic, electromagnetic, generation of pollution, etc.

I

2.14 Coordination of Insulation - The correlation of insidation characteristics of electrical equipment on the one hand with the expected overvoltages and with the characteristics of overvoltage protective devices, and on the other hand with the expected micro-environment and the , pollution protective means.
is limited and where NOTE1 - Where the energy of the expected overvoltage the preferred impulse withstand voltage is 1 500 V, the clearances provided may serve as simple overvoltage protective devices withoutcausingany malfunction.The work `malfunction' refers to discontinuity of service as well as to physical damage to the equipment itself or the surroundings. Where such use is made of a clearance, this feature must be clearly identified, td that no inadvertent design or field change could upset the coordination.

8

SP : 39 - 1987
NOTE2 - The minimum values prescribed in this Guide cannot by themselves ensure insulation coordination but make it possible. Coordination also requires the presence of gaps with a rpecified breakdown voltage or of overvoltage protective devices.

2.15 Isolating Distance - The clearance between open contacts of a pole of a mechanical switching device which meets the saft=tyrequirements specified for disconnectors. 2.16 Homogeneous ( Uniform ) Field - An electric field which has an essentially constant voltage gradient between electrodes, such as that between two spheres where the radius of each sphere is greater than the distance between them. 2.17 Jnhomogeneous ( Nonuniform ) Field - An electric field which does not have an essentially constant voltage gradient between electrodes.

SECTION 2
3. BASIC PRINCIPLES 3.1 Insulation

lNSlJl.ATlON CO-ORDINATION
OF INSULATION COORDINATION

Co-ordination

3.1.1 Insulation co-ordination implies the selection of the electric insulation characteristics of equipment with regard to its application and in relation to its surroundings. Considkration must be given to the voltages which can appear within the system, to the location and characteristics of the overvoltage protective devices, to the continuity of service desired and to the safety of persons and property, so that the probability of undesired incidents due to voltage stresses is reduced to ensure an economically and operationally acceptable performance. 3.1.2 Insulation co-ordination requires that solid or liquid insulation materials involved have an impulse withstand voltage value in excess of the breakdown value of either the voltage limiting device or the actual clearance on which the co-ordination is based. On the other hand the equipment itself shall not inject into the system an overvoltage in excess of the rated impulse withstand voltage. 3.1.3 Insulation co-ordination cannot be achieved only by specifying minimum values of clearances. However, it can be achieved by use of clearances having specified breakdown voltages or overvoltage protective devices having specified characteristics. 9

SP�39-1987 The overvoltage protective devices may be special equipment including means for the storage or dissipation of energy or simple air gaps ( clearances ), under defined conditions, capable of dissipating without harm the energy of the overvr ltages expected at the relevant location. 3.1.4 For systems, and insulation series of impulse withstand voltage. rated impulse withstand voltage of the appropriate value for the Table 1 ). co-ordination is based on a preferred For each location in the system the equipment shall be equal to or above particular installation category ( see distinction is

In order to apply this concept of insulation co-ordination, should be made between two types of transient overvoltages: a) transient originating in the system to which connected through its terminals; and b) transients generated within the equipment the

equipment

itself.

3.2 Impulse Withstrurd Voltages for Insulation Co-ordination Table 1 gives theseries of impulse withstand voltages related to system voltage ranges. The transient overvoltage occurring at the innerfaces in the aystem must remain below or be limited to the values' stated. The rated impulse withstand voltage of the equipment shall be equal to or higher than the values stated.
NOTE- Technical committees are recommended withstand voltage for their equipment. to specify a rated impulse

3.3 Interface Requirements - In a system, the insulation levels of the various installation categories normally follow each other in descending order of magnitude of the impulse withstand voltage as the equipment is located further away from the source of energy. The transition from one installation category to the next lower category is justified by compliance with appropriate interface requirements. Typical elements that influence the interface are: - an overvoltage protective device; - a transformer with isolated windings; - a busbar system with a multiplicity of branches ( capable of diverting energy of surges ); - a capacitance, for example a cable or a capacitor ( capable of absorving energy of surges ); and
capacitance may be used to absorb the energy of an NOTE-While impulse, the effectr of subsequent releare of the #tored energy back into the circuit must be conridered. a resistance or similar

damping

device

( capable

of dissipating

energy of surges ). 10

SP I 39 - 1997 3.4 Insulation Co-ordination Within a System - It is the responsibility of the technical committees dealing with installations to specify the necessary standard installation category and the interface requirements that justify the transition from one level ( installation category ) to the next lower level. 3.5 Insulation Co+dination Inside a Piece of Eqaipment

3.5.1 For those parts in a cirduit within equipment which are significantly influenced by or can themselves influence external circuit conditions, the responsible committees should suggest, if applicable, the most advantageous locations for clearances that are capable of suffering a flashover with the minimum risk of damage or disturbance. It is to be understood that all other clearances inside the same piece of equipment shall be larger ( having higher impulse withstand voltage ). 3.5.2 For other parts or circuits within equipment which are not significantly influenced by or cannot themselves influence external circuit conditions, the recommendations for clearances and creepage distances are not related to the installation category of the equipment but to the actual conditions for that part or circuit. Interpolation of values given in Table 2 in this case is possible. 3.6 Selection of Rated Impdme Withmtand Voltage
3.6.0 The Technical Committee responsible dered shall indicate the installation categories which their specification applies. for Eqalpment

for the equipment consiaccording to Table 1 for

S.6.1 The manufacturer shall relect the rated impulse withstand volta6c or range of voltage for which the equipment is designed in view of those combinations of installation category and rated voltage range fat which the equipment ia intended, 3.6.2 For equipment capable of creating overvoltages, for example switching devices, the magnitude of the rated implse withstand volt+ implies that no overvoltage in excess of this value can be generated by the quipment itself when used in accordance with the relevant stardard and instructions of the manufacturer. Conversely, a given value of rated impulse withstand voltage implies that overvoltages of that magnitude might be generated and that, as a consequence, the equipment could be unsuitable for use in lower installation categories or it may necessitate consideration of suppression means suitable for the lower category.
NOTE- Zf the rated implre withstand voltage ir expresed aa two valuea of voltage, the highest valnc indicatea the rated impulse withstand voltage and the lower value the highest overvoltage generated by the equipment itself.

11

SP:39-1987
TABLE

1 PREFERRED SERIES OF VALUES OF IMPULSE WITHSTAND VOLTAGES FOR RATED VOLTAGES BASED ON A CONTROLLED OVERVOLTAGE SITUATION
( Clanses 3.1.4, 3.2.1, 3.6.0, 3.8.1, aad 7.1 )

VOLTAOES PEASE-TO-EAETHDBBIVED FBOY RATED SYSTEM VOLTAQBSV~ TO AND IXCLVDINOV rms AND dc

PRE~~~UREDSB~IB~O~I~PVLSE W~TESTAHD VOLTA~SSIEZVOLTspOBINsTALLATION CATEOOBY ,--'---A----.-m--, I II III IV (2) 330 500 800 1500
2500

(1)
50 100 150 300 600

(3) 500 800 I 500 2500
4000

(4) 800 1 500 2 500 iooo
6000

(5) 1 500 2500 aooo 6000
8000

4000 6000 8 000 12 ooo 1000 NOTE1 - For the purpose of insulation co-ordination, the voltage phase-to-earth in the first column of the table ia the rmr value of the ac or dc voltage existing in the system under normal operating conditions. The installation categories are baaed on protection by transient overN-2voltage control means, for example, rurge arresters, or by other surge protectors, such as rpirk gaps ( clearances ) designed for this purpose or by metal oxide varistors, etc, unless the nature of the installation L ruch that the impulse withstand voltage of the selected category ia not exceeded ( see Fig. I ). the rituation can N~FE 3 - For rystemr where no rurge ruppresaor is installad, be described as `uncontrolled'. However, overvoltages will rtill be ultimately limited by sparkover of air clearance ( self-restoring ) or by puncture of solid insulation ( permanent failure ), whichever is the lowert. This ultimate voltage ( typically between 5 kV and 25 kV ) is determined by the derign or actual construction of the hanlware and ia subject to unpredicable factors. Cleaily, the indeterminate levels of vo[tage as well as the permanent puncture riab, make the uncontrolled approach undesirable.

with one phase Nom 4 - For unearthed ( ungrounded ) system8 or wtems earthed ( gtouaded phase ), the phua-to-aarth voltaSo is to be connidered aa the
DbMPtO-DhUe

voltaae.

Table 1 is a proposal for future system design which includes interface requirements to establish limited impuhe voltage conditions at specific locations on the system. It must be recognized that overvoltage controlled systems do not generally exist at thia time. However, it must also be recognized that this type of system must exist before true insulation co-ordination can be achieved. In the meantime, individual technical committees can achieve more efficient design standards by considering the use of transient overvoltage control means to achieve the voltage lcvelr proposed in Table 1 ( SICalso Appendix B ).

s.8 Preferred series of v8luesof lmpdsc withstand Vohgem for R8ted Voltqp B8sed on 8a overvoltage controllc!d situ8tion -

I2

SP:39-1987

i i

i

I !

CATEGORY IV

RI
Znstallafion~Calrgory Fixed installation following installation category IV.

II

I

InrlaUa~io;yCategory Primary supply level. Overhead linea and cable systems including distribution bus and its associated overcurrent protection equipment.

InS&Uati;; Calrgory
Appliances, portable equipment etc. following installation category III.

Inskzf&tir;Catrgory Special equipment Or parts of equiprn+-dt following cateinstallation gory II, teletommunication elect* nit, etc.

category may NOTB - A lower installation category when appropriate transient overvoltage provided.

follow control

any higher installation means ( interfaces ) are

Fm.1

EXAMPLE FOR INSTALLATION CATR~ORIIISITOIVAND INSTALLATION CO-ORDINATION &CORDINO TOTABL~ 1

13

SP : 39 - 1987 SECTION 4. INFLUENCING 3 CLEARANCES IN AIR

FACTORS

4.0 The requirements of clearances in air are ditermined by the microenvironment in which the ( clearance ) under consideration is situated ( also see Appendix G ), 4.1 Fundamental factors influencing Factors InRnencing Clearance clearance are ( se8 also 5 ): The fundamental

a) transient overvoltages, b) electric field condition c) pollution, and d) altitude. 4.2 Other Factors which factors influencing clearance a) protection b) mechanical aspects, may Iduence a Clearance are ( SMalso 6 ): The other ( shape of the electrodes ),

against electric shock,

c) isolating distance, d) consequences of an insulation fault in a circuit, and e) continuity 5. DESCRIPTION INFLUENCING of service. OF THE CLEARANCE

F'UNDAMENTAL

FACTORS

5.0 The minimum clearances are obtained by application of this clause. However, the other conditions given in 4.2 spay require increased distance which are' not directly dimensidnable but are the responsibility .of the individual technical committees and should take into consideration 6. 5.1 Transient Overvoltagea-For the purpose of withstanding transient overvoltages, the impulse withstand voltage of a clearance in air has been derived for homogeneous ( Case B ) and inhomogeneous ( Case A ) fields under normal conditions of temperature and relative humidity and for a barometric pressure of 80 kPa ( corresponding to aa altitude. of about 2 000 m above mean sea level ). Daily variations in barometric pressure have been disregarded.
NOTE -

Information on thir can be found in Appendix A.

14

SP :39-Ha7
5.2 Electric Field Conditions - The shape and arrangement of the conductive parts ( electrodes ) between which the clearance exists influence the homogeneity of the field and consequently the distance needed to withstand a given voltage ( see Appendix A and Table 2 ). 5.2.1 Case A of Table 2 - .Values of clearances equal to or larger than those in Table 2 under Case A can be used irrespective of electrode configuration and without verification by electric impulse test. Case A clearance values are accepted as having under all conditions the ability to withstand the rated impulse withstand voltage. 5.2.2 Case B of Table 2 - Values of clearances in Table 2 under Case B represent ideal conditions that may be approached when the electrode configuration is designed to minimize local electric stresses. Clearance values which require verification by test. are between Case A and Case B values

of pollution may destroy NOTE - For small values of clearances, the presence the uniformity of the field, making the use of Case B impossible, or at least unreliable. For rated impulre withstand voltages higher than 6 000 V, the clear&es are large enough for pollution not to influence significantly the uniformity of the electric field.

5.3 Pollution 5.3.0 Means may be provided to reduce pollution at the clearance under consideration by effective use of enclosures, encapsulation or hermetic sealing. It should be recognized that such means to reduce pollution may not be effective when the equipment is subject to condensation or if, in normal operation, it generates pollutants itself. The effects of pollution in the micro-environment need only be taken into account when the position and orientation of the clearance are such that deposition of dust, dirt, water, etc, is likely to occur in a manner to reduce the clearances. Small clearances can be bridged completely by solid particles, dust and water, and therefore minimum clearances are specified where pollution may be present in the micro-environment.
NOTB - The conductivity under polluted conditions is mainly caused by water, soot, metal dust, carbon dust or rimilar components. Conductive pollution by ionixed gases and metallic deposition is restricted to specific instances, for example in switchgear or controlgear which are not cavered by this guide. Where ionized gases are present the necessary clearances cannot be specified. Ionized gases often occur coincidental to switching surges. When appropriate manufactures of switcding equipment will indicate the safety zone beyond which no ionized gases will appear during normal operation.

15

Sl? -t 39 k 1987

5.3.1 Degrees of Pollution in the Micro-mironment - For the purpose of evaluating clearances, the following four degrees of pollution in the micre environment are established:

4

Pollution Degree 1 - No pollution or only dry, non-conductive pollution occurs. The pollution has no influence. The clearance has to be determined only according to the voltage as described in 5.1 and 5.2. pollution Pollution Degree 2 - Normally, only non-conductive occurs. Occasionally, however, a temporary conductivity caused by condensationmust be expected. The clearance has to be determined only according to the voltage as described in 5.1 and 5.2. However, the minimum clearance is 0.2 mm. Pollution Degree 3 - Conductive pollution occurs, or dry, nonconductive pollution occurs which become conductive due to condensation which is expected. The clearance has to be determined only according to the voltage as described in 5.1 and 5.2. However, the minimum clearance is 0.8 mm, Pollution Degree 4-The pollution generates persistent conductivity caused, for instance, by conductive dust or by rain or snow. The clearance has to be determined only according to the voltage as described in 5.1 aud 5.2. However, the minimum clearance is l-6 mm.

b)

4

4

NOTE - The minimum clearances given for po!lution degrees 2,3 and 4 are based on experience rather than on fundamental data.

5.4 Altitmde
5.4.0 Breakdown voltage of a clearance in air, for a homogeneous field ( withstand voltage Case B in Table 6 ), is according to Paschen's Law, proportional to the product of the distance between electrodes and the atmospheric pressure. Therefore, experimental data recorded at approximately sea level are calculated, according to the difference in atmospheric pressure between 2 000 m and sea level. For the purpose of this Guide, the similar calculation is made for inhomogeneous fields. As the given millimetre values in Table 2 are valid for an altitude of 2 000 m above sea level, clearance for other altitudes must be multiplied by the multiple factor for distance. This correction factor corresponds to Paschen's Law. The relevant table is shown in Appendix A. 16

SPh9.1967
TABLE 2 MINIMUM CLEARANCES FOB INSULATION CO-ORDINATION

( Clauws 3.5.2, 5.2,5.4.Oond 8.1 RATED INPULSE WITR~TAND VOLTAGE PEAK kV

)

MINIBIUM CLEARANOE~ IN Ara IN MILLIXETREB UP TO 2 000 m ABOVE SEA LEVEL A-----__---____7 r----------Case A (Inhomogeneous Field Case B (Homogeneous Field, Ideal Conditions ) ( see2.17 ) Conditions ) ( see 2.16 ) No Dielectric Test Required C___--h------~ Pollution degree #---_-_h----~ 3 1 Dielectric Test Required* c----h____.__~ Pollution degree #-------*_--__~

(1) 0*33t :I$+ 0.60 ;*;ot . ::;t I:+ . 4.0t 5'0 6.ot anot 10

(2)
0'01 0'02 0.04 0'06 0.10 0.15

(4)

04

. x'z5 ;:;
4 5.5 a :: la z 40 E 90 130 170

0.25 0.5 1.0 1'5 s' t-5 8 11 14 ia f3 40 60 75 I% 170

: i

+ I d.8 I + 1'0 l-5 3' 54.5 a 11 :4e z; 40 E 1% 170

1.6 I I J

I I

0'01 0'02 0.04 0.06 O-1 0.is 0.2 E5 0'6 0'8 1'2

(:I
012

4

t
0.8 0.3 0.45 0'6 0.8 ::5' 2 3 3'5 4'5

(9) f

I
I

I G

1'6 I i ! 3 3'5 4'5 5'5 YO 12.5 17 f27 35 45

I I
1'2 :`" 33.5 4'5 5'5 l"O 12'5 17

3'

1

w

:o" 25
30 z :: 100

40 60 75

1%
170

22 27 35 45

22 ;: 45

2272 35 45

*Verification by a dielectric test is required specified for Case A. ipreferred values used in Table 1.

if the clearance is less than the value

6. DESCRIPTION OF THE OTHER INFLUENCE A CLEARANCE

FACTORS

WHICH

MAY

6.0 The clearances specified here must be retained

throughout the useful life of the equipment taking into account the othet factors. In some cases, increase of the cltiarance may be necessary to achieve this result. However, a mere increase of clearance may not in itself ensure this result, for example, due to mechanical aspects. 17

SP:39-1987 Technical committees should establish clerances for products their scope taking into account relevant influencing factors. within

6.1 Additional I~sulatit~n and Memmres to Provide Protection Against Electric Shock- Attention is drawn to IS : 9409-1980* wherein it is intended to give guidance to technical committees on the classification of low-voltage electrical and electronic equipment intended for connection to an external supply with regard to protection against electric shock in the event of an insulation failure. For supplementary insulation and for reinforced insulation the technical committee concerned shall state the rules governing clearances for the equipment in its scope of work. extent to which the manufacturing pro6.2 Mechanical Aspects -The cess can control the mechanical tolerances decides the limit to which practical clearances can approach the theoretical minimum clearances. It is possible to approach minimum clearances when the equipment is manufactured in a factory under controlled conditions and finished to a point where additional assembly other than the connections to terminals prior to placing the equipment in service, is not rlecessary. Replacement of components normally effected in service shops or in normal use ( e. g. fuses ) are considered to be part of controlled conditions. Routine maintenance schedules for testing or examining insulaion are expected. Increased clearances are required when equipment is field-mounted and field-connected because the method of mounting and the wiring method at the terminals have to be considered. 6.3 Isolating Distance manner as clearances. Isolating distances are determined in the same

The ratio of the impulse withstand voltage for the isolating distance to the rated impulse withstand voltage is under consideration. 6.4 Consequinces sideration. of a9 Insulation Fault in a Circuit Under con-

6.5 Continuity of Service Insulating

Under consideration.

dimensional changes ( deformation ) Nor& This includes changes due to loss of constiafter being incorporated in equipment. tuents due to evaporation aa well aa flow due to thermal or mechanical stress, absorption of water ( swelhng ) or chemical changes. Particular or even lost. +Cb&ication againat electric attention should be given to gasketa that may be unduly compressed

matarial may undergo

of electrical rho :k.

and

electronic

equipment

with

regard

to protection

18

SP : 39 - 1997
Special attention should be given to the possibility of elastic deformations, as they may not be present at the time of inspection, but only under certain conditions of service. Mechanical displacement of parts, whether operational due to the motion of movable parts, or more permanent such as the displacement of terminals due to the attachment of wires, should be considered and liberally compensated for.

7. DIELECTRIC

TESTS type tests. Technical

7.0 All dielectric tests stated in this guide are committees shall specify which tests are applicable.

When using the minimum clearance values in accordance with Case A values, no withstand voltage tests are required. Withstand voltage tests are required only when using values less than Case A values and greater than Case B values. There should be no disruptive discharge during the tests. 7.1 Preparation for Dielectric Test - When clearances are verified by dielectric tests, it is up to the manufacturer to ensure that irrespective of manufacturing tolerances the products will comply with the test requirement. An increase of test voltage shall be considered if the test is performed at an altitude below 2 000 m ( se8 Appendix A ). Exam@ I :

An equipment with a rated voltage of 230 V phase-to-earth for use up to 2 000 m above sea level and an installation category III is required to withstand an impulse voltage of 4 000 V according to Table 1. This equipment is to be tested at a site located 500 m above sea level. What is the required impulse withstand voltage at 500 m. The Case B clearance at 2 000 m and 4 000 V impulse withstand voltage according to Table 6 is 1.2 mm ( actual value is 4 090 v ). The multiplying Appendix A is 0.84. Therefore, 500 m is: factor for distance, at 500 m according corresponding to to

,

the equivalent

increase in distance I.00 m I.43 mm

1.2mmx

-

The corresponding impulse withstand voltage for I.43 mm clearance from Table 3 ( by interpolation from Case B ) is 4 750 V. This value can also be read from Fig. 4, curve 1 for 1.43 mm. 19

SP : 39 - 1987 Example 2 : What is the required impulse withstand voltage ment of Example 1 when tested at sea level ? The multiplying Therefore, sea level is: the equivalent increase in distance 1.52 mm from for the equip

factor for distance at sea level is O-79. corresponding to

1.00 1.2 mm x --

The impulse withstand voltage is 5 000 V ( by interpolation Table 3 ) or from Fig. 4, curve 1 for 1.52 mm.

7.2 General Requirements for Test- In principle, the test for impulse withstand voltage shall be performed by an impulse test accbrding to 7.4. When the conducting parts to which the test voltage is applie&are permanently connected to parts or components that may influence the magnitude or duration of the impulse, for example, surge arresters or capacitors, only the impulse test with the specified energy according to 7.4 is applicable. If a sustained voltage of the magnitude of the test voltage cannot harm any of the, components in parallel with the clearance under test, a dc test may be used instead of the impulse test. If the above conditions are satisfied and solid insulation is not unduly stressed, an ac test with a peak value corresponding to the required teat voltage may be used. 7.3 Results to be Obtained - When. a peak voltage according to the desired insulation level is applied, no flash-over or breakdown shall occur. Corona effects which do not result in breakdown are disregarded. 7.4 Impdse Test Procedure Under consideration.

SECTION 4 CREEPAGE DISTANCES 8. CREEPAGE DISTANCES
8.0 General - The recommendations for creepage distances are based on a considerable amount of empirical data and on a basic review of the physical mechanisms behind various influencing factors, rather than on exact measurements of known physical phenomena.

20

SP ;,S9 - 1987
8.9.1 A possible deterioration over the useful life of a creepage distance or the total failure of insulation properties depends on many factors just as the magnitude of the surface leakage current over a crcepage distance does not present any simple physical dependency on distance and voltage. A number of aspects have still to be studied. 8.0.2 For equipment operating within certain voltage ranges and under certain operating conditions a vast amount of practical experience exists, forming a useful guide for design purposes. Such empirical values form a part of this Guide bearing in mind that certain existing standards. require distances significantly greater than would be necessary from a technical point of view and that good experience with equipment designed in accordance with such standards is no proof that larger distances are really necessary. The values for printed boards are based on a statistical evaluation of a series of tests. Different circumstances may require greater or permit smaller creepage distances than those iven in Table 3. This decision shall be made by the individual technica f committees. 8.0.3 In view of the necessity that as much protection against deterioration of the properties of insulating material as possible is to be achieved, the values given in Table 3 present creepage distances where the influencing factors, pollution digree andtae properties of insulating material are taken into account. These distance? represent conditions of continuous stress. It should be pointed out however that the exclusion or diversion of contamination by design measures and the proper selection of a suitable type of insulating material hay5 a greater influence on the performance than the values of the creepage distances contained in Table 3. 8.0.4 Clearance and creepage distances serve different purposes in the insulation co-o&nation, and therefore it may happen that the minimum creepage distance established on the basis of the following will be smaller than the minimum clearance determined in accordance with Section 3. In that case, the cleara%= becomes the deciding design basis. 8.1 Muenciag Factors - Creepage distances are determined by the micro-environment in which the distance under consideration is situated.
creepage 82

NOTE -

This meana that in the same dbtances may be permitted.

piece

of equipment

widely

different

Folrdomentol Factors Influencing Creepage Distances a) Rated insulati_dn voltage b) Pollution ( see 9.3 )* i) Moisture, ii) Orientation and location of a creepage distance ( SCE 9.5 ), 21 or working voltage ( MC9.2 ),

SPr39.1987 iii) Shape of insulating c) Insulating materials d) Relationship surface (
SM

9.6 ),

iv) Electrostatic precipitation ( see 9.4 ),

( see 9.7 )

to clearance ( see 9.1 ),

e) Time under voltage stress ( see 9.8 ), and f) Other factors which may influence creepage distance: i) Su~jizc~leakage current ( scc9.9 ) - It may be necessary reduce the surface leakagarurrent in order: - to prevent damage to insulating material, to

to prevent perception, current ( electric shock ), and to maintain proper functioning of the equipment (crosstalk). including

ii) Consequences of an iusulati>n fault in a circuit, continuity of service ( see 9.10 ): id) Constructional aspects ( see 9.11 ), and ( see 9.12 ). FACTORS iv) Properties of electrode material 9. SPECIFICATION

OF THE INFLUENCING

9.1 Relationship to Clearance - A crcepage distance cannot be less than the associated clearance, so that the shortest creepage distance possible is equal to the clearance. However, there is no physical relation between the minimum clearance in air and the minimum acceptable creepage distance, except for this dimensional limitation. With respect to flashover, creepage distances less than the clearances required by Case A of Table 2 may only be used under conditions of pollution degree 1 in which situation the associated clearance test by impulse withstand voltage or equivalent rms voltage test for the creepage distances is sufficient. of a creepage distance is 9.2 Voltage - The basis for the determination the rms or dc value of the voltage existing between electrodes and across the creepage distance for an extended period of time. Transient overvoltages are neglected on the basis of the fact that they will normally not influence the tracking phenomenon. However, temporary and' functional overvoltages may have to be considered, depending upon duration and Voltages which result in partial discharges also frequency of occurcnce. require additional consideration in the selection of insulating material. 9.3 Pollation ( scG5.3.1 ) - The degrees of pollution which were specified for clearances rhall apply also to creepage distances. 22

,

SP

I

39

-

1987

9.3.1 Condensation - The condensation of water shall always be considered a possibility, except in the case of pollution degree 1. Condensation will occur in the case of pollution degrees 2, 3 and 4 as a result of the following condition: a) Where the tempctature of insulation surface falls the surrounding air. below the dew-point of

is negNOTE I - The statement in (a) implies that the risk of condensation ligiblc within a certain type of equipment ( for example, a radio receiver ) used in an enclosed space, such as a weakened housing. Cooling of the house will, when the dt*w-point is attained, result in condensation on the walls of the house, but not to condensation in the equipment located inside the house. When heating the house ( from the outside or from the inside ), parts having a high thermal capacity ( walls, structure, etc ) will always lag with regard to equipment having a relatively low thermal capacity. Hence there is a negligible risk resulting from condensation within the equipment and pollution degree 1 conditions normally exist. A similar consideration is valid for small components located within a larger enclosure. On the other hand, an enclosure exposed to a low temperature ambient, hut constructed in a manner that allows the exchange of air with a higher ambicnt temperature, may be subject to continuous condensation. Examples are boxes built into external walls, but with openings to an inside room or conduits passing through a low-temperature arca. Unless properly drained, condensate may collect in such enclosures. Enclosures subject to variation of temperature ( for example, between day and night ) are particularly prone to cumulative condensation because the variations promote the air exchange ( breathing ). distances in the vicinity of components NOTE 2 - In the case of creepage dissipating a small quantity of heat, the micro-environment may differ considerably from the surroundin environment of the equipment as far as condensation and tracking are concerne 8 . Close to the source of heat, drying-out is achieved quickly, which results in low conductivity of the surface so that tracking will not occur. However, for certain designs, the water vapour may recondense 09 cold sports located elsewhere and may thus increase the risk of tracking at such places.

b) Where the insulation suface is contaminated with: a) hygroscopic dust, or b) salt and the relative humidity is above a particular value.

NOTE- For example, in the presence of salt, condensation may take place where the surrounding air has a relative humidity as low as 40 percent.
Unless suitable precautions are taken, condensation may occur in any enclosure but condensation may be reduced or eliminated by one or more of the following means: - the use of a dried and hermetically sealed enclosure; it should be noted that `hermetically scaled' implies an ahsohtt(*ly airtight enclosure so that an exchange of lmmid air, cal1sc.d by a normal rhangn in air prcssurc, is impossible;

23

_..

SP : 39 - 1987
the use of an enclosure with ventilation; heating of the equipment either by continuous energization or by the use of supplementary heaters; maintaining the surrounding air at constant temperature and suitably low relative humidity; and encapsulation ( for example, pottiog ).

9.3.2 Conductive Dust - In certain locations, conductive deposits may be present. Such deposits can be avoided by means of suitable enclosures around the creepage distance in question, but attention must be paid to the fact that within that enclosure conductive deposits may be produced, for example, those originating from carbon brushes, in which case this enclosure will not ensure protection and may even aggravate the problem, Conductive dust can lead to very high values of surface leakage currents, and can lead to failure by a flashovrr, but it seldom leads to progressive tracking. 9.4 Insulating Materials 9.4.1 Charact&.stics of Insulating Matwiab - Insulating materials can be roughly characterized according to the damage they may suffer from concentrated release of energy as a result of the action of electric arcs ( miniarcs ) when a surface leakage current is interrupted, that is, due to drying of the contaminated surface. The following behaviour of insulating materials in the presence of mini-arcs may occur: a) no decomposition of the insulating materials, b) decomposition of material into volatile components ( erosion ), and c) decomposition of material resulting in carbon residues (tracking).
visually

NOTEI -

The test in accordance with IS : 2824-1975. determine whether the inrulating material under

makes

it possible

to

test will:

- remain un&Tected by the teat conditions, or - have a tendency to erode, or - have a tendency to form tracks.
cl;peefing

But in practicf,

erosion and on the kmd of insulating

tracking mate&i,

can be more contamination

or less intermixed, and current ( ac

.
create the chemical decomposition required for tracking in a localized dryiog out in the rutface conductivity. These rituntionr situation or equivalent chang arise when the electrodes of a 7 ootaminated creepage distance are energized or when the creepage distance between energized electrodes becomes contamiaated. The magnitude of the surface leakage current depends upon the conductive of the contamination of the surface and on the configuration of the relevant parts. The progression of tracking or of e rosion increaser with the number of localized dry-out incidents.

Tracking or erosion eanaot occur uoleo the surface leakage current exceeds a limiting value related to the minimum energy necessary to

NOTB 2 -

lrMethodr for determining comparative under moist conditions ( jrst revisivn ).

tracking

index of solid

insulating

materials

24

SP t 39 - 1987
A method of classification for insulating materialr accordirg to groups (a), (b) and (c). does not exist. The behaviour of the inurlating material under various contaminants and voltages is extremely complex. Under these variour conditions many material will fall into two or even all three of the groups (a), (b) and (c). A direct correlation of groups (a), (b) and (c) with the material groupr of 9.4.2 is not practical. However, it has been found by experience and teata that insulating materials having a higher relative performance also have approximately the aame relative ranking according to the Comparative Tracki Index ( CT1 ). Therefore, thia Guide uaea the CT1 values to eatabliah a ae St* 1OD of insulation materials for dimensioning in Table 3. 9.4.2 Comparative Tracking Index ( CTI ) - The test for Comparative Tracking Index in accordance with IS : 2824-1975*, is designed to compare the performance of various insulating materials under test conditions, namely drops of an aqueous contaminent falling on a horizontal surface leading to electrolytic conduction. Basically, it gives a qualitative comparison, but in the case of insulating materials having a tendency to form tracks it may also give a quantitative comparison, the Comparative Tracking Index.

I

For the purpose of this Guide materials are separated into four groups according to their CT1 values, as follows: Material Group I Material Group II Material Group IIIa Material Group IIIb 600 ( CT1 400 < CT1 < 600 175 < CT1 < 400 100 < CT1 < 175

The above CT1 values refer to values obtained in accordance with IS : 2824-1975*, on samples specifically made for the purpose and tested with Appendix A.
NOTE - For inorganic inaulating materiala, for example glass or ceramica, which do not track, creepage didWPncea need not be greater than their associated clearance for the purpose of iusulation co-ordination.

9.5 Orientation and Location of a Creepage Distance - The orientation and location of a creepage distance is significant in the folhswing ways: a> The tendency to collect dust which is deposited by gravity centrifugal force or by draughts of air as a result of natural or induced circulation, b> The flow pattern or drops of water over the surface in between electrodes or form one electrode to another, and c) The location of a creepage distance with respect to a heat source causing accelerated uniform drying of the insulating surface. _-___. ._.. ~_
*Methods for determining comparative under moist conditions (fist not&~ ). trackiog index of solid insulating materials

25

SPr39.1987 The pollution is influenced by the position in which the equipment or component is installed in a room, frame, or enclosure. All intended positions should be considered when evaluating the pollution for the creepage distance. Particular attention should be given to equipment or components that may change their position while in use, for example, portable equipment or moving parts of mechanically operated switches.
equipment

NOTB1 -The

manufacturer should indicate the intended orientation or component, if a particular orientation Ir required or excluded.

of the

NOTE 2 - It should be recognized that equipment may he rtored in one orientation but be used in another and this may influence the collection of dust.

9.6 Shape of InsuIating Surface - Creepage distances may preferably include transverse ridgessand grooves that break the continuity of the leakage path caused by conductive surface layers. Likewise, ridges and grooves may be used to divert the flow of drops of water to areas not under electrical stress. Joint grooves or cracks running parallel between the conductive parts ( the electrodes ) should be avoided as they may collect pollution or retain water by capillary action. Examples of the evaluation of the length of a creepage path are given in the examples 1 to 11 in clause 11. 9.7 Electrostatic Precipitation - In the presence of electrostatic fields, contaminating non-conductive dust partidea can be deposited on insulating surfaces where otherwise dust may not accumulate to the same degrea. The adhesion and accumulation of precipitated dust particles result from the presence of high unidirectional electric fields and are independent of material orientation. 9.8 Time Under Voltage Stress - The time under. yoltage stress influences the number of drying out incidents capable of.,c&nsing mini arcs of an energy high enough to entail tracking. `We number ofdrying out incidents is considered to be sufficiently large to cause tracking: in equipment intended for continuous use and not generating its interior sticient heat for drying out; in

in any equipment of the input side of any switch and between-the line and load (input and output) terminals of any switch supplied from the mains; and in any equipment subject to condensation being frequently switched on and off. 26 for longer periods, and

-

The creepage distances shown in Table 3 have been determined for insulation intended to be under voltage stress for a long time ( or continuously ). Technical committees concerned with insulation for equipment which is under voltage stress for only a short time may consider using shorter creepage distances than those recommended in Table 3.
ted in Note

NOTE-

For pollution degree 1 to Table 3.

2, a material

of lower CT1 may be used as sugges-

Alternatively, except for pollution degree 4, the creepage distance corresponding to one voltage step lower may be used for insulation stressed for a total of 15 000 h or less Similarly, for insulation stressed 1 500 h or leas, the creepage distance corresponding to two voltage steps lower may be used. These degrees of relaxation from the conditions of continuous stress are provisional and under consideration. Therefore, interested technical committees are invited to give their experience. The same consideration may he given to insulation which is only intermit: tently stressed ,within equipment which is itself under voltage strers for a long time. Consideration of even smaller distances may be given in the cases of insulation of floating ( not energized or not cadable of being earthed ) parts.

9.9 Considerations to Reduce Lerrliage Current - The consequence. of a creepage distance with conductive contamination, whether it is inherently conductive or conductive because of humidity, is that it permits a leakage current over the insulating surface. The magnitude of this Ieakage current is a function of the voltage and impedance of the source, the conductivity of the pollution and both the length and width of creepage distance. 9.9.1 Protection Against Elcctrie SIwck - Any leakage current to an accessible part presents a risk of electric shock if leakage current can exceed the perception level when the accessible part is touched by a human body in contact with earth. The leakage current to be considered is the sum of the capacitative;conductive and surface leakage current but only the latter is dealt with here. When evaluating the risk of electric shock by a surface leakage current from an accessible part which is not earthed directly or indirectly,it should be remembered that such a current can only flow when the-`accessible part is earthed, for example, by touching. Therefore, a wet surface will not dry out due to leakage current, but for the same reason no tracking can occur. Consideration should be given to joints, cracks, and crevices that may retain water by capillary action and also form part of the leakage path.
current ), the possibility NOTE - With regard to safety ( perception joints, cracks and crevices becoming conductive should be considered. of such

27

sP139-1987

Similar considerations relate to the collection of conductive dust, for example from the commutator of motors or from other switching devices. 9.9.2 Protection Against Malfunctioning - Considerations very similar to those relating to electric shock are valid in connection with leakage current crosstalk or similar malfunction. Because of its irregular and unpredictable nature, surface leakage currents should be considered when evaluating the influence of one circuit on the operation of another circuit, such as in communications equipment and in sensitive control circuits. However, it is not possible to indicate specific values of leakage current since the highest tolerable value depends upon circumstances, In general, proper attention to the character and location of the circuits is of far greater significance than the dimensioning of the creepage distances involved. Sensitive circuitry may require the exclusion of contamination and moisture [see alJo 9.3.1 (b) J. 9.10 Consequences of an Insulation Fault in a Circuit - Tracking of the insulation is likely to result in permanent failure. The possible consequence of this, whether it is the starting of a fire, the interruption of an essential supply or any other undesirable circumstance, must be considered by the technical committees which may take steps to give greater degree of protection. These steps may include for example increased creepage distance, better materials, encapsulation, etc. On the other hand, creepage distances. circumstances may justify a reduction of the

The following should be considered: a) A leakage current leading to tracking in a circuit may cause a short circuit and consequential operation of the overcurrent protective device if the circuit impedance is low enough. The damage depends upon the resulting current and the operating characteristics of the overcurrent protective device. b) A fire may be caused by a leakage current leading to tracking in a circuit where impedance is too high to cause the overcurrent protective device to operate. c) In high-power circuits, the power of the fault arc can be appreciable, even though the operation of the overcurrent protective device may be very fast or even current limiting, the energy released can be appreciable and capable of causing mechanical damage ( pressure ) and fire. d) In some cases the impedance of the circuit is so high or the micro environment is so favourable that tracking is unlikely to occur. Provided that a short circuit in such a case will not constitute a fire hazard, electric shock or malfunction, the creepage distance need not exceed the clearance. 28

CREEPAGE DISTANCES IN MILLIMETRESFGR A MICRO-ENVIRONMENT TABLE 3 MINIMUM DEPENDENT ON VOLTAGE, POLLUTION DEGREE, INSULATINGMATERIAL AND TIiBIR USB ON PRINTED WIRING MATERIAL OR IN EQUIPMENT VOLTAGE VALUES SELECTED W ACCORDANCB WITH THE R lO=SBR&BS ( Cluum &0,9.&l, 9.8 and 10.0 )

VOLTAGE V 8C rms ::

PEIWrlm WISIWO
MATEBIAL

CX~PAOS DIBTAPJCEB IN WrtwmBlpe mm EQUIPY~~T SUBJEOT TOLoxa-Rar 8xsqtrr \

-

Pollution Degree 1 2 1

Pollution Degree 2

Pollution Degree 4 Mmri8l group IIIb
I II

hami8l
II

group IIIa

h48terial group I II IIIa IIIIb

Se. Sss Note 2 Note

Note :

SU

-t
12.5
10

I

I
:::2 o-45

I
1 ::Y5 1.2 1.25 ::: `7 : 1:: i-1 ;:i `1 1'05 ::; 1'25 ::; 1.9 f.* ::: ;:2" f i:; 10 E'" 20 E E 63 1% 125 160 1'6 1'6 ::i 1'7 1'8 ;:j 2.6 E. 9'2 4 z.3 8 10 12'5 16 f
I

0.025 0.025 0'025 0'025 0'025 0'025 8::;; 0'04 0'063

xzi! z2 0.45
0.125 o-14 0.16

X%

0'48

z553 0.56 E3 867 0'71 0.75 Y" 1'25 1.6 2 2.5 3.2 4 5.3 1: 12'5 :: :; 40 50

. X-f
0.53 ::; Z" ::: 1.6 2 3:; 4 65.3 8 s-5 if :: 40 D 80 100

200

E 160

!I'16 925 X:$ 0.75 :*3

. Z" 0.22 O-25 . x';: 0.42 O-56 o-75
1 1.3 ::"s 3:; 56 7.5 10 12.5 16 zo5 3:

% 400 %

. 5.;
7.1 1': 14 18 ;: ; G

:Ei
1600 !Z :z

!

:; E 1E 125 E 250

6300 8000 10 000

110 140

L

NoxnlM8terial group I or Muerial &oups II, II4 UXb<m ck ia reduced due to conditions *' of g#& Nom2 - Material groupa I, II, IIIa, IIIb. Noxm 3 - Material groups I. II, III& in this area have not been established. M8terial grou IIIb is in general not 3 above 630 V and in llution degree 4. Availa Ele data indicate that very much greater than thore in C aterial group Illa. But on the decision of a Techbe used in this area if it can be shown by experience or by design of a particular Nom 5 - It is appreckted that traching or erosion will not occur on insulation subjected to worllmg voltages of 32 V and below. However, the possibility of electrolytic corrcuion has to be considered and for this reason minimum creepages have been specified. (

29

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

SP:39-19lH 9.11 Constructional Aspects - Special attention should be given to terminals, where the rffective creepage distance can be shortened by the conductors attached to the terminals, for example by touching ridges separating two terminals or by hygroscopic action of the conductor insulation. Minimum creepage distances associated with. terminals may be solely governed by constructional considerations as specified by the relevant technical committees ( see alsa 6.2 ). 9.12 Properties of Electrode Material - For small values of creepage distances, it may be necessary to consider the fact that some electrode materials have a tendency to migrate under the influence of a leakage current or to form dendrites ( whiskers ) which may reduce both clearance and creepage distances. Other materials, or particular alloys may exhibit dimensional growth due to recrystallization, usually very slowly in the order of years. Some electrode materials tend to dissolve in electrolytic pollutants, thereby increasing the conductivity and thus increasing the probability. of tracking or flashover. 9.13 Other Conditions-Other conditions may require the consideration of supplementary factors which are not directly dimensionable and are the responsibility of the individual technical committees. Considerations of ribs and grooves are given in 9.6. 10. DIMENSIONING OF CREEPAGE DISTANCES

10.0 The values of creepage distances given in Table 3 are based upon existing empirical data and are suitable for a majority of applications but exclude certain applications for which other values of creepage distances are appropriate. Technical committees may have experiences `which are valid under certain conditions specific to their products. In these cases other creepage distances either smaller or larger than those given in Table 3 may be selected taking the influencing factors of 9.5 to 9.12 into account. Where the working voltage is used for dimensioning, appropriate to interpolate values for intermediate voltages. IO.1 Selected Voltage VaIues - The technical committees rated insulation voltage or system voltage from the voltage in Table 5. it may be can select a values given

The RIO series voltage values given in Table 3 are derived from Fig. 2 and the table includes values of typical system voltages. If necessary, technical committees can select other voltages. Tables 4 and 5 are for the purpose of relating the voltage Table 3 to the most commonly used supply systems voltages. 31 values of

SP:39-1997

6 4 3 2

6

10'1 ii2

I I 2

IIIiIX I111 34 6

YI ld

I I 2

lllllll

ll/lIll//l
6 18

I111111 2

111111 I 111111
1 lllll1 6
--t to Table 6.

3 4

3 L

Id

2

31

6

lo2

OISTANCE

IN MILLIMETRES

1. Withstand voltages for clearances according 2. Homogeneous field U impulse ( l-2/50 ). 9. Homogeneour field U rms. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. l?io.

Inhomogeneour field U impulse
Pollution Pollution Pollution Pollution Pollution degree degree degree degree degree 1. 2. 2 Material 3 Material 4 Material

( 1'2/50 ).

group 1. group 1. group 1. clearances are added.

NOTE - For the purpose of comparison,

2

CREEPAOBDISTANCES, DEPENDENT ON VOLTAQEPOLLUTION DBQREE,MATERIAL GROUP a2

TABLE 4

SINGLE-PHASE

THREE

OR TWO-WIRE

AC OR DC SYSTEMS TABLE 3

( Clam IO.1 ) NOMINAL VOLTAGE OF

SUPPLYSY~TEX+

r----------

VOLTAQE REFERENCE

*-_-_---_-_----~

FOB

Phase-to-Phase All Systems ( Between Conductors of Different Polarity for dc ) ( see Note 1 )

Phase-to-Earth

V rms or dc 12'5 ;z 30 42 48 5ot 60 --__ GO/30 ~;.--~-_-~ loot --__-__--~ 110 120 ._A 150t -

V rms or dc 12.5 25 32 58 63 _zL__..-___.100 125 160 --~~-_ 250 250 320 500 630 1000 -

V rms or dc -

32 -

-~----.___

- 220.-220/l 10 240/!20

125

3w
4401220 soot 960/480 1 ooot

250 500

loo0*This voltage can be the same aa the rated voltage of the cquipmcat. *These values correspond to the values given in Table 1. NOTE- Phase-to-earth insulation level for unearthed or impedanced earthed systems equals that for phase-to-phase because the operating voltage to earth or any phase may, inpractice, approach full phase voltage. This is because the actual voltage to earth is determined by the insulation resistance and capacitative reactance of each phase to earth; thus, low ( but acceptable ) insulation resistance on one ph*lse may in effect earth it and raise the other two to fuI1 phase volts above earth.

33

8Ps39-

1987

11. MEASUREMENT OF CREEPAGE DISTANCES AND CLEARANCES
11.0 The widths X of grooves basically apply to all examples follows: Pollution Degree 1 2 3 4 specified in Fig. 3, Examples 1 to 11 as a function of pollution deglee as Minimum Values of Width X of Grooves 0 25mm 1-O mm 1.5 mm 2.5 mm

NOTE- If the associated clearance distance is less than 3 mm, the minimum groove width may be reduced to one-third of this clearance distance.
The methods of meaauring creepage distances and clearances to be used in interpreting the requirements of this report are indicated in Examples 1 to I I. These cases do not differentiate between gaps and grooves or between types of insulation. The-following assumptions are made: width

a) Any corner is assumed to be bridged with an insulatiug link of S'mm moved into the most unfavourable position ( scc Example 3 ).

b) Where the distance across the top of a groove is X mm or more, a cserpage distant e is measured along the contours of the grooves ( see Example 2 ). c) Creepagc distances and clearances measured between parts moving in relation to each other are measured when these parts are in their most unfavourable positions.

12. DlMENSIONlNG i'ROC&DURE 12.1 Examples
distances of dimensioning procedure for clearances according to this Guide are given in Appendix D. and creepage

34

SPr39-1987

TABLE

5

THREE-PHASE

FOUR-

OR THREE-WIRE

AC SYSTEMS

(Cluuw 10.1) NOMINAL VOLTAon OF SOPPLY
SYSTEM*

rms in volts

~---~___-_-----------_ Phase-to-------Phase All Svstems (SIC Note 1J

VOLTAQE REBEB~WE FOB TABLE S -----6,-Phase-to-Earth ------? 0

------_--____~ -.----`-------~ b

rms in volts (1) 66 110 120 127 150t 203 EJ 240 SOW (2) 69 125 160 200 250 320 400 500 500 630 630 660 690 720 830 f&lo 1000 7 630 800 1666 1000

'

-&AA4
rms in volts ( ss~ Note 2 ) (3) 52 . 80 125 160 125 160 250 -250 320 400 200 250 320 460 500 500 630 650 400 500 6MJ *._ -_ __ *. _W.%%_ _. 630 800 1000 1000 ofthe 1. equipment. rms in volts .(4) 6S ( sss Note 1 )

380
400
415 440

E
575

*This voltage *These values

cat be the same correspond

as the rated voltage given

to the values

in Table

NOTE 1 - Phase-to-earth insulation level for unearthed or impedanced earthed systems equals that for phase-tophsse because the operatmg voltage to earth or any phase may, `in practice, approach full phase voltage. This is because the actual voltage to earth is.determined by the insulation resistance and capacitative reactance of each phase to earth;. thus, low ( but acceptable ) rnsulation resistance on one phase may in effect earth it and raise the other two to full phase volts above earth. NOTE 2 - In those countries where both star and delta, for delta systems only should be used. earthed and unearthed supply systems are used, the values

35

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

SPrJ-1987

TABLE

6

WITHSTAND

VOLTAGES IN KILOVOLTS OF 2 Ooo m ABOVE SEA LEVEL ( Cfuuses 5.4.0 and 7.1 )

FOR

AN ALTITUDE

CLEABAIW~ ,.-A---

CASE A
I~HOMOQENEOlJ8 bt.LD

cA8E B Hoaromm~oua FIELD I-_~--( 50/6?Hz ) ( 50/% Hz ) and Impulse

( 50/z Hz )

IG&iZ ( 1'2/50 )

( 1*2/50 1 mm (1)
o-010 0.012 o-015 0'020 0'025 0'030 o-040 o-050 0'062 5 @080 U rms

VD
(3) 0'33 0.35 0'37 0'40 0'44 0'47 0.52 0'56 O-60' 0'65

A

u

U rms
(5) 0'23 0'25 0'26 O-28 o-31 0'33 0.37 0'40 0'42 0'50

i?and$ (6) 0'33 o-35 0'37 o+-J 0'44

impluse

(2)
0.23 O-25 0'26 0'28 0'3 1 o-33 0'37 0% 0'42 0'46

(4) 0'33 o-35 0.37 0'40 0'44 0'47 0'52 0'56 O-60' 0'70

O-47 0'52 0'56 o%o* 0'70

0'10 o-12 0'15 @20 0'25 0'30 o-40 o-50 0'60 0.80

o-50 O-52 0'57 O-62 0'67 0'71 O.78 0.84 0'90 O-98

0.70 0'74 0'80 0'88 0'95 i-01 1'11 1'19 l-27 1.39

0'81 o.91 l'o4+ 1'15 1.23 1'31 1'44 1'55 1'65 1.81

0'57 0'64 0'74 O-89 1'03 1'15 1.38 1'59 l-79 2'15

0.81 o-91 l-04 1'26 1'45 1'62 1'95 2'25 2'53 3.04

( Confinued )

37

#P:39-1987
TABLE 6 WITHSTAND VOLTAGES OF 2 Ooo m ABOVE IN KILOVOLTS FOR AN ALTITUDE SJIA LEVEL - Cmti Caele B
FIELD Hoxoar~~oos c-------7 FIELD

CLNAItANaE

CASEA
INEOYOOEIEOUB r-----~_---7

(5O/$Ha)

( 5o160a&

)

( 5018 Ha ) and Impulse ( l-2/50)

mm

U rms

A

u

U rmr

i? and%
imoulse

1-O 1.2 1.5 2'0 25 3'0 I'0 50 6.0 8.0 180 129 150 200 259 309 40.0 50.0 609 80.0 100'0

IQ8
1'20 1'39 1'68 1% 2'21 2'68 3.11 3.51 4'26 4'95 5'78 788 898 10'8 127 16'2 19.6 22'8 292 35.4

l-50* 1'70 1.97 2.38 2.77 3'13 3.79 4.40 497 6'03 7.00. 8'18 990 12.7 15'3 17'9 22.9 27.7 32.3 413 50'0*

1'95
2'20 256 3.09 3.60 4'07 4'93 5.72 646 784 9'10 10'6 i2'9 16'4 19.9 233 29'8 36'0 42'0 53.7 65.0

2'47 2-H 3'50 448 5.41 6'32 8'06 976 11'5 14'6 17'7 20.9 25.7 33'5 41'2 488 63'6 78'5 92'6 120.9 148'5

3.50' 4'09 4'95 6.33 7.65 8.94 11'4 13.8 16.2 20'7 25'09 29'6 36'4 47'4 58'S 690 90.0 1119 131.0 171.0 219'09

thmic diagram taking into account the correction factors from 0 to 2 000 m altitude. The intermediate values are taken from the diagram ( see Fig. 6 ) so that they enThe values of U rms are close the measured values with a small afcty margin. found by dividing the values of U by g 2.

the statistical measured values according to this NOTN - For rimplilication table are replaced by straight lines between the values marked "*" in double logari-

38

Exam@

I

< Xmm

Condition : Path under conrideration includes a parallel- or converging-sided groove of any depth with a width less than X mm. Rule : Creepage distance and clearance are measured directly acmes the groove as shown. Ermnplr 2

Condition : Path under consideration includes a parallel-sided groove of any deptb and equal to more than X mm. Clearance is the "line of sight" distance. Creepage path follows the Rule : contour of the groove. Erclmplc 3

~ndition Rule :

: Path under consideration includes a V-shaped groove with a width greater than X mm. Clearance is the %ne of sight" distance, Creepage path follows the contow of the groove but "short-circuits" the bottom of the groove by X mm.

-

-

-

-

-

Cle.ariutce

Creepage dima

Fro. 3

MBTRODS OF MSASURINO CLEARANCES AND

CREEPAGES

-

Co&

39

SPtti-1987
Exomf& 4

Condition Rule :

: Path under consideration

includes

a rib.

Clearance is the shortest direct air path over the top of the rib. Creepaee path foollows the contour of the rib. Examp1s 5 < Xmm <Xmm

Condition Rule

: Path under consideration includes than X mm wide on each side. Creepage and clearance

an uncemented of sight"

joint

with

grooves shown.

less

:

path is the Tine Eaxmpls 6

distance

Condition Rule

: Path under consideration
to or more than X mm Clearance is the "line contour of the groover.

includes an uncemented wide on each side. of sight" distance.

joint with grooves equal Creepage path follows the

:

----FIO; 3

Clearance

m

.

Creepage

dtstance

METHODSOF MEASURING CLSARANCES AND Caes~lross -

Con&f

40

bP I
&ample ),Xmm 7 <Xmm I--

39

-

1987

Condition

: Path under consideration

includes an uncemcnted joint with a groove on one side less than X mm wide and thd groove on the other side equal to or more than X mm wide. Clearance and creepage paths are as
shown.

Rule

:

Barnfile

8

--Condition

: Creepage distance through uncemented
over barrier. Clearance is the shortest

joint is less than creepage

distance

Rule

:

direct air path over the top of the barrier.

-

-

-

-

-

Clearance

B

Creepage

dtstance

FIG. 3

METHODS OF MEASURINQ CLEARANCES AND CREEPAOIS41

Contd

SP ; 39 - 1987
Exam/de 9
5 Xmm-ctlc_

Gap between

head

of screw

and wall of recess wide

enough

to be taken into account.

Exam/de 10

Gap between Measurement to X mm.

head of screw and wall of recess too narrow to be taken into account. of creepage distance is from screw to wall when the distance is euual

----FIG. 3

Clearance METHODS OF ME~URIN~

B

Crccpagr dtstancc -

CLEARANCES,AND CREEPAOES

Contd

42

SP

I

39

-

1981

C

floating part

Clearance Creopage

is the distance distance

d + D.

is also d + D.

- -

-

-

-

Clearance

w

Creepage

distance

FIG. 3

METHODS OF MEASURINO CLEARANCES AND CREEPAGES

43

SP I 39 - 1987

(1)
(2) (3)

Case B IJ 1'2/50 and U rms 50/60 Hz
Case A Case A

U l-2/50 LI rms50/60 Hz
m

Fxa. 4

WITHSTAND VOLTAGE FOR AN ALTITUDE OF 2 000 hOVB SEA LEVEL

44

SP t 39 - 1987

ih
I 2

4 3

II

I I

I

IIHII

I111111 I III

II

I I

10

IO 1o-2 2 32 6 15' 2 34 6 loo 2 346 OISIANCE IN MllLIMF.TREf ld 2 34 6 lb

(1)
(2) (3) (4)

CJ -

1'2/50

Low limitafor U = l-2/50
U = 50 Hz Low limita for U = 50 Hz

FIG.

5 EXPBRMENTALDATA MEASURBF AT APPROXIMATELY SEA LEVEL
AND

THEJR Low LIMJTS FORINHOM~~ENEOUS FIELD

45

SP : 39 - 1987
TABLE 7 EXPERIMENTAL ( See Fig. 5 ) CLEARAINROMOQENEOUS FXELD NCESIN ( POIXT TO PLANE ) r--_-___-~-----_--_~ Al% Breakdown voltages Low limit voltages+ HOYOGENEOUSPIELD (SPHERE TO PLANE) --_-w--y r-----Breakdown voltages Low limit voltages r-_A_--T U-50 Hz U-l.2150 U-50 Hz and U-1'2/5d U-1*2/50 (5) DATA

p-----__
mm (1) 0'010 0.012 0.015 0.020 0'025 0.030 0.040 0'050 0'060 0'080 0.10 0'12 0.15 0'20 0.25 0% 0'40 0'50 OS0 0'80 1'0 1'2 1'5 2'0 2.5 3.0 4.0 5'0 6.0 8'0 *Low z:r$%TG (2) -780 990 1 200 1 370 1440 1940 2300 2660 3 150 3 680 5 370 7 920 (3) 360 460 560 640 720 800 930 1 030 600 631 701 754 801 863 949 1041 1085 1 193 1284 1 364 1500 1 742 1 967 2 280 2 770 3 210 3 630 4400 5 110 5 770 7600 z `U-50 Hz (4)

(6)
360

(7) 360 -

(8)

430 500 580 600 674 809 932 1 041 1 121 1 234 1 327 1410 1351 1669 1 773 1 950 2 265 2 560 2960 3 600 4 170 4 720 5 720 6 640 7 500 9 100 11 200 16 800 26 000 4500 6 000 7 500 2700 650 700 820 980

460 560 640 720 800 930 1 030 600 674 809 932 1047 1 530 2 030 2 410 2 810 1 207 I 449 1 670 1 876 2 250 2600 2 910 3500 4640 5 370 6 360 7 820 4 230 4950 5990 7 650 9260 10 820 13 830 16 740 19560 25 000

I 500
1 670 1 750 1900 2 500 2 650 3 140 3 600 5 100 6 700 __ -

limit voltage U-1.2/50 = I.3 x U-50 Hz above 0.12 mm.

SP t 39 - 1987

TABLE Cr,unnaNI'LS IN AlI%

7

EXPERIMENTAL

DATA

-

Contd

INIKW~~E~E~US FIELD ( POINT TO PLANE )
C------_-h-__---

HOMOGENEOUSFIF.LD ( SPEEBICTO PLANE )
c-_--_--L,---_-~

Breakdown

voltages

Low limit

voltages*

Breakdown * ---*--_U-50 Hz

voltages

LOW

limit voltages

mm (1) 10'0 12.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30'0 40'0 50-o 60'0 800

_--*---U-1.2/50 .U-50 Hz

A_-_? _--U-1-2/50 U-50 Hz (4) 8 470 9900 (5) II 010 12 870 15 560 19 900 24 100 28 100 36 000 43 600 50 800 65 000

U-1*2/50(7) -

U-50 Hz and U-1*2/50 (8) 30 700 36 400 44 700 58 300 71 700 84 800 110 700

(2)
9 480 10 900 12 600 15 600 22 000 27 600 33 900 38 900 43 100 52 300 voltage
1 -

(3)

(6)
31 700 45 500 59000 86 000 112 000 138 000 I64 000 215000

-

11970 15 310 18 520

-

-

21 600 27 700 33 500 39 100 5oooo

-

136000 161 000 210 000

*Low limit
NOTE

U-1*2/50

=

1'3 x U-50 Hz above 0'12 mm. sea level and

their low limits. NOTE 2 -

Experimental The values Values

data in volts measured at approximately are obtained under ultra violet exposure. of line 4 in Figure 5.

in bold show breakpoints

APPENDIX

A

( Clousrs 1.3, 5.1, 5.2, 5.4.0 and 7.1 )
ALTITUDE CORRECTION FACTOR8

A-O.Paschen's Law - The Paschen's law states that at a constant tem-

perature and above the critical pressure the breakdown voltage is a function only of the product of the gas pressure and the distance between

47

SP:39-1981 parallel plane electrodes. Values of multiplication the pressures at different altitude are as follows: Altitude factor, corresponding to

.hhrnQl
Barom&ic Presswc kPa

Multifilication~ Factor for Distance

m 0 500 1 000 2 000 3 000 4 000 5 000 6000 7 000 8 000 9000 10 000 15 000 20 ooo

101*3 95.0 90.0 80.0 70.0 62.0 54.0 47.0 41-o 35.5 30.5 26.5 12.0 5.5

o-79 0.84 0.89 1'00 l-14 1.29 1.48 1.70 1 a95 2.25 2.62 3-02 6.67 14.5 through a gas

A-l. Condactioa Throagh a Gas - The conduction may be initiated in different forms classified as follows: a) Corona, b) Glow dischage, c) Spark, and d) Arc.

One form may give place to another in quick succession, depending upon attendant conditions. Arc formation depends upon the presence of an electric field which tends to strip'el&trons from the positively charged nuclei of the atoms of the gas between electrodes. Under the right conditions, these electrons collide with other electroxis and release them from their atomic bonds in a cascading fashion. The net result is a flow of ele&rons, that is, electric current and arc dischafge.

48

SPr99-1987 A-2. Dielectric Breakdown of a Gas - The dielectric breakdown of a gas in a uniform electric field depends upon the product of the gas pressure and the electrode spacing ( Paschen's law ) for a given gas mixture, electrode shape and material. The peak value of the minimum sparking potential (U) for some gases is as follows: Air Nitrogen Hydrogen Oxygen ( N, ) ( Hs ) ( 0s ) 327 V 251 V 273 V 439 v Carbon dioxide Helium ( H, ) Acetylene ( C.&H, ) ( SOs ) ( CO, ) 419 v 156 V 468 V 457 v

Sulphur dioxide

APPENDIX ( Clause 3.8.1 )

B

MEANS FOR TRANSIENT OVERVOLTAGE ( SURGE ARRESTER DEVICES

CONTROL )

B-O. For the purpose of this Guide, surge arrester devices are to protect given clearance values from sparkovers which may be caused by overvoltages. From Appendix A, it can be seen that a clearance in air will withstand a standard 1-2150s impulse, depending solely upon the electrode configuration and air pressure. B-l. Table 2 shows the most unfavourable Case A, that is, the most nonuniform electric field conditions, and the most favourable Case B, that is, the most uniform electric field conditions to withstand given values of impulse voltages. Conversely, Table 3 shows withstand values of impulse voltages for Case A and Case B electric field conditions for given values of clearance. Corresponding rms and peak values of voltage are also given. It follows, then, that every clearance is actually a spark-gap device, and that each clearance has an impulse withstand voltage capability ranging from Case A to Case B values, dependent solely upon electrode configuration ( at a given air-pressure or altitude ). 49

SP:39-1987

104 10'2

I

1

*,

2

34

6

16' 2
=

34 6 10' 2 34 6 10' OlSlANCE IN MILLIMETRES-

2

34

6

10'

(1) U (2) u

l-2/50

= 50 Hz by Pa&hen

(3)

Low limits for U -

30 HE and U =

l-2/30

Fra. 6

EXPERWENTAL DATA MMSURED AT APPRO~IMATSLY SEA LEVEL ANDTHEIR Low LIMITSFORHOMOGENEOUS FIELD

SO

SP t 39 0 1987 B-2. It is, therefore, evident that clearances sparkover when impulse voltages exceed the impulse withstand voltage capability. In electrical systems having no specific surge arresters for the purpose of preventing sparkovcrs, clearances sparkover when the withstand voltage capability is exceeded. The result of sparkover may be insignificant or catastrophic depending upon the amount of impulse energy to be dissipated, the power frequency voltage, and the available power follow current, etc. The follow current resulting from a sparkover may also affect the performance of insulation materials. The simple spark gap in air, or clearance, can be used as a surge arrester to protect other clearances from sparkover due to overvoltages, when used within its limitations. B-3. The occurrence of power-follow-current due to an impulse voltage sparkover is unpredictable, as it depends upon the time relationship of the impulse sparkover and the power current in the circuit, the ionization present between electrodes due to the impulse sparkover, the configuration of the electric field between the electrodes, the electrode material as well as the surge impedance characteristic of the circuit. Another practical consideration is the breakdown voltage of the air gap. From Table 2 it can be seen that the minimum peak value of impulse voltage is 330 V, for a @Ol mm gap. This is a rather impractical design criteria. A more practical minimum dimension might be 0.5 mm, which will withstand 1 500 V impulse. Therefore, if small values of clearance less than 0.5 mm are to be protected, the simple air-gap might be impractical.

APPENDIX ( ClOUJG 4.0 )
APPLICATION GUIDE

C

FOR CLEARANCES

CO-ORDINATION
recommendations

AND INSULATION BASED ON CLEARANCE

C-l. There are several ways in which technical committees may use the
and data presented in this report. A rated impulse withstand voltage may be established for all present equipment based on the clearances used, by reference to Case A, in Table 2. A technical committee may alternatively establish a rated impulse withstand voltage for equipment using controlled design parameters and production techniques by specifying testing with an appropriate impulse test.

SPr39.1987
The technical committee should consider the conditions to which the products will be subjected. transient overvoltage

C-2. When transient overvoltages are controlled in the electrical system at the location where the product will be connected, the controlled value becomes the value or at least the minimum value of rated impulse withstand voltage for the product line. When transient over-voltages are not controlled in the system, the technical committee should consider the consequence of the appearance of transient overvoltages in excess of the rated impulse withstand voltage. Consideration should be given to the provision of or the specification of the use of voltage limiting means at the line terminals of the equipment. It should be recognized that in some circumstances a clearance between conductive parts may be used as a transient overvoltage limiting means, if the clearance and the electrodes are appropriately evaluated. C-3. The technical committee may utilize clearances from Table 2 based on the control of transient overvoltages within the equipment, either those coming from the supply circuit or those generated within the equip ment. If desired the technical committee may utilize the complete series of values, with interpolation, given in Table 2, or alternatively, impulse withstand or equivalent ac ( rms ) withstand tests as defined in Appendix A may be used to confirm the presence of adequate clearances. dc withstand test voltages may be considered to be same .as the peak ac values given under Case A in Appendix A.

APPENDIX ( Clause 12.1 )
EXAlliPLE OF DIMENSIONING

D

CLEARANCES AND CREEPAGE

PROCEDURE FOR DISTANCES

D-O. In order to achieve insulation co-ordination within an equipment or an electrical system, initial conditions need to be stated from which decisions are made to determine minimum clearances, creepage distances and nameplate marking, where appropriate. Initial conditions the manufacturer: to be stated by the technical voltage committee and/or ( SCI

rated voltage, rated insulation 2.3, 2.4 and 2.7 ); 52

or working

voltage

8Pr39-1987 installation category ( location of equipment system ) ( Figure 1 ); pollution degree ( see 5.3.1 ). procedure is suitable only for operational or basic within an electrical

The following insulation. D-l. DERIVED
Step 1 -

CONDITIONS From the equipment nominal voltage voltage reference of value, the supply

system, determine the corresponding earth, from Table 6 or 7.

phase-to-

reference voltage derived in Step 2 - Using the phase-to-earth Step 1 and the stated installation category, determine the rated impulse withstand voltage from Table 1. Use the nearest higher phase-to-earth voltage value given in Table 1. For equipment having several installation categories, determine the lowest and highest impulse withstand voltages. Using the highest rated impule withstand voltage from Step3Step 2 and the stated pollution degree, determine the Cases A and B clearances from Table 2. Step 4 - From the equipment system, determine the corresponding phase, from Table 6 or 7. Where the working voltage voltage can be used in Step 5. nominal voltage voltage reference of the supply value, phase-tois known, that ; .,

across the insttlation

stepsUsing the voltage reference values from Step 1 and Step 4 or the working voltage, the stated pollution determine the creepage distances from Table 5 for the appropriate material group. The material group is decided by the equipment manufacturer.

Check the' minimum creepage distances with associated S*ep6cka;.ances. The creepage distance shall be not less than the associated (=a~ A clearance ( with the exception, sdc 9.1, second paragraph ).

IdentiJ~ingData - For insulation co-ordination, the rated insulation voltage( see2.1 ) and the rated impulse withstand voltage ( s# 2.5 ) arc required.
53

Technical committees should decide whether identifjring data is to be made available with the equipment or in relevant specifications. Where compktc marking is appropriate, the nominal voltage(s) of supply system for which the equipment is intended is ( are ) the jirs: number(s) stated and the' corresponding rated impulse withstand voltage(s) is ( are ) the second numbst(s) stated. Example 1: 220/380/6 kV

Explanation of ExamprC 1 - The first numbers, 220/380, indicate that the creepage distance to earth is appropriate for 220 V and between phases for 380 V and the equipment is suitable for a four-wire earthed neutral system of supply. The second number, 6 k V, is the rated impule withstand voltage of the equipment. The combination of 220 V to earth and 6 kV impulse withstand voltage indicates equipment suitability for .installation category IV ( s#dTable 1 ). Example 2: 220/380 / 25-6 kV

Explanation of Exam/h 2 - The&t numbers have the same meaning as in example 1. The second numbers, 25-6 kV, indicate that the equipment has a 6 kV impulse withstand voltage and will not generate overvoltages in excess of 2.5 kV ( see 3.6 ). The combination of 220 V to earth and 2.5-6 kV impulse wuhstand volta es indicates equipment suitability for installation categories II, III and 1g, ( SMTable 1 ).
NATE - In addition, in some iostancu, it may be desirable for the manufacturer to rtate tbc r&ted insulation voltage(r) ( su 2.4 ). In the examples above, tbir would be 250 V phase-to-earth and 400 V phase-to-phase ( su Tables 7 and5). D-3. A dimensional procedure worksheet, useful for recording the dimensional procedure decisions is given in'Table 8.

Table 8 is a worksheet useful for-recording the dimensioning procedure decisions under stated initial &nditionr for rpe~W equipment. In addition, Table 8 has space provided to record empirical data recording clearance and creepage distances. Comparison of empirical data with the minimum values determined from the dimensioning procedure will enable evalution of past and present practice with clearances and creepage distances determined for a coordinated insulation system.

54

SPr39-1987
TABLE 8 DIMENSIONING PROCEDURE WORKSHEET ( Clauw D-3 )
EQUIPMENT

PARAYETW~ VOLTAGE, DIEITAWXS (2) Nominal voltage ofsupply ( rated voltage ) or voltage Installation category Pollution degree Clearances for: Phase-to earth voltage Rated impulse withstand Clearance case A Clearance case B Voltage reference value: Phase-to-earth Phase-to-phase Creepage distance for: Material group I Phase-to-earth Phase-to-phase Material group II Phase-to-earth Phase-to-phase Material group IIIa Phase-to-earth Phase-to-phase Material group IIIb Phase-to-earth Phase-to-phase system working

VALUB

SOURCE

(1) Stated conditions ( ses Note 1 )

(3) -

(4) Rating plate or manufacturer's data Fig. 1 5.3.1 Table 1 2.5 and Table Table 2 Table 2

Derived

coditions

Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4

voltage

1

-

Table

6 or Table

7

Step 5

Table -. 9.4.2 -

5 and 9.4.2

9.43

9.4.2

Step 6

Check minimum creepage distance case A clearance for each material group Identifying data ( name plate ) Accordiag to specification of the Technical Committee

Empirical

data

Clearance Creepage distance stated initial conditions must be assutned in order to make

Identical NOTESvalid comparisons.

55

la~RWAtl8WAL
Beu

SYSTEY

OF UWITS ( $1 lmlfS)
Symbol m kg t, K cd mol

UnIta
Quwi&y
Unll

Length Meer Time Electric currenl thermodynamic temperature f.umlnour intsnrlty Amount of rubstance lupplomontuy Ouantffy Plane angle SolId an& Derived Unite
Ownllty

metre kilogram recond kelvin candela mole

Unita lJnM radian etemdlen rad
lr

UnR newton joule watt weber todr hertz

Symbol

Oapnltlon
1 N - 1 kg.m/ss 1 J = 1 N.m 1 W - 1 J/r 1 Wb - 1 V.. 1 T - 1 Wb/mx f Hz - 1 c/r (e-1) 1 s - 1 A/V 1 v - 1 W/A 1 Pa - 1 N/w

Force Energy Power Flux Flux denrlty Frequency Elecwlc conductance Etectromotive forue Preeeure, etreee

N J W Wb T HZ S V PI

BUREAU
Hwdquerterrt

OF

INDIAN

STANDARbS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahad.ur Shah Zatar MarQ, NEW DELHI 110002E Telephones I 331 01 31,331 13 75 Toleg(ams I Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices )
Regional Offices I Tefephoncs

*Western tEastern Southern Northern
Brench

I Manakalaya, EQ MIDC, Marol, Andheri BOMBAY 400093

( East ),

6 32 92 95
36 24 99 41 24 42 2 18 43 3 1641 2 63 48 1 2 63 49

I l/14 C. 1. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANOIGARH 160036
Offices I

`Pushpak'

Nurmohamed 380001

Shaikh

Marg, Khanpur, Square,

AHMADABAD

`F' Block Unity Bldg, Narasimharaja BANGALORE 560002 Gangotri Complex, Bhadbhada BHOPAL 462003

22 48 05 667 16 5 36 27 23 10 83 6 98 32 21 68 76 6 23 05 7 66 37

Road, T. T. Nagas,

Plot No. 82183, Lewis Road, BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5315, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road 5th Byelane, GUWAHATI 781003 5-8-56C L. N. Gupta Marg, HYDERABAO 500001 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 Road, ) I

Hantex B,ldg ( 2nd Floor ). Rly Station TRIVANDRUM 695001
Inspection Office ( With

Sale Point

Pushpanjali 205-A West High Court Road, Bharampeth txtension, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers PUNE 411066 ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar,

2 51 71 5 24 35

*Sales Offlce in Bombay Is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, 6ombay 400007 males Offlce In Cakutta is et !t Chowrlnghoo Approach, P.0. Prjncop Street. Calcutta 700072
Printed at Simco Printing
PreS6.

89 35 28 27 68 00

Delhi. India

