**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11091 (1984): Method of test for degree of curl of paper 
and degree of sizing [CHD 15: Paper and its products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



ISi 110S1 >fBS4 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 



METHOD OF TEST FOR DEGREE;0F 
CURL OF PAPER AND DEGREE OF SIZING 



UDC 676 Ol9'l3g3 




® Copy fight i9^S 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTfOM 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 3AHAPUK SHAH ZAFAK MARQ 
NEW DBLHJ UOOOZ 

Gf» March ]9BS 



IS : 11091 • 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR DEGREE OF 
CURL OF PAPER AND DEGREE OF SIZING 



Paper and Its Products ( Excluding Packaging Materials ) 
Sectional Committee, CDC 15 

Chairman 

Shri N. Narasimhan 
C-48. NDSE ( Part II ) 
New Delhi 

Members Representing 

Shri M, B. N. Anand India Tourism Development Corporation, New 

Delhi 
Shri N. J. AROEsmR Ail India Federation of Master Printers, New 

Delhi 
Shri R. Venkateswaran ( Aiternate ) 
Shri S. K . Bhoumik Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), 

Bhubaneswar 
Shri S, K. Chopra Indian Paper Makers Association, Calcutta 

Shri R. C. Devgan Atkins Das Pvt. Ltd, Calcutta 

Maj K. R. DHARMADHfKARY Ministry of Defence ( J>Gl ) 

Shri C. G. Tekchandani ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. R. Gupta Centra) Revenues Control Laboratory, New Delhi 

Deputy Chief Chemist, 
Cbntbral ExcrsE Laboratory, 
Bombay ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Keshava LT.C. Ltd, Calcutta 

Shri P. Dayal ( Aiternate ) 
Shri D. Mahanta Regional Research Laboratory ( CSIR ), Jorhat 

Shri C. N. Saikia ( Alternate ) 
Dr A. Panda Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd, Calcutta 

Dr Rajesh Pant Central Pulp & Paper Research Institute, 

Dchra Dun 
Shri R. J. Patel All India Small Paper Mills Association, Bombay 

Shri Parmod Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. N. Rao Directorate General of Technical DcveJopment. 

New Delhi * 

Dr N. J. Rao Institute of Paper Technology, Saharanpur 

Dr S. Bharati ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on pag€ 2 ) 



© Copyright 1985 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act {X\V of \951 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be ao infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 1J091- 1984 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Dr V. N. Sehgal Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New Delhi 

Shri M. K. Jain ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. K. Ramalinga Setty Mandya Nationa] Paper Mills Ltd, Belagula 

Shri Y. K. Sharma Forest Research Institute & Colleges, Dehra Dun 

Shri G. M. Mathur ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Shivaram India Security Press, Nasik Road 

Shri K. S. A. Chary ( Alternate ) 
Shri Man Mohan Singh Indian Paper Mills Association, Calcutta 

Dr D. C. Tapadar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Prem Uberoi Federation of Paper Traders Association of India, 

Bombay 

Shri Ramesh S. Desai ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K. Mathur, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director ( Chem ) 

Secretary 

Shri E. Devendar 

Assistant Director ( Chem ), ISI 

Methods of Test Subcommittee, CDC 15:2 

Convener 

Dr D. C. Tacadar Tiiaghur Paper Mills Co Ltd, Calcutta 

Members 
Dr M, B. Jauhari ( Alternate to 

Dr D. C. Tapadar ) 
Shri K. K. Bajaj Orient Paper Mills Ltd, Brajrajnagar 

Shri Man Mohan Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shri U, K, Deb The West Coast Paper Mills Ltd, Bombay 

Shri R. V, Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. Y. Kulkarni Pulp and Paper Research Institute, Jaykaypur 

Dr Subhash Maheshwari ( Alternate ) 
Shri S- Mukherjee Institute of Paper Technology, Saharanpur 

Shri Y. P. Singh ( Alternate ) 
Dr a. K, Prasad The Central Pulp Mills Ltd, Pune 

Shri A. P. Nagarkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri Keshav Prasad Central Revenues Control Laboratory, New Delhi 

Shri S. Naryanan ( Alternate I ) 

Shri N. Subramanian( Alternate M ) 
Shri V. N. Sehgal Central Forensic Science Laboratory, New Delhi 

Shri S. K. Gupta ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. S. Shivaram India Security Press, Nasik Road 

Shri N. P. Sarnaik ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. K. Tully Precision Scientific Equipment CotporsLiion, 

New Delhi 

Dr Siddharth Ghosh ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Varadhan Ballarpur industries Ltd, New Delhi 



Is : 11091 - 1984 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR DEGREE OF 
CURL OF PAPER AND DEGREE OF SIZING 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 28 November 1984, after the draft finalized by the Paper and Its 
Products ( Excluding Packaging Materials ) Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Chemical Division Council. 

0.2 This method applies the principle of wetting one side of the paper and 
determining (a) the maximum curvature developed, or (b) the time required 
to reach maximum curvature. The maximum curvature is an indication 
of the relative tendency of certain papers, especially printing papers, to 
curl under normal conditions of usage. The time required to reach maxi- 
mum curvature is a measure of relative degree of sizing. 

0.3 This standard is mainly based on TAPPI T 466-OS-52 'Degree of curl 
and siziug of paper', issued by the Technical Association of Pulp and 
Paper Industry. 

0.4 In reporting the results of a test or analysis, made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard prescribes the method of test for degree of curl and 
degree of sizing of paper. 

2- TERMINOLOGY 

2.1 For the purpose of this standard the definitions given in 
IS : 4661-1968t shall apply. 

3. APPARATUS 



* Hulcs lor rounding off numerical values ( revised ). 
t Glossary of terms used in paper trade and industry. 



is : 11091 - 1984 

3.1 The apparatus, shown in Fig. 1, consists of a float having near the 
centre a rectangular wetting aperture about 50 milhmetres long and a 
width L which is adjustable from zero to about 25 millimetres. A stop H 
IS provided to hold one end of the curling specimen at a fixed angle F with 
respect to the horizontal. A scale with stippled surface, graduated in 
degrees, is fastened to the float to indicate the movement of the pointed 
end of the curling specimen. 

3.2 Stop watch or other suitable timing device. 




^^/^^^J^Jl^l^l^^^^^^ 



'FLOAT 



aperture^l 

Fig. 1 Curl Tester 

3.3 Vessel container distilled water at 27 ± TQ 

4. TEST SPECIMEN 

4.1 From each test unit of the sample cut specimen in the shape of a right 
trapezoid having an altitude of 40 millimetres in the machine direction 
and bases of 40 millimetres and 70 millimetres extending in the cross 
direction. 



5. PROCEDURE 

5.1 Condition the test specimen as prescribed in 5 of IS : 1060 ( Part 1 )- 
1966*. 

5.2 Degree of Curl — Put the float on water, place ihe square end of the 
trapezoidal specimen under the stop with the longest, pointed side next to 
the scale, and allow the specimen to fall across the aperture and become 
wet over that area. Read the scale angle reached by the point of the 
specimen at the instant the direction of curling reverses. If this angle is 
less than 30 or more than 60 degrees, adjust the width of the aperture 

♦Methods of sampling and test for paper and allied products, Part 1 ( revised). 



IS: 11091 -1984 

until the angle lies within the desired range. In general, if the curve of the 
specimen departs noticeably from a circular cylindrical surface, reduce the 
width, in the cross direction, of the wetted portion of the specimen until 
the curve is substantially circular. Test in this manner at least five speci- 
mens for each side of the paper, making sure that the top of the lloat is 
dry before each test. Add the average scale angle to the horizontal { the 
fixed angle, about 30° ) which the square end of the specimen makes with 
the horizontal ). Divide this sum by the width in centimetres of the aper- 
ture used ( length of arc of wetted, curled portion of specimen in cross 
direction ). The result is the maximum curvature in degrees per centimetre 
of arc. 

5.3 Degree of Sizing — Degree of sizing is determined by affixing the 
specimen in the apparatus as described in 5.2. Determine the time from the 
moment the specimen comes in contact with the water tili the point of the 
specimen reverses its direction of movement. For this test it is preferable 
to adjust the width of the aperture so that maximum curvature is reached 
near the middle of the scale. Test at least live specimen for each side of 
the range of time in seconds to reach maximum curvature. 

6. REPORT 

6.1 Report as degree of curl the av:rage value and the range of maximum 
curvature, m degrees per centimetre of ap.-rture width and degree of sizing, 
the average value, in seconds. 



