( Reaffirmed 2001 )

UCI

"&,_,,I

J7.

.a>7

I~"IT.O.JJ7

1L

"O.aL*

\r_J,

a!

"

---

-

--

-_-

\--

.-,

Indian Standard SPECIFICATION FOR RADIATION DETECTORS FOR 1NSTRUMENTATION AND PROTECTlON OF

NUCLEAR REACTORS (IEC Title : Radiation Detectors for the Instrumentation and Protection of Nuclear Reactors; Characteristics and Test Methods)
National Foreword

This Indian Standard, which is identical with IEC Pub 515 (1975) `Radiation detectors for the instrumentation and protection of nuclear reactors; characteristics and test methods' issued by the International Electrotechnical Commission, was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on the recommendation of the Nuclear Instrumentation Sectional Committee and approval of the Electronics and Telecommunication Division Council. Wherever the words `International as `Indian Standard'. Cross References In this Indian Standard, respective places the following: the following International Standards are referred to. Read in their Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should be read

International Standard

Corresponding Indian Standard

IEC Pub 50(66) (1968) Detection and measurement of] ionizing radiation by electric means [Supersed- I ed by IEC Pub 50(391) and 50(392)] : IEC Pub 50(391) (1975) Detection and measurement I of ionizing radiation by electric means J

IS : 1885 (Part vocabulary: mentation

63)-1985 Electrotechnical Part 63 Nuclear instru-

The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this Indian Standard has reviewed the provisions of the following IEC standards and decided that they are acceptable for use in conjuction with this standard. 1EC Pub 231 (1967) General principles of nuclear reactor instrumentation IEC Pub 232 (1966) General characteristics of nuclear reactor instrumentation Only the English language text of the International this Indian Standard. Standard has been retained while adopting it in

Adopted 28

August 1985
BUREAU
MANAU

@ October
I

1987,

BIS

Gr9

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

BWAVAN. 9 BAH,+iDUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO NEW DELHI 110002

TS : 11797-198s IEC Pub 515(1975) CONTENTS

SECTIONONE Clause
1. 2. 3.

INTRODUCTION

Page 3 3 5

Scope.. ........................................ Definitions ........................................ ............................... Interpretation of this standard SECTIONTwo PRELIMINARY

4. 5. 6. 7. 8.

General.. ....................................... Types of radiation to be measured .............................. ............................... Detector operating conditions ............................ Conditions of detector measurement Connectors and cables ................................... SECTION THREECHARACTEIUSTICS

5 5 6 6 7

9. 10. 11.

General .......................................... ............................... Pulse mode neutron detectors .............................. Current mode neutron detectors
SECTION FOUR -

7
10

12 TEST METHODS 14
15

12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.

General ......................................... ...................... Specific tests for pulse tission ionization chambers Specified tests for boron trifluoride and boron-lined proportional counter tubes .................... Specific tests for helium-3 proportional counter tubes ............... Specified tests for compensated boron current ionization chambers .............. Specific tests for uncompensated boron current ionization chambers ............... Specific tests for current ionization chambers for gamma radiation ..................... Specific tests for fission current ionization chambers

.........

17 18 18 21 22 22

2

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)

SECTION 1. scope

ONE - INTRODUCTION

The aim of this publication is to establish a standard concerning the characteristics and test methods of gas-filled radiation detectors used for the instrumentation and protection of nuclear reactors. These detectors function as electrical transducers and are used particularly in:
-

assemblies for measuring power and rate of change of power by means of neutron fluence rate (flux); periodmeters or reactivity meters; reactor warning and safety monitoring assemblies; assemblies for measuring power by means of gamma radiation. The detectors examined in this standard are not used for personnel dosimetry purposes.

-

In so far as they do not conflict with the present standard, IEC Publication 231, General Principles of Nuclear Reactor Instrumentation, and I EC Publication 232, General Characteristics of Nuclear Reactor Instrumentation, should be followed, as well as general recommendations and safety standards for electrical equipment which have already been issued. The detectors subject to this standard are: boron current ionization chambers; fission current ionization chambers or pulse ionization chambers; ionization chambers for gamma radiation; boron tritluoride proportional counter tubes; -boron-lined proportional counter tubes; helium-3 proportional counter tubes.
This list is not restrictive and it is hoped that all types of radiation detectors used in reactor installations will benefit from the present standard. The standard for tests also applies to connecting cables and conmcto~ when they form an integral part of the detector.

Note. -

2.

Definitions

Preliminary note Definitions given in Sub-clauses 2.1, 2.2 and 2.4 to 2.9 are taken from or based on IEC Publication 50(391), Detection and Measurement of Ionizing Radiation by Electric Means. The other definitions are still under consideration and given here to facilitate understanding of this standard. 2.1 Concomitant radiation
,

Radiation which is associated with the radiation to be measured but which is not the object of the measurement, and whose effects on the measurement should preferably be eliminated.

3

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
2.2 Sensitivity (of a measuring assembly) quantity, the ratio of the increase ofthe observed variable to the corresponding

For a given value of the measured increase of the measured quantity.

s=
2.3 Influenceability

variation variation

of output of input

quantity quantity

(detector (radiation

response) to be measured)

*

If the operation

of a detector

is disturbed

by a concomitant

radiation,

the detector

is said to be "influenceable"

by this other radiation. The influenceability

The concomitant of a detector variation variation

radiation

is an influence radiation quantity quantity

quantity.

to concomitant of the output of the input

is given by: (detector (concomitant values. response) radiation) such as temperature, pressure, *

s=
with

all other influence quantities held constant at specified polarizing potential, etc., may also be influence quantities. 2.4 Compensation factor (of a compensated

Other factors

ionization chamber) chamber to the sensitivity

The ratio of the sensitivity to concomitant radiation of the compensated ionization to the same concomitant radiation of the same chamber, if it were not compensated. 2.5 Compensation ratio (of a compensated factor ionization chamber) used as an index of performance

The inverse 2.6

of the compensation

of a compensated

ionization

chamber.

Sensitive material (of a neutron detector) to

The material used in certain neutron detectors either, for example, in a lining or a filling gas, which is intended `produce directly ionizing particles from the neutrons by nuclear reaction.
Note. -

The wc,.d "particle" is used here in a general sense including fission fragments.

2.1

Burn-up life (of a neutron detector)

An estimatedjuence of neutrcns of a given energy distribution after which the sensitive material will be consumed to such an extent that the detector characteristics exceed the specified tolerances for a specified purpose.

2.8

Useful life (of a detector) conditions restricted within specified limits, after which the Useful life can be expressed in incident particle Jluence,

Operational life, under irradiation and environmental detector characteristics exceed the specified tolerances. number of produced pulses, etc. 2.9 (Particle) jkence rate (particlejux density)

Increment

of fluence A CD during

a suitably

small interval

of time A t divided

by that interval

of time.

* In many applications

where the detector has a linear characteristic

and negligible output for zero input

s=

output quantity . mput quantity

4

Symbol: q A@ I= At

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)

Nofe. - Fluence rate is identical with the product of the volume particle density and the average speed. 2.10
CTjzperturbed neutron fruence I ate (jiux)

Mean neutron fluence rate in a position without the neutron detector placed in the same position. 2.11
Perturbed neutron fluence rate (flux)

Spatial mean neutron fluence rate in a position with the neutron detector placed in the same position for measurement. This quantity is equal to the detector output divided by its sensitivity and is, in practice, approximated by the neutron fluence rate averaged over the detector surface. 3.
Interpretation of this standard

The verbs listed below have the following implications in this standard :
Mandatory : "shall" or "must". Recommendation : "should". Permissible : "may".

SECTION TWO 4. General

PRELIMINARY

Although each category of detector and each type of apparatus has its own particular conditions of use and range of application, it is possible to define general principles of use which depend essentially on the following:
a) the intrinsic characteristics

of each type of detector;

b) the limitations resulting indirectly from the quantity measured, e.g. activation of the materials by neutrons;

c) the measuring sub-assembly used, the characteristics of which must be suited to those of the detector;
d) the characteristics

of the medium surrounding the detector and particularly the influence quantities.

The mode of use of the ionization produced must be defined: the pulse mode, the direct current mode and the mean square or variance current mode are examples. If detectors are operated in more than one mode, their characteristics shall be given for each mode.

5.

Types of radiation to be measured

The two principal types of radiation to be measured are neutrons and photons. They are represented by neutron fluence rate (flux) in the first case and by either the absorbed dose rate or the exposure rate in the second case. Each detector is preferably constructed to measure one single kind of radiation but it is a.lmost always influenced by other radiations which surround it. This means: the superposition measurement; on the measuremeht of a background which impairs accuracy and can reduce the range of

if the influence of the concomitant radiation becomes significant, the radiation to be measured may be obscured. In particular, residual gamma radiation often impairs the measurement of neutrons.

5

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
All radiation in the detector environment has to be considered in the conditions of use. The characteristics may be altered by activation of the detector materials by neutrons, the release of heat by the absorption of radiation and therefore changes in material properties, or by other changes to the filling gas.

6.

Detector operating conditions Detectors placed in or near the core of reactors used. on the use of detectors should be specified together with their limits for are subject to very stringent design regulations, particularly with

reference

to the materials

The variables which impose a limitation each type of detector. The significant variables, pressure, humidity, etc. in general,

are neutron

fluence

rate (flux) and spectrum,

environmental

temperature,

7.

Conditions of detector measurement Measuring conditions are characterized mainly by the following: ._ a large range of measurement (often of the order of six to ten decades); due to high-flux values1 a high intensity in replacement difficulties of concomitant radiation and high the severity of the ambient conditions pressures and temperatures; the activation of materials,

-

often resulting

even when the reactor

is shut down.

7.1

Limits due to the detector of ions

For an ionization chamber, the upper limit of the measuring range is set by the rate of recombination causing deviation from proportionality between the neutron fluence rate (flux) and the output signal.

This upper limit of the measuring range may be determined by a specified deviation from proportionality given polarization voltage or by the output current at which a given ratio or difference between U,,, and obtained (see Sub-clause 16.4.1). For pulse detectors, an absolute upper limit to the measuring together with its associated measuring assembly. The intrinsic lower limit of the measuring range is determined ionizing radiation under given ambient conditions. range is set by the resolving

for a U,,, is

time of the detector

by the output

signal in the absence

of the primary

It is desirable not to exceed a given value of the neutron fluence rate (flux) beyond which activation of materials would produce a gamma or beta background large enough to make subsequent low-level measurements difficult.

An important case is that of highly sensitive detectors used for reactor start-up (in particular boron or boron-lined counter tubes) where the activity of materials may be prejudicial to immediate re-use.

trifluoride

7.2

Limits due to the measuring sub-assembly

The limits due to the measuring sub-assembly are determined essentially by the resolving time, bandwidth, noise level and input impedance in the case of pulse measuring systems, and by the current sensitivity, drift, zero offset and input impedance in the case of current measuring sub-assemblies.

6

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
7.3 Limits due to surrounding gamma radiation

Frequently, the surrounding gamma radiation imposes a lower limit in the use of detectors. Gamma radiation generates spurious ionization current in current ionization chambers and modifies the counting plateau to give false counts in ionization pulse chambers. This limit can be lowered in neutron current ionization chambers by compensation, and in pulse fission chambers by reduction of the chamber and amplifier assembly resolving time. Improvements can also be made by suitably shielding the detector against gamma radiation.

In the particular case -of boron current ionization chambers, the lower limit imposed by gamma radiation is relatively high. When the chambers are compensated, the lower limit of practical use can be calculated with the following relation :

in which:
`Pmin =

minimum neutron fluence rate (flux) measurable with the required accuracy

e
f

= required -maximum ratio of the gamma current to neutron current expressed as a percentage ( %) = compensation factor expressed as a percentage (%)

S,
S,

= sensitivity of the chamber to neutron radiation in amperes per unit

of neutron flux density (A * n" * cmz - s)
in amperes per unit of exposure

= influenceability of the chamber to gamma radiation without compensation, rate (A - R-l - h)

x

= exposure rate (R - h-l) In some designs, the compensation factor can be changed, for example by adjusting the compensation voltage.

The compensation factor can depend on the intensity of the radiation y and its energy spectrum. The compensation should therefore allow for variation in conditions with respect to the gamma radiation source and the source to detector geometry.

8.

Connectors and cables

Connectors and cables are often an integral part of a detector assembly and should be designed so as not to limit detector performance. The design of connectors and cables should enable them to be easily manipulated by hand or by remote handling devices without risk of damage. Care should be taken in particular to avoid electrical interference which could interfere with the operation of measuring sub-assemblies. To reduce electrical interference, detectors may need to be electrically shielded and the outer shield insulated from the common side of the measuring circuit and from electrical contact whith the external frame (for example see I EC Publication 232). It is also necessary to ensure the continuity of connections and it is desirable for connectors to include a device enabling continuity to be checked at any time. Detector terminations shall be marked.

SECTION THREE 9.
General

CHARACTERISTICS

The list below gives the data which, where applicable, shall be supplied by the manufacturer.

7

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
9.1 Characteristics
9.1.1 Mechanical of detectors data

An outline drawing shall be supplied.
Dimensions :

-

length; diameter; weight ; position of sensitive volume.

Principal materials : -

metals; insulators ; sensitive lining (type and amount); major impurities. *

-

-

Temperature : -

range of normal operation; maximum permissible value.

-

Filling gas : -

analysis of main constituents; pressure.

-

External pressure : -

maximum permissible value.

Shock and vibration : -

limit values.
Electrical and nuclear data

9.1.2

Mode of operation.
Polarizing voltages : -

polarity; recommended operating-value or values; maximum permissible value or values.
conditions :

-

Compensation -

compensation voltage polarity, recommended value and permissible range; compensation factor.
.

-

.
activity in the detector body and thermal

l

In particular, elements which may cause excessive parasitic detector signals, post-irradiation
neutron absorption.

8

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515m(f975)
Capacitances and insulation resistances : -

electrode to electrode electrodes to casing casing to frame or interference shielding as a function of temperature.

-

I Electric charge delivered per ionizing event for both the radiation to be measured and the main concomitant radiation. Charge collection time.
Sensitivity :. -

pulse mode; current mode; mean square mode (fluctuations). Range of measurement.

-

Injluenceability : -

pulse mode ; cnrrent mode; mean square mode (fluctuations).

-

Background signal (ari undesired signal produced by natural or induced radioactivity in the materials of the detector) : -.

initially; after a given period in a known neutron flux. Maximum permissible neutron fluence rate (flux). Maximum permissible gamma exposure rate.

Sensitive material: type;

purity. Burn-up life.

Useful life : -

the detector manufacturer

shall also supply the test data produced by the tests described in this standard.

9.2
9.2.1

Characteristics of connectors Mechanical data

The physical quantities mentioned in Sub-clause 9.1 and applicable to connectors shall be specified as such by the manufacturer. Particularly important factors are :
I
Plug
I

lBody Centre pin Insulation

Socket

Dimensions

Outside diameter Coupling description Centre conductor dimensions Overall length

Outside diameter Coupling description Dimensions for mating plug and pin Overall kngth

Body
Materials Centbe pin Insulation

IS : 11797-1985 1EC Pub 515 (1975)
9.2.2 Electrical characteristics

Characteristic impedance and leakage resistance at rated temperature and nominal conditions of use.

Maximum ratings : -

voltage between electrodes and~between electrodes and the casing; temperature; external pressure; ambient humidity.
Characteristics of cables Mechanical data

9.3

9.3.1

Dimensions : -

outside diameter; centre conductor diameter; length; minimum bending radius; weight.

-

Materials : -

inner conductor; outer screens; insulation.
Electrical characteristics

-

9.3.2 -

leakage resistance (minimum) at rated temperature and humidity; capacitance per unit length; characteristic impedance and pulse attenuation (where applicable); any nuclear limitations on use.

-

Maximum ratings : -

voltage between conductors; temperature ; external pressure; ambient humidity.

-

10.
10.1

Pulse mode neutron detectors Principles

Pulse mode neutron detectors include the fission pulse ionization chamber, the boron trifluoride counter tube, the boron-lined counter tube and the helium-3 proportional counter tube.
a) Fission ionization chambers contain a fissile element-for

example, uranium 235 whose nuclei, after capturing neutrons, disintegrate into "fission fragments". The latter have considerable kinetic energy which is partly expended in the filling gas to produce ionization.

10

IS : 11797-1985 1EC Pub 515 (197s)
Fission chambers can be utilized in pulse counting assemblies, in mean current measuring assemblies or in mean square current measuring assemblies (fluctuations). b,J Boron trifluoride counter tubes are thermal neutron detectors which use the reaction: `:B + znth -+ :He + :Li in the boron trifluoride filling gas. The ionization due to the alpha particle and lithium nucleus is multiplied by an electric field and the counter tube is operated under proportional conditions. c) Boron-lined counter tubes also use the nuclear reaction of thermal neutrons with boron which is deposited in the form of a solid lining on the inside of the counter wall. The filling gas can therefore be chosen to obtain other required characteristics such as a particular collection time.
d) Helium-3 proportional

counters are thermal neutron detectors which use the reaction of the neutron in the

gas helium-3.

10.2

Sensitivity in the linear range

The sensitivity of a pulse mode neutron detector is determined by dividing the mean counting rate, excluding background, by the thermal neutron fluence rate (flux) at the detector. It is specified in units of counts per second per unit neutron fluence rate (flux) (counts n-j * cm*). This sensitivity must be measured with defined electrical characteristics in the detector and the measuring sub-assembly, and it must be stated whether the neutron fluence rate is perturbed or unperturbed.
10.3 Range

of measurement

The theoretical range of measurement of the detector is determined by its lower and upper limits. The lower limit is fixed for the pulse fission chamber by "alpha pile-up" and by the background due to spontaneous fissions. The upper limit depends on the resolving time, which is a function of the charge collection time and the electrical characteristics of the measuring sub-assembly. In practice, the lower operating limit may be set by other factors such as counting statistics, gamma radiation and amplifier noise. The practical limitations are explained in Clause 7. 10.4
E&ct of gamma radiation

The presence of gamma radiation is indicated by the degradation of the pulsespectrum, the bias plateau length and, in certain cases, by the reduction of the multiplication factor of proportional counter tubes.

10.5

Operating temperature

The range of operating temperatures is determined by the structural materials and the technology of manufacture. At high temperature, the principal problem is to maintain satisfactory insulator performance.

10.6

Burn-up and useful life (see definitions in Sub-clauses 2.7 and 2.8)

The burn-up life depends on consumption of the sensitive material. It is measured by the number of counted events or by the value of the neutron fluence corresponding to a specified quantity of sensitive material consumed. The useful life depends on the ambient conditions and the influence quantities. If storage conditions can affect the useful life of the detector, they must be clearly defined. 10.7
Polarization voltage

The polarization voltage is defined by polarity and magnitude. In the pulse mode, the polarization voltage of the chamber is commonly a positive voltage applied to the collecting electrode relative to the case.

11

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
For proportional curves characterizing counters, the multiplication factor depends on the value the relationship shall be given by the manufacturer. of the polarization voltage. The

For some types of detectors, the characteristics of themeasuring sub-assembly and the required should be taken into account when selecting the operating polarization voltage. 10.8 Response to a nuclear event electrical charge developed counter per event in the detector is a function must be known. of the multiplication

life of the detector

The mean

It is expressed

in coulombs.

In the case of a proportional to measure. The charge collection

tube, this variable

factor and may be difficult

times and the pulse output

current

are also important

data.

10.9

Znsulation resistance

For the range of specified temperature, pressure and voltage, the insulation resistance sha!l have a sufficiently high resistance to restrict leakage current to a reasonable value and shall be free from the pulse breakdown effect, i.e. the generation of spurious pulses which can simulate signal pulses. For detectors given to variation 10.10 and any associated of the insulation connector resistance and cable which will operate with temperature. at high temperature, attention shall be

Electrical capacitance when it has an appreciable effect on the time constant of

The electrical capacitance is an important characteristic the input circuit of the measuring sub-assembly.

11. 11.1

Current mode neutron detectors Principles chamber, the boron ionization chamber and ionization chambers

Current detectors include the fission ionization sensitive to gamma radiation.

a) Fission current ionization

chambers chambers.

(see item a) of Sub-clause These are thermal l:B + :nth -+ neutron

10.1). detectors which use the reaction:

b)

Boron current

ionization

%He + ZLi

A great part of the ionization charge caused by the alpha particle and the recoil of the lithium nucleus in the filling gas is collected as a current, whose mean value is generally measured. These chambers may also be used in the mean square current mode. Boron is utilized in these chambers gaseous compound. in the form of a solid lining on the electrodes or sometimes in the form of a

To reduce the influence of gamma radiation, compensated chambers use the measuring principle of current difference. They generally comprise two nearly identical chambers. One contains a sensitive lining and collects the charge produced by ionization due to the effects of both neutron and gamma radiation, while the other collects only the charge produced by the effect of gamma radiation. By choice of the polarity of the polarization voltages, the output currents of these chambers each other so that the net output from the detector is essentially due to neutrons. are made to oppose

These ditTer only from c,J Similar detectors may be used as ionization chambers sensitive to gamm a radiation. uncompensated boron ionization chambers in the omission of the neutron sensitive material. They can be tested in a similar way

12

11.2

Sensitivity in the linear range

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)

As has been stated in Sub-clause 2.2, the neutron and gamma sensitivity of current detectors (S, and S,, ) is determined by dividing the mean or mean square output current by the perturbed thermal neutron fluence rate (flux) or gamma exposure rate with a specified energy spectrum in the detector. For d.c. measurements, it is specified in units of current per unit of neutron or gamma flux density (A * n-l - cm2 - s or A - R-l * h).

II .3

Range of measurement

The theoretical range of measurement appropriate

to the detector is determined by its lower and upper limits.

The lower limit is fixed by parasitic current due to chamber activation, insulation leakage or background alpha current in the case of a fission chamber. The upper limit is fixed by recombination effects.

The practical limitations are explained in Clause 7. 11.4 Influenceability by concomitant radiation For neutron detectors, the main concomitant radiation to be considered is gamma radiation. Influenceability is determined by dividing the output current due to gamma radiation alone by the value of the exposure rate which produces this current. It is measured in A * R-l * h. For a compensated chamber, the influenceability is reduced by the compensation factor. If Iy is the current delivered by an uncompensated chamber in the presence of gamma radiation, the current delivered by an identical but compensated chamber would be Iy *f, where Zy - f' is the product of I? and the compensation factor J For gamma ionization chambers, the concomitant gamma radiations.
11.5 Operating temperature

radiations to be considered are neutron flux and induced

The range of operating temperature is determined mainly by the structural materials and the technology manufacture. At high temperature, the principal problem is to maintain satisfactory insulator performance.

of

11.6 Burn-up and useful life (see definition in Sub-clauses 2.7 and 2.8)
The burn-up life depends on consumption of the sensitive material. It is measured by the total output charge or by the value of the neutron fluence corresponding to a specified quantity of sensitive material consumed.

The useful life depends on the ambient conditions and the influence quantities. If storage conditions can affect the useful life of the detector, they must be clearly defined. 11.7 Polarization vohages
The polarization

voltages are defined by polarity and magnitude.

The compensation voltage is usually negative with respect to the chamber case and may be adjustable or fixed, depending on the design of the chamber. The main polarization voltage is generally positive with respect to the chamber case and is chosen to ensure saturation of the chamber over the operating range. This choice shall be based on data furnished by the saturation curves. Polarization characteristics for the detector shall be furnished by the manufacturer to allow proper determination of voltage regulation requirements.

13

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
11.8 Response to a nuclear event

In some applications, the mean and mean square electric charge released per detected neutron or gamma photon is of interest. For mean square measurements, the electron and ion collection time is also important.

11.9

Insulation

resistance resistance of the collector electrode shall be such that leakage current shall be related does not introduce significant sub-

The insulation error within assembly. 11.10 Electrical

the measurement

range. The value chosen

to the performance

of the measuring

capacitance when it has an appreciable effect on the time constant

The electrical capacitance is an important characteristic of the input circuit of the measuring sub-assembly.

SECTION 12. 12.1 General Introduction

FOUR

-

TEST

METHODS

The tests specified are final tests in the production process. They shall be performed by the manufacturer on each detector and its cable (if the cable is an integral part of the detector) except where the detector is in large quantity production. In this case, the tests shall be performed on an adequate sample. The test methods described in this standard relate to electrical, as the basis for acceptance of production detectors. nuclear and mechanical characteristics and serve

Wherever neutron or gamma radiation tests involving detector sensitivity, ability, etc., are required, the energy spectrum and intensity of the radiation a known isotropic fluence rate 01 gamma radiation rate is necessary.

compensation, activation, influenceshould be specified. For these tests,

Certain batch.

special or additional

tests should be carried out on prototypes

or on detectors

selected at random

from a

Examples of these special tests are: burn-up and useful life, long-term ability of pulse fission ionization chambers, high-stress mechanical temperature, vibration, saturation characteristics at high neutron information should be available from the manufacturer.

stability at maximum temperature, influencetests, variation of neutron sensitivity with fluence rate (flux) or gamma level. This

12.2

Choice of test methods

In selecting test methods, consideration should be given to the fact that detectors for the instrumentation and protection of reactors are designed primarily for relative measurements of nuclear radiation and not for absolute measurements. Test methods used shall be such that the results are not influenced by electrical interference.

12.3

List of typical tests tests should tests : be carried out wherever they are applicable:

The following a) Mechanical microphony.

14

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
Electrical tests :
insulation dielectric electrical resistance; stren~gth; capacity;

background.

Nuclear tests :
sensitivity; influenceability compensation saturation ; or counts per event; plateau; ;

voltage

charge developed collection time ;

discrimination multiplication

curve or pulse spectrum; factor. by the particular detector specification.

Special tests: may be required Climatic conditions
Unless otherwise

specified, the tests shall be carried out under the following

conditions

(see also Sub-clause

12.2):

-

ambient relative

temperature: humidity:

2.5 I

1.5 "C; 45 % and 75 %.

between

The actual atmospheric conditions shall be stated on the test sheets. In accordance with good practice, they shall not be subject to large or rapid variations during a series of tests. A practical method for avoiding such variations is to place the detector in a climatic chamber at constant temperature.

12.5

Mechanical tests
tests should be performed first and then followed by the electrical supplemented and nuclear tests. for the

Mechanical

The mechanical tests shall comprise specific application. Vibration and impact

at least a visual inspection

by such tests as are required

tests shall be performed

on a prototype

according

to specifications.

13. 13.1

Specific tests for pulse fission ionization chambers

General
is complete in all respects including connectors

These tests shall be carried out when the detector sub-assembly and integral cables. They may form the basis of final acceptance.

The equipment used for all the tests shall comprise suitable measurin g instruments which have been accurately set up. It will include a capacitance bridge, appropriate voltage supplies, radiation sources, ovens, etc.

It is necessary that measuring sub-assemblies istics can be accurately reproduced. In addition, pulse generators or by a standard chamber.

used for tests should be identified in such a way that their charactermeans must be provided to check the calibration at any time either by

15

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
The important factors are: input circuit type (charge, voltage or current sensitive), input circuit impedance, frequency response, input level, discriminator dead time, dynamic range and recovery time. overall

13.2 13.3 13.3.1

Mechanical

tests (see Sub-clause

12.5)

Electrical and nuclear tests At ambient temperature possible, the capacitance and the continuity between the electrodes and between the electrodes and the chamber case

a) Where

shall be measured

of all connecting

cables verified. outer screen shall be measured at a specified

b) The leakage current voltage.

between the chamber

case and any additional

c) The chamber alpha current plus the leakage current between the electrodes shall be measured over a specified voltage range and, where applicable, the leakage current between the electrodes and the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage. d) The chamber shall be connected to-the measuring sub-assembly polarizing voltage and for the specified operating polarizing voltage. and a discriminator curve plotted for zero

The zero voltage curve shall be used to determine that amplifier noise is satisfactory, curve shall be recorded to define the alpha activity of the chamber.

and the operating

voltage

The effective discriminator preferable for this purpose

level shall be expressed in identifiable units of current or charge. Absolute units are although other, non-absolute units such as "ion pairs" are in common use.

e) The chamber shall be exposed to a reproducible perturbed neutron fluence rate (flux) which gives a count rate of at least 10 counts - s-l at the specified operating voltage. A discriminator curve shall be plotted.

fl

The polarizing

plateau characteristic

curve shall be plotted

using a selected discriminator

level.

d When required,

the mean electron

collection

time of the chamber

shall be measured.

In the case of current pulses (time constant of the measuring circuit much shorter than the collection time), the electron collection time is represented by the pulse base width.* In the case of charge collection (time constant of the measuring circuit much greater than the collection time), the collection time is measured by the resultant pulse rise time as defined in I E C Publication 50(66), I.E.V. 66-10-375.

h) The electric charge or current per pulse at the specified polarizing potential and at a given discriminator level shall be recorded. This may be determined from the characteristics of the pulse or by a special measurement.

13.3.2

At maximum

operating temperature out on those chambers whose maximum working temperature shall not

This test does not need to be carried exceed 100 "C.

a) The chamber and an appropriate length of cable shall be placed in an oven and the temperature raised to the maximum operating temperature within defined limits. All connecting cables shall be verified for -electrical continuity where possible. The leakage voltage. current between the chamber case and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a suitable

* The pulse width is defined by the interval of time measured on the straight line parallel to the time axis and between points with an ordinate equal to 10% of the pulse amplitude.

16

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975) b,l The chamber alpha current plus the leakage current between the electrodes shall be mea&-red over a specified
voltage range and, where applicable, the leakage current between the electrodes and the chamber case shall be measured~at a specified voltage. c) The chamber shall be connected to the measuring sub-assembly and a discriminator curves plotted for zero polarizing voltage and for the specified operating polarizing voltage. The zero voltage curve shall be used to determine that amplifier noise is satisfactory, and the operating voltage curve shall be recorded to define the alpha activity of the chamber. d) The chamber shall be exposed to the same neutron fluence rate (flux) used in Item e) of Sub-clause 13.3.1 above and a discriminator curve plotted. The curve shall agree with that obtained in Item e) of Sub-clause 13.3.1 within the specified limits. e) The polarizing plateau characteristic curve shall be plotted using the discriminator test under Item e) of Sub-clause 13.3.1. level defined after the

f) When required, the mean electron collection time of the chamber shall be measured.
g) The chamber and its cables shall remain at the maximum operating temperature for not less than 100 h. At the end of this time and while the chamber and its cables are still at this temperature, the tests under Items a), b), c), d), e), f) and g) of Sub-clause 13.3.2 shall be repeated. The results obtained shall be the same within the specified limits. 13.3.3 Repeat tests at ambient temperature After the tests at the maximum operating temperature, the sub-assembly shall be allowed to cool to ambient temperature. The tests under Items a), b), c), d), e), f)and g) of Sub-clause 13.3.1 shall be repeated. The results obtained should remain within -the specified limits. If the tests of Sub-clause 13.3.2 have been omitted because the operating temperature is less than 100 "C, at least 100 h must elapse between the tests of Sub-clauses 13.3.1 and 13.3.3. 13.4 Neutron sensitivity in the linear range The chamber neutron sensitivity at a specified operating voltage shall be determined and expressed in the units given in Sub-clause 10.2. This may be done by measuring the neutron flux density used in Item~e) of Sub-clause 13.3.1 or by a special measurement.

14. 14.1 14.2

Specified tests for boron trifluoride and boron-lined proportional counter tubes General (see Sub-clause 13. I) Mechanical tests (see Sub-clause 12.5)

14.3 Electrical and nuclear tests 14.3.1 At ambient temperature

a) The leakage current between the anode wire and the counter case shall be measured at a specified voltage. b) The counter tube shall be exposed to a reproducible perturbed neutron fluence rate (flux) and the output of the measuring sub-assembly amplifier shall be connected to a multi-channel analyser. The polarizing voltage shall be applied to the counter tube and adjusted until the peak of; the spectrum on the analyser is at a predetermined position. The applied voltage and the spectrum full width at half-magnitude shall be recorded. For the boronlined proportional counter tube, other.data such as the whole spectrum may be recorded instead of full width at half-magnitude.

17

IS : 11797-1985 IEC P&b 515 (1975) c) A polarizing
A discrimination 14.3.2 voltage plateau curve shall be plotted be plotted-at at a specified discriminator potential. level.

curve should

a specified polarizing

At maximum operating temperature out on those counter tubes whose maximum working temperature will not

This test does not need to be carried exceed 100 "C.

a) The counter tube and an appropriate length of cable shall be placed in an oven and the temperature the maximum operating temperature within defined limits. b) The tests under Items a) and b) of Sub-clause within the specified limits. c) The counter tube and its cables shall remain 14.3.1 shall be repeated. The results obtained shallbe

raised to

the same

at the maximum

operating

temperature

for not less than 100 h.

At the end of this time and while the counter tube and its cables are still at this temperature, the foregoing tests under Items a) and 6) of Sub-clause 14.3.1 shall be repeated. The results obtained shall be the same within the specified limits. 143.3 Repeat tests at ambient temperature

After the tests at the maximum operating temperature, the sub-assembly shall be allowed to cool to ambient temperature. The tests under Items a) and b) of Sub-clause 14.3.1 shall be repeated and the results obtainedshall be the same within the specified limits. If the tests given in Sub-clause 14.3.2 have been omitted because the ~operating temperature at least 100 h shall elapse between the tests given in Sub-clauses 14.3.1 and 14.3.3. 14.4 Neutron sensitivity in the linear range is less than 100 "C,

The counter tube neutron sensitivity at a specified operating voltages shall be determined and expressed in the units given in Sub-clause 10.2. This may be done by measuring the neutron flux density used in Item b) of Subclause 14.3.1 or by a special measurement. 14.5 Injluenceability by gamma radiation in which gamma infuenceability is particularly important, the following tests should

For specified applications be performed :

The counter tube shall be connected to a specified measuring sub-assembly and exposed to a specified gamma exposure rate. The output count rate should be determined and should be less than a specified value. For boron trifluoride counter tubes, this test should be repeated can influence after not less than 100 h. of a counter tube to neutrons. In such

In some applications, the gamma radiation cases, special tests would then be necessary.

the response

15.

Specific tests for helium-3 proportional counter tubes are not given because they are similar to the tests applied to boron trifluoride

Details of tests on these detectors counter tubes.

16. 16.1

Specified tests for compensated boron current ionization chambers General is complete in all respects including connectors

These tests shall be carried out when the detector sub-assembly and integral cables. They may form the basis of final acceptance.

18

IS : 117!n-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
The equipment used for the tests shall comprise suitable measuring instruments which have been accurately set up. It will include a capacitance bridge, appropriate voltage supplies, radiation sources, ovens,-etc.

16.2 Mechanical tests (see Sub-clause 12.5) 16.3 Electrical tests 16.3.1 At ambient temperature

a) The capacitance between the collector and each of the polarizing voltage electrodes, and between the collector and the chamber case, shall be measured. All connecting cables shall be verified for electrical continuity. b) With both polarizing electrodes connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the collector and the case shall be measured at a specified voltage. c) With the collector and gamma polarizing electrodes connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the neutron polarizing electrode and the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage.

d) With the collector and neutron polarizing electrodes connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the gamma polarizing electrode and the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage. e) The leakage current betweenthe chamber case and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a specified voltage. 16.3.2 At maximum operating temperature

This test does not need to be carried out on those chambers whose maximum working temperature does not exceed loo "C. a) The chamber and an appropriate length of cable shall be placed in an oven and the temperature raised to the maximum operating temperature within defined limits. All connecting cables shall be verified for electrical continuity.

b) Repeat

test under Item b) of Sub-clause 16.3.1.

C) Repeat test under Item c) of Sub-clause 16.3.1 4 Repeat test under Item d) of Sub-clause 16.3.1 4 Repeat test under Item e) of Sub-clause 16.3.1 f) With the neutron polarizing electrode connected to the chamber case, the collector current shall be determined
as a function of potential applied to the gamma polarizing electrode. The readings obtained should be less than specified values at all potentials up to a specified limit. g) With the gamma polarizing electrode connected to the chamber case, the collector current shall be determined as a function of potential applied to the neutron polarizing electrode. The readings obtained should be less than specified values at all potentials up to a specified limit. h) The chamber and its integral cables shall remain at the maximum operating temperature for not less than 100 h. At the end of this time and while the chamber and its integral cables are still at this temperature, the foregoing tests under Items a), b), c), d) and e) of Sub-clause 16.3.2 shall be repeated. The results obtained shall be the same within specified limits. 16.3.3 Repeat tests at ambient temperature After the tests at maximum operating temperature, the sub-assembly shall be allowed to cool to ambient temperature. The tests under Items a), b), c), d) and e) of Sub-clause 16.3.1 shall be repeated and the results obtained shall be the same within specified limits.

19

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
If the tests given in Sub-clause 16.3.2 have been omitted because the operating temperature at least 100 h must elapse between the tests given in Sub-clauses 16.3.1 and 16.3.3. is less than 100 "C,

16.4

Nuclear tests

1~6.4.1 Injluenceability

by gamma radiation and compensation factor

The chamber shall be exposed to a known gamma exposure rate of known energy spectrum in a stated geometrical relationship with the source. These factors having been chosen with a view to obtaining adequate accuracy in the following tests. to the gamma polarizing electrode and a saturating positive potential shall electrode. Collector current shall be measured for both positive and reverse

a) A potential U7' shall be applied be applied to the neutron polarizing values of Uy. Gamma collector current currents. in the compensating This current

section

of the chamber and plotted

is given by half the difference as a function of the potential

between Uy.

the two

shall be evaluated

b) A positive potential U, shall be applied to the neutron polarizing electrode and the collector current shall be measured with positive and reverse operating potentials applied to the gamma polarizing electrode. The current in the neutron section of the chamber is given by half the sum of these two currents. This current shall be evaluated and plotted as a function of the potential U,. value shall be determined and designated as

The voltage at which the current Un 0.9 and un 1.1'

is 90% and 110% of its plateau

An upper limit to the value of U,, which may be applied in this test may be specified lower than causes a 10% increase in saturation current, since it is recognized that some ionization chamber cannot be tested to U,, ,,, without exceeding their maximum rated voltage The gamma influenceability of the neutron-sensitive volume obtained in this way and the known gamma exposure rate. shall be determined

that which assemblies

from the saturation

current

c) The compensation factor is given by the difference between the currents given in a) and in b), this difference being divided by the current given in b). It shall be determined as a function of Uy for a specified value of U,. This should be repeated for specified source to detector geometries. On some compensated ionization chambers, reversal of the gamma polarizing potential may introduce errors. In such cases, it may be possible to reverse the neutron polarizing potential and to modify the above procedure accordingly.

16.4.2

Neutron sensitivity

in the linear range

The chamber shall be exposed to a known perturbed stationary neutron flux with negligible gamma radiation. The neutron saturation characteristics of the neutron-sensitive section shall be determined using the method given in Sub-clause 16.4.1 A positive potential U, shall be applied to. the neutron polarizing electrode and the collector current shall be measured with positive and reverse operating potentials applied in turn to the gamma polarizing electrode. The current due to neutrons is given by half the sum of these two currents. This current shall be evaluated and plotted as a function of the potential U,. and designated as

The voltage at which the current Un 0.9 and un 1.1'

is 90 % and 110 % of the saturation

value shall be determined

An upper limit to the value of U,, which Item b) of Sub-clause 16.4.1.

may be applied

in this test may be specified for the reason

given in

From the saturation current and the known neutron fluence rate (flux), the neutron shall be determined and limits of accuracy shall be stated.

sensitivity

of the chamber

20

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
17. Specific tests for uncompensated boron current ionization chambers
17.1 General (see Sub-clause 16.1)

The tests on uncompensated chambers are based on those for compensated chambers but are simpler because of the absence of a gamma polarizing electrode. 17.2 Mechanical tests (see Sub-clause 12.5) 17.3 Electrical tests 17.3.1
At ambient temperature

a) The capacitance between the collector and the polarizing electrodes and between the collector and the chamber

case shall be measured. As far as possible, all connecting cables shall be verified for electrical continuity. b) With the polarizing electrode connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the collector and the case shall be measured at a specified voltage. c) With the collector connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the polarizing electrode and the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage. d) The leakage current between the chamber case and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a specified voltage. 17.3.2
At maximum operating temperature

This test does not need to be carried out on those detectors whose maximum working temperature exceed 100 "C.

does not

a) The-chamber and an appropriate length of cable shall be placed in an oven and the tem~perature raised to the maximum operating temperature within defined limits.

As far as possible, all connecting cables shall be verified for electrical continuity. b) With the polarizing electrode connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the collector and the case shall be measured at a specified voltage. c) With the collector connected to the chamber case, the leakage current between the polarizing electrode and the chamber case shall be measured at a specified voltage.
d) The leakage current between the chamber case and any additional outer screen shall be measured at a specified

voltage. e) The collector current shall be determined as a function of potential applied to the polarizing electrode. The readings obtained shall be less than specified values at all potentials up to a specified limit. fl The chamber and its cables shall remain at the maximum operating temperature for not less than 100 h. At the end of this time, and while the chamber and its integral cables are still at this temperature, the foregoing tests under Items a), b), c) and d) of Sub-clause 17.3.2 shall be repeated. The results obtained shall be the same within specified limits. 17.3.3
Repeat tests at ambient temperature

After the tests at maximum operating temperature, the sub-assembly shall be allowed to cool to ambient temperature. The tests under Items b), c) and d) of Sub-clause 17.3.1 shall be repeated and the results obtained should be the same within specified limits.

21

IS : 11797-1985 IEC Pub 515 (1975)
If the tests of Sub-clause 17.3.2 have been omitted because the operating temperature is less than 100 "C, at least 100 h must elapse between the tests of Sub-clauses 17.3.1 and 17.3.3. 17.4 Nuclear tests
Neutron sensitivity and influenceability by gamma radiation The polarization voltage, neutron sensitivity, influenceability by gamma radiation and background for an uncompensated ionization chamber shall be determined by the test methods given in Sub-clauses 16.41, 16.4.2 and 16.4.3, as applicable.

18. Specific tests for current ionization cl~ambersfor gamma radiation The tests for current ionization chambers are identical to those for uncompensated chambers except tbat the primary and concomitant radiations are interchanged. boron current ionization

19. Specific tests for fission current ionization chambers The tests for fission current ionization chambers are identical to those for uncompensated boron current iomzation chambers. Alpha activity of the chamber coating will, however, influence leakage current measurements and should be taken into consideration. It will influence the tests under Items b) and c) of Sub-clauses 17.3.1 and 17.3.2 as well as Sub-clause 17.3.3, and may also cause errors in the primary and concomitant sensitivity measurements unless adequate radiation strengths are used.

22

