IS : 12553 - 1988 (Reaffirmed 2000)

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION AND OPERATION OF INDUSTRIAL GAS/OIL BURNING EQUIPMENT

UDC

662'94/`95'005 : 614'8 : 006'76

(C) C'(J/J,)'J'i,$/l1!)8(`)

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDAKDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAIIADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

Gr 7

IS : 12553 - 1988

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, INSTA.LLA.TION A.N D OPERATION OF INDUSTRIAL GAS/OIL BURNING EQUIPMENT
0. FOREWORD
critical energy and critical time are functions of, and are peculiar to the individual appliance. Critical time indicates the maximum allowable time delay for ignition to occur with safety, and also the maxttnum safe response time for any flame-failure safeguard system. The critical times for certain high-input equipment may sometimes be loo short to allow available safety equipment to react, in which cast the efficiency of the ignition system becomes critical and facilities for relieving excessive explosion pressures are essential.

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on 18 April 1988, after the draft finalized by the Industrial Fuel-fired Furnace Sectional Committee had been approved by the Structural and Metals Division Council. 0.2 Safety is an essential factor in all industrial activity; it can be achieved in even the most sensitive processes if adequate equipment design and operating procedures have been developed for the purpose. Fuel-fired appliances are intended to process fuel,/air mixtures and may contain or operate in atmospheres which include finely divided combustible materials. In such conditions, hazards are always a possibility and this standard gives principles for designing such appliances to operate with safety. 0.3 The most common accidents to occur in heated industrial equipment are internal explosions that result from the accidental ignition of accumulations of fuel/air mixtures, volatile solvents, other vapours or combustible dusts. An explosion becomes damag ing when the internal pressure created exceeds the ability of the appliances to contain it and since few appliances arc of sufficient strength to be able to withstand pressures of high order, it is necessary first to prevent the accumulation of combustible mixtures; secondly to avoid their ignition, wherever possible; and thirdly, depending on the operating characteristics and reliability of these preventive measures to provide means for relieving or mitigating the effect

0.6 It should be recognized that a differing degree of hazard exists during the starting-up phase in comparison with the operating phase of an appliance. The hazard inherent during the ignition of fuel is greater than that existing after it has been ignited ad Ihe appliance is operating normally. 0.7 Combustible vapours or dusts have essentially the same characteristics as fuel, that is, Ihev possess upper and lower combustible limits, stoikhiometric ratios and characteristic flame speeds. Any material that will burn is potentially cxplosivc if it is in the finely divided state and mixed with air. Since it is never possible to guarantee the absolute elimination of all possible sources of accidental ignition, first attention should be given to prekcnting the formation of combustible mixtures, the usual method being by dilution with air, but sometimes inert pseq or products of combustion are used. Since these measures also cannot be guaranteed to be absolutely reliable. it is necessary to provide explosion-relieving faciliiics whenever such combustibles arc present unless the any possible cuplo5icrn C'1 appliance L I1 withstand pressure. 0.8 Ccrtaiii types of appliance make Ll5e of alrno+
pheres that arc rich in comhuct~hlc mtitl`ri;tls. often well above 111~ upper combustible limit, ;IIKI ;IL temperatures that ;trc abo\ e I hc normal aul~~-iqilioti tcmpcraturch. For thcsc apphar~ccs the S;IIRC basic

of an explosions. 0.4 When a finely divided fuel is introduced into an enclosed space, it is potentially unsafe until it is ignited; and so the first essential safety rule for fuel firing is that ignition should bc as close to instantaneous as possible, and the second is fhat ignition rcli;lbility must hc of ;I very high order. If the ignition attempt fails, or if the flame is exlinguished
:tl any time ;tfter the initial ignition, ~211 accumulate in the CI~CI~~~LII~C, ant1 reach potenttally clangcrow proportions. unburnt fuel niay quickI\

0.5 The amount 0T energy that can be released in the form of f`uel bcf;jre the accumul;tt ion hecomcs and is callccl the dan.gcrous can bc calculatctl, `critlwl cnurgy'; the time rcquircd to reach the critical energy p9int ic called the `critic21 time'. Both 1

rules apply, that is, the siniultanC0us occurrcncc 01' combustlhlc mixtures and igniting tcmI:cratuI~~~ tnll\t he avoidt4 wccpt in strictl)~ cnntrotlcd circtim\i:ttwr`i.

IS : 12553 - 1988

consideration

is that damage to the appliance or its

surroundings should be minimized or contained. This order of priorities should be the criterion for determining protection requirements. 0.10 Certain essential safety rules have widespread application irrespective of wide varieties of configuration, methods of heating, or types of control. For example, a reaction to a fault or to a danger must be equally effective whether it is the reaction of an attendant or of an automatic device and adherence to a certain sequence of events may be equally important irrespective of whether the timing is provided manually or mechanically. The safety of an industrial appliance is a function of the features peculiar to that individual appliance, and the functions of any accessories often cannot be specified independently but must be derived from and be suitable for the needs of the individual application. 0.11 Thus it will be noticed that this standard in general avoids giving mandatory lists of precisely what types of hardware should be fitted to particular appliances. In particular, it makes little mention of `automatic burners' or `package burners' and makes

no attempt to provide rules for such burners independently of the whole appliance. When using this standard to check individual appliances, it will be necessary to decide whether the controls provided or the operating techniques specified are capable of providing with a sufficient degree of reliability the functional characteristics that are necessary for the safety of the particular appliance. The intent of this standard is to describe how to determine these critical appliance characteristics. 0.12 Although the rules for combustion safety given in this standard are applicable in principle to very high energy release appliances, such as, large land boilers for electricity generation, it should be recognized that appliances of such a size present unique problems, often requiring comparatively sophisticated control systems. Each such case should be studied individually and its safety evaluated in relation to its own particular conditions. 0.13 This standard is the adapted version of AS : 1375-1979 `Rules for the design, construction; operation of industrial fuel-fired applications', issued by the Standards Association of Australia.

1. SCOPE
1.1 This standard sets out safety principles related to the design, installation and operation of industrial appliances that involve the combustion of gas, oil or other fuel in air suspension, or the generation of combustible vapours in such appliances. 1.2 Relationship with Regulations - The requirements of this code should be read in conjunction with any Statutory Regulations that may apply in any area. 1.3 New Designs, Innovations - Notwithstanding the Specific requirements of this code, any IICW materials, designs, techniques, methods of assembly, etc, which give equivalent results to those specified may be considered for acceptability. 2. DEFINITIONS 2.0 For the purpose of this dcfinilions shall apply. code, the following

2.4 Critical Energy - The maximum potential energy in the form of unignited fuel which may be introduced into an appliance before a potentially hazardous level is reached. 2.5 Critical Time - The time required to accumulate unignited fuel in such quantity and proportions that, if it were ignited, the pressure of the resultant cxplosion WOLIICI constitute a hazard. 2.6 Dilution - The supply of fresh air or other suitable dilucnt, and its circulation, distribution and exhaust to outside atmosphcrc, with the purpose of diluting flammable vapour-s or dusts to concentrations that are below the lower explosive limit ( LFL ). 2.7 Duct Taken to include:

a) any passage that leads gases from an external combustion chamber to the appliance; b) any passage that introduces ventilating air;

2.1 Appliance - Industrial-type equipment, irrcspective of application or location, used to apply heat to objects or materials or to product ;I special atmosphere. 2.2 Approval,
acceptable

c) any passage that recirculates air or gases, either external to or as an integral part 01` Itie appliances; and d) any exhaust
dLl<l\.

for process products,

V;I~OIII-j III.

Approved -- With

to, and

the al~~rov:~l 01 rncct~ng, the prcscrihcd standards

of, the: authority

havltig jurladlcllon.

2.3 Authority, Authority having -Jurisdiction - The authority having statutory ( Icgal ) cwtrol 01` the subject inst;lllatiun. 2

IS : 12553 - 1988 2.10 J!rrsh Air - Air which, at the point of usage, is essentially free from solid particles, fibres, liquid droplets, or gaseous contaminants. 2.11 Installer - A person undertakes the responsibility tion, and not an individual the installer. or organization who of making the installatradesman employed by 4.1.4 Accutnulations Within Cavity Walls - Cavity walls in an appliance structure, whether or not they contain insulating material, shall be so designed that condensible products of combustion or flammable gastis and vapours cannot accumulate within them. 4.1.5 Support of Insulation - Adequate shall be provided to prevent the settling occurrence of voids in, insulating materials. supports of, or the

2.12 Interlock - A device which makes the operation of an item of equipment dependent 01 the fulfilment of predetermined conditions by any other item of equipment. 2.13 Lockout - A condition in which the device under consideration has been turned off and can be restarted only after an initial manual action. 2.14 Purging - The use of air or inert gas to remove and replace a potentially dangerous atmosphere. 3. AUTHORITY, RESPONSIBILITIES, PRESCAUTION GENERAL

4.1.6 Electrostatic Earthing - Where there is any danger that static electric changes may cause an explosion, provision shall be made for electrical bonding and earthing in accordance with IS : 30431966*. 4.1.7 Belt Drives - Belt drives that are used in proximity of flammabIe fuel/air mixtures, vapours, or dusts should be of the antistatic type. 4.1.8 Strength qf Doors - The strength of fasteners and mountings of doors and covers over access ports or opening shall be sufficient to ensure that explosion pressures will not cause them to open before explosion reliefs operate unless the doors or covers themselves form part of the designed explosion relief. 4.1.9 Prevention of Accia'cutal Fires - An appliance shall be so designed, and in particular heating means shall be so located, that accumulations of combustible waste or similar material on a scale likely to cause accidental fires are prevented. 4.1.10 Free Circulatiorl - Shelves, loading arrangements, and internal design generally shall be such that the circulation of dilution air, the exhaust of vapours, and purging, are not impaired. 4.1.11 Acljusting Devices - Any appliance adjusting device that affects the safety of the appliance shall be so designed that: a) it may be readily required; b) it is, if important ment, prdtected ference; and conveniently rcsct as

3.1 Statutory Requirements - Appliances shall when installed, contravene the requirements of Statutory Authority which may be applicable; example, factory or machinery safety, electricity, health, water supply, sewerage and drainage.

not, any for gas,

main3.2 Qualifications of Staff - Installation, tenance and operating staff shall be trained for their particular functions and shall be licensed, or otherwise authorized, under the terms of any Statutory regulation which may be applicable. 3.3 General Safety - The design, installation and operation of any appliance should be such as to permit compliance with the provisions of any applicable regulations. 3.4 Alternations, Extensions, Repairs - It shall be the responsibility of the owner to ensure that any alterations or repairs to any appliance or associated equipment do not render the installation hazardous or otherwise unacceptable to the Slatutory Authority. 4. DESIGN 4.1 General AND CONSTRUCTION Design

to the safety of the cquipagainst una;thorized interchangc5; sciling

cl it is not upset by temperature

4.1.1 Expansion - The appliance together with conveyors and other equipment shall incorporate where necessary provisions to prcvlnt damage resuiting from thermal expansion and contraction. 4.1.2 Ldders or Steps - Any ladder or step which may be needed to reach valves or other operating controls on the appliance should bt: an integral part of the appliance. 4.1.3 Protection 01' &llijWKWf --~- Guard, rails, or equivalent protection shall bc provided where nccessary to protect controls and Lquipmrnt rrom damage or from alternation of settings by Lraflic, mechanical and the like. equipment, 3

d) it is not susceptible
under normal conditions

to sticking or of` use; and

e) it incorporates

locking or holding nrrangcmcnts which are sufliciently positlvc to prevent accident, through niovemcnt subsequent vibration, or expansion; the tightening 01' any such locking devlccs shall not signllicantly alter any setting. /n/rv Guards - Any Illl~l oulsidc shall be protectcd by ;I screen, and lhc sl~all

4.1 .I2

appliance

IS:

12553 - 1988

be so guarded

or so located

that

it is not likely to

b) insulating

be obstructed. 4.2 Appliance Heating and Fuel Systems

material shall be suitable temperature and other conditions particular application, and to ensure

for of

the the

c) material

Fuel Shut-off - A means for quickly shutting-off the flow of fuel shall be fitted adjacent to each burl:er, and shall be so located that it is readily accessible at all times. If access may be prevented in the event of fire, explosion, or other emergency, another shut-off shall be provided in a safe location.
NOTE -Any arrangement that valves of a burner would comply

4.2.1

shall be subject to heat or corrosion acceptable equipment life.

shuts-off the internal with this requirement.

used in the con4.3.3 Com'x/stiDility - Mltcrials struction of an appliance should be csscntially noncombustible. Where the use of combustible maicrials is unavoidable, they shall not be used in appllcutions in which their temperature could exceed 70�C. In any case, ladders, steps, walkways, handrails and the like shall be of non-combustible matcriul.

4.2.2 Manual Ignition Equipment - Any manually inserted gas torch shall be connected by mcalls ok which shall be of the approved flexible tubing minimum length for the purpose. Where extended distances occur between burners, two or more lighting torches shall be used. Torches of the oil soaked type shall be of a metal rod, with provision for securing the absorbent material to the rod and a safe quenching pot shall be provided. 4.2.3 Gas Piping and Components - Gas fittings and components that form part appliance shall comply with the requirements Authority. 4.2.4 Fuel Supply - Fuel comply with the Authority's supply installations requirements. piping, of the of the shall

4.4 Ducts 4.4.1 Construction -- Ducts shall be of adequate strength and rigidity, sulficicntly braced and supportprotected from mcchunical cd, and adequately dimage to meet the normal conditions of operation. 4.4.2 Joints - Where leakage from or air induction into a duct is unacceptable, for exarnplc, whcrc a duct is carrying volatile or toxic materials, the joint shall be sealed in a manner and with materials suitable to the conditions of the applications. The assembly of a lap joint in relation to the direction of flow should ensure induction into, in prcfcrcnce to leakage from, the duct. No part of the duct system shali depend on soft solder for mechanical strength.
NOTE -Where

4.2.5 Solid Fuel Systems - Systems for handling, preparation and supply of powdered or pulverized solid fuel shall be so designed that the possibility of uncontrolled ignition or explosion of the fuel within the supply system is minimized.
NOTE --- The hazards resulting from residual fuel contained within the fuel-handling system after shutdown require pal-ticl~larly close attention, and PI-occdures to clear out this rcsidrlal fuel, or render it inert, or prevent the gcncl-ation of volaliles in stationary fuel in hot bunkers and handling equipment, must bc arranged and enfol-ccd.

condensation

or sloped duct, the direction the sealing should be so prcvcntcd.

of 111e lap

may occur

arranged

in a vertical joint and that I&age is
of the

4.4.3 Cleaning - Duct used to convey materials in suspension that may settle or form deposits shall incorporate provision for cleamng. 4.4.4 Condensatiun Provisions - The dc*;ign of any duct shall be such that any vapours that condense in it, do not drip back into an arca whcrc they could create a hazard. Means shall be provided to collect any deposit in a trap which can be periodically cleaned. 4.4.5 Dampers - Duct dampers that affect the volume of fresh air admitted to and the volume 01 vapours or gases exhausted from 311 applianc~c shall be so designed or so interlocked with the heat input system that unsafe accumulations of volatiles cannot occur, and heating cannot be initiated unless the dampers arc in a safe operating position. 4.5 Safety of Personnel 4.5.1 WorPirlg Itr.5icle Applkmcrs - Wliel-c any operator is requrrcd to enter a potentially ha.7,;lrdouc location in tllc ~ru~~mal course of his tiutiea, I~C;IIIS under the sidle control of` that operator shall Ix pro-vi&d to prevent the haLard i'roni causing Ir~_jur~ lo the opcralor, and provision shall bc nxldc lor the purging of any potentially hazardous atnwsphc'rc~
before wit q of p~~sonncl.

4.2.6 /Jot Fluid Uealitlg S~~.stc~~~.s -- Elenlcnts, radiafors, etc, containing heated fluids shall be designed to withstand the maxim&m temperatuI-cs and pressures to which they are likely to bc
sul~.;cctcd.

4.3 Materials 4.3.1 SpeciJcations - Material used in the construction of an appliance shall comply with the relevant Indian Standard, or an appropriate acceptable standard of no Indian standard exists. Alternative materials or components shall not bc used without specific approval. 4.3.2 J'rlitrrhili/l~ - Material used in the construction and instnlla~tion 01` a11 appliance shall bc suItablc for lllc conditions of ubc. In particular:
a) material

patible

used 10 convey fuel shall with tlrc particular fuel,

be com-

4

IS : 12553 - 1988 4.5.2 Door Handles - Any door which may be used as an entry for personnel shall be so designed that it may be opened from both inside and outside. 4.5.3 Burns Injury - The method of ignition and the location of burner controls shall not render the operator liable to injury or burns while carrying out the lighting procedure. Door handles or knobs shall be designed to obviate accidental contact with hot surfaces. Handles, removable parts of ccmponents, shelves, racks, and the like, shall hale no sharp points or edges of a nature likely to cause injury. Inspection ports shall be designed to avoid injury. 4.5.4 Prqjections - Appliances shall be so designed that projection of a nature likely to cause injury to personnel are adequately guarded. 4.5.5 Explosion Reliefs - Any explosion relief, vent or closure shall be designed and located on the appliance so as to facilitate compliance with 7.3.5. 4.6 Operating and Maintenance Provisions 4.6.4 Test Facilities - Any equipment that incorporates sequential start up shall be so designed that with the main heat system locked out, all operations prior to the initiation of main heat or main fame can be initiated for the purpose of checking. 4.6.5 Removable Components - Designs that require the removal or dismentling of panels or components during routine operation should be avoided. Where unavoidable, their design should be such that replacement dncs not require undue force, and incorrect replacement is either impossible or completely obvious. 4.6.6 Special Tools - The use of special tools for operating or maintaining equipment should be avoided. Where unavoidable, the special tool shall be provided by the manufacturer. 4.6.7 Cleaning - Interior surfaces and auxiliary equipment, such as, conveyors, racks, shelves, baskets, and hangers should be finished, smooth and designed to facilitate cleaning. 4.6.8 Maintenance Safety and Convenience - Each appliance should be so designed and constructed that its maintenance may be carried out safely and conveniently and without undue risk of damage or incorrect replacement of component parts. Particular attention should be paid to the following: a) Isolaticn of fuel and power sources; as is

4.6.1 Control Equipment - Controls and indicating devices shall be sufficient to provide complete control of the appliance, and those that require frequent observation or manipulation should be in convenient locations. In particular, a) gauges and meters should be at a convenient viewing level, well illuminated and free from glare or reflections; b) where direct access to controls from floor level is not possible, remote control devices should be provided in preference to steps; c) method of operation and direction of motion of manual controls should comply with accepted practice and with any applicable standards or regulations; and d) controls facilitate should be located and arranged operation in an orderly sequence. to

b) The safety of such maintenance operations may need to bc made when the equipment operating;

c) The design of access panels for control equipment, so that their opening or removal cannot cause wiring or piping connections to be stretched, kinked, or otherwise damaged; and d) The design or marking of handles, pointers, knobs, or spindles, such that incorrect reassembly after dismcntling is prevented. 4.7 Explosion Relief and Damage Protection

4.6.2 Manual Ignition - An appliance requiring manual ignition shall be so arranged that the operator can simultaneously operate the fuel valve, initiate ignition, and observe the flame. 4.6.3 Visual Flame Cllecltirlg Provisions - Facilities for visually checking the flame shall be provided as follows: a) It shall be possible for an operator to ensure visually, safely, and at any time that a burner or pilot is alight. Reflected glare would be considered to be adequate for this purpose. b) It shall be possible for maintenance or adjusting personnel to view a flame, either by direct sight or by means of a remote viewing dcvicc equivalent to direct sight. The removal of a panel or part to facilitate viewing is permissihle provided that there is no hazard involved. 5

4.7.1 General - Explosion reliefs complying with the requirements of this standard shall be provided in accordance with the conditions specified in 5.2.4 or 6.1.3, and where required by the Authority. 4.7.2 Operation - The design of an explosion relief, its effective vent, area, closure and location shall be such that under the worst attainable conditions of explosion, the products of combustion 01 the explosion can be so relieved through the explosion vent that the pressure within the appliance is below the level which will cause damage sullicient to endanger personnel. 4.7.3 Relief Loca/iwr - The location on an appliance of any explosion relief should bc chosen to ensure its optimum elTcctivcncss; for example, it should bc:

`ES : 12553 - 1988

4 as-close .as practicable to any potential
of ignition;
: ..5r :: i' ,

source
of

b)

facing the! direction cowbdstion;

of flow

.' . of;products ,

`circulating boiler, shall be so designed or shall!~ be .fitted with such.; prDtactive devices as to bacapable &complying with thi: requirements of 4.8.1 with I& pump or fan iilCperatiW.
"' `!

4.9 Instructions racks oi `similar the flow of ;exploas to,facilitate

I>

li c)
I

so located thit shelves, obstructions dS;*fi$ impair sion pro,tuc$, `and". compliance'with 1.314.

d) so located' on the appliance

4,s Temper&ye Hazards 7 `I. 4.8.1 Cbnlponenf~+ Floors, Walls - The temperatures given in Table ;I shall not be exceeded nhten the appliance has been operated at maximumthermal input .rate "in stich conditions and" for `a sufficient time ias to allow `surrounding miter'ials' to reach equilibritim temperature.

4.9.1 The manufacturer of the appliance dr his representative shall provide in'structions that are sufficient to permit safe and satisfactory installation, maintenance and operation. Regular testing of safety devices and procedures is given at Appendix A. The nature and extent of instructions shall be determined by agreement between the purchaser and the supplier, and shall meet all the requirements of the Authority. Instructions shall include a programmed schedule of checks of safety equipment.

4.9.2 Additional In.fbrmario,r - Where an appliance has been specially designed to bperatc in particular conditions, or to handle a particular material so that any subsequent alteration to operating procedures, type of work handled, or other factors could possibly result in unsafe operating TABLE 1 MAXIMUM TEMPERATURES OF conditions, sufficient additional information and SURFACE AND COMPONENTS instructions shall be supplied to ensure that the for which the equipment was TEMPERATURE limits of safe operation SURFACE OR COMPONENT designed are clearly understood. This information "C may be marked on the equipment or supplied separately. A typical form for the recording of such Adjacent combustible materials, floors, 50 information is set out in Appendix B. walls and the like
that is,
50 50

Surfaces intended to be handled, handles, knobs and the like When made of Metals, materials with similar conductivity ( see Note ) Procelain, vitreous medium conductivity

4.10 Marking 4.10.1 General - The appliance shall bc legibly and indelibly marked with the following illformation: a> Name or registered facturer; b) Serial number c) Rated and/or trade-mark catalogue of the manu-

high
60 ?O 120 120

enamel of similar surfaces or similar low

Plastics, wood, rubber conductivity surfaces

number;

heat input

( W, kW, etc ): Authority ); and

Surfaces likely to be accidentally touched except those obviously hot ( see Note ) Bodies of valves, cocks, and the llke ( unless specifically designed for higher temperature ) Controls and components containing non-metallic bellows, diaphragms alld the llkc (unless specifically dcsigncd for higher tcmpct-aturc ). Copper main and pilot fuel lines

d) Marking required by any Statutory ( for example, electrical data plates e) Type, grade or class of fuel.
4.10.2
Zndicalors, Gauges, and Controls

-.

DinIs,

165

120

guages and indicators, shall be indelibly marked with the appropriate scale and unit, and ~11~function should be identified. Wherever practicable, the function of operating controls should be identified and direction of operation indicated. 4.10.3 Emergemy Stops Emergency shutdown devices shall be clearly indicated, together with suficient instructlons to ensure that thclr method ot` operations is clear. 5. IGNITION OF FULL 5.1 General AND COMBUSTION CONTHOI.

NOTE - The limits specified above for knobs, handles, so rfaces, etc, are intended to provide a 1 degree of personnel prolcclion It is rcccgnized that equivalent protection may be achieved by the provision of such mcasurcs as special protective clothing, gloves, guards, ar;d the like. In any such cast, the appliance would bc cxcmpt from the rclcvant rule.

IS : 12553 - 1988 procedures and control equipment shall be such that unsafe conditions are prevented from occurring. Whether operation, supervision and control arc manual or automatic, they shall be such that:
operation, with the possible addition of some degree of flame-failure protection as rietermined by the degree of risk and the quality of operator supervision. The extent to which manual or automatic controls are used should be determined with due regard for the quality of operator supervision. the relative ability of operators or automatic control devices to respond quickly and reliably, and the degree of risk that would arise from any failure to respond. In many instances, the Authority will specify that particular controls be used in particular circumstances.

a>

each action or response is carried correct relative order or sequence; checks and procedures

out

in the

b) pre-starting
out;

are carried

4 4

fuel supply is available, adequate, and correctly treated, prepared and presented; any necessary services, such as electricity, compressed air, steam or hydraulic power are available and ready for operation; flammable gases, vapours, or airborne dusts are removed from the combustion chamber or are safely diluted or rendered inert before ignition is initiated;

e) any residual

5.1.2 Autonmic Control - Automatic control equipment shall be so designed that essential safety features cannot be bypassed or otherwise rendered inoperative except in the case of closely supervised maintenance or checking procedures. The control equipment shall be SO designed that in the event of fault or breakdown, the appliance is placed in a safe condition. 5.1.3 Manzraf Control - Where important operating procedures are under manual control by an operator, the operator shalt receive sufficient training to permit him to carry out his tasks in a safe and reliable manner; adequate notices, indicators, and other procedural aids shall be supplied, and it is the appliance owner's responsibility to ensure that the operator continues to carry OUI correct procedures. Controls - Safe 5.1.4 Interlocking operating conditions or correct sequences and procedures as required in 5.1.1 above should be ensured by providing interlocks wherever possible. Where an interlock is provided, a means should be incorporated, wherever practicable, to identify the function that caused the interlock to operate. Supply Faults - Any electricity or variations that could cause malfunction shall result in lockout unless it can be shown that an automatic restart on restitution of supply can be carried out safely.
supply interruptions

f> fuel is not admitted

into the combustion chamber before any necessary combustion or atomizing airflow has been established; is not admitted into the combustion chamber before the means of ignition has been energized; within a safe time; if a stable

6) fuel

11)ignition is accomplished 3 fuel supply

is shut off promptly flame is not established; flame failure

k) fuel supply is shut off promptly
of main operation;

in the event after a period of stable

m) no

attempt at re-igmtion is made until it has been established that it is safe to do so; and the appliance is rendered auxiliary should fail. safe if any
may

5.1.5 Electricity

essential be opera-

NOTE - Combustion control systems ted in one of the following ways:

a) Fully manual in which the and the fuel flow is controlled observation of an operator.

fuel is lit manually manually under the

b) Fully automatic, in which are incorporated selflighting provisions. supervision of the main flame and/or pilot, and purging facilities if necessary to the process. Automatic firing systems usually operate in repeated cycles of purge, ignite, prove, on, 00'. purge, re-ignite, et!, unless shut down and locked out by a safety device. They may incorporate intermediate checking functions between stages, alarm systems, and n,av even incorl orate duplicalcd safety features if this is considered nccessar-y 1u achieve a higher degree of reliability. c) Semi-automatic which may combine a number of manual and automatic opci-ations. a.s, such initial lighting of a pilot or main llame may be manual, fol t owed by remperature-controlled

5.1.6 Shutdown. Breakdown, Lockout, Restart Any shutdown that is caused by breakdown, that is, a system or component failure that is not selfcorrecting, shall result in lockout. When the shutdown is the result of a circumstance other than breakdown, automatic restart is permissble provided that the condition that caused the shutdown has corrected itself, and the provision of automatic restarting is not unsafe in the circumstances. When lockout has occurred, the restarting procedure shall ensure that means of ignition cannot be introduced before safe conditions have been established. 5.1.7 Conhrstion ad Flmle Stahilit~~ - Flame shall be stable over the whole operating range and deposits dclrimcntal tcb the combustion process should be kept tu a mmlmum. A pilot flame shall be stable under any conditions that may he present when a pilot may he rcquircd to bc active. 7

IS : 12553 - 1988 5.1.8 Moveable or Swing-out Burners - When the operating procedure may require the removal of a burner or part thereof from its intended operating position, the following rules shall apply: 2) It is not possible to carry out the igniting procedure unless doors of sufficient area to constitute an explosion relief remain open during the igniting period; or 3) exemption Authority. has been obtained from the

4

The method of mounting and locating the burner shall be sufficient to prevent inadvertent movement from the intended operating position; the fuel supply is disconnected, a means for preventing significant leakage of fuel shall be provided, and

b) If cl

5.2.5 Attempted Re-ignition - When an ignition attempt has failed, no further attempt to ignite shall be made until it has been established that it is safe to do so. 5.2.6 Pilot Ignition - Any pilot burner shall be so located that it will safely and reliably ignite the main burner. Where a pilot-flame detector is fitted, the arrangement of the pilot and its detector shall be such that the detector cannot indicate the presence of a pilot flame unless that flame is in the correct position and of the correct size and shape to cause ignition. 5.2.7 Ignition during Purging - No means of ignition shall be introduced during a purge period. 5.2.8 Multiple Main Burner Appliances - Multiple main burners should, wherever practicable, be ignited in sequence rather than simultaneously. In either case, the following requirements shall apply: a) The start sequence of a multiple main burner appliance shall require that the fuel shut-off valve be proved to be closed before initiating start; b) Design of the ignition system or the ignition procedure shall provide for the smooth, safe and reliable ignition of each individual burner. c) Any flame failure safeguard system for a single burner shall respond to the pilot or main flame of that burner only, d) Multiple burner appliances should operate in either the `high-low' or modulating modes rather than in the `on-off' mode. 5.2.9 Sequentia/ ignition @' Muitipie Main Burners - Where each main burner of a multiple main burner arrangement is ignited scqucntially, the foIlowing requirements shall apply: a) Each burner and its associated ignition system shall comply with all other requirements for ignition in 5.2.1 to 5.2.X.

If automatic ignition is incorporated, a means shall be provided to prevent inadvertent startup when in the other intended operating position,

No=This requirement is not intended to apply to mobile hand burners, such as, hand torches, lighting torches and the like.

5.2 Starting and Ignition 5.2.1 Ignition Procedure - The starting and ignition procedure shall be such that the requirements of 5.1.1 are met. ( see Appendix C for a typical starting and ignition procedure ). 5.2.2 Time to Zgnite - On carrying out the normal ignition procedure, a burner shall ignite completely and quietly and the flame shall stabilize. The time from first flow of fuel to the establishment of a completely ignited and stable flame shall be less than the critical time for the particular appliance. 5.2.3 Ignition Fault Protection - If the burner ( either pilot or main > fails to ignite, the fuel shall be shut-off as quickly as practicable. Where ignition is initiated by an automatic device rather than by an operator, the shut-off function shall be provided by automatic sensing and control equipment which shall lock out in the event of ignition failure. 5.2.4 Ignition Fuilure Response Time - The time from first flow of fuel to fuel shut-off following ignition failure should, wherever possible, be less than the critical time. Where the response time of the supervisory system equals or exceeds the critical time for: a) the pilot rate where a proven b) the start rate of the main pilot rate where an ullprovcn pilot is fitted; or burner plus the pilot is fitted; or

b) The

c) the start fuel rate of the main burner where no pilot is fitted, explosion reliefs in accordance with 4.7 shall be fitted unless:

operator or the control equipment shall ensure that each single burner is alight and stable before initiating the agnition of lhe next burner to be lit. or essential lighting s~~c1ucncc should either he specified in operating illstructions or marked on the appliance. Where ignition of the main burners is iniliated automatically, the sequence shall be cont.rullcd ailtom;itlc;llly.

Cl Any preferred

1) it can be proved that the appliance

is suf?`iciently strong to contain the maximum fuel without explosion pressure of the sulfcring damage which could endanger

personnel; or

IS : 12S53 - 1988 5.2.10 Simultaneous Ignition qf Multiple Main Bf4rners - Where the main burners of a multiple burner arrangement are ignited simultaneously, the following requirements shall apply: b) two or more separate firing simultaneously: I) through 2) through separate fue!i with two or burners, and more

4

The group of burners shall be taken as being a single burner for the purpose of this standard and particularly when calculating the critical time. by an ignition failure protection system which shall be individual to the burner unless it can be shown that a common ignition protection system will cause lockout of all the burners in the group being ignited should any one or more of the burners fail to ignite, or unless exemption has been obtained from the Authority.

the same burner.

b) Each burner shall be supervised

In each of these cases, one fuel may fire at a constant rate with the other( s ) varying to adjust for load fluctuations or all fuel rates may fluctuate simultaneously.
NOTE -A burner that uses different and main flame would not be considered fuel application.

fuels for pilot to be a multi-

cl The occurrence

of flame failure on any one burner shall cause shut-down with lockout of the failed burner where each burner is individually supervised, or of all burners in the group when a common supervision system is used.

4

The occurrence of flame simulation on any single burner of the group of burners during a start-up check shall lead to the lockout of all the burners in the group unless each burner is provided with its own ignition and flame safeguard system.

5.4.2 Alternative Firing - Where two or more fuels are available but never used more than one at a time, each fuel system shall comply with all the requirements of this code applicable to that particular fuel. An interlocking system shall be provided, sufficient to ensure that more than one fuel cannot be supplied simultaneously, and that the shut-down procedure for one fuel is completed before the startup procedure for the other fuel is initiated. This does not preclude the use of common components, such as, air supply fans provided that the component fully meets all the needs of each fuel system and sufficient interlocks are provided to eliminate all possibility of non-compliance with requirements. 5.4.3 Sinnhneous Firing fuels are fired simultaneously: a) operating all fuels possibility Where two or more for the

5.3 Flame Failure and Re-ignition 5.3.1 Flume Supervision and Failure Protection Every burner shall be so supervised when operating that if the flame is extinguished the fuel supply is shut-off as quickly as practicable. Where a burner is not under constant operator's supervision, the flame failure protection shall be provided by means of automatic devices. 5.3.2 Flutm Faihre Response after flame failure should critical time.
off

procedures and safety systems should be similar to minimize of operator confusion;

b) if only one fuel each such burner system; c) if more burner include:

is used through any burner shall operate as a complete is used through any the system shall

than one fuel simulraneously,

TirMe - Fuel shutoccur within the

0

5.3.3 Relighting after Flame fibil:rre - Where automatic control equipment is provided, no attempt to automatically relight after flame failure shall be made. The appliance shall shut-down to a condition that requires a manual rcbet followed by the complete procedure for initiating ignition. 5.3.4 Extrmeous fgnition Sources - No attempt shall be made to light a burner by means of hot brick-work, nearby burners, or other hot bodies unless the specific case can be shown to be safe to the satisfaction of the Autority. 5.4 Multi-Euel Firing This clause separate applies to firing

a means of ensuring that an adequate air supply is always available to cope with the total fuel ( regardless of type or differing air/fuel ratios ) being admitted through the burner;

2) an ability to control all the firing rates of all the fuels to ensure stable and complete combustion at safe levels at all time; the rate of change 3) an ability to control from one fuel to the other within sal'c bounds: and which can function safclv and 4) 9 control satisfactorily if the Supply of any 61. the fuels temporarily fails or is shut-ofT for any reason whatsoe~cr. 5.5 Normal Shut-down Prucedures

5.4.1 Applicatim system using: a) two or more

fuels

but never more

than one in use at a time,

whether 5.5.1 Saf?ry ~ Shut-down pl-ocedures manual or automatic, shall be such as IO lcave the 9

IS : 12553 - 1988
its contents and component parts in a safe condition ready for the next operation, cycle or batch. appliance,

the a>

5.5.2 Shut-down Sequence - Closing down shall be done in the following sequence: a) Shut-off fuel supply; h) Operate and the post-purge system, if provided; and controls on
an

volume of purging medium used shall at least be equal to five times the volume of the combustion chamber plus associated recirculation ducts, compartments, or appliance flueways unless it is shown to the satisfaction of the Authority that a lesser amount is safe; and that its distribution is adequated and no zone in the appliance remains unpurged.
connects into

b) the purging medium shall be so circulated

c) Close down all systems completion of purging.

particular care should be taken to miniNOTE Imize the effects of residual heat which may cause a local temperature rise after shutdown. to ensure that an adequate NOTE 2 - It is important supply of combustion air is maintained while the last of the fuel is being cleared from the burner. NOTE 3 - It is common practice to use an intended shut-down as a convenient opportunity to check the action of safety devices.

the volume of purging medium will need to take account of the purging requirements of that additional space.

NOTE - Where a combustion chamber additional space in an appliance,

5.6.4 Manually Controlled Purging - Where the duration and extent of a purge period is under the control of an operator as in the case of a manuallylit manually-operated appliance, the operating instructions shall specify the purging technique and its duration.

5.6 Purging tion chamber Purging of the combusor, where necessary, any associated recirculation ducts, compartments or flue-ways, shall be carried out in the following circumstances:
5.6.1 When to Purge -

When purging is carried out by means of combustion air fans, the operating instructions shall require that the fuel supply be manually shut-off. 6. CONTROL OF EXPLOSIONS
NON-FUEL SOURCES FROM

6.1 Prevention or Relief of Explosions 6.1.1 Explosion Prevention - Atmospheres that contain combustible vapours or dusts shall be prevented from exploding by one of, or a conlhination of, the following:

a) Immediately before a source of ignition is introduced into or energized within the appliance at the commencement of every before any tiring cycle, and immediately
attempt to relight after flame failure ( purging optional ). b) Immediately before into the appliance.
jng

ignition failure after shut-down

of is

Ensuring a>

the entry

of any personnel

In a multiple-burner installation incorporatsequential ignitio?. after the first burner has been ignited, further purging before igniting additional burners is not required.
NOTE -

that any such atmosphere will not contact any hot surface, flame zones, or heated gases whose temperature is higher than the auto-ignition temperature of the combustible material minus 100�C except in specifically designed incineration zones;

b) Maintaining

5.6.2

Method

of

Purging

provided by mechanical

~- Purging means for:

shall

be

the concentration of the combustible gas, vapour or dust at a safe level by diluting with air and/or products of combustion: and below 50 percent of the lowest oxygen percentage necessary to sustain combustion, for example, by introducing inert gases, by retaining or recirculating products of combustion and the like.
~;~rt' IO

where combustible a) direct fired appliances vapours or dusts other than unburnt fuel may be present; and b) appliances in which the combustion chamber or any associated recirculation duct, compartments or flue-ways operate under forced or induced drought. Natural convection purging may with the approval of the -4uthority.
be used only

cl Maintaining the oxygen concentration

NOTF - When ( c ) alone is used, particular prevent air infiltration is essential.

6.1.2 lligll

ConceMratiorl

o/'

Volatiles

IIlL*

5.6.3 Completeness of Purging - Purging shall be continued for a sufficient time to ensure that the concentration of potentially hazardous mixtures has been reduced to a safe level. in particular.

operating procedures of appliances whose atmospheres contain high concentrations of combustible, materials shall be such as will avoid the simultaneous occurrence within the appliance of mixtures with air which are within the combustible range and ternperillures that are likely to cause ignition. Particular

;IS : 12553 - 19&? :car&sbould.be taken to control the operation of any tdoois, hatches or other.: entries that may admit air &ring aliy period of potential hazard. ,-ii Ii I ;/ II. 6;1.3 Explosion. Relief - Every oven, furnace, -combustion chamber or duct in which ,airborne kombustible vapours or dusts are present as the result of the process, shall incorporate provisions for relieving an explosion unless it can Ee proved that the appliance is sufficiently strong to contain the maximum cause injury to personnel.
- ,6.1.4 Incineration -

6.2.4 Vapom and9ust Removal m:,The. design .of the equipment and its installation shallr,& s&uchA that any process products which may be flammable, noxious or toxic are removed effectively to ati dutside ,atmosphere or are ekctively destroyed. Wheie it is intended to discharge to atmosphere, any applicable requirements of health and clean air authorities shall be met.
'NOTE - Where air containing cdmb'us'tib`le materials recirculates and does not exhaust dirkctly to' atmosphere, it is not uncommon to limit the concentration of combustibles by passing the circulating air through the flame zone to achieve a degree of inc&eration. In such cases, the requirements for inci'neration will apply.

An,atmosphere that contains any combustible vapour or dust in a cohcentration greater than s25 percent of the LEL shall tiot be passed through a flame zone except in the case of intentional incineration of the combustible. In that case, atmosphere as it zone shall be not speed of the mateless than 5 m/s;

._ a) the velocity of such an approaches the incinerating `>.i less than twice the flame rials, and, in any case, not

6.2.5 Leakage of Hazardous Materials - Any aircirculation system shall be SO designed that it does not cause leakage of flammable or toxic materials into surrounding areas.

7. INSTALLATION
7.1 Installer's Responsibility

., .

b) percautions shall be taken to ensure that an atmosphere which is within the combustible range and is moving at a velocity lower than the flame speed cannot occur during normal ..start-up or shutdown operations; and c) in the event of an emergency shutdown, the incinerating flame shall be turned off and any possible source of ignition shall be isolated from such an atmosphere.

7.1.1 Licences. Approvals - The installer shall ensure that any necessary licences, approvals, or other forms of authorization required under 1.3 have been obtained at the approximate time from any authority having jurisdiction.

i ,

`6.2":Air Dilution, Exhaust`ing, Circulation, Purging _ ""`&,2.1 Af+dhhod of Providing, Dilution Air - Any `air for dilution that may be provided as in 6.1.1 ( b ) shall be supplied by a mechanical system unless specific approval has been given for the provision of dilution air by natural convection. 6.2.2 Distribution of Dilution Air - Air supplied to the appliance shall be so circulated that its distribution is substantially even, and no dead pockets occur.
NOTEIt is recommended that airflow tests be conducted under operating conditions after installation, whenever internal furniturb or loading has been changed, and at regular intervals thereafter.

7.1.2 htruction - The installer shall ensure that the installation instructions required under 4.9.1 have been complied with and that all equipment installed by him is left either in safe working order, or in a safe inoperative condition. Any testing or operator training which may have been agreed between the manufacturer, installer and the purchaser shall be completed. Any required operating instructions shall be permanently and prominently displayed near the appliance.
7.1.3 Faulty Eqrgomenf - If the equipment does not operate correctly due to defects either in the equipment itself or in the fuel supply, the installer shall not attempt rectification unless specifically authorized to do so. The equipment shall be shut down and protected against unauthorized or inadvertentattcmpts at operation, and the person or party responsible shall be advised.

6.2.3 Purging - An appliance in which combustible vapours or dust are generated shall be so designed as to provide for purging the appliance before initial start-up, after an accidental or intentional shut-down, and before restarting after shutdown. The volume of purging medium circulated during the purge period shall be at least five times the internal volume of the appliance.
NOTE I -The

installer

7.1.4 Suitability for Fuel and Electriciry - The shall ensure that the appliance is suitable for, and, where necessary, approved for the type of fuel and/or electricity supply with which it will be supplied. If the appliance is found to be unsuitable for the fuel or electricity supply available, it shall not be connected but the purchaser shall be notified.

7.2 Standards for Workmanship and Good Practice 7.2.1 .Uooteriuls- Any material used installation of an appliance shall comply requirements listed in 4.3. in the with the

provide

dilution air fan may the purging medium in this case.

be used

to

NOTE 2--Particular care should be taken to allow for residual heat after shut-down which may cause rising temperatures or a continued generation of vapours.

7.2.2 Finish - Sharp corners Or edges, projections and the like which could cause injury to personnel, 11

IS : 12553 - 1988 should be removed of the installation. or guarded before the completion 7.3.5 Explosion Relief Protection - An appliance shall be so located or so protected or guarded that when installed and operating, explosion reliefs, vents or closures cannot cause injury to personnel from moving parts or ejected flame. Where an appliance does not incorporate sufficient protection or guarding to permit compliance with this requirement, such protection or guarding shall bc provided by the installer. 7.4 Fresh Air Supply 7.4.1 Air Supply - The area in which the appliance is located shall be sufficiently vented to provide adequate fresh air for dilution purposes, for the combustion of the fuel and for the comfort and protection of personnel. 7.4.2 Air Intakes - Any opening that functions as an intake for the fresh air required in 7.4.1 shall be so designed that it cannot be closed unless it is appropriately interlocked and shall be so arranged or protected that the materials or articles cannot be stacked so as to restrict the entry of the required amount of fresh air. 7.4.3 Fan Failure - Where fans or blowers are used to supply fresh air, appropriate interlocks or warning devices shall be provided to ensure safe conditions in the event of air supply failure. 7.5 Flues, Ducts and Exhaust so that the passage of persons or goods along any passageway or through any exit is not hindered; and that the traffic is not likely to cause damage or malfunction of the appliance or its components ( see a/so 4.1.3 ). Systems

7.2.3 Building Structures - The appliance should be separate from the building in which it is installed It should not and from all building members. support, include or incorporate any such member but where this is unavoidable, proper action should be taken to ensure that the strength of such a member, building or appliance is not impaired, and that it is not subject to overheating. 7.2.4 Connection of Services - The connection of an appliance to services, such as, fuel, water, air, electricity and sewerage shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the relevant Autority and standards. 7.3 Location and Access 7.3.1 Building Safety - An appliance should bc located so as to minimize building damage or personal injury resulting from any fire, explosion, escape of fuel, escape of flue gases, or escape of deleterious process products. 7.3.2 Sqfety be located: and Convenience An appliance shall

a) so as to facilitate

safe working; 7.5.1 Provision of Flues - Where products of combustion are of such a nature, or occur in such volumes, that they, may cause unacceptable discomfort to personnel, health hazards, spoilage or deterioration of products, structures, and the like, they shall be removed effectively to outside atmosphere. Each individual appliance should be provided with an individual flue.
NOTE- A common flue serving more than one appliance requires special design to ensure that it does not constitute an explosion hazard.

b)

so c> to

7.3.3 Combustible Materials - An appliance shall be located so as to permit compliance with 4.8. 7.3.4 Clearance for Explosion Relief-The distance between the vent of an explosion relief and any nearby wall, ceiling, or other solid construction shall be suficient to ensure that the flow of products of an explosion is not restricted, and shall be not less than following: a) Clearance, -0.4 ( in metres, from one wall or ceiling of 0'4 m. right

;_ "i with a minimum J

7.52 Separate Flues and Exhausts -- Products of combustion of indirect fired appliances shall be discharged separately from any process products, except that, and provided that approval has been obtained, the flue may be connected to the exhaust system on condition that the temperature of the products of combustion at this point is always at least IOO'X below the ignition temperature of the process products. 7.5.3 Cotnr?lon Exhaust - A common exhaust system may be used to remove process vapours or dust from a number of appliances or from a number of internal appliance compartments provided that the mixing of the various exhaust products 15 1101. hazardous. 7.5.4 Hot Flues and Ducts - 1~1~~sand ducts sh:~II b.: installed to comply with the requirements of 4.x (temperature harurds). 12

b) Clearance, in metres, from two walls at angles, or from out wall and a ceiling

Y()`(j i
NOTE It

`j J

: with a minimum of 0% m.

where V - : volume of' the space being vcntcd.
should be recognized that if nn explosion

relief discharges into a COI~~I-K~space may be subjected to an imreose of internal pwsure.

Is : 12553 - 1988 1.5.5 Terminals ,jbr Exhaust Ducts and Fhcs Exhaust ducts and flues that terminate outside a building shall discharge away from doors, windows, of other possible air intakes in such a manner as to preclude the rc-entry of vapours, hot air, exhaust products, and the like, into the building. The terminal shall comply with the requirements of the Authority, and shall be clear of any building or other construction the terminal. tl,at may impede free disch,rrge from

NOTF - Care should be exercised to prevent any exhaust gases that contain volatile materia!s, particularlp those beii,g dizchalgetl during ptlrgillg from being directed toMaIds hot slncks or ~.,,nes `where ignition may ta!,c place.

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.9.1 )
REGULAR A-l. REGULAR TESTING TESTING OF SAFETY DEVICES

A
AND PROCEDURES

A-l.1 Systematic and thorough inspection and maintenance are essential and should be arranged on a properly established regular basis. A-1.1.1 The frequency of testing should be determined by the reliability of the device, the environthe back-up protection mental conditions and afforded by other devices or procedures. A-2. METHOD OF TEST

b) The various safety devices should be opcratcd in turn to check the proper performance of each one. of all mechanical and c) Close visual inspection electrical components of the safety dcviccs should be made. This includes all timers, relays, contactors, limit switches, etc. Particular notice should be taken of broken or bent parts, unusual or stickly action improper contact appearance or lack of contact pressure, effects of excessive heating, vibration, the presence of metallic particles and the intrusion of moisture or dust. d) A proper check and engagement gears and the wiles, cables or cal interference should be made of the surfaces of any clutches or timing position of connecting lever, pipes to be sure that mcchanicannot occur. need to be satisfactory

A-2.1 At least one complete cycle of operation should be performed prior to and immediately following every test and at least two complete cycles where any adjustment has been made or any part replaced. A rigorous inspection after the initial operating the following: should cycle be made during and and should include be or

a) All appropriate inspection covers should removed to expose any levers, contacts other working parts.

and devices c) Timing mechanisms checked several times bcforc performance can bc assumed.

IS : 12553 - 1988

APPENDIX ( Clause 4.9.2 )
OPERATING DATA, SPECIAL

B

PURPOSE

FURNACES

Identification of Manufacturer...
Manufacturer's

. . . . . . . . . . . . .., . . . . . . . . . . . .

Dilution air volume . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .m3/min at 2G�C Design solvent: Purging period: Type. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .l/h
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .

Serial No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Name of Owner. ,...... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Location. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . This appliance is designed for use under the conditions specified below. Any deviation from these conditions may create hazards. Type or purpose of . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . appliance: paint, for example, paking, enamel japan, metal heat treatment - exothermic atmosphere Kind of Material handled:

Give complete details when more than one purging provision is incorporated Baking time (batch oven): Type of heating system: Heat medium: Oven or furnace temperature: . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . *. . . . . for example, convection, radiation
. .. ... .. . .. . .. .. . . . ... ... .. . . .. .. . .. . ..

for example, oil direct, gas indirect
*. . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..." . . . . OC

for example, wood, paper, textiles, metals, minerals

Internal dimensions: . . . . . . ,..... . ..Volume. . . . . . . . . . . . . . m3

THIS FURNACE

IS NOT INTENDED

FOR USE IN HAZARDOUS

LOCATIONS

I4

IS:

12553 - 1988

APPENDIX ( Clause 5.2.1 )
TYPICAL C-l. IGNITION OF A BURNER WITHOUT System ) IGNITION

C

PROCEDURES BURNER ( Manual or Automatic

THE USE OF A PILOT

I. Decide to start burner f&l valve is closed J, 3. Ensure no accumulation of combustible mixture 4 4. Ensure adequate airflow for combustion I 5. Activate 6. Admit fuel to burner i&ion source rate for ignition 2. Ensure

at suitable J

J ignition as fuel L Sa. Remove ignition source 4 9. Ensure flame is stable 7a. Observe IO. Adjust fuel/aif rate ( as required 4 1 la. Continue to observe flame-+ 1

7b. Observe

4 non-ignition of fuel j, 8b. Remove ignition source shut-off fuel valve

I lb.

In flame out-+ shut-off fuel valve

---, Only after rectifying the fault, repeat start procedure from 2 _

IS : 12553- 1988 C-2. IGNITION USING A PILOT ( Manual or Automatic System )

1. Decide to start burner 1 2. Ensure pilot and main fuel valves are closed J 3. Ensure no accumulation of combustible mixture 1 4. Ensure adequate airflow for combustion J 5. Activate ignition source 4 6. Admit fuel to pilot 4 , 7a. Observe 8a. Remove 9a. Continue iresence of pilot flame $ ignition source 1 to observe I 7b. Observe 8b. Remove absence of pilot flame

ignitick source shut off fuel supply

pilot flame

9b. If flame out, turn off fuel suPPlY

I 1 I 1 ' Only after rectifying the fault, repeat start procedure from 2. ----+

I"o. Admit

main fuel to burner

at suitable 1 lb.

rate for ignition absence

lla.

Observe

12a. Turn 13. 14. Ensure Adjust

1 presence of main flame J off pilot fuel (if not required)

4 of main flame & 12b. Shut-off main and pilot fuel Observe I

4
flame is stable miin flame (as required) J, 15a. Continue to observe main flame+

15b. If flame out shutoff fuel supply

__,

I
___ _-i-__ Only after rectifyr il lg the fault, [ repeat start procedure from 2:

BUREAU
Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Shah Zafar

Marg,

NEW DELHI

110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all ollices ) Telepllone

Telephones

: 3310131,

3311375

Regional Offices: Central
*Enstern

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur NEW DELHI 110002

Shah Zafar

Marg, Maniktola, H 160036 600113

3310131,

3311375 362499

: l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII RI, V. I. P. Road, CALCUTTA 700054 : SC0 445 -446, Sector : C. I. T. Campus, 35-C, CHANDIGAR MADRAS

Northern Southern TWestern

21843, 31641 412442, 412519,412916 6329295

IV Cross Road, Marol,

: Manakalya, E9 MIDC, ROM BAY 400093

Andheri

( East ),

Branch Ofices: `Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMADABAD Road, T. T. Nagar, 751002 GUWAHATI j, 781003 380001 26348, 26349 384955, 384956 66716
53627

fPeenya Industrial BANGALORE

Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore-Tumkur 560158 Bhadbhada Road,

Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83, Lewis Road,

BHUBANESHWAR 5th By-lane, Station

53/5, Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5-8-S6C L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampally H Y DERABAD 50000 1 R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, Nagar, Estate, University JAIPUR

33177 231083 6347 1, 69832 216876, 218292 02305

Road

302005 208405

117/418 B Sarvodya Patliputra industrial

KANPUR PATNA

800013 TRIVANDRUM 695034

T.C. No. 14/1421, Inspection Ofices

P.O., Palayam,

62104, 62117

( With Sale Point ): Road, Shankar Nagar, Nagar 25171 52453

`Pushpanjali', First Floor, 205A West High Court Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of' Engineers Pune 4 I 1005 ( India ) Building,

1332 Shivaji

*Sales Oflice in C:llcutta Calcutta 700072 tS;ilcs Ofice

is at 5 Chowringhee

Approach,

P.0. Princep

Street,

in Bombay is at Novelty

Chambers,

Grant Koad, Narasimharaja

Bombay 400007 Square, Bangalore 560002 -__~ Printed at f'rintwcll

ISales Oflice in Bangalore

is at Unity Building,

Printers,

I)elhi.

llldla

