INATA Ah IS 18307 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


Tach ST 979 


Isolated Organ Bath 


ICS 07.140 


© BIS 2023 


т Ҥч 5451 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


ey тч чач, 9 FR IE AHL AMT, 4$ Ree - 110002 


MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


August 2023 Price Group 4 


Anatomy and Forensic Sciences Equipment Sectional Committee, MHD 23 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Anatomy and 
Forensic Sciences Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by Medical Equipment and Hospital 
Planning Division Council. 


This standard describes the specifications for isolated organ bath which is used to study the drug action. It is used 
to study the interaction between a living organism and exogenous chemicals that alter normal biochemical 
function. Isolated organ bath experiment is one of the methods employed to quantify these interactions. Isolated 
tissue in its most basic form requires the use of a vessel or bath where the tissue resides ex-vivo. The life support 
is provided by the physiological solutions filled in the bath. A tissue holder is used to hang the tissue. A 
manipulator to dial in the correct tension on the prep, an isometric or isotonic transducer is used to measure the 
force. Optimum oxygen and heat are maintained in order to keep the tissue viable. 


It is important that individuals following this procedure are experienced and aware of the experimental protocols, 
and be familiar with the human and animal safety, in order to avoid and damage during the experiment. It is not 
intended to be used to diagnose, treat or monitor a subject in hospital or domestic environment. Furthermore, it is 
not intended for the prevention, curing or alleviation of disease, injury or handicap. It should be installed, used 
and operated under the supervision of an appropriately qualified life-science researcher. The typical usage 
environment is a research or teaching lab or hospital. Environmental factors, temperature, humidity, ventilation, 
noise intensity and light intensity must be maintained at appropriate levels as they may contribute to the levels of 
mouse anxiety. 


The technical committee responsible for the preparation of this standard has reviewed the provisions of the 
following International Standards/Other Publications and has decided that they are acceptable for use in 
conjunction with this standard: 


International Standard Title 


IEC 61326-1 : 2020 Electrical equipment for measurement, control and laboratory use — 
EMC requirements — Part 1: General requirements 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex А. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)”. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value shall be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 18307 : 2023 


Indian Standard 
ISOLATED ORGAN BATH 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard specifies requirements for 
isolated organ bath intended for research and 
teaching use. This standard covers the general 
description of standard materials, technical 
parameters, test settings, and procedures. The test 
methods described herein must follow the procedure 
strictly and are intended for use by individuals who 
have been trained, and are competent in performing 
the procedures. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of 
publication, the editions indicated were valid. All 
standards are subject to revision, and parties to 
agreements based on the standard are encouraged to 
investigate the possibility of applying the most 
recent editions of these standards: 


IS No. Title 


IS 13450 (Part 1) : Medical electrical 
2018/IEC 60601- 1 equipment: Part 1 
: 2012 General requirements 
for basic safety and 
essential performance 

(second revision) 


IS/IEC 61010: (Part 1) Safety requirements for 
:2010 electrical equipment for 
measurement, control, 
and laboratory use: 
Part 1 General 

requirements 


3 REQUIREMENTS 
3.1 Isolated Organ Bath 


The system should comprise multiple transducers 
and accessories to acquire the drug’s effect on the 
tissue along with an analysis software. It is used for 
conducting two simultaneous isolated tissue studies. 
The software should offer comprehensive signal 
processing, data acquisition, data recording, display, 
and analysis features for a variety of teaching and 
research application. The isolated organ bath should 
have electro-valve based two chamber organ baths 
to carry out simultaneous two isolated tissue 
experiments. The system should be compact and all 
in one structure with no external glassware. 


3.2 Self-Test 


The isolated organ bath should be able to perform a 
diagnostic self-test each time it is switched on. 
Before connecting it to the computer for the first 
time, it should test that the system is functioning 


properly. 


3.3 Hardware and Software 


3.3.1 The system should have a software-controlled 
USB based minimum two channels and up to eight 
channels data acquisition system with + 2 mV to 
+ 10 V in 12 steps amplification range and variable 
and high sampling rate up to 400 kHz (aggregate 
speed), 16-bit ADC resolution on all gain ranges. 


3.3.2 It should have programmable gain, variable 
sampling speed on each channel. 


3.3.3 The structure of isolate organ bath should be 
built of thick perspex/glass and must include 
immersed tissue chambers, pre-heating reservoir 
coils, gas diffusers, tissue holders, micro 
positioners, a water pump, and thermostat controller 
to maintain temperature. 


3.3.4 Force transducers should be provided to 
measure forces under isometric conditions in single 
range of 0 mg to 25 g. 


3.3.5 Tissue hooks or tissue clips should be 
provided for different Tissues. 


3.3.6 The hardware should have adjustable gas 
diffuser for oxygenation and electro valves should 
allow simultaneous or individual emptying and 
refilling of tissue chambers at the press of a button. 


3.3.7 The different sizes of tissue chambers that is, 
5 ml, 10 ml, 25 ml or 50 ml should be provided with 
an easy replacement option. The electro-valves must 
have a provision to be operated manually or by using 
the digital output of the data acquisition system. 


3.3.8 The hardware should include a 2 channel 
(0 mA to 100 mA) stimulator. It should provide a 
mono/bipolar output and several stimulation modes 
such as single, continuous and frequency regulated 
steps. 


3.3.9 All protocol parameters can be entered from 
the front panel and can be stored in internal program 
memories and can be easily reloaded. 


IS 18307 : 2023 


3.3.10 The device shall have facility to connect to 
a computer using the standard RS 232 serial 
interface. 


3.3.11 The Software should be able to control the 
compact multi-channel amplifier with manual or 
automatic zeroing circuitry. It should be able to 
perform online and offline analysis of force 
waveforms with calculation of slopes, indices and 
time intervals. Software should allow recording, 
analysing, storing, and printing the data. The 
analysis module should tabulate the results 
automatically or manually, generate instantaneous 
Hill curves, displays single or multiple response 
curves, calculates ECs» and hill slopes, exports the 
results in XML and tab-delimited text format for use 
in other applications. The software should have free 
update and upgrade for 5 yrs. 


3.3.12 The system should be supplied with Intel 15 
processor-based desktop computers with DVD RW, 
minimum 4GB RAM and 500 GB hard disk and 21 
inch LED monitor with stand and other required 
accessories and [kVA UPS. 


3.4 Safety Requirements 


The device should comply with all safety 
requirements as described in IS 17724 (Part 1)/ 
IEC 61010-1 Safety requirements for electrical 
equipment for measurement, control, and laboratory 
use: Part 1 General requirements. 


3.5 Troubleshooting 


The troubleshooting steps should be instructed in the 
user manual of the system. 


3.6 Cleaning and Maintenance 


The cleaning guidelines of organ bath should be 
instructed in the user manual. The system should be 
maintenance-free and should not require periodic 
calibration or adjustment to ensure safe operation. 
Internal diagnostic software should able to perform 
system checks during power up and will report 
errors if a significant problem is found. 


4 GENERAL TEST CONDITIONS 
4.1 Subject 


Subjects (rodent) before testing should be 
acclimated to testing environment and experimenter. 


4.2 Environmental Factors 


Environmental factors may contribute to the levels 


of anxiety within the subject therefore temperature, 
humidity, ventilation, noise intensity and lighting 
intensity must be maintained at levels appropriate. 
In order to avoid anomalous results, it is essential 
that the subject be kept in a uniform environment 
before and after testing 


4.3 Temperature 


The temperature range in the testing room may be 
adjusted at 5 °C to 35 °C for subject. The 
temperature range could change depending on the 
experimental protocol. 


4.4 Humidity 


The humidity range in the testing room may be 
adjusted at 50 percent + 20 percent. 


4.5 Lighting 


Room lighting in the testing room should be 
appropriate. 


4.6 Noise 


The ambient background noise levels in the 
procedure room may be adjusted to 60 dB to 70 dB. 
Audible timers should be avoided during this test. 


5 TEST METHODS 
5.1 Procedure 


Students/Researchers are advised to wear a white 
laboratory coat, glasses, and gloves throughout the 
practical, to avoid potential contamination with 
bacteria from intestinal contents or blood borne 
pathogens. Animal subject should be anesthetized 
before the experiment. A segment of animal tissue is 
dissected for the study/research purpose. The length 
of tissue should be transferred from the animal to the 
organ bath as quickly as possible to avoid 
deterioration of the tissue. A force transducer is 
connected to a data acquisition system and to the 
tissue inside the tissue chamber filled with 
physiological saline solution. The tissue should be 
connected to the force transducer using tissue hook 
and thread. The thread should not taut enough to 
register contractions with the tension transducer but 
not so tight as to damage the contractile machinery 
of the tissue. The tissue’s temperature is maintained 
using thermostat controller and oxygen is provide to 
the tissue either through oxygen cylinder or aerator. 
After connecting the transducers, the experiment 
should start for collecting the baseline for first 
5 minutes to 10 minutes. The experimenter can start 
and record the study of drug’s effect on the tied 
tissue. 


6 PARAMETERS 


The isolated organ bath system should be able to 
acquire and analyse the below mentioned 
parameters: 


a) Forces under isometric condition; 
b) Instantaneous Hill curves; 
c) Single or multiple response curves; 


d) Study reaction time, pulse transit time and 
peak waveform analysis; and 


e) EC 50 (Estimated concentration of drug that 
generates 50 percent of the muscle’s 
maximum response) and Hill slopes. 


7 REGULATORY SYMBOLS 


The device shall comply to IS 13450 (Part 1) : 
2018ЛЕС 60601- 1 : 2012 and IS 17784 (Part 1)/IEC 
61326-1, and carry one or more of the safety 
symbols below. 


7.1 B (Body Protected) Symbol 


Equipment marked with this symbol is suitable for 
connection to humans and animals provided there is 
not direct electrical connection to the heart and 
provides basic protection against electric shock. 


7.2 BF (Body Protected-Floating) Symbol 


This means that the input connectors are suitable for 
connection to humans and animals provided there is 
no direct electrical connection to the heart and 
provides increased protection against electric shock 
over B rated applied parts. 


7.3 Warning Symbol 


The exclamation mark inside a triangle means that 
the supplied documentation must be consulted for 
operating, cautionary or safety information before 
using the device. 


7.4 WEEE Directive Symbol 
Unwanted equipment bearing the Waste Electrical 


and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) directive symbol 
requires separate waste collection. 


IS 18307 : 2023 


7.5 Date of Manufacture/Manufacturer’s Name 
Symbol 


This symbol indicates the date of manufacture of the 
device and the name of the manufacturer 


8 DATA RECORDS AND REPORTS 


The software should be able to record and save the 
recorded data for desired interpretation of the data. 


9 OPERATING MANUAL 


Each isolated organ bath system shall be 
accompanied by an operating manual which shall 
contain the following information: 


a) Instructions and plan for installation, 
b) Operation of the apparatus, and 


c) Routine maintenance and service. 
10 MARKING AND PACKING 


10.1 The apparatus shall be legibly and indelibly 
marked at a suitable place with the designation 
number; the manufacturer’s name, initials or 
recognized trade-mark; serial number; and the 
country of manufacture. 


10.2 The apparatus may be packed as agreed to 
between the purchaser and the supplier. 


10.3 The apparatus shall be securely packed, in any 
manner, acceptable to the purchaser, so as to 
minimize the risk of damage in handling, transport 
and storage. 


10.4 BIS Certification Marking 


10.4.1 The isolated organ bath may also be marked 
with the Standard Mark. 


10.4.2 The product(s) conforming to the 
requirements of this standard may be certified as per 
the conformity assessment schemes under the 
provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
2016 and the Rules and Regulations framed 
thereunder, and the product(s) may be marked with 
the Standard Mark. 


IS 18307 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Anatomy and Forensic Sciences Equipment Sectional Committee, MHD 23 


Organization 
Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 


Association of Indian Medical Device Industry, 
New Delhi 


CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Hyderabad 


Sri Ramachandra Medical College & Research Institute, 
Chennai 


Directorate General of Health Services, Delhi 

Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI), New Delhi 

Indian Council of Medical Research, Delhi 


Indian Medical Association, Delhi 


Kalam Institute of Health Technology, Visakhapatnam 


LNJN National Institute of Criminology and Forensic 
Science, Delhi 

Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi 

National Health Systems Resource Centre, New Delhi 


VMMC & Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
DR SABITA MISHRA (Chairperson) 


SHRI RAJESH KHATRI 
MRS LALITA KHATRI (Alternate) 


DR A. KIRAN KUMAR 


DR KALPANA RAMACHANDRAN 
DR SENTHIL KUMAR (Alternate) 


DR ANITA TULI 
DR M. К. WAHI (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY KUMAR 
DR SANDEEP SEWLIKAR (Alternate) 


DR GEETA JOTWANI 


DR R. V. ASOKAN 
DR N. V. KAMAT (Alternate) 


SHRI KINGSHUK PODDAR 
SHRI DILIP KUMAR CHEKURI (Alternate) 


DR K. P. S. KUSHWAHA 
DR J. K. MODI (Alternate) 


DR DINESH KUMAR 
DR SRINIVAS M. (Alternate) 


SHRIMATI VERTIKA AGARWAL 
SHRI BHARAT BHUSHAN DAHIYA (Alternate) 


DR MANOJ KUMAR WAHI 
DR G. A. SUNIL KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI A. В. UNNIKRISHNAN SCIENTIST ‘F’/SENIOR 
DIRECTOR AND HEAD (MEDICAL EQUIPMENT AND 
HOSPITAL PLANNING) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR 
GENERAL (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Ms NAGAVARSHINI M. 
SCIENTIST ‘B’/ASSISTANT DIRECTOR 
(MEDICAL EQUIPMENT AND HOSPITAL PLANNING), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MHD 23 (16256). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower -1, 6" Floor, | 2323 7617 


DMRC Building, Bhavbhuti Marg, New 
Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8% Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, | 2367 0012 

Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 2320 9474 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, | 265 9930 
Chandigarh 160019 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 | 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western : Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri { 2821 8093 


(East), Mumbai 400093 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


