( Reaffirmed 2003 )

1s : lOD4 - 1983

Indian Standard
SPECIFlCATION FOR CASE, VANITY, MOULDED BODY
Travel
Chairman

Requisites Sectional Committee, CPDC 18
Representing

Da D. K. GHOSH
Members SI-IRI B. MAJUMDAR( Alternate

Khadi & Village Industries Commission, Bombay

to Tannery & Footwear Corporation of India Ltd, Calcutta Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals, New Delhi -Arts & Prints Private Ltd, Calcutta
Maharashtra Small Scale Industries Development Corporation Ltd, Bombay Prof KanPUr Moni Banerjee & Associates,

Dr D. K. Ghosh ) SHRI M. P. BAJPAI PROP MONI BANERJEE Sum A. T. BASAK SHR~DIPANKAR BASU
SHRI R. S. BHAT

CAPT A. C. BHATIA

CDR S. P. DUTT ( Alternate )

Naval Headquarters, New Delhi Bengal Waterproof Ltd, Calcutta
West Bengal Development State Leather Industries Corporation Ltd, Calcutta

SHRI B. S. BHATNA~AR SHRIB. DUTTA ( Alternate ) SHRI M. K. CHAKRABORTY

SHRI BIKAS KUMARDEY ( Alternate ) V. 1. P. Industries Ltd, Bombay SHRI P. CHAUDHURY SHRI A. S. ATHALYE ( Alternate ) Universal Luggage Manufacturing Co Pvt Ltd, SHRI SHASHI S. DASH Bombay SHRI E. KOTIAN ( Alternate ) The Premier Leather Crafts, Bombay SHRIC. A. FERENS SHRI J. C. FERENS ( Alternate ) Directorate General of Technical Development, SHRI R. S. GHOSH New Delhi Export ~Promotion Council for Finished Leather SHRI JANE ALAM & Leather Manufacturers, Kanpur Air-India, Bombay SHRI R. J. KANAL SHRI K. V. BHAT ( Alternate )

( Continued on page 2 ) @ Copyright 1984 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 10734 - 1983
( Continuedfrom page 1 ) Members SHRI NAVIN MALHOTRA Representing

Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ) Indian Airlines, New Delhi SHRIU. N. MENON SHRI M. S. MOHANTY Polytechnic, Rayagada ( Orissa ) SHRIB. P. DEBGOSWAMY ( Alternute ) National Engineering Industries Ltd, Calcutta DR R. PANDA SHRIG. S. LAKHO~IA ( Alternate ) Centgidraeather Research Institute ( CSIR ), SHRIT. K. PARTHA~ARATHY SHRIK. RADHAKRISHNAN (Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) GP CAF-T K. RAJAN SHY V. P. CHIRAYA~H ( Alternate ) Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-&J_ C. M. RAMAKRISHNA MAJ R. M. SINGH ( Alternate) Jeewanlal ( 1929 ) Ltd, Calcutta SHRI D. H. SHAH SKI N. H. SHAH ( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( &-officio Member ) DR A. S. SETHI, Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs )

Secretary
SHRI J. P. MEHTA Deputy Director ( Consr Prods & Med Instrs ), IS1

2

IS:10734-1983

Indian Standard
SPECIFICATION FOR CASE, VANITY, MOULDED BODY
0. FOREWORD
0.1

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 24 October 1983, after the draft finaIized by the Travel Requisites Sectional Committee had been approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division Council. 0.2 Moulded body vanity cases are commonly used by ladies for carrying make-up materials and jewellary during travel.

0.3 This standard contains clauses which call for agreement between the purcharer and the manufacturer, and which permit the purchaser to use his option for selection to suit his requirements. The relevant clauses are 3.1.1, 4.1 [ Table 1, Sl No. (xvi)] 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.8, 5.10, 5.15, 7.1, 9.1 and 9.1.1. 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers requirements 2. NOMENCLATURE 2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the nomenclature as indicated in Fig. 1 shall apply. 3. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 3.1 The vanity case shall be manufactured shown in Fig. 2. to the shape and
dimensions

of moulded body vanity case.

for

various parts

*Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised ),

3

r

MIRROR

Al TACHMW41 ,-MIRROR NOLE BRACKET

L COtdBINhllr!~
I-.117AY MULT:SATc

OR L (?I`H .

LOCK

k4*,,

BODY

\-

FRAME

FIG. 1 NOMENLCATURE OF CASE, VANITY, MOULDEDBODY

All dimensions in millimetres.
FIG. 2 CASE, VANITY, MOULDED BODY, TYPICAL

3.15 The vanity case may also be manufactured to other shapes and dimensions in accordance with the manufacturcr'S patent or as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 4

IS:10734-1983 4. MATERIALS 4.1 Various components of the vanity case shall be made from the materials specified in Table 1. The materials not specifically designated shall be suitable for the purpose intended.
TABLE
SL

1 MATERIALS

FOR COMPONENTS MOULDED BODY MATERIAI. (3)

OF VANITY CASE, CONFORMINGTO (4) IS : 7328-1974" -

COMPONENT(S) (2) Main body and lid

No. (1) i) HDPE A&GRP/PP ii) Reinforcing frame Aluminium Shzlt metal iii) Lining material Ra;g;atin SilkoYcloth Coy& gaberdine lining alloy

Designation 63400 of IS : 733-1975t IS : 513-1973f IS : 2136-1974s IS : 1687-196011 IS : 1423-1973q IS : 3840-1979,' alloy -

Linigleather iv) v) vi) vii) Lock Channel Handle Trays and trayholding brackets Steel/brass/zinc-aluminium Azzeprn

aIloy/steel/brass/ABS,

HDPE/ABS/PVC/GRP/PP Polystyrene ABy/GRP/acrylic/SAN IS : 2267-1972tt -

viii)

Spacers? covers and packmgs

HDPE/PP/LDPE/polystyrene

*Specification for high density polyethylene materials for moulding and extrusion. tspecification for wrought aluminium and aluminium alloy bars, rods and sections ( for general engineering purposes ) (second revision ). $Specification for cold rolled carbon steel sheets ( second revision ). SSpecification for rayon satin lining cloth (first revision ). 11 Specification for handloom silk KORA ( loomstate ) cloth. TSpecification for cotton gaberdine ( jirst revision). **Specification for lining leather (first revision ). ttSpeci6cation for polystyrene moulding materials (firstrevision ). ( Continued )

IS : 10734 - 1983
TABLE 1 MATERIALS FOR COMPONENTS OF VANITY CASE, MOULDED BODY - Contd
SL No. (1) COMPONENT(S) (2) MATERIAL (3) Minimum 0'7 mm thick CONIWRMING TO (4)

ix)

Handle bracket

IS : 513-1973* IS : 513-1973' IS : 513-1973* IS : 343&I-1977t -

sheet metal ZincoBlloy X) Outer clamp Minimum 0.7 mm thick sheet metal or ABS Minimum 0.7 mm thick sheet metal Aluminium ( solid or semitubular ) Miid steel Mild steel/plastics Silvered glass mirror Clear PVC, fabric foam or moulded plastics, with shee rivets, or any other suitable arrangement as agreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer Rayon/silk/cotton, lining of clear PVC with

xi) xii) xiii) xiv) xv) xvi)

Hinges Rivets Screws Washers Mirror Mirror attachment

xvii)

Pouch

HDPE LDPE ABS PP GRP PVC SAN *Specification tspecification

- High density polyethylene - Low density polyethylene - Acrybnitrile butadiene styrene - Polypropylene - Glass reinforced plastics - Polyvinyl chloride - Styrene acrylonitrile for cold rolled carbon steel sheets ( second revision ). for siivered glass mirrors for general purposes (first revision ).

5. MANUFACTURE,

WORKMANSHIP

AND FINISH

5.1 The vanity case shall be sound

in construction and shall be neatly finished on edges. The outside surface shall have texturized finish. 5.2 The body and the lid of the vanity case shall be reinforced with aluminium alloy frame or sheet metal frame. The body and the lid shall be fastened together by means of hinges and fasteners.

IS : 10734 - 1983 5.3 The handle of the vanity case shall be of moulded material specified in Table 1 and shall be reinforced with steel wire or steel strip, if necessary. The two ends of the handle shall be secured to the vanity case suitably as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. A minimum gap of 35 mm in actual use shall be provided to give a comfortable grip. In the case of spring-back handles, the minimum clearance at the centre shall be 10 mm, and on lifting, the clearance at the centre shall be minimum 35 mm. Inside length of all types of handles shall be not less than 85 mm. 5.4 The vanity case shall be equipped with minimum two locks, which shall be firmly secured to the front of the vanity case. The type, design and mode of securing the locks to the vanity case may be as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 5.5 If required by the purchaser, ~a combination lock or a multisafe lock shall be fitted at the centre, or both the end locks shall have a multisafe arrangement. These locks shall have positive function for additional safety. 5.6 The outer and central PVC strips,if provided, shall be properly in the recess of reinforcing frames by means of adhesive. fitted

5.7 The inner side of the vanity case shall be neatly finished and lined with lining material specified in Table 1. However, the inner side of the vanity case may not be lined if it is provided with a fully or partially engraved design. 5.8 The top half portion of the vanity case shall have mirror fitted to the inside of the lid. The size of the mirror shall be 150 X 100 mm or asagreed to between the purchaser and the manufacturer. 5.9 The inside detachable trays shall be manufactured from the material specified in Table 1 and shall be placed on the tray-holding brackets. 5.10 The inside pocket and hinge flap shall be of the lining material specified in Table 1 and shall be fitted to the vanity case properly with self-tapping screws or by riveting or any other suitable arrangement as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. 5.11 Four lugs shall be provided at the bottom of the vanity case so that the case rests firmly when placed on the ground without any visible roc&g. The rocking shall be not more than 0'75 mm. 5.12 When the lid of the vanity case is open and the mirror position, the vanity case shall not topple or overturn. 7 is in its

IS:10734-1983 5.13 All steel components shall be electroplated chromium over nickel so that the coating conforms to Service Grade No. 2 of IS : 1068-1968* or given a nickel or zinc plating. As a guide, all the front components ( lock cover, channel, handle bracket, lock flap, handle lugs > may have chromium over nickel plating. Remaining external components ( rivets, hooks, hinges, fasteners ) may have nickel or zinc plating. 5.14 The vanity case shall be free from visual defects like flow lines, poor colour dispersion, black and white spots, embedded foreign matter, waviness, sink marks, deformed or broken lugs, etc. 5.15 In respect of appearance, general workmanship and finish, the vanity case shall conform to the sample previously approved by the purchaser. 6. TESTS 6.1 Performance Test - The vanity case shall be opened and closed for 100 times in normal way ( without locking ). There shall not be any obstruction in this process. ( After opening and closing for 100 times, the vanity case shall open and close smoothly in further use. The lid shall not open out from closed position if the vanity case is held by sides with bottom side up. 6.2 Performance Test for Locks and Latches - The locks and latches shall be~opened and closed with key for 1 000 iimes. After operating for 1 000 times, they shall not show any sign of malfunctioning. 6.3 Drop Test - The vanity case shall be locked with key and then dropped from a height af 1 m, on a normal concrete or tiled floor or on steel plate having a minimum thickness of 4'5 mm with a total mass of 6 kg on (a) rear side, (b) top and bottom sides, and (c) front side of the top and bottom shells. The mirror shall be detached before testing and the same vanity case shall be used for all these drops. The vanity case after these drops shall be examined. The shell and the frame shall not show any cracks and the lock shall not open out.
NOTE - For the test, the vanity case may not be locked or multisafe lock, if provided for additional safety. with combination lock

6.4 Creep Test - The handle of the vanity case shall be tested for tendency to come out of the fittings due to creep. For this, the vanity case shall be hung by handle under static conditions for 200 hours with a total mass of 6 kg. The handle shall not come out of its fittings. *Specificationfor electroplated coatings of nickel and chromium
(first revision ). on iron gpd steel

IS:10734-

1983

6.5 Fatigue Test - The vanity case with a total mass of 6 kg shall be allowed to vibrate vertically with the h:lp of the handle with an ampli-

tude of 20 mm for 4 000 times. The handle of the vanity case shall not come out during or after the test. The vanity case with all components shall remain in good shape. 6.6 Colour Fastness Test - A panel shall be cut from the vanity case and subjected to xenon arc fadeometer test for 50 hours. After this test the panel shall be examined with reference to a referee sample. The colour of the outside surfzze of the sample piece shall not show any sign of decoloration. 6.7 Test for Protective Coating of Metal Components - Plated steel components shall satisfy the requirements of acetic acid salt spray test as given in IS : 6910-1973*. 6.7.1 Alternatively, the plated components shall be dipped in a solution of mineral spirit to remove the surface film or grease,wiped dry and immersed in a boiling IO-percent (m/v) solution of sodium chloride, for 15 minutes. The specimens shall be removed from the solution and immediately placed in a similar solution at room temperature for 24 hours. They shall then be examined. There shall be no sign of rusting on the plated surface. 6.8 Test for Tilting Arrangement of Mirror - The tilting arrangement for fixing of the mirror, if provided, shall be tested for 500 times after fitting the mirror in its position. The tilting arrangement shall not show any sign of malfunctioning or breakage during or after the test. 7. SAMPLING
7.1 Sampling AND INSPECTION

procedure and acceptance criteria for the moulded body vanity cases shall be as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier. A recommended scheme for the same is given in Appendix A. 8. MARKING 8.1 Each vanity case shall be legibly marked with the following: a) Manufacturer's name, initials or registered trade-mark; b) Dimensions; and c) Batch number and/or date of manufacture. 8.1.1 The dimensions of the vanity case if not marked itself may be given on a tag attached to it.
*Method of testing corrosion resistance coatings by acetic acid salt spray test. of electroplated

on the case
aluminium

and anodized

9

IS : 10734 - 1983 8.1.2 Each vanity case may also be marked

with the IS1 Certification

Mark.
NOTE - The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certfication Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well-defitred system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that standard as further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a Iicence for the use of the IS1 Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.

9. PACKING

liners, placed at the bottom of the tray and held with three rubber bands tightly. Each vanity case shall be put in a polyethylene bag and properly sealed. The sealed cases shall then be packed individually in decorative cartons. These shall be further packed in corrugated cartons as agreed to between the purchaser and the supplier to ensure easy and safe transportation. The corrugated cartons shall be sealed with plastic reinforcement gum tape and finally sealed with polypropylene strappins.
9.1.1 The vanity cases purchaser and the supplier.

9.1 The mirror shall be packed in corrugated

may also be packed as agreed to between the

APPENDIX ( Clause 7.1 )
SAMPLING A-l. LOT

A
FOR

SCHEME AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY MOULDED BODY VANITY CASE

A-l.1 In any consignment, the vanity cases of the Same size, manufactured from the same raw material under similar conditions shall be grouped together to constitute a lot.

A-2. SAMPLING the conformity of a lot to the requirements of this standard, samples of vanity cases shall be selected and tested separately from each lot. A-2.2 The number of vanity cases to be selected at random from a lot shall depend upon the size of the lot and shall be in accordance with co1 2 of Table 2. 10
A-2.1 For ascertaining

as : lOV34 - 1963
TABLE 2 SAMPLE SIZE AND CRITERIA FOR CONFQRMITY ( Clauses A-2.2, A-3.1 and A-3.2 )
LOT SIZE SAMPLE SIZE ACCEPTANCE NUMBER SUB-SAMPLESIZE

(1) `ik" :o" zi 51 to 100
to

(2) 5' 8 32

(3) : I 3

(4) 1 : 2 3 3

151 to 300 301 and above

li

no

A-2.3 The vanity cases in the sample shall be selected at random from the lot, and in order to ensure randomness of selection, IS : 49051968* may be used. A-3. NUMBER OF TESTS AND CRITERIA FOR CONFORMITY A-3.1 The vanity cases selected according to co1 2 of Table 2 shall be inspected for shape and dimensions (see 3), and manufacture, workmanship and finish (see 5). A vanity case failing in any one or more of the requirements shall be considered as defective. The lot shall be considered as conforming to these requirements if the number of defective vanity cases in the sample does not exceed the number given in co1 3 of Table 2. A-3.2 The lot having been found conforming to the requirements of 3 and 5 as in A-3.1 shall be subjected to the tests laid down in 6.1 to 6.6, For this purpose, a sub-sample of size given in co1 4 of Table 2 shal.1 be taken from the vanity cases selected for the purpose of A-3.1. The lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of these tests if all the vanity cases in the sub-sample pass. A-3.3 The lot having been found conforming to the requirements of 6.1 to 6.6 as in A-3.2, tests for protective coating of metal components (see 6.7) and tilting arrangement of mirror (see 6.8) shall be carried out on one vanity case if the number of vanity cases in the lot is up to 50 and on two if the number of vanity cases in the lot is more than 50. If the results of these tests are satisfactory, the lot shall be considered as conforming to the requirements of this standard.

*Methods

for random sampling.

11

