: (Reaffirmed 2021) 
Indian Standard 


Magnetic Materials — Methods of 
Measurement of the Magnetic 
Properties of Fe-Based Amorphous 
Strip by Means of a Single Sheet 
Tester 


ICS 77.140.40 


© BIS 2016 


ada AM SRT 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WS, 9 aage WHC Art, we feeei-110002 
Vee” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2016 Price Group 5 


Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee, MTD 4 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Wrought 
Steel Products Sectional Committee and has been approved by Metallurgical Division Council. 


After appropriate heat treatment, the strip exhibits quite a lower value of specific total loss in comparison to 
grain-oriented electrical steel strip. It is associated with low hysteresis loss due to low magnetic anisotropy and 
low eddy current loss due to a high resistivity and a thin thickness. However, it may deteriorate significantly by 
applying stress on the strip due to high magnetostriction and low magnetic anisotropy of the material. 


The strip is usually supplied without any insulating coating. Consequently, an effect of inter-laminar eddy-current 
loss may increase the specific total loss values when the strip is laminated tightly into toroidal cores. Moreover, 
even if construction stresses induced by bending the strip into toroidal core could be removed by heat treatments, 
a small change in the diameter of test specimen cases unexpected stress in the material and then deteriorated 
magnetic properties may be obtained. 


Therefore, methods of measurement of the magnetic properties of Fe-based amorphous strip by means ofa single 
sheet tester are required. 


Several attentions are necessary for the single sheet tester. Insignificant stress applied on the material could cause 
deterioration of magnetic properties of the material. Effects of the flux closure yoke, an introducing on stress into 
the material by a weight of upper yoke could be severe for the material. Therefore, a vertical single yoke is 
suitable to prevent the effects caused by an upper yoke. Moreover, deformation of the test specimen near the pole 
faces may introduce stress into the material. The H coil method is essential to avoid detecting the deteriorated 
properties of the test specimen beneath the pole faces. The material has lower magnetic anisotropy due to lack of 
crystalline anisotropy and its permeability is quite high, so the single sheet tester is recommended to be equipped 
a magnetic shield to prevent unexpected magnetization by the geomagnetic field. 


Thin thickness, higher permeability and low total loss of the Fe-based amorphous strip bring weak output signals 
from the secondary coil, the H coil and the shunt resister to measure the magnetizing current of the SST apparatus. 
These signals shall be amplitude using low noise pre-amplifiers before the data acquisition devices. The digital 
sampling method is recommended to measure these weak signals. Observations of hysteresis loops are necessary 
to check the quality of measurements. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16586 : 2016 


Indian Standard 


MAGNETIC MATERIALS — METHODS OF 
MEASUREMENT OF THE MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF 
Fe-BASED AMORPHOUS STRIP BY MEANS OFA 
SINGLE SHEET TESTER 


1 SCOPE 


This standard specifies methods for the measurement 
of a.c. magnetic properties of Fe-based amorphous 
strips at frequencies up to 400 Hz. 


The object of this part is to define the general principles 
and the technical details of the measurement of the 
magnetic properties of Fe-based amorphous strips by 
means of a single sheet tester. 


The single sheet tester is applicable to test specimens 
obtained from Fe-based amorphous strips of any 
quality. The a.c. magnetic characteristics are determined 
for a sinusoidal induced voltage, for specified peak 
values of magnetic polarization and for a specified 
frequency. 


The measurements are made at an ambient temperature 
of 27 + 5°C on test specimens which have first been 
demagnetized. 


NOTES 


1 Fe-based amorphous strip is much thinner and its specific 
total loss is much lower than electrical steel strips. So 
specifications of the single sheet tester are different from those 
for electrical steel sheets in accordance with IEC 60404-3 (1). 


2 This standard can cover other materials which have similar 
magnetic properties and physical characteristics as Fe-based 
amorphous materials, such as nano-crystalline soft magnetic 
materials. 


3 Throughout this standard the term ‘magnetic polarization’ is 
used as described in IEC 60050-121. In some standards of the 
60404 series, the term “magnetic flux density” is used. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No./International Title 
Standards 


1885 (various parts) Electrotechnical vocabulary 
13795 (Part 1): 1993 Glossary of terms relating to 


IS No./International Title 
Standards 


special alloys: Part 1 Soft 
magnetic materials 


16585 : 2016 Magnetic materials — 
Specification for individual 
materials —  Fe-based 


amorphous strip delivered in 

the semi-processed state 

International Electrotechnical 

Vocabulary — Part 121: 

Electromagnetism. 

International Electrotechnical 

Vocabulary — Part 221: 

Magnetic materials and 

components. 

IEC 60404-3(1): 1992 Magnetic materials — Part 3: 
Methods of measurement of 
the magnetic properties of 
magnetic sheet and strip by 
means of a single sheet tester 


IEC 60050-121: 1998 


IEC 60050-221: 1990 


3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard, the terms and 
definitions relating to magnetic properties given in 
IS 13795 (Part 1), IS 1885 (Various parts), IEC 60050- 
121 and IEC 60050-221 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


4.1 Principle of the Method 
This method adopts the H coil method. 


Any other International standards/methods are also 
applicable when the supplier and the purchaser agree. 


The test specimen comprises a sample of Fe-based 
amorphous strip and is placed inside the following two 
windings: 
a) An exterior primary winding ( magnetizing 
winding); and 
b) An interior secondary winding (voltage 
winding). 


An H coil, that detects the strength of magnetic field 
where the test specimen is enclosed, is placed under 
surface of the test specimen. 


IS 16586 : 2016 


Windings 


Yoke 


Test specimen 


Fic. 1 DIAGRAM OF THE TEST APPARATUS 


The flux closure is made by a magnetic circuit 
consisting of a single vertical yoke, the cross-section 
of which is very large compared with that of the test 
specimen (see Fig. 1). 


The digital sampling method is recommended to 
measure the a.c. magnetic properties of the materials. 
The apparatus and the windings shall be connected as 
shown in Fig. 2. 


The following signals should be measured as time 
functional data, which can represent waveform of 
magnetic flux, magnetic field strength and magnetizing 
current: 


a) Voltage induced in the secondary winding; 


b) Voltage induced in the H coil; and 


c) Voltage across a non-inductive precision 
resistor in series with the primary winding. 


Synchronizing signal 


Arbitrary 
waveform 
generator 


Power 
amplifier 


Power supply 


Key Components 


M — mutual inductor for air flux compensation 
N, — secondary winding 

R — non-inductive precision resistor 

u, — voltage induced in H coil 


NOTES 


1 Because of smaller cross-section of the test specimen, lower 
loss properties and higher permeability of the Fe-base 
amorphous strip than electrical steel sheets, the power loss in 
yoke cannot be neglected in comparison to the loss in the test 
specimen. Therefore the magnetizing current method, which 
adopted in the single sheet tester for electrical steel sheets in 
accordance with IEC 60404-3(1), results much higher values 
of the specific total loss than those of the H coil method. 


2 The magnetizing current method based on the wattmeter 
method that measured total power consumed in the magnetic 
circuit as vector products of the magnetizing current and the 
secondary voltage, would be disadvantageous because the 
influence of the yokes is the more significant due to the thinner 
and magnetically softer sample. 


3 Addition of an upper yoke can effect to deteriorate the 
magnetic properties of Fe-based amorphous strip. The upper 
yoke apply pressure on the test specimen, and as a result, stresses 
are introduced in the material. Moreover, large magnetostriction 
of Fe-based amorphous material causes compressive stress in 
the material if both end of the test specimen was clamped by 
the pole faces of the yokes. These effects are considered larger 


Digital feedback signal 


Multi 
channel 
preamplifier 
Idigitizer 


Digital 
signal 
calculator 


Measuring apparatus 


N, — primary winding 

H — Hcooil 

u, — voltage induced in secondary winding 

u, — voltage drop across the non-inductive 


precision resistor R, 


Fic. 2 CIRCUIT FOR THE DIGITAL SAMPLING METHOD 


than loss increase by planer eddy currents in the test specimen 
on the pole faces of the lower yoke. 


4 The voltage induced in the H coil is weak and have not enough 
signal-to-noise quality to input a wattmeter directly. So, it is 
difficult to measure the specific total loss of the test specimen 
using the A-V-W meter method with sufficient reproducibility 
required in this standard. The digital sampling method can 
overcome the difficulties and is now common to the 
measurement of magnetic properties. 


4.2 Test Specimen 


The test specimen shall be sampled in accordance with 
the product standard IS 16585. 


The length of the test specimen shall be no less than 
280 mm that is outside dimension of the distance over 
the pole faces of the yokes. Although the part of the 
specimen situated outside the pole faces has no great 
influence on the measurement, this part shall not be 
longer than is necessary to facilitate insertion and 
removal of the test specimen. 


The test specimen shall be with as-cast edge and cut in 
length from Fe-based amorphous strip without the 
formation of excessive burrs or mechanical distortion. 
The test specimen shall be plane and rectangular. 


The test specimen shall be heat treated in a d.c. magnetic 
field directed parallel to the casting direction according 
to the instructions of the manufacturer. The test 
specimen shall be flat during the heat treatment. 


Care shall be taken in handling of the test specimen 
after the heat treatment to avoid rising fragments of 
the strip or creating mechanical stresses in the test 
specimen, because Fe-based amorphous strip is usually 
brittle after the heat treatment. 


When supplier and purchaser agree to apply any other 
International standards/methods, the length, width of 
the test specimen and the number of stacks and 
specimens shall be determined by agreement between 
parties when ordering. 


NOTE — Nominal widths of Fe-based amorphous strip are 
142.2 mm, 170.2 mm and 213.4 mm. 


4.3 Test Apparatus 
4.3.1 General 


The test apparatus comprises windings and yokes (see 
Fig. 1). 


A mutual inductor for air flux compensation and a non- 
inductive precision resistor for current measurement 
are included with the single sheet tester (see Fig. 2). 


Care shall be taken to ensure that temperature changes 
are kept below a level likely to produce stress in the 
test specimen due to thermal expansion or contraction. 


IS 16586 : 2016 


4.3.2 Yoke 


The yoke is in the form of a letter U made up of soft 
ferrite. It shall have a low residual magnetization, a 
low reluctance and a low specific total loss. 


The yoke shall have pole faces having a width of 20 + 
1 mm. The two pole faces of each yoke shall be as flat 
as possible and coplanar to within 0.1 mm. Also, the 
yoke shall be rigid in order to avoid creating mechanical 
stresses in the test specimen. 


The height of each yoke shall be between 80 mm and 
120 mm. Each yoke shall have a width of 220 + 1 mm 
and an inside length of 240 + 1 mm (see Fig. 3). 


When the supplier and the purchaser agree to apply 
any other International standards/methods, other yoke 
dimensions can be used by agreement between parties 
when ordering. 


There shall be a specimen support, which made of non- 
conductive and non-magnetic materials, between the 
vertical limbs of the yokes. This surface support, on 
which the test specimen is supported, shall be in the 
same plane with the pole faces so that the test specimen 
can contact the pole faces with minimum air gaps. 


NOTES 


1 Higher residual magnetization of yokes cause higher d.c. bias 
of magnetization of the test specimen. 


2 The yoke can be made of insulated sheets of grain oriented 
electrical steel or nickel iron alloy instead of soft ferrites 
provided that the compatibility of the results can be 
demonstrated. 


3 Values of magnetizing current measured by the single sheet 
tester include effects of reluctances of yokes, conventional 
magnetic path length and air gaps between the pole faces of 
yokes and the test specimen. Therefore, the magnetic field 
strength and the specific apparent power calculated by the 
values of magnetizing current with the conventional magnetic 
path length are fairly larger than the value measured by the H 
coil method. 


4 Other yoke dimensions can be used provided that the 
comparability of the results can be demonstrated. 

5 In the case that the magnetizing current method is adopted, 
values of total loss are measured including power losses in 
yokes. The power loss in the yoke at magnetic flux of each 
measurement conditions can be measured by making a magnetic 
closure circuit using an upper yoke that is the same with the 
lower yoke, and using primary and secondary windings wound 
on the yokes. 25 turns are sufficient for each of these windings. 
6 If there are steps between the surface of the test support plane 
and the pole faces, deteriorated magnetic properties are 
measured. 


4.3.3 Windings 


The primary winding shall be at least 230 mm in length. 
The secondary winding shall be between 100 mm and 
120 mm in length and centred in the primary winding. 
The primary and secondary windings shall be wound 
on a non-conducting, non-magnetic, rectangular former. 


IS 16586 : 2016 


20 mm 
ee i 
t 
220 mm < 0,1 mm 
240 mm A 


80 mm - 120 mm 


20 mm 


Fic. 3 YOKE DIMENSIONS 


The dimensions of the former shall be as follows: 


a) Length for winding — 235 mm + 5mm 


b) Internal width — 220 mm +3 mm and 
no negative tolerance 

c) Internal height — 3mm+1mm 

d) External height — <12mm 


The primary winding can be made up of a single 
continuous and uniform winding taking up the whole 
length. One example of the winding can be made up of 
220 turns of copper wire | mm in diameter taking up 
the whole length, wound in one or more layers. 


The number of turns on the secondary winding depends 
on the characteristics of the measuring instruments. 


The H coil shall be the same length with the secondary 
winding and centred in the primary winding. The H 
coil shall be wound on a non-conducting, non-magnetic 
and rectangular plate. The width of the plate shall be 
100 mm to 120 mm and the height of the plate shall be 
not larger than 3 mm. 


The H coil shall be embedded in the specimen support 
plate and the distance between the surface of the support 
plate and the surface of the H coil shall be as small as 
possible, not larger than 1 mm. 


When the supplier and the purchaser agree to apply 
any other International standards/methods, windings 
and the dimensions of the former shall be determined 
by agreement between parties when ordering. 


4.3.4 Air Flux Compensation 


Compensation shall be made for the effect of air flux 
on the secondary voltage at measurements of the peak 
values of magnetic polarization for set values of the 
peak values of magnetic field strength. This air flux 
compensation is not necessary at measurements of the 
specific total losses because the effect is negligible at 
low magnetic field strength. 


This can be achieved, for example, by a mutual inductor. 
The primary winding of the mutual inductor is 
connected in series with the primary winding of the 


test apparatus, while the secondary winding of the 
mutual inductor is connected to the secondary winding 
of the test apparatus in series opposition (see Fig. 2). 


The adjustment of the value of the mutual inductance 
shall be made so that, when passing an alternating 
current, corresponding to the maximum magnetic 
polarization for such as 80 A/m, through the primary 
windings in the absence of the specimen in the test 
apparatus, the voltage measured between the non- 
common terminals of the secondary windings shall be 
no more than 0.1 percent of the voltage appearing across 
the secondary winding of the test apparatus alone. 


Thus the average value of the rectified voltage induced 
in the combined secondary windings is proportional to 
the peak value of the magnetic polarization in the test 
specimen. 


Air flux compensation can be achieved, for example, 
by the numerical air flux compensation or by 
subtractions of the averaged rectified values of 
secondary voltage measured for the same peak value 
of magnetic field strength in the absence of the test 
specimen from the averaged rectified values of 
secondary voltage at the measurements. 


4.3.5 Non-Inductive Precision Resistor 


A non-inductive precision resistor of an accuracy of 
+0.1 percent or better shall be used to measure the 
magnetizing current. In order to minimize the distortion 
of the magnetic polarization waveform, the resistance 
value shall be as small as possible depending upon the 
characteristics of the measuring instruments; the 
recommended resistance value is to below 1 Ohm (Q). 


A four-terminal resistor of sufficient heat capacity is 
recommended and then the two current terminals shall 
be connected in series with the primary winding and 
two potential terminals shall be connected to an input 
channel of the measuring instrument (see Fig. 2). 


4.3.6 Magnetic Shield 


Fe-based amorphous material is nearly isotropic and 
its permeability is quite high, so the single sheet tester 


is recommended to be equipped a magnetic shield to 
prevent unexpected magnetization by the geomagnetic 
field, 


NOTE — Even, if the magnetic axis of the test apparatus settled 
at right angle the direction of geomagnetism, the geomagnetic 
field can magnetize the test specimen in a substantial degree at 
cross direction of the a.c. magnetization. 


4.4 Power Supply 
4.4.1 General 


The power supply shall consist of an arbitrary waveform 
generator and a power amplifier, or an instrument 
integrating both these functions (see Fig. 2). 


In addition, the waveform of the secondary voltage shall 
be maintained as sinusoidal as possible. It is preferable 
not only to maintain the form factor of the secondary 
voltage to within + 1 percent of 1.111 but also to 
suppress harmonic contents in the secondary voltage 
as small as possible. This can be achieved by various 
means, for example by using digital means described 
in Annex A. 


NOTE — The form factor of the waveform is the ratio of the 
r.m.s. value to the average rectified value. 


4.4.2 Arbitrary Waveform Generator 


The arbitrary waveform generator shall synthesize a 
signal of magnetizing waveform, amplitude and 
frequency data which are programmed externally, and 
shall convert the signal to voltage using a digital-to- 
analogue (D/A) convertor consecutively in coincidence 
with a readout clock to synchronize with the sampling 
clock of analogue-to-digital (A/D) convertors of the 
measuring apparatus (see Fig. 2). 


The D/A convertor shall have a sufficiently high 
resolution and the number of signal data in one 
magnetizing period should be sufficiently large. A low 
pass filter should be inserted between the arbitrary 
waveform generator and the power amplifier to reduce 
higher harmonics that can cause aliasing at digitising 
of measuring apparatus. 


In order to synchronize the arbitrary waveform 
generator and the digitizer, a common clock shall be 
used to synchronize the readout clock of the generator 
with the sampling clock of the digitizer. An arbitrary 
waveform generator with two-channel outputs using a 
common readout clock may be used; one output 
generates the magnetization signal to the power 
amplifier and the other output synchronizes the 
sampling clock of the digitizer (see Fig. 2). 


4.4.3 Power Amplifier 


The power amplifier shall be of low internal impedance 
and shall be highly stable in terms of voltage and 
frequency, being sufficiently low noise on the voltage. 


IS 16586 : 2016 


During the measurement, the voltage and frequency 
shall be maintained constant within + 0.2 percent. 


The power amplifier should be a bipolar type with low 
noise and wide ranges of frequency and voltage. 


NOTE — The output of the bipolar power amplifier can handle 
source and sink current as well as positive and negative voltage. 
It is suitable for an inductive load of low impedance. 


4.5 Measuring Apparatus 
4.5.1 General 


The measuring apparatus shall consist of a digitizer 
with at least three A/D convertors and a digital signal 
calculator, or an instrument integrating both these 
functions (see Fig. 2). 


In order to transform digital data, the digitizer shall be 
connected to the digital signal calculator by a data bus 
(see Fig. 2). 


4.5.2 Digitizer 


The digitizer shall be comprised of at least three 
independent signal channels of calibrated pre- 
amplifiers, sample-and-hold circuits (S/H) and 
calibrated A/D converters. The S/H shall work 
simultaneously with a sampling clock synchronized 
with the readout clock of the arbitrary waveform 
generator (see Fig. 2). 


NOTE — The digitizer can be a digital storage oscilloscope 
with required function. 


The single channels shall have sufficiently high input 
impedance and low input capacitance typically IMQ 
(Megaohm) in parallel with about 100 pF (picofarad) 
to avoid loading of the secondary winding. 


The phase shift difference among the channels shall be 
sufficiently small even at the lowest power factor. 


The A/D convertor shall have a sufficiently high 
resolution to reduce the digitizing error. 12-bit or larger 
resolution is recommended. 


The sampling clock shall be at a sufficiently high rate. 
The rate of samplings per one magnetization period is 
recommended not less than 512. 


The synchronous averaging of the signal over the 
several periods is effective to remove noise on the 
signal. 

NOTE — It is also convenient if the sampling number shall be 


equal to the power of 2 in terms of digital data processing such 
as the fast Fourier transform (FFT). 


4.5.3 Digital Signal Calculator 


The numerical data set of signals shall be transferred 
from the digitizer to the digital signal calculator and 
the magnetic properties shall be determined using the 
dataset. 


IS 16586 : 2016 


In order to maintain the waveform of the secondary 
voltage by using digital means described in Annex A, 
the digital signal calculator calculates the magnetizing 
waveform and its amplitude that can achieve the 
prescribed sinusoidal waveform and peak value of the 
secondary voltage and carries out the digital feedback 
signal to the signal generator (see Fig. 2). 

NOTE — The digital signal calculator can be a personal 


computer (PC) or a digital signal processor (DSP) that is 
composed of a sufficiently fast digital multiplier and adder. 


5 MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE 


5.1 Principle of Measurement 


The specific total loss of the test specimen is determined 
by calculating the area of the hysteresis loop composed 
of time-function waveform of the magnetic field 
strength, H(t) and the magnetic polarization, J(d). 


The data pair of signals, U,,(4) digitized from the voltage 
in the H coil and U,(¢) digitized from the voltage of the 
secondary coil represent the magnetic field strength, 
H(t), and the time derivative of magnetic polarization, 
dJ(t)/dt, respectively; both are functions of time, t. The 
date pairs sampled over one period of magnetization 
provide the complete information for one measurement. 


This data set enables to determine all magnetic 
properties required in this standard. 


5.2 Preparation of Measurement 


The length of the test specimen shall be measured with 
an accuracy of + 0.1 percent and its mass determined 
within + 0.1 percent. The test specimen shall be loaded 
and centred on the longitudinal and transverse axes of 
the windings. 


The cross-sectional area, A , of the test specimen shall 
be calculated using the following formula: 


m 


= ...(1) 
IP mn 
A = cross-section area of the test specimen, 
expressed, in square metre (m°); 
m = mass of the test specimen, expressed, in 
kilogram (kg); 
l = length of the test specimen, expressed, in 


metre (m); and 
Pm = density of the test material, expressed, in 
kilogram per cubic metre (kg/m*). 
Before measurement, the test specimen shall be 
demagnetized from well above the value of magnetic 
field strength to be measured at by slowly decreasing 
the corresponding magnitude of the magnetizing current 
to zero. 


5.3 Adjustment of Power Supply 


In practice, single or groups of peak values of magnetic 
polarization, J, and magnetic field strength, Å, are 
set ata specified frequency. 


For the measurements of the specific total loss, the 
specific apparent power, r.m.s. value of magnetic field 
strength and the peak value of the magnetic field 
strength, J shall be set by adjusting power supply. 


For the measurement of the peak value of magnetic 
polarization, H shall be set. 


The output of the power supply shall be slowly 
increased until J or H has reached the desired value. 
The output of the power supply shall not decrease 
during the measurement. 


The data set of U,, (i) and U, (i) shall be measured 
over one or several periods of magnetization by the 
digitizer and calculated by the digital signal calculator. 


The wave form of the secondary voltage, dJ(t)/dz, 
should be checked to ensure that only the fundamental 
component is present. 


The shape of the hysteresis loop of J(t) and H(#) shall 
be checked to ensure that a symmetrical loop is 
presented. 


6 DETERMINATION OF CHARACTERISTICS 


6.1 General 


All the required magnetic properties shall be 
determined through numerical calculations using the 
data set of U,, (i) and U, (i) . 


6.2 Determination of the Magnetic Polarization 


The magnetic polarization at the time t, J(£), shall be 
calculated from the following equation: 


t 
1 
IO aa [eee 2) 


J(t) = magnetic polarization at a time ¢, in tesla (T); 
N, = number of turns of the secondary winding; 
A = cross-sectional area of the test specimen, in 
square metre (m°); 
a, = combined amplitude of the instruments in the 
secondary circuit; 
U(t) = secondary voltage at a time ¢, in volt (V); 
and 
K = constant such that the time average of B(d) 
is zero. 


6.3 Determination of the Magnetic Field Strength 


The magnetic field strength at the time ¢, H(£) shall be 
calculated from the following equation: 


H(t) -fu (jdt+A 68) 
Ho (N H Ay) a 
where 
H(t) = magnetic field strength at a time ¢, in ampere 


per metre (A/m); 

(N,4y)= area-turns of the H coil, expressed, in square 
metre (m’); 

Oy = combined amplitude of the instruments in the 
H coil circuit; 


U,(4) = secondary voltage at a time ¢, in volt (V); 
and 

A = constant such that the time average of H(t) 
is zero. 


The area-turns of H coil can be determined in a uniform 
field using a solenoid coil of enough diameters and 
length to obtain uniform field over the volume of the H 
coil before installing the H coil into the former. After 
the H coil was installed in the former, the area-turns of 
H coil may be determined in comparison of the peak 
values of magnetic field strength obtained by the H 
coil method and the magnetizing current method or a 
separated H coil, placed in the centre of the windings, 
which should be calibrated before in a uniform field. 
The peak value of magnetic field strength by the 
magnetizing method is calculated by the following 
equation: 


> N 
H= LR” ..(4) 


H = peak value of magnetic field strength, H(d), 
in ampere per metre (A/m); 


N, = number of turns of the primary winding; 

la = conventional effective magnetic path length, 
in metre (m); /,, = 0.24 m; 

R = value of the resistance of the non-inductive 


precision resistor in series with the primary 
winding to determine the magnetizing 
current, in ohm (Q); 

U, = peak value of voltage, U (£, developed 
across the non-inductive precision resistor 
R in series with the magnetizing winding, in 
volt (V). 

6.4 Determination of the Specific Total Loss 


The specific total loss, P,, corresponds to the area of 
the hysteresis loop composed of J(f) and H(A). 


IS 16586 : 2016 


Thus, the specific total loss P, of the test specimen 
shall be calculated in accordance with the following 
equation: 


T 
-2 YOy, f 
J HAS Va EF [ON (1)de 
(5) 


P, = specific total loss of the test specimen, in 
watt per kilogram (W/kg); 


Pm = conventional density of the test material, in 
kilograms per cubic metre (kg/m°); 
= frequency, in hertz (Hz); 


f 

T = period where T= 1/f in second (s); 
N, = number of turns of the secondary winding; 
A 


= cross-sectional area of the test specimen, in 
square metre (m°); 
A(t) = magnetic field strength at time t, in ampere 
per metre (A/m); 
J(t) = magnetic polarization at a time £, in tesla (T); 
and 


U,(t) = secondary voltage at time ¢, in volt (V). 


6.5 Determination of the Specific Apparent Power 


The specific apparent power, S, of the test specimen 
corresponds to the product of the r.m.s. value of the 
magnetic field strength and the r.m.s. value of magnetic 
polarization. 


The specific apparent power S, shall be calculated as 
follows: 


Dona 
S,=—H-J ...(6) 
Pm 
where 
S, = specific apparent power of the test specimen, 
expressed, in volt ampers per kilogram 


(VA/kg); 


Pm = conventional density of the test material, in 
kilogram per cubic metres (kg/m°); 


H = rms. value of magnetic field strength, H(t), 
in ampere per metre (A/m); and 
J = rms. value of magnetic polarization, J(t), 


in tesla (T). 
7 REPRODUCIBILITY 


The reproducibility of the results obtained from the 
procedures described in this clause depends essentially 
upon the accuracy of the instruments used for the 
measurement and careful attention to the physical 
details of the test equipment. 


IS 16586 : 2016 


The reproducibility of the specified total loss 
measurement is characterized by a relative standard 
deviation of 2 percent for measurement on Fe-based 
amorphous strip at magnetic polarization up to 1.3 T. 
For measurements at higher magnetic polarizations, it 
is expected that the relative standard deviation will be 
increased. 


The reproducibility of the peak value of magnetic 
polarization measurement is characterized by a standard 
deviation of the order of 1 percent. 


The reproducibility of the specific apparent power 
measurement is characterized by a standard deviation 
of 6 percent. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.4.1) 
SINUSOIDAL WAVEFORM CONTROL BY DIGITAL MEANS 


A-1 GENERAL 


For the determination of the specific total loss and the 
specific apparent power, the waveform of the magnetic 
polarization should be generally maintained sinusoidal 
with a form factor of 1.111 + 1 percent. The form factor 
of the waveform is the ratio of the r.m.s. value to the 
average rectified value. 


The prescribed sinusoidal waveform, frequency and 
amplitude of the magnetic polarization may be difficult 
to achieve by means of conventional analogue feedback 
techniques at higher magnetic polarizations. 
Instabilities and auto-oscillations are, in fact, likely to 
occur when the magnetic polarization is increased. The 
digital feedback method [5, 6] is expected to be immune 
from auto-oscillatory effects. 


In a possible realization of this method, it is assumed 
that the time functions J(4) and H(¢) form a parametric 
representation of the hysteresis loop J(#). Under this 
assumption, a certain time dependence of the current 
in the primary circuit [that is H(2)] automatically defines 
the J(4) function. 


An arbitrary signal generator controlled by computer 
is employed to provide the required H(¢) function. An 
iterative procedure is devised, where at each ith step 
the dynamic J(H) relationship is refreshed by the actual 
J(t) and H(t) functions and is used to calculate the 
function H;,,(¢) at the (i+1) th step. The iteration can 
be stopped once the prescribed form factor value of 
the magnetic polarization is attained. 


The so-calculated H,,,,(¢) function should be translated 
into a voltage function U,,,(4), to be fed into the arbitrary 
signal generator at (i+1 )th step. U;,.,() can be calculated 
from the following equation, neglecting spurious 
capacitance effects: 


Ui. O= 


a U, O+ UOU O -0 


dJ or (t) 
U, (OWENA (8) 
dH; (t) 
U (=u, N,4A, B a (9) 
UR ...(10) 
where 


U,,, ( = voltage to be fed into the arbitrary signal 
generator at (7+ 1)th step, a time function, 
expressed in volt (V); 


N, = total number of turns of the primary 
winding; 

G = gain of the power amplifier; 

N, = total number of turns of the secondary 
winding; 


U, (£ = induced voltage of the magnetic 
polarization of the test specimen in the 
secondary winding, a time function, 
expressed in volt (V); 


Uir (£) = additional inductive voltage developed by 
the effect of air flux across the 
magnetizing winding, a time function, 
expressed in volt (V); 

U(f) = resistive voltage developed in the 
magnetizing circuit, a time function, 
expressed, in volt (V); 

G = cross-sectional area of the test specimen, 
expressed, in square metre (m7); 


J (f) = set sinusoidal signal of the magnetic 
polarization, a time function, expressed 
in tesla (T); 

H; (t) = magnetic field strength at i-th step, a time 
function, expressed, in ampere per metre 
(A/m); 


A, = effective cross-sectional area of the 
magnetizing winding, expressed, in 
square metres (m) 


Uo = magnetic constant; 4m x 10-7 henrys per 
metre (H/m); 

T = number 3.141 592 6... ; 

R, = total series resistance of the primary 
circuit, expressed in ohms (Q); and 

L = primary current, expressed in amperes 
(A). 


An alternative method of signal control is possible. A 
voltage U,,, (£), to be fed into the arbitrary signal 
generator at (i+1) th step, can be calculated from 
equation (11) instead of equation (7). In this case, the 
voltage U;,,(¢) is calculated from the difference between 
the measured voltage induced in the second winding 
U,(t) and the target voltage induced in the second 
winding for the desired set point U (^) without setting a 
field strength function. 


Ni 


Un O= U O+K gy [UV O-0 0 -0D 


IS 16586 : 2016 


where 


U,,, (£)= voltage to be fed into the arbitrary signal 
generator at (i+1)th step, a time function, 
expressed, in volt (V); 

U, (t) = calculated voltage induced across the 
secondary winding when the set magnetic 
polarization has been achieved, a time 
function, expressed, in volt (V); 


U, (t) = voltage induced in the secondary winding, 
a time function, expressed, in volt (V); 


K = constant of negative-feedback; positive 
value below 1.0; and 


G = gain of the power amplifier. 


Because the signal control by digital means is the 
repetition of magnetization, acquisition of the signals, 
demagnetization, and waveform deformation, the total 
time for signal control becomes longer compared with 
the analogue case. In order to reduce the total control 
time, the special arbitrary signal generator can be 
switched synchronously between the two independent 
waveforms. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 04 (5283). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


