**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13335 (1992) : Muscovite mica scrap for mica paper [ETD 
2 : Solid Electrical Insulating Materials and Insulation 
Systems] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



m^cft^r ^T?T^ 



IS 13335 : 1992 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



Indian Standard 

MUSCOVITE MICA SCRAP FOR MICA PAPER — 

SPECIFICATION 



UDC 621-315-613-1 [ 666-658002-68 ] 



© BIS 1992 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

March 1992 Price Group 1 



Solid Electrical Insulating Materials Sectional Committee, ETD 02 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Solid Electrical Insulating Materials Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

Muscovite mica scrap finds large application along with crushed mica in the manufacture of mica paper 
for various applications. In the trade, sale and purchase of mica scrap, had been carried out for many 
years based on mutually agreed samples. Several varied practices are, therefore, followed in respect of 
agreeing to appearance and size of mica scrap. 

Unification of these practices, had been wanting for quite a some time in respect of the quantity of mica 
scrap. It is, therefore, felt necessary to specify the optimum acceptable characteristics of muscovite mica 
scrap. This standard is, therefore, being brought out to identify such of those requirements that are vital 
for the trade of mica scrap. 

Muscovite mica scrap finds large application in the manufacture of mica paper. This standard is being 
brought out keeping this application in view though other applications of scrap mica might exist, for which 
modified requirements may be necessary. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final 
values observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : I960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )'. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



IS 13335 : 1992 



Indian Standard 



MUSCOVITE MICA SCRAP FOR MICA PAPER - 

SPECIFICATION 



1 SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the physical require- 
ments of muscovite mica scrap including crushed 
mica used for the manufacture of mica paper. 

1.2 The requirements for mica flakes and mica 
powder are not covered in this standard. 

2 GENERAL PHYSICAL APPEARANCE 

Mica scrap shall be: 

a) Clean and dry; 

b) Free from organic or inorganic impurities 
such as rock, quartz, tourmatine, garnet, 
clay particles, metal oxides, paper, wood, 
fabrics, etc; 

c) Free from phlogopite, biotite and green 
muscovite mica ( Madras mica ); 

d) Clear or slightly stairried in colour; and 

e) Originating from one mine only or one 
limited group of mines in each consign- 
ment. 

3 SIZE 

The size of the muscovite mica scrap shall be 
such that it shall pass through a screen with 
75 mm X 75 mm opening and be retained on a 
screen with 25 mm X 25 mm opening. 



4 LENGTH 

The length of any individual piece in the mica 
screen shall not exceed 80 mm. 

5 THICKNESS 

The allowable thickness of mica scrap shall be 
between 1*5 mm to 3*0 mm. 

6 PACKAGING AND MARKING 

The mica scrap shall be packed in woven poly- 
ethylene bags and shall be distinctly marked with 
a means to identify the mines of origin, supplier 
and nett weight of the contents. Any further 
information that may be required, to be provided 
along with the package shall be subject to agree- 
ment between purchaser and supplier. 

7 CRITERIA FOR ACCEPTANCE 

A consignment of mica scrap shall be deemed to 
conform to this standard, if: 

a) At least 90 percent of the scrap by weight 
satisfies the requirements of size ( 3 ); 
and 

b) At least 85 percent of the scrap by weight 
satisfies the requirements of thickness ( 5 ) 
provided the remaining ( up to a maximum 
of 15 percent by weight ) shall be in the 
thickness range of 1*0 mm to 3-5 mm. 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been 
produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of 
inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated 
by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for con- 
formity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence 
for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be 
obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bi&/uof 



BdiiNu of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No pari of these publications may be reproduced in any 
form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Revision of Indian Standards 

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are 
issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the 
following reference; 

Doc: No ETD2(2308) 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 
Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



^ 



h 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 ( Common to all Offices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manan Bhavan, 9 Bhadur Shah Zafar Marg p^l 01 31 

NEW DELHI 110002 \331 13 75 

Eastern : 1/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. L P. Road, Maniktola 87 86 62 

CALCUTTA 700054 

Northern t SCO 445-446, Sector 35A CHANDIGARH 160036 53 38 43 

Southern : C. I. T* Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 235 02 16 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, MaroU Andheri ( East i 632 92 95 

BOMBAY 400093 ^ ^ 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. 

COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATL HYDERABAD, 
JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at New India Fiintinfl Preu. Kbutja, India 



