**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9470 (1979) : Method of test for the usability of 
resistors under pulse conditions [LITD 5: Semiconductor and 
Other Electronic Components and Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^^PTT ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS s 9470 - 1919 

( Reaffirmed 2002 ) 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

THE USABILITY OF RESISTORS 

UNDER PULSE CONDITIONS 



UDC 62L316B: 620*1 G 




f> Copyright I960 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN. 9 LlAHAiJUK &KAH 2AFAR MARtt 

NSW utLHi n-nuoa 



IS : 9470 • 1979 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

THE USABILITY OF RESISTORS 

UNDER PULSE CONDITIONS 

Resistors Sectional Committee, LTDC 14 

Chairman Representing 

Brig B. Bhasin Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

Members 

Shri P. K. Rao ( Alternate to 
Brig B. Bhasin ) 
Shri K. K. Aggarwal Posts and Telegraphs Department, New Delhi 

Shri T. L. Bhatia ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. A. Bhat Electronic Component Industries Association, 

New Delhi 

Shri Deepak N. Patel ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. B. Chemburkar All India Instruments Manufacturers and Dealers 

Association, Bombay 

Shri P. A. Bhat ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Desikamani Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri S. K. Pandey ( Alternate ) 
Shri D. Eshwar Railway Board, New Delhi 

Shri Dev Raj ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. P. Fernandes The Radio Electronic and Television Manufacturers* 

Association ( RETMA ), Bombay 

Shri D. D. Maini ( Alternate ) 
Shri N. T. Kinariwala Pankaj Electricals, Bombay 

Shri V. N. Kinariwala ( Alternate) 
Shri B. K. Narakesari Asian Electronics Ltd, Bombay 

Shri Abizer Husamuddin ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. V. Narayanan Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals 

( DGS &D ), New Delhi 

Shri D. R. Chandran ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. N. Patel Peico Electronics and Electricals Ltd, Bombay 

Dr P. B. Parikh ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. V. Rao Directorate General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi 

Shri N. Parthasarthy ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. V. Rao Indian Telephone Industries Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri B. Viresalingam ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1980 
INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS 1 9470 • 1979 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri L. Satyanarayana Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri S. L. Sarnot Department of Electronics, New Delhi 

Dr R. G. Tripathi ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Somasekhara Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. Chandrasekaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri C. G. Subramanyan Electronic Trade & Technology Development 

Corporation Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri S. P. Aoarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri P. Stoyanarayana National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 

Shri D. P. Telang Rescon Manufacturing Go Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

Shri S. R. Doshi ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. C. Jain, Director General, ISI ( Ex-offido Member ) 

Head ( Electronics ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. C. Gupta 
Assistant Director ( Electronics ), ISI 



IS : 9470 - 1979 

Indian Standard 

METHOD OF TEST FOR 

THE USABILITY OF RESISTORS 

UNDER PULSE CONDITIONS 

0- FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 28 November 1979, after the draft finalized by the 
Resistors Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electronics 
and Telecommunication Division Council. 

0.2 The object of this Indian Standard is to specify test method to 
determine the usability of resistors under conditions of very short high 
overloads occurring periodically. 

0.3 This standard is largely based on the following documents issued by 
International Electrotechnical Commission: 

40 ( Secretariat ) 342 Draft — Amendment to IEC Publication 
115-1 : Fixed resistors — Part I : Terms and methods of test — 
Method of test for the usability of resistors under pulse 
conditions. 

40 ( Secretariat ) 343 Draft — Tentative list x>f preferred test 
severities to be used for testing resistors under pulse conditions. 

0.4 In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with 
this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded 
off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies test methods which, under stated pulse 
conditions, show changes in component parameters arising from pulse 
loading basically due to: 

a) local thermal stresses, 

b) internal voltage effects, and 

c) electrical current load effects including mechanical forces. 



♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised). 

3 



IS: 9470-1979 

1.2 Where this test is called for in the detail specification it shall be 
applied in arder to show the feasibility of using the component under 
stated conditions of pulse loading. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following terms and definitions 
shall apply. 

2.1 Pulse Duration — The duration between pulse start time and 
pulse stop time. 

2.2 Pulse Repetition Period — The interval between the pulse start 
time of a first pulse waveform and the pulse start time of the immediately 
following pulse waveform in a periodic pulse train. 

2.3 Pulse Load Capability — The ability of a component to withstand 
a continuous sequence of equally spaced, equal electrical pulses during a 
specified time without more than a definite change in electrical para- 
meters. 

2.4 Pulse Ratings — Assessed values of pulse load capability expressed 
limiting pulse parameters with respect to power, voltage, or current. 

3. TEST PROCEDURE 

3.1 Description of the Test Set-Up — The pulse source shall be able 
to produce a continuous sequence of the specified pulse with the specified 
repetition period over the specified duration of the test. Care has to be 
taken not to influence one test specimen by others. This may demand 
a separate output stage for each specimen. 

A block diagram of a suitable test set-up is given in Fig. 1. It 
consists of a series of power amplifiers with low internal impedance 
(Ri) as compared to the sample (R) under test (voltage source), which 
can transmit the specified pulse train within the distortion limits given 
in Fig. 2. These amplifiers are fed from a conventional pulse generator 
delivering the desired waveform, when necessary via further forming, 
shifting, and driving stages. 

To permit the use of a more economical power supply for the driver 
and power stages in testing many resistors at the same time, it is 
recommended to drive them sequentially by appropriately phased pulses. 

Unless otherwise specified in the relevant specification the pulse 
train shall be applied from a constant voltage source with permitted 
distortion of the pulse as given in Fig. 2. 



IS i 9470 • 1979 



GENERATOR SHAPING 



M 



STAGE 




CONTROL 


/ 




•4*10 




-TLT 



PULSE -SH1- 
FTER+PULSE 
WIDTH LOGIC 

CIRCUIT 



FAN OUT 

AN? (POWER 

|? A V | E R *i! AMPLIFIER 



- IV* 



_^-*3 



*ONE FOR EACH SPECIMEN 
Ri-«R UNDER TEST 




MAINS 



Fig. 1 Block Diagram of a Set-Up for Pulse Testing of Resistors 



0*9 U 




t r =lT0 2 H s — *| t r 
tf = 1 TO^M* 

Fig. 2 Tolerances on the Pulse Shape 

3.2 Severities — A test severity shall be chosen from those specified in 
Table 1 and shall be specified in the relevant specification. If no severity 
is specified, severity 3 shall be used. 



Si 

No. 



TABLE 1 TENTATIVE LIST OF SEVERITIES 

Parameter 



(1) (2) 

i) Peak voltage U ( multiples of C7r ) 

ii) Pulse width t{ , ( jas ) 

iii) Pulse repetition period t p , ( [is ) 

iv) Equivalent average power P 
( % of PR ) 

v) Duration of test, ( hours ) 





Severities 




1 


2 


3 


4 


(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


2-5 


4"5 


5 


8*5 


JO 


1 000 


100 


2 000 


625 


20 000 


2 500 


143 000 


100 


100 


100 


100 



100 



100 



100 



1 oco 



Note — These severities are intended to be used with figures of permitted change 
of resistance similar to those used with the endurance tests. 



IS : 9470 - 1979 

The severity of the test is given by peak voltage, pulse duration, 
pulse repetition period and by its totai duration and the ambient 
temperature. 

3.3 Preconditioning — Before the test begins, the resistors shall have 
attained temperature and humidity equilibrium under standard atmos- 
pheric conditions for testing [ see IS : 9000 ( Part I )-1977* ]. 

For special applications other preconditioning requirements may be 
given in the relevant specification. 

3.4 Initial Measurements — Unless otherwise specified the resistors 
shall be visually examined and the resistance shall be measured with an 
error not exceeding 10 percent of the maximum permitted change. 

3.5 Conditioning 

3.5.1 The method of mounting of the resistor shall be specified in the 
relevant specification and shall be thermally equivalent to normal 
endurance testing. The mounting shall not distort the pulse shape to 
outside the limits given in Fig. 2. 

3.5.2 The resistor shall be subjected at room temperature ( or at such 
other temperature as given in the relevant specification ) to a continuous 
train of rectangular pulses delivering the severity specified by the rele- 
vant specification. 

3.6 Intermediate Measurements — May be performed to shorten the 
test in the case of exceptional poor behaviour of the resistors under test 
after 24, 100 and 500 hours. 

3.7 Recovery — Two to four hours at standard atmospheric conditions 
for testing [ see IS : 9000 ( Part I ) - 1977* ]. 

3.8 Final Measurements — The resistors shall be visually examined. 
There shall be no indication of mechanical or insulation breakdown. 
The marking shall remain legible. 

Then the resistance shall be measured. The change against the value 
from the initial measurement ( set 3.4 ) shall not be more than that 
permitted in the relevant specification. 

3.9 Information to be Given in the Relevant Specification — The 

relevant specification shall give the following details: 

a) Method of mounting of the resistor for the test; 

b) Test severity, chosen from Table 1. Severity 3 shall be preferred: 

c) Test ambient temperature, if other than 27 ± 2°C; 

d) Limiting value of voltage; and 

e) Permissiblre resistance change. 



♦Basic environmental testing procedures for electronic and electrical items: Part I 
General. 



