INRI AAF IS 16042 (Part 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Ame AA EA h 
HT HUT UAT A HA AT RAT 
AT 2 caret Amn EA 


Cigarettes — Determination of Water 
in Total Particulate Matter From the 
Mainstream Smoke 


Part 2 Karl Fischer Method 


ICS 65.160 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Teg TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2021 Price Group 4 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture Divisional 
Council. 

This Indian Standard has been developed by taking assistance from ISO 10362-2 : 2013 “Cigarettes — 
Determination of water in smoke condensates — Part 2: Karl Fischer method” issued by the International 
Organization for Standardization. The ISO standard has given information on machine smoking regime, which 
has been omitted from this Indian Standard. 

This Indian Standard is published in two parts. The other part in this series is: 


Part 1 Gas-chromatographic method 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard if the final value, observed or 
calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical 
values ( revised )’. 


IS 16042 (Part 2) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


CIGARETTES — DETERMINATION OF WATER 
IN TOTAL PARTICULATE MATTER FROM THE 
MAINSTREAM SMOKE 


PART 2 KARL FISCHER METHOD 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) specifies the use of the 
Karl Fischer method for the determination of water in 
cigarette smoke condensates. The smoking of cigarettes 
and collection of mainstream smoke are normally 
carried out in accordance with IS 16023. 
NOTE — IS 16023 specifies the use of gas chromatography 
for the determination of water in smoke condensate solutions 
[see also IS 16042 (Part 1)]. For labs not in a position to use 
the gas-chromatographic method, the determination of water in 
smoke condensate can be performed by the method described 
in this part of ISO 16042 and an appropriate note made in 
the expression of the results. However, the method is also 
applicable to the determination of water in smoke condensates 
obtained by non-standard smoking. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions, which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
1070 : 1992/ Reagent grade water — 
ISO 3696 : 1987 Specification (third revision) 
16022 : 2015/ Routine analytical cigarette 
ISO 3308 : 2012 smoking machine — Definitions 
and standard conditions 


(first revision) 


16023 : 2021 Cigarettes — Determination of 
total and nicotine — Free dry 
particulate matter using a routine 
analytical smoking machine 


(first revision) 


3 PRINCIPLE 


Dissolution of the total particulate matter from the 
mainstream smoke in a solvent. Determination of the 
water content of an aliquot of the solution by titration 
with standardized Karl Fischer reagent. 


4 REAGENTS 


Use only reagents of recognized analytical reagent 
grade and distilled water complying with grade 2 of 
IS 1070 or better. 


4.1 Propan-2-ol, (CH,),CHOH, extraction solvent. 


NOTE — Propan-2-ol normally contains a small amount 
of water which is determined as a blank as outlined in the 
procedure. It is not recommended that specially dried solvent 
(for example, using a molecular sieve) should be used since 
in this state it is extremely hygroscopic and further handling 
problems are introduced. 


4.2 Karl Fischer reagent (KFR), which can be 
obtained commercially in two forms: 


a) as a single reagent with an initial water equivalent 
of approximately 5 mg/ml; this value decreases on 
storage; and 


b) as two separate reagents (Karl Fischer solution A: 
methanol, pyridine, sulfur dioxide; Karl Fischer 
solution B: methanol, iodine) which, when mixed 
in equal volumes, give a reagent with a water 
equivalent of approximately 3 mg/ml. 


Reagents which do not contain pyridine are preferred 
if these are available. If these are not available, take 
special care during handling. See also CAUTION 
concerning waste disposal in 6.4.1. 


4.3 Methanol, CH,OH, with a water content of less 
than 0.05 g per 100 g. 


4.4 Silica Gel, freshly activated. 


5 APPARATUS 


Normal laboratory apparatus and in particular the 
following items: 


5.1 Karl Fischer Apparatus, preferably of the 
automatic or semi-automatic type set up according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions for direct titration. 


5.2 Solvent Dispenser, a suitable container type is a 
51 aspirator bottle with a silica gel moisture trap in 
the neck and the bottom outlet connected to a 25 ml 
double-action automatic pipette or an electronically 
operated pipette. The silica gel has a drying effect on the 
surface of the solvent causing the water content to vary 


IS 16042 (Part 2) : 2021 


during use. To avoid this, stir the solvent continuously 
during use by mounting the dispenser on an automatic 
stirrer. 


5.3 Syringe, of capacity 20 ul. 


5.4 Syringe, of capacity 10 ml, fitted with a wide bore 
needle, or pipette of capacity 10 ml. 


5.5 Hot-air Oven, capable of maintaining a temperature 
of (105+5) °C. 


5.6 Flask Shaker, horizontal-action type. 


6 PROCEDURE 


6.1 General 


Care shall be taken during all operations to avoid 
contamination from atmospheric moisture. 


All glassware used in the preparation of the test portion 
and in the water determination shall be heated at 
(105+5) °C for at least 1 h after visible water has 
evaporated, and cooled and stored in a desiccator over 
silica gel until used. 


6.2 Test Portion 


The following procedure shall be used when cigarettes 
are smoked in accordance with IS 16023. When 
non-standard smoking or collection of total particulate 
matter from the mainstream smoke has been used, 
the procedure described below shall be modified 
accordingly to give a suitable total particulate matter 
from the mainstream smoke solution. In this event, a 
note of the alternative procedure shall be included with 
the test results. 


Collect the total particulate matter from the mainstream 
smoke in accordance with IS 16023 on a routine 
analytical cigarette smoking machine complying with 
the requirements of IS 16022. 


Wearing gloves, remove the sealing devices from the 
smoke trap, open it and remove the filter disc with 
forceps. Place the folded disc in a dry conical flask 
(maximum 150 ml for 44 mm discs; maximum 250 ml 
for 92 mm discs). 


Wipe the inner surface of the filter-holder front with 
two separate quarters of an unused conditioned filter 
disc and add these to the flask. 


Run an appropriate quantity of extraction solvent (4.1) 
into the flask. The folded disc shall be covered with 
solvent. In the case of a 44 mm glass fibre filter trap, 
25 ml is necessary. In the case of a 92 mm glass fibre 
filter trap, 50 ml is necessary. 


Stopper the flask immediately and shake gently on an 
electric flask shaker (5.6) for at least 20 min, ensuring 
that the disc does not disintegrate. This provides the 
total particulate matter from the mainstream smoke 
solution. 


6.3 Blank Test 


Due to the absorption of water by smoke traps and 
solvent, determine a value for the sample blank. 


Prepare sample blanks by treating additional smoke 
traps (at least 2 per 100 cigarettes smoked) in the same 
manner as that used for smoke collection. Place them 
near the smoking machine during smoking, and extract 
and analyse them together with the smoke samples. 


6.4 Standardization of Karl Fischer reagent 


6.4.1 Standardization Procedure 


Add sufficient methanol (see 4.3) to the Karl Fischer 
titration vessel (see 5.1) to immerse the tips of the 
electrodes. Titrate any residual solution (see note) in 
the titration vessel to its end-point by addition of Karl 
Fischer reagent (KFR). 


Using the 20 ul syringe (see 5.3), add 20 ul (V,) of 
water to the titration vessel. To ensure that the syringe 
does not contain air bubbles, fill it to above the 20 ul 
mark, invert it and tap the air bubbles to the top. Then 
depress the plunger to the 20 ul mark and remove 
excess water quickly from the needle tip with a tissue. 


As an alternative, fill the syringe with 20 ul of water 
and weigh the syringe. After dosage, weigh the syringe 
again and note the exact mass of water. 


Transfer the volume (V) of water to the titration vessel 
taking care to inject the water directly into the solution, 
not allowing any to fall on to the neck or walls of the 
vessel. Where the vessel can be fitted with a rubber 
membrane cap, this shall be used and the needle 
inserted through the cap. If a water droplet remains on 
the needle tip, remove it by touching the surface of the 
solution in the vessel. 


Titrate with KFR (see 4.2) and record the titration 
value. 


Repeat the process and again record the titration value. 
Repeat a third time. Calculate the mean titration volume 


N). 
Standardize the KFR every working day. 


For best results with the Karl Fischer technique, it is 
important to ensure that all stages of the analysis are 
carried out in a uniform manner, extract-to-extract, 
sample-to-sample, day-to-day. 


NOTE — It is common practice with the direct-titration 
technique to carry out a titration “on top of” residual solution 
in the titration vessel, i.e. without removing the residual 
solution. When the volume in the vessel reaches a certain 
level, the liquid is run to waste, retaining just sufficient for the 
electrode tips to be immersed. In time, however, the methanol 
concentration in the vessel falls to a level such that the reaction 
cannot proceed satisfactorily. A precipitate may form and false 
titration values be obtained. Only experience will tell when 
titrating “on top of” residual solution has reached this point 
and then the titration vessel should be completely emptied to 
waste, rinsed, and recharged with methanol. 


CAUTION — Waste from the titration vessel should be run 
into a container which is kept stoppered until such time as safe 
disposal can be arranged, preferably through a waste-disposal 
agency, or in compliance with other national regulations. 


6.4.2 Calculation of Water Equivalent 


The water equivalent, E, of the Karl Fischer reagent, 
expressed in milligrams of water per millilitre, is given 
by the equation: 


m 
E=— 
LA 
where 

m,,= is the mass, in milligrams, of the volume of 
water (V,,) used for the standardization of the 

Karl Fischer reagent; and 
V = is the mean volume, in millilitres, of the Karl 


Fischer reagent used for the titration of the 
water. 


6.5 Determination 


Add to the titration vessel 10 ml of the propan-2-ol 
extract from the blank, preferably using a syringe with 
a wide-bore needle (5.4) to enable rapid transfer. Titrate 
with KFR and record the titration volume. 


Repeat and again record the titration volume. Determine 
the mean titration volume for the blank, V.. Repeat the 
duplicate determination for all sample blanks. 


Add 10 ml of the total particulate matter from the 
mainstream smoke solution to the titration vessel. Use 
a minimum volume of solution to wash the syringe or 
pipette since the residue of the extract may be required 
for the determination of nicotine. Titrate with KFR and 
record the titration volume of the sample, V.. 


Dependent on the use to be made of the remaining total 
particulate matter solution, it may be possible to repeat 
this determination. However, when this method is used 
to determine the water content, the remaining solution 
is frequently used to determine nicotine by steam 
distillation. This does not allow sufficient solution to 
duplicate the water determination. 


7 EXPRESSION OF RESULTS 


The water content, W, of the total particulate matter 
for each trap, expressed in milligrams per cigarette, is 
given by the equation. 


w - Os Va) Exh 
gxFY, 


where 


V, = is the volume, in millilitres, of the Karl Fischer 
reagent used for the titration of the total 
particulate matter solution; 


yV = 


a Is the mean volume, in millilitres, of the Karl 


Fischer reagent used for the blank titration; 


IS 16042 (Part 2) : 2021 


E = is the water equivalent, in milligrams of water 
per millilitre, ofthe Karl Fischer reagent; 

V,= is the volume, in millilitres, of solvent used for 
dissolving the total particulate matter; 

q = is the number of cigarettes smoked into the 
smoke trap; and 

V = is the volume, in millilitres, of the total 


particulate matter solution for the titration. 
Express the test results as follows: 


a) water content, expressed in milligrams per 
cigarette smoked, to the nearest 0.01 mg for each 
individual smoking run; and 


b) mean water content, expressed in milligrams per 
cigarette smoked, to the nearest 0.1 mg for the 
whole test sample. 


8 TEST REPORT 


The test report shall give the water content from each 
cigarette smoked and the method used, and shall 
include all conditions which may affect the result 
(for example, atmospheric pressure during smoking). It 
shall also give all details necessary for the identification 
of the cigarettes smoked. The test report shall show 
the method used and the results obtained. It shall 
also mention any operating conditions not specified 
in this International Standard (for example, smoking 
regime used), or regarded as optional, as well as any 
circumstances that may have influenced the results 
(for example, atmospheric test conditions during 
smoking). The test report shall include all details 
required for complete identification of the sample. 
If appropriate, the information given below in 
a) to d) shall be recorded. 


a) Characteristic data about the cigarette — All 
details necessary for the identification of the 
cigarettes smoked shall be given. In the case of 
commercial cigarettes this should include: 


1) name of manufacturer 
manufacture, 


and country of 


2) product name, 

3) packet number (of the product sampled that 
day), 

4) marks on any tax stamp, 

5) printed smoke yields (if any), 

6) length of cigarette, 

7) length of filter, and 

8) length of overwrap. 


b) Data about sampling — The following particulars 
shall be included: 


1) type of sampling procedure, 
2) date of sampling, 
3) place of purchase or sampling, 


IS 16042 (Part 2) : 2021 


c 


wa 


4) kind of sampling point, 


5) sampling point (for example, address of retail 
outlet or machine number), and 


6) number of cigarettes in laboratory sample. 


Description of test — The following particulars 
shall be included: 


1) reference to this International Standard, 
2) date of test, 
3) type of smoking machine used, 


— 


4) type of smoke trap used, 
5) total number of cigarettes smoked, 


6) number of cigarettes smoked into each smoke 
trap, 


butt length, 


room temperature (in degrees Celsius) during 
smoking operation, 


7 
8 


NED 


9 


— 


relative humidity (in percent) during smoking 
operation, and 


10) atmospheric pressure (in kilopascals) during 


smoking operation. 


d) Test results — The expression of the laboratory 


data depends on the purpose for which the data 
are required, and the level of laboratory precision. 
Confidence limits shall be calculated and expressed 


on the basis of the laboratory data before any 
rounding has taken place. Details should include 
the following: 


1) average length of the cigarettes to the nearest 
0.1 mm, 


2) average length of the filter to the nearest 
0.5 mm, 


3) average length of the overwrap to the nearest 
0.5 mm, 


4 
5 


wa 


butt length to which cigarettes were smoked, 


wa 


average diameter of the cigarettes to the 
nearest 0.01 mm, 


6 


wm 


average number of puffs per cigarette for each 
channel to the nearest 0.1 puff, 


7) TPM (total particulate matter) content 
(in milligrams per cigarette) for each channel 
to the nearest 0.1 mg, and the average per 
cigarette to the nearest 1 mg, 


8) DPM (dry particulate matter) content 
(in milligrams per cigarette) for each channel 
to the nearest 0.1 mg, and the average per 
cigarette to the nearest 1 mg, and 


9) NFDPM (nicotine-free dry particulate matter) 
content (in milligrams per cigarette) for each 
channel to the nearest 0.1 mg, and the average 
per cigarette to the nearest 1 mg. 


IS 16042 (Part 2) : 2021 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


[1] IS 16042-1 Cigarettes — Determination of water in total particulate matter from the mainstream smoke: 
Part 1 Gas chromatographic method. 


IS 16042 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Tobacco and Tobacco Products Sectional Committee, FAD 04 


Organization 


Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry 
Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry 


Acharya N.G. Ranga Agricultural University, 
Hyderabad 


All India Bidi Industry Federation, Pune 


Bidi Tobacco Research Station, Anand Agricultural 
University, Anand 


Consumer Education & Research Centre, Ahmedabad 
Consumer Guidance Society of India, Mumbai 
Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 


FICCI Research and Analysis Centre, New Delhi 
Godfrey Phillips India Limited, Mumbai 


Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 


National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research, 
Noida 


ITC Limited, Bengaluru 


National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Ahmedabad 


Smokeless Tobacco Association, New Delhi 


Smokeless Tobacco Federation (India), Delhi 


The Association Chambers of Commerce & Industries 
of India (ASSOCHAM), New Delhi 


The Indian Tobacco Association, Guntur 

The Tobacco Institute of India, New Delhi 

Tobacco Board, Min of Commerce & Industry, 
Guntur 


VST Industries Ltd, Hyderabad 


In personal capacity 
D S Group, Noida 


Representative(s) 


Dr D. DAMODAR REDDY (Chairman) 
Dr C. CHANDRASEKHARA RAO 


Dr J. MANJUNATH 
Dr K. PRABHAKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ARJUN KHANNA 
Dr K. R. JosHI 


Ms Dotty A. JANI 
SHRI HARARAYTRIPATH (Alternate) 


DR SITARAM DIXIT 
DRM. S. KAmatH (Alternate) 


Dr MOHD SHAUKAT 
Dr L. SWASTICHARAN (Alternate) 


SHRI AKHILESH KUMAR PANDEY 


Dr BIswAJIT DEB 
SHRI PRANAM NAGARE (Alternate) 


Dr YOGESHWER SHUKLA 


Dr Roopa HARIPRASAD 


Dr KAMAL KUMAR TYAGI 
Dr PARAG VILAS NAIK (Alternate) 


Dr VASUMATI N. GOKANI 


SHRI C. K. SHARMA 
Ms NAVNEET Kaur (Alternate) 


SHRI SANJAY BECHAN 


SHRI SURAJIT GHOSH 
Dr MADHAVAN SRIDHARAN (Alternate) 


Dr P. SRINIVAS 
Hon SECRETARY (Alternate) 


SHRI SHARADTANDAN 
Dr P. P. SINGH (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN, TOBACCO BOARD 
SHRI P. Manos REDDY (Alternate) 


SHRI C. VIJAYA KUMAR 
SHRI J. NAGESHWARA Rao (Alternate) 


Dr C. V. N. Rao 


SHRI C. K. SHARMA 


IS 16042 (Part 2) : 2021 


Organization Representative(s) 


National Tobacco Testing Laboratory, Mumbai Dr RAMAN MOHAN SINGH 
Dr K. V. SATYANARAYANA (Alternate I) 
DR SoBIA GHANI (Alternate II) 


National Tobacco Testing Laboratory, Guwahati DR PRASENJIT SAHA 
SHRI SANJIB KUMAR SHARMA (Alternate) 
BIS Directorate General SHRIMATI SUNEETI TOTEJA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (FAD) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio )] 


Member Secretary 


SHRIMATI NAVITA YADAV 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (FAD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue” and “Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 04 (16062). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


