**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 1957 (1961) : Prismatic compasses, non-liquid [PGD 22: 
Educational Instruments and Equipment] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 1957 - 1961 

Indian Standard reafmrmi u 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
PRISMATIC COMPASSES, NON-LIQUID 



Third Reprint APRIL 1986 
Incorporating Amendment No. 1 ) 



UDC 526.915.2 



m 



©Cop^>n)rht 1977 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN» 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAWAR MARG 

NEW DELHI n0002 

^ a February )967 



IS : 1957 - 1961 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
PRISMATIC COMPASSES, NON-LIQUID 



Optical mnd Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee, EDC 36 



Chmrmati 
Dm C. S. Rao 

Mtmbm 

\tUITANT DiRfCTOR STANnARDIZATION 

(Civil) 
Shei Balmr Sinoh 
Con O. J. Baptiita 
Shiu p. N. Deobhakta 

Smki V. Kkuhnamoortiiy {AlUmate) 

D« S. P. Vmma {AUematt) 
Shri D. p. Jethwam 
Cox. R. S. Kalka 

Col S. K. S. Mudaliar {AlUrnate) 
Smri B. G. Navlakhi 

Shri B. V. Dalal (AlUrntu) 
Shri Prem Prakaih 

Shri M K. Sen Gupta [AUtmate) 
Snri E. B Rajoerkar 

Shri £. N. Nair (Ali€maU) 

Dr J. RAMAKRItHNA RaO 

Prof S. Hariharan {AlUmaU) 
Smri A. N. Sen 

.Shri R R C'makra\arty (Atifmatr) 
Shri A. R Si»n 

Shri Balram Spthi 

Shri P. V. Surba Rao 

Shri M. Panddranoa Rao {AUtmaU) 
Shri H. C Verma 

Shri D. Nirody {Altemmie) 
Smri K. Vltdavachalam 
Smri J. P. Mehrotra, 
Deputy Dir<»rtor (Eiigg; 



Reprtseniint 
Ministry of Defence 'R <t D) 



Retearch, Drsiftni and SiRndard^ Orrani/ation ^MinUii^' of 

Railwayi; 
Grab Ud>o« Saluikan Sainitt Ltd, Roorkee 
Indian Navy 
Dcvelopnr^ent Wine Mmi^trv of Conrim^rre L IndiwliA* 



Central Water & Power C^nmmiviion 
Survey of India 

j V. Navlakhi Si Co, Bom»>av 

National Physical I^boratorv K.SIR), New Delhi 

Raj-Der-Kar and C^, IJomlwv 

Madras Iii«titute of TechnoKxev, Madras 

Natumal Instruments Liil, C'Jilrutia 

Office of the Development Commmioner (Small Scale 

Industries), New I^elhi 
Directorate General of Ordnance Factories (Ministry of 

IVfcnre) Calcutta 
Tlie Andhra Scientific Co Ud. Masulipatam 

Associated Instrument Manufactureni (India) Private Ltd, 
New I>clhi 

Central Public Works Department 
Director, ISI (Ex-c0i{in Sitmbtr) 



Sttrttartts 
Skri M. V. Patankar 
Assuttant Director (Enffg), ISI 
Shri P. N. Kohu 
Senior Technical Auistant (Engg). 



ISI 



Cnwentr 
Cni. R. S. Kalha 



Surveying InstnimcnU Subcommittee, EDC 3G ; 

Surve> of Imliu 



Cot. S. K. S, MtDALiAR {AiiniuHf to 
Co! R. S. Kalha) 
Shri Balvir Sinoh 
Cdr O. J. BArntTA 
Skri S. S. Dharmayya 

SmM a. N. BHATTArHARVYA {AlUtMte) 

Shri M. K. Koundinva 
SHiti Prem Prakash 

Shri M. K. Skn Gitta (AUenuHt) 
Shiu A. N. Sen 



Grab Udyof; Sahakan Samiu Lid« Roorkee 

Indian Navy 

Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Central Public Works DcfMrtment. New Delhi 
National Phyweal Laboratrry (CSIR), New Delhi 

National Instruments Ltd. Caliutu 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI U0002 



IS: 1957-1961 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
PRISMATIC COMPASSES, NON-LIQUID 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 17 October 1961, after the draft finalized by the Optical and 
Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Engineering Division Council. 

0.2 The surveyors compass is an instrument for determining the difTerencc 
in direction between any horizontal line and a magnetic needle, the needle 
pointing the magnetic north. Magnetic compasses, though of limited 
accuracy, have the advantage of giving reading directly in terms of direc- 
tions or bearings referred to magnetic north. Prismatic compasses, non- 
liquid, can either be used independently or in conjunction with other angle 
measuring instruments in orienting a map or plane table and making a 
survey or traverse. 

0.3 Taking into consideration the views of producers and consumers, the 

Sectional Committee responsible for the preparation of this standard felt 

that it should be related to the manufacturing practices followed in the 
country in this field. 

0.4 Wherever a reference to any Indian Standard appears in this specifica- 
tion, it shall be taken as a reference to the latest version of the standard. 

0.5 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expres- 
sing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS: 2-1960 
Rules for Rounding Off Numerical Values (Revised), The number of 
significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as 
that of the specified value in this standard. 

0.6 India has changed over to the metric system and all the dimensions in 
this specification are given in this system. 

0.7 This standard is intended chiefly to cover the technical provisions 
relating to prisniatic compasses, non-liquid, apd it docs not include all the 
necessary provisions of a contract. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This specification covers the requirements for prismatic compasses, 
non-liquid. The preferred sizes are 85, lOb and 110 mm. 



IS : 1957 - 1961 

2. NOMENCLATURE 

2,1 The names of different components of the prismatic compass, non- 
Hquid, are shown in Fig. 1. 



FILTER 




'OUTER CASE V-MAGNETIC NEEDLE 

Fig. 1 Prismatic Compass, Non- Liquid 

3. TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 

3.1 True Bearing — The horizontal angle measured from the true north 
in a clockwise direction to desired line. 

3.2 Magnetic Bearing — The horizontal angle measured from the 
magnetic north in a clockwise direction to desired line. 

3.3 Traverse — The traverse consists of connected lines, the length and 
directions of which arc measured. 



IS: 19S7-1961 

3.4 Declinmtioii — The horizontal angle l>etween the true north and the 
magnetic north. 

3.5 Dip — The vertical angle between the horizontal plane and the plane 
of freely suspended symmetrical magnetic needle pivoted at its centre of 
symmetry. 

Note — To overcome this dip, a small weight is placed on one side of the needle so 
that it can be adjusted until the needle is horizontal. 

3.6 Orientation — The determination of the location of points and the 
establishment of lines of known directions. 

3.7 Size of Compass — The size of the compass is indicated by the dia- 
meter of the reading edge of the graduated arc. 

4. COMPONENTS 

4.1 Sighting System — The sighting system shall consist of sighting vanes 
hinged diametrically opposite to each other on the outer case. The eyeing 
vane shall have a vertical line slot in the metal housing of the magnifying 
prism and the front or sighting vane shall have a fine vertical hair line sight. 
In sizes up to 50 mm the front vane shall preferably be a folding lid contain- 
ing a disc of clear glass with a vertical line etched on it. 

4.2 Magnet Assembly — The magnet assembly shall consist of a thin 
bar magnet fitted to a conical agate, sapphire, and pivoted on a sharp pin 
pDint. 

4.3 Bearing IndLlcating System — The system shall consist of a graduated 
circular arc which may form integral part of the needle or which may 
support itself on the outer case. 

4.4 Damping-cnmi-Antiwear System — The system shall consist of a 
device to lift the needle when the former is moved by one of the vanes nor- 
mally kept folded when not in use. 

4.5 Dip Adjusting Slide — The dip adjusting slide shall consist of a small 
metal rider which may slide along the needle to balance it in the horizontal 
plane. 

4.6 Protecting Cover — The protecting cover shall consist of a disc of 
glass fitted on top of the brass case to protect the needle and graduated 
circle. 

4.7 Reading System — The reading system shall consist of a magnifying 
prism attached to the outer case. 

5. MATERIALS AND WORKMANSHIP 

5.1 Materials — All parts of the compass, except the magnetic needle, 
shall be made of non-magnetic materials. 



IS : 1957 - 1961 

5.2 Magnetic Needle — The magnetic needle shall be or good quality 
magnet steel. It shall be properly hardened and aged. 

5.2.1 The magnetic moment of the needle shall be between 20 and 25 cgs 
units. Each pole of the magnedc needle shall have a flux of approximately 
100 lines. 

5.3 Bearing — The bearing shall be of good quality natural or synthetic 
white sapphire free from inclusions or other defects. 

5.4 Pivot Tip — The pivot tip shall be made of hardened steel or iridium. 

5.5 Window Glass — The window glass shall be polished plate glass with 
parallel surfaces and snugly fitted. 

5.6 Pivot Mounting — The pivot shall be properly centered and fitted. 
Line of contact between pivot and mounting shall be continuously smooth 
and free from irregularities. 

5.7 Prism — The prism shall be of good quality optical glass, colourless, 
^rcc from bubbles, and shall be ground and brought to a high d^^ce of 
polish on the reflecting and curved surfaces. 

5.8 Sealing Glass, Lid Window and Index Glass — Polished plate 
glass, with parallel surfaces and the edges ground truly circular, shall be 
used. Compasses of 85 mm and above shall be provided with fixing device 
at the bottom to take the tripod. 

5.9 Dial — The dial, if made of mother-of-pearl, shall be of good quality, 
free from flaws, and shall be regularly formed and of uniform colour in 
daylight or of good quality mica. 

5.10 Screw Threads — The threads shall conform to IS : 4218 ISO 
Metric Screw Threads. 

6. TESTS 

6.1 Plane of Ck>incidence of the Features in the Sighting Aads — With 
the compass held level and sighted along the local magnetic meridian as 
obtained by a standard compass, the following features shall lie in the same 
vertical plane: 

a) the centre of the prism slide block, 

b) the slot in the prism bracket, 

c) the South line on the outer box below the prism, 

d) the tip of the pivot, 

e) the North line of the outer box, 

f ) the centre line marked on the hinge lug, and 

g) the sighting line on the vane. 



18 t 1957-1961 

6.2 Ease of Prismmdc Rcmding— The slide of the prism shall be adjusted 
to' suit the vision of the observer. The edge of the dial, the vane and the 
figures on the outer circle shall be clearly visible through the eye-hole in the 
prism bracket. The definition of the prism shall be sharp for all readings 
of the dial and shall be free from lateral distortion of the divisions on the dial. 
The normal focus of the prism shall be at half the range of the slide. The 
slide pins shall work smoothly in the slide block without shake, and shall 
be friction-tight in any position. 

6.3 Range of Tilt — The compass shall be tilted through an angle of 
7 degrees cither way from the horizontal position, that is, in elevation or in 
depression so as to give a total range of tilt of not less than 14 degrees, and 
rotated. The suspension unit shall in no position foul with the inner box. 

6.4 Fricdonal Error — The frictional error of the needle in the compass 
shall not exceed 15 minutes at 27^C. During the test, the compass shall be 
level and free from external vibration. Any frictional error may be found 
by the following methods. 

6.4.1 Deflecting the pointer through any angle to one side of any original 
position by a small iron rod, removing the cause of deflection and noting 
the reading of the pointer when it comes to rest. 

6.4.2 Repeating the deflection through any angle to either side of the 
original position of the pointer as in 6.4.1^ removing the cause of deflection 
and noting the reading of the p>ointer when it comes to rest. 

6.4.3 The total angular variation between the two readings so obtained 
shall be the frictional error and shall not exceed 15 minutes at 27'*C. 

6.5 Bearing Error — The total error in any magnetic bearing, as read 
through the prism, shall not exceed ± 30 minutes and the direct reading of 
the dial against the lubber line on the sealing glass shall agree with the 
supplementary angle of the magnetic bearing within ±2 degrees. 

7. MARKING 

7.1 The compass shall be engraved at a suitable place with the maker^s 
name or trade-mark and the year of manufacture, if required by the pur- 
chaser. 

7.1.1 The compasses may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Norm «— The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions of the 
Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks ) Act and the Rules and Regulations 
made thereunder. The ISI Mark on producti covered by an Indian Standard 
conveys the assurance that they have been produced to 'comply^ with the reauirements 
of that itandard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control 
which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. ISI marked 
products are also continuously checked by ISt for conformity to that standard as a 
fiirther safeguard/ Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the ISI 
Certification Mark may be granted to numufacturers or processors, may be obtained 
firom the Indian Standards Institution. 

8- PAGKINC 

S«l Each compass shall be securely packed in a box to prevent damage to 
the tips of the pivots. 

8.2 A leather case shall be provided if required by the purchaser. 



m 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 



H09dqu9rt9n / 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELH1 110002 
Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all offices ) 

(^•gion§i Offices i Te/ephon^ 

^Western : Manakalaya, E9 MlOC. Marot, Andheri ( East ). 6 32 92 95 
BOMBAY 400093 

tEastern : 1/14 C. I. T, Scheme VII M, V, I. P. Road, 36 24 99 

Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 

Southern : C. 1. T. Campus. MADRAS 600113 41 24 42 

Northern : 669 Phase VII, Industrial Focal Point, 8 79 26 

S. A. S. NAGAR 160051 ( Punjab ) 

Branch Offices i 

'Pushpak' Nurmohamed Shaikh MarQ, Khanpur, J 2 63 48 

AHM AD AB AD 380001 1 2 63 49 

*F Block Unity BIdg, Narasimharaja Square, 22 48 05 

BANGALORE 560002 

Gangotrl Complex, Bhadbhada Road, f. T. Nagar, 6 27 18 

BHOPAL 462003 

22£ Kalpana Area, BKUBANESHWAR 751014 5 36 27 

5-8-58C L. N. Gupta Marg. HYDERABAD 500001 22 10 83 

R14 Yudhister Marg, C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 6 98 32 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar. KANPUR 208005 4 72 92 

Patliputra Industrial Estate. PATNA 8CC013 6 23 05 

Hantex BIdg ( 2nd Floor ). Riy Station Road. 32 27 

TRIVANDRUM 695001 

Insp^Qtion Office ( With Sale Point ) : 

Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar. 5 24 35 
PUNE 411005 



*Sal«8 Office in Bombay It at Novelty Chambers* Grant Road. 
Bombay 400007 

tSaJes Office In Calcutta it at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P Q. Prtncep 
Street. Calcutta 700072 



S9 65 Zt 
27 68 00 

R«pfoduc«dbyfUpfotr«phy UoU« tSI, Nfwweflil 



