NAT HIAS IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


Siferen Seated Wore ust stferen Sa a 
secured sardi At erster 
ATT 2 UM ameta 


Organic Production System 
and Labelling of Organically 
Produced Products 


Part 2 Animal Based 


ICS 65.020.01 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 10 


Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee, FAD 22 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Agricultural Systems and Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and Agriculture 
Division Council. 


Organic livestock and poultry production may be defined as a system of livestock production that promotes 
the use of organic and biodegradable inputs from the ecosystem in terms of animal nutrition, health, animal 
housing, breeding and animal welfare. It deliberately avoids use of synthetic inputs such as drugs, feed additives 
and genetically engineered breeding inputs, while ensuring the welfare of animals. Under organic production 
management, animals are raised in a system that takes into consideration the wider issues of environmental 
pollution, human health on consumption of animal products and allowing animals to meet their basic behavioural 
needs and reduce stress. 


Under organic livestock production systems, it is expected that all products of animal origin including milk, meat, 
poultry, egg and products thereof, come from farms that have been inspected to verify that they meet standards 
developed for organic production and processing. These standards mandate among others the use of organic feed, 
prohibit the use of antibiotics, give animals access to outdoor, fresh air and sunlight. The production methods 
are selected based on criteria that meet all health regulations, work in harmony with the environment, build 
biological diversity and foster healthy soil and growing conditions and animals are raised without or under certain 
conditions with very limited use of toxic persistent pesticides, antibiotics and parasiticides. Under this system, 
animal health, well being, better living conditions, welfare measures, feeding practices are to be ensured through a 
set of standards and maintenance of written records by the organic livestock farmers. Better management practices 
and prevention are emphasized over treatment. Thus, the primary characteristics of organic livestock production 
system are: a defined standard; greater attention to animal welfare; no routine use of growth promoters, animal 
offal or any other additives; at least 80 percent of feed grown and fed to animals according to organic standards, 
without the use of artificial fertilizers or pesticides. 


To be precise, organic meat, milk, eggs, products thereof means that are produced, harvested, preserved and 
processed as per organic standards. The organic standard as provided in this document ensure and help attain 
good animal health and well-being through better living conditions, improved welfare measures and good feeding 
practices and the maintenance of written records by organic livestock producers/farmers. Better management 
practices and prevention of illness are emphasized over treatment. Thus, the primary characteristics of organic 
livestock production systems are: a well-defined standards and practices which can be verified; greater attention 
to animal welfare; no routine use of growth promoters, animal offal, prophylactic antibiotics or any other additives 
and at least 80 percent of the animal feed grown according to organic standards, without the use of artificial 
fertilisers or pesticides on crops or grass. 


India has some natural advantages in switching over to organic livestock production for domestic as well as 
export markets. The traditional animal husbandry practices followed by majority of livestock farmers, indigenous 
technical knowledge possessed by them, indigenous cattle breeds being hardy and tolerant to many diseases, 
limited or no antibiotic use, limited chemical fertilizers application, less dependence on market for inputs, etc. 
make India an ideally suited country for organic livestock farming. 


National Standard for Organic Production (NSOP) under the National Programme for Organic production (NPOP) 
is being implemented by Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India for the export market. Organic 
products are gaining importance in the domestic market and their demand is on continuous increase. To meet the 
domestic requirements, Ministry of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) has launched a 
Participatory Guarantee System (PGS). 


In view of the above, this standard is being formulated to prescribe the requirements for organically produced crop 
based and animal based products. Part lof this Standard covers the requirements for crop based organic production 
system and labelling of organically produced products and Part 2 of this standard covers the requirements for 
Animal based organic production system & labelling of organically produced products. 


In the formulation of this Standard, considerable assistance has been derived from NSOP of the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry. 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


Indian Standard 


ORGANIC PRODUCTION SYSTEM AND LABELLING 
OF ORGANICALLY PRODUCED PRODUCTS 


PART 2 ANIMAL BASED 
ae IS No. Title 
1.1 The standard (Part 2) covers the requirements for 2732 : 1985 Code of practice for poultry 
organic production system and labelling of products housing (second revision) 
that are livestock based, through the process of 2733 : 1985 Code of practice for sheep and 
d rearing up to packaging and transport of the goats housing (first revision) 
t. : : 

Qd 3441 : 1982 Specification for solvent extracted 
1.2 Organic livestock based products shall cover groundnut oilcake (meal) 
livestock, poultry and their products. as livestock feed ingredient 

(first revision) 
2 REFERENCES 4307 : 1983 Fish meal as livestock feed 
The following standards contain provisions, which ingredient (second revision) 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of — 5238 : 2001 Transport of poultry — Code of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions practice (second revision) 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 5470 : 2002 Diccictin: phosphite, animal 
revision and parties to agreements based on this feed brade — eT , 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility M ion) T peciicauion pns 
of applying the most recent editions of the standard din de 
indicated below: 6242 : 1985 Specification for solvent extracted 
undecorticated safflower oilcake 
IS No. Title as livestock feed ingredient (first 
920 : 1972 Specification for common revision) 
salt and cattle licks for animal 6559 : 1972 Code of practice for ante-mortem 
consumption (first revision) and post-mortem inspection of 
1664 : 2002 Mineral mixtures for POUR 
supplementing cattle feeds — 7049 : 1973 Code for handling, processing, 
specification (fourth revision) quality evaluation and storage of 

1712 : 1982 Cottonseed oilcake as livestock Fonds 

feed ingredient (second revision) 8895 : 2015 Handling, storage and transport 
1932 : 1986 Mustard and rape seed oilcake non aE dudes 

as livestock feed ingredient eu 

(second revision) 10500 : 2012 Drinking water — Specification 
1934 : 2016 Sesamum oilcake as livestock (Snai ETIR] 

feed ingredient (second revision) 12829 : 1989 Mango seed kernel (solvent 
1982 : 2015 Ante-mortem and post-mortem denda e fed 

inspection of meat animals — 8 p 

Code of Practice (second revision) 14702 : 2014 Undecorticated sunflower oilcake 
2239 : 1971 Specification for wheat bran x Eu j feed eee E 

(frst revision) pecification (first revision) 
2152 : 2013 Specification for maize bran Pied aM MPH UNOSI. roe 

as livestock feed ingredient 

(second revision) 
2153 : 1985 Specification for maize bran as Se ies 


livestock feed ingredient (first 
revision) 


For the purpose of this standard the following 
definitions shall apply. 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


3.1 Conventional Farming — Conventional Farming 
shall mean the farming systems dependent on synthetic 
inputs which are not in conformity with the basic 
standards of organic production. 


3.2 Conversion — Conversion is the process of 
changing an agricultural farm from conventional to 
organic farm. This is also called transition. 


3.3 Conversion Period — The transition from non- 
organic to organic farming within a given period of 
time, during which the provisions concerning organic 
production have been applied. 


3.4 Farm Unit — A farm unit is the livestock and 
poultry farm area managed organically, by a farmer or 
a group of farmers or a business enterprise. 


3.5 Inspection — Inspection shall include the site 
visit to verify that the performance of an operation 
is in accordance with the production or processing 
standards. 


3.6 Labelling — Labelling shall mean any written, 
printed or graphic matter that is present on the label, 
accompanies the food, or is displayed near the product, 
including that for the purpose of promoting its sale or 
disposal. 


3.7 Producer — producer shall mean an individual 
farmer or a group of farmers or a business enterprise 
practicing organic farming or organic processing. 


3.8 Operator — A Farmer, processor, trader, handler 
or exporter, who is under Organic Certification. 


3.9 Organic — Organic refers to a particular farming 
system as described in this standard. 


3.10 Organic Agriculture — Organic agriculture is a 
system of farm design and management to create an 
eco system, which can achieve sustainable productivity 
without the use of synthetic external inputs such 
as chemical fertilizers, pesticides and synthetic 
hormones. 


3.11 Part Conversion — Part conversion is when 
part of a conventional farm or unit has already been 
converted to organic production and a part is still under 
conventional system. 


3.12 Risk Assessment — Risk assessment is process 
to identify potential risk in production and handling 
systems of organic products in order to check the 
infringement in the entire process for maintaining 
organic integrity of the produce/product. 


3.13 Certification — Certification shall refer to the 
procedure which demonstrates that the production 
system of the operator has been methodically assessed 
and conforms to the requirements as specified in this 
standard. 


3.14 Certification Body — Body that is responsible 
for certification of the operators as per this standard. 


4 REQUIREMENTS 


4.1 Organic Management Plan 


The producer shall establish an organic management 
plan, which shall be updated annually. 


4.2 Choice of Breeds/Strains 


The choice of livestock and poultry, breeds, strains 
and breeding methods shall be consistent with the 
principles of organic farming, taking into account, in 
particular, the following: 


a) Their adaptation to the local climatic and socio- 
economic conditions and also consistent with the 
breeding policies of the state government; and 


b) Their vitality and relative resistance to diseases. 
4.3 Sources/Origin 


4.3.1 Animals must have been born or hatched from 
production units complying with this standard, or must 
be the offspring of parents raised under the conditions 
set down in this standard. 


4.3.2 Transfer of livestock and poultry between organic 
and non organic units shall not be permitted. It shall be 
ensured that livestock and poultry inducted from other 
units comply with this standard. 


4.3.3 Livestock and poultry raised on non organic 
production units shall be converted into organic unit as 
per this standard. 


4.3.4 When a producer demonstrates that the organic 
source, breed and required management are not 
available, such livestock and poultry may be allowed 
under the following circumstances: 


a) When the producer is establishing an organic 
livestock and poultry operation for the first time; 


b) When a farmer wants to change the livestock and 
poultry breed/ strain or when new livestock and 
poultry specialization is developed; 


c) For the renewal of a herd, for example, high 
mortality of animals caused by catastrophic 
circumstances; 


d) When the farmer wishes to introduce breeding 
males into the farm. In such cases the young 
animals that are introduced to the organic farm 
shall be as young as possible, preferably as soon 
as they are weaned. 


4.4 Record Keeping and Animal Identification 


The animals shall bear unique identification numbers 
in accordance with this standard. The producer shall 
maintain detailed and up-to-date records as set out in 
Annex A. 


4.5 Housing and Management 


4.5.1 Livestock and poultry shall be maintained 
under natural conditions as far as possible. This shall 
include utilizing natural breeding methods, housing 
and management conditions to minimize stress, health 
management system to prevent diseases, with the 
ultimate aim to progressively limit use of chemicals, 
allopathic veterinary drugs (including antibiotics and 
hormones) reduce feeding of animals with products 
of animal origin (for example meat meal, blood meal), 
and ensure animal comfort and welfare. 


4.5.2 The housing and day-to-day management of 
the animal, maintenance of sanitation, hygiene and 
environment shall be planned to suit the specific 
behavioural needs of the livestock and poultry. 


4.5.2.1 Sufficient space shall be provided to ensure free 
movement and opportunity to express normal patterns 
of animal behaviour. 


4.5.2.2 The animals should not be tied unless required 
for specific reasons, such as, at the time of milking or 
for some medical procedures. 


4.5.2.3 Where the livestock and poultry normal 
behaviour demands group living, animals shall not be 
kept in isolation, but shall have company of like kind 
except for breeding males. 


4.5.2.4 As far as possible two different kinds of animals 
shall not be kept together, unless for specific purposes, 
such as, free range poultry birds in cow/buffalo shed for 
scavenging on ticks and other insects. 


4.5.2.5 The housing system shall ensure prevention of 
abnormal behaviour, injury and disease. 


4.5.2.6 Appropriate facilities to cover emergencies such 
as fire, breakdown of essential mechanical services and 
disruption of supplies, shall be available. 


4.5.2.7 Housing for livestock and poultry shall not 
be mandatory in areas where appropriate climatic 
conditions exist to enable animals to live outdoors 
without compromising their comfort, health and 
welfare. 


4.5.2.8 Housing conditions shall meet the biological 
and behavioural needs of the livestock and poultry by 
providing easy access to feeding and watering all the 
time. 


4.5.2.9 Insulation, heating, cooling and ventilation 
of the building to ensure that air circulation, dust 
level, temperature, relative air humidity and gas 
concentrations are kept within limits which are not 
harmful to the livestock and poultry. 


4.5.2.10 Adequate natural ventilation and light to be 
available. 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


4.5.2.11 Appropriate fencing not harmful to the animals. 


4.5.2.12 Confinement shall be permitted under the 
following conditions: 


a) Inclement weather to protect animals from injury; 
b) To ensure health, safety or welfare; and 
c) To protect plant, soil and water quality. 


4.5.2.13 The stocking density shall provide comfort 
and well being of the livestock and poultry with regard 
to the species, the breed and the age; behavioural needs 
with respect to the size of the group and the sex of the 
livestock and poultry; sufficient space to stand naturally, 
lie down easily, turn round, groom themselves, and 
assume all natural postures and movements such as 
stretching, lying and rumination and wing flapping in 
case of birds (Annex-B). 


4.5.2.14 The sanitation and hygiene in the livestock 
and poultry farm shall be as per the advisory issued by 
the Central/ State Government. The standard operating 
protocols to keep the house, pens, equipment and 
utensils clean and free from microbial contamination 
shall be followed. 


4.5.2.15 Free-range, open-air exercise areas, or open-air 
runs should, if necessary, provide adequate protection 
against rain, wind, sun and extreme temperatures, 
depending on the local weather conditions and the 
breed concerned. 


4.5.2.16 The outdoor stocking density of livestock and 
poultry kept on pasture, grassland, or other natural or 
semi-natural habitats shall be low enough to prevent 
degradation of the soil and over-grazing of vegetation 
(Annex C). 


4.6 Mammals 


4.6.1 All mammals shall have access to open-air 
exercise or resting area, paddock or run which may 
be partially covered or shall have space for protection 
from heavy rains. The animals must be able to use 
those areas whenever the physiological condition of 
the animal or the weather conditions and the state of 
the ground, permit. 


4.6.2 Exceptions may be made for the access of males 
or bulls to open areas, to avoid mixing with female 
animals for controlled breeding. The other animals may 
also not have access to open-air exercise area or run 
during the winter period or the final fattening phase. 


4.6.3 Livestock shed shall have properly laid and 
smooth floor, although not slippery. The floor shall not 
be entirely of slatted or grid construction. 


4.6.4 The housing shall be in accordance with the 
standards laid down and shall aim at providing 
comfortable, clean and dry laying/rest area of sufficient 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


size, consisting of a solid construction. Wherever 
possible, straw bedding shall be provided. 


4.6.5 The calves of different age groups shall be housed 
separately and never in the adult animal shed tethering 
of livestock and poultry is prohibited. 


4.6.6 Pigs shall be kept in groups, except in the last 
stages of pregnancy and during the suckling period. 
Piglets shall not be kept on flat decks or in piglet cages. 
Exercise areas must permit laying of dung and rooting 
by the animals. 


4.6.7 Rabbits shall not be kept in cages. 


4.6.8 Housing for sheep and goat shall be as per IS 
2733. 


4.7 Poultry 


4.7.1 Poultry for organic products shall be reared in 
open-range conditions and shall have free access to 
open-air run whenever the weather conditions permit. 


4.7.2 Housing of poultry in cages shall not be permitted. 


4.7.3 Water fowl/duck shall have access to a stream, 
pond or lake whenever the weather conditions permit. 


4.7.4 Poultry house floor if of solid construction, shall 
be covered with litter material such as straw, wood 
shavings, sand or turf. In case of layers, the floor area 
shall be large enough to permit dropping collection. 
Perches/ higher sleeping areas of a size and number 
commensurate with the species and size of the group 
and of the birds and exit/entry holes of an adequate size 
shall be provided. 


4.7.5 In the case of laying hens, manipulation of day 
length may be permitted through the use of artificial 
lights. The maximum day length shall be 16 hrs with 
minimum of 8 hrs of natural light (Annex D). 


4.7.6 The producer shall follow the all-in all-out system 
of rearing and shall avoid mixing of different age group 
of birds, species and breeds. Mixed farming of poultry 
and pigs shall not be permitted. Between each batch, 
the house shall be emptied, and runs shall be left to 
allow the vegetation to grow. 


4.7.7 Poultry Housing shall be as per IS 2732. 


4.7.8 Each Poultry house shall not contain more than, 
a) 4 800 chickens, 
b) 3 000 laying hens, 
c) 5 200 guinea fowl, 
d) 4 000 female ducks and 3 200 male ducks, and 
e) 2 500 turkeys. 


4.7.9 Poultry shall have access to an open area for at- 
least one third of their life. 


4.7.10 Livestock and poultry not reared in accordance 
with these provisions may also be maintained on the 
production unit, provided that they are segregated 
and reared separately from the organically maintained 
animals. 


4.7.11 All animals shall have access to proper 
ventilation and open-air runs. Exceptions may be 
permitted in case of inclement weather conditions or 
physiological conditions or under certain ‘traditional’ 
farming systems that restrict access of animals to 
paddock. But in these cases, it should be ensured that 
the welfare of the animals is not compromised. 


4.7.12 Stocking rates for livestock and poultry should 
be appropriate for the region in question taking into 
consideration, general climatic conditions, fodder 
production capacity, stock health, nutrient balance, and 
environmental impact (Annex C). 


4.8 Conversion Period for Animal Production 


4.8.1 The establishment of organic animal husbandry 
requires an interim period, the conversion period. 
The conversion period shall be for three years. The 
conversion period can be reduced up to one year in the 
following cases: 


a) Open-air runs and exercise areas used by non- 
herbivore species; 


b) For dairy herds converted for the first time 
and for bovine, ovine, pig and caprine coming 
from extensive husbandry system during an 
implementation period. 


4.8.2 Simultaneous conversion of livestock and poultry 
and land used for raising feed/fodder within the same 
unit should be a preferred approach. In such cases 
wherein the existing livestock and poultry and their 
offspring are fed mainly with products from the unit, 
the conversion period for the livestock and poultry, 
pasture and /or land used for animal feed, may be 
reduced to two years. 


4.8.3 The conversion period shall be accounted from 
the day of implementation of organic management. 


4.8.4 In cases, where the land and livestock and poultry 
conversion to organic status is not simultaneous and the 
land alone has reached organic status and the livestock 
and poultry from a non-organic source is introduced, 
these must be reared according to this standard for at 
least the following compliance periods before their 
products are to be sold as organic. 


4.8.4.1 Bovine including buffalo 


a) Meat products — 12 months and /or at least 3/4th of 
their life span is spent in the organic management 
system. 


b) Calves for meat production — 6 months when 


brought in as soon as they are weaned and less 
than 6 months old. 


c) Milk Products —90 days during the implementation 
period established, after that six months. 


4.8.4.2 Ovine and Caprine (Sheep and Goat) 
a) Meat products— six months; and 


b) Milkproducts—90 days during the implementation 
period established, after that six months. 


4.8.4.3 Pig 


Meat products — Six months. 


4.8.4.4 Poultry 


a) Meat products — from the second day to the entire 
life span, and 


b) Eggs —six weeks. 
4.9 Feed 


4.9.1 Livestock and poultry farms shall provide 


maximum diet from feedstuffs (including ‘in conversion’ 


feedstuff) produced as organic as per the requirements 
of this standard. Agricultural processed residues 
of organic origin, such as from grain fermentation, 
fruit processing, vegetable processing, etc, shall be 
permitted for purpose of feeding, provided that the 
overall feeding practices satisfy the daily energy and 
nutrient requirements of the concerned animals. 


4.9.2 The agriculture land committed to cultivation 
of feed / fodder crops intended to be used as feed for 
livestock and poultry shall be organically grown. 


4.9.3 During the operations, the products shall maintain 
their organic status, provided that ruminants are fed 
with at least 85 percent and non-ruminants as well as 
poultry with 80 percent , feed obtained from organic 
sources, calculated on a dry matter basis 


4.9.4 Notwithstanding the above requirements, in the 
event of unforeseen severe natural or man-made events 
or extreme climatic weather conditions, drought, crop 
failure, etc, a producer may use up to an additional 
5 percent of feedstuffs (not grown organically) for 
a limited time, provided that it does not contain 
genetically engineered/modified organisms or products 
thereof. 


4.9.5 Specific livestock and poultry rations shall take 
into account the following : 


a) The need of young animals for natural feed, such 
as, feeding of maternal milk, milk from other 
mammal or milk replacer of organic origin that has 
maximum similarity with maternal milk, provided 
that it does not contain any genetically modified 
ingredient, antibiotics, hormone, etc. 


b 


wm 


That in herbivores, substantial proportion of the 
dry matter and energy in the daily rations should 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


consist of roughage, fresh or dried fodder, or silage; 
need for inclusion of cereals in the fattening phase 
of poultry; livestock and poultry must have ample, 
free access to water appropriate to maintain full 
health and productivity. 


4.9.6 Due to reasons of animal welfare, health and 
productivity, if supplements are to be added, the same 
shall be permitted on the written advice of a qualified 
veterinarian. The permitted list of such supplements, feed 
materials (probiotics, and biologicals, immunologicals 
and procuring aids etc.) and processing aids that comply 
the following criteria are at (Annex E). 


4.9.7 General Criteria for Feedstuff and Nutritional 
Criteria 


4.9.7.1 Substances shall be permitted as per Annex E 


4.9.7.2 Such substances should significantly satisfy 
feeding requirements of the livestock and poultry 
fulfilling the physiological, behavioural and welfare 
needs of the concerned species. 


4.9.7.3 Such substances should not contain genetically 
engineered/modified organisms and products thereof. 


4.9.7.4 Such substances are non-synthetic and are 
primarily of plant, mineral or animal origin. 


4.9.8 Specific Criteria for Feedstuffs and Nutritional 
Elements 


4.9.8.1 The feedstuffs should not be prepared by using 
chemical solvents and chemical treatment. All the 
ingredients of the feed including supplements, fed to 
organic animals should be from organic sources. In 
case of shortage of these substances, or in exceptional 
circumstances, well-defined analogic substances may 
also be used (Annex F). 


4.9.8.2 Feedstuffs of animal origin, with the exception 
of milk and milk products, fish, other marine animals 
and products derived thereof, shall not be used. The 
feeding of mammalian material to ruminants shall 
not be permitted with the exception of milk and milk 
products. 


4.9.8.3 Synthetic nitrogen or non-protein nitrogen 
compounds shall not be used. 


4.9.9 Specific Criteria for Additives and Processing 
Aids. 


4.9.9.1 The supplements should be from natural 
sources. 


4.9.9.2 Feed processing aiding supplements like 
binders, anti-caking agents, emulsifiers, stabilizers, 
thickeners, surfactants, coagulants if used should be 
from natural sources. 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


4.9.9.3 Antioxidants — Only from natural sources shall 
be permitted. 


4.9.9.4 Preservatives — Only natural acids are allowed. 


4.9.9.5 Colouring agents (including pigments), 
flavours, odour masking agents and appetite stimulants: 
only natural sources are allowed. 


4.9.9.6 Probiotics, enzymes and microorganisms are 
allowed; but shall not be from genetically modified 
sources. 


4.9.9.7 Any synthetic chemicals, such as, antibiotics, 
coccidiostat, medicine, growth promoters or any other 
substance supplemented for the purpose to stimulate 
growth or production shall not be fed to the organic 
livestock and poultry. 


4.9.9.8 Silage additives, additives for enriching crop 
residues and processing aids may not be derived from 
genetically engineered/modified organisms or products 
thereof, and may be comprised of only: 


a) Sea salt; 

b) Coarse rock salt; 
c) Yeasts; 

d) Enzymes; 

e) Whey; 


f) Sugar; or sugar products such as molasses, jaggery, 
grain bran; 


g) Honey; and 


h) Lactic, acetic, formic and propionic bacteria, 
or their natural acid product when the weather 
conditions or the fodder harvesting conditions 
could be perceived as a constraint to adequate 
fermentation (only, if approved). 


4.10 Health Care 


4.10.1 The organic livestock and poultry, in general, 
should follow the basic principles of preventive health 
and productivity management where in, the focus would 
be on preventing diseases, detecting underlying fertility 
and production problems and its correction - primarily 
on correcting management, nutrition and sanitation. 


4.10.2 The producer in consultation with the veterinarian 
should draw a program of health management of 
animals and carry out testing of the herd as per the 
common diseases of herd/ flock (Annex G). The health 
care shall be based on the following broad principles: 


a) Choice of appropriate breeds or strains of animals 
that can acclimatize, adapt to environment as per 
4.2. 


b) Setting up of the animal husbandry practices 
should be appropriate to the requirements of each 
species and should focus on encouraging strong 
resistance to disease and prevention of infections; 


c) Use of good quality organic feed, together with 
regular exercise and access to fodder/roughages, 
and/or open-air runs, so as to have positive effects 
on natural immunological defence of the animal; 


d) Appropriate stocking density of livestock and 
poultry so as to avoid overcrowding and spread of 
infections or competition to feeding. 


4.10.3 The farm should have an established system of 
detection of sub-clinical, sick or injured animals and 
if, so detected, must be treated immediately. In cases 
where isolation is necessary it will be so carried out in 
suitable housing areas. The paramount interest in case 
of sickness would be animal welfare and mitigating 
pain and suffering, and hence the producer shall not 
withhold medication even if the use of such medication 
will cause the animal to lose its organic status. 


4.10.4 The use of veterinary medicinal products in 
organic farming shall comply with the following 
principles: 


a) All vaccinations required by law of the land 
shall be permitted. Where specific disease 
or health problems occur, or is predicted to 
occur, and no alternative permitted treatment or 
management practices exist, use of parasiticides, 
or therapeutic use of veterinary drugs are 
permitted under prescription and supervision 
of a registered veterinarian, provided that the 
mandatory withdrawal periods as provided under 
this standard (Annex H) are observed. In drugs 
where withdrawal period is not prescribed in 
this standard, a minimum of 48 h for milk and 
one week for meat of withdrawal period shall be 
observed. 


b 


wm 


For the purpose of treatment and prevention of 
diseases and under-performances, herbal/phyto- 
therapeutic (excluding antibiotics), homeopathic 
or ayurvedic products shall be preferred to 
allopathic veterinary drugs or antibiotics, provided 
that their therapeutic effect is effective for the 
species of animal and the condition for which the 
treatment is intended. 


c 


— 


In case alternative therapeutic or preventive 
measures are unlikely to be effective in combating 
illness or injury, allopathic veterinary drugs or 
antibiotics may be used under the responsibility 
and supervision of a veterinarian. 


4.10.5 The use of allopathic veterinary drugs or 
antibiotics or drugs derived from genetically modified 
source for preventative treatments and for enhancing 
productivity or fertility is prohibited. 


4.10.6 Hormonal treatment may only be used for 
therapeutic reasons and under veterinary supervision. 


4.10.7 Growth stimulants agents or substances used for 
the purpose of stimulating growth or production shall 
not be permitted. 


4.11 Breeding and management 


4.11.1 The major focus of livestock and poultry 
management shall be to provide care, comfort, and 
respect to the animals and ensure their welfare in the 
farming system. 


4.11.2 Livestock and poultry breeding methods shall 
be in accordance with and in compliance with the 
principles of organic farming and shall take into 
account, 


a) The breeds and strains most suited to local 
conditions; 


b) The preference for reproduction through natural 
methods, although artificial insemination may be 
used ; 


4.11.2.1 Embryo transfer techniques and the use 
of hormonal reproductive treatment shall not be 
used unless prescribed therapeutic directed towards 
correcting the physiological problem. 


4.11.2.2 That breeding techniques employing genetic 
engineering shall not be used. 


4.11.3 Mutilation, such as, tail docking, cutting 
of teeth, trimming of beaks and dehorning are not 
permitted. In exceptional cases, some of these may be 
permitted for reasons of safety (for example dehorning 
in young animals) or if they are intended to improve the 
health and welfare of the livestock and poultry. Such 
surgical procedures shall be carried out by a registered 
veterinarian at the most appropriate age; and any 
suffering to and pain shall be reduced to a minimum. 
Wherever possible, anaesthetic and analgesics shall 
be used. Physical castration is allowed only in order 
to maintain the quality of products and traditional 
production practices (meat-type pigs, bullocks, 
capons, etc). 


4.12 Manure and Urine Excreta Management 


4.12.1 Excreta collection and management practices 
in the organic livestock and poultry farm are a critical 
component. The collection, handling and disposal of 
the dung and urine from shed, paddock, open run or 
grazing areas shall be implemented in a manner that, 


a) Minimizes soil and water degradation; 

b) Does not significantly contribute to contamination 
of water by nitrates, phosphates, and pathogenic 
bacteria; 

c) Optimizes recycling of nutrients; and 


d) Does not include burning or any practice 
inconsistent with organic practices. 


4.12.2 All manure storage and handling facilities, 
including composting facilities shall be designed, 
constructed and operated to prevent contamination of 
ground and/or surface water. 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


4.12.3 Manure application rates shall be at levels 
that do not contribute to ground and/or surface 
water contamination. The timing of application and 
application methods shall not increase the potential for 
run-off into ponds, rivers and streams. 


4.13 Transport 


4.13.1 During transport, the producer shall prevent 
stress, injury, hunger, thirst, malnutrition, fear, distress, 
physical and thermal discomfort, pain, disease during 
the transport. 


4.13.2 All necessary arrangement be made in advance 
to minimize length of the journey and meet the animal’s 
need during the journey. 


4.13.3 Animals must be fit for the intended journey. 


4.13.4 Means of transport as well as the loading and 
unloading facilities must be designed, constructed, 
maintained and operated so as to avoid injury and 
suffering and ensure the safety of the animals; 


4.13.5 Personnel that handle animals must be skilled 
and competent as appropriate for this purpose and must 
carry out their tasks without using violence or any 
other method likely to cause unnecessary fear, injury 
or suffering. 


4.13.6 Transportation must be carried out without delay 
to the place of destination and the welfare conditions of 
the animals must be regularly checked and appropriately 
maintained. 


4.13.7 Sufficient floor area, height and other spacing 
requirements must be provided for the animals, 
appropriate to their size and intended journey. 


4.13.8 Water, feed and rest must be offered to the 
animals at suitable intervals and should be appropriate 
in quality and quantity to their species, size and age. 


4.13.9 Efforts should be made to avoid or reduce 
following stress factors: 
a) Stress due to gathering and handling; 


b) Stress due to deprivation of, or changes in quantity 
or quality of feed and water; 


c) Stress due to extremes of temperature or change in 
climatic conditions 


d) Stress due to the groupings of animals strange to 
each other both within and between species; 


e) Stress due to separation from others of the animals’ 
own kind; 


f) Stress due to unfamiliar surroundings, noises and 
sensations; 


g) Stress due to overcrowding and isolations; 
h) Stress due to fatigue; and 
j) Stress due to exposure to disease; 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


4.13.10 The use of electric stimulation or allopathic 
tranquilizers shall not be permitted during loading and 
unloading of animals. 


4.13.11 IS 14904 and IS 5238 shall be followed. 
4.14 Slaughter of the Animals 


4.14.1 The slaughter of livestock and poultry shall be 
undertaken in a manner, which minimizes stress and 
suffering, and shall be in accordance with the following 
national rules framed for the purpose. 


4.14.1.1 In the case of livestock, the by-products shall 
be from animals subjected to proper ante-mortem and 
post-mortem inspection. IS 1982 shall be followed. 


4.14.1.2 Guidelines for handling, storage and transport 
of slaughter-house by-products as per IS 8895 shall be 
followed. 


4.14.2 For handling, processing, quality evaluation 
and storage of poultry, following shall be maintained. 
Approved products for cleaning and disinfection of the 
buildings and installations are at Annex J. 


4.14.2.1 The slaughter, evisceration and packing of 
poultry shall be conducted in such a manner as will 
result in hygienic processing, proper inspection and 
preservation for the production of clean and wholesome 
poultry and poultry products. 


4.14.2.2 Separate rooms shall be provided for the 
following: 


a) Live poultry receiving and holding 
b) Washing and disinfection of coops. 
c) Slaughter and bleeding 

d) Feather removal 

e) Evisceration, chilling and packing 
f) Inedible products room 


4.14.2.3 The quality of water shall conform to IS 10500. 
4.14.2.4 Particular attention shall be given to ventilation. 


4.14.2.5 Illumination should be sufficiently strong, 
properly situated and should not cause glare. 


4.14.2.6 Personnel shall wear protective clothes of 
washable material. 


4.14.2.7 Proper training shall be given regarding 
hygiene, frequent hand washing, disinfection etc. 


4.14.2.8 Ante-mortem and Post-mortem inspection of 
poultry shall be done in accordance with IS 6559. 


4.14.2.9 Activities such as stunning, bleeding, scalding, 
plucking, feet removal, evisceration and chilling, 
draining, grading etc, shall be done in accordance with 
IS 7049. 


4.14.2.10 The minimum age for slaughter shall be as 
follows 


a) 81 days for chickens, 

b) 150 days for capons, 

c) 140 days for male turkeys, 

d) 100 days for female turkeys, 
e) 94 days for guinea fowls, 

f) 70 days for female ducks, and 
g) 84 days for male ducks. 


4.15 Processing and Handling 


4.15.1 Any handling and processing of organic products 
should be carried out in a manner so as to maintain the 
organic integrity of the product. The operator shall 
develop an organic processing and handling plan. An 
organic processing and handling plan must include, 


a) description of practices and procedures to be 
performed. 


b) list of each  substance/input used during 
production, processing, storage and handling 
indicating its composition, source, locations 
where it will be used and documentation of 
commercial availability as applicable. The 
approved ingredients and additives used in food 
processing of animal based organic products is at 
Annex K and Annex L. 


description of the monitoring mechanism followed 
and maintained to verify that the plan is effectively 
implemented. 


c 


— 


d 


— 


description of the record keeping system 
implemented to comply with the requirements of 
this Standard. 


description of the management practices and 
segregation measures established to prevent co- 
mingling of organic and non organic products 
during parallel processing and handling. 


e 


wm 


f) identification of pollution sources and methods 
adopted to avoid contamination. 


g) procedure followed for processing and handling 
of organic products separately in time or place 
from the handling and processing of non-organic 
products. 

h) the means and measures followed for identification 
of all products through the whole process. 

j) method followed for decontamination, cleaning or 
disinfection of all facilities where organic 
products are kept, handled, processed or stored. 


4.15.2 Pest Control During Processing 


4.15.2.1 Pests should be avoided by good manufacturing 
practices. This includes general cleanliness and 
hygiene. 


4.15.2.2 A plan for pest prevention and pest control 
should be developed. 


4.15.2.3 For pest management and control the following 
measures shall be used in order of priority: 


a) Preventive methods such as disruption, elimination 
of habitat and access to facilities , 


b) Mechanical, physical and biological methods, and 
c) Other substances used in traps. 


4.15.2.4 Irradiation shall not be permitted. 


4.15.2.5 There shall be no direct or indirect contact 
between organic products and prohibited substances. 
(for example pesticides). In case of doubt, it shall be 
ensured that no residues are present in the organic 
product. 


4.15.3 Ingredients 


4.15.3.1 Ingredients used in processing shall be organic 
except where an organic ingredient 1s not available in 
sufficient quality or quantity, non-organic ingredients 
may be used to an extent of 5 percent only in case of 
technological necessity or for particular nutritional 
purpose. Such non organic raw material shall not be 
genetically engineered. 


4.15.3.2 The same ingredient within one product shall 
not be derived both from an organic and non-organic 
origin. 


4.15.3.3 Preparations of micro-organisms and enzymes 
commonly used in food processing may be used, 
with the exception of genetically engineered micro- 
organisms and their products. For the production of 
enzymes and other micro-biological products, the 
medium shall be composed of organic ingredients. 


4.15.3.4 Water and common salt may be used in organic 
products. 


4.15.3.5 Minerals (including trace elements), vitamins 
and similar isolated ingredients shall not be used except 
where use is legally required or where severe dietary, or 
nutritional deficiency can be demonstrated. 


4.15.4 Processing Methods 


4.15.4.1 Processing methods should be based on 
mechanical, physical and biological processes. 


4.15.4.2 The vital quality of an organic ingredient shall 
be maintained throughout each step of its processing 
methods and shall be chosen to limit the number and 
quantity of additives and processing aids. The following 
kinds of processes are approved: 

a) Mechanical and physical, 

b) Biological, 

c) Smoking , 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


d) Extraction, 
e) Precipitation , and 
f) Filtration. 


4.15.4.3 Extraction shall be with water, ethanol, plant 
and animal oils, vinegar, carbon dioxide, nitrogen or 
carboxylic acids. These shall be of food grade quality, 
appropriate for the purpose. 


4.15.4.4 Filters shall neither be made of asbestos nor be 
permeated with substances which may negatively affect 
the product. 


4.15.4.5 Irradiation shall not be permitted. 
4.16 Packaging 


4.16.1 Biodegradable, recyclable, reusable systems 
and eco-friendly packaging materials shall be used 
wherever possible. 


4.16.2 Material used for packaging shall not contaminate 
food. Certain additives for use in manufacturing of 
packaging films for packaging of organic food stuffs 
are allowed for restricted use as given in Annex M. 


4.16.3 The product shall be packed in a manner to 
prevent the substitution or manipulation of the content. 


4.16.4 Only approved packaging material shall be used. 
4.17 Labelling 
4.17.1 General Requirements 


4.17.1.1 Labelling shall convey clear and accurate 
information on the organic status of the product. 


4.17.1.2 When all the requirements of this standard 
are complied with, products shall be sold as ‘organic 
products’. 


4.17.1.3 The label for conversion products shall be 
clearly distinguishable from the label for organic 
products by mentioning the year of conversion. 


4.17.1.4 The name and address of the person or 
company legally responsible for the production of the 
product shall be mentioned on the label. 


4.17.1.5 Additional product information shall be made 
available on request. 


4.17.1.6 Ingredients or products derived from wild 
production shall be declared as such. 


4.17.2 Processed Products 


4.17.2.1 Single ingredient products shall be labelled as 
‘Organic’ when all requirements of this standard have 
been met. 


4.17.2.2 Multi ingredient products where not all 
ingredients, including additives, are of organic origin 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


shall be labelled in the following way (raw material 
weight): 
a) Where a minimum of 95 percent of the ingredients 
are of certified organic origin, products shall be 
labelled ‘organic’. 


b 


wma 


Where less than 95 percent but not less than 70 
percent of the ingredients are of certified organic 
origin, products shall not be labelled ‘organic’. 
The word ‘organic’ may be used on the principal 
display in statements like ‘made with organic 
ingredients’ provided, there is a clear statement of 
the proportion of the organic ingredients. 


c 


— 


Where less than 70 percent of the ingredients are 
of certified organic origin, the indication that an 
ingredient is organic may appear in the ingredients 
list. Such a product shall not be labelled ‘organic’. 
d) Added water and common salt shall not be 
included in the percentage calculations of organic 
ingredients. 

e) All raw materials of a multi-ingredient product 
shall be listed on the product label in order of their 
weight percentage. It shall be apparent which raw 
materials are of organic certified origin and which 
are not. All additives shall be listed with their full 
name. 

If herbs and/or spices constitute less than 2 percent 
of the total weight of the product, they shall be 
listed as ‘spices’ or ‘herbs’ without stating the 
percentage. 


a 


Organic products shall not be labelled as 
GE (genetic engineering) or GM (genetic 
modification) free, in order to avoid potentially 
misleading claims about the end product. Any 
reference to genetic engineering on product labels 
shall be limited to the production method. 


g 


h 


wm 


The label of a certified organic product shall 
depict the name and logo of the certification body 
and accreditation number. 


j) In addition, the organic logo shall also be depicted 
for product categories as stated at a)and b) above. 
4.18 Storage and Transport 


4.18.1 Organic products shall be stored at ambient 
temperature. The following special conditions of 
storage are permitted 


10 


a) Controlled atmosphere, 
b) Cooling, 

c) Freezing, 

d) Drying, and 

e) Humidity regulation. 


4.18.2 Product integrity shall be maintained during 
storage and transportation of organic products. Organic 
Products shall be protected at all times from co- 
mingling with non-organic products and from contact 
with materials and substances not permitted for use in 
organic farming/processing and handling. 


4.18.3 Where only part of the unit is certified and other 
products are non-organic, the organic products shall be 
stored and handled separately to maintain their identity. 


4.18.4 Bulk stores for organic products shall be separate 
from conventional product stores and clearly labelled 
to that effect. 


4.18.5 Storage areas and transport containers for 
organic products shall be cleaned using methods and 
materials permitted in organic production. Measures 
should be taken to prevent possible contamination from 
any pesticide or other treatment not listed in Annex N. 


4.19 Marking 


4.19.1 In addition to the labelling requirements at 4.17, 
each package of the organic food product shall also be 
marked with the following details: 


a) Name of the product, 

b) Net Quantity, 

c) Batch or Code Number ( where ever applicable), 

d) The words ‘Best before 
to be indicated), and 


e) Any other requirements as specified under the 
Legal Metrology (Packaged Commodities) Rules, 
2011 and Food safety and standards (Food product 
standards and Food Additives) regulation, 2011 
and the Rules framed there under. 


' (month and year 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.4 ) 
ANIMAL DATA RECORDING 


A-0 The producer shall maintain management records 
of all animals in the farm. Each animal shall be 
identified with a unique identification number with ear 
tags as specified by International Committee on Animal 
Records (ICAR), as adopted by India. 


A-1 ANIMAL IDENTIFICATION 


In case of cattle / buffalo, sheep and goat identification 
device as prescribed by ICAR, shall be applied to 
each animal and could be two-way plastic ear tag 
(laser-printed numeric and in bar code) or three-way 
(additional RFID micro-chip) identification number of 
the animal. In case of birds, flock may be identified. 
The identification devices of the out-going animals 
shall not be recycled and used on other animals. 


A-2 ANIMAL DATA RECORDING 


The data of the animal should be recorded preferably in 
digital format so that data retrieval is convenient. The 
animal data should be accessible to the veterinarian 
and the inspection Authority. Following data for each 
animal shall be recorded in case of ruminants: 


11 


A-2.1 Parent Details 

Identification numbers and details of dam and sire 

The condition of details of sire in case of ruminants and 
pigs may be relaxed, during the initial period 


A-2.2 Source: Whether in farm or purchased 


A-2.3 Purchase Details: Date of purchase, date of 
introduction in the farm, details of the earlier owner 


A-2.4 Animal Details: Date of birth, parity number, 
breed, Sex 


A-2.5 Breeding Details: Details of dates of services, 
sire used, drying off, calving 


A-2.6 Feeding Details : Feeds and fodder and their 
source 


A-2.7 Production Details: Weight gain, milk produced 
(Minimum one record per month of lactation) in case 
of cow and buffalo 


A-2.8 Sale Details: In case of sheep and goat, weight at 
the time of sale, reasons for sale, the purchaser details 


A-2.9 Health Details: All sickness treatment, diagnostic 
tests results, vaccination, deworming, surgeries, etc. 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


B 1 BOVINES, EQUIDAE, OVINE, CAPRINE AND PIG 


ANNEX B 
( Clause 4.5.2.13 ) 


MINIMUM SURFACE AREA INDOORS AND OUTDOORS AND OTHER CHARACTERISTICS OF 
HOUSING IN DIFFERENT SPECIES AND TYPES OF PRODUCTION 


i) Livestock Indoor Area (net area available to animals) Outdoor Area (exercise 
area,excluding pasturage) 
Live Weight Minimum (kg) M?/Head M?/Head 
ii) Breeding and fattening Up to 100 1.5 1.1 
bovine and equidae Up to 200 25 19 
Up to 350 4.0 3 
Over 350 5 with a minimum | 3.7 with a minimum of 
of 1m?/100 kg 0.75m?/100kg 
iii) Dairy Cows 6 4.5 
iv) Bulls for breeding 10 30 
v) Sheep and Goats 1.5 sheep/goat 2:5 
0.35 lamb/kid 0.5 
vi) Farrowing Pigs with 7.5 sow 2.5 
piglets upto 40 days 
vii) Fattening pigs Up to 50 0.8 0.6 
Up to 85 1.1 0.8 
Up to 110 1.3 1 
viii) Piglets Over 40 days and up to 30 kg 0.6 0.4 
ix) Brood Pigs 2.5 female 1.9 
6 male 8.0 
(If pens are used 
for natural service: 
10m?/boar) 
B2 POULTRY 
Poultry Indoor Area (net area available to animals) Outdoor Area (exercise 
No. animals/m? Cm perch/animal Nest arca, excluding 
pasturage) 

Laying hens 6 18 7 laymg hens per | 4, provided that the limit 
nest or in case | of 170 kg of N/hac/year is 
of common nest | not exceeded 
120cm?/bird 

Fattening 10 with a maximum 20 - 4 broilers and guinea fowl 

Poultry (in fixed | of 21 kg live weight/ | (for guinea fowl 4:5 ducks 

housing) m? only) 

10 turkey 

In all the species 
mentioned above the limit 
of 170 kg of N/hac/year is 
not exceeded 


12 


ANNEX C 
( Clauses 4.5.2.16 and 4.7.12 ) 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


MAXIMUM NUMBER OF ANIMALS PER HECTARE 


Species/Class Maximum no. per Ha 
Equines over six months old 2 
Calves 5 
Other bovine animals less than one year old 5 
Male bovine animals from one to less than two years old 4 
Female bovine animals from one to less than two years old 4 
Male bovine animals two years old or over 2 
Dairy cows 2 
Female breeding rabbits 100 
Sheep 14 
Goats 14 
Piglets 74 
Breeding pigs 7 
Pigs for fattening 14 
Chicken 580 
Laying hens 230 
ANNEX D 
( Clause 4.7.5 ) 
DAY LENGTH REQUIREMENTS FOR POULTRY 
D-1 BROILERS Age Day length 


23 hours light and 1 hour darkness throughout the | 20 — 60 weeks 


rearing period 


Gradually increase the light hours 
from 12 to 16h 


D-2 LAYERS 


60 — 72 weeks 


Increase light to 18 h 


0 — 19 week Gradually decrease the light hours 
from 23 to 12 h or natural day length 


13 


Age Day length D-3 OTHER BIRDS 
0 — 8 weeks 23 hours light and one hour darkness | Increase the light hours when the birds start laying eggs 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX E 
( Clauses 4.9.6 and 4.9.7.1 ) 


PERMITTED LIST OF FEED MATERIALS, FEED ADDITIVES AND 
PROCESSING AIDS FOR ANIMAL NUTRITION 


E- 1 FEED MATERIALS FROM PLANT 
ORIGIN 


E-1.1 Cereals, Grains, Their Products and By- 
Products — The following substances are permitted: 


a) Oats as grains, flakes, middlings, hulls and bran; 


b) Wheat as grains, wheat as germ, middling, bran[ 
See IS 2239] gluten feed, gluten and germ 


c) Barley as grains, protein and middlings; 


d) Maize as grains; bran [ See IS 2153] middling; 
germ expeller and gluten [See IS 2152 ]; 
e) Sorghum as grains; 
f) Rice germ expeller and bran; 
g) Millet as grains; 
h) Rye as grains and middlings; 
j) Triticale as grains, bran, middlings, brewers’ 
grains; and 
k) Other cereals and grains 
E-1.2 Oil seeds, oil fruits, their products and by- 
products - The following substances are permitted: 


a) Rape seed and mustard as expeller and hulls [ See 
IS 1932 ]; 


b) Soya bean as bean, toasted, expeller and hulls; 


c) Sunflower seed as seed and expeller [See IS 
14702]; 


d) Cotton as seed and seed expeller [See IS 1712]; 
e) Linseed as seed and expeller [ See IS 1935 ]; 
f) Sesame seed as expeller [ See IS 1934 ]; 
g) Groundnut seed as expeller [See IS 3441 ]; 
h) Palm kernels as expeller; 
j) Safflower decorticated cake [ See IS 6242 | 
k) Toria Cake 
m) Taramira Cake 
n) Pumpkin seed as expeller; 
p) Other oilseeds 
q) Vegetable oils (from physical extraction). 
E-1.3 Legume seeds, their product and by-products - 
The following substances are permitted: 
a) Bengal gram as seeds, middlings and hulls 
b) Black gram as seeds, middlings and hulls 
c) Pigeon pea as middlings and hulls 
d) Green gram as middlings and hulls 
e) Horse beans as seeds middlings and bran 


f) Lentil as middlings and hulls 
g) Chickpeas as seeds, middlings and bran; 


h) Ervil as seeds, middlings and bran as seeds 
submitted to heat treatment, middlings and bran, 


j) Peas as seeds, middlings, and bran; 
k) Broad beans as seeds middlings and bran; and 
m) Lupin as seeds, middlings and bran. 
n) Other legumes 
E-1.4 Tuber, roots, their products and by-products - 
The following substances are included in this category: 
a) Sugar beet pulp, potato 
b) Sweet potato as tuber, 


c) Potato pulp (by-product of the extraction of potato 
starch), potato starch, potato protein 


d) Carrot 
e) Turnip 
f) Other tubers 


E-1.5 Other seeds and fruits, their products and by- 


products - The following substances are permitted: 


14 


a) Fruits & Fruit Pulps of apple, citrus fruits, 
pears, peaches, grapes, figs, Pineapple, quinces, 
pumpkins; 

b) Chestnuts, walnut expeller, hazelnut expeller; 
cocoa husks and expeller; acorns. 

c) Mango seeds [ See IS 12829], tamarind seeds 
meal. 


E-1.6 Forages and The 


substances are permitted: 


roughages. following 


a) Cultivated fodder crops. Only the following 
fodder crops are included in this category: 


b) Sorghum (Sorghum vulgare) 
c) Maize (Zea Mays) 
d) Bajara (Pennisetum typhoides) 
e) Teosinte (Euchlaena Maxicana) 
f) Cow Pea (Vigna ungui culata) 
g) Guar (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba) 
h) Oats (Avena sativa) 
j) Berseem (Trifolium Alexadrinum) 
k) Lucerne (Medicago Sativa) 
m) Senji (Melilotus Parviflora) 
n) Hybrid Napier 


p) Para Grass (Brachiaria mutica) 


q) Rhodes Grass (Chloris Gayana) 

r) Guinea Grass (Panicom Maximum) 
s) Sudan Grass (Soreghum Sudanenes) 
t) Mustard (Brassica spp) 


u) Clover, Clover meal, Grass (obtained from forage 
plants), Grass meal, 


v) Hay, Silage & Straw of ceral crops and Root 
vegetables for foraging. 

E-1.7 Pasture Grass & Legumes - Following are 
included in this category: 

a) Anjan (Cenchrus ciliaris) 

b) Marvel (Dichanthium Annulatum) 

c) Dinanath (Penniactum pedicellatum) 

d) Kazungla (Setaria Sphacelata) 

e) Sain (Sehima nervosum) 

f) Siratro (Macroptilum atropurpureum) 

g) Stylo (Stylosanthes Humilis) 

h) Bankulthi (Atylosia Scarabaeoides) 

j) Field bean (Dolichos lablab) 

k) Butterfly Pea (Clitoria termatea) 
E-1.8 Leaves of common Indian trees - Following tress 


are included in this category whose leaves can be fed 
to animals 


a) Acacia Arabica (Babul) 

b) Acacia Senegal (Kumat) 

c) Adina cordifolia (Haldu) 

d) Ailanthus excelsa (Ardu) 

e) Amaranthus spinosus (Goja), 

f) Albizia lebbeck (Siras) 

g) Azadirachta indica (Neem) 

h) Banhinia variegate (Kachnar) 

j) Cassia auriculata (Tarwad) 

k) Dalbergia Sissoo (Sissoo) 
m) Ficus benghalensis (Bargad) 

n) Ficus relegiosa (papal) 

p) Ficus Glomerata (gular) 

q) Hardwickia binata (Anjan) 

r) Leucaena leucocephala (Subabul) 
s) Morus alba (Tut) 

t) Marus indica (Mulberry) 

u) Prosopis cineraria (Khejri) 

E- 2.0 Other plants, their products and by-products - 
The following substances are included in this category: 

a) Molasses 


b) Seaweed meal (obtained by drying and crushing 
seaweed and washed to reduce iodine content), 


c) Powders and extracts of plants, 


15 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


d) Plant protein extracts (solely provided to young 
animals), 


e) Spices and herbs. 


E-2 FEED MATERIALS FROM ANIMAL 
ORIGIN 


E-2.1 Milk and Milk Products — The following 
substances are included in the category: 


a) Raw milk 

b) Milk powder, skimmed milk, skimmed-milk 
powder, 

c) Buttermilk, buttermilk powder, 


d) Whey, whey powder, whey powder low in sugar, 
whey protein powder (extracted by physical 
treatment), 

e) Casein powder, lactose powder, curd and sour 
milk. 


E-2.2 Fish, other marine animals, their products and 
by-products — Only the following substances are 
included in the category: 


a) Fish, fish oil and cod-liver oil not refined; 


b) Fish molluscan or crustacean  autolysates, 
hydrolysate and proteolysates obtained by an 
enzyme action, whether or not in soluble form, 
solely provided to young animals. 


c) Fish meal [ See IS 4307] 


E-2.3 Eggs and egg products for use as poultry feed, 
preferably from the same holding. 


E-3 Feed materials from mineral origin 
(See IS 1664) — The following substances are included 
in this category: 
E-3.1 Sodium 

a) unrefined sea salt 

b) coarse rock salt 

c) sodium sulphate 

d) sodium carbonate 

e) sodium bicarbonate 

f) sodium chloride [See IS 920] 


E-3.2 Potassium 


a) Potassium chloride; 


E-3.3 Calcium 
a) lithotamnion and maerl 


b) Shells of aquatic animals (including cuttlefish 
bones) 


c) Calcium carbonate 
d) Calcium lactate 
e) Calcium gluconate 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


E-3.4 Phosphorus 
a) Defluorinated dicalcium phosphate [See IS 5470] 
b) Defluorinated monocalcium phosphate 
c) Monosodium phosphate 
d) Calcium-magnesium phosphate 
e) Calcium-sodium phosphate 


E-3.5 Magnesium 
a) Magnesium oxide (anhydrous magnesia) 
b) Magnesium sulphate 
c) Magnesium chloride 
d) Magnesium carbonate 
e) Magnesium phosphate 
E-3.6 Sulphur 
a) Sodium sulphate 
E-4 FEED ADDITIVES, CERTAIN 
SUBSTANCES USED IN ANIMAL NUTRITION 


AND PROCESSING AIDS USED IN FEEDING 
STUFFS 


E-4.1 Feed Additives 


E-4.1.1 Trace elements - The following substances are 
included in this category: 
E-4.1.1.1 /ron 

a) Ferrous (II) carbonate 


b) Ferrous (II) 
heptahydrate 


c) Ferric (III) oxide 
E-4.1.1.2 Iodine 


a) Calcium iodate, anhydrous 


sulphate monohydrate and/or 


b) Calcium iodate, hexahydrate 


c) Sodium iodide 


E-4.1.1.3 Cobalt 


a) Cobaltous (II) sulphate monohydrate and/or 
heptahydrate 


b) Basic cobaltous (II) carbonate, monohydrate 
E-4.1.1.4 Copper 

a) Copper (II) oxide 

b) Basic copper (IT) carbonate, monohydrate 

c) Copper (II) sulphate, pentahydrate 
E-4.1.1.5 Manganese 

a) Manganous (II) carbonate 


b) Manganous oxide and manganic oxide 


c) Manganous (IT) sulfate, mono- and/or tetrahydrate 


16 


E -4.1.1.6 Zinc 
a) Zinc carbonate 
b) Zinc oxide 
c) Zinc sulphate mono- and/or heptahydrate 


E-4.1.1.7 Molybdenum 
a) Ammonium molybdate 
b) Sodium molybdate 


E-4.1.1.8 Selenium 
a) Sodium selenate 
b) Sodium selenite 
E-4.1.2 Vitamins, Pro-Vitamins and Chemically Well 
Defined Substances Having A Similar Effect — 
The following substances are included in this category: 


a) Preferably derived from raw materials occurring 
naturally in feeding stuffs 


b) Synthetic vitamins identical to natural vitamins 
only for monogastric animals 


c) During a transitional period synthetic vitamins of 
types A, D and E may be used for ruminants in so 
far as the following conditions are met: 


i) the synthetic vitamins are identical to the 
natural vitamins; and 


ii) the authorization issued is founded on precise 
criteria. 


(Producers may benefit from this authorization only if 
they have demonstrated that the health and welfare of 
their animals cannot be guaranteed without the use of 
these synthetic vitamins) . 


E-4.1.3 Microorganisms The following 
microorganisms are included in this category: 


Microorganisms such as lactobacillus, yeast, etc., that 
are not genetically modified. 


E-4.1.4 Preservatives — The following substances are 
included in this category: 

a) Sorbic acid 

b) Formic acid 

C) Acetic acid 

d) Lactic acid 

e) Propionic acid 

f) Citric acid 
(The use of lactic, formic, propionic and acetic acid 
in the production of silage shall be only permitted 


when weather conditions do not allow for adequate 
fermentation.) 


E-4.1.5. Binders, anti-caking agents and coagulants - 
The following substances are included in this category: 


a) Calcium stearate of natural origin 

b) Colloidal silica 

c) Kieselgur 

d) Bentonite 

e) Kaolinitic clays 

f) Natural mixtures of stearites and chlorite 

g) Venniculite 

h) Sepiolite 

j) Perlite 
E-4.1.6 Antioxidant substances — The following 
substances are included in this category: 

Tocopherol — rich extracts of natural origin 
E-4.1.7 Silage additives - The following substances are 
included in this category: 

enzymes, yeasts and microorganisms that are not 

genetically modified. 

E-4.2 Certain products used in animal nutrition — The 
following products are included in this category: 


Brewer’s yeasts 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


E-4.3 Processing aids used in feeding stuffs 
E-4.3.1 Processing aids for silage — The following 
substances are included in this category: 

a) Sea salt 

b) Coarse rock salt, 

c) Whey 

d) Sugar 

e) Sugar beet pulp 

f) Cereal flour 

g) molasses 


E-4.4 Biologicals and Immunologicals in feed 
a) Colostrum powder / whole colostrum (provided 
that it is preferably derived from animals that are 
reared under organic farming). 
b) Ayurvedic and plant-derived products that are 
claimed to have immuno potentiating properties. 


17 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX F 
( Clause 4.9.8.1 ) 


ENZYMES AND THEIR SOURCES PERMITTED FOR USE IN LIVESTOCK/ POULTRY 


Name of the Enzyme 


Source 


i) Alpha-Amylase 


Aspergillus niger,var. 
Aspergillus oryzae, var. 
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 
Bacillus lentus 

Bacillus licheniformis 
Bacillus stearothermophilus 
Bacillus subtilis, var. 
Barley malt 

Rhizopus niveus 


Rhizopus oryzae, var. 


ii) Maltogenic alpha-Amylase 


Bacillus subtilis 


iii) beta-Amylase 


Barley malt 


iv) Cellulase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 
Humicola insolens 


Trichoderma longibrachiatum (formerly reesei) 


v) alpha-Galactosidase 


vi) beta-Glucanase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 

Mortierella vinaceae var. raffinoseutilizer 
Saccharomyces sp. 

Aspergillus niger, var. 

Bacillus lentus 

Bacillus subtilis, var. 

Humicola insolens 


Trichoderma longibrachiatum (formerly reesei) 


vii) f-Glucosidase 


Aspergillus niger 


viii) Glucoamylase also known as amlyo 
- glucosidase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 
Aspergillus oryzae, var. 
Rhizopus niveus 


Rhizopus oryzae, var. 


ix) Hemicellulase 


Aspergillus aculeatus 
Aspergillus niger, var. 
Bacillus lentus 
Bacillus subtilis, var. 
Humicola insolens 


Trichoderma longibrachiatum (formerly reesei) 


X) Invertase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 


Saccharomyces sp. 


18 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


Name of the Enzyme 


Source 


x1) Lactase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 
Aspergillus oryzae, var. 
Candida pseudotropicalis 


Kluyveromyces marxianis var.lactis (formerly Saccharomyces sp.) 


xii) beta-Mannanase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 
Bacillus lentus 


Trichoderma longibrachiatum 


xiii) Pectinase 


Aspergillus aculeatus 
Aspergillus niger, var. 


Rhizopus oryzae 


xiv) Pullulanase 


Bacillus acidopullulyticus 
Bacillus licheniformis containing Bacillus 


deramificans gene for pullulanse 


xv) Xylanase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 
Bacillus lentus 
Bacillus subtilis, var. 
Humicola insolens 


Trichoderma longibrachiatum (formerly reesei) 


xvi) Lipase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 
Aspergillus oryzae, var. 
Candida rugosa (formerly cylindracea) 


Rhizomucor (mucor) miehei 


Rhizopus oryzae 
Rhizomucor (Mucor-) miehei 
Rhizopus oryzae 
xvii) Bromelain Pineapples — stem 
fruit 
xviii) Ficin Figs 
ix) Papain Papaya 


xx) Protease (general) 


Aspergillus niger, var. Aspergillus oryzae, var. 
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens 
Bacillus licheniformis 


Bacillus subtilis, var 


xxi) Catalase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 


Micrococcus lysodeikticus 


xxii) Phytase 


Aspergillus niger, var. 


Aspergillus oryzae, var. 


19 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX G 
( Clause 4.10.2 ) 
LIST OF DISEASES FOR HERD / FLOCK DIAGNOSIS 


G-0 In consultation with the veterinarian a program 
of health management of the animals shall be drawn 


up and testing of the herd shall be carried out for the 
following diseases: 


G -1 CATTLE INCLUDING BUFFALOES 


a) Brucellosis 

b) Leptospirosis 

c) Mastitis 

d) Tuberculosis 

e) Para-tuberculosis 


G-2 SHEEP AND GOAT 


a) Brucellosis 

b) Leptospirosis 

c) Tuberculosis 

d) Para-tuberculosis 


G-3 PIGS 


a) Swine fever 
b) Brucellosis 


G-4 POULTRY 


a) Mycoplasma gallinarum 
b) Fowl Typhoid 


ANNEX H 
( Clause 4.10.4 ) 


ANTIBIOTIC / ANTIBACTERIAL WITHDRAWAL PERIOD 


SI No. Intramammary Preparations Discard time for milk 
i) Benzathine cloxacillin 72 h (of milk discard) 
il) Cloxacillin sodium 48 h (of milk discard) 
ili) Hetacillin potassium 72 h(of milk discard) 
iv) Procaine penicillin G (Peanut oil) 84 h (of milk discard) 


WITHDRAWAL PERIODS (SHEEP AND GOATS) 


SI No. Drug Pre-Slaughter Withdrawal Time (days) 
1) Chlortetracycline (Oral) 2 
ii) Procaine penicillin-G 9 

iii) Procaine penicillin-G, dihydrostreptomycin sulphate 30 
iv) dihydrostreptomycin sulphate 30 
v) Erythromycin 3 
vi) Sulphamethazine 10 
vii) Sulphamethazine (Oral) 10 
viii) Sulphaquinoxaline (Oral) 10 
ix) Sulpfisoxazole (Oral) 10 
x) Tetracycline (Oral) = 
xi) Thiabendazole (Oral) 30 


20 


WITHDRAWAL PERIODS (SWINE) 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


SI No. Drug Pre-slaughter withdrawal 
time (days) 

1) Chlortetracycline (Oral) 2 
ii) Procaine penicillin-G 30 
iii) Procaine penicillin-G, dihydrostreptomycin sulphate 30 
iv) Dihydrostreptomycin sulphate 30 
v) Erythromycin 7 
vi) Ampicillin trihydrate 15 
vii) lincomycin hydrpchloride 2 
viii) Oxytetracycline HCl 26 
ix) Tylosin 4 
x) Amoxycillin trihydrate (oral) 15 
xi) Ampicillin trihydrate (oral) 15 
xii) Chlortetracycline, Sulphathiazole, Procaine penicillin (oral) 7 
xiii) Chlortetracycline, sulphamethazine, penicillin (oral) 15 
xiv) Chlortetracycline HCI (oral) 5 
xv) Dihydrostreptomycin (oral) 30 
xvi) Erythromycin (oral) T 
xvii) | Furazolidine (oral) 5 
xviii) | Hygromycin B (oral) 2 
xix) Lincomycin (oral) 

xx) Nystatin (oral) -- 
xxi) Oxytetracycline (oral) 26 
xxii) | Penicillin 50gm/900kg ffed (oral) 0 
xxii) | Spectinomycin dihydrochloride pentahydrate (oral) 21 
xxiv) | Streptomycin, sulphathizole, phthalylsulphathiazole (oral) 10 
Xxv) Sulphachloropyridazine sodium (oral) 4 
xxvi) | Sulphaethoxypyridazine (oral) 10 
xxvii) | Sulphamethazine (oral) 15 
xxviii) | Sulphaquinoxaline (oral) 10 


WITHDRAWAL PERIODS (POULTRY) 


SI No. Drug Pre-slaughter withdrawal 
time (days) 

i) Bacitracin 0 

ii) Carbomycin 1 

iii) Chlortetracycline 

iv) Erythromycin 2 

v) Gentamycin sulphate (inj) 35 

vi) Lincomycin 5 

vii) Monensin sodium 5 

viii) Nitrofurazone 5 


21 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


SI No. Drug Pre-slaughter withdrawal 
time (days) 

ix) Novobiocin 4 

x) Oleandamycin = 


xi) Oxytetracycline (50-200gm/900kg feed) 
xii) Penicillin (2.4-125 gm/900kg) 


xiii) Spectinomycin 5 
xiv) Sulphadimethoxine 5 
Xv) Sulphaquinoxaline 10 
xvi) Tylosin Phosphate 5 


Reference : Jones Veterinary pharmacology and Therapeutics Vth edition. Toxicity of drug and chemical residues 


ANNEX J 
( Clause 4.14.2 ) 


PRODUCTS AUTHORIZED FOR CLEANING AND DISINFECTION OF 
LIVESTOCK BUILDINGS AND INSTALLATIONS 


a) Potassium and sodium soap, j) Natural essences of plants, 

b) Water and steam, k) Citric, peracetic acid, formic, lactic, oxalic and 
c) Milk of lime, acetic acid, 

d) Lime, m) Alcohol, 


e) Quicklime, n) Nitric acid (dairy equipment), 


f) Sodium hypochlorite (for example as liquid P) Phosphoric acid (dairy equipment), 
bleach), q) Formaldehyde, and 


g) Caustic potash, r) Sodium carbonate. 
h) Hydrogen peroxide, 


ANNEX K 
( Clause 4.15.1 ) 


FOOD ADDITIVES INCLUDING CARRIERS FOR USE IN PRODUCTION OF PROCESSED 


ORGANIC FOOD 
International Name of Additive/Carrier | Use in Preparation Conditions for Use 
Numbering System of Food Products 
INS 170 Calcium carbonate y Not for use for colouring/ 
calcium enrichment of products 
INS 220 Sulphur dioxide V 
INS 270 Lactic acid V 
INS 296 Malic acid 
INS 290 Carbon dioxide y 
INS 300 Ascorbic acid y For meat products 
INS 306 Tocopheroles, mixed, natural Y Antioxidant for fats and oils 
concentrates 


22 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


International Name of Additive/Carrier | Use in Preparation Conditions for Use 
Numbering System of Food Products 

INS 322 Lecithin y For milk products (to be 
obtained without use of bleaches 
and organic solvents) 

INS 325 Sodium lactate y For milk based and meat 
products 

INS 330 Citric acid V 

INS 331 Sodium citrate 

INS 333 Calcium citrate 

INS 334 Tartaric acid 

INS 335 Sodium tartarate 

INS 336 Potassium tartarate 

INS 341 Mono calcium phosphate 

INS 400 Alginic acid V For milk based products 

INS 401 Sodium alginate Y For milk based products 

INS 402 Potassium alginate y For milk based products 

INS 406 Agar V For milk based and meat 
products 

INS 407 Carrageenan Y For milk products 

INS 410 Locust bean gum y 

INS 412 Guar gum Y 

INS 414 Arabic gum y 

INS 415 Xanthum gum V 

INS 422 Glycerol 

INS 440 Pectin y For milk based products 

INS 464 Hydroxy propyl methyl For encapsulation material for 

Cellulase capsules 

INS 500 Sodium carbonate y For milk product substances 

INS 501 Potassium carbonate 

INS 503 Ammonium carbonate 

INS 504 Magnesium carbonate 

INS 509 Calcium chloride y For milk coagulation 

INS 516 Calcium sulphate Restricted; For use only as 
carrier 

INS 524 Sodium hydroxide 

INS 551 Silicon dioxide 

INS 553 Talc Coating agent for meat products 

INS 938 Argon Y 

INS 939 Helium y 

INS 941 Nitrogen Y 

INS 948 Oxygen y 


23 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX L 
( Clause 4.15.1) 


PROCESSING AIDS AND OTHER PRODUCTS FOR USE IN 
PROCESSING OF INGREDIENTS 


Product Use in Preparation Conditions for Use 
of Food Products 
Water Y Potable water 
Calcium chloride Coagulation agent 
Calcium carbonate Coagulation agent 
Calcium hydroxide 
Calcium sulphate Coagulation agent 
Magnesium chloride Coagulation agent 
Potassium carbonate 
Sodium carbonate 
Lactic acid Y For regulation of pH of brine bath in cheese production 
Citric acid V For regulation of pH of brine bath in cheese production; oil 
production and hydrolysis of starch 
Sodium hydroxide 
Sulphuric acid V Gelatin production 
Hydrochloric acid V Gelatin production 
Ammonium hydroxide V Gelatin production 
Hydrogen peroxide Y Gelatin production 
Carbon dioxide Y 
Nitrogen Y 
Ethanol Y Solvent 
Tannic acid Filtration aid 
Egg white albumin 
Casein 
Gelatin 
Isinglass 
Vegetable oils Y Greasing, releasing or antifoaming agent 
Silicon dioxide gel 
Activated carbon 
Talc In compliance with the specific purity criteria for food additive 
Kaoline V 
Cellulose V Gelatin production 
Diatomaceous earth y Gelatin production 
Perlite y Gelatin production 


Hazel nut shells 


Rice meal 


Bee wax 


Releasing agent 


24 


Flavouring Agents 


a) Volatile (essential) oils produced by means of 
solvents such as oil, water, ethanol, carbon dioxide 
and mechanical and physical processes 

b) Natural smoke flavour 

c) Use of approved natural flavouring preparations 

Preparations of Micro-organisms 

a) Preparations of micro-organisms accepted for use 
in food processing 

b) Genetically modified 


microorganisms are 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


excluded 
c) Bakers yeast produced without bleaches and 
organic solvents 
Ingredients 
a) Drinking water 
b) Salt 


c) Minerals (including trace elements) and vitamins 
where their use is legally required or where 
severe dietary or nutritional deficiency can be 
demonstrated. 


ANNEX M 
( Clause 4.16.2 ) 


APPROVED ADDITIVES FOR USE IN MANUFACTURING OF PACKAGING 
FILMS FOR PACKAGING OF ORGANIC FOODSTUFF 


M.1 Certain additives for use in manufacturing of means that the use of these inputs shall be subject to 


packaging films for packaging of organic food stuff are 
allowed for restricted use .In this annex "restricted" 


conditions. 


S. No. Products Limitation 
i. 4,4’-Bis(2-benzoxazolyl)stilbene Restricted 
ii. 9,9-Bis(methoxymethyl)fluorine Restricted 
iii. Carbonic acid, copper salt 
iv. Diethyleneglycol Restricted 
V. 2-(4,6-Diphenyl-1,3,5-triazin-2-yl)-5-(hexyloxy)phenol 
Vi. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, copper salt Restricted 

Vii. 2-(2-Hydroxy-3,5-di-tert-butyl-phenyl-5-Chlorobenzotriazole 

viii. 2-Methyl-4-isothiazolin-3-one Restricted 

ix. Phosphoric acid, trichlorocthylester 

X. Polyesters of 1,2 propanediol and/or 1,3-and 1, 4 butanediol and/or Restricted 
polypropyleneglycol with adipic acid, also end-capped with acetic acid or 
fatty acids C10-C18 or n-octanol and/or n-decanol 

xl. 1,1,1-Trimethylolpropane Restricted 

xil. 3-hydroxybutanoic acid 3-hydro xypentanoic acid, Copolymer Restricted 


25 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


ANNEX N 
( Clause 4.18.5 ) 
PRODUCTS FOR PLANT PEST AND DISEASE CONTROL 


N-1 ertain products are allowed for use in organic Many of these products are restricted for use in organic 
agriculture for the control of pests and diseases in plant production. In this annex “restricted” means that the 
production. Such products should only be used when use of these inputs shall be subject to conditions. 
absolutely necessary and should be chosen taking the 

environmental impact into consideration. 


S.No Inputs Condition for use 
Substances from plant and animal origin 
i) Azadiracta indica Permitted 
ii) Neem oil Restricted 
iil) Preparation of rotenone from Derris elliptica Lonchocarpus, Thephrosia spp Restricted 
iv) Gelatin Permitted 
v) Propolis Restricted 
vi) Plant based extracts — garlic, pongamia etc. Permitted 
vil) Preparation on basis of pyrethrins extracted from Chrysanthemum Restricted 
viii) | Cinerariaefolium, containing possibly a synergist Pyrethrum cinerafolium 
ix) Preparation from Quassia amara Restricted 
x) Preparation from Ryania species Restricted 
xi) Tobacco tea Not permitted 
xil) Lecithin Restricted 
xii) | Casein Permitted 
xiv) Sea weeds, sea weed meal, sea weed extracts, sea salt and salty water Permitted 
xv) Extract from mushroom (Shiitake fungus) Permitted 
xvi) Extract from Chlorella Permitted 
xvii) | Natural acids (vinegar) Restricted 
xviii) | Minerals 
xix) | Chloride of lime/soda Restricted 
Xx) Clay (for example perlite, vermiculite, zeolite) Permitted 
xxi) | Copper salts / inorganic salts (Bordeaux mixture, copper hydroxide, copper Restricted 


oxychloride) used as a fungicide depending upon the crop and under the 
supervision of the Certification Body 


xxii) | Mineral powders (for example stone meal,) Not allowed 
xxii) | Diatomaceous earth Restricted 
xxiv) | Light mineral oils Restricted 
xxv) | Permanganate of potash Restricted 
xxvi) | Lime sulphur (calcium polysulphide) Restricted 
xxvil) | Silicates, clay (Bentonite) Restricted 
xxvill) | Sodium bicarbonate Permitted 
xxix) | Sulphur (as a fungicide, acaricide, repellant) Restricted 


xxx) | Microorganism used for biological pest control 


26 


IS 16550 (Part 2) : 2021 


S.No Inputs Condition for use 
xxxi) | Fungal preparations Trichoderma spp, Metarhizium, Bauveria, Verticillium, Permitted 
Noumeria, etc) 
xxxil) | Bacterial preparations Bacillus spp, Pseudomonas fluorescens) Permitted 
xxxill) | Release of parasites, predators, natural enemies of pest and sterilized Insects Permitted 
xxxiv) | Others 
xxxv) | Carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas Restricted 
xxxvi) | Soft soap (potassium soap) Permitted 
xxxvil) | Ethyl alcohol Not allowed 
xxxviil) | Homeopathic and ayurvedic preparations Permitted 
xxxix) | Herbal and biodynamic preparations Permitted 
XXxx) | Traps 
xxxxi) | Physical methods (chromatic traps, mechanical traps, sticky traps and Permitted 
pheromones 


27 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 22 (2772). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


