(Reaffirmed 2012)

1s : 7688( Part 11) - 19%

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS
PART II
Food Hygiene, Chairman DR RANJIT SEN Members AGRICULTURAL M A R K E T I N c Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ); Faridabad ;;;::;A TO THE GOVERNMENT
SHRI T. V. MATHEW ( Alternate ) Institute of Agricultural Research Statistics ( ICAR ), SHRI V. N. AMBLE New Delhi SHRI K. S. KRISHNAN( Alternate ) Health Officer, Corporation of Calcutta DR G. C. DAS All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, DR P. K. DATTA Calcutta The Metal Box Company of India Limited, Calcutta SHRI K. c. DE SHRI V. K. KARNIK ( Alternate ) National Dairy Research Institute ( ICAR ), Karnal SHRI SUKUMAR DE DR C. A. MULAY ( Alternate ) Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi SHRI 0. P. DHAMIJA Central Food Laboratory, Calcutta DIRECTOR Directorate General Armed Forces Medical Services DIRECTORGENERAL. ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi MAJ-GEN DARYAO SINGH ( Alternate ) Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay EXECUTIVE HEALTH OFFICER MUNICIPALANALYST ( Alternate ) Corporation of Madras HEALTH OFFICER Health Department, Municipal Corporation of Delhi COL KEWAL KRISHNA DR A. D. KUMAR ( Altrrnate ) Department of Health & Family Planning, GovernDR ( SMT ) S. KHOSLA ment of Punjab, Chandigarh Food & Nutrition Board ( Ministry of Agriculture & DR P. K. KYMAL Irrigation ), New Delhi DR 0. N. A~ARWALA ( Alternate ) Defence Food Research Laboratory (Ministry of MAJ V. A. NARAYANAN Defence ) , Mysore DR G. M. VERMA ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 )

GUIDELINES
and Analysis

ON
Sectional

CLAIMS
Committee, AFDC 36

Sampling

Representing Serologist to the Government of India (Directorate General of Health Services ), Calcutta

@ INDIAN

Copy&n

1976 INSTITUTION

STANDARDS

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of capyrigh t under the said Act

IS : 7688 ( Part II ) - 1976 ( Continucdfrom page 1 )
Representing Members Government of West Bengal, Calcutta PUBLIC ANALYST (FOOD AND WATER ) PUBLICANALYST ( BACTERIOLOGY ) ( Alternate ) National Institute of Communicable Diseases, Delhi DR A. N. RAI CHAWDHURI Central Food Technological Research Institute DR T. N. RAMACHANDRA RAO ( CSIR 1, Mvsore `. . SHRI C. T. DWARKANATH( Alternate ). Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters, COL K. SEETARAM New Delhi LT-COL D. D. VOHRA (Alternate ) SENIOR MEDICAL 0 P F I c E a Northern Railway, New Delhi ( HEALTH ) Public Analyst, Government of Uttar Pradesh, DR S. B. SINGH Lucknow Public Analyst, Government of Tamil Nadu, Madras SHRI N. SRINIVASAN Directorate of Sugar & Vanasnati, (Ministry of DR M. R. SUBBARAM Agriculture & firigation) _ . . . SHRI I. A. SIDDI~I ( Alternate ) Vallabhbhai Pate1 Chest Institute, Delhi DR T. A. V. SUBRAMANIAN Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of DR M. C. SWAMINATHAN Health & Family Planning ), New Delhi SHRI D. S. CHADHA ( Alternafe ) The Coca-Cola Export Corporation, New Delhi SHRI P. C. VIN SHRI J. D. CONTRACTOR( Alternate ) Director General, IS1 ( Ex-o&o Member) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM, Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ) SHRI SOHRAB Deputy Director ( Agri & Food ), IS1

Ad-hoc Panel on Food Labelling and Advertising, AFDC 36 : Pl
SHRI D. S. CWADHA Members DR K. T. ACHAYA SHRI RAJAT MITRA ( Alternate ) SMT T. JACOB DR S. JAYARAMAN COL KEWAL KRISHNA DR A. D. KUMAR ( Alternate ) Protein Foods and Nutrition Development Association of India, Bombay Lady Irwin College, New Delhi Directorate of Marketing & Inspection ( Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation ), Faridabad Health Department, Municipal Corporation of Delhi Directorate General of Health Services ( Ministry of Health & Family Planning ), New Delhi

2

IS : 7688 ( Part II ) - 1976

Indian Standard
CODE OF PRACTICE FOR LABELLING OF PREPACKAGED FOODS
PART II GUIDELINES ON CLAIMS

0. FOREWORD
0.1 This Indian
Standard ( Part II ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 31 August 1976, after the draft finalized by the Food Hygiene, Sampling and Analysis Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.

0.2 Food labelling is an essential component in all food processing Industries. The purpose is to tell the consumer, in correct manner, about the contents of The consumers want to know the food inside the package or container. what a package contains to be sure that they are not paying for an unknown quality and quantity of the food in the package. This leads to the necessity of enumerating on the label the ingredients, net contents and other essential points about the food in the package. It is also equally important that the declarations and claims made on the label are true and reflect the product packed. 0.3 This standard is being issued in three parts. This part covers guidelines on labelling claims of prepackaged foods. Parts I and III cover general guidelines and nutritional labelling respectively. 0.4 This standard Adulteration Act, is subject to the provisions of the Prevention 1954 and the Rules framed thereunder. of Food

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard ( Part II ) lays down guidelines various kinds on the label of prepackaged foods.
2. TERMINOLOGY for making claims of

2.1 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions, in addition those given in IS : 7688 ( Part I )-1975* and IS : 7655-1975t shall apply.

to

2.2 Dietetic Claim - This relates to (a) higher or lower than normal content or the absence of a particular substance and/or (b) physical, chemical, *Code of practice for labelling of prepackaged foods: Part I General guidelines. tCodc of practice for food advertising.

3

IS : 7688 ( Part II ) - 1976
biological or other property of the food by reason of which the implication arises that the food is suitable to meet the special nutritional requirements of persons whose digestive process or metabolism are disturbed or who on account of age or other conditions are liable to obtain benefit from a controlled consumption of foodstuffs ( see 5 ). 2.3 Medical Claims - This relates to the suitability of a food for use in the prevention, alleviation, treatment or cure of a disease or symptoms of a disease, disorder or physiological condition ( see 6 ). 2.4 Nutritional Claims - This relates to the claim of the presence of particular substances by reason of which the food may be used in the selection of a balanced diet. Statements of quantity only, as envisaged in nutritional labelling and, in particular, vitamin and mineral labelling, imply such claims [ see IS : 7688 ( Part III )-1976* 1. Mere declaration of a nutrient in the list of ingredients without quantity or for technological reasons only would not imply such claims ( see 4 ). 3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES

3.1 A claim shall comply with the general principles given in IS : 7688 (Part I l-1975? and IS : 7655-1975: in particular with respect to any possibility of misleading the consumer. 3.2 A food shall not bear any label constituting a claim which cannot be substantiated or the special properties claimed for the food are of marginal additional benefit to the consumer, having regard to the products of like composition available in the market where the product is to be sold. 3.3 When a claim is made, it shall be factual, truthful and capable of being objectively substantiated with speci.fic technical data or by means of comparative figures, when the claim is made in the form of a comparison. 3.4 The term `natural' may be used on a label only in association with a product which is raw, unmixed, contains no additives and has not been subjected to any preservation process other than chilling or freezing. 3.5 The term `home made' may be used on the label with a product produced in a home kitchen. 3.6 The term `fresh' may be used to describe significantly to deteriorate in overall quality. only in association

foods that have not begun provided it

3.7 Religious or ritual preparation of a food may be claimed does not hurt religious sentiments of the consumers.
*Code

ofpractice for labelling t Code of practice for labelling

SCode of practice

of prepackaged of prepackaged for food advertising.

foods: foods:

Part III Nutritional labelling. Part I General guidelines.

4

IS:7688 4. NUTRITIONAL CLAIMS

(PartII)-1976

4.1 No food label should contain

any claim that may mislead the consumer as to the composition, character or action of a food or as to its suitability for the nutritional purpose for which it is recommended. Exaggerated claims should not be made.
NOTE- Rounded off figures for joules (J )* ( or kcal ), ingredients, etc, may be given, provided rounded off figure does not disturb the relevance of the result claimed.

4.2 No claims may be made that a food is a significant source of a nutrient unless the nutrient is present in the food at a level equal to one-third of the Recommended Daily Allowance ( RDA ) in a expected daily consumption. No claim may be made that a food is nutritionally superior to another food unless it contains substantially more of the RDA of the claimed nutrient per unit mass. 4.3 No foodlabel should contain a claim: a ) for any particular value derived from food or its ingredients unless that value can be wholly contributed by, or derived from that food; b ) as to the nature or effect of such food based on its ability to provide energy unless, joules ( or kcal ) content is significant, with regard to the normal recommended consumptions of such food and includes a true statement of the joules ( or kcal ) in 100 g or 100 ml of that food; and c ) as to the nature or effect of such a food suggesting that it is a source of protein unless at least 12 percent of the joules ( or kcal ) of such food is provided by protein. 4.4 No label shall include any words or description which constitutes:

a>

claim that vitamins or minerals are present in that food unless that food contains one or more of the substances established to contain vitamins and minerals, and is accompanied by a true statement of the minimum quantity of each such substance per 100 g or 100 ml as the case may be; and
a general

b)

any claim or suggestion that a particular substance specified is present in that food unless it is accompanied by a true statement of the minimum quantity of every such substance contained in 100 g of food.

4.5 The term enriched shall be used on the label only to describe the addition of vitamins, mineral nutrients or amino acids to a food which normally would contain the added nutrients.
4.6 The term fortified shall be used on the label only to describe addition of vitamins, mineral nutrients or amino acid to food which normally may not contain these nutrients. * 1 kilocalorie ( kcal ) = 4186.8 joules (J ).

5

IS : 7688 ( Part II ) - 1976 5. DIETETIC CLAIMS 5.1 Slimming Claim - No label should include any words, device or description calculated to indicate that the food is an aid to slimming or to weight control or reduction unless such food is capable of making definite and positive contribution to weight reduction.
5.2 Diabetic Claims - No label should indicate specially prepared for diabetics, unless: that the food has been

a) the carbohydrate content of the food calculated by mass is substantially less than the carbohydrate content of similar foods not sold as diabetic food, the carbohydrate content and_joules thereof expressed in g/l00 g and joules or kcal/lOO g respectively; and b) the carbohydrates in the food, either in the ingredients used to make the food or added as an extra component has been specially prepared or chosen to suit the needs of diabetics, and are free from sucrose. 6. MEDICINAL CLAIMS

6.1 No label shall indicate either directly or indirectly that the food has or medicinal properties or properties which make it restorative, tonic, beneficial for invalids or which will cure, alleviate or prevent disease, unless:
a) the food contains a substance or substances in such quantity as to confer such properties, or in the case of an indication as to tonic properties, unless the food contains substances, other than alcohol, carbohydrate, protein or caffeine or other purine derivatives, in such quantities as to confer tonic properties, and, in every case, unless accompanied by a true statement of minimum quantity of each such substance present in the food ( calculated by mass and expressed as a percentage of the mass of the food ) and if a specific purpose is claimed, of the amount of such food which has to be consumed to achieve that purpose; or b) the food is sufficiently deficient in a substance or substances as to confer properties in the food which can be expressed as percentage of the minimum quantity of the substances that have or have not been removed. 6.2 No label should hold out a promise of cure or contain any statement likely to endanger the health of any person suffering from illness. In particular, care should be taken in the case of illness requiring medical attention. No food label should contain any matter which may be regarded as an offer of a food product for the treatment of any serious illness which should rightly receive medical attention.

6

IS : 7688 ( Part i1) - 1976 6.3 No label should, without justifiable reason, induce fear on the part of the consumer that he is suffering, or may without treatment suffer, or suffer more severely, from an ailment, illness or disease. 6.4 No label should contain any reference to doctors, or hospital tests, unless such reference may be substantiated by independent evidence, and may be properly used in the manner proposed. This also applies to the use of the dress or the surrounding in a manner likely to convey an impression of independent professional medical advice or recommendation. 6.5 No label should contain the terms college, institute, laboratory, or similar terms, unless the establishment referred to genuinely corresponds to the description used. 7. PROHIBITED CLAIMS

7.1 The following types of claims shall be prohibited: a) Misleading claims, claims, b) Unsubstantiated

c) Medical claims with exceptions ( see 6 ), d) Meaningless claims including meaningless comparatives and superlatives, e) Claims which give rise to doubts about the safety of similar foods, f) Claims which arouse or exploit fear in the consumers, g) Claims as to an organic nature or origin of food. and

fNfb)iAld ON

S'fArjIbAlib~

FOOD ADVERTISING AND LABELLING
IS: 7655-1975 Code of practice for food advertising of prepackaged foods: Part 1 General foods: foods: Part Part II III

7688 ( Part I )-I975 Code of practice for labelling guidelines 7688 (Part 7688 (Part II )-I976 Code of practice Guidelines on claims III )-I976 Nutritional Code of practice labelling for

labelling

of prepackaged of prepackaged

for labelling

