**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 5151 (1969) : Method for Evaluating the Relative 
Efficiency of Wetting Agents for Mercerization [TXD 5: 
Chemical Methods of Test] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 5151 -1969 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR EVALUATING THE 

RELATIVE EFFICIENCY OF WETTING 

AGENTS FOR MERCERIZATION 

( Second Reprint JANUARY 1982 ) 



UDC 677I62-3 ;66I185-001-4 




© Copyright 1969 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, t BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI M0002 

August 1969 



m 



AMENOHENT NO. 1 NAY 1983 

TO 

IS:5151-1969 METHOD FOR EVALUATING THE REUTIVE 
EFFICIENCY OF WETTING AGENTS FOR MERCERIZATION 

(This aaeodaent baa been carried out for giving the 
details of preparation of vetting agent and caustic 
Soda solution) 

Alteration 

{Ptxge S^ clause 4«3.1^ Note 2) - Substitute the 
folloving for the existing note: 

*HOTE 2 -- It is often better to mix the vetting 
agent thoroughly vith small Yolume of the caustic 
soda solution before adding this to the bulk of the 
mercerising solution. It should be particularly 
noticed vhether the vetting agent remains veil dls- 
X>ersed or dissolved » because separation of an 
immiscible layer on the surface vould entirely 
viciate the results and give false values.' 



(TDC 5) 



Reprography Unit* ISI» lev Delhi, India 



I8t5151-19fS 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR EVALUATING THE 

RELATIVE EFFICIENCY OF WETTING 

AGENTS FOR MERCERIZATION 

Chemical Methods of Test Sectional Ck^mmittee, TDC 5 

Chairman IUpf$S0ntuig 

Dh P, C. Mshta Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research AMociatioa* 

Ahxnedabad 

Mtmbns 

Db S. M. BETRABErr Cotton Technological Research Laboratory ( ICA& )» 

Bombay 
Sbri K. S. Bhujano Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Shri B. B. Chakravbrti Superintendence Company of India ( Private ) Ltd. 

Calcutta 
Shbi T. K. Ghosh ( AlUmaU ) 
Db N. F. Desai Sandoz ( India } Limited. Bombay 

Shbi Y. H. Desai I. C, I. ( India ) Private Ltd, Calcutu 

Shri K. S. Srinivasan ( Alttmau ) 
DiBECTOR.or Hakdloomb Government of Madras 

SuBi K. Ramamubthy ( AUernaU ) 
Sbri M. H. Doshi Silk and Art Silk Mills* Association Limited, Bombay 

Shri J. G. Parikh ( Alttmau ) 
Db a. S. Dutt Indian Jute Industries' Research Association, CalcuttB 

Sbri S. K. Dutta Ahmedabad Manufacturing & Calico Printing Co Ltd, 

Ahmedabad 
Shri C. L. Gupta Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) 

*— Shri R. S. Agabwal ( AlUrnaUy 
Shri K. B. Kul.ka.rni Textile Auxiliaries Manufacturers' Association, 

Bombay 
Dr V. P. KuLKARKi All India Handloom ttoard, Bombay 

Dr S. H. Mhatrb The Bangalore Woollen, Cotton & Silk Mills Co Ltd, 

Bangalore; and Hxe Buckingham & Cai-natic Co 
Ltd, Madras 
Shri S. M. Mistry Association of Merchants & Manufacturers of Textile 

Stores & Machinery, India, Bombay 
Dr K. I. Narasimhan Office of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Db V. N. NiOAM Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Shri K. K. Ganguly {AlUrnaie ) 
Dr M. V. NriCKAR The Millowners* Association* Bombay 

Shri Gordhambhai H. Patbl Shri Dinesh Mills Ltd, Baroda 

( Contimud on pag€ 2 ) 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



IS:5151-19^; 

{ Conttnwd from pag$ I ) 

Members Riprisenttng 

Shki I. L PATEr. Inspection Wing, Directorate General of SuppYiet & 

Disposals ( Ministry ofWorks, Hoiuing & Supply ) 
Shhi a. K. Pramanick ( Atttmatt ) 
Repbeskntative National Test House, Calcutta 

SiiKi N. S. Saraiya The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shui Jamnadas K. Shah The Raipur Manufacturing Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Shri R. C. Shah Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association, 

Ahmedab-^d 
Shri G. V. Sninoi k -i The Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co Ltd, Delhi 

Shri G. K Pak ,jpk [AlUrnaU) 
Shri N S Simu] Directorate of Industries, Government of Punjab 

Shri A Stjhuamanian The Ahmedabad Millowners.' Association, Ahmedabad 

Ok R V R SrwKAMANiAN The Silk & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, 

Bombay 
Shri S- M CiiAKRABOnTV, Director General, ISI ( Ex-ojficio Member ) 

Director ( Tex ) 

Secretary 

Shri D. R. Kohli 

Assistant Director ( Tex ) , ISI 

Textile Auxiliaries and Desizing Agents Subcommittee, TDC 5:6 

Converur 
Shri K. S. Bhujang Oflfice of the Textile Commissioner, Bombay 

Members 

Or N. F. Desai Sandoz ( India ) Limited, Bombay 

Dh R. M. Drbai Sardesai Brothers Limited, Bombay 

Shri D, V, Patwabdhan ( AUemaU)^ 
Shri M D. Dixit The Bombay Textile Research Association, Bombay 

Shri V.'M. Kai.e Hormosynth Chemical Corporation, Bombay 

Shri I. Y Mahajan Shree Shakti Mills Limited, Bombay 

Shri S. M. Mistry Ahura Chemical Producu Private Ltd, Bombay 

Shri M. S. Mhaiskab {Alurnate) 
Shri R. C Mody Anil Starch Products Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Shri D. Bhattacharyya ( AltemaU ) 
Shri Jayanti Parekh Dai-ichi Karkaria Private Limited, Bombay 

Shri B. B. Baoaikotk ( AUemaU ) 
Shri J. R. Patil Hico Products Private Limited. Bombay 

Shri V. L. Modak ( Alternate ) 
Shri Jamnadas K, Shah The Raipur Manufacturing Co Ltd, Ahmedabad 

Shri K. V, Shenoy Ciba of India Limited, Bombay 

Shri T. Sadasivak ( AlUmaU ) 
Shri K. S. Srinivasak L C. I. ( India ) Private Limited, Calcutu 

Shri Y. H. Desai ( AlterruOe ) 



IS I 5151. 1969 

Indian Standard 

METHOD FOR EVALUATING THE 

RELATIVE EFFICIENCY OF WETTING 

AGENTS FOR MERCERIZATION 

0. FOREWORD 

0*1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution 
on 30 June 1969, after the draft finalized by the Chemical Methods of Test 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 

0.2 To facilitate uniform, thorough and speedy impregnation of textile 
materials which is much desired in mercerizing, wetting agents are exten- 
sively used. I'Vom among the varieties of commercial wetting agents, the 
textile processor has to choose the one suitable for his requirements. 
Formulation of standard method of test for determining the relative effi- 
ciency of wetting agents used for mercerization is, therefore, necessary. 



1. SCOPE 

1*1 This standard prescribes two methods for evaluating the relative 
efficiency of wetting agents used in the mercerization of cotton textiles. 

2. PRINCIPLE 

2.1 In the first method the time required for complete wetting of a bundle 
of yarn or canvas disc in caustic soda solution containing the wetting agent 
is determined. For the same concentration of different wetting agents, 
lesser the wetting time, higher is the efficiency of wetting agent. In the 
second method, a single cotton thread is allowed to contract in caustic soda 
solution containing the wetting agent for definite time and the contraction 
is determined. Higher the contraction, more efficient is the corresponding 
wetting agent. 

3. REAGENTS 

3.1 Q^lity of Reagents — Unless specified otherwise pure chemicals 
shall be employed in tests and distilled water shall be used where the use 
Df water as reagent is intended. 

NOTK — < Pure chennicah ' shall mean chenicalathat do not contain impurities which 
affect the tett results. 



ISt5151-lM9 

3J2 CaustiG Soda Solution— 300 g/L 

NoTB — The solution ihould be allowed to stand and supernatant clear solution be 
uied. 

4. FIRST METHOD 

4.1 Apparatus and Materials 

4.1.1 Beakers or Glass Jars — of 600 ml capacity. 

4.1.2 Measuring Pipettes — graduated in 005 ml. 

4.1.3 Measuring Flask — of 500 ml capacity. 

4.1.4 Stop-Watch — to read correct to one-tenth of a second. 

4.1.5 A Special Holding Device — made of stiff stainless steel wire with a 
coil about 50 mm in diameter at one end and a hook in the centre of the 
coil to hold the test specimen {see Fig. 1 ). 




— THREAD 
LOOP 



Fio. 1 Apparatus for Determination of Wetting Time 

4 



IS s 5151- 1969 

4.1.6 Cotton Tarn or Cotton Canvas 

Cottonyarn — grey, unboiled, 15 lex X 2 (or 40*/2) combed, long staple. 
Cotton canvas — grey, unboiled, 615 g per m*. 

4.2 Preparation of Test Specimens 

4,2.1 From the grey cotton yarn, cut out the required number of bundles, 
each containing 160 parallel ends, 25 mm in length. In case of canvas, 
cut out the required number of test specimens of size 25 X 25 mm with 
the help of a die. Aiiernarively, prepare test specimens of 25 mm 
diameter. 

Note 1 — The cotton yams may be tied by single thread of the same quality 
( jM 4.1.6 ) to form the bundle. 

Note 2 — The square pieces may be cut with sharp pair of scissors. Precautions 
should be taken that there are no frayed ends. 

4*3 Procedure 

4«3*1 Take a 600-ml beaker or glass jar. Pour 500 ml of caustic soda 
solution at 27 ± 2°G. Pipette out 3*75 ml of one of the wetting agents 
( see Note 1 ) under test. Stir the contents until the wetting agent is 
dissolved completely in caustic soda solution {see Note 2), Allow the 
solution to stand until all air bubbles have risen to the surface, 

NoTB 1 — It is presumed that the mercerizing wetting agents are mostly liquids. 

NoTK 2 — It should be particularly noticed whether the wetting agent remains well 
dispersed or dissolved, because separation of an immiscible layer on the surface would 
entirely vitiate the results and give false values. 

4.4 In case of yarn Drop one bundle carefully on the surface of caustic soda 
solution. Start the stop-watch and note the time required for complete 
wettinjf of all the ends. 

And in case of canvas attach a loop of thick sewing thread about 
100 mm in perimeter to one corner of the test specimen. Attach the speci- 
men through the loop to th^.j^ire holder. Hold the wire holder with one 
hand and the test specimen with the other. Immerse the test specimen in 
caustic soda solution gently such that the specimen remains upright in the 
solution and the thread of the loop is also straight [see Fig. 1 ). Start the 
stop»watch. Note the time required for the specimen to sink as indicated 
by limning of the thread. 

4.5 Repeat the test {see 4.4) for four times for the same concentration of 
the wetting agent and calculate the average sinkinir tim' 

4.6 Repeat the test {see 4.4 and 4.5) with different concentrations of 
wetting agents, say, by adding 5*00 ml and 6*25 nil each time instead 



ISi5151.1969 ' 

of 3*75 ml of wetting agent in caustic soda solution, and calculate the 
average sinking tinne for each concentration separately. 

NoTB — If the mercerizing agent to be tetted is too efficient or too inefficient to 
obtain a comparison within the range of the volume* already employed then either 
■mailer ( 1*25 ml, 2*50 ml ) or larger ( 1000 ml, 12-50 ml ) volumes of the product 
should be tested 

4.7 Plot a graph showing the average sinking time against the correspond- 
ing concentrations of wetting agents in ml per 500 ml o£ caustic soda 
solution. Similarly, plot the graphs for the other wetting agents under test 
on the same graph paper. 

4.8 From the graphs obtained as in 4*7, determine the wetting time for 
each wetting agent under test for specific concentration, say, 5"00 ml of 
wetting agent. 

4.9 Compare the I'esults to determine the relative wetting power of the 
wetting agents under test bearing in mind that lesser the wetting time, the 
higher is the efticiency of the wetting agent. 

5. SECOND METHOD 

9*1 Apparatus and Materials 

5.1.1 A 50-ml graduated burette in O'l ml with a two way stopcock and 
a side arm — the side arm being connected to a reservoir. 

5.1.2 A Slop-WaUh — to read correct to one-tenth of a second. 

5.1.3 Coilon Tarn--' grey, unboiled 15 tex X 2 (or 40«/2) combed, long 
staple cotton. 

5.2 Procedure 

5.2.1 To one end of the cotton yarn tie a one-gram weight. Adjust the 
yarn in such a way that the knot tied on the weight coincides with the 
50-ml mark of the burette. The other end of the yarn is fitted above the 
burette in such a way that the yarn is in the central position {see Fig. 2). 
Prepare separately solutions containing four different concentrations of the 
wetting agent under test. Draw into the burette 50 ml of the solution from 
the reservoir and start the stop-watca when the level of the solution reaches 
the zero mark. Observe the contraction in one minute {see Notes 
under 4.3.1 ). 

5.2.2 Repeat the test for nine times for the same concentration of wetting 
agent in the solution. Calculate the average of the tep determinations. 

5.2.3 Calculate percentage contraction as follows: 

Difference in burett e readin g ,qq 
~~50^ 

5.3 Similarly, determine the percentage contraction for other concentrations 
of the wetting agent. 

G 



IS 1 5151 '1969 



COfJNCCTEO XC 
PE5EHV0IR 




Fio. 2 Apparatus for Determination oh Yarn Contraction 

5.4 Similarly, determine the percentage contractions for the other wetting 
agents at the same four concentrations {see Note under 4.6). 

5.5 Plot a graph showing the average percentage contraction against 
concentration of wetting ageTit. Similarly, plot the graphs for the other 
wetting agents under test on the same graph paper. 

5.6 From the graphs obtained in 5.5, determine the percentage contraction 
for each wetting agwit^^nder test for specific concentration. 

5.7 Compare the results to determine the relative wetting power of the 
wetting agents under test bearing in mind that higher the percentage 
contraction^ higher is the efficiency of the wetting agent. 



INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS ) 



Base Unks 








QrianUty 


Unit 


Sj^mboi 




Length 


metre 


m 




Mass 


kilogram 


kg 




Time 


second 


t 




rJectric current 


ampere 


A 




Thermodynamic 


krlvin 


K 




icmprraturc 








Luminous inlcniity 


candcla 


cd 




Amount of substance 


mr»lr 


mol 




Supplementary Units 








Qiianttty 


Umt 


Symbol 




Plane angle 


radidn 


rad 




Solid ancrle 


stcradian 


sr 




Derived Units 








Qiiantttjf 


Unit 


Symbol 


Definition 


Fo'-ce 


ncwton 


N 


1 N-lkgm/s* 


Energy 


joule 


J 


I J-iN.m 


Power 


watt 


W 


1 W-1 J/s 


Flux 


weber 


VVb 


1 VVb-1 V.s 


Fiux density 


tei^la 


T 


1 T-i Ub/ms 


Frequency 


hertz 


Vz 


1 Hz --= Jc/s(8-^) 


Electric conductance 


sic'TJ^rns 


s 


i S-1 A/V '^ 


Kleciromotivc force 


vuU 


V 


1 V^\ W/A 


Pressure, stress 


Pascal 


Pa 

M 





INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUl 

Manah niiavan, 9 Ji.Jjadwr Shah 7ah» M&fg, NhW^ 



Telephones i 26 60 21, 27 01 31 

Itfgicnal OfftctsT 

Western ; Novelty Chambrrs. Giant U<iad 

Eastern : 5 Chowiwfrhrc Af>j)io,)r)) 

Southern : C LT Campus, Adyar 

Noffhern : B 69, Phase VII 

Bratiik Ojfica : 

*PufhpAk\ Nurmobamrd Shaikh Marg, Khanpiii 

*l'*niork, Unity Blrlg, NaiasiMilu»rdia Squaie 



'fUIorlc, Unity IJIMR, iNaiasiMiiu»rd)a Equate ttAlNt .AI.l^KK ^ 

Gangoiri Complex, Bhadbbada Road. P, T. Nagar UHOPAL 4^2003 



Telegrams I !) lanakeniiettia 

Tclcphon* ^ 
nOhfH'W 4U0O07 
f Al.(/in JA 700'>72 

MAHU AS finno2o 

S. A. S. N\C;AU 

(MOHALI) ir.OO'il 
AHMAI>AHAD 300001 
HANC.AT.OUK 560002 



37 97 29 
27 50 90 
41 24 42 


2 03 91 
2 76 4P 
6 27 16 



t2K Kalpana Aiea 

J.«-36C L N. Gupta Marg 

R 14 Yudhisrer Marg. C Scheme 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar 

Patllputra Industrial Kstate 

Hsntex BIdg (2nd Floor K Riv Station Road 



nilUBANKSHWAR 751014 5 56 27 



HYDKRARAD 500001 
JAIPUR 302005 
KANPUR 208005 
PATNA 80001S 
TRIVANDRUM CQ'iOOl 



22 10 83 

6 98 32 

4 72 92 

6 28 08 

S2 27 

Printed at today A Tomorrow's Prtntors & Publishers l^ew Delhi India, 



