IS/IS0

8626 : 1989

( Reaffirmed 2002 )

Indian Standard

SERVO-HYDRAULIC TEST EQUIPMENT FOR GENERATING VIBRATION METHOD OF DESCRIBING CHARACTERISTICS

ICS 17.160

0 BIS 1996 B`UREAU
MANAK

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

April

1996

Price Group

12

Mechanical

Vibration

and Shock Sectional

Committee,

LM 04

NATIONAL

FOREWORD

This Indian Standard which is identical with IS0 8626 : 1989 `Servo-hydraulic test equipment for generating vibration - Method of describing characterist.ics', issued by the International Organisation for Standardization (ISO), was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of the Mechanical Vibration and Shock Sectional Committee and approval by the Light _ Mechanical Engineering Division Council. In the adopted standard, certain terminology and conventions are not identical Indian Standards; attention is especially drawn to the following: a) Comma (,) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards is to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. b) Wherever the words `International be read as `Indian Standard'. Standard' with those used in the current practice they should

appear referring to this standard,

In this adopted standard. reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence for the editions indicated: International IS0 2041 :. 1975 IS0 4413 : 1979 Standard Corresponding Indian Standard Degree of Equivalence Identical Technically equivalent

IS 11717 : 1985 Vocabulary on vibration and shock IS 10481: 1983 Guide for applications and installations of oil hydraulic systerns

The concerned technical committee has reviewed the provisions of IS0 3746 : 1979, IS0 4406 : 1987 and IS0 6070 : 1981 referred in this adopted standard and has decided that these are acceptable for use in conjunction with this standard.

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

Indian Standard SERVO-HYDRAULIC TEST EQUIPMENT FOR GENERATING VIBRATION METH0.D OF DESCRIBING CHARACTERISTICS

0

Introduction
Standard covers the characteristics used for generating of servo-

In order to enable the possibilities afforded by test equipment from different sources to be compared, this International Standard establishes linear vibrations a) a list of the characteristics; the standard method of obtaining' certain of these

This International hydraulic

test equipment

and serves as a guide

for the selection

of such equipment.

NOTE - For the purposes of this International Standard, servohydraulic test equipment is more simply referred to as "hydraulic test equipment" The term "hydraulic" means that the vibratory movement produced results from the variable flow of a liquid which is generally ensured by means by a hydraulic power one or several control of an electrohydraulic control device fed system and acting on an actuator, using loops.

b)

characteristics.

This International Standard provides two levels of description to be used in describing the test equipment, as follows: a)
b) level

.b

1 description;

level 2 description.

The hydraulic test equipment for generating schematic diagram of which is shown in figures prises

vibration, a 6 and 7, com-

It gives, for each level of description, tween the user and the manufacturer,

chosen -by agreement bea list of the characteristics

the complete hydraulic vibration generator I hydraulic vibration generator(s), servovalve device(s), hydraulic power systeml, control auxiliary other desks, tables,

-

system control

to be described by the manufacturer in his tender as well as a list of technical documents to be supplied with the equipment. Furthermore, the manufactorer's characteristics corresponding literature shall contain at least the to a level 1 description.

This International static hydraulic force

Standard vibration compensating

applies to the following generators control device devices systems [actuators, device and, (see clauses

equipment: servovalves, if fitted, the 5, 6 and 711;

-

peripherals.

NOTE - Control desks will be dealt with in a future International Standards. Auxiliary tables are covered by IS0 6070. Clauses 6, 7, 8 and 9 enable the user to specify separately individual components of a servo-hydraulic vibration test system if he chooses to assemble the system obtained from more than one source. If the user chooses to acquire the vibration test system from a single clauses 6, 9 and 10. from components

all or part of the position

the servovalve the hydraulic the complete

control power

(see clauses 5, 6, and 81; (see clauses 5, 6 and 9); systems

hydraulic

vibration

generator

(see clauses complete servo-hydraulic source, he shall refer to

5, 6 and 10).

2 1 Scope and field of application
used for generating vibration has which can be evaluated in many IS0

References
2041, Vibrations and shock Vocabulary.

The hydraulic test equipment a wide range of characteristics different ways.

IS0 3746, Acoustics - Determination noise sources - Survey method. 1

of soundpower

levels of

IS/IS0

8828

: 1989

IS0 4406, Hydraulic fluidpower level of contamination IS0 4413, application

-

Fluids -

Method

for coding

kh

Linear Height

hydraulic

stiffness CI

by solid particles.

L me ml

of the test mass (see annex element

Hydraulic fluid power General rules for the of equipment to transmission and control systems. Methods

Mass of the moving

(see 5.5.5)

Test masses (I = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5) (see 5.4) Supply Maximum Flow Flow pressure supply pressure by the servovalve power system

IS0 6070, Auxiliary tables for vibration generators of describing equipment characteristics.

PS P S.NlClX

9c

rate generated

3
A a
ab %

Symbols
Useful cross-section Acceleration Maximum r.m.s acceleration under random conditions 9 "" s S u u SO
V x

rate of the hydraulic operator amplification voltage

Laplacian Dynamic Control

factor loop amplifier conditions input at the

at the position

Noise acceleration with the amplifier input in the absence of a control signal - being loadedwith an impedance equivalent to the impedance of the signal source. Maximum no-load acceleration Maximum acceleration Viscous damping Longitudinal velocity (see annex C) (see 5510.1) (see 5.5.10.2) (see 5.5.7.2.1.1)

Rated r.m.s. input

voltage

under sinusoidal

of the servovalve

Velocity Displacement R.M.S. tions value of displacement under random condi-

a0 amax

xb

b c d
do

&

Reduced Tranverse also annex

damping

factor coefficient (Poisson ratio) (see

P

contraction C)

Total distortion

Rated total distortion

V

Modal Density

frequency

D E
f f, mm f max

Diameter of the test load Longitudinal elasticity (Young's modulus)

e cp

Operational Acceleration PSD)

noise power spectral density (acceleration

Fundamental frequency Minimum frequency used Maximum frequency used Smallest modal annex Cl frequency of the load test (see

@if) e(f)

Displacement PSD)

power

spectral

density

(displacement

fo foh
FO

Normal hydraulic mode frequency (see 5.5.6) Rated force (see 5.5.7.2.1.2) under sinusoidal conditions

4

Units
manufacturer or the user gives values required by this International Standard, the units and state, where peak or peak-to-peak necessary, values. for the he shall the

When the parameters clearly define values

whether

F ob F oml

Rated random force, broad-band

(see 5.5.7.2.2)

are r.m.s.,

Rated force under sinusoidal conditions for a test mass mt (see 5.5.7.2.1.1) (the index f represents the various masses) Static force (see 5.5.7.1)
Standard Hydraulic acceleration transfer of free fall (due to gravity)

5

Definitions
of this International Standard, in IS0 2041 and the following the gsneral definitions

F,, gn
f&(S) HIV)

For the purposes definitions given apply.

function characteristic at constant current

Acceleration transfer (see clause 6.1)

Servovalve input current
`SO

5.1 hydraulic vibration generator: A test device in which the vibratory linear movement of the test table or power takeoff 1) is produced by the action of a fluid on a piston. A schematic diagram of the test table power generator is shown in figure 7. take-off vibration

Rated r.m.s. current under sinusoidal input of the servovalve

conditions

at the

1)

Throughout

the text, where for simplicity's sake "test table" has been used, read "test

table or power take-off"

2

IS/IS0 8626:1989

The hydraulic

vibration

comprises

the constituent

parts defined

5.3.3

hydraulic

pump:

Equipment

which

produces

the flow

in 5.1.1 to 5.1.3.

rate and pressure necessary for feeding the hydraulic vibration generator; it can have a constant or variable flow rate. element: Constituent part comprising the 5.3.4 pressure regulator: Equipment which keeps the pressure between certain limits fixed by the vibration generator manufacturer; it may have a proportional or on-off action.

5.1.1 piston -

moving

rod, the piston the moving

and,. if fitted,

table,

the connecting element between the piston rod and the power take-off, if it is other than part of the rod,

-

the moving the moving

part of the position

transducer, system.

5.3.5 filtration system: Series of filters in the reservoir discharge and return circuits which keep the hydraulic circuits clean, as required for servovalve applications.

parts of the anti-rotation

5.3.6 5.1.2 if fitted. 5.3.7 5.1.3 ted, order test. 5.3.8 5.2 which servovalve is to ensure the conditioning conditions, of the moving element is mainof the control signals under static and control device: Device the function of gravity in certain compensation cases, forces device: caused Constituent vibration by the material part fitin to the hydraulic generators return) pedestal: Constituent part that connects the body of the actuator to the foundation, the reaction mass or baseplate,

heat

exchangers: of the hydraulic

Devices fluid

which

maintain within

the the

temperature temperature

in the reservoir

range set by the manufacturer.

accumulator: for circuits pressure

Pressurized surges

fluid

reservoir

which

comand

pensates

in the hydraulic hammering

(discharge

and attenuates

in the installation.

to resist the static

under auxiliary equipment: (see 10.32). Equipment comprising the ac-

cessories and safety

used, the device providing systems

information,

and the alarm

dynamic -

5.4 test masses, m,: Mechanical masses selected by the manufacturer and used for the testing of hydraulic vibration generators.
NOTE ~~ For requirements on shape, dimensions, flatness, roughness and fixing of the test mass, see annex C. surface

that the mean position (see note 11, and

tained -

that the harmonic

disiortion

factors

are minimized

(see

note 2). 5.4.1 NOTES 1 In certain cases or for certain servovalves, the valve may not include the hydromechanical position transducer; this should then be a
function 2 of the control to minimize system. the harmonic distortion factors, this device

test

mass

Q:

The special

case where

the test mass is

zero and only the moving

table is driven.

5.4.2

test

mass

nl,

: A load permitting
sinusoidal

a peak acceleration

of

approximately

lg under

conditions.

In order

velocity or pressure data in addition to the vibration signal and its slide valve position data.

may be fed with acceleration,

5.4.3 test mass m2: A load permitting a peak acceleration approximately 4g under sinusoidal conditions.

of

5.3

hydraulic

power for

supply: feeding

The complete the

hydraulic

in5.4.4 test mass log ~1~: A load permitting under sinusoidal a peak acceleration of approximately conditions.

stallation generators.

necessary

hydraulic

vibration

A schematic

diagram

is given

in figure

8.

5.4.5 test mass mq: A load permitting a peak acceleration approximately 209 under sinusoidal co`nditions.

of

The hydraulic power supply designed for feeding the hydraulic vibration generator is generally made up of the elements defined in 5.3.1 to 5.3.8

5.4.6 test mass ~77~: A load permitting a peak acceleration approximately 4Og under sinusoidal conditions.

of

5.3.1 hydraulic hydraulic power

fluid: supply

The power transfer agent between and the vibration generator.

the

5.5

Quantities

5.5.1 5.3.2 reservoir: Container pump. for storing depends the hydraulic fluid and flow the capacity of which generally on the maximum

supply

pressure,

ps:

The pressure

produced

by the

hydraulic pressure pascals.

power system at the flow rate qc,. The supply is measured at the pressure regulator outlet in bars or

rate of the hydraulic

3

IS/IS0 8626

: 1989

5.5.2

flow

rate

of the

hydraulic

system,

qVn: The maxi-

mum flow

rate which can be delivered by the power system at the supply pressure, ps, measured at the pressure regulator output in litres per minute or cubic centimetres per second.

5.5.7.2 dynamic forces: These the following two main variables: a) b) the frequency;

are generally

a function

of

the type of load on the moving

element.

5.5.3

Travel

5.5.3.1

rated

travel:

The limits,

in millimetres,

within

which

Practical loads may include spring forces and/or damper forces which will influence the performance of the generator. Characteristics of vibration generators are normally specified for mass loading which is the basis of this International Standard. A manufacturer tuator performance loading, if required. should, however, be expected to give ac with pure spring loading or pure damper

the moving element operates and beyond guaranteed

of the vibration generator normally which the performance is no longer

by the manufacturer.

5.5.3.2 travel between stops: safety margins at each limit which

The rated travel plus the are to be used for braking.

5.5.7.2.1

Dynamic

forces

under

sinuskdal

conditions

5.5.7.2.1.1 rated test force, I-, ,,,,,, for a specific test mass, /Hi: l-his is the maximum force whch can !IC introriuced in a 5.5.4 moving rated velocity, element which A',: Maximum can be obtained velocity amplitude of the condiFO,,,, = F" Uf, a max = 111, (I,,,, test mass, l)rl, without use of any resonant etfect. under sinusoidal

tions with test mass `no without the use of any resonance effect. The rated velocity is given in millimetres per second or metres per second.

The maximum acceleration ijrnnX is defined in connectlon with the test loads (see 5.4). The frequency range in which (I,,,~~ can be obtained is the rated frequency range for the test load /!I,.

5.5.5

mass

of

the

moving

element,

m,:

The

mass,

in 5.5.7.2.1.2 vibration rated force, f-0: The rated dynamic generator force

kilograms,
NOTE fluid.

of the moving

element,

as described

in 5.1

.l.
hydraulic

t, that the

can supply for all the test masses VI, (see 5.4).

This mass does not include

the mass of the moving

5.5.6

frequency given

of the normal by the following

hydraulic formula:

model,

,Joh: The

NOTE ~ The ratetl dynamtc force, I ", may be different from the static load force, I ., ;~nri ~houlrl not cause any fatigue damage of the actuator.

frequency

kh fob = & me + ml

5.5.7.2.2 rated random value of the force under with has a behaviour system which similar to that density (PSD) of uniform

force, broad-band, EL,: Minimum random conditions in a broad band corresponds to a power 5). spectral acceleration tag,within the frequency

test mass U/~. This force to /h (see 5.5.8,

Indeed

the hydraulic

generator

band,/3

5.5.9 and figure

of a single degree-of-movement ing parameters:

has the follow-

NOTE

a total

moving

mass tne + /)I, k,
h may be disregarded.

a hydraulic
-- The viscous

stiffness
damping

5.5.8 Random displacement/acceleration spectral density (PSD)

power

For test applications using servo-hydraulic vibration test equipment, both the acceleration power spectral density, NJ, and the related significant. displacement power spectral density, 0(/j, are

5.5.7

force:

For the purposes

of this International developed

Standard,

the force

in newtons

or kilonewtons,

by a hydraulic 5.5.8.1 limiting acceleration value of $$ value power when spectral density, O(f)

vibration generator which can be delivered to a load mounted on the test table or connected to the power take-off, i.e. output force.

: The
I/~ is

_I,/ tends-towards waveform

zero, where with band

the r.m.s. 5.5.7.1 moving section static force, Fs, (at zero velocity): The force of the element at zero velocity and supply pressure 11~; this is of the supply pressure ps and the useful cross5.5.8.2 limiting n

of an acceleration and _I/

Gaussian centred

amplitude distribution about frequency 1:

is a frequency

the product

:

displacement

power

spectral

density,

(I(/):

The

.Xbi value of .zwhen value

11.f tends towards waveform

zero, where _v,, is with band Gaussian centred

Fs, = ps A
the r.m.s.
NOTE -- If fitted, the gravity compensation definition (see 5.1.3 and 7.2.7). device does not affect this

of a displacement and

amplitude distribution about frequency ,f:

LJ/ is a frequency

4

IS/IS0 8828:1989

off frequency f4, a second cut-off the highest operating frequency,

The graph of the acceleration and displacement power spectral density functions may be specified in terms of the lowest operating frequency f,, a displacement-velocity transition frequency f2, a velocity-acceleration transition frequencyfs, a cut-

5.5.9.2 following

r.m.s. value formula :

Of aCC&ratiOR,

ab: Value given by the

frequency f5, if required, and f6.Between f, and f2 the

displacement power spectral density is constant, between and f4 the acceleration power spectral density is constant. The values for the displacement various frequency ranges and acceleration 1.

f3

PSDs for the

are listed in table

Table

1 -

Values

for displacement

and acceleration

PSDs

5.5.9.3 The formulae given in 5.5.9.1 and 5.5.9.2 simplified where particular frequency bands are omitted. example is lower become in the case where than the first the highest cut-off operating frequency, the frequency,

are For

f4,

fs,

formulae

:

f2 < f < h

2 ecJl = $0,

J2 @J(f) = @, .A*
00 @,cfl = q

f3

< f

< f4

SCf,

=

~

(f3f2I2
f4

I

I
I

f4

< f

< f!j

1

I
I

.Qy,

=

(f4f3f2 ___ P (f5f4f3f2 18

I2 00
I

@y,+D,

4
CJCJ-I = (f4f5 I2 ~ .f4 @l

fs

< f

6 fs

ey,

=

j2 0,

.f > .fs

e(f)

=

0

I

@If)

=

0

I

The crest factor

shall be at least 3.

In table

1
The rated travel (see 5.5.3.1) shall be at least twice stops. the r.m.s. to 1 ___ value of the displacement, avoid contacting xb, multiplied by the crest factor

e, =
5.5.9

(27Tf*F

@o

the mechanical

R.M.S.

values

of displacement

and acceleration

5.5.10 by There ferent

Distortion

5.5.9.1 r.m.s. VahJe Of displacement, the following formula:

xb:

Vahf?

giVen

are two

definitions

with

respect using

to distortion the following

with

dif-

values for d, determined

formulae:

d

=

Jo2- 4
al

where

0 and al are as defined

in 5.5.10.1.

IS/IS0

8626 : 1989

With respect to the operational determined by the formula

noise (p, the distortion

is often

The velocity distortion

is expressed

by the following

formula

:

I
fmin

Q$_fJdf
5.5.10.1.3 displacement distortion: When signal is integrated again to obtain a displacement harmonic distortion components of displacement displacement the velocity signal, if the than the

where GxxV) is the PSD of the signal; of the basic signal.

are larger

noise, which may be the case, the displacement If displacerather than acceleration distortion" distortion

will be less than the velocity distortion.

f

ment distortion is the frequency

d is intend-

ed, the words "displacement The displacement mula distortion

shall be clearly stated. for-

5.5.10.1

Total

distortion,

d (see figure 1)
distortion: An acceleration signal a

is expressed by the following

:

5.5.10.1.1

acceleration

may be considered as made up of components following formula :

as given by the

d =
x

~(l,b~~dtj* + g2(&)'
=

a=zjp2+a,2+a22+a32+

. ..+a.Z=

d

n

al
4n2J;

(42+

i=

c

ai
1

=

Jx2Xl

x,2

where

a is the r.m.s. value of the acceleration; a,
is the r.m.s. value of the component of acceleration at the fundamental ponent desired;
"2, 03, . . . a,

5.5.10.2 rated total distortion, the total distortion, d, determined the rated frequency

d,: The maximum value of at maximum acceleration in

frequency f, which is usually the only com-

range, for a given test mass. See figure 2.

are the r.m.s.

values of the harmonic

com-

ponents at frequencies 2f 3f, . . . components of significant value;

nf, where n includes all

5.5.11 noise: Noise is caused well as by the control loop.

by the measuring

system

as

cp is the operational The total distortion,

noise (see 5.5.11.2).

5.5.11.1

background

noise:

The

r.m.s.

or peak-to-peak band, with

d, is the ratio between all of the undesired
and the desired acceleration, al

acceleration components

:

value of the vibratory motion, in a given frequency the input signal of the system at zero. NOTE The background noise acceleration,
control device input loaded with impedance

d = 4p2 + a22 + a32 + .,. + an2
01 n

=

servovalve timum

ua, is defined with the an Impedance equivalent device adjusted for op-

to the signal source control

and the control

performances.

=

d

(P2 +

i=2

c

ai =
&z-G

5.5.11.2 vibratory

operational motion,

noise,

p:

The

residual band,

value

of the

in a given frequency

with a control

signal present. p is the r.m.s. value of the "noise", or non-harmonically related

5.5.10.1.2

velocity

distortion:

When the acceleration

signal

acceleration -

components,

caused usually by:

is integrated to obtain a velocity signal, each component is divided by its own frequency and the ratio between the harmonic components and the fundamental is deduced. If the harmonic components are much larger than the noise, as is usually the case, the velocity distortion will be much lower than the acceleration distortion. If velocity rather than acceleration distortion is intended, the words "velocity distortion" shall be clearly stated.

line frequency

pick-up into the servovalve control, the actuator

start-stop friction in the servovalve and/or

(jack), impacting of loose parts in the specimen flow effect at controlling being tested,

turbulence valves.

edges of servo-

6

IS/IS0

8626 : 1989

/ / / / / / / / / / /

mO

/

0

10

Frequency Acceleration

Figure 1 - Total distortion at a fixed frequency as a function of the acceleration

Figure 2 - Total distortion as a function of the frequency at maximum acce!eration for a given test mass

5.5.11.3 signal-to-noise ratio : Value derived from technical causes, expressed in decibels, and given by the following formula

6 Characteristics to be supplied by the manufacturer for each level of description
Attention is drawn to the fact that the two levels of description adopted in this International Standard do not relate to the qual-

:

2Olg

"

ity or size of the test equipment. A level 1 description may be adequate test apparatus whereas, under certain description would be, for example, for a large, high-quality circumstances, a level 2 required for a small,

where a is the maximum conditions permissible acceleration under

medium-quality

test apparatus. required shall usually depend on the

sinusoidal ag

at rated force F,,,,, and test mass mg; The level of description noise acceleration (see 5.5.11.1). use to which This the equipment Standard different is to be put. also gives the relevant of the characvibration

is the background

5.5.12 dither: High frequency signal introduced into the signal in the servovalve control device to linearize the servovalve zero crossing order to improve region, and also to decrease the friction in the resolution of the valve and actuator.

International for system.

teristics generator

matching

components

The characteristics indicated by an "X" in tables 2 to 5 shall be supplied when demanded by the particular level of description. The characteristics which are not required for a particular level of description, i.e. those which are not marked with an "X", may, however, be supplied if agreed between the manufacturer and the user. NOTE - Attention is drawn to the need to specify these particular characteristics at the time of enquiry and when ordering because their cost, which can be high, has to be taken into consideration. Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5 give a list of the characteristics to be described by the manufacturer as a function of the chosen level of description. Explanations of the listed characteristics are given in clauses measuring certain 7, 8 and 9. Explanations of methods for of these characteristics are given in annex B.

5.5.13 transverse acceleration ratio: The ratio between the transverse acceleration and the axial acceleration; this may be related to test loads and frequency.

5.5.14 mean position deflection under load: Applying a load results in the first mean position being displaced, which is a function of the characteristics of the position control loop.
The differential pressure on each side of the piston resulting from opening the servovalve statically balances the external forces. The opening of the servovalve therefore depends on the loads to be balanced, the leakage flow rate and the mean position error of the piston. It is controlled by the mean position control loop.

7

is/Is0

8626 : 1989

Table

2 -

Vibration

generator Reference to corresponding clause

Characteristic General characteristics
Hydraulic supply conditions Characteristics of the servovaive Static force Rated velocity Rated frequency ranges Limitations of characteristics under sinusoidal conditions Limitation of characteristics under random conditions Rated force under sinusoidal conditions, F,,,,

T

Level of description 1

____-.__
2

1

Rated random force, broad-band, Fob Ijniformity of the acceleration field of the test table Transverse motion of the test table Limitation of characteristics Moving element Mass Rated travel Travel between electrical safety devices Travel between stops Normal hydraulic mode frequency Hydraulic stiffness Gravity compensation device Maximum transverse load Rated static transverse load Transverse static stiffness Static friction of moving element Dimensions of the test table Means of attaching the loads or the materials under test Recommended torque on the threaded inserts or fixing elements in the table Maximum permissible axial force on the threaded inserts or other fixing element Flatness of the test table Perpendicularity of the threaded inserts with respect to the plane of the test table Perpendicularity of the plane of the test table with respect to the axis of the rod Concentricity of axes (exciter power take-off) Coupling tolerances of an auxiliary table Auxiliary equipment

7.1.1 7.1.2 7.1.3 7.1.4 7.1.5 7.1.6 7.1.7 7.1.8 7.1 .s 7.1.10 7.1.11 7.1.12

X

X

X

7.2.1 7.2.2

X

X X

7.2.3 7.2.4 7.2.5 7.2.6 7.2.7 7.2.8.1 7.2.8.2 7.2.9 7.2.10 7.2.11 7.2.12 7.2.13 7.2.14 7.2.15 7.2.16 7.2.17 7.2.18 7.2.19

X X X X

x
X
X X

X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X

X X

Generator shaft position transducer Pressure, force, velocity or acceleration transducer Cooling system Safety systems, alarm and cut-out devices End of travel Actuator force Bearing temperatures Oil flow rate Clogging of the filter
Hoses and cables Installation conditions

7.3.1.1 7.3.1.2 7.3.2 7.3.3 7.3.3.1 7.3.3.2 7.3.3.3 7.3.3.4 7.3.3.5 7.3.4

X
X X

X
X

X X X X
X

General Masses of the vibration generator Vibration generator pedestal Orientation device Dynamic characteristics Fixing conditions Generated sound power level

7.4.1 7.4.2 7.4.3 a) 7.4.3 b) 7.4.3 c) 7.4.4 7.4.5 7.4.6

X X
X

X X X X X

X

Heat dissipation
Test table temperature Environmentel Site Combined tests Documents and operating conditions

7.5.1 7.5.2

X

X

7.6

X

X

8

IS/IS0 8626:1989

Table

3 -

Control

system Reference to corresponding clause

Characteristic

______

Level 1

of description _ 2

Servovalve

control

device, 8.1.1 8.1.2 8.1.3 8.1.4 8.1.5 8.1.6 8.1.7 8.1.8 8.1.9 8.1.10 8.1.11 8.1.12 8.1.13 8.1.14 panel 8.2 8.3 8.4 conditions 8.5 8.6 X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X

Unmodulated input characteristics Modulated input characteristics A.C. source output characteristics D.C. source output characteristics Dither characteristics Characteristics of output to servovalve Characteristics of primary input (from signal sources) Maximum input voltage Transfer functions Total distortion, d Signal-to-noise ratio Stability of the output quantity Gain stability Limitation of characteristics Control Auxiliary Installation Environmental Documents and protection equipment conditions and operating

for a zero input

X

Table

4 -

Hydraulic

power

system Reference to corresponding clause

Characteristic

Level of description 1 [ 2

General

characteristics 9.1.1 9.1.2.1 9.1.2.2 9.2.1 9.2.2 9.2.3 9.2.4 9.2.5 9.2.6 9 2.7 X X X X X X X X

I / 1 C ::
X X X X X

Drive motor characteristics Flow rate/pressure Hydraulic fluid Reservoir Hydraulic pump Pressure regulator Filter system Heat exchanger Accumulators Auxiliary equipment characteristics of the power system

Accessories Indicating equipment Safety systems, alarms and cut-out Installation General Masses of the main part of the hydraulic fluid power system Power consumption Connections Start-up and maintenance Generated sound power level Heat dissipation Cooling medium requirements Environmental Documents and operating conditions conditions devices

9.3.1 9.3.2 9.3.3

X X X

X X X

9.4.1 9.4.2 9.4.3 9.4.4 9.4.5 9.4.6 9.4.7 5.4.8 9.5 9.6

X X X X X

X X X X X

X X X

X X X

9

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

Table

5 -

Complete

hydraulic

vibration

generator

system of description -IX

Characteristic General characteristics
Static force Rated velocity Rated frequency ranges Limitations of characteristics under sinusoidal conditions Limitations of characteristics under random conditions Rated force under sinusoidal conditions, I;,,,,, Rated random force, broad-band, Fob Uniformity of the acceleration field of the test table Transverse motion of the test table Limitation of characteristics Total distortion, test load noise noise d No-load Background Operational

Reference to corresponding clause

Level 1

1

i

2

10.1.1 10.1.2 10.1.3 10.1.4 10.1.5 10.1.6 10.1.7 10.1.8 10.1 .s 10.1 .lO 10.1.11.1 10 1.11 2 10.1.12 10.1.13 10.1.14 10.1.15

X X X
X X

Test under

X X

X X
X X X

Signal-to-noise ratio Dither Input characteristics of the complete hydraulic Output force stability Transient motion of the moving element Servosystem stability Mean position deflection under Gravity compensation device load

vibration

generator

system

10.1.16 10.1.17 10.1.18 10.1.1s 10.1.20 10.1.21

X

X
X

Moving element
Mass Rated travel Travel between electrical safety frequency device load devices Travel between stops Normal hydraulic mode Hydraulic stiffness Gravity compensation Maximum transverse 7.2.1 7.2.2 7.2.3 7.2.4 7.2.5 7.2.6 7.2.7 7.2.8.1 7.2.8.2 7.2.9 7.2.10 7.2.11 under test 7.2.12 7213 7.2 14 7.2.15 inserts with respect to the plane of the test table respect to the axis of the rod 7.2.16 7.2.17 7.2.18 7.2.19 X X X X X X X X X

X
X X X

X
X X

Rated static transverse load Transverse static stiffness Static friction of moving element Dimension of the test table Means of attaching the loads or the materials

X
X

X X X

X

Recommended torque on the threaded inserts or fixing elements in the table Maximum permissible axial force on the threaded inserts or other fixing element Flatness of the test table Perpendicularity of the threaded

X X X X
X X

Perpendicularity of the plane of the test table with Concentricity of axes (exciter power take-off) Coupling Auxiliary tolerances equipment of an auxiliary table

X

Vibration generator transducers Safety systems, alarm, cut-off

10.3.1 and limrtation devtces 10.3.2 10.3.2.1 10.3.2.2 1032.3 10.3.2.4 10.3.2.5

X X

X X

Failure of the electrical supply Failure of the hydraulic supply Electrical level of the input signal Manual emergency cut-off Automatic cut-off by external signal

X

X

10

IS/IS0 8626: 1989

Table

5 -

Complete

hydraulic

vibration

generator system konChd@d)
Reference to corresponding clause Level of description -7 2

Characteristic Installation conditions

General layout Masses of the main parts of the complete vibration generator Foundations for the complete vibration generator system Orientation device Dynamic characteristics Fixing conditions Power consumed Cooling medium External and internal connections Start-up conditions Generated sound power level Heat dissipation Test table temperature Environmental Installation site

10.4.1

X X X X X X X X

X X X X X X X X X

system

10.4.2 7.4.3 al 7.4.3 b) 1.4.3 c) 10.4.4 10.4.5 10.4.6 10.4.7 10.4.8 10.4.9 10.4.10

and operating

conditions
10.5.1.1 10.5.1.2 10.52 10.5.3 10.6 X X X X X

Combined tests Servovalve control device Hydraulic Documents power supply

X X

7
The

Hydraulic
hydraulic and,

vibration
vibration possibly,

generators
comprises force an actuator, device. hydraulic take-off A. a

7.1

General characteristics
mentioned supply in this clause shall be measured has a sufficient being flow rate in of the vibrashall be low the vibration in order not to of the vibration

generator a static

The characteristics with tion a large power generator,

servovalve Schematic vibration

compensation 7 in annex

which

diagrams generator

of a table are given

and power

order not to introduce pressure of the ripple (pressure generation introduce generator. any

any limit in the performance pressure

in figure

the delivered

the rated supply

generator. Furthermore, there noise at input and output of 1 % of the rated pressure) in the operation

The manufacturer hydraulic vibration specified following in 7.1.

shall describe the configuration of the generator used to achieve the performance

less than

I to 7.1.10.

disturbance

The description

shall include

the

information: 7.1.1 Hydraulic supply conditions

a) b)

the type of generator, the type of bearing

with

table or power the actuator

take-off; rod; body The manufacturer requirements for characteristics a) shall specify the following hydraulic supply the servovalve input in order to obtain the in 7.1

for guiding liaisons

c) the nature of the and the base plate; d) et f) g) the presence, the presence the integrated the number

between

the actuator

described

:
flow (the rates for the various stages of the ripple;

the pressures inputs

and hydraulic and outputs etc.)

or not, of a static of an adjustable and/or

force

compensation:

generator servovalve, b) c)

different

bearings, fluid

and the corresponding range; of the hydraulic and its viscosity)

bypass; transducers,

the hydraulic the type and

temperature

associated stages;

characteristics water content

fluid

tin

particular, of servovalve and type

its purity,

which

can be used in the vibration of performance. Its degree constituting each of in accordance

generator without deterioration of cleanliness shall be specified

h) the number the stages; the presence pressure (LPI.

of elements

with IS0 4406.

i)

7.1.2 of accumulators, high pressure (HP) or low

Characteristics

of the servovalve

Furthermore, the manufacturer shall describe, operation process of the servovalve.

in particular,

the

The manufacturer and any attacled istics in sufficient of the servovalve

shall describe the type of servovalve supplied feedback transducers, with therr characterdetail for the user to specify the requirements control device needed to drive the servovalve.

11

IS/IS0 8626:1989

The manufacturer characteristics of characteristics

shall specify the servovalve in 7.1 :

the following in order to

electrical obtain the

The use of the vibration generator lies by the following criteria a)

may be limited at the upper frequen-

:

described

the servovalve characteristics; the resonance the velocity frequency limitations ); limitations (part of the curve placed between established, when relevant, with account of the system; (part of the curve placed between

a)

the' input

impedance,

including

the

equivalent

series

bj c)

resistance b)

and inductance; current, Iso, required to provide the rated

the maximum

points @ d)

and @

performance of the vibration generator, Us,, required to obtain the current I,,;

and the voltage, the manufacturer

the acceleration @ and 0 3

points

shall show the characteristic voltage and current as curves as a function of frequency, of which examples are shown in figure 3 for a single-stage valve spring return; c) the breakdown voltage between any of the input minals and metal body of the generator; d) the characteristics and the transfer function loops; dither (see specified in requireter-

being taken of the leak flow in the bypass); e) the servovalve limitations (part of the curve placed to the right or @ resonance 1; frequencies of the complete system );

side of point @ f) the hydraulic

(part of the curve placed to the right side of point @

or @

of

gl

the transverse

motion of the moving element.

transducers

used in the electrical

feedback

eJ the manufacturer shall also state whether 5.5.12) is required to achieve the performance 7.1.3 to 7.1.5, and, if it is required, ment may be met.

7.1.7

Limitation

of characteristics

under

random

conditions The manufacturer shall specify the limits of PSD acceleration in

how the dither

7.1.3

Static

force,

F,.

which may be applied to different test masses, to,, defined 5.4, as a curve. Figure 5 gives an example of this curve.

The manufacturer shall specify the static force (see 5.5.7.1) within the rated conditions defined in 7.1.1 and 7.1.2.

7.1.8

Rated

force

under

sinusoidal

conditions,

FO,,,,

7.1.4

Rated

velocity

The manufacturer shall specify the amplitude of the rated force with the chosen test masses (5.4) for the frequency ranges given in clause 7.1.5, with the force of gravity being compensated

The manufacturer shall specify the rated velocity of the hydraulic vibration generator (see 5.5.4) within the rated supply conditions defined in 7.1.1 and 7.1.2 (see figure 4).

force

either

by an external

system

in the vibration

generator,

or by an internal generation. operation certain

system

independant

of the dynamic

If the generator

is fitted

with

an adjustable

bypass,

the rated If continuous example for is not possible masses specified. generator specified. and not to in certain conditions. for test or certain frequency bands,

velocity shall be defined for the regulation indicated by the manufacturer.

value of the bypass

these limits shall be clearly 7.1.5 Rated frequency ranges If rated force the complete The manufacturer shall specify the frequency ranges cor7.1.9 Rated random

applies only to the vibration system, it shall be clearly

responding to the rated force, Fo,,,,, (see 5.5.7) for the various test masses (see 5.4) chosen by the manufacturer.

force,

broad-band,

Fob ranges defined

The manufacturer 7.1.6 Limitations conditions of characteristics under sinusoidal

shall specify,

for all frequency

by frequencies .fs and .J4 (see 5.5.8, 5.5.9 and figure 5), the rated random force (see 5.5.7.2.2) that the hydraulic vibration generator can produce in continuous operation.

The manufacturer shall specify the limits of the displacement, velocity and acceleration of the vibration generator for the different test masses (see 5.4), as a curve. Figure 4 gives an example of this curve.

7.1.10 table

Uniformity

of the

acceleration

field

of the

test

NOTE - The use of the vibration generator may be limited at the lower frequencies by the following criteria : a) bl c) harmonic distortion; signal-to-noise ratio; maximum piston travel (part of the curve placed on the left side
).

The manufacturer shall state the uniformity of the acceleration field of the unloaded test table as a function of the frequency giving the acceleration tolerance limits at the fixed points. In the case of slotted test tables, measuring points shall be selected the best possible the worst possible. at least the tollowing on the radius: two

(as close to the centre

as possible);

of point (ij

12

IS/IS0 8626:1989

/ / / / / / / /

\ \ \ \ \ \ \
I

I

/I /I I

1'

f2

f3
Frequency

f oh

I
/

1

f6

1oc

30 > $ 1 10 2 @i
. / / / / / / / \ \ \ \ \ \

/

/I

3
i
fl
I
I I

I
System Servovalve alone

I

I

i

J
f3

I

I(

f oh

f6

__-----

Frequency

Figure 3 -

Example of system and single hydraulic stage servovalve drive requirements

13

IS/IS0

8626 : 1989

- 6 de/octave +6 dB/Octave

- 12 dB/octave + 12 dB/octave

1;=1 $9
Figure 5 -

f,=lO

[=SO <=lOO{=200
of a power spectral density acceleration

Frequency, Hz

Example

(PSD,)

profile

7.1.11

Transverse

motion

of the test table the transverse motion of the

7.2.1

Mass shall specify the mass of the moving element

The manufacturer

shall specify

The manufacturer (see 5.1.1).

test table or the power take-off as a function of the frequency by means of two curves representing the ratio between the transverse motions and the linear motion at the central fixing point. Each of the curves shall correspond directions perpendicular to one of the two orthogonal element. If the central point is not accessible, the position of the to the axis of the moving

7.2.2

Rated

travel shall specify the rated travel of the moving

The manufacturer element

(see 5.5.3.1).

reference

point shall be indicated. 7.2.3 Travel between electrical safety devices the electrical shall be made at no load and, if possible, at manufacturer shall indicate the method

The measurements rated force; the employed

The manufacturer safety devices,

shall specify the travel between or their control ranges.

and the value of the force.

if fitted,

Supplementary measurements of the transverse motion, such as measurements with test loads or measurements away from the central point, shall be carried out if agreed between the manufacturer and the user.

7.2.4

Travel between

stops

7.2.4.1
7.1.12 Limitation of characteristics

Simple mechanical stops
shall specify the travel between mechanical

The manufacturer The manufacturer shall specify all factors limiting the characteristics of the hydraulic vibration generator provided they are not already made clear elsewhere. stops (see 5.5.3.2).

7.2.4.2 7.2

Mechanical

stops with dampers

Moving

element
element of a hydraulic vibration generator com-

The moving prises -

The manufacturer shall specify either the velocity decay, as a function of the displacement for different initial velocities and loads, or the modification of kinetic energy. The manufacturer shall specify if the damping is internal to the generator.

a piston

(0

in figure 7);

a piston rod

(@

in figure 7); in figure 7);

7.2.5

Normal

hydraulic

mode

frequency

a moving table (@) a test table

The manufacturer

shall specify the normal hydraulic mode fre-

(@

in figure 7) or power take-off

(@

quency with a specified test mass and the method by which it is in derived (see 5.5.6.1). An example of the method for measuring the normal hydraulic mode frequency is given in clause 5.1.

figure 7).

15

IS/IS0 8626:1989

7.2.6

Hydraulic stiffness

7.2.12 Means of attaching under test
The manufacturer

the loads or the materials

The manufacturer shall specify the hydraulic stiffness and the method by which it is derived, An example of the method for
measuring the hydraulic stifness is given in clause 6.2.

shall specify

the means

of attaching

the and

loads to the moving element the maximum tightening

(test table or power take-off)

torque of the screws. shall state whether

7.2.7

Gravity compensation

device
In the case of test tables, the manufacturer gravity comor not replaceable threaded inserts have been used and, if so, their position relative to the plane of the moving table.

If the hydraulic generator

contains an integrated

pensation device, the manufacturer shall specify the maximum load which can be compensated and the conditions for regulating the device over the frequency range given in 7.1.5 and the various conditions, such as adjustment of bypass and gravity compensation device.

7.2.13 or fixing

Recommended elements

torque

on the threaded

inserts

in the table shall specify the torque to be applied to the

The manufacturer 7.2.6

Permissible loads on the guiding and positioning devices Maximum transverse load
to the equipment permissible it is static, the'manufacturer instantaneous dynamic or a

threaded

inserts or fixing elements.

7.2.8.1

7.2.14

Maximum permissible axial force on the threaded inserts or other fixing element per-

In order to avoid damage shall specify the

maximum

transverse load, and state whether combination of the two.

The manufacturer shall specify the value of the maximum missible axial force per threaded insert or fixing element.

7.2.15 The maximum transverse load perpendicular to the vibration axis, imparted at the level of the test table, shall be applied to at least three positions of the shaft (e.g. zero stroke, and full stroke). half stroke

Flatness

of the test table shall specify the overall and local tolerances thermal conditions (in accordance

The manufacturer ditions and with 7.4.6).

with regard to the flatness of the test table under ambient constabilized

7.2.8.2

Rated static transverse

load If the inserts are below the plane of the table, the flatness of the whole surface of the table shall be specified. If the test table has replaceable projecting inserts, the manufacturer shall specify both the flatness of the insert mounting surface and the thickness tolerance of the insert mounting heads.

The manufacturer shall specify the static transverse load that the vibration generator can withstand permanently without any of its other characteristics Its point of application being affected.

is defined in 7.2.8.1.

7.2.9

Transverse static stiffness
shall specify the transverse static stiffness being con-

7.2.16 respect

Perpendicularity to the plane

of the threaded of the test table

inserts

with

The manufacturer

with respect to the actuator body, this stiffness sidered at the level of the test table.

The manufacturer shall specify the perpendicularity tolerance of the threaded inserts with respect to the plane of the test table.

Transverse static stiffness is made up of two elements: the transverse stiffness of the moving element guide mechanism and the bending stiffness of the actuator rod.

7.2.17 Perpendicularity of the plane with respect to the axis of the rod The manufacturer

of the test table

NOTE - In the case of long-travel linear vibration generators, the stiffness value should be given as a function of the position of the actuator rod.

shall specify the perpendicularity

of the plane

of the test table with respect to the axis of the rod. 7.2.10

Static friction of moving element
7.2.18 Concentricity of axes (exciter power take-off) tolerances of

The manufacturer shall specify the forces necessary to overcome the friction forces when the moving element is started.

The manufacturer

shall specify the concentricity and the rod,

axes of the exciter power take-off

7.2.11

Dimensions

of the test table
7.2.19 Coupling tolerances of an auxiliary table be-

The manufacturer shall specify the test table dimensions and supply a dimensioned drawing indicating the fixing point tolerances and the constituent materials.

The manufacturer shall specify the coupling tolerances tween the auxiliary and the vibration generator,

16

IS/IS0

8626 : 1989

7.3 7.3.1

Auxiliary Vibration
Generator

equipment generator transducers
shaft position transducer

The manufacturer shall specify each case, shall state whether being used fin certain tivate an alarm for another). one

the safety an alarm and

system used and, in or cut-out device is system can acfor a cut-out device

cases, the same detection threshold

7.3.1.1

A vibration generator has at least one transducer used as a mean position feedback control unless position control is obtained shaft a) b) c) mechanically. position The manufacturer the following: voltage; signal; shall specify, for the transducer, input

The should

manufacturer

shall

also

specify shut-down

the

procedure this

and

characteristics

of the shut-down. is avoided.

In general, which

procedure

be such that a sudden

may damage

the test specimen

the nominal the frequency the nominal

7.3.3.1 This fixed output (e.g. in of the

End of travel or adjustable safety device may be independent of

of the input input current;

d) the sensitivity, i.e. signal (e.g. in millivolts) volts) moving e) f) to the position element;

the ratio of the maximum related to the input signal at the rated travel

the generator end-of-travel threshold

shaft position measuring system (by means of contact), but it may also make use of it las in

transducers

detection).

the minimum the relative signal,

load impedance; phase between the output signal and the

7.3.3.2

Actuator

force the actuator device the working at a greater which pressure force than is activated, difference

In order to prevent its rated value, for example, acting when

input g)

if necessary. voltage. with incorporated electronics, between the the

a safety

may be fitted of the

the breakdown

threshold

on the piston

has been exceeded. device vibration can be adjusted generator. to suit the

In the case of a transducer manufacturer transducer output

shall also specify the transfer function and the displacement

In certain application

cases, this safety of the hydraulic

of the generator

shaft.

7.3.1.2 transducer

Pressure

force,

velocity

or acceleration

7.3.3.3 The

Bearing

temperatures shall describe a system, if supplied, to

If the vibration generator has one or more of these transducers, the manufacturer shall specify, for each, the following: a) b) c) d) e) the nominal the frequency the input input voltage, if applicable; signal;

manufacturer

measure the bearing temperatures safety device when a set temperature ed.

and activate an alarm or threshold has been reach-

of the input

impedance, loading function

if applicable; impedance; between the electrical input output

7.3.3.4

Oil flow

rate limiter, power if fitted supply. to the

the minimum the transfer

The manufacturer shall describe the flow generator or, if required, in the hydraulic

(voltage or current) and the force, velocity or acceleration); f) g) the nominal the sensitivity input signal;

mechanical

(pressure, 7.3.3.5 Clogging of the filter vibration generator a system is fitted with a

[as in 7.3.1.1

d)].

In cases where

the hydraulic

7.3.2

Cooling

system

filters, the manufacturer clogged filter.

shall specify

for detecting

If there are cooling systems for the generator which are independent of the hydraulic power supply, the manufacturer shall specify their characteristics (see 9.2.6).

7.3.4

Hoses

and cables
shall describe with the interconnecting vibration hoses and

The manufacturer 7.3.3

Safety systems, alarm
may

cables supplied and cut-out according devices to how they 7.4

the hydraulic

generator.

TWO systems

be distinguished

function

:

Installation General
manufacturer

conditions

a) the alarm which attracts attention by means of a visual or audio signal as soon as an abnormal event occurs and which leaves the operator to take the necessary action, if any is required; b) the cut-out standstill. system which brings the installation to a

7.4.1
The

shall

provide

dimensioned

and toleranced

diagrams of the generator and the auxiliary devices (fluid and power supply systems, cabling, etc.) and shall specify if any special tools need to be used for installation.

17

IS/IS0

8626 : 1989

7.4.2

Masses of the vibration generator
shall specify the following masses:

7.5

Environmental

and

operating

conditions

The manufacturer a) b) cl

7.5.1

Site
shall specify the following being damaged permissible condi-

the total mass of the vibration the mass of the pedestal, the heaviest

generator;

The manufacturer site conditions

tions under which the hydraulic generator if fitted; when dismantling a without

may be used at rated

:
ranges;

mass to be handled

vibration d)

generator;

a) b)

temperature

and relative humidity

the mass of the auxiliary devices, if fitted.

cleanliness of the area.

7.5.2 7.4.3 Vibration generator pedestal the manufacturer shall give

Combined

tests

If the system includes a pedestal, the following a) information

When the vibration generator is used in combined tests (vibration tests carried out jointly with a climatic or mechanical test), the manufacturer, following if requested by the use?, shall provide the necessary information

:
orientation device: the posi-

:

for the vibration generator

tioning stops, the locking device and principle of operation: b) the dynamic characteristics of the vibration generator

For the climatic conditions
a) b) temperature and relative humidity ranges; where

pedestal for the two positions (vertical and horizontal); c) the conditions for fixing the vibration generator

permissible absolute pressure range, stating, operation either,

necessary,

with a heat barrier or in a

pedestal on its foundations,

with drawing

if necessary.

climatic chamber.

For centrifugal
NOTE ~ Attention is drawn to the importance of the dynamic characteristics of the foundations with respect to the efficiency of the
installation, account being taken of the frequency range of the hydraulic generators, and, the mechanical connection in particular, with respect to the quality of between the foundation and the generator.

acceleration
of

a) maximum permissible continuous acceleration the vibration generator for all three dimensions; bl specification system, if fitted. of the acceleration

compensation

7.4.4

Generated

sound

power

level

7.6
The manufacturer shall specify the maximum sound power level of the vibration generator and auxiliary equipment, if fitted, during operation under conditions of maximum no-load range. al The manufacturer shall use the measuring method specified in shall clearly IS0 3746. If it cannot be used, the manufacturer explain the method used. (load mo) sinusoidal acceleration in the rated frequency

Documents

The manufacturer shall list the documentation provrded with the hydraulic vibratton generator. Documentation might include the following schematic items: diagram and description of the hydraulic

generator b) c)

with its auxiliary equipment);

characteristics; operating mode and control; and diagram; for fixing the pedestal (see 7.4.3);

7.4.5

Heat

dissipation

d) el

layout conditions

details on conditions connecting

If requested by the user, the manufacturer shall specify the heat dissipation of the vibration generator, together with the thermal stabilization time, under rated conditions. dissipation of these

f) g) ht

and cabling diagram; of the spare parts;

overall diagram and nomenclature assembly and dismantling

instructions;

If auxiliary devices are used, the heat devices shall be specified separately.

i) jr

list of special tools, if necessary; start-up and maintenance; list of spare parts recommended by the

7.4.6

Test table temperature

k) preferred manufacturer; I) m)

If requested by the user, the manufacturer shall specify the test table temperature for the stabilized conditions correspondjng to the maximum temperature of the moving element.

environmental

and operating

conditions;

any other information.

IS/IS0

8626 : 1989

8
In

Control
the context

system
of this International Standard, the control

i)

common

mode

rejection; circuit level and adjustment

protection j) input possibilities.

system a) b) c)

comprises the hydraulic the control auxiliary vibrator servovalve panel; Where applicable, the manufacturer characteristics for each modulated shall specify input: the following control device; 8.1.2 Modulated input characteristics

and protection

equipment;

d) all devices used to turn on and off, protect, and provide failure or other alarms for the complete hydraulic vibration generator system. of the control system are normally mounted in

a) maximum and minimum ranges full scale (mV/V) for full output; b) c) range of the input gain stability, sensitivity

of the input

voltage

in

The components

adjustment of temperature

control; and mains

a control console with signal sources, displacement, velocity and acceleration are not covered Occasionally, hydraulic by this International of the components

such as oscillators and display devices which

as a function

voltage; d) range of zero shift zero stability, adjustment; of temperature and mains

Standard. of the control power supply system or the the

some

e)

as a function

may be mounted vibration on-off control and from the servovalve the on-off control control functions

on the hydraulic generator.

fluid

voltage; f) g) range of quadrature frequency range filter; frequency adjusting range; voltage of the compensation; system, including the

Some manufacturers

provide

protection functions on a panel separate control and other manufacturers integrate functions with the servovalve chassis. panel-mounted

and protection into a single,

demodulator h) ij j) filter input

corner

The user should refer to the whole of this clause, even though he may be specifying only one the devices included. Attention shall be given to the alarm transfer and interlock, if the hydraulic vibration generator system is supplied by different sources (manufacturers).

impedance; mode rejection; circuit level and adjustment

common

k) input possibilities.

protection

8.1

Servovalve

control

device
the operation of the servovalve with a 10 (see figure

8.1.3

A.C.

source

output

characteristics

The manufacturer control device,

shall describe preferably

For each a.c. source shall specify

output

to transducers, characteristics:

the manufacturer

in the form of a block diagram of each of the blocks

the following

description of the operation in annex D). The manufacturer device

a) the characteristics of the control b) c) d)

frequency; range of frequency frequency voltage; range of voltage voltage stability; continuous current; adjustment; stability; adjustment;

shall specify

listed in 8.1.1 to 8.1.13.

8.1.1

Unmodulated

input

characteristics e) shall specify input: the following f) gl

Where applicable, the manufacturer characteristics for each unmodulated a) b) minimum and maximum

maximum

ranges

of the input

voltage;

range of the input

sensitivity

adjustment of temperature

control; and mains

h) output configuration, usually referenced to earth, balanced to earth, or a floating transformer secondary, with or without centretap; i) any provisions for short-circuit protection.

c) gain stability, voltage; d)

as a function

range of zero shift

adjustment; of temperature and mains 8.1.4 D.C. source output characteristics

e) zero stability, voltage; f) frequency usable; g) h) internal input

as a function

range,

maximum

and

minimum,

to d.c.

if

For each d.c. source output to transducers, shall specify the following characteristics: a) b) voltage; range of voltage adjustment;

the manufacturer

filter

response;

impedance;

19

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

c) d) e) f)

voltage

stability;

8.1.10

Total

distortion,

d shall specify with the

residual noise voltage; If requested maximum output only) current; usually to earth unidirectional (equal (plus or by the user, the manufacturer d, for the rated output a resistance which enables total distortion, put loaded with stated quantity, the out-

configuration, or balanced

the rated quantities

minus

plus and minus);

in 8.1.7 to be obtained.

g)

any provisions

for short-circuit

protection. 8.1.11 Signal-to-noise ratio

8.1.5

Dither

characteristics is supplied

(see 5.5.12) in the servovalve control device

If requested by the user, the manufacturer shall specify the signal-to-noise ratio, measured at the output of the control device, loaded with the themselves being loaded pedance. rated with impedance with their maximum the inputs source im-'

If a dither

oscillator

to superimpose a dither signal on the servo-valve drive to friction" or "silting", the manufacturer shall reduce "stick specify a) b) c) d) the following dither characteristics

:

frequency; frequency adjustment;

8.1.12 With

Stability the inputs if requested value.

of the loaded loaded

output

quantity

for

a zero

input

range of dither dither amplitude;

with with

the source rated

maximum

impedances the manufacexfrom the rated

and the output amplitude adjustment; the dither as frequency above which dither is turer, output pressed

impedance, quantity

range of dither

by the user, shall specify of the output

the deflection,

as a percentage,

e) circuitry to reduce automatically increases, and if so, the frequency absent.

It shall be specified as a function of the temperature and the supply voltage of the control device, which shall be within the of output to servovalve limits stipulated in the operating conditions (see 8.4).

8.1.6

Characteristics

The manufacturer

shall specify both both

the following and a.c.; and a.c.;

characteristics:

6.1.4

Gain

stability the manufacturer, which if requested by the user, by the

a)
b)

output output

current, voltage,

d.c. d.c.

For each

input,

shall specify

the gain stability

shall be determined

CA output d) e)

impedance; range; for short-circuit protection.

percentage variation ambient temperature ing conditions: a) signal with

of the output quantity as a function of the and the supply voltage under the follow-

frequency

any provisions

the control impedances; the value; the sources

device

loaded

with

rated

source

and

output 8.1.7 Characteristics of primary inputs (from b) sources) The manufacturer shall specify the required control device input voltage range in order to obtain the current or voltage of the servovalve control device stated in 8.1.6, the feedback loops being on zero.

with

stabilization

devices,

if required,

having

a

specified c) with

supplying

signals

of set frequencies to a rated output

and constant quantity;

amplitudes

corresponding

d) with the temperature and supply the limits stipulated in 8.4. voltage 8.1.14 Limitation manufacturer of characteristics shall specify all the control

voltage

varying

within

6.1.6

Maximum

input

The manufacturer shall specify the maximum voltage which may be applied to each input without deterioration in performance.

The

factors device

limiting provided

the they

characteristics are not already

of the servovalve

made clear elsewhere.

8.1.9

Transfer

functions 8.2

Control

and protection

panel

The transfer functions from the primary and auxiliary inputs to the output shall be determined for the linear operation of the device.

The manufacturer shall describe the control and protection device stating what controls are provided to start and stop the system, turn off/on the coolant and what and protective interlocks are provided. protective circuits

If the gain is adjustable,

the range shall be specified.

20

IS/IS0

8828 : 1989

8.3

Auxiliary

equipment

9.1

General characteristics
shall describe the components supplied and

and shall describe the functions The manufacturer characteristics of the auxiliary equipment necessary for the operation of the servovalve control device when such equipment is fitted.

The manufacturer

shall state their characteristics. The hydraulic specifications power system shall be in accordance laid down in IS0 4413. with the

8.4

Installation

conditions
shall specify device power the following requirements for

9.1.1

Drive motor characteristics
shall specify of drive etc. 1; characteristics (speed, etc.). voltage, current and motor the following (electric characteristics: internal com-

The manufacturer installing

the control the required

:
supply (voltage, current, frequency, etc.);

The manufacturer

a)
b) c) type d)

a)

the type

motor,

power

consumption, required;

any cooling

requirements,

bustion b)

engine,

space

its rated

frequency (types of connection, length and

for an electric

motor,

connection of cable, environment

methods etc.); which

meets

the

conditions

specified

9.1.2 Flow rate/pressure system

characteristics

of the power

in 8.5. 9.1.2.1 The manufacturer shall specify the flow rate, 4 V, (see 5.5.2), and the supply pressure, ps (see 5.5.1 I, for the hydraulic power The which following a) b) c) manufacturer the control information temperature permissible variations shall specify the permissible be used, conditions in the 9.1.2.2 If requested pressure by the user, the manufacturer flow rate available for the rated power shall proas a function vide the curve of the maximum of the supply and relative electromagnetic in the mains power conditions of the humidity ranges; system.

8.5

Environmental

and operating

conditions

device(s)

may

by supplying

:

of the motor.

disturbances; supply for which the rated are

9.2
device(s)

Characteristics
Hydraulic fluid
fluid,

of the equipment

operating guaranteed.

control

9.2.1

The hydraulic with

generally

mineral

oil, shall be compatible in particular

the different

components

of the installation,

8.6

Documents
provided with might include

the seals. The type of fluid following physical a) dynamic operating density; bulk modulus; (compatible with the materials in contact with shall be specified characteristics: viscosity; by its reference or the

The manufacturer shall list the documentation the servovalve control device. Documentation the following a) items:

or kinematic temperature;

schematic

diagram

and

description

of

the

control b) c) d)

device(s); b) c) d) e) f) g) operating layout mode and control; and diagram; diagram;

conditions

connecting installation nomenclature preferred

and cabling conditions;

e) pH-value the fluid); f) flash point; de-aeration

of the spare parts; g) list of spare parts recommended by the The manufacturer shall specify the types of hydraulic fluids which may be used in the hydraulic power system and state the types of fluids which are recommended in particular. capability.

manufacturer; h) i) environmental any other and operating conditions;

information.

9.2.2

Reservdir
is characterized by its volume which shall be

9

Hydraulic

power

system
power system is given in

The fluid reservoir

A schematic figure

diagram A.

of the hydraulic

adequate to allow the oil to recover its characteristics during its passage through the system with particular attention being paid to its de-aeration Idemulsification) and its cooling.

8 in annex

21

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

The manufacturer ing the fluid: a)

shall specify the following

parameters

affect-

c) d)

pressure filter

drop;

mesh size. by the manufacturer with 7.1.1. with

the useful volume of the reservoir, the latter complying

with the local regulations; b) the ratio between the maximum volume flow rate and

The purity reference ble with

of the fluid shall be stated to IS0 4466; the purity in accordance

of the fluid shall be compati-

that specified

the volume of the reservoir; c) the minimum level of oil and the time it takes to pass 9.2.6

Heat exchanger
fluid temperature shall be stable under the most operation.

through

the reservoir. The hydraulic shall also state if the reservoir has: orifice with or without a filter; severe operating The manufacturer a) the conditions and in continuous

The manufacturer -

a ventilation

shall specify temperature fluid temperature level, limits; used (natural using (continuous the fluids, or forced conand the upper and

a filling hole with plug and possibly filter; one or several drainage holes and hatches to allow optimum lower b) hydraulic

periodic cleaning of the reservoir.

the type of heat exchanger air-coolant, heat

9.2.3

Hydraulic pump
shall specify the type of hydraulic pump used

vection,

exchanger

a secondary or two points); upstream and

fluid) and its mode of operation c) the ranges of pressure for

The manufacturer

(vane pump, gear pump or piston pump, depending on the desired pressure level), and whether the flow rate is fixed or variable. The manufacturer shall state if the high-pressure pump is supplied by a low-pressure (boost) pump, and, if so, the type.

downstream

of the exchanger; and mean permissible flow rates for the rated oil flow, as a function of input fluid; medium to be used; ambient temperature; as heat, by the

d) the maximum cooling fluid, at temperature e)

of the cooling

characteristics for air cooled the maximum shall pump.

of cooling units,

9.2.4

Pressure

regulator

f) gt

the maximum of power of the

The manufacturer shall state whether the regulator is incorporated in the pump or is separate from the pump and fitted on its discharge pipe. The manufacturer mode of control (manual or automatic) or on-off). The pressure characteristics: a) pressure regulator shall shall also specify the and action (proportional

amount

dissipated absorbed

which

be function

power

hydraulic

9.2.7 by the following

Accumulators shall specify, operating for each accumulator,

be specified

The manufacturer control stability, range; as a function of time and of flow rate a) b) c) time to a step change in flow rate. d) e) levels maximum capacity; inflation whether

pressure;

b) pressure fluctuations; c) response

pressure; any periodical checks have to be made;

9.2.5

Filter

system

type of gas. shall satisfy in force. the inspection criteria laid down

The filter system can be at one or several of the following specified by the manufacturer: a) b) C) d) e) filling suction filter; filter at the pump filter, inlet;

The accumulators by the regulations

9.2.8 The

Interconnections manufacturer power shall define the interconnection pipework) system between

high-pressure return filter,

in the pump inlet;

discharge

circuit;

(high-pressure the hydraulic

supply,

return system

and drainage

at the reservoir

and the actuator.

bypass filter.

9.3
The manufacturer shall specify the type and location of each filter provided. The manufacturer shall also specify the following characteristics, some of which depend on the type of fluid and its temperature: a) b) maximum maximum permissible permissible flow rate;

Auxiliary

equipment

9.3.1

Accessories
shall specify the accessories required:

The manufacturer

pressure;

a) the sampling equipment necessary for checking the degree of contamination of the hydraulic fluid in the circuit;

22

IS/IS0

8626 : 1989

b)

any thermostatic

valve

on the heat echanger; the etc.; main pump, if

9.4.3

Power

consumption motor is used, the manufacturer under pressure, shall specify the

c) various pumps for charging necessary, for making up leakages, d) a filter, with or without

If an electric power as a function

consumption of flow

of the system

stabilized

conditions

desiccator,

for

air which

has

rate and supply

/)s (see 5.5.1).

leaked e)

into the reservoir.

de-aerator.

The manufacturer and its duration. supply fluid pressure

shall also specify the peak start-up current Where appropriate, the manufacturer shall consumption as a function of hydraulic

curves of power and flow.

9.3.2

Indicating

equipment shall state whether the following equipment where the corresponding information is location): gauges capable of isolation; If an internal combustion engine is used for driving of the hydraulic power system, the manufacturer the pump(s) shall specify

The manufacturer is provided and available a) b) c)

(on site or in a remote the high- and low-pressure the reservoir the level gauges;

the hourly consumption of fuel and the electric power consumed by the auxiliary devices necessary for operation of the system.

9.4.4 thermometer fluid indicating the temperature of the hydraulic in the reservotr.

Connections shall provide references and dimensions of

The manufacturer the following and cut-out devices a) b) ct hydraulic hydraulic return auxiliary electrical

connections: fluid fluid filling outlet port; port;

9.3.3

Safety

systems,

alarms

The manufacturer shall specify each case, shall state whether being a) used (see 7.3.3), thermostat;

the safety an alarm

system used and, in or cut-out device is details about

for example,

by giving

ports

to the reservoir; (for example, drains);

d) b) pressure switch (hydraulic fluid pressure and, possibly, secondary fluid pressure in the heat exchanger); c) maximum and minimum level (for example, a device for detecting any secondary fluid in the hydraulic fluid circuit in the heat exchanger); d) e) filter clogging indicator; permitting the hydraulic by allowing power system to into 9.4.5 Attention cleaning permitting the vibration generator(s) to be of the e)

ports

connections; fluid circuit connections (coolant, etc. ).

f 1 secondary

Start-up

and

maintenance of the start-up up. procedure and

a distributor from

is drawn the circuits

to the importance as well when starting

be isolated the reservoir; fl

the generator

it to drain

of the installation

as the procedure

for flushing

a distributor system.

isolated complete

if there is damage

to the pipe or break-down

The manufacturer system checking between clogging tridges.

shall state

how

often

the hydraulic

power for

is to be emptied,

and shall specify

the procedure

9.4
9.4.1

installation

conditions

for pollution of the hydraulic fluid (with the intervals checking), the procedure for checking the degree of of the filters and the conditions for replacing the car-

General 9.4.6 Generated sound power level

The manufacturer shall provide layout diagrams of the hydraulic power system, in particular the layout diagram specifying the fixing elements (sockets, anti-vibration mounts, etc.) and the dimensions of the fixing points. The manufacturer shall specify the space required around the power system to allow maintenance and repair.

The manufacturer shall specify the generated sound power level for the maximum flow rate and pressure of the hydraulic power system. The manufacturer shall use the measuring method IS0 3746. If it cannot be used, the manufacturer explain the method used. specified in shall clearly

9.4.2 Mass system

of the main

parts

of the hydraulic

power

The manufacturer

shall specify

the following

masses: 9.4.7 Heat dissipation hydraulic The manufacturer shall specify the maximum thermal power discharged into the room for the rated flow rate and supply pressure, ps.

a) the mass of the main parts power system;

of the complete

b) the heaviest mass to be handled part of the hydraulic power system.

when

dismantling

any

23

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

9.4.8

Cooling medium

requirements

10

Hydraulic

vibration

generator

system

The manufacturer shall specify: a) the maximum quantity of cooling medium per time unit (in litres per minute) as 3 function of input temperature; b) the temperature range for the required cooling medium input; c) the pressure range for the cooling medium input;

The hydraulic vibration generator system comprises a hydraulic vibration generator, a servovalve control device and a hydraulic power system. The characteristics specified in this clause apply to the hydraulic vibration generator system and should not be applied to individual components. For each of its elements, the manufacturer shall specify the characteristics laid down in the corresponding clauses (see clauses 7, 8 and 9). Hydraulic vibration generator systems shall be tested using the test masses, m, (see 5.4). 10.1 General characteristics

d) the chemical requirements for the cooling medium (e.g. pH-value, hardness).

9.5

Environmental

and operating

conditions

The manufacturer shall specify the free space necessary around the hydraulic power system to allow operation under rated conditions. The manufacturer shall also specify the following characteristics : a) permissible temperature-relative humidity range;

10.1.1

Static force, F,,

The requirement laid down in 7.1.3 for generators also applies to the complete vibration generator system. 10.1.2 Rated velocity

b) required air flow rate (independently of any flow rate in the heat exchanger); c) limit altitude, where relevant;

The requirement laid down in in 7.1 A for generators also applies to the complete vibration generator system. 10.1.3 Rated frequency ranges

d) permissible range of variation in the characteristics in the electrical supply (frequency and voltage); e) in the case of an internal combustion engine, the flow rate of the air supply to the engine,

The requirement laid down in 7.1.5 for generators also applies to the complete vibration generator system. 10.1.4 Limitations conditions of characteristics under sinusoidal

the permissible temperature-relative humidity range of this air, the filtration conditions.

9.6

Documents

The requirement laid down in 7.1.6 for generators also applies to the complete vibration generator system. 10.1.5 Limitations conditions of characteristics under random

The manufacturer shall list the documentation provided with the hydraulic power system. Documentation might include the following items: a) schematic diagram and description of the hydraulic power system; b) characteristics of the system and equipment (see 9.1 and 9.2); c) operating mode, control, start-up and maintenance (see 9.4.5); d) e) f) g) layout conditions and diagram (see 9.4.1); connecting and cabling diagram; overall diagram and nomenclature of the spare parts; assembly and dismantling instructions;

The requirement laid down in 7.1.7 for generators also applies to the complete vibration generator system. 10.1.6 Rated force under sinusoidal conditions, Fomr

The requirements laid down in 7.1.8 for generators also apply to the complete vibration generator-system. 10.1.7 Rated random force, broad-band, Fob

The requirement laid down in 7.1.9 for generators also applies to the complete vibration generator system. 10.1.8 table Uniformity of the acceleration filed of the test

h) preferred list of spare parts recommended by the manufacturer; i) j) environmental and operating conditions; any other information.

The requirements laid down in 7.1.10 for generators also apply to the conlplcte vibration generator system.

24

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

10.1.9

Transverse

motion

of the test table also apply

10.1.14 The

Signal-to-noise

ratio

lsee 5.5.11.3) the signal-to-noise ratio as

The requirements to the complete

laid down in 7.1.11 for generators vibration generator systen-,.

manufacturer in 5.5.11.3.

shall specify

defined

10.1.10

Limitation

of characteristics also applies

10.1.15 system.

Dither shall specify whether dither to achieve the characteristics and, if it is required, (55.12 and specified in

The requirement to the complete

laid down in 7. I. 12 for generators hydraulic vibration generator

The manufacturer 8.1.5) is required 10.1.1 to 10.1.7 ment mav be met.

10.1.11

Total

distortion,

d (see 5.5.10.1)

how the dither require-

The manufacturer it is displacement,

shall specify the distortion and state whether velocity or acceleration distortion.

10.1.16 vibration

Input

characteristics system

of the complete

hydraulic

The manufacturer shall alsc specify the frequency band-width of the signal being analysed, including any filters used. The total distortion, d, shall >e rneasured at the operating limits of the hydraulic vibration geclerator (rated displacement, rated velocity and rated acceleration).

generator

The manufacturer complete hydraulic

shall specify the input characteristics vibration generator system.

of the

The required input voltage and the minimum for the frequency particular. range betweenf,,, and f,,,,

input impedance shall be given in

10.1.11.1

No-load

test

The manufacturer shall specify the acceleration distortion of the unloaded, Jibration-generator test table or the unloaded, exciter power take-off for the rated force characteristics and in the useful frequency range.

10.1.17

Output

force

stability

The manufacturer

shall specify the change in output force (F,,

The distortion shall be indicated by means of curves as a function of the frequency at the rated force and at a tenth of this for the normal hydraulic mode damping value stipulated by the manufacturer, The limits of this curve are defined by the rated frequency ranges (see 7.1.5 and 7.1.61.

or ~~0,,, I for a IO % variation in the supply voltage applied to the complete hydraulic vibration generator system.

10.1.18 The

Transient

motion shall

of the moving the

element values and

manufacturer

specify

maximum

10.1.11.2

Test under load

characteristics of transient motion of the moving element under the following conditions: a) b) c) normal start-up conditions; conditions; if fitted;

The manufacturer shall specify the acceleration distortion under the same conditions as laid down in IO. 1.11.1, but with different test loads. The distortion should be recorded at maximum values of displacement, velocity and acceleration and, in particular, at the velocity/acceleration breaking point corresponding to the maximum amount of power produced. The manufacturer may also specify the acceleration distortion at a half and at a quarter of the maximum acceleration.

normal shut-down operation

of safety systems,

d) in the case of a sudden disconnection of the supply to all or part of the complete hydraulic vibration generator system. The measurements shall be carried out, with the test mass and the feedback loop control being specified.

10.1.12

Background

noise

(see 5.5.11. I) and displace-

The manufacturer

shall specify the acceleration

10.1.19

Servosystem

stability used to obtain the

ment background noise values as r.m.s. and peak values on the test table or power take-off. The manufacturer shall also specify the frequency band in which this measurement is to be taken under no-load conditions with zero signal input, the input being loaded with an impedance source impedance. equivalent to the maximum

The manufacturer servosystem

shall specify the method

stability. leakage is used to obtain this stability or to

If an adjustable

10.1.13

Operational

noise

(see 5.5.11.2)

reduce the distortion, the manufacturer shall specify the maximum leak rate for the maximum force and how it affects the maximum velocity. If an electric shall describe stabilization how the method signals is used, to be the manufacturer from the

If requested by the user, the manufartclrer shall specify the operational acceleration and displacement noise (spectral analysis) in addition to Ihe frsquency band in which this measurement is to be taken far the two types of test, i.e. with no-load and under load, tit the rated values of displacement,

provided

transducers to the various feedback inputs are used (such as the actuator rod displacement, the actuator rod and pilot spool velocity, the slave spool displacement, pressure and the table acceleration). the piston differential

25

IS/IS0 8626: 1989

10.120

Mean position deflection

under load

example,

on detection

of a specimen conditions

response

threshold.

In

this case, the operating The manufacturer shall specify the mean position deflection defined in 5.5.14 under the permissible static load, F,,, defined in 5.5.7.1.

and the mode of operation (see 10.6).

shall be provided in the documentation

10.4

Installation

conditions

10.1.21

Gravity compensation

device
also applies

10.4.1

General

layout

The requirement laid down in 7.2.7 for generators to the complete vibration generator system.

The manufacturer shall provide dimensioned and toleranced installation drawings of the complete vibration generator system and of the auxiliary devices (fluid and power supply systems, cables, etc.). The manufacturer shall specify the individual items items, and preparations the user has to make, including which the user has to supply.

10.2

Moving

element

The requirements laid down in 7.2 for generators also apply to the complete hydraulic vibration generator system.

10.3

Auxiliary

equipment hydraulic

He shall specify the necessary free space around the different parts of the whole system.

10.3.1 Transducers built into the complete vibration generator system

10.4.2 Masses of the main parts of the complete vibration generator system (see 7.4.2 and 9.4.2)
The manufacturer shall specify the following masses: vibration

The requirements laid down in 7.3.1 for generators also apply to the complete hydraulic vibration generator system.

a) the mass of the main parts of the complete generator system;

10.3.2 Safety systems, alarm, cut-off end limitation devices
In addition to the individual alarm and cut-off (see 7.3.3). devices of the

b) the heaviest mass to be handled when dismantling part of the complete vibration generator system.

any

hydraulic vibration generator

the servovalve control

device (see 8.2) and the hydraulic power system (see 9.3.3) and all limitation devices, the manufacturer shall specify the devices used for the complete hydraulic vibration generator system. The manufacturer shall specify in each case whether an alarm, a cut-off or a limitation device is used (see 7.3.3).

10.4.3 Foundations for the complete generator system

vibration

The requirements laid down in 7.4.3 for generators also apply to the complete hydraulic vibration generator system. If necessary, the manufacturer shall specify the foundation requirements for the complete system.

10.3.2.1

Failure of the electrical supply of events in the

10.4.4.

Power consumed

The manufacturer shall specify the sequence case of a failure of the electrical supply.

When the complete hydraulic generator is being used under rated conditions, the manufacturer shall specify the electric power consumed under stabilized conditions and the peak start-up power of the hydraulic power system.

10.3.2.2

Failure of the hydraulic supply

The manufacturer shall specify the sequence of events in the case of a failure of the hydraulic supply to the vibration generator.

NOTE - If a thermal motor is used for driving the pump(s) of the hydraulic power system, the manufacturer should specify its hourly consumption of fuel as well as the electrical power required for the
complete system.

10.3.2.3

Electrical level of the input signal

10.4.5

Cooling medium

The manufacturer shall specify the maximum input signal level which could not cause the jack to operate beyond its rated characteristics. In certain cases, there is also a safety device for loss of input signal; the manufacturer shall state its mode of operation.

The manufacturer shall specify the cooling media requirements. The requirements laid down in 9.4.7 and 9.4.8 also apply to the complete hydraulic vibration system,

10.4.6

External and internal connections

10.3.2.4

Manual emergency cut-off

The mode of operation of this safety device which may be activated by the operator shall be specified by the manufacturer.

The manufacturer shall specify the references and characteristics of the external electrical and hydraulic connections necessary for the complete generator and of the connections between the different parts of the system, nections for the cooling medium. including con-

10.3.2.5

Automatic

cut-off

by external signal

NOTE - The attention of the user is drawn to the importance
rect operation of the dimensional characteristics (diameter, face roughness, radius of r.urvature) and of the constituent the hydraulic connections.

The manufacturer shall specify whether the user has the possibility of cutting in one or several extra safety devices, for

for corlength, surmaterials of

26

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

10.4.7

Start-up

conditions

10.5.1

Hydraulic

vibration

generator

The manufacturer shall specify the start procedure of the complete hydraulic generator system and the cleaning procedure (rinsing, etc.) for the hydraulic circuits. This procedure applies to the first start-up following an intervention on the hydraulic system.

10.5.1.1

Installation

site

The requirement

laid down in 7.5.1 applies in this case.

10.5.1.2

Combined

tests

10.4.8 The

Generated manufacturer

sound

power

level the maximum generator sound power unload-

The requirement

laid down in 7.5.2 applies in this case.

shall specify

10.5.2

Servovalve

control

device

level for each part of the complete no-load sinusoidal acceleration

for the maximum

of the moving element

The requirement

laid down in 8.5 applies in this case.

ed and with the vibration system being supplied at pressure p. 10.5.3 The manufacturer explain the method shall use the measuring used. method specified in shall clearly Hydraulic power supply

IS0 3746. If it cannot

be used, the manufacturer

The requirements

laid down in 9.5 apply in this case.

10.6
10.4.9 Heat dissipation

Documents shall list the documentation system. provided with

The manufacturer thermal power of to the thermo-

The manufacturer

shall specify the maximum conditions, in addition

the hydraulic vibration generator might include the following items: a) schematic diagram

Documentation

the hydraulic power system (9.4.7) (7.4.5) under rated stabilization time.

and the vibration generator

and description

including

auxiliary

equipment; b) characteristics; operating mode and control; and diagram; of the foundations (see 7.4.31;

If auxiliary devices are used, the thermal power of these devices shall be specified separately.

c) d)

layout conditions

10.4.10

Test table

temperature shall specify the test to the

e) f)

details on site conditions connection

and cabling diagrams; of the spare parts;

If requested by the user, the manufacturer

g) h) i)

overall diagram and nomenclature assembly and dismantling

table temperature for stabilized conditions corresponding maximum temperature rise of the moving element.

instructions;

list of special tools, if necessary; start-up and maintenance; list of spare parts recommended by the

10.5

Environmental

and

operating conditions

conditions may be different

j)

As the permissible

environmental

k) preferred manufacturer; I) m)

for each of the elements which constitute the vibration generator system, the manufacturer shall describe the precise operating conditions of each of these sub-units.

environmental

and operating

conditions;

any other information.

27

IS/IS0

8826

: 1989

\

-0 6

NOTES 1 The moving element table body @ @ is made up of the piston 0 the rod

NOTES

and the moving 2 The actuator

,

including

the test table. @

0

4

1 The

moving

element take-off body

is made up of the piston ($) @ and the pedestal mountings. @

0,

the rod

0

4

and the power can be connected 2 The actuator

and the pedestal mountings.

can be connected

by means of trunnions

or spherical

by means

of trunnions

or spherical

a)

Hydraulic

linear

vibration

generator

with

test table

bl

Hydraulic

linear vibration

generator

with power

takeoff

Piston

(useful

cross-section

Al

Servovalve Moving

control

coil

Servovalve Guide Rod Seal and leakage Snubbers Positional displacement supply transducer displacement transducer

table

Test table Threaded Power insert

take-off

Body of the actuator Adjustable Baseplate Foundations or reaction mass bypass

High-pressure Pedestal

Figure

7

Hydraulic

linear

vibration

generator

29

IS/IS0 8626:1989

t

Ps (4""
.

c
0
5 < >>
-i

&.q ---

A'_____

1

1
1 I
I

12

I lWater

w-B-_

I-

Reservoir Hydraulic pump Pressure-relief valve (safety valve) Filter Heat exchanger Accumulator Level indicator and temperature Detector of minimum-maximum High-pressure gauge Pressure regulator (adjustable) Pressure switch Thermostatic valve indicator level

Control valve (isolates the power system) Motor

Figure 8 -

Schematic

diagram of a hydraulic power system (given as an example)

30

ISjlSO 6626i:1989

Annex Methods for measuring

6 various vibration generator

or calculating parameters

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.)

B.l

Measuring mode,

the frequency fob

of the normal

where s is the Laplacian operator;

hydraulic
The generator, constant

H,(s) operating at no load (m, =

is the hydraulic transfer function;

m&, is supplied at

pressure. of this mass,

q,, is the flow rate generated by the servovalve. This flow rate, q,,, is a function of Id, where Id is the servovalve current.
With the servovalve transfer function given by

The generator

m,,in motion is taken as a function
current (I,v) in the servovalve

of the frequency coil. The frequency

for a constant

H,ls) resonance, for,, may be derived

= __

4"(S)

Id of the hydraulic
by cancelling out q,,

from the response curve Hfl. H,(s)
NOTES 1 If there is a hydraulic damping circuit between the two chambers of this may be removed for measurement purposes.

1 = ___ I, H,,(s)

H,(s)
to multiply H,(s) by the inverse of the

the generator,

As I,, is constant, it is adequate servovalve transfer function.

2 The relative velocity between the cylinder and the rod is measured preferably with a velocity transducer of the inductive type. It may also be `measured by differentiation using an internal linear displacement transducer as long as the cut-off frequency of the displacement measuring range is at least twice the normal hydraulic frequency allowed for. Measuring the velocity with an acceleration transducer is only possible if the normal modes of the generator and seismic mass are known. 3 If the hydraulic frequency is adjacent to or outside the pass-band of the servovalve, it has to be taken into account and a correction made for determining the hydraulic transfer function, H,Js), as follows:

In general, a servovalve current equal to one-tenth is selected.

of the rated current

B.2

Measuring

the hydraulic
possible to measure

stiffness,
the hydraulic

kh
stiffness

It is not generally directly.

It is derived from measuring

the frequency

of the nor-

mal hydraulic mode, for,. It is determined using the following equation:

H,,(s) = -

H,(s) 4"(S)

31

is/IS0

8626

: 1989

Annex Selection

C

of test mass

(This annex forms an integral part of the standard.)

C.l Position of the first modal frequencies of a test mass compared with the maximum operating frequency, fmax
A test mass is a structure consisting of masses and stiffnesses

The test mass is defined as a pure mass for St = S2. The test mass can be regarded as a pure mass if S2 - St < 1 %, which is the case if f, > 10 f,,
The proposed specification confirms the equality hence `7 0 S1 = S2 at

which responds as a pure mass if the maximum operating frequency, f,,,. is much lower than the lowest frequency, f,, of all the possible vibratory modes of this mass mounted on a test table or the power take-off of the vibration generator. It can be assumed that the vibratory response of the structure which constitutes the test mass is, roughly speaking, similar to that of an undamped system with a single degree of freedom:
1

less than or equal to 1 % approximately, therefore

< $,

f, > 10 f,,,.

The search for f,, also defines the minimum value of v, from among all the possible values (VI, v2, . . . , v,l of modal frequencies :

f, = minimum (vt, v2, . . . . vs)
Table 6 gives eight initial modes corresponding to one homogeneous test mass, cylindrical, with a circular base diameter D, height L, with conditions at the limits, some of which are not in common use and would probably bring a penalty. The longitudinal velocity of sound, c, in the material is given by the following formula : c= where E Q is the elastic modulus; is the density of the material. E e

s2 -= Sl

I__ f2 max fo2

where SJ is the amplitude of excitation of a stiffness situated at the level of the test table or power take-off; S2 is the amplitude of response of a pure mass through the above stiffness;

i--

fo

is the smallest modal frequency of the test mass;

f maxis the maximum frequency of the operating range.

32

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

Table

6 -- Initial

mode

for a homogeneous

test

mass
Frequency

--_
Mode Deformation

3,516 Transverse bendloq "I *8

<,I) 12

_ 0441)

1:

free-fixed

Lonqitudinal free edge

bending

L'q=

0,726 -2,

[, = 0,3

supported

edqe

fixed

edqe

,_ =
`b

198 "
D2

, I,

=

0.3

free-free

1 C' "s = ------_=O3,~ 2L V'ziQ

'

L

The

v values

are

the

result

of

known

theoretical

work.

When account sities, and of

is taken of the various the advantages

materials

of different of

denthe

However, they should be considered as a guide only, as they correspond here to structures which are too massive to satisfy the hypotheses of the theory for thin plates or slender beams.

and

disadvantages

mechanical properties of these materials, in most cases steel will be chosen as the material used as a test mass. If steel is chosen, (diameter it is advisable to optimize the dimension or height D

of the test mass) and L. (thickness

of the

C.2

Dimensioning

the test

mass

Definitions of test masses 111,to tna are given in 5.4. However, the choice of materials and dimensions can be specified in order to obtain test masses of a given mass, with mechanical properties which are closer to those of a pure mass.

test mass) so that phenomena linked to the different natural modes of the mass do not interfere with the interpretation of the results. Various values for natural modes masses are given in clause C. 1, For the

the specific

case in which

are used to determine

33

Is/IS0 8626:1989

characteristics modes a)

of

vibration

generators,

the

following

three

calculated exceed moving

for a mass fixed

only at its centre,

it is possible

to

can be used: the first extension-compression impedance bending mode which modifies

these values in so far as the mass is attached to the element by screws placed around a diameter which is to the diameter of the mass.

fairly

large compared

the mechanical
b) the

of the mass; mode which, while slightly

transverse

modifying generates bearings c)

the mechanical impedance of the mass, bending stresses which are liable to damage the of the vibration generator; which gives rise to accelera-

C.3

Requirements

for the test

mass
requirements:

The test masses shall meet the following a) the centre of gravity centreline of the actuator; b) the maximum number

the longitudinal

bending

of the test mass shall be on the

tion field gradients

on the mass. for the test the best com-

Once the maximum operating frequency, f,,,, method and the test mass to be used are known, promise between the values for different be situated, associated

of fixing

screws

shall be used for modes range; area (ground

the available

mounting

locations

so that the normal

of D and L are found. maximum within with which the operating frequencies,

of the test mass are outside cl the surface roughness,

the rated'frequency

R,,

of the contact

Figure 9 enables, should to cl. preferably

an area to be determined of phenomena

the values listed

D and L
in a)

finish) R, d)

of the test mass shall be < 1,6f_tm

in order to avoid the appearance modes above

the flatness

tolerance mm/m;

of the contact

area shall be equal

to or less than 0,l operating frequency, the area is bounded transverse bending to the lonqitudinal The for L a limit

For a given maximum
by

a straight line corresponding to the mode and a straight line correspondinq bending mode, is outside the-influences mode of which gives, above.

e) the tightening torque of the screws shall be such that the test mass remains in contact with the table or the power take-off at the fixing points. Within the frequency modes range used, are quite the test mass used shall act of the longitudinal from the rated fredifferent

are to be avoided. in general,

extension-compression which Once

the area defined defined,

like a pure mass, and transversal quency range.

i.e. that

the frequencies

the area has been

it is also possible difficulty

to check

whether

the mass mj can be used without f. value.

(in this case

the line m,) to choose

a value for D between

two limits D, and

D, and the corresponding

Newton's law can then be applied across the whole range of frequencies to the "mass/moving" assembly which is assumed to be rigid.

It will

be noted values

that

:

=

1,75 is the ratio which regardless

enables

the

The specification following inequality

concerning

the test masses is defined C. 1) :

by the

(see also clause

maximum adopted, quency.

of mass to be used, regardless

of the area operating fre-

and thus

of the maximum

f" > 1O.f,a,
where

Example.
Given a vibration generator with maximum operating frequency f 0 is the lower frequency quencies v, to va; f max is the maximum between the values of modal fre-

f max = 2gO Hz; the length of the mass shall be less than 0,6 m. If the mass specified for the test is 1 000 kg, the reading of the graph gives 0.59 m < D < 0,74 m. Choosing for example

frequency

in the range used. of the test

D = 0,6 m, L = 0,45 m is given by the graph.
If the which maximum the operating line frequency m, does gives not an area through (for example

In addition, the coupling equipment and the shape mass shall be described in all cases. NOTES

desired

pass

/;,, = 500 Hz, rn = 500 kg), it is recommended that the correponding L value does not exceed L,,, of the area (in this case L < 0,24 m) so as to not disturb generator for the extension-compression is then necessary
this case

1 If agreed between the manufacturer and the user, eccentric test masses may be used, in which case the masses and their fixing
elements should be described.

the operation of the mode of the mass. It large value for D (in
indicated for 4 are

2

D >

to choose a sufficiently 0,57 m). If the limits

In the case where the test is carried out along the horizontal axis, the static and dynamic transverse loads should not exceed the maximum transverse loads (see 7.2.8.1).

34

IS/IS0

8626

: 1989

Annex Servovalve
(This annex forms

D device

control

an integral

part of the standard.)

The servovalve

control

device

usually

has a primary

input

to

valve

control

device

compares

to the primary

input

signal

and

which a primary input signal is supplied from an external signal source and it acts on a function of the actuator motion, normally displacement, so that this function is proportional to the primary input signal. control device usually has one or more feedback Signals from various

uses to develop

the drive to the servovalve.

Inputs for other feedback transducers, if such inputs are supplied, are for signals from transducers which produce signals used by the servovalve frequency control device to increase the stability, accuracy, response of the servohydraulic test system. usually produce signals proportional and

The servovalve inputs

in addition

to the primary

input.

types of feedback transducers attached to the actuator and perhaps to the servovalve are provided to these feedback inputs. A transducer signal attached to the actuator rod generally which provides the servoa

Such other transducers

to

the actuator rod velocity, or the displacement, velocity, or differential output pressure of the servovalve output spool and/or pilot spool. A typical servovalve in figure 10. control system block diagram is illustrated

proportional

to actuator

displacement

36

IS/Ml

8626

: 1989

I
I

D.C. source (see 8.1.4) I----

TO potentiometers

A.C source (seek 1.3)

To LVDTs

+
Demodulator lsee 8.1.2)

1
From displacement lLVDT

I
Primary (from input sources, c/I E%rol q Fkr signal (see 8.1.7)

t

~~~~%~~~8.l.l)

Dither generator (see 8.1.5)

Alarms

Protection

From mechanical stop transducers

Figure

10

- Typical

servovalve

control

system

block

diagram

37

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau harmonious development of the activities of standardization, and attending to.connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has'the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form
' without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of

of Indian

Standards Act, 1986 to promote marking and quality certification of goods

implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
. Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot : No. LM 04 ( 146 ).

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 0131,323 83 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg .

Telegrams : Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 323 76 17 323 48 41 .4 37 84 99,37 85 61 37 86 26,37 9120 60 38 43 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 832 78 91,832 78 92
_

NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern
: l/14 C. I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

Western

; Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East)

BOMBAY 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. BANGALORE. Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
ted al Simco Printing Press, Delhi

,

