**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 9950 (1981): Clamp, Vascular, Wister Pattern [MHD 6: 
Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Instruments] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



IS: 9950-1981 

( Reaffirmed 2005 ) 



SPECIFICATION FOR 
CLAMP, VASCULAR, WISTER PATTERN 



UDC til 5* 472-2 : 610 136-Ot$ c >7: 




O Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAR 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 11000(2 



D-Ln* Dm g'Dfl 



:w 



Ur S% 



F&nmy 1992 



IS : 9950 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CLAMP, VASCULAR, WISTER PATTERN 

Thoracic and Cardio-Vascular Surgery Instruments Sectional 
Committee, CPDC 28 

Chairman Representing 

Dr P. S. Narayanan G. B. Pant Hospital, New Delhi 

Members 

Shri P. N. Bajaj South India Surgical Co, Madras 

Shri S. Pariasamy ( Alternate ) 
Dr J. V. Bhatt T. N. Medical College & B. Y. L. Nair Charitable 

Hospital, Bombay 
Dr (Shrimati) Ratna Magotra 
( Alternate ) 
Shri Bhufinder Singh Punjab Surgical Instruments Manufacturers 1 and 

Suppliers Association, Jullundur 
Shri Ved Prakash M. Chadda Bharat Surgical, Bombay 
Shrimati Mohini V. Chadda 
( Alternate ) 
Shri K. K. Ghai Ministry of Defence (DG1), New Delhi 

Shri J. N. Vishwakarma ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. R. Girinath Railway Board, Ministry of Railways, New Delhi 

Dr N. Gopinath Directorate General of Health Services, New Delhi 

Dr B. L. Gupta Dr Balabhai Nanavati Hospital, Bombay 

Dr S. Gupta Department of Health & Family Planning, Calcutta 

Shri P. Y. Kalelkar Kalelkar Surgical Industries, Bombay 

Shri Y, P. Kalelkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. S. Khandpur Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 

New Delhi 
Shri P. S. Malhotra ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Mitra J. Mitra & Bros, New Delhi 

DR Sandip Mukerjee In personal capacity ( 32 Skaheed Bhagat Singh Marg 3 

New Delhi ) 
Shri B. L. Pahwa The Surgical Manufacturers & Traders Association, 

New Delhi 
Shri H. L. GROVER ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. Prabhakar Surgical Instruments Plant, Indian Drugs & 

Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Madras 
Shri B. Dhanasekaran ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. Sengupta Baruipur Surgical Instruments Centre, Calcutta 

Shri S. Roy ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



© Copyright 1982 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) and 

reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS : 9950 - 1981 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Col R. N. Thareja Ministry of Defence (DGAFMS), New Delhi 

Lt-Col M. K. Bagchi ( Alternate ) 
Dr M. S. Valiathan Sree Chitra Tirunal Medical Centre, Trivandrum 

Dr Solomon Victor Health and Family Planning Department, Madras 

Dr A. S. Sethi, Director General, ISI ( Ex-officio Member ) 

Director (Consr Prod & Med Instrs) 

Secretary 

Shri B. K. Mahata 
Deputy Director ( Consr Prod & Med Instrs), ISI 



IS : 9950 - 1981 

Indian Standard 

SPECIFICATION FOR 
CLAMP, VASCULAR, WISTER PATTERN 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institu- 
tion ob 19 October 1981, after the draft finalized by Thoracic and 
Cardio- Vascular Surgery Instruments Sectional Committee had been 
approved by the Consumer Products and Medical Instruments Division 
Council. 

0.2 This type of clamp is mainly used for occlusion of abdomino- 
thoracic aorta, in close relation to the diaphragm for aneurism-surgery. 
The special triple curvature is designed so that the shanks and rings lie 
in the left para-vertebral gutter and permit surgeons to operate without 
any obstruction. 

0.3 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, 
expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in 
accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified 
value in this standard. _ __ — _ — ^^__ 

1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard specifies dimensional and other requirements for 
Wister pattern vascular clamp used in cardio-vascular surgery. 

2. SHAPE AND DIMENSIONS 

2.1 The clamp shall be made to shape and dimensions as shown 
in Fig. 1. 

2.2 A deviation of ±2*5 percent shall be allowed on all dimensions. 
However, the two halves of the instrument shall not differ at any specifi- 
ed dimension and shall be perfectly symmetrical. 

2.3 Joint — The clamp shall have box type joint in accordance with 6.1 
of IS : 3642-19781*. 

2.4 Serrations — The clamp shall have non-cutting longitudinal jaw 
serrations with 60° profile and shall grasp the tissue delicately but firmly. 
In other respect the serrations shall be in accordance with Section 1 of 
IS : 3642-1978f. 

♦Rules for rounding off numerical values ( rtvised ). 
fGencral requirements for surgical instruments (first revision ). 



IS : 9950 - 1981 




ENLARGED 
SECTION ZZ 



A 


B 


C 


210 


50 


67 


150 


37'5 


51 



*See IS : 3642-1978 General requirements for surgical instruments. 
All dimensions in millimetres. 

Fig. 1 Clamp, Vascular, Wister Pattern 



IS:^950-1981 

2.5 Ratchet — Teeth used in ratchets of the clamp shall conform to 8.1 
of IS : 3642-1978* with a combination of 1 in 9. 

2.5.1 The load required to close the clamp on first step of the ratchet 
shall be 2*5 N, for second step be 5 N, for third step 7 N, and so on. 

2.6 Finger Loops — The finger loops of the clamp shall be Size No. 2 
in accordance with Section 5 of IS : 3642-1978*. 

3. MATERIAL 

3.1 The clamp shall be manufactured from stainless steel conforming to 
designation 20 Cr 13 or 30 Cr 13 of IS ; 6603-l973t 

4. WORKMANSHIP AND FINISH 

4.1 The surfaces of the clamp shall be finished smooth and free from 
burrs, pits, cracks, scale and other defects. 

4.2 The jaws shall open and close with even and balanced movement. 
The opening and closing of the jaws shall be smooth and jerk free. 

4.3 The clamp shall be passivated and shall be polished bright. 

5. HEAT TREATMENT 

5.1 The different components of the clamp shall be hardened and 
tempered to give a hardness of 400 to 460 HV. 

6. TESTS 

6.1 Performance of Tips and Jaws — When first step of the ratchet is 
engaged, the teeth shall approximate to a gap of 2 mm and not inter- 
digitate; the gap shall become 1 mm on engaging the second step; tips 
shall bite when the third step of ratchet engages. The jaws shall fully 
close when the last step engages. The teeth shall match perfectly and truly. 

5.1.1 In other respects, the jaws shall engage as stipulated in 3.1 
to 3.3 of IS : 3642-1978*. 

6.2 Flexibility — Each arm of the clamp shall be fixed in a vice so that 
the entire arm projects above the vice. By gradual application of force 
on the finger loop, the arm shall be defected by 15 mm in the same 
plane as that of the finger loop. The arm shall not take a permanent 
set or break. 

6.3 Corrosion Resistance — Test the clamp in accordance with IS : 7531- 
1975$. The clamp shall show no sign of corrosion after the test. 



♦General requirements for surgical instruments (first revision ). 
fSpecification for stainless steel bars and flats. 

JMethod for boiling and autoclaving test for corrosion resistance of stainless steel 
surgical instruments. 



IS : 9950 • 1981 

7. MARKING 

7.1 The clamp shall be clearly and indelibly marked, preferably by 
etching, with the following: 

a) Manufacturer's name, initials or registered trade-mark; and 

b) The words « Stainless Steel \ 

7.1.1 The clamp may also be marked with the ISI Certification Mark. 

Note — The use of the ISI Certification Mark is governed by the provisions 
of the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act and the Rules and 
Regulations made thereunder. The ISI Mark on products covered by an Indian 
Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the 
requirement* of that standard under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and 
quality control which is devised and supervised by ISI and operated by the producer. 
ISI marked products are also continuously checked by ISI for conformity to that 
standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for 
the use of the ISI Certification Mark may be granted to manufacturers or proces- 
sors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution. 

8. PACKING 

8.1 The clamp may be packed as agreed to between the purchaser and 

the supplier. 



