IS 5052-z 1993
( Reaffirmed 2003 )

(

'Ti$FTT

@hVT )

hdian Standard

ALUMINIUMANDITSALLOYS-TEMPER DESIGNATIONS
( First Revision )

UDC

669.71 : 003'62

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110 002

Qctober 1993

Price Group 2

Light Metals and Their Alloys Sectional Committee,

MTD 7

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Light Metals and Their Alloys Sectional Committee bad been approved by the Metallurgieal Engineering Division Council. This Standard was originally published in 1969. In this revision Tempers have been re-designated in line with Aluminium Association of USA, which are generally followed in all other countries and are similar to alternate designations recommended in IS0 2107 : 1983 `Aluminium, magnesium. and their alloys - Temper designations'. A comparison of new and old temper designations has been given in Annex A for information.

IS 5052 : 1993

Indian Standard
ALUMINIUM AND ITS ALLOYS DESIGNATIONS ( First Revision )
1 SCOPE This standard covers temper designations for cast and wrought products of aluminium and its alloys. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards adjuncts to this standard:
IS No.

TEMPER

3.5 Natural Ageiog ( Age Hardening ) The increase in hardness and tensile properties and reduction in ductility which occurs at room solution treatment and temperature after quenching of most heat-treatable alloys. The change in properties is substantially complete within four to five days. 3.6 Partial Annealing ( Temper Annealing ) The low material causing to obtain temperature treatment of cold-worked to effect limited softening without recrystallization, this treatment is used certain intermediate tempers.

are necessary

Title

Glossary of terms relating 5047 ( Part 1 ) : 1986 to aluminium and aluminium alloys : Part 1 Unwrought and wrought metals ( second
revision )

3.7 Solution Heat-Treatment Heating at a prescribed temperature rapid cooling ( quenching ) as a natural ageing or precipitation ( artificial ageing ). 3.8 Stabilizing A low temperature treatment applied to caldworked aluminium-magnesium alloys to provide remain mechanical properties which will constant. 3.9 Straightening by heating to and sufficient to cause The removal of longitudinal 3.10 Strain Hardening Modification of a metal structure by cold working resulting in an increase in strength and hardness with corresponding reduction in ductility. 3.11 Stretching Thelevelling of rolled materials or the straightening of extruded or drawn materials by imparting the minimum permanent extension required to remove distortion. 3.12 Wrought Product A product which has been subjected to mechanical working by such processes as rolling, extrusion, forging, etc. 1 distortions. followed by prelude to treatment

Glossary of terms relating to 5047 and aluminium ( Part 2) : 1979 aluminium alloys : Part 2 Plant and thermal treatoperations, control and testing, ment, finishing 3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard following definitions as given in IS 5047 ( Part 1 ) : 1986 and IS 5047 ( Part 2 ) : 1979 shall apply. 3.1 Annealing The softening of material holding at a temperature recrystallization. 3.2 Artificial

Ageing ( Precipitation Treatment )

The controlled heating of solution heat-treated material above room temperature for required duration in order to increase its hardness, proof stress and tensile strength. 3.3 Cast Product ( Casting ) Metallic shapes formed by pouring molten metal into a mould. 3.4 Flattening The flattening of plate or sheet by passing it between a series of staggered rollers of small diameter.

IS 5052 : 1993 4 BASIS OF CODIFICATION 4.1 The temper designations sequence of basic treatments the tempers. are based on the used to produce 6 SUBDIVlSIONS DESIGNATIONS 6.1 -H OF BASIC TEMPER

Strain Hardened

4.2 The temper designations, which are used for all cast and wrought products except ingots, follow the designation of aluminium and its alloys and is separated from them by a dash. 4.3 Basic temper designations consist of letters. If sub-divisions of basic tempers are required, they are indicated by a digit, following the letter of the basic temper. Only those treatments or influence the operations which significantly product characteristics are recognized. 5 BASIC TEMPER DESIGNATIONS 5.1 -M as Manufactured

6.1.1 For wrought products of aluminium and its alloys sub-divisions of temper H are made according to the basic operations described in 5.4 and the final degree of strain hardening as foHows: a) The combination of basic operations is indicated by the first digit of the designations as below. The designations Hl,H2, H3 are always followed by second digit as given in (b). Hl Strain-Hardened Only Appplies to products which are strain-hardened to obtain the desired strength without supplementary thermal treatment. The digit following designation indicate degree of hardening. H2 Strain-Hardened and Partially Annealed Applies to products which are strain-hardened more than the desired final amount and then reduced in strength to the desired level by partial annealing. For alloys that age-soften at room temperature, the H2 tempers have the minimum tensile strengths as the corresponding H3 tempers. For other alloys, the H2 tempers have the same minimum tensile strength as the corresponding Hl temper land slightly higher elongation. The digit following this designation indicates the degree of strain hardening remaining after the product has been partially annealed. H3 StrKin-Hardened and Stabilized Applies to products which are strain-hardened and whose mechanical properties are stabilized by a low temperature thermal treatment which results in slightly lower tensile strength and improved ductility. This designation is~ applicable to only those alloys which, unless gradually age-soften at room stabilized, temperature. The digit following this designation indicates the degree of strain hardening remaining after the stabilization treatment.
~NOTE - This temper designation to aluminium-magnesium alloys. generally applies

This designation applies to the product which from hot shaping some temper acquired processes for which mechanical property limits apply. This temper designation is applicable for cast products only. 5.2 -F as Fabricated

This designation applies to the products of without special control processes shaping thermal condition or strain hardening and for which no mechanical property limits apply. This temper designation is applicable for wrought products only. 5.3 -0 Annealed

This designation applies to wrought products which are fully annealed to obtain the lowest strength condition and to cast products which are annealed to improve ductility and dimensional stability. 5.4 -H Only 1 Strain Hardened ( Wrought Products

This designation applies to products which are subjected to the application of cold work after annealing ( or hot forming ) or to a combination of cold work and partial annealing or stabilizing treatment in order to secure the specified mechanical properties. The letter H is always followed by one or more digits according to basic operation and the final degree of strain hardening. 5.5 -T Thermally Treated to Produce Tempers other than M, F, 0 or H This designation applies to products which have their strength increased by thermal treatment, with or without supplementary strain hardening. The letter T is always followed by one or more digits indicating the specific sequence of treatments.

b) The final degree of strain hardening is indicated by the second digit preceded by HI or H2 or H3. The following, designations indicate the condition of the alloy [ the letter X denotes the first digit as given in (a) above 1. H-X 8 Full hard tempertj;I$&es having an ultimate strength equivalent to that achieved by a cold reduction of approximately 75 percent from 0 temper.

IS 5052 : 19 93 strength approximately H X 4 Tensile midway between that of the 0 temper and that of the H X 8 temper. H X 2 Tensile strength approximately midway between that of the 0 temper and that of the H X 4 temper. H X 6 Tensile strength approximately midway between that of the H X 4 temper and that of the H X8 temper. 6.2 -T Thermally Treated 6.2.5 T5 Cooled from an Elevated Temperature Shaping Process and then Artificially Aged

Applies to products which are not cold worked after cooling from an elevated shaping process or in temperature which the effect of cold work in straightening is not flattening or recognized in mechanical property limits. 6.2.6. T6 Solution Heat-Treated ( see Note 2 ) and then Artificially Aged

6.2.0 Numerals 1 through 10 following the T indicate specific sequences of basic treatments as follows ( see Note 1 >. 6.2.1 Tl Cooledfrom an Elevated Temperature Shaping Process and Naturally Aged to a Substantially Stable Condition

Applies to products which are not cold worked after solution heat-treatment or in which the effect of cold work in or straightening is not flattening recognized in mechanical property limits. 6.2.7 T7 Solution Heat-Treated and Stabilized ( see Note 2 )

Applies to products which are not cold worked after cooling from an elevated temperature shaping process or in which the effect of cold work in flattening or straightening may not be recognized in mechanical property limits. 6.2.2 T2 Cooledfrom an Elevated Temperature Shaping Process, Cold Worked and Naturally Aged to a Substantially Stable Condition

Applies to wrought products which are artificially aged after solution heattreatment to carry them beyond a point of maximum strength to provide control of some significant characteristics. Also applies to cast products that are artificially aged after solution heat-treatment to provide dimensional and strength stabili y. 6.2.8 T8 - Solution Heat-Treated
Cold Aged Worked and ( see Note 2 ) then Artscially

Applies to products which are cold worked to improve strength after cooling from an elevated temperature shaping process or in which the effect of cold work in flattening is recognized in or straightening mechanical property limits. 6.2.3 T3 Solution Heat-Treated ( see Note 2 1, Cold Worked and Naturally Aged to Substantially Stable Condition

Applies to products which are cold worked to improve strength after solution heat-treatment or in which the effect of cold work in flattening or straightening' is recognized in mechanical property limits. 6.2.9 T9 Solution Heat-Treated ( see Note 2 ) Artificially Aged and then Cold Worked

Applies to products which are cold worked to improve strength after solution heat-treatment or in which the effect of cold work in flattening or straightening is recognized in mechanical property limits. 6.2.4 T4 Solution HeatlTreated ( see Note 2 ) and Naturally Aged to .Substantially Stable Condition

Applies worked solution ageing 6.2.10 TlO -

to products which are cold to improve strength after heat-treatment and artificial

Cooled from an Elevated Temperature Shaping Process, Cold Worked and Artificially Aged

Applies to products which are not cold worked after solution heat-treatment or in which the effect of cold work in flattening or straightening may not be recognized in mechanical property limits.
3

Applies to products which are cold worked to I'mprove strength after cooling from an elevated temperature shaping process or in which the effect of cold work in flattening or straightening is recognized in mechanical property limits.

IS 5052:1993 6.3 If necessary any additional digits the first, *of which shall not be zero, may be added to indicate any variation of sub-division of basic .tempers. NOTES 1 A period of natural ageing at room temperature may occur betureen or after the operations listed for the T tempers. Control of this period is
exercised when it is metallurgically important. 2 Solution heat-treatment is achieved by heating cast or wrought products to a suitable temperature and holding at that temperature long enough to allow constituents to enter in to a solid solution and cooling rapidly enough to hold the constituents in the solid solution. Some 6000 series alloys attain the same specified mechanical properties whether furnace solution heat-treated or cooled from an elevated temperature shaping process at a rate rapid enough to hold constituents in solution. In such cases the temper designations T3, T4 T6. T7, T8 and T9 are used~to apply to either process and are appropriate designations.

ANNEX A ( Foreword )
COMPARISON OF IS TEMPERS TEMPERS New IS tempers
M F ii HX4 HX6 HX8 Tl T'; TT; T6 T7 2 TlO WITH

IS0

Old IS tempers

IS0 tempers
M F 0 H HXB HXD HXF HXH TA TC TD Et %I TH T'k -

M 0 H HI E3" H4 WD W P WP WS WDP WPD PD WR

HX2
l

4

Standard Mark by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further -safeguard. Details of conditions under which a icence for the use of the Standard Mark may be-granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard Mark is governed
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institutione stablished under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary detlails, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard alon g with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of lndian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Comments on this Indian Standard May be sent to BIS giving the following Monthly Additions'. reference : Dot : No. MTD 7 ( 3334 ) Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices : Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI

110002 37 84 99, i 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 1 53 23 84 235 02 16, ( 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91

331 01 31 c 331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40

Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

Southern

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113

235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East > BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Paragon bnterprises,
Delhi, India.

