ттт HAF IS 16833 : 2018 
Indian Standard 


ач т sumo (те) 
ча qhipa woei 


Automotive Tracking Device 
(ATD) and Integrated Systems 


ICS 35.240.60; 43.040.01 


© BIS 2018 


mA AH ART 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM зая, 9 етте 5194 DB as І5еей-110002 
vum. MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


July 2018 Price Group 16 


Intelligent Transport Systems Sectional Committee, TED 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Intelligent 
Transport Systems Sectional Committee had been approved by the Transport Engineering Division Council. This 
standard is a technical document which covers the basic architecture and the test requirements of the automotive 
tracking device (ATD) with an integrated emergency system. The other configuration of devices, for example, 
ATD with an integrated emergency button system is covered in Annex A. ATD with an integrated emergency 
button system and Auto fare meter is covered in Annex B of this standard. The CCTV system with an integrated 
emergency button system is covered in Annex C of this standard. ATD with an integrated emergency button 
system and CCTV system is covered in Annex D. Any further configuration or applications of the ATD used in the 
transportation domain, for example, Portable ATD/Application based ATD can be added as an Annex to this 
standard. 


While formulating this standard assistance has been taken from following standards/documents: 


MoRTH document: National Level Vehicle Security and Tracking System 


ISO 7637-2 : 2011 Road vehicles —Electrical disturbances from conduction and Coupling — Part 2: 
Electrical transient conduction along supply Lines only 

ISO 10605 : 2008 Road vehicles —Test methods for electrical disturbances from Electrostatic discharge 

ISO 16750-2 : 2012 Road vehicles — Environmental conditions and testing for electrical and electronic 


equipment — Part 2: Electrical loads 

ISO 16750-4 : 2010 Road vehicles — Environmental conditions and testing for electrical and electronic 
equipment — Part 4: Climatic loads 

IS/IEC 60529 : 2001 Degrees of protection provided by enclosures (IP CODE) 


IEC 60947 Low-voltage switchgear and control gear 
AIS 004 (Part 3) Automotive vehicles — Requirements for electromagnetic compatibility 
AIS 028 Code of Practice for use of CNG fuel in internal combustion engine vehicle 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)'. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Indian Standard 


AUTOMOTIVE TRACKING DEVICE (ATD) AND 
INTEGRATED SYSTEMS 


1 SCOPE 


The purpose of this standard is to define the basic 
architecture and performance requirements of the 
automotive tracking systems. The ATD system consists 
of the receiver, receiver antenna, transmitter, transmitter 
antenna, controller, etc. The standard covers the 
performance requirements of the automotive tracking 
device (ATD) with an integrated emergency button 
system and other configurations/applications of ATD 
in different annexes as mentioned below. Annex A, B, 
C and D are the fixed system: 


a) Annex A: ATD with an integrated emergency 
system. 

b) Annex B: ATD with an integrated emergency 
system and fare meter. 

c) Annex C: CCTV system with an integrated 
emergency system. 

d) Annex D: CCTV system with in-built tracking 
system and integrated emergency system. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
2465 : 1984 Specifications for cable for motor 
vehicles 
4905 : 2015 Random sampling and 


randomization processes 

Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and 
electrical items: Part 2 Cold test 
Section 4 Cold test for heat 
dissipating items with gradual 
change of temperature 

Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and 
electrical items: Part 3 Dry heat 
test 

Basic environmental testing 
procedures for electronic and 


9000 (Part 2/ 
Sec 4) : 2004 


9000 (Part 3/ 


Sec 5) : 1977 


9000 (Part 5/ 
Sec 2): 1981 


IS No. Title 
electrical items: Part 5 damp heat 
(cyclic) test 
10250 : 1982 Specification for severities for 
environmental test for automotive 
electrical equipment 
3 ABBREVIATIONS 
Abbreviation Description 
A-GPS Assisted Global Positioning System 
APN Access Point Name 
ATD Automotive Tracking Device 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
DRMS Distance Root Mean Square 
DUT Device Under Test 
CAN Controller Area Network 
CCTV Closed-Circuit Television 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GPRS General Packet Radio Service 
GSM Global System for Mobile 
Communications 
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System 
NC Normally Closed 
NO Normally Open 
PWM Pulse Width Modulation 
RD Remote Diagnostics 
ADC Analog to Digital Converter 
TTFF Time To First Fix 
TEC Telecommunication Engineering 
Centre, Department of 
Telecommunications, Government of 
India 
NMEA National Marine Electronics 
Association 
OTA Over The Air 
IP Ingress Protection 
IRNSS Indian Regional Navigation Satellite 
System 
CEP Circular Error Probability 
DRMS Distance Root Mean Square 
NMR Network Measurement Report 
SBAS Satellite Based Augmentation 
System 
SEP Spherical Error Probability 
SIM Subscriber Identity Module 
SMS Short Message Service 
mDVR Mobile Digital Video Recorder 
mNVR Mobile Network Video Recorder 


IS 16833 : 2018 


4 TERMS, 
NOMENCLATURE 


DEFINITIONS AND 


4.1 Sensitivity — Sensitivity refers to the minimum 
signal strength level at which locating module can 
successfully perform a location fix. A GNSS locating 
module has two different sensitivity levels — 
acquisition sensitivity and tracking sensitivity. 


4.2 Acquisition Sensitivity —Acquisition sensitivity 
refers to the minimum signal level at which the receiver 
is able to successfully perform a cold start. During the 
signal acquisition process the signal level must be 
higher than that during the tracking process because 
the time synchronization is not known to the locating 
module. 


4.3 Tracking Sensitivity — Tracking sensitivity refers 
to the minimum signal level at which the locating 
module receiver 1s able to maintain a location fix. This 
is generally a much lower signal level than the 
acquisition sensitivity level. 


4.4 Ratings — The voltage and current range at which 
the ATD is designed to operate satisfactorily. 


4.5 Rated Voltage — The operating voltage (12/24 V) 
specified by the manufacturer for terminal or pair of 
terminals at which the ATD is designed to operate 
satisfactorily. 


4.6 Type Tests — Tests carried out to prove conformity 
of ATD with respect to the requirements of this standard. 
These are intended to prove the general quality, design 
and performance of a given type of ATD. 


4.7 Acceptance Tests — Tests required to be carried 
out on samples taken from a lot for the purpose of 
acceptance of the lot. 


4.8 Lot — Fifty numbers of ATDs of the same type, 
design, rating, manufactured in the same premises, 
using the same process and materials, offered for 
inspection at a time shall constitute a lot. 


4.9 Functional Status Classification — Operational 
status of a device during and after exposure to an 
electromagnetic environment. 


4.10 Circular Error Probability — CEP is defined 
as the radius of a circle centered on the true value that 
contains 50 percent of the actual GPS measurements. 
So a receiver with 5 m CEP accuracy will be within 5 
m of the true measurement 50 percent of the time. The 
other 50 percent of the time the measurement will be 
in error by more than 1 m. 


4.11 Device — Device is a component implementing 
one or more ITS function mentioned in this standard. 


4.12 Integrated System — It 1s a device having 
multiple ITS functions implemented in one unit. For 


example, single board computer. 


4.13 HMI/Driver Console — Human machine 
interface which allows user to select various options in 
software or modes of software. 


4.14 Emergency Request/Panic Alarm/Emergency 
Button — A button provided in vehicle for passengers 
or crew members to send specialized data packet/SMS 
to centralized regulatory server to indicate safety/panic 
situation caused by human or natural disaster or vehicle 
accident, etc. 


5 CLASSIFICATION OF FUNCTIONAL STATUS 


Following classifications are for the total device/system 
functional status: 


a) Class A — All functions of a device/system 
perform as designed during and after exposure 
to disturbance. 

b) Class B — All functions of a device/system 
perform as designed during exposure. 
However, one or more of them can go beyond 
specified tolerance. All functions return 
automatically to within normal limits after 
exposure is removed. Memory functions shall 
remain Class A. 

c) Class C— One or more functions of a device/ 
system do not perform as designed during 
exposure but return automatically to normal 
operation after exposure is removed. 

d) Class D — Опе or more functions of a device/ 
system do not perform as designed during 
exposure and do not return to normal operation 
until exposure is removed and the device/ 
system is reset by simple *operator/use' action. 

e) Class E— One or more functions ofa device/ 
system do not perform as designed during and 
after exposure and cannot be returned to 
proper operation without repairing or 
replacing the device/system. 


NOTE — The word ‘function’ in this context refers only to the 
function performed by the electronic system. 


6 MARKING 


The ATD shall have the following information marked 
indelibly and legibly at an easily accessible location: 
a) Nameand/or trade-mark ofthe manufacturer, 
b) Rated voltage, 
c) Size, 
d) Type of ATD, 
e) Model number (if any), 
f) Unique identification number, 
g) Month and year of manufacture, and 
h) Country of manufacture (if required). 


7 BIS CERTIFICATION MARKING 


The product may also be marked with Standard Mark. 


7.1 The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the 
provisions of Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 


IS 16833 : 2018 


and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The 
details of conditions under which the license for the 
use of Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers 
or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian 
Standards. 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword and Clause 1) 
ATD WITH AN INTEGRATED EMERGENCY SYSTEM 


A-1 This annex primarily covers the functional 
requirements, test and protocol requirements of *ATD 
with an integrated emergency system’. 


A-2 FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
A-2.1 General Features 


1. 


The system should support any operational 
GNSS system (Location, speed, heading, time 
stamp) data polling and capable of sending 
this data at a frequency that shall be 5 s during 
vehicle operation and not less than 10 min. 
The devices installed on or after 1 September 
2017 should also support Indian Regional 
Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS). 

The system should support GAGAN, the 
Indian SBAS (Satellite Based Augmentation 
System). 

The System should support: 

a) Location on demand on GPRS/SMS, 


b) Non-volatile memory to store min 40 000 
positional log, 

c) Configurable backup SMS facility in case 
of GPRS failure, and 

d) Capability to send serving and adjacent 
cell ID as well as network measurement 
report (NMR). 

System shall have positional accuracy of less 

than 6 m 2DRMS (on ground) or 2.5 m CEP 

(on ground). 


5. 


10. 


11. 


The system’s GNSS module shall have an 
acquisition equal to or better than (-) 148 dBm. 
The system’s GNSS module shall have a 
tracking sensitivity equal to or better than 
(-)165 dBm. 

The system’s GNSS module should support 
any operational GNSS system with a minimum 
of 12 acquisition channels. 

The system’s GNSS module should have: 

a) the capability of hot start <5s, 

b) the capability of warm start : < 30s, and 
c) the capability of cold start < 40 s. 
Should support standard digital I/O: Four 
Digital, two Analogue and one serial 
communication for interfacing external 
systems (For example, Digital input for 
emergency request button interfacing) and 
output for triggering other devices like hooter/ 
flash light, etc. 


In case of use on buses it will provide the 
following additional information: 


a) Provide GPS data via RS 232/Ethernet 
to other on—bus devices, and 


b) Receive route number information from 
other on-board devices and transmit to 
back end. 

System shall be capable of transmitting data 

to minimum two different IP addresses (one 

IP address for regulatory purpose (PVT data) 


IS 16833 : 2018 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 
21. 


and one IP address for operational purpose). 


System shall have an internal back-up battery 
to support 4 h of normal operations. (To be 
tested for position records transmission once 
every minute). 


The system's GPRS module should have: 


a) Multislot GPRS with in - built quad-band 
GPRS module/modem. 


b) GPRS Class 10 or above. 


c) Support embedded SIM (As per TEC 
specification released time to time) to 
cater to the automotive operational 
requirement such ав vibration, 
temperature and humidity and provide 
long life span with at least 10 years life 
and more than 1 million read/write cycles. 

d) GPRS module and SIM: 


1) Shall support SMS, data (GPRS, 
TCP/IP). 


2) Support multiple network OTA 
switching (on-demand/automatic) 
capabilities. 

3) In case of use on city buses it shall 
support minimum 3G network 
compliance. 

System shall have automotive grade 
components using processes in line with 
quality management standard for automotive 
industries as ISO/TS 16949 or equivalent BIS 
prevalent. 


System shall have internal GPRS antenna and 
internal GPS antenna. 

System shall have status LED’s to indicate 
power, GPS, emergency status, and GPRS 
status. 

System shall be capable to operate with 
vehicle battery input voltage range 8-32 V. 
System shall have the capability for over the 
air download of firmware as well as 
configuration parameters. 

System shall have remote administration and 
firmware update over the air. 


System shall support A-GPS (Assisted GPS). 


The system shall have a unique identifier for 
identifying the unit and data from the unit. The 
unique ID shall be stored in a read only 
memory area so that it cannot be altered or 
overwritten by any person. IMEI 
(International Mobile Station Equipment 
Identity) number shall be the unique identifier. 


22. System shall store/write the registration 
number of the vehicle in the internal non- 
volatile memory. 

23. Device shall have 3 axis accelerometer and 3 
axis gyroscope for accessing driving 
conditions such as rapid acceleration, sudden 
braking and hard turn. 


24. System shall have provision of secured data 
transmission to the backend from the devices 
through secured channel. Secured channel 
means encrypted data transmission from 
device to backend using a secured tunnel on 
communication medium such as ‘Secured 
dedicated APN or 2G/3G network’. 


A-22 Configuration of Device Parameters Over the 
Air (OTA) 


The device parameters given below should be 
configurable over the air (through SMS or GPRS). The 
updation shall be allowed only over an ‘authenticated’ 
channel, which could be: 


a) Change ofthe APN. 

b) Change ofIP and port number. 

c) Setting of the primary or secondary IP. 

d) Configuring the vehicle registration number. 

e) Configuring the frequency of data 
transmission in Ignition ‘ON/OFF’, 
emergency state. 

f) Configuring the time duration for emergency 
state. 

g) Capability to reset the device. 

h) Command to get the IMEI of the device. 


Configurable commands must involve the following 
features: 


1) SET— For setting the parameters. 

2) GET— For enquiring regarding the 
parameters such as mobile number, GSM 
strength, vehicle number and other important 
parameters. 

3) CLR— For clearing certain commands, 
alarms, alerts, etc. 


A-2.3 Tracking Device Health Monitoring 
Parameters 


The device should send status of system health 
parameters at configurable interval and this threshold 
value should also be configurable over the air. It should 
be possible for system health parameters to be fetched 
on demand via command as set out in the table given 
below: 


IS 16833 : 2018 


SI Field Description 
No. 
i) Start character $ 
Header The header of the packet/identifier 


i) Vendor ID 
iii) Firmware version 
iv) IMEI 


v) Battery percentage 
vi) Low battery threshold value 


Vendor identification header 
Version details of the Firmware used in EX.1.0.0 


Identified of the sending unit. 15 digit standard unique IMEI 
no. 


Indicates the internal battery charge percentage 
Indicates value on which low battery alert generated in 


percentage 


vii) Memory percentage 

viii) Data update rate when ignition ‘ON’ 
ix) Data update rate when ignition ‘OFF’ 
x) Digital I/O status 
xi) Analog I/O status 

xii) End character * 


Indicates flash memory percentage used 
Indicates Packet frequency on ignition ON 
Indicates Packet frequency on ignition OFF 
Inputs connected to the device. 

Analog input status 


A-3 EMERGENCY REQUEST 


a) Passengers or in-vehicle crew present in the 
vehicle shall be able to make an emergency 
request by pressing the emergency button 
provided. 

b) The emergency request function shall not exist 
as standalone. The function shall be part of 
Automatic Vehicle Location Tracking (AVL) 
system. An alert shall be send to the control 
center when emergency request is activated 
and de-activated. De-activation shall always 
be from authorized government server which 
receives alert message. 

c) The emergency Buttons will be ‘Normally 
Closed’ (NC) type. The form factor of 
emergency Buttons will be such that the button 
is easy to press in the case of an emergency, 
and simultaneously also minimizes the 
possibility of accidental or unintended press 
thereby causing a false alert. 

d) Onpressing of emergency button, the system 
implementing AVL function shall send 
emergency alert to the configured IP addresses 
as per the communication protocol mentioned 
in A-4. In the absence of GPRS network, the 
alert shall be sent as SMS message along with 
vehicle location data to configured control 
center number(s). 


A-4 COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL 
A-4.1 Data Frame Format 


Table 1 contains the listing of fields that the vehicle 
tracking devices would be required to send to the 


backend. The first three fields (Start character, Header 
for SI and Vendor ID, who had supplied the device) 
must be fixed in position as well as format (Header 
part of frame). Rest all other fields are required to be 
present in the location data sent by the devices to the 
backend, but can be in any sequence or with any 
separator between fields. The data value can be either 
in American Standard Code for Information Interchange 
(ASCID or in HEX format. Device must transmit the 
login message whenever it establishes its connectivity 
with Server with the specified fields. Login message 
will carry below following information: 


a) $DeviceName — Vehicle number where the 
device was installed 


b) S$IMEI — 15 Digit IMEI number 


c) $Firmware — Version of the firmware used 
in the hardware 


d) $Protocol — Version of the frame format 
protocol. 

e) $LastValidLocation — Last location info 
saved at the device. 


A-4.2 Messages and Alerts from Devices 


Table 2 contains the listing of alerts that need to come 
from the tracking devices. These alerts are applicable 
for both live packets as well as the history packets. 


In case of emergency Alert, the alert message should 
be sent to dual IP addresses hence the device should 
support minimum two IP addresses simultaneously. 
Primary alert will go to the Emergency Response 
backend (NERS/MHA) as may be notified by the 
Government of India in the schema below: 


IS 16833 : 2018 


xvi) 
xvii) 
xviii) 
xix) 
xx) 
xxi) 
xxii) 
xxiii) 


xxiv) 
xxv) 
xxvi) 


xxvii) 
xxviii) 
xxix) 


xxx) 


Field 
(2) 
Start character 
Header 
Vendor ID 


Firmware version 


Packet type 


Packet status 
IMEI 


Vehicle Registration No. 


GPS Fix 
Date 


Time 

Latitude 

Latitude Direction 
Longitude 
Longitude Direction 


Speed 

Heading 

No. of satellites 
Altitude 

PDOP 

HDOP 

Network operator name 
Ignition 


Main power status 
Main input voltage 
Internal battery voltage 


Emergency status 
Tamper alert 

GSM signal strength 
MCC 


Table 1 Data Message Format 


(Clause A-4.1) 


Description 


(3) 


$ 
The header of the packet/identifier 


Vendor identification header 


Version details of the Firmware used in 
EX.1.0.0 


Specify the packet type— 

NR = Normal 

EA = Emergency Alert 

TA = Tamper Alert 

HP = Health Packet 

IN = Ignition On 

IF = Ignition Off 

BD = Battery Disconnect 

BR = Battery Reconnect 

BL = Battery Low 

L=Live or H= History 

Identified of the sending unit. 15 digit 
standard unique IMEI no. 

Mapped vehicle registration number 


1 = GPS fix or 0 = GPS invalid 


Date value as per GPS date time per GPS 
date time (ddmmyy) 

Time value as per GPS date time in UTC 
format (hhmmss) 

Latitude value in decimal degrees (up to 
not less than 6 places) 

Latitude Direction. For example, N=North; 
S= South 

Longitude value in decimal degrees (Not 
less than 6 places). 

Longitude Direction. 

For Example, E=East, W= West 

Speed in km/h (Up to one decimal value) 


Course over ground in degrees 

Number of satellites available for fix 
Altitude of the device in ‘m’ 

Positional dilution of precision 

Horizontal dilution of precision 

Name of Network operator 

1= Ignition On ; 0 = Ignition Off 

0 = Vehicle Battery Disconnected 

1= Vehicle Battery Reconnected 

Indicator showing source voltage in ‘V’ 
(Up to One Decimal Value) 

Indicator for Level of battery charge 


remaining. (Up to One Decimal Value) 
1= On; 0 = Off 


C = Cover closed, O = Cover open 
Value Ranging from 0-31 
Mobile Country Code 


Sample Data 


(4) 


1.0.0 


Depending upon the context, every 
frame from tracking device must 
carry a qualification code. This helps 
to determine the state in which 
vehicle is at that time. 


L 
123456789012345 


DLIPC9821 
1 
220714 


050656 
28.758963 
N 


77.6277844 


12.5 


404 


Table 1 — (Concluded) 


IS 16833 : 2018 


SI Field Description Sample Data 
No. 
(D (2) (3) (4) 
xxxi) ММС Mobile Network Code 10 
xxxi) LAC Location Area Code 00D6 
xxxii) Cell ID GSM Cell ID CFBD 
xxxiv) ММК (neighbouring Cell ID) Neighbouring 4 cell ID along with their — 
LAC & signal strength 
xxxv) Digital input status 4 external digital input status (Status of 000 
Input 1 to Input 3 (0-Off; 1=On)) 
xxxvi) Digital output status 2 external digital output status 01 
(0=Off; 1=On) 
xxxvii Frame number Sequence Number of the messages (000001 000005 
to 999999) 
xxxvii) Checksum Ensures no error in transmission (optimal) 16 
xxxix) End character Indicated end of the frame Т 
Table 2 Messages and Alerts Supported 
(Clause A-4.2) 
SI Message Remarks 
No. 
а) (2) (3) 
i) Location Update Default message coming from each device 
ii) Location Update (history) Would be sent, if GPRS is not available at the time of sending the message 
iil) Alert — Disconnect from main battery If device is disconnected from vehicle battery and running on its internal battery 
iv) Alert — Low battery If device internal battery had fallen below a defined threshold, indicating that 
device need to get a recharge 
v) Alert — Low battery removed Indicate that vehicle internal battery is charged again 
vi) Alert — Connect back to main battery Indicate that vehicle is connected back to main battery 
vii Alert — Ignition “ОМ”? Indicates that Vehicle has started (ignition ON) 
vii) Alert — Ignition ‘OFF’ Indicates that Vehicle has stopped (ignition OFF) 
ix) Alert – GPS box opened Message would be generated indicating GPS box opened 
x) Alert — Emergency state ‘ON’ When any of the emergency button is pressed by any passenger. System should 
also provide location of emergency button which is pressed 
xi) Alert — Emergency state ‘OFF’ When emergency state of vehicle is removed 
xi) Alert over the air parameter change Alerts for any parameter changed over the air/manually. Shall include the 
name/value of parameter changed and source of command 
xii) Нагѕһ Braking Alert indicating for harsh braking 
xiv) Harsh Acceleration Alert indicating for harsh acceleration 
xv) Rash Turning Alert indicating for rash turning 


IS 16833 : 2018 


USE IN DANGER 
PRESSES THE 


Primary alert will go to the Emergency Response 


PANIC BUTTON 


EMR М5С 


EMR MSG 


EMR MSG 


WHEN THE VICTIM 
RECEIVES THE 
NECESSARY HELP 


STOP MSG 


STOP ACK 


DEVICE CONTINUE TO 
SEND EMR MSG AT THE 
CONFIGURED INTERVAL 


Fic. 1 SCHEMATIC DEPICTING THE FUNCTIONING EMERGENCY RESPONSE BACHEND SYSTEM 


backend system as notified by the Government of India 


in the indicative format given in the table below: 


SI Attribute Value/ Description Size 
No. 
i) Packet Header EPB, the unique identifier for all messages from VTU Character, 3 bytes 
i) Message Type Message Types supported. Emergency Message (EMR) Character, 2 bytes 
or Stop Message (SEM) 
ш) Vehicle ID Unique ID of the Vehicle (IMEI Number) Character,15 bytes 
iv) Packet Type NM - Normal packet, SP — Stored packet Character, 2 bytes 
v) Date Date and time of location the location obtained from the — Character,14 bytes 
data in YY Y YMMDDhhmmss format 
vi) GPS Validity A — Valid, V — Invalid Character, 1 byte 
vii) Latitude Latitude in decimal degrees - dd.mmmmmm format Double, 12 bytes 
viii) Latitude N - North, S — South Character, 1 byte 
Direction 
ix) Longitude Longitude in decimal degrees - dd. mmmmmm format Double, 12 bytes 
x) Longitude E – East W — West Character, 1 byte 
Direction 
xi) Altitude Altitude — in *m' (above sea level) Double, 12 bytes 
xi) Speed Speed in km/h Float, 6 bytes 
xii) Distance Distance calculated from previous GPS data Float, 6 bytes 
xiv) Provider G - Fine GPS Character, 1 byte 
N – Coarse GPS or data from the network 
xv) Vehicle Registration number of the vehicle Character, 16 bytes 
Registration No. 
xvi) Reply Number The mobile number to which Test response need to be 0 
sent 
xvii) CRC The 32 bit checksum of all the characters from the header 8 bytes 


up to the CRC field 


NOTE — Above format is indicative only. The format will be notified by the Government of India time to time. 


A-5 INSTALLATION GUIDELINES 
A-5.1 Location 


The device should be mounted on the vehicle dashboard 
or any suitable location and emergency buttons within 
easy reach of the passengers. 


A-5.2 Power Supply 
Vehicle power interface shall have, 


a) onecommon ground linked to vehicle chassis; 


b) one permanent power supply (12/24V) 
connected to the vehicle battery; and 


c) one non-permanent power line (12/24V) 
connected to the battery after ignition. 


A-5.3 Electrical Wiring 


The wiring harness used in the device should be tested 
for flammability as per IS 2465. 


A-5.4 Emergency Buttons 


Emergency buttons should be mounted within easy 
reach of the passengers. 


A-6 TESTS 


a) Thetests have been classified as type tests and 
acceptance tests (see 1.1). 


b) The tests have been divided into categories 
(see 2.0). 


A-6.1 Type Tests 
The following shall constitute type tests: 


a) Functional testing: 
1) Location accuracy test [see A-7.1 (a)]. 
2) Cold-start time to first fix (TTFF) test 
[see A-7.1 (b)]. 
3) Warm-start time to first fix test 
[see A-7.1 (c)]. 
4) Hot-start time to first fix test 
[see A-7.1 (d)]. 
5) Acquisition sensitivity test [see A-7.1 (e)]. 
6) Tracking sensitivity test [see A-7.1 (f)]. 
7) Interference testing [see A-7.1 (g)]. 
8) Multipath testing [see A-7.1 (h)]. 
9) SIM testing [see A-7.1 (1)1. 
b) Performance and durability testing: 


1) Performance parametric test (tri 
temperature/tri voltage) [see A-7.2 (a)]. 


2) Shock test [see A-7.2 (b)]. 
3) Vibration test [see A-7.2 (c)]. 
4) Ingress protection [see A-7.2 (d)]. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


5) Over voltage 
[see A-7.2 (e)]. 
6) EMI-EMC [see A-7.2 (f)]. 
7) Load dump test, Pulse 5a [see A-7.2 (g)]. 
8) Battery backup test [see A-7.2 (h)]. 
9) Reverse polarity protection without fuse 
[see A-7.2 (])]. 
10) Test for wiring harness [see A-7.2 (k)]. 
11) Free fall test [see A-7.2 (m)]. 
c) Environmental testing: 
1) High temperature test [see A-7.3 (a)]. 
2) Cold test [see A-7.3 (b)]. 
3) Damp heat test [see A-7.3 (c)]. 
4) Insulation resistance test [see A-7.3 (d)]. 
5) Thermal shock test [see A-7.3 (e)]. 
6) Salt spray test [see A-7.3 (f)]. 
7) High voltage test [see A-7.3 (g)]. 
d) Protocol testing (see A-7.4). 


protection test 


A-6.1.1 Criteria for Approval 


Minimum three samples shall be submitted for testing 
together with the relevant data. The testing authority 
shall issue a type approval certificate if the ATD is found 
to comply with the requirements of the type tests. 


The samples shall be tested as per the test sequence in 
Table 3. 


The sequence of tests on Sample sets S1 to S3 shall be 
as mentioned in Table 3 and is subject to agreement 
between manufacturer and the test agency. 


In case of failure in one or more type tests, the testing 
authority may call for fresh samples not exceeding twice 
the number of original samples and subject those 
samples to test(s) in which failure occurred. If, in 
repeated test(s) no failure occurs, the test may be 
considered to have been satisfactory. 


A-6.2 Acceptance Tests 
The following shall constitute acceptance tests: 


a) Location accuracy test [see A-7.1(a)]. 

b) Cold-start time to first fix (TTFF) test 
[see A-7.1(b)]. 

c) Warm-start time to first fix test [see A-7.1(c)]. 

d) Hot-start time to first fix test [see A-7.1(d)]. 

€) Acquisition sensitivity test [see A-7.1(e)]. 

f) Tracking sensitivity test [see A-7.1(f)]. 

g) Interference testing [see A-7.1(g)]. 

h) Multipath testing [see A-7.1(h)]. 

j) SIM testing [see A-7.1(])], and 

k) Protocol testing (see A-7.4). 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Table 3 Sample-Wise Test Sequence 
(Clause A-6.1.1) 


SI Sample Set No. S1 52 53 
No. Tests 


|Ð [Lomonacuxytes ooo d S S 
r E LL 
аон 
у оа 
ШЕКТЕН анн 
ШЕКТЕН о 
И ЕТТИ E 

[Performance parametric к Gri temperaturen voltage) — | 


mL ЕЛ А АЕ 


Performance parametric test (tri temperature/tri voltage) 


ix) 

x) 

s) 
xv) 


xi 
xiii) Ingress protection 
xiv) Over voltage protection test 
EMI-EMC X 
xvi) Load dump test, Pulse 5a X 
xvii) Battery backup test 
High temperature test 
xxv) Temperature shock test ПИШЕ ШЕШ 
xxvii) High voltage test xo | | 
ххуш) Protocol testing [х | —À 


А-7 CATEGORY OF TESTS to determine its first good location fix is 
recorded. Normally, this test is done many 
times (>15) over many conditions and the 
Functional testing will be carried out to assess the results are averaged. 

performance of the tracking device on important Тһе various types of location accuracy tests to be 
functional aspects as given below. The functional tests performed on the device are as follows: 

(a) to (h) mentioned below may be done either inside 

the test lab using a GPS simulator or outside the lab by 1) Location accuracy test compares the variation 


other methods as decided by the authorized test agency: between multiple location data obtained by the 
device under the cold/warm/hot start mode 


while the device remains at the same location. 


| х|х 
ІШІ | T 


A-7.1 Functional Testing 


a) Location accuracy test — Location accuracy 
signifies the ability of tracking device to 


accomplish a location data relative to the true Acceptance criteria: 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 
position. The test setup in Fig. 2 shows that 2DRMS. 
the satellite simulator is programmed to send 3j Меш or Dynamic location aecanaey test 


out GPS test signal. DUT is connected to a 
laptop with display terminal. In this test, the 
receiver is placed into a cold start state, usually 
by some command sent to the receiver through 
a test connection, and then a fairly strong Acceptance criteria: 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 
signal is sent. The time it takes for the receiver 2DRMS. 


10 


compares the variation between the location 
data obtained by the device with the true 
positions at multiple locations along a test path. 


b) 


d) 


SIMULATOR 


IS 16833 : 2018 


MEASURING SETUP 


Fic. 2 LOCATION ACCURACY TEST 


Cold-start time to first fix (TTF F) test — This 
test is used to determine the time taken for 
first fix during a cold start of the device. The 
device in this test is placed into a cold start 
state. The time it takes for the device to 
determine its first good location fix is 
recorded. The cold start test is performed 
several times and the results are averaged. 
Acceptance criteria: Should be less than 40 s 
at (-) 148 dBm. 


Warm-start time to first fix test — This test is 
used to determine the time taken for first fix 
during a warm start of the device. In this test 
the device is started in warm start mode and 
time taken by device to determine the first 
valid location fix is recorded. This is done 
several times and results are averaged. 
Acceptance criteria: The warm start TTFF 
should be less than 30 s at (-) 148 dBm. 


Hot-start time to first fix test — This test is 
used to determine the time taken for first fix 
during a hot start of the device. In this test the 
device is started in hot start mode and time 
taken by device to determine the first valid 
location fix is recorded. This test is performed 
several times and results are averaged. 
Acceptance criteria: The hot start TTFF 
should be less than 5 s. 

Acquisition sensitivity test — Acquisition 
sensitivity refers to the minimum signal level 
at which the device is able to successfully 
perform a cold start TTFF. The acquisition 
sensitivity test is a simulated signal test. A 
device cold start is performed, and the time 
to acquisition is measured. Signal levels are 
then progressively decreased until the device 
can no longer acquire the location. This signal 
strength is recorded. 


11 


g) 


Acceptance criteria: The acquisition 
sensitivity should be equal to or better than 
(-) 148 dBm. 

Test setup for the acquisition sensitivity 
receiver test is as shown in Fig. 3. Set the 
simulator to output GPS signal to a particular 
location with a very level so that the tracking 
is not possible. Gradually increase the signal 
level that allows the receiver to successfully 
perform a cold start TTFF within a specified 
time frame. The minimum signal level that 
allows acquisition is referred as to the 
acquisition sensitivity. 

Tracking sensitivity test — Tracking 
sensitivity refers to the minimum signal level 
at which the device is able to successfully 
maintain the location fix. The acquisition 
sensitivity test is a simulated signal test. Test 
setup for the tracking sensitivity receiver test 
is as shown in Fig. 3. The device under this 
test is locked on to the simulator’s output 
frequency and the simulator power output is 
lowered until the lock is lost. Multiple 
repetition of the test with different satellite 
geometries ensures that an accurate average 
measure is recorded. 

Acceptance criteria: The tracking sensitivity 
should be equal to or better than (-) 165 dBm. 
Interference testing — Interference testing is 
a type of test, in which cold start/hot start test 
are performed with device exposed to 
interfering signals and the performance as 
recorded. Test setup for the receiver radio 
frequency interference test is as shown in Fig. 
4. In this test, the GPS receiver is turned on 
and allowed to achieve a location fix. The 
jamming signal is then added to the GPS signal 
at a level that is detectable to the GPS receiver. 


IS 16833 : 


h) 


2018 


SIMULATOR 


Be 


ДА 


MATERIAL 


R F TEST CHAMBER 


DUAL POLORIZED 
MEASUREMENT 
ANTENNA 


FROM OPEN 
CONTROL LINES 
AAA 


t SA AAA NI NV V V 
ppp Г Ба) 


MEASUREMENT 
SIGNAL PATH 


MULTI-AXIS 
POSITIONER 


ААКу 


Fic. 3 ACQUISITION SENSIVITY TEST 


SIMULATOR 


AMEE RSE тамды ERI 
: =H] EE 
H Lj Bea 
5 оовве = 


[z] 
оо оо ooo 


JAMMER 


MEASURING SETUP 


Fic. 4 INTERFERENCE TESTING 


The jamming signal power level is increased 
in 1 dB increments until the first degradation 
of the GPS receiver is noticed. This is typically 
a dropped satellite. The jamming signal power 
level is again slowly increased until the GPS 
receiver loses its 3D navigation fix. 
Acceptance criteria: The interference should 
not result in any degradation ofthe cold start/ 
hot start TTFF times. In addition, it should 
not result in any degradation of the absolute 
location accuracy required and the same 
should be 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 2DRMS. 
Multipath testing — This test is a simulated 
frequency test conducted to determine the 
effect of multipath signals. The signal from a 
single satellite is simulated to arrive at the 
device via two or more paths. One path is 
typically a direct path, and other paths are 
typically a reflection of the same signal from 
building or structure. Multipath testing 1s a 
kind of a meta-test in that some of the above 
tests are done with the addition of multi-path 
simulation of one or more satellites by the GPS 
signal simulator. 


12 


Acceptance criteria: The multipath should not 
result in any degradation of the cold start/hot 
start TTFF times. In addition, it should not 
result in any degradation of the absolute 
location accuracy required and the same 
should be 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 2DRMS. 

SIM testing — This test is to check the 
suitability of the SIM and communication 
module. The test shall be conducted to 
determine the effectiveness and operation of 
the GPRS module with OTA network 
switching capabilities on demand as well as 
automatically in real-time. 


The test consists of two type of testing as below: 


1) 


2) 


The device would be tested to perform as рег 
the protocol (see A-7.4) using an embedded 
SIM. The GPRS module and SIM, shall 
support SMS, data (GPRS, TCP/IP), and 


Support multiple network OTA switching 
capabilities (On demand as well as automatic 
switching on real-time basis). 


Acceptance criteria: In the testing, vendors 
has to demonstrate the embedded SIM based 


tracking and multiple network OTA switching 
capabilities (On demand as well as automatic 
switching on real-time basis) for effective 
network management and transmission. 


A-7.2 Performance and Durability Testing 


The devices will need to be tested for performance in 
the challenging vehicle environments of vibration, dust, 
fluctuating power supply, etc. 


a) 


b) 


с) 


Performance parametric test (tri temperature/ 
tri voltage) — During testing, device shall be 
kept inside test chamber in power ON 
condition. (System should be stabilized for 
minimum 5 min at each condition. At each test 
point the system will be powered on and shut 
down 5 times with a duration of 1 min ON 
and 1 min OFF time). 

The temperatures are: -25?C, Room 
Temperature, +80°C 

Following are the various voltages: 

For 12V System: 9V, 13.5V, 16V. 

For 24V System: 18V, 27V, 32V. 
Acceptance criteria: Device after the 
performance parametric test shall meet the 
requirements of functional tests. 


Shock test — Shock test is performed to 
provide a degree of confidence that the device 
can physically and functionally withstand the 
relatively infrequent, non-repetitive shocks 
encountered in transportation environments. 
This test provides an assessment of the effect 
ofthe shocks on the performance ofthe device. 
The test shall be performed as per IS 9000 
(Part 7). Severity level = 15 g, Impact duration 
= 11 ms, Impact type = Half sine, Total number 
of impact — 9 (3 on each axis). 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the shock test 
shall meet the requirements of functional tests. 
Vibration test — This test is performed to 
check that the device can physically and 
functionally withstand the vibration exposures 
in the life cycle typically encountered in a 
vehicular environment. The test shall be 
performed as per IS 9000 (Part 8). The test 
specimen mounted on a suitable support shall 
be rigidly fixed on a suitable vibrating 
machine constructed to produce simple 
harmonic function (total amplitude of 1.5 mm) 
and shall be subjected to vibration through a 
frequency range of 10-55-10 Hz in a sweep 
period of 1 min with continuously varying 
frequencies. The vibration shall be applied for 
not less than 1 h in the directions of each of 
the 3 major axes of the light. 


d) 


e) 


f) 


g) 


h) 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the vibration test 
shall meet the requirements of functional tests. 
Ingress protection (IP) — The vehicle 
tracking devices must be able to work in dusty 
environment that are typically encountered by 
the public transport vehicles where these 
would be installed. IP rating (IS/IEC 60529) 
is used for specifying the environmental 
protection characteristics of the tracking 
device. The device will be tested for dust and 
water ingress according to IP 65 rating. 
Acceptance criteria: The device should be IP 
65 compliant or better. 

Over voltage protection test — Test shall be 
conducted as per ISO 16750-2. 

AVL, DVR, camera & antenna shall be 
connected as a system as per vehicle 
configuration. (This is in case of controller 
alone being powered by vehicle battery). 


Apply 18 V for 12 V system or apply 36 V for 24 
system on power lines for 60 min to units which 
are powered directly by the vehicle battery. 
Acceptance criteria: Device after the vibration 
test shall meet the requirements of functional 
tests. 

EMI/EMC — The Electromagnetic 
Interference (EMI) and Electromagnetic 
Compatibility (EMC) tests are performed to 
assess whether the device performs its 
intended functions in the electromagnetic 
environment to which it would be exposed. 
Further, the device should not generate 
electromagnetic disturbances that may 
influence other equipment in the vicinity. 
Acceptance criteria: The device should meet 
the EMI/EMC requirements as per AIS 004 
(Part 3). 

Load dump test, Pulse 5a 

For 12 V systems: 


A voltage spike of 65 V, 4 Q, 200 ms, Pulse- 
5a as per standard ISO 7637-2. 


For 24 V systems: 


A voltage spike of 123 V, 8 Q, 200 ms, Pulse- 
5a as per standard ISO 7637-2. 


Acceptance criteria: Device shall meet the 
requirements of functional tests, after the load 
dump test. 

Battery backup test — Battery backup is the 
amount of time that the device battery can 
support sending the data without being 
connected to the power source. This test will 
be performed by disconnecting the input 
charging voltage to the device. On 
disconnecting the external supply, battery 


IS 16833 : 2018 


j 


k) 


would use its charge capacity to send data 
through GPRS. Time duration between 
external power disconnect to the last data 
packet time denotes the battery backup time. 
Acceptance criteria: Device should be able to 
work in active mode for a period of 4 h or 
more at the polling/transmission rate of 60 sec. 
Reverse polarity protection without fuse — 
The device to be tested should be connected 
to a reversed voltage of 14 V for 12 V systems 
and 27 V for 24 V systems for 2 min after 
connecting the system to the suitable circuit. 
Acceptance criteria: Device shall meet the 
requirements of functional tests, after the 
reverse polarity test. 

Test for wiring harness — Flammability test: 
The wiring harness used in the device should 
be tested for flammability as per IS 2465. 


Electrical properties: The wiring harness used 
in the device should be tested for electrical 
properties as per AIS 028. 

Free fall test — The free fall test shall be 
conducted as per IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 4) at 
500 mm. 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the free fall 
test shall meet the requirements of functional 
tests. 


A-7.3 Environmental Test 


The following testing should be carried out as part of 
environmental testing: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


High temperature test — The high 
temperature test is used to evaluate effects of 
high temperature conditions on safety, 
integrity, and performance of the device. The 
test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 
9000 (Part 3/Sec 5), the device shall be 
subjected to temperature of 70 + 2?C for 16h 
with device in working condition. The 
recovery period shall be 2 h. 


Acceptance criteria: Device during and after 
the high temperature test shall meet the 
requirements of functional tests. 

Cold test — The test shall be carried out in 
accordance with IS 9000 (Part 2/Sec 4). The 
device under test shall be subjected to 
temperature of —10 + 2°C for 2 h with device 
in working condition. The recovery period 
shall be 2 h. 

Acceptance criteria: Device during and after 
the cold test shall meet the requirements of 
functional tests. 


Damp heat test — The device under test 
should be tested according to IS 9000 (Part 5/ 


14 


Sec 2). The test is carried out at +25° to +55° 
C, Humidity 95 percent. Six cycles (each test 
cycle of 24 h) should be run with device in 
‘Off ‘condition. Functional test shall be carried 
out with power in ‘On’ condition at start of 
2nd, 4th and 6th cycle. 

Acceptance criteria: Device during and after 
the test shall meet the requirements of 
functional tests. 


d) Insulation resistance test — Test shall be 
conducted as per ISO 16750-2 after damp heat 
test mentioned in point 4 of the Annex F. 
System/components shall remain 0.5 h at room 
temperature after the damp heat test. 
Test shall be conducted with a voltage of 500 
V d.c. Insulation Resistance shall be > 1 MQ. 
Acceptance criteria: No arcing or puncturing 
of insulation allowed shall be observed after 
the insulation resistance test. 


e) Thermal shock test — Temperature shock test 
is carried out to determine, if the device can 
withstand sudden changes in the temperature 
of the surrounding atmosphere without 
experiencing physical damage or deterioration 
in performance. The device shall be tested as 
per IS 9000 (Part 14/Sec 2). Exposure time 
would be 3 h/cycle and number of cycles 
would be two. 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 

f) Salt spray test — The salt spray test is 
conducted to check corrosion resistance of 
device. The device should be tested according 
to 4.8 of IS 10250 for 96 h. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 

g) High voltage test — The test is conducted to 
ensure service life requirements and 
functionality. The device under test shall be 
operated for 60 min at 18 V for 12 V systems 
and 36 V for 24 V systems. This test is as per 
ISO 16750-2. 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


A-7.4 Protocol Testing 


Protocol is a set of rules to be followed by the device 
while sending data to the backend. The protocol 
comprises data update rate, number of fields, start 
character, end character, alert type, etc. Protocol testing 
involves checking the compliance of data sets received 
by the backend against the protocol both with respect 
to the data fields as well the format. It is expected that 
the data coming to a central server should be exactly 
as required under the protocol. Table 4 mentions the 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Table 4 Protocol Testing Parameters 


(Clause A-7.4) 


SI Field Description 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Start Character $ 
ii) Header The header of the packet/identifier 
Vendor ID Vendor identification header 
iii) Firmware Version Version details of the firmware used in EX.1.0.0 
iv) Packet Type Specify the packet type— 
NR = Normal 
EA = Emergency alert 
TA = Tamper alert 
HP = Health packet 
IN = Ignition on 
IF = Ignition off 
BD = Battery disconnect 
BR = Battery reconnect 
BL = Battery low 
v) Packet Status L=Live or H= History 
vi) IMEI Identified of the sending unit. 15 digit standard unique IMEI No. 
vii) Vehicle Registration No. Mapped vehicle registration number 
уш) GPS Fix 1 = GPS fix or 0 = GPS invalid 
ix) Date Date value as per GPS date time (ddmmyy) 
x) Time Time value as per GPS date time in UTC format (hhmmss) 
xi) Latitude Latitude value in decimal degrees (with minimum 6 decimal places) 
xi) Latitude Direction Latitude Direction. 
For example, N=North; S= South 
xii) Longitude Longitude value in decimal degrees (with minimum 6 decimal places) 
xiv) Longitude Direction Longitude direction. 
For example, E=East, W= West 
xv) Speed Speed in km/h 
xvi) Heading Course over ground in degrees 
xvii) Мо of Satellites Number of satellites available for fix 
хуш) Altitude Altitude of the device іп ‘m’ 
xix) РООР Positional dilution of precision 
xx) НООР Horizontal dilution of precision 
xxi) Network Operator Name Name of Network operator 
xxi) Ignition 1= Ign On; 0 = Ign Off 
Main Power Status 0 = Vehicle Battery Disconnected 
1= Vehicle Battery Reconnected 
xxii) Main Input Voltage Indicator showing source voltage in Volts. 
xxiv) Internal Battery Voltage Indicator for Level of battery charge remaining 
xxv) Emergency Status 1= On; 0 = Off 
xxvi) Tamper Alert C = Cover Closed, О = Cover Open 
xxvil) GSM Signal Strength Value Ranging from 0-31 
xxvii) MCC Mobile Country Code 
xxix) MNC Mobile Network Code 
xxx) LAC Location Area Code 
xxxi) Cell ID GSM Cell ID 
xxxi) ММК (neighbouring Cell ID) Neighbouring 4 cell ID along with their LAC and signal strength 
xxxii) Digital Input Status 4 external digital input status (Status of Input 1 to Input 3 (O=Off, 1=On)) 
xxxiv) Digital Output Status 2 external digital output status 
(0=Off; 1=On) 
xxxv) Frame Number Sequence Number of the messages (000001 to 999999) 
xxxvi) Checksum Insures no error in transmission (optional) 
xxxvii End Character Indicated end of the frame 


15 


IS 16833 : 2018 


validation process for the protocol communication. 


The following test would be performed along with the 
protocol testing of the device: 


a) Memory storage— The device should support 


40 000 or more positional logs/packets. This 
is a functional test and the device will be 
simulated to be in non-GPRS coverage area 


b) 


and the logs will be maintained. The capacity 
of logging will be checked by monitoring the 
logs on the device. 

Messages and alerts from devices— Table 5 
contains the listing ofalerts that need to come 
from the tracking devices. These alerts are 
applicable for both live packets as well as the 
history packets. 


Table 5 Messages and Alerts from Devices 


(Clause A-7.4) 


SI Message Remarks 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Location Update Default message coming from each device 
ii) Location Update (history) Would be sent, if GPRS is not available at the time of sending the message 
ii) | Alert — Disconnect from main battery If device is disconnected from vehicle battery and running on its internal battery 
iv) Alert — Low battery If device internal battery had fallen below a defined threshold, indicating that device 
need to get a recharge 
v) Alert — Low battery removed Indicate that vehicle internal battery is charged again 
vi) Alert — Connect back to main battery Indicate that vehicle is connected back to main battery 
vii) Alert — Ignition ON Indicates that vehicle has started (ignition ‘ON’) 
vii) Alert — Ignition OFF Indicates that vehicle has stopped (ignition *OFF") 
ix) Alert Over the air parameter change Alerts for any parameter is changed over the air. Shall include the name/value of 
parameter changed and source of command. 
X) Alert — GPS box opened Message would be generated indicating GPS box opened 
xi) Alert — Emergency state “ОМ” When any of the emergency buttons is pressed by any passenger or in case of any 
open circuit, alert should be flashed. 
System should also provide location of emergency button which is pressed. 
xi) Alert — emergency State OFF When emergency state of vehicle is removed 
xii) Harsh Braking Alert indicating for harsh braking. 
xiv) Harsh Acceleration Alert indicating for harsh acceleration. 
xv) Rash Turning Alert indicating for rash turning. 


NOTE — In case of Emergency Alert ‘ON’ system, the alert message should go in the format given in Table 6. This emergency alert 
message should be sent to dual IPs; that is, the device should support minimum two IPs simultaneously. 


16 


SI Attribute 
No. 
(1) (2) 


Table 6 Message Format 
(Clause A-7.4) 


Value/Description 


(3) 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Size 


(4) 


i) Packet Header 
ii) Message Type 


ii) Device ID 
iv) Packet Type 
v) Date 


vi) GPS Validity 

vii) Latitude 

Latitude Direction 
ix) Longitude 

x) Longitude Direction 
xi) Altitude 


xii) Speed 
xii) Distance 
xiv) Provider 


xv) Vehicle Registration No. 
Reply Number 


CRC 


EPB, The unique identifier for all messages from ATD 


Message Types supported. Emergency Message 
(EMR) or Stop Message (SEM) 


Unique ID of the Vehicle (IMEI Number) 
NM - Normal packet, SP — Stored packet 


Date and time of the location obtained from the 
location data in YY Y YMMDDhhmmss format 


A — Valid, V — Invalid 

Latitude in decimal degrees — dd.mmmmmm format 
N - North, S — South 

Longitude in decimal degrees — dd.mmmmmm format 
E — East; W — West 

Altitude in ‘m’ (above sea level) 

Speed in km/h 

Distance calculated from previous GPS data 


G - Fine GPS 
N - Coarse GPS or data from the network 


Registration Number of the Vehicle 


The mobile number to which Test response need to be 
sent 


The 32 bit checksum of all the characters from the 
header up to the CRC field 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword and Clause 1) 


Character, 3 bytes 
Character, 2 bytes 


Character,15 bytes 
Character, 2 bytes 
Character,14 bytes 


Character, 1 byte 
Double, 12 bytes 
Character, 1 byte 
Double, 12 bytes 
Character, 1 byte 
Double, 12 bytes 
Float, 6 bytes 

Float, 6 bytes 

Character, 1 byte 


Character, 16 bytes 
0 


8 bytes 


ATD WITH AN INTEGRATED EMERGENCY SYSTEM AND FARE METER 


B-1 This annex primarily covers the functional 
requirements, test and protocol requirements of *ATD 
with an integrated emergency system and Fare Meter’. 


B-2 FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 


The Automatic Tracking Devices (ATD) will be tested 
by the testing agencies for the ATD related features of 
GNSS/GPRS, whereas fare meters related functions/ 
parameters will be tested by the Weights & 
Measurements Department as per IS 2747. The model 
approval from the Department of Legal Metrology 


17 


(Weight and measures) (for compliance to metering 
related specification as per IS 2747) of the complete 
integrated unit with ATD will be required and the same 
will be tested by the nominated testing agencies. The 
device would need to be duly approved, tested and 
sealed by Controller, Weights and Measures, 
Government of India. 


B-2.1 General Features 


1. The system should support any operational 
GNSS system (Location, speed, heading, time 


IS 16833 : 2018 


10. 


11. 


12. 


stamp) data polling and capable of sending 
this data at a frequency shall be 5 s during 
vehicle operation and not less than 10 min. 
The devices installed on or after 1 September 
2017 should also support Indian Regional 
Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS). 

The system should support GAGAN, the 
Indian SBAS (Satellite Based Augmentation 
System). 

The System should support: 

a) Location on demand on GPRS/SMS, 


b) Non-volatile memory to store min 40 000 
positional log, 

c) Configurable backup SMS facility in case 
of GPRS failure, and 

d) Capability to send serving and adjacent 
cell ID as well as network measurement 
report (NMR). 

System shall have positional accuracy of less 

than 6 m positional accuracy 2DRMS (on 

ground) or 2.5 m CEP (on ground). 

The system’s GNSS module shall have an 

acquisition equal to or better than (-)148 dBm. 

The system’s GNSS module shall have an 

tracking sensitivity equal to or better than (-) 

165 dBm. 

The system’s GNSS module should support 

any operational GNSS system with a minimum 

of 12 acquisition channels. 

The system’s GNSS module should have: 

a) The capability of hot start «5s, 

b) The capability of warm start : < 30s, and 

с) The capability of cold start < 40 s. 

Should support standard digital I/O as 

mentioned: 4 digital, 2 analogue and 1 serial 

communication for interfacing external 

systems (For example, digital input for 

emergency request button interfacing) and 

output for triggering other devices like hooter/ 

flash light, etc. 

System shall be capable of transmitting data 

to minimum two different IP addresses (One 

IP address for Regulatory purpose (PVT data) 

and one IP address for operational purpose). 

System shall have an internal back-up battery 

to support 4 h of normal operations (To be 

tested for position records transmission once 

every minute). 

The system's GPRS module should have: 

a) Multislot GPRS with in-built quad-band 
GPRS module/modem. 


b) GPRS class 10 or above. 


18 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 
20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


c) Support embedded SIM (As per TEC 
specification released time to time) to 
cater to the automotive operational 
requirement such ав vibration, 
temperature and humidity and provide 
long life span with at least 10 years life 
and more than 1 million read/write cycles. 

d) GPRS module and SIM: 


1) Shall support SMS, Data (GPRS, 
TCP/IP). 

i) Support multiple network OTA 
switching (on-demand/automatic) 
capabilities. 

iil) Support multiple network OTA 
switching (on-demand/automatic) 
capabilities. 

System shall have automotive grade 
components and manufacturing process used 
shall be in line with quality management 
standard for automotive industries as 
ISO/TS 16949 or equivalent BIS prevalent. 
System should have internal GPRS antenna 
and internal GPS antenna. 

System shall have status LED’s to indicate 
power, GPS, emergency function, and GPRS 
status. 

System shall be capable to operate with 
vehicle battery input voltage range 8-32 V. 
System shall have the capability for over the 
air download of firmware as well as 
configuration parameters. 

System shall have remote administration and 
firmware update over the air. 

System shall support A-GPS (Assisted GPS). 
The system shall have a unique identifier for 
identifying the unit and data from the unit. The 
unique ID shall be stored in a read only 
memory area so that it cannot be altered or 
overwritten by any person. IMEI 
(International Mobile Station Equipment 
Identity) number shall be the unique identifier. 
System shall store/write the registration 
number of the vehicle in the internal non- 
volatile memory. 

Device shall have 3 axis accelerometer and 3 
axis gyroscope for accessing driving 
conditions such as rapid acceleration, sudden 
braking and hard turn. 

System shall have provision of secured data 
transmission to the backend from the devices 
through secured channel. Secured channel 
means encrypted data transmission from 
device to backend using a secured tunnel on 


communication medium such as ‘Secured 
dedicated APN or 2G/3G network’. 

System shall be integrated with fare meter 
complying with IS 2747 in cab as well as in 
auto rickshaw. 


24. 


25. System should support printer with following 
specs: 

a) Font: 12 x 24. 

b) Print width: 2 inch (minimum). 

с) 
d) 
е) 
f) 


Print speed: 60 mm/s. 
Print: English alphanumeric characters. 
Resolution: 8 dots/mm. 


Print receipt should have the following 
fields: 


1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) Night time flag/charge. 


System shall have LCD display (Minimum 4 
lines x 20 characters per line, backlit). 


Vehicle number, 
Start time, 

End time, 

Trip details, 

Trip distance, 
Waiting time, and 


26. 


27. System shall have the following switches/ 


buttons/mechanism: 
a) Trip start (Mandatory and integrated with 
the meter start), 

Trip end (Mandatory and integrated with 
the end of meter), 


b) 


с) 
d) 


Waiting (Visual display), 

Emergency button to trigger the alert 
message, and 

e) Print button to get the bill printed. 


B-2.2 Optional/ADD On for ATD with and 
Integrated Emergency System and Fare Meter 


a) Display panel for maps, navigation and 
location — Optional larger display screen with 
map display for trip tracking as well as 
directions for driver for taxis/cab. 

1) Minimum 7" TFT LCD. 
2) Viewing angle 70/70/50/70 (L/R/U/D). 
3) Resolution 800x480 or better. 


Biometric driver identification — Optical 
fingerprint sensor based biometric module for 
driver authentication with minimum 


b) 


IS 16833 : 2018 


specifications as below: 


1) Resolution: Minimum 500 DPI with 5 
percent margin on the lower side, 


2) 
3) 


Grey scale/Image type: 8 bit, 256 levels, 
Performance test : under 2 percent FRR, 
and 

4) Maximum acquisition time (Placement to 
template): « 2 s. 


B-2.3 Configuration of Device Parameters Over the 
Air (OTA) 


The device parameters given below should be 
configurable over the air (through SMS or GPRS). The 
updation shall be allowed only over an ‘authenticated’ 
channel, which could be: 


a) Change ofthe APN. 

b) Change ofIP and port number. 

c) Setting of the primary or secondary IP. 

d) Configuring the vehicle registration number. 

e) Configuring the frequency of data 
transmission in ignition ON/OFF, emergency 
state. 

f) Configuring the time duration for emergency 
state. 

g) Configuring the frequency of data update in 
trip ON. 

h) Capability to reset the device. 

j) Command to get the IMEI of the device. 

k) Configuring of fare parameters, night time 


rates, waiting period rate, minimum fixed rate, 
etc. 


Configurable commands must involve the following 
features: 


1) 
2) 


SET: For setting the parameters. 

GET: For enquiring regarding the parameters 
such as mobile number, GSM strength, vehicle 
number and other important parameters. 

3) CLR: Forclearing certain commands, alarms, 
alerts, etc. 


B-2.4 Tracking Device Health Monitoring 
Parameters 


The device should send status of system health 
parameters at configurable interval and this threshold 
value should also be configurable over the air. It should 
be possible for system health parameters to be fetched 


IS 16833 : 2018 


on demand via command as set out in the table below: 


Description 


The header of the packet/identifier 

Vendor identification header 

Version details of the firmware used in EX.1.0.0 

Identified of the sending unit. 15 digit standard unique IMEI no. 
Indicates the internal battery charge percentage 

Indicates value on which low battery alert generated in 


Indicates flash memory percentage used 
Indicates packet frequency on ignition ON 
Indicates Packet frequency on ignition OFF 


Inputs connected to the device. 
Analog input status 
LED health status 


Optional, to be made available if possible 


SI Field 
No. 
i) Start Character $ 
i) Header 
ii) Vendor ID 
iv) Firmware Version 
v) IMEI 
vi) Battery percentage 
vii) Low battery threshold value 
percentage 
viii) Memory percentage 
ix) Data update rate when ignition ON 
x) Data update rate when ignition 
OFF 
xi) Digital I/O status 
xi) Analog I/O status 
xiii) EFM LED working 
xiv) Printer Working Printer status 
х0 Printer paper present or not 
xvi) End character т 


В-3 SMS FALL BACK 


In case of emergency state, (that is, on pressing the 
emergency button), the device will shift to the SMS 
mode in case GPRS connectivity is not available. In 
such case, the device will send the alert message, health 
status data and tracking data through SMS mode. Since 
SMS has the limitation of sending only 160 characters, 
so the tracking data to be sent in one SMS will have 
fields - IMEI, Latitude, Direction, Longitude, Direction, 
location fix, speed, Cell ID, LAC, Date and Time. 


B-4 COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL 
B-4.1 Data Frame Format 


Table 7 contains the listing of fields that vehicle tracking 
devices (with electronic fare meter) would be required 
to send to the backend. Such devices will be installed 
in the vehicles that charge fare as computed by the fare 
meter such as auto rickshaws or taxis. 


It is the first 3 fields (Start character, Header for SI and 
Vendor ID, who had supplied the device) which must 
be fixed in position as well as format (Header part of 
frame). Rest all other fields are required to be present 
in the location data sent by the devices to the backend, 
but can be in any sequence or with any separator 
between fields. The data value can be either in American 


20 


Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) 
or in HEX format. Device must transmit the login 
message whenever it establishes its connectivity with 
the server with the specified fields. Login message will 
carry below following information: 


a) $DeviceName — Vehicle number where the 
device was installed 

b) S$IMEI —15 Digit IMEI number 

c) $Firmware — Version of the firmware used in 
the hardware 

d) $Protocol — Version of the frame format 
protocol 

e) $LastValidLocation — Last location info 


saved at the device 


B-4.2 Messages and Alerts from Devices 


Table 8 contains the listing of alerts that need to come 
from the tracking devices. These alerts are applicable 
for both live packets as well as the history packets. 


In case of emergency Alert, the alert message should 
be sent to dual IP addresses hence the device should 
support minimum two IP addresses simultaneously. 
Primary alert will go to the Emergency Response 
backend (NERS/MHA) as may be notified by the 
Government of India in the schema below: 


Table 7 Data Message Format 
(Clause B-4.1) 


IS 16833 : 2018 


SI Field Description Sample Data 
No. 
а) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Start Character $ $ 
ii) Header The header of the packet/identifier = 
ii) Vendor ID Vendor identification header — 
iv) Firmware Version Version details of the Firmware used in EX.1.0.0 1.0.0 
v) Packet Type Specify the packet type— NR 
NR = Normal 
EA = Emergency Alert 
TA = Tamper Alert 
HP = Health Packet 
IN = Ignition On 
IF = Ignition Off 
BD = Battery Disconnect 
BR = Battery Reconnect 
BL = Battery Low 
TS = Trip Start 
TE = Trip End 
vi) Packet Status L=Live or H= History L 
vii) IMEI Identified of the sending unit. 15 digit standard unique IMEI no. 123456789012345 
vii) Vehicle Registration No. Mapped vehicle registration number DLIPC9821 
ix) GPS Fix 1 = GPS fix OR 0 = GPS invalid 1 
x) Date Date value as per GPS date time (ddmmyy) 220714 
xi) Time Time value as per GPS date time in UTC format (hhmmss) 050656 
xii) Latitude Latitude value in decimal degrees (with minimum 6 decimal 28.758963 
places) 
xii) Latitude Direction Latitude Direction. N 
Example N=North; S= South 
xiv) Longitude Longitude value in decimal degrees (with minimum 6 decimal — 77.6277844 
places) 
xv) Longitude Direction Longitude Direction. W 
Example E=East, W= West 
xvi) Speed Speed in km/hr. (Upto One Decimal Value) 25.1 
xvii Heading Course over ground in degrees 310.56 
xvii) No. of Satellites Number of satellites available for fix 8 
xix) Altitude Altitude of the device in meters 183.5 
xx) PDOP Positional dilution of precision (Upto 2 digit) 2 
xxi) “НООР Horizontal dilution of precision (Upto 2 digit) 3 
xxi) Ignition 1- Ignition On, 0 - Ignition Off 1 
Main Power Status 0 = Vehicle Battery Disconnected 1= Vehicle Battery 1 
Reconnected 
xxii) Main Input Voltage Indicator showing source voltage in ‘V’. (Up to One Decimal 12.5 
Value) 
xxiv) Internal Battery Voltage Indicator for Level of battery charge remaining. (Up to One 42 
Decimal Value) 
xxv) Emergency Status 1= On; 0 = Off 0 
xxvi) Tamper Alert C = Cover closed ; С 
О = Cover open 
xxvil) GSM Signal Strength Value Ranging from 0-31 25 
xxvii) MCC Mobile Country Code 404 
xxix) MNC Mobile Network Code 10 
xxx) LAC Location Area Code 00D6 
xxxi) Cell ID GSM Cell ID CFBD 
xxxi) NMR (neighboring Cell ID) Neighbouring 4 cell ID along with their LAC and signal strength — 
xxxii) Digital Input Status 4 external digital input status (Status of Input 1 to Input 3 000 
(0=Off; 1=On) 
xxxiv) Digital Output Status 2 external digital output status (0-ОҒ; 1=On) 01 


21 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Table 7 — (Concluded) 


SI Field Description Sample Data 
No. 
a) (2) (3) (4) 
xxv) Emergency Status 1= On; 0 = Off 0 
xxvi) Tamper Alert C = Cover closed ; C 
O = Cover open 
xxvii) GSM Signal Strength Value Ranging from 0-31 25 
xxviii) MCC Mobile Country Code 404 
xxix) MNC Mobile Network Code 10 
xxx) LAC Location Area Code 00D6 
xxxi) Cell ID GSM Cell ID CFBD 
xxxii) NMR (neighboring Cell ID) Neighbouring 4 cell ID along with their LAC and signal strength — 
xxxii) Digital Input Status 4 external digital input status (Status of Input 1 to Input 3 000 
(0=Off; 1=On) 
xxxiv) Digital Output Status 2 external digital output status (0-ОҒ; 1=On) 01 
xxxv) Vehicle Status H = Hired, H 
А = Available, 
R = Retired/Off Duty 
xxxvi) Trip Start Trip start time integrated with meter switch 050620 
xxxvi) Trip End Trip End time integrated with meter switch 053020 
xxxix)  TripID Unique ID for each trip 06 
xl Trip Duration Duration of trip in min 30 
xl) Waiting Time Duration of the idle time 20 
xli) Trip Distance Distance covered during the trip in km. (Up to One Decimal 18.5 
Value) 
xlii) Trip Fare Total amount payable for the trip. (Up to One Decimal Value) 56.0 
xliv) Frame Number Sequence Number of the messages (000001 to 999999) 000005 
xlv) Checksum Ensures no error in transmission (optional) 16 
xlvi) End Character Indicated end of the frame M 
Table 8 Messages and Alerts Supported 
(Clause B-4.2) 
SI Message Remarks 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Location Update Default message coming from each device 


ii) Location Update (history) Would be sent, if GPRS is not available at the time of sending the message 
ii) Alert— Disconnect from main If device is disconnected from vehicle battery and running on its internal battery 
battery 

iv) Alert — Low battery If device internal battery had fallen below a defined threshold, indicating that device need to 
get a recharge 

v) Alert — Low battery removed Indicates that vehicle internal battery is charged again 

vi) Alert — Connect back to main Indicates that vehicle is connected back to main battery 

battery 

vii) Alert — Ignition ON 
vii) Alert — Ignition OFF 

ix) Alert— ATD opened 

X) Alert — Emergency state ‘ON’ 


Indicates that vehicle has started (ignition ON) 

Indicates that vehicle has stopped (ignition OFF) 

Message would be generated indicating ATD opened 

When any of the emergency button is pressed by any passenger. System should also provide 
location of emergency button which is pressed. 

When emergency state of vehicle is removed 

xi) Trip Start Only for hired mode vehicle, when fare meter is ‘Down’ 

xii) Trip End Only for hired vehicle, when fare meter is ‘Up’ 


xiv) Alerts over the air parameter Alerts for any parameter is changed over the air/manually. Shall include ће name/value of 
change parameter changed and source of command 


xi) Alert — emergency State OFF 


xv) Over the air change of tariff Changing of fare parameters, night time rates, waiting period rate, minimum fixed rate. 
fare 


NOTE — Above format is indicative only. The Format will be notified by the Government of India time to time. 


22 


IS 16833 : 2018 


USE IN DANGER 
PRESSES THE 
PANIC BUTTON 


Primary alert will go to the emergency response backend system as notified by the Government of India in the 


EMR_MSG 


EMR_MSG 


EMR_MSG 


STOP_MSG 
STOP_ACK 


DEVICE CONTINUE TO 
SEND EMR MSG AT THE 
CONFIGURED INTERVAL 


WHEN THE VICTIM 
RECEIVES THE 
NECESSARY HELP 


Fic. 5 SCHEMATIC DEPICTING THE FUNCTIONING EMERGENCY RESPONSE BACHEND SYSTEM 


format given in the table below: 


SI Attribute Value/Description Size 
No. 
i) Packet Header EPB, The unique identifier for all messages from VTU Character, 3 bytes 
i) Message Type Message Types supported. Emergency Message (EMR) or Character, 2 bytes 
Stop Message (SEM) 
ш) Vehicle ID Unique ID of the Vehicle (IMEI Number) Character,15 bytes 
iv) Packet Type NM - Normal packet, SP — Stored packet Character, 2 bytes 
v) Date Date and time of the location obtained from the location  Character,14 bytes 
data in YY Y YMMDDhhmmss format 
vi) GPS Validity A — Valid; V — Invalid Character, 1 byte 
vii) Latitude Latitude in decimal degrees - dd.mmmmmm format Double, 12 bytes 
vil) Latitude N - North, S — South Character, 1 byte 
Direction 
ix) Longitude Longitude in decimal degrees - dd. mnmmmm format Double, 12 bytes 
x) Longitude E — East; W — West Character, 1 byte 
Direction 
xi) Altitude Altitude in m (above sea level) Double, 12 bytes 
xi) Speed Speed in km/h Float, 6 bytes 
xil) Distance Distance calculated from previous GPS data Float, 6 bytes 
xiv) Provider G - Fine GPS; Character, 1 byte 
N — Coarse GPS or data from the network 
xv) Vehicle Registration Number of the Vehicle Character, 16 bytes 
RegnNo 
xvi) Reply Number Тһе mobile number to which Test response need to be sent 0 
xvii) CRC The 32 bit checksum of all the characters from the header 8 bytes 


up to the CRC field 


NOTE — Above format is indicative only. The Format will be notified by the Government of India time to time. 


23 


IS 16833 : 2018 


B-5 INSTALLATION GUIDELINES 
B-5.1 Location 


The device should be mounted on the dashboard/other 
suitable locations and emergency buttons within easy 
reach of the passengers. 


B-5.2 Power Supply 
Vehicle power interface shall have, 


a) onecommon ground linked to vehicle chassis; 


b) one permanent power Supply (12/24V) 
connected to the vehicle battery; and 


c) one non-permanent power line (12/24V) 
connect to the battery after ignition. 


B-5.3 Electrical Wiring 


The wiring harness used in the device should be tested 
for flammability as per IS 2465. 


B-5.4 Emergency Buttons 


Emergency buttons should be mounted within easy 
reach of the passengers. 


B-6 TESTS 


a) Thetests have been classified as type tests and 
acceptance tests (see 1.1). 


b) The tests have been divided into categories 
(see 2.0). 


B-6.1 Type Tests 
The following shall constitute type tests: 


a) Functional testing: 
1) Location accuracy test [see B-7.1(a)]. 
2) Cold-start time to first fix (TTFF) Test 
[see B-7.1(b)]. 
3) Warm-start time to first fix test [see 
B-7.1(c)]. 
4) Hot-start time to first fix test [see 
B-7.1(d)]. 
5) Acquisition sensitivity test [see B-7.1(e)]. 
6) Tracking sensitivity test [see B-7.1(f)]. 
7) Interference testing [see B-7.1(g)]. 
8) Multipath testing [see B-7.1(h)]. 
9) SIM testing [see A-7.1(j)]. 
b) Performance and durability testing: 


1) Performance parametric test (tri 
temperature/tri voltage) [see B-7.2(a)]. 


2) Shock test [see B-7.2(b)]. 

3) Vibration test [see B-7.2(c)]. 

4) Ingress protection [see B-7.2(d)]. 

5) Over voltage protection test [see 


B-7.2(e)]. 
6) EMI-EMC [see B-7.2(f)]. 
7) Load dump test, Pulse 5a [see B-7.2(g)]. 
8) Battery backup test [see B-7.2(h)]. 
9) Reverse polarity protection without fuse 
[see B-7.2(])]. 
10) Test for wiring harness [see B-7.2(k)]. 
11) Test for free fall [see B-7.2(m)]. 
c) Environmental testing: 
1) High temperature test [see B-7.3(a)]. 
2) Cold test [see B-7.3(b)]. 
3) Damp heat test [see B-7.3(c)]. 
4) Insulation resistance test [see B-7.3(d)]. 
5) Thermal shock test [see B-7.3(e)]. 
6) Salt spray test [see B-7.3(f)]. 
7) High voltage test (see B-7.3(g)]. 
d) Protocol testing (see B-7.4). 


B-6.1.1 Criteria for Approval 


A minimum of three samples shall be submitted for 
testing together with the relevant data. The testing 
authority shall issue a type approval certificate 1f the 
ATD is found to comply with the requirements of the 
type tests. 


The samples shall be tested as per the test sequence in 
Table 9. 


The sequence of tests on sample sets S1 to S3 shall be 
as mentioned in Table 9 and is subject to agreement 
between manufacturer and the test agency. 


In case of failure in one or more type tests, the testing 
authority may call for fresh samples not exceeding twice 
the number of original samples and subject them to 
test(s) in which failure occurred. If, in repeated test(s) 
no failure occurs, the test may be considered to have 
been satisfactory. 


B-6.2 Acceptance Tests 
The following shall constitute acceptance tests: 


a) Location accuracy test [see B-7.1(a)]. 

b) Cold-start time to first fix (TTFF) Test 
[see B-7.1(b)]. 

c) Warm-start time to first fix test [see B-7.1(c)]. 

d) Hot-start time to first fix test [see B-7.1(d)]. 

e) Acquisition sensitivity test [see B-7.1(e)]. 

f) Tracking sensitivity test [see B-7.1(f)]. 

g) Interference testing [see B-7.1(g)]. 

h) Multipath testing [see B-7.1(h)]. 

j) SIM testing [see A-7.1(h)]. 

k) Protocol testing (see B-7.4). 


Table 9 Sample-Wise Test Sequence 
(Clause B-6.1.1) 


Ба ld 

No. 

| i)|Location accuracytet xf | | 

| Cold-start ime wo fis ix (TTE) es [X | [| БЕН 

[ iii)| Warm-start time to frstfixtest_ [X БЕН БЕН 
i) 
y 
s) 
i 


viii) | Multipath testing 


ix) | SIM testing 


x) | Performance parametric test (tri 
temperature/tri voltage) 


[ Co|sekes Ту 
[xi |[ Vibration ese — S г БЕ 
ШЕТІ [ingress protection — — — — | [x | 
[ s [Over voltage protecion | [Х| 
[ [mw — — — — x] 1— 
[Ev [Load dump test, Paises — — x БЕ БЕ 
svi [Battery backup test | [Хх | — 
[xviii Reverse polarity protection without ase | |X | | 
хз) Тел for wiring hamess — | X | 
ШЕСІ 271711! — — — — БЕН РЗЕ БЕ 
[D High temperare rs | X | — 
ШЕГЕ БЕН БЕЗІ 
ii) |Damphestes — — — — — БЕН БЕЗІ 
ss) [Insulation resistances — |х 
| Temperature shock test — — — | [|x 
изар — — — БЕН БЕН ЕЗІ 
еді) 


xxviii) | Protocol testing 


B-7 CATEGORY OF TESTS 


ЫГЫ 


Б ШЕШ 


Xp» [р 


B-7.1 Functional Testing 


Functional testing will be carried out to assess the 
performance of the tracking device on important 
functional aspects as below. The functional tests (a-h) 
mentioned below may be done either inside the test lab 
using a GPS simulator or outside the lab by other 
methods as decided by the authorized test agency : 


a) Location accuracy test — Location accuracy 
signifies the ability of tracking device to 
accomplish a location data relative to the true 
position. The test setup in Fig. 6 shows that 
the satellite simulator is programmed to send 
out GPS test signal. DUT is connected to a 
laptop with display terminal. In this test, the 
receiver is placed into a cold start state — 
usually by some command sent to the receiver 
through a test connection — and then a fairly 
strong signal is sent. The time it takes for the 
receiver to determine its first good location 


25 


b) 


d) 


е) 


IS 16833 : 2018 


fix is recorded. Normally, this test is done 
many times (>15 times) over many conditions 
and the results are averaged. 

The various types of location accuracy tests 
to be performed on the device are as follows: 


1) Location accuracy test compares the 
variation between multiple location data 
obtained by the device under the cold/ 
warm/hot start mode while the device 
remains at the same location. 


Acceptance criteria: 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 
2DRMS. 


2) Moving or Dynamic location accuracy 
test compares the variation between the 
location data obtained by the device with 
the true positions at multiple locations 
along a test path. 


Acceptance criteria: 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 
2DRMS. 


Cold-start time to first fix (TTF F) test — This 
test is used to determine the time taken for 
first fix during a cold start of the device. The 
device in this test is placed into a cold start 
state. The time it takes for the device to 
determine its first good location fix is 
recorded. The cold start test is performed 
several times and the results are averaged. 


Acceptance criteria: Should be less than 40 s 
at (-)148 dBm. 


Warm-start time to first fix test — This test is 
used to determine the time taken for first fix 
during a warm start of the device. In this test 
the device is started in warm start mode and 
time taken by device to determine the first 
valid location fix is recorded. This is done 
several times and results are averaged. 


Acceptance criteria: The warm start TTFF 
should be less than 30 s at (-) 148 dBm. 


Hot-start time to first fix test — This test is 
used to determine the time taken for first fix 
during a hot start of the device. In this test the 
device is started in hot start mode and time 
taken by device to determine the first valid 
location fix is recorded. This test is performed 
several times and results are averaged. 


Acceptance criteria: The hot start TTFF 
should be less than 5 s. 

Acquisition sensitivity test — Acquisition 
sensitivity refers to the minimum signal level 
at which the device is able to successfully 
perform a cold start TTFF. The acquisition 
sensitivity test is a simulated signal test. A 
device cold start is performed, and the time 
to acquisition is measured. Signal levels are 


IS 16833 : 2018 


H#FIG#HH 


g) 


SIMULATOR 


MEASURING SETUP 


Fic. 6 LocATION ACCURACY TEST 


then progressively decreased until the device 
can no longer acquire the location. This signal 
strength is recorded. 

Acceptance criteria: The acquisition 
sensitivity should be equal to or better than 
(-) 148 dBm. 

Test setup for the acquisition sensitivity 
receiver test is as shown in Fig. 7. Set the 
simulator to output GPS signal to a particular 
location with a very level so that the tracking 
is not possible. Gradually increase the signal 
level that allows the receiver to successfully 
perform a cold start TTFF within a specified 
time frame. The minimum signal level that 
allows acquisition is referred as to the 
acquisition sensitivity. 

Tracking sensitivity test — Tracking 
sensitivity refers to the minimum signal level 
at which the device is able to successfully 
maintain the location fix. The acquisition 
sensitivity test is a simulated signal test. Test 
setup for the tracking sensitivity receiver test 
is as shown in Fig. 7. The device under this 
test is locked on to the simulator’s output 
frequency and the simulator power output is 
lowered until the lock is lost. Multiple 
repetition of the test with different satellite 
geometries ensures that an accurate average 
measure is recorded. 

Acceptance criteria: The tracking sensitivity 
should be equal to or better than (-) 165 dBm. 
Interference testing — Interference testing is 
a type of test, in which cold start/hot start test 
are performed with device exposed to 
interfering signals and the performance as 
recorded. Test setup for the receiver radio 


26 


h) 


j 


frequency interference test is as shown in Fig. 
8. In this test, the GPS receiver is turned on 
and allowed to achieve a location fix. The 
jamming signal is then added to the GPS signal 
at a level that is detectable to the GPS receiver. 
The jamming signal power level is increased 
in | dB increments until the first degradation 
of the GPS receiver is noticed. This is typically 
a dropped satellite. The jamming signal power 
level is again slowly increased until the GPS 
receiver loses its 3D navigation fix. 
Acceptance criteria: The interference should 
not result in any degradation of the cold start/ 
hot start TTFF times. In addition, it should 
not result in any degradation of the absolute 
location accuracy required and the same 
should be 2.5 СЕР or 6 m 2DRMS. 
Multipath testing — This test is a simulated 
frequency test conducted to determine the 
effect of multipath signals. The signal from a 
single satellite is simulated to arrive at the 
device via two or more paths. One path is 
typically a direct path, and other paths are 
typically a reflection of the same signal from 
building or structure. Multipath testing is a 
kind of a meta-test in that some of the above 
tests are done with the addition of multi-path 
simulation of one or more satellites by the GPS 
signal simulator. 

Acceptance criteria: The multipath should not 
result in any degradation of the cold start/hot 
start TTFF times. In addition, it should not 
result in any degradation of the absolute 
location accuracy required and the same 
should be 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 2DRMS. 


SIM testing— This test is to check the 


SIMULATOR 


IS 16833 : 2018 


R F TEST CHAMBER 


DUAL POLORIZED 
MEASUREMENT 
ANTENNA 


SIGNAL PATH DUTT 


MULTI-AXIS 
POSITIONER 


FROM OPEN 
CONTROL LINES 


Fic. 7 ACQUISITION SENSITIVITY TEST 


SIMULATOR 


JAMMER 


MEASURING SETUP 


Fic. 8 INTERFERENCE TESTING 


suitability of the SIM and communication 
module. The test shall be conducted to 
determine the effectiveness and operation of 
the GPRS module with OTA network 
switching capabilities on demand as well as 
automatically in real-time. The test consists 
of two type of testing as below: 

1) The device would be tested to perform 
as per the protocol (see B-7.4) using an 
embedded SIM. 

2) The GPRS module and SIM, shall 
support: 

i) SMS, Data (GPRS, TCP/IP), and 


ii) Support multiple network OTA 


27 


switching capabilities (On Demand as 

well as automatic Switching on real- 

time basis). 
Acceptance criteria: In the testing, vendors has 
to demonstrate the embedded SIM based 
tracking and multiple network OTA switching 
capabilities (On demand as well as automatic 
switching on real-time basis) for effective 
network management and transmission. 


B-7.2 Performance and Durability Testing 


The devices will need to be tested for performance in 
the challenging vehicle environments of vibration, dust, 
fluctuating power supply, etc. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


a) 


b) 


c) 


d) 


Performance parametric test (tri temperature/ 
tri voltage) — During testing, device shall be 
kept inside test chamber in power ‘ON’ 
condition. (System should be stabilized for a 
minimum duration of 5 min at each condition. 
At each test point the system will be powered 
on and shut down 5 times with a duration of 1 
min ‘ON’ and | min ‘OFF’ time). 

The temperatures are: —25°C, Room 
temperature, +80°C. 

Following are the various voltages: 

For 12V system: 9V, 13.5V, 16V. 

For 24У system: 18У, 27У, 32V. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the 
performance parametric test shall meet the 
requirements of functional tests. 

Shock test — Shock test is performed to 
provide a degree of confidence that the device 
can physically and functionally withstand the 
relatively infrequent, non-repetitive shocks 
encountered in transportation environments. 
This test provides an assessment of the effect 
of the shocks on the performance of the device. 
The test shall be performed as per IS 9000 
(Part 7). Severity level = 15 g, Impact 
duration = 11 ms, Impact type = Half sine, 
Total number of impact = 9 (3 on each axis) 
Acceptance criteria: Device after the shock 
test shall meet the requirements of functional 
tests. 

Vibration test — This test is performed to 
check that the device the device can physically 
and functionally withstand the vibration 
exposures in the life cycle typically 
encountered in a vehicular environment. The 
test shall be performed as per IS 9000 (Part 8). 
The test specimen mounted on a suitable 
support shall be rigidly fixed on a suitable 
vibrating machine constructed to produce 
simple harmonic function (total amplitude of 
1.5 mm) and shall be subjected to vibration 
through a frequency range of 10-55-10 Hz in 
a sweep period of | min with continuously 
varying frequencies. The vibration shall be 
applied for not less than | h in the directions 
of each of the 3 major axes of the light. 
Acceptance criteria: Device after the vibration 
test shall meet the requirements of functional 
tests. 

Ingress protection (IP) — The vehicle 
tracking devices must be able to work in dusty 
environment that are typically encountered by 
the public transport vehicles where these 
would be installed. IP rating (IS/IEC 60529) 


28 


e) 


f) 


g) 


h) 


is used for specifying the environmental 
protection characteristics of the tracking 
device. The device will be tested for dust and 
water ingress according to IP 54 rating. 
Acceptance criteria: The device should be IP 
54 compliant or better. 


Over voltage protection test — Test shall be 
conducted as per ISO 16750-2. 

AVL, DVR, camera and antenna shall be 
connected as a system as per vehicle 
configuration. (This is in case of controller 
alone being powered by vehicle battery). 
Apply 18 V for 12 V system or apply 36 V for 
24 system on power lines for 60 min to units 
which are powered directly by the vehicle 
battery. 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the vibration 
test shall meet the requirements of functional 
tests. 

EMI/EMC — The Electromagnetic 
Interference (EMI) and Electromagnetic 
Compatibility (EMC) tests are performed to 
assess whether the device performs its 
intended functions in the electromagnetic 
environment to which it would be exposed. 
Further, the device should not generate 
electromagnetic disturbances that may 
influence other equipment in the vicinity. 
Acceptance criteria: The device should meet 
the EMI/EMC requirements as per AIS 004 
(Part 3). 

Load dump test, Pulse 5a 

For 12 V systems: 


A voltage spike of 65У, 4 О, 200 ms, Pulse- 
5a as per standard ISO 7637-2. 


For 24 V systems: 

A voltage spike of 123V, 8 О, 200 ms, Pulse- 
5a as per standard ISO 7637-2. 

Acceptance criteria: Device shall meet the 
requirements of functional tests, after the load 
dump test. 

Battery backup test — Battery backup is the 
amount of time that the device battery can 
support sending the data without being 
connected to the power source. This test will 
be performed by disconnecting the input 
charging voltage to the device. On 
disconnecting the external supply, battery 
would use its charge capacity to send data 
through GPRS. Time duration between 
external power disconnect to the last data 
packet time denotes the battery backup time. 


Acceptance criteria: Device should be able to 


j 


k) 


m) 


work in active mode for a period of 4 h or 
more at the polling/transmission rate of 60 s. 
Reverse polarity protection without fuse — 
The device to be tested should be connected 
to a reversed voltage of 14 V for 12 V systems 
and 27 V for 24 V systems for 2 min after 
connecting the system to the suitable circuit. 
Acceptance criteria: Device shall meet the 
requirements of functional tests, after the 
reverse polarity test. 

Test for wiring harness 

Flammability test: The wiring harness used in 
the device should be tested for flammability 
as per IS 2465. 

Electrical properties: The wiring harness used 
in the device should be tested for electrical 
properties as per AIS 028. 

Free fall test —The Free fall test shall be 
conducted as per IS 9000 (Part 7/Sec 4) at 
500 mm. 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the free fall 
test shall meet the requirements of functional 
tests. 


B-7.3 Environmental Test 


The following testing should be carried out as part of 
environmental testing: 


a) 


b) 


c) 


High temperature test — The high 
temperature test is used to evaluate effects of 
high temperature conditions on safety, 
integrity, and performance of the device. The 
test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 
9000 (Part 3/Sec 5), the device shall be 
subjected to temperature of 70 + 2?C for 16h 
with device in working condition. The 
recovery period shall be 2 h. 


Acceptance criteria: Device during and after 
the high temperature test shall meet the 
requirements of functional tests. 

Cold test — The test shall be carried out in 
accordance with IS 9000 (Part 2/Sec 4). The 
device under test shall be subjected to 
temperature of —10 + 2?C for 2 h with device 
in working condition. The recovery period 
shall be 2 h. 

Acceptance criteria: Device during and after 
the cold test shall meet the requirements of 
functional tests. 


Damp heat test — The device under test 
should be tested according to IS 9000 (Part 5/ 
Sec 2). The test is carried out at 25? to +55°C, 
humidity 95 percent. Six cycles (each test 
cycle of 24 h) should be run with device in 
‘Off’ condition. Functional test shall be carried 
out with power in ‘On’ condition at start of 


29 


IS 16833 : 2018 


2nd, 4th and 6th cycle. 

Acceptance criteria: Device during and after 
the test shall meet the requirements of 
functional tests. 

d) Insulation resistance test — Test shall be 
conducted as per ISO 16750-2 after damp heat 
test mentioned in point 4 of the Annex F. 
System/components shall remain 0.5 h at room 
temperature after the damp heat test. 

Test shall be conducted with a voltage of 
500 V d.c. Insulation resistance shall be > 
1 MQ. 

Acceptance criteria: No arcing or puncturing 
of insulation allowed shall be observed after 
the insulation resistance test. 

e) Thermal shock test — Temperature shock test 
is carried out to determine if the device can 
withstand sudden changes in the temperature 
of the surrounding atmosphere without 
experiencing physical damage or deterioration 
in performance. The device shall be tested as 
per IS 9000 (Part 14/Sec 2). Exposure time 
would be 3 h/cycle and number of cycles 
would be two. 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 

f) Salt spray test — The salt spray test is 
conducted to check corrosion resistance of 
device. The device should be tested according 
to 4.8 of IS 10250 for 96 h. 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 

g) High voltage test — The test is conducted to 
ensure service life requirements and 
functionality. The device under test shall be 
operated for 60 min at 18 V for 12 V systems 
and 36 V for 24 V systems. This test is as per 
ISO 16750-2. 

Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


B-7.4 Protocol Testing 


Protocol is a set of rules to be followed by the device 
while sending data to the backend. The protocol 
comprises data update rate, number of fields, start 
character, end character, alert type, etc. Protocol testing 
involves checking the compliance of data sets received 
by the backend against the protocol both with respect 
to the data fields as well the format. It is expected that 
the data coming to a central server should be exactly 
as required under the protocol. Table 10 mentions the 
validation process for the protocol communication. 


The following test would be performed along with the 
protocol testing of the device: 


a) Memory storage 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Table 10 Protocol Testing Parameters 
(Clause B-7.4) 


SI Field Description 
No. 

(1) (2) (3) 

1) Start Character $ 

ii) Header The header of the packet/identifier 
ili) Vendor ID Vendor identification header 

iv) Firmware Version Version details of the firmware used in EX.1.0.0 

у) Packet Туре Specify the packet type— 

NR = Normal 


EA = Emergency alert 
TA = Tamper alert 

HP = Health packet 

IN = Ignition on 

IF = Ignition off 

BD = Battery disconnect 
BR = Battery reconnect 
BL = Battery low 

TS = Trip start 


TE = Trip end 
vi) Packet Status L = Live or H= History 
vii) IMEI Identified of the sending unit. 15 digit standard unique IMEI no. 
viii) Vehicle Registration No. Mapped vehicle registration number 
ix) GPS Fix 1 = GPS fix OR 0 = GPS invalid 
x) Date Date value as per GPS date time (ddmmyy) 
xi) Time Time value as per GPS date time in UTC format (hhmmss) 
xii) Latitude Latitude value in decimal degrees (with minimum 6 decimal places) 
xiii) Latitude Direction Latitude direction. 
For example, N=North; S= South 
xiv) Longitude Longitude value in decimal degrees (with minimum 6 decimal places) 
xv) Longitude Direction Longitude direction. 
For example, E=East; W= West 
xvi) Speed Speed in km/h 
xvii) Heading Course over ground in degrees 
xviii) No. of Satellites Number of satellites available for fix 
xix) Altitude Altitude of the device in ‘m’ 
хх) РООР Positional dilution of precision 
хх1) Network Operator Name Name of network operator. 
xxii) Ignition 1= Ign On; 0 = Ign Off 
xxiii) Main Power Status 0 = Vehicle Battery Disconnected 
1= Vehicle Battery Reconnected 
xxiv) Main Input Voltage Indicator showing source voltage in Volts. 
XXV) Internal Battery Voltage Indicator for level of battery charge remaining 
xxvi) Emergency Status 1= On; 0 = Off 
xxvii) Tamper Alert C = Cover Closed ; O = Cover Open 
xxviii) GSM Signal Strength Value ranging from 0-31 
xxix) MCC Mobile country code 
XXX) MNC Mobile network code 
xxxi) LAC Location area code 
xxxii) Cell ID GSM Cell ID 
xxxiii) NMR (neighbouring Cell ID) Neighbouring 4 cell ID along with their LAC and signal strength 
xxxiv) Digital Input Status 4 external digital input status [Status of Input 1 to Input 3 (0=0ff, 1=On)] 
XXXV) Digital Output Status 2 external digital output status 
(0—Of£ 1=On) 
xxxvi) Vehicle Status H - Hired, 


A — Available, 
R = Retired/Off Duty 


xxxvii) Trip Start Trip start time integrated with meter switch 
xxxviii) Trip End Trip End time integrated with meter switch 
хххіх) Trip ID Unique ID for each trip 
xl) Trip Duration Duration of the trip in minutes 
xli) Trip Distance Distance covered during the trip in km 
xlii) Trip Fare Total amount payable for the trip 
xliii) Frame Number Sequence number of the messages (000001 to 999999) 
xliv) Checksum Ensures no error in transmission (optional) 
xlv End Character Indicated end of the frame 


30 


The device should support 40 000 or more 
positional logs/packets. This is a functional 
test and the device will be simulated to be in 
non-GPRS coverage area and the logs will be 
maintained. The capacity of logging will be 


IS 16833 : 2018 


b) Messages and alerts from devices 


Table 11 contains the listing of alerts that need 
to come from the tracking devices. These 
alerts are applicable for both live packets as 
well as the history packets. 


checked by monitoring the logs on the device. 


Table 11 Messages and Alerts 
(Clause B-7.4) 


SI Message Remarks 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Location Update Default message coming from each device 
ii) Location Update (history) Would be sent, if GPRS is not available at the time of sending the message 
ii) Alert — disconnect from If device is disconnected from vehicle battery and running on its internal battery 
main battery 
iv) Alert — Low battery If device internal battery had fallen below a defined threshold, indicating that device need to 
get a recharge 
v) Alert — Low battery removed Indicate that vehicle internal battery is charged again 
vi) Alert — Connect back to Indicate that vehicle is connected back to main battery 
main battery 
vii) Alert — Ignition ‘ON’ Indicates that vehicle has started (ignition *ON") 
viii) Alert — Ignition ‘OFF’ Indicates that vehicle has stopped (ignition *OFF") 
ix) Alert Over the air parameter Alerts for any parameter is changed over the air/manually. Shall include the name/value of 
change parameter changed and source of command 
X) Alert — GPS box opened Message would be generated indicating GPS box opened 
xi) Alert — Emergency state “ОМ When any of the emergency buttons is pressed by any passenger or in case of any open circuit, 
alert should be flashed.System should also provide location of emergency button which is 
pressed. 
xi) Alert — emergency State ‘OFF’ When emergency state of vehicle is removed 


NOTE — In case of Emergency Alert ON system, the alert message should go in the format given below in Table 12. This emergency 
alert message should be sent to dual IPs; that is, the device should support minimum two IPs simultaneously. 


Table 12 Message Format 
(Clause B-7.4) 


81 Attribute Value/Description Size 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Packet Header EPB, The unique identifier for all messages from ATD Character, 3 bytes 
ii) Message Type Message Types supported. Emergency Message (EMR) or Stop Message (SEM) Character, 2 bytes 
ш) Device ID Unique ID of the Vehicle (IMEI Number) Character,15 bytes 
iv) Packet Type NM - Normal packet; SP — Stored packet Character, 2 bytes 
v) Date Date and time of the location obtained from thelocation data in Character,14 bytes 
YYYYMMDDhhmmss format 
vi) GPS Validity A — Valid; V – Invalid Character, 1 byte 
vii) Latitude Latitude in decimal degrees - dd.mmmmmm format Double, 12 bytes 
vii) Latitude Direction N - North; S — South Character, 1 byte 
ix) Longitude Longitude in decimal degrees - dd.mmmmmm format Double, 12 bytes 
X) Longitude Direction E — East ; W — West Character, 1 byte 
xi) Altitude Altitude in *m' (above sea level) Double, 12 bytes 
xi) Speed Speed in km/h Float, 6 bytes 
xii) Distance Distance calculated from previous GPS data Float, 6 bytes 
xiv) Provider С - Fine GPSN - Coarse GPS or data from the network Character, 1 byte 
xv) Vehicle Registration No. Registration Number of the Vehicle Character, 16 bytes 
xvi) Reply Number The mobile number to which Test response need to be sent 0 
xvii) CRC The 32 bit checksum of all the characters from the header up to the CRC field 8 bytes 


31 


IS 16833 : 2018 


ANNEX C 
(Foreword and Clause 1) 
CCTV SYSTEM WITH AN INTEGRATED EMERGENCY SYSTEM FOR BUSES 


C-1 GENERAL 


This annex will be applicable only to those buses which 
are already fitted with GPS tracking devices as per Part 
Ion the date of notification ofthis standard. It primarily 
covers the functional specifications, test and protocol 
requirements of ‘CCTV system with an integrated 
emergency system for buses’. 


C-2 COMPONENTS OF CCTV SYSTEM 


The on-board CCTV System will comprise various 
devices such as video recorder without an integrated 
vehicle tracking module, CCTV cameras and 
emergency buttons. The specifications of these devices 
will vary depending upon the type of CCTV system 
device and technology of CCTV system. 


This system will consist of: 


a) Analog camera with mDVR, or 
b) IP camera with mNVR, or 
с) Incase of more than 4 channels, Hybrid DVR 


with mix of analog and IP camera may be used. 
In this case relevant specifications of mDVR/ 
mNVR will apply to Hybrid DVR. 


C-3 The Analog CCTV System will comprise the 
following devices: 


a) Analog CCTV cameras, 
b) Mobile digital video recorder (та УК), and 
c) Emergency buttons. 


C-4 IP CCTV On-Board Devices will comprise the 
following devices: 


a) IP CCTV cameras, 
b) Mobile network video recorder (mNVR), and 
c) Emergency buttons. 

C-5 FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICATIONS 

C-5.1 Analog CCTV Camera 


1. The CCTV camera shall support analog high 
definition, colour camera (Monochrome in 


night with IR on). 

2. The CCTV camera shall have video format 
PAL. 

3. The CCTV camera shall have fixed lens of 
3.6 mm. 

4. The CCTV camera shall have camera 


resolution of 720p, 1 280 (H) x 720 (V). 
5. The CCTV camera shall have Image sensor 


32 


of 1/3 CCD/CMOS progressive scan. 


6. The CCTV camera shall support minimum 
illumination 0.01 Lux at F1.2 with IR Off and 
0.0 Lux with IR on. 

7. Тһе CCTV camera shall have shutter time of 


1/50 sec to 1/100 000 sec. 

8. Тһе CCTV camera shall have built-in infrared 

LEDs with range of minimum 10 m, auto day 

and night. 

The CCTV camera shall support camera 

ruggedness: 

i) Rugged, vibration, shock and tamper 
proof metal housing, 

ii) Aviation connectors installation, and 

ш) Anti-vibration installation with multipoint 
locking mechanism in horizontal and 
vertical direction. 

10. CCTV camera shall have image enhancement 

capacity as: 

i)  Auto-tracking white balance (ATW), 

ii) Automatic gain control, and 

ii) Wide dynamic range (WDR) and 
Automatic backlight compensation 
(BLC). 

CCTV camera shall have capability of 

automatic motion detection. 


11. 


12. CCTV camera shall have power input from 


mDVR. 
Camera has capacity of built-in microphone 
or separate microphone. 


13. 


C-52 mDVR 


1. The mDVR shall support the video format 

PAL. 

The mDVR shall support 4 channels video 

input for vehicle having up to 4 CCTV 

cameras and 8 channels video input for vehicle 

having more than 4 and up to 8 CCTV 

cameras. In case of 8 channels, cameras and 

DVR may be hybrid. 

3. The трук shall have 1 video output. 

The mDVR shall have 1 audio output. 

5. The mDVR shall support H.264 video 
compression standards. 


6. The mDVR shall support G.711 or G.726 
audio compression standards. 
7. The трук shall support dual streams, both 


streams independently configurable for each 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


camera resolution and frame rate. 

The mDVR shall support 720p/4CIF/2CIF/ 
CIF/QCIF (can be set independently for each 
channel, for both streams). 


The mDVR shall support 1 to 25 fps for all 
channels at 720p resolution and frame rate can 
be set independently for each camera, for both 
streams for vehicle having 4 CCTV cameras 
and 1 to 25 fps for all channels at 720p (total 
100 fps at 720p) — resolution and frame rate 
can be set independently for each camera, for 
both streams for vehicles having 4 to 8 
cameras. 

The mDVR shall have a minimum of four 
inputs (NO/NC, configurable) and two output 
alarm sensors. 

The mDVR shall have storage of: 


a) 500 GB, 2.5" SATA hard disk drive or 
solid state drive or industrial grade SD 
Card with suitable anti-vibration 
mechanism, Storage to be pluggable and 
easily removable, secure and protected by 
lock for vehicles up to four cameras. 

b) 1 TB, 2.5" SATA hard disk drive or solid 
state drive or industrial grade SD Card 
with suitable anti-vibration mechanism 
storage to be pluggable and easily 
removable, secure and protected by lock 
for vehicles having more than four 
cameras up to eight cameras. 

The mDVR will record in normal, schedule 
based, alarm triggered and motion detection 
mode. Alarms triggered modes may include 
alarms triggered via digital I/O input, for 
example, emergency button, emergency door 
open, brake on, reversing, DVR enclosure 
open. 

The mDVR will support event based recording 

and tagging: 

a) Pre-recording — 1 to 30 min, and 

b) Post-recording - 1 to 30 min. 

The mDVR shall support configurable shut 

down delay after ignition off — up to 24 h 

(configurable in hours and minutes). 

The mDVR shall have facility of regulated 

power to CCTV cameras and microphones. 

The mDVR shall have 

communication interfaces as 

a) LAN- I RJ45 interface, 

b) Wi-Fi — 802.11/b/g/n (optional), and 

c) Built-in minimum 3G module, supporting 
both 2G, 3G (at least 900, 1 800 and 
2 100 MHz frequency bands), support for 


network/ 


33 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 
24. 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


SMS, Voice, data (GPRS, TCP/IP) with 

multiple network OTA switching 

capabilities. 
System shall have provision of secured data 
transmission to the backend from the devices 
through secured channel. Secured channel 
means encrypted data transmission from 
device to backend using a secured tunnel on 
communication medium such as ‘Secured 
dedicated APN or 2G/3G network.’ 


Support embedded SIM (As per TEC 

specification released time to time) to cater 

to the automotive operational requirement 

such as vibration, temperature and humidity 

and provide long life span with at least 10 

years life and more than 1 million read/write 

cycles. 

Device shall have built-in/integrated 3 axis 

accelerometer and 3 axis gyroscope for 

accessing driving conditions such as rapid 

acceleration, sudden braking & hard turn. 

It will provide the following additional 

information: 

a) GPS data via RS 232/Ethernet to other 
on — bus devices, and 

b) Receive route number information from 
other on-board devices and transmit to 
back end. 

It will support transmission mode: 

Always —On, Turned ‘On’ by: 

a) Emergency button, or 

b) SMS or telephone or alerts from I/O. 

The mDVR shall support the external 

interfaces 1 RS232, 1 USB 2.0. 

The mDVR have external GSM antenna. 

The mDVR shall have minimum of five 

configurable image settings (One to be the best 

quality). 

The mDVR shall have tamper-proof 

watermark. 

The mDVR video over-written to be 

configurable to support: 

a) Cyclic overwriting (oldest recording to 
be overwritten), and 

b) Event tagged recording not to be 
overwritten for a longer period (7 to 30 
days, configurable). 

The mDVR shall have LED indicators for 

power, recording, minimum 3G/GPRS 

Network. 

The mDVR shall have vibration resistance, 

shock resistance as per C-8. 

The mDVR shall be capable of sending 


IS 16833 : 2018 


30. 


31. 


32. 


33. 


34. 


communicating system health parameters over 
2G/3G/SMS as well as shall be: 

a) Capable of sending health parameters 
(cameras not-functioning, cameras 
tamper, storage error, storage full, video 
loss, camera cover) at specified frequency 
to the server. 

b) Capable of sending video and snapshot 
images (of configurable resolution, 720p, 
4СІЕ CIF, 2CIF, QCIF) from each camera 
to the server at specified frequency 
(configurable). 

The system shall support over the air 
configuration parameters for mDVR and 
cameras 

The system shall support independently 
configuration of motion detection zones. 


The system shall have built-in RTC, drift not 
more than 10 s at any time. 

The mDVR should provide video and audio 
download facility for the desired date/time and 
duration. It should be possible to connect a 
laptop to mDVR through network cable on 
RJ45 port and open mDVR's user interface in 
a standard browser using a standard URL such 
as http://dvr with no/minimum configuration 
requirement of the laptop's network settings. 
After entering user-id and password, it will 
be possible to search, view, select and 
download video clips of desired duration and 
date/time in standard formats such as (.avi) 
or (.mpg). It will not be possible to delete any 
video or change configuration settings using 
this set of user-id and password. 

The system shall be capable of: 

a) In Normal situation, the mDVR will send 
system health status data and images from 
cameras to the backend server, at 
configurable frequency over 3G network. 
On press of an emergency button, the 
mDVR will automatically send the video 
from cameras to the backend server over 
3G at configurable frame rate and 
configurable resolution. 

In case the vehicle moves to an area where 
3G coverage is not present, the mDVR 
will automatically shift to EDGE/GPRS 
(2G) connectivity to send the system 
health status data. Also, in such case, on 
press of an Emergency button, the mDVR 
will automatically shift to a lower frame 
rate and resolution (both configurable/ 
self-adaptive) and send the video from 
cameras to the backend server over 3G/ 
EDGE/GPRS (2G). 


b) 


34 


C-5.3 IP CCTV Camera 


1. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


The IP camera should have colour camera 
(monochrome in night with IR on). 


The IP camera shall have fixed, 3.6 mm lens. 
The IP camera shall have minimum 1 
megapixels, 1 280 x 720 pixels camera 
resolution. 

The IP camera shall have '/," CCD or '/," 
CMOS progressive scan image sensor. 

The IP camera shall support H.254 video 
compression. 

The IP camera shall support G.711 or G.726 
audio compression. 

The IP camera shall support | to 25 fps for 
different resolution. 

The IP camera shall have minimum 
illumination of 0.01 Lux at F1.2 with IR off 
and 0.0 Lux with IR on. 


The IP camera shall have shutter time of 1/50 
sec to 1/100 000 sec. 

The IP camera shall have built-in Infrared 
LEDs with range of minimum 10 m, Auto Day/ 
Night. 

The IP camera shall have ruggedness of : 

a) Rugged, vibration, shock and tamper 
proof metal housing, and 

b) Anti-vibration installation with multipoint 
locking mechanism, in horizontal and 
vertical direction. 

The IP camera shall have either built-in 
microphone or separate microphone. 

The IP camera shall support image 
enhancement of Auto-tracking white balance 
(ATW), Automatic gain control, Wide 
dynamic range (WDR) and Automatic 
backlight compensation (BLC). 

The IP camera shall receive power from 
mNVR through power-over-ethernet. 

The IP camera shall support automatic motion 
detection. 


The IP camera shall support RJ45 10/100 M 
ethernet interface. 


The IP camera support ONVIF profile S 
compliant. 


С-5.4 mNVR 


1. 


The mNVR shall support four channels video 
input for vehicle having up to four CCTV 
cameras and eight channels video input for 
vehicle having more than four and up to eight 
CCTV cameras. In case of eight channels, 
cameras and DVR may be hybrid. 


The mNVR shall have one video output. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


The mNVR shall have one audio output. 


The mNVR shall support H.264 video 
compression standards. 


The mNVR shall support G.711 or G.726 
audio compression standards. 


The mNVR shall support dual streams, both 
streams independently configurable for each 
camera resolution and frame rate. 


The mNVR shall support 720p/ACIF/2CIF/ 
CIF/QCIF (can be set independently for each 
channel, for both streams) recording 
resolutions. 


The mNVR shall support 1 to 25 fps for all 
channels at 720p (total 50 fps at 720p) — 
resolution and frame rate can be set 
independently for each camera, for both 
streams for vehicle having 4 CCTV cameras 
and 1 to 25 fps for all channels at 720p (total 
100 fps at 720p) — resolution and frame rate 
can be set independently for each camera, for 
both streams for vehicles having four to eight 
cameras. 


The mNVR shall have a minimum of four 
inputs (NO/NC) and two output alarm sensors. 


The mNVR shall have storage of: 


a) 500 GB, 2.5" SATA hard disk drive or 
Solid state drive or Industrial grade SD 
card with suitable anti-vibration 
mechanism, storage to be pluggable and 
easily removable, secure and protected by 
lock for vehicles up to four cameras. 

b) 1 TB, 2.5" SATA hard disk drive or solid 
state drive or industrial grade SD Card 
with suitable anti-vibration mechanism 
storage to be pluggable and easily 
removable, secure and protected by lock 
for vehicles having more than four 
cameras up to eight cameras. 

The mNVR will record in normal, schedule 
based, alarm triggered and motion detection 
mode. Alarms triggered modes may include 
alarms triggered via digital I/O input, for 
example, emergency button, emergency door 
open, brake on, reversing, DVR enclosure 
open. 

The mNVR will support event based recording 

and tagging: 

a) Pre-recording — 1 to 30 min, and 

b) Post-recording - 1 to 30 min. 

The mNVR shall support configurable shut 

down delay after ignition off — up to 24 h 

(configurable in hours and minutes). 

The mNVR shall have facility of Integrated 

PoE switch supporting peak power 

requirement for four CCTV cameras with 


35 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25; 


26. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


infrared on and Integrated PoE switch 

supporting peak power requirement for eight 

CCTV cameras with infrared on. 

The mNVR shall have 

communication interfaces as: 

a) LAN - 1 RJ45 interface (in addition to 
the camera ports), 

b) Wi-Fi — 802.11/b/g/n (optional), and 

c) Built-in minimum 3G module, supporting 
both 2G and 3G (at least 900, 1 800 and 
2 100 MHz frequency bands), support for 
SMS, voice, data (GPRS, TCP/IP) with 
multiple network OTA switching 
capabilities. 

Support embedded SIM (As per TEC 

specification released time to time) to cater 

to the automotive operational requirement 

such as vibration, temperature and humidity 

and provide long life span with at least 10 

years life and more than 1 million read/write 

cycles. 

Device shall have in-built/integrated 3 axis 

accelerometer and 3 axis gyroscope for 

accessing driving conditions such as rapid 

acceleration, sudden braking and hard turn. 


network/ 


System shall have provision of secured data 

transmission to the backend from the devices 

through secured channel. Secured channel 

means encrypted data transmission from 

device to backend using a secured tunnel on 

communication medium such as 'Secured 

dedicated APN or 2G/3G network." 

It will provide following additional 

information: 

a) GPS data via RS 232/Ethernet to other 
On -Bus Devices, and 

b) Receive route number information from 
other on-board devices & transmit to back 
end. 

It will support transmission mode: 

Always —On, turned *On' by: 

a) Emergency button, and 

b) SMS or telephone or alerts from I/O. 

The mNVR shall have ONVIF profile S 

compliant. 

The mNVR shall support the external 

interfaces 1 RS232, 1 USB 2.0. 

The mNVR have external GSM antenna. 

The mNVR shall have minimum 5 

configurable image settings (one to be the best 

quality). 

The mNVR shall have tamper-proof 

watermark. 

The mNVR video over-written to be 


IS 16833 : 2018 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 


32. 


33. 


34. 


35. 


configurable to support: 
a) Cyclic overwriting (oldest recording to 
be overwritten). 

b) Event tagged recording not to be 
overwritten for a longer period (7 to 30 
days, configurable). 

The mNVR shall have all input and output 
connections to be vibration/shock resistant and 
locking as per C-8. 

The mNVR shall have LED indicators for 
power, recording, network. 

The mNVR shall be capable of 
communicating system health parameters over 
2G/3G/SMS along with: 

a) Capable of sending health parameters 
(cameras not-functioning, cameras 
tamper, storage error, storage full, video 
loss, camera cover) at specified frequency 
to the server 

b) Capable of sending images, video and 
snapshot (of configurable resolution, 
720p, 4CIF, CIF, 2CIF, QCIF) from each 
camera to the server at specified 
frequency (configurable). 

c) Capable of detecting failure, error or 
tamper of cameras or any component and 
sending alert to server. 


The system shall support over the air 
configuration parameters for mNVR and 
cameras. 


The system shall support independently 
configuration of motion detection zones for 
each camera. 


The system shall have buit in RTC, drift not 
more than 10 s at any time. 


The mNVR should provide video and audio 
download facility for the desired date/time and 
duration. It should be possible to connect a 
laptop to mNVR through network cable on 
RJ45 port and open mNVR’s user interface in 
a standard browser using a standard URL such 
as http://dvr with no/minimum configuration 
requirement of the laptop's network settings. 
After entering user-id and password, it will 
be possible to search, view, select and 
download video clips of desired duration and 
date/time in standard formats such as (.avi) 
or (.mpg). It will not be possible to delete any 
video or change configuration settings using 
this set of user-id and password. 

The system shall be capable of: 

a) Innormal situation, the mNVR will send 
system health status data and images from 
cameras to the backend server, at 
configurable frequency over 3G network. 


36 


On press of an emergency button, the 
mNVR will automatically send the video 
from cameras to the backend server over 
3G at configurable frame rate and 
configurable resolution. 


In case the vehicle moves to an area where 
3G coverage is not present, the mNVR 
will automatically shift to EDGE/GPRS 
(2G) connectivity to send the system 
health status data. Also, in such case, on 
press of an emergency button, the mNVR 
will automatically shift to a lower frame 
rate and resolution (both configurable/ 
self-adaptive) and send the video from 
cameras to the backend server over 3G/ 
EDGE/GPRS (2G). 


b) 


C-5.5 Emergency Buttons 


a) 


b) 


The emergency buttons will be ‘Normally 
closed’ (NC) type. The form factor of 
emergency buttons will be such that the button 
is easy to press in the case of an emergency, 
and simultaneously also minimizes the 
possibility of accidental or unintended press 
thereby causing a false alert. 

The emergency buttons will be connected to 
both, the mDVR and the vehicle tracking 
device (Туре 3 device) іп a manner such that 
in case of press of any emergency button, both 
трук and the vehicle tracking device get the 
alert signal. 


C-6 OPTIONAL ADD-ON TO CCTV SYSTEM 


l. 


d) 
e) 


Driver Console Specifications 


a) Minimum 7" TFT LCD with arrow keys 
and number buttons, 


b) Luminance 400cd/m? minimum, 

c) Viewing angle 70/70/50/70 (L/R/U/D), 
d) Resolution 800 x 480 or better, 

e) Back-light type LED, 

f) Two video inputs, 

g) Live view and play back, and 

h) Power supply from mDVR/mNVR. 
Wi-Fi AP Specifications 

a) USB 2.0 interface, 


b) Support (802.11b/g/n) 2.4 GHz LAN - 
minimum 10 m range, 


c) Support easy configuration, 
Support external SD card for backup, and 
Support data export from mDVR/mNVR. 


C-7 COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL 


The CCTV system will communicate with the backend 
server for sending data to the backend server as well as 


to receive data from the backend server. The data that 
will be sent by the CCTV system is listed in the table 
below: 


51 |Data To Remarks 
No. Transport 
Backend 
i)| Video Y Only in case of press 
data of Emergency button 


ii) | System Y At specified 
Health frequency 
status 

iii) | Images Y At specified 
snapshot frequency and 
data specified resolution 


up to 720p 


C-7.1 Data from CCTV System to Backend System 
C-7.1.1 Video Data in case of Emergency Button 


In case of press of any emergency button, the video 
recorder (mDVR or mNVR) will get the input regarding 
the emergency alert. The video recorder will start 
sending the images to the backend at a specified 
frequency and resolution (both configurable 


IS 16833 : 2018 


parameters). The video recorder will keep on sending 
the video data to the backend for a specified duration 
(configurable parameter). CCTV System sub-stream 
will be used for transmission. 


The following metadata will also be sent with the 
images: 
a) Vehicle registration number (Can be 
configured as video recorder's identifier), 
b) Camera identifier, and 
c) Date and time. 


The above metadata will also be embedded on the 
video/images as watermark. 


C-7.1.2 Data on Request 


It will be possible to poll a video recorder (mDVR or 
mNVR) from the backend and download live or 
recorded video and/or audio data from the video 
recorder. It will be possible to search and select the 
video and/or audio clip to be downloaded, based on 
date and time. 


C-7.1.3 System Health Status Data 


The CCTV system device will send the health status 
data to the backend at specified frequency (configurable 
parameter). The health status data will comprise the 
data elements as listed in the table below: 


SI No. Data Element 


Remarks 


i) | mDVRID — 
i) | mDVR Name = 
ii) Manufacturer's ID 
iv) Date and Time of Health Status — 
v) Device Primary IP — 
vi) Device secondary ip — 
vii) Firmware version — 
vill) Protocol version — 
ix) IMEI number 
x) Storage 1 Status 
x1) Storage 1 Memory Status 
xii) Storage 2 Status 
xil) Storage 2 Memory Status 
xiv) Camera | recording status 
xv) | Camera 2 recording status == 
xvi) | Camera 3 recording status — 
xvii) | Camera 4 recording status — 
xviii) | Camera 5 recording status — 
хіх) | Camera 6 recording status — 
xx) | Camera 7 recording status — 
xxi) Camera 8 recording status — 


Unique identifier for manufacturer 


IMEI number of device 

Whether storage 1s functioning properly or has any error 
Whether memory has exceeded the specified threshold 
Whether storage is functioning properly or has any error 
Whether memory has exceeded the specified threshold 


IS 16833 : 2018 


51 No. Data Element Remarks 
xxii) | Microphone | recording status 
xxii) | Microphone 2 recording status 
xxiv) | Microphone 3 recording status 
xxv) Microphone 4 recording status Any microphone disconnect 
xxvi) Microphone 5 recording status 
xxvii) Microphone 6 recording status 
xxviii) | Microphone 7 recording status 
xxix) | Microphone 8 recording status 
xxx) Ignition status Whether ignition is ‘ON’ or ‘OFF’ 
xxxi) | Emergency buttons Status = 


It will be possible to configure the mDVR to send an 
image at CIF resolution from each camera on the vehicle 
to the backend along with the system health status. The 
images will be accompanied with the metadata, as listed 
below: 


a) Vehicle registration number (Can be 
configured as video recorder’s identifier), 

b) Camera identifier, and 

c) Date and time. 


The above metadata will also be embedded on the 
images as watermark. 


C-7.1.4 Alert Data 


In case of press of any emergency button, the mdvr 
will get the input regarding the emergency alert. The 
mDVR will immediately send the emergency alert data 
to the backend. The emergency alert data will be 
prioritized above all other type of data scheduled to be 
sent by the device to the backend. In addition, the 
mDVR will also send alert data in case of specified 
events like ignition on, ignition off, etc. A list of such 
alerts that CCTV system will send to the backend server 
is provided in the table below: 


SI No. Message 


Remarks 


1 Alert Ignition ‘ON’ 
ii) Alert — Ignition ‘OFF’ 
ii) Alert — Camera cover 
iv) Alert – Video loss 
v) Alert — mDVR enclosure opened 
vi) Harsh Braking 
vii) | Harsh Acceleration 
viii) Rash Turning 


Message would be generated when ignition is ‘On’ 

Message would be generated when ignition is ‘Off? 

Message would be generated if any of the cameras is covered 
Message would be generated if video is lost 


Alert indicating harsh braking 
Alert indicating harsh acceleration 
Alert indicating rash turning 


C-7.2 Data to be Sent by Backend System to CCTV 
System 


C-7.2.1 Configuration parameters update 


There may be a requirement to change the configuration 


parameters of various CCTV System from the backend. 
The list of such configuration parameters of CCTV 
cameras and mDVR (or mNVR) that could be changed 
from the backend is provided in the table below: 


SI No. Configuration Parameter 


Remarks 


i) Camera main stream video resolution 
i) Camera main stream image quality 
iii) Camera main stream bitrate 
iv) Camera main stream bitrate type 
v) Camera main stream max bitrate 
vi) Camera main stream frame rate 
vii) Camera main stream I frame interval 
viii) Camera sub-stream video resolution 


Main stream will be for local recording 

Only for mNVR 

Only for mNVR 

Only for mNVR 

Only for mNVR 

Camera sub-stream will be for transmission to 
backend in case of press of emergency button 


38 


IS 16833 : 2018 


SI No. Configuration Parameter Remarks 


ix) Camera sub-stream image quality — 


X) Camera sub-stream bitrate Only for mNVR 
x1) Camera sub-stream bitrate type Only for mNVR 
xi) Camera sub-stream max bitrate Only for mNVR 
xil) Camera sub-stream frame rate = 
xiv) Camera sub-stream I frame interval Only for mNVR 


xv) Camera video recording enable/disable — 
xvi) Camera audio recording enable/disable — 
xvii) Camera name for display — 
xviii) Camera schedule based recording — On/Off In case of camera schedule based recording — off, it 
will be all-day recording 
xix) Camera record schedule — weekday; In case of camera schedule based recording on only can 
start time; end time be different for different days of week 
xx) Camera video expired time (number of days) Time for keeping the recording in local storage. 
Recording will be permanent (will be overwritten on 
cyclic basis), in case, camera video expired time is set 
as 0. 
xxi) Camera record based on motion — 
detection — On/Off 
xxii) Camera record based on motion EE 
detection — sensitivity 
xxii) | Camera record based on motion detection — 
— area for motion detection 
xxiv) Camera pre-record time for event trigger — 
xxv) Camera post-record time for event trigger — 
xxvi) Resolution of images for sending to backend Video and snapshot of each camera 
xxvil) Frequency of sending images to backend From each camera 
xxviii) Camera text overlay — text = 
xxix) Camera text overlay — X-coordinate = 
xxx) Camera text overlay — Y-coordinate = 
xxxi) mDVR clock time To set the mDVR clock time 
xxxii) mDVR post ignition- ‘Off’ duration — 
xxxil) Get mDVR firmware version — 
xxxiv) Get mDVR protocol version — 
xxxv) Get mDVR MAC address — 
xxxvi) Get mDVR primary IP address — 
xxxvii) Set mDVR primary IP address — 
xxxvii) Get mDVR secondary IP address = 
xxxix) Set mDVR secondary IP address = 
xl) Set port number = 
xli) Configure vehicle registration number == 
xlii) Change APN = 
xliii) Configure time duration for emergency state — 
xliv) Get IMEI number of mDVR — 
xlv) Reboot/Reset mDVR — 
xlvi) Transmission mode Always —On, turned — 
*on' by a) emergency button b) SMS or 
telephone or alerts from I/O 


39 


IS 16833 : 2018 


The above parameters will be applicable for both 
Analog CCTV system as well as IP CCTV system. In 
case of IP CCTV system, mDVR will be read as mNVR. 


It will be possible to set the parameters at SI No. (1) to 
(xxxvi), separately for each camera, based on Camera- 
ID. 


C-7.2.2 CCTV Devices Firmware Upgrade 


There may be a requirement to upgrade the firmware 
of the CCTV Devices (mDVR, mNVR or IP cameras) 
for enhancement of any functionality or removal of any 
error. It will be possible to upgrade the firmware of the 
CCTV devices from the backend over-the-air. This will 
also include any upgrade of protocol of communication 
between CCTV Devices and backend. For upgrade of 
CCTV device firmware, the backend will first get the 
current firmware version of the CCTV device using 
command ‘Get mDVR Firmware Version’ (or Get 
mNVR Firmware Version or Get IP Camera Firmware 
Version). In case, the firmware version is not matching 
the latest firmware version and needs to be upgraded, 
the backend will send a message to the mDVR or 
mNVR (for both mNVR firmware as well as IP Camera 
firmware), as the case may be, with the new firmware 
file. 


For each firmware version upgrade message, the mD VR 
(or mNVR in case of IP CCTV System) will return a 
success message on successful upgrade. 


C- 8 TYPE TESTS 
The following shall constitute type tests: 


1. Image quality test (see C-10.1.1). 

2. Camera resolution test (see C-10.1.2). 
3. Camera IR test (see C-10.1.3). 
4 


IP camera video compression support test 
(see C-10.1.4). 


Camera frame rate test (see C-10.1.5). 


л 


6. Camera audio compression support test 
(see C-10.1.6). 

7. mDVR/nDVR video compression support test 
(see C-10.1.7). 

8. mDVR/nDVR audio compression support test 
(see C-10.1.8). 

9. mDVR/nDVR recording resolution test 
(see C-10.1.9). 

10. mDVR/mNVR dual stream capability testing 
(see C-10.1.10). 

11. mDVR/mNVR recording modes testing 
(see C-10.1.11). 

12. mDVR/mNVR video overwriting testing 
(see C-10.1.12). 


13. mDVR/mNVR data download testing 
(see C-10.1.13). 


14. mDVR/mNVR data communication testing 
(see C-10.1.14). 


15. mNVR Power-over-ethernet (PoE) test 
(see C-10.1.15). 


16. IP camera and mNVR ONVIF compliance 
testing (see C-10.1.16). 


17. Performance parametric test (Tri temperature/ 
tri voltage) (see C-10.2.1). 


18. Shock and vibration test (see C-10.2.2). 

19. Ingress protection (IP) (see C-10.2.3). 

20. Over voltage protection test (see C-10.2.4). 
21. EMI/EMC test (see C-10.2.5). 

22. Load dump test, Pulse 5a (see C-10.2.6). 


23. Reverse polarity protection without fuse 
(see C-10.2.7). 


24. Test for wiring harness (see C-10.2.8). 

25. High temperature test (see C-10.3.1). 

26. Cold test (see C-10.3.2). 

27. Damp heat test (see C-10.3.3). 

28. Insulation resistance test (see C-10.3.4). 

29. Thermal shock (see C-10.3.5). 

30. Salt spray test (see C-10.3.6). 

31. High voltage test (see C-10.3.7). 

32. USB port overloading test (see C-10.3.8). 

33. Endurance test (see C-10.3.9). 

34. Free fall test (see C-10.3.10). 

35. Protocol testing (see C-10.4). 

36. Additional testing for mDVR and mNVR 
(see D-2). 


Criteria for approval: Minimum three samples shall be 
submitted for testing together with the relevant data. 
The testing authority shall issue a type approval 
certificate if the CCTV system is found to comply with 
the requirements of the type tests. 


The samples shall be tested as per the test sequence in 
Table 13. 


The sequence of tests on sample sets S1 to S3 shall be 
as mentioned in Table 13 and is subject to agreement 
between manufacturer and the test agency. 


In case of failure in one or more type tests, the testing 
authority may call for fresh samples not exceeding twice 
the number of original samples and subject them to 
test(s) in which failure occurred. If, in repeated test(s) 
no failure occurs, the test may be considered to have 
been satisfactory. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Table 13 Sample-Wise Test Sequence 
(Clause C-8) 


xvii) 
xviii) 
xix) 
xx) 
xxi) 
xxii) 
xxiii) 
xxiv) 
xxv) 
xxvi) 
xxvii) 
xxviii) 
xxix) 
xxx) 
xxxi) 
xxxii) 
xxxiii) 
xxxiv) 
XXXV) 


xxxvi) 


C-9 ACCEPTANCE TESTS 

The following shall constitute acceptance tests: 
a) Functional testing (see C-7.1) 
b) Protocol testing (see C-7.4) 

C-10 CATEGORIES OF TESTS 

C-10.1 Functional Testing 


Functional testing will be carried out to assess the 
performance of the CCTV devices on important 
functional aspects as below: 


‘Supplier provided Application would be used for 
performance verification, wherever required’. 


Sample Set No. 


рар 
рапа 
ЕТТТ Е TL И 
ЕТЕТ Е Е — 
аруу оао 
ЕТТТ Е Е И 
ЕТТТ Р oo 
ЕТТТ Xd И 
ЕТ БЕРЕН БЕНЕН БЕНЕН 
[ mDVR/mNVR video overwriting testing Е o 
[ mDVRimNVR data download testing Е Е И 
[ mDVR/mNVR data communication esting З Е И 
[mNVRpowrowrehemer(ob)s Е Е И 
ГІР camera and амома 
[ Performance parametric test (ТЕ-нетретшгегі уіл ——  — {| X | —— 
[Sekadvbntons [у 
Pingress protection (IP) ——  — [IX БЕНЕН 
Гонок 
ммо [| [Г [хх 
ТЕТИГИ И Е Е И 
ИСТОГ И x 
тазар 
ОТТЕ И Е T 
бш | IX 
ТТЕ TI XT _ 
ЕТТИ И Е CE A 
ТЕТЕ Гур 
ЕТТИ БЕНЕН БЕЗІН БЕНЕН 
[High volagetet_ | [| [х_ 
USB port overloadingtest т [р [1 Х_ 
[Protocol esting O O CY Cd dX И 
[Endurance test [X T — TL И 
[ке  — A O _ 


Additional testing for type 1 mDVR and mNVR mars 


C-10.1.1 Image Quality Test 
Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras. 


The CCTV devices in vehicles are subjected to a wide 
range of light condition such as bright light, low light, 
etc. The CCTV cameras will be tested for image quality 
in varying light conditions including bright light at a 
spot, overall bright light, low light and in no light with 
IR on. 


Acceptance criteria: The images captured by the camera 
in different light conditions should be clear without any 
blur or haziness. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


C-10.1.2 Camera Resolution Test 
Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras. 


The CCTV cameras will be tested for meeting the 
camera resolution specification. The analog camera will 
be tested for meeting the requirement of 700 TV Lines, 
720p, 1 280 (H) X 720 (V) resolution. 


The IP camera will be tested for meeting the 
requirement of one megapixel, 720p, 1 280 (H) X 720 
(V) resolution. 


Acceptance Criteria: The supplier would provide self- 
certification for the above specification. 


C-10.1.3 Camera IR Test 
Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras. 


The infrared capability of CCTV cameras is used to 
capture images in low light or no light conditions. The 
cameras will be tested for their IR capability. The 
cameras should be able to switch on the IR and shift to 
monochrome image capture automatically in case the 
brightness level is less than 0.01 lux. The camera should 
automatically switch off the IR and shift back to colour 
image capture, in case light conditions improve. 


With IR on, the camera should be able to capture clear 
image for objects up to 10 m range. 


Acceptance Criteria: The camera switches IR on and 
off automatically and capture clear images for objects 
up to the specified IR range. 


C-10.1.4 ІР Camera Video Compression Support 
Applicable for: IP Cameras. 


The IP CCTV cameras should support H.264, MPEG- 
4 and M-JPEG video compression standards. The IP 
CCTV cameras will be tested for supporting all these 
compression standards. The future IP CCTV cameras 
which support H.265 video compression standard will 
be tested for this also. 


Acceptance criteria: The IP CCTV camera should 
support H.264, MPEG-4 and MJPEG video 
compression standards. The future IP CCTV cameras 
should support H.265 video compression standard also. 


C-10.1.5 /P Camera Frame Rate 
Applicable for: IP cameras. 


The IP CCTV cameras should be able to capture images 
in varying frame rate ranging from 1 fps to 25 fps for 
all resolutions supported by the camera. The capability 
of camera to capture images at different frame rates 
will be tested at different resolutions (equivalent to 
720p/4CIF, 2CIF, CIF and QCIF). 


Acceptance Criteria: The IP CCTV camera should be 


42 


able to capture images at varying frame rates ranging 
from 1 to 25 fps at all supported resolutions. 


C-10.1.6 ІР Camera Audio Compression Support 
Applicable for: IP cameras. 


The IP CCTV cameras should support G.711 and G.726 
audio compression standards. The IP CCTV cameras 
will be tested for supporting both these compression 
standards. 


Acceptance Criteria: The IP CCTV camera should 
support G.711 and G.726 audio compression standards. 


C-10.1.7 mDVR/mNVR Video Compression Support 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should support H.264, 
video compression standards. 


Acceptance criteria: The supplier would provide self- 
certification for the above specification. 


C-10.1.8 mDVR/mNVR Audio Compression Support 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should support G.711 
or G.726 audio compression standards. The video 
recorder will be tested for supporting all these 
compression standards. 


Acceptance criteria: The supplier would provide self- 
certification for the above specification. 


C-10.1.9 mDVR/mNVR Recording Resolution 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should be capable of 
recording video at different resolutions which would 
be configurable individually for each channel. The 
video recorder will be tested for recording of video at 
different resolutions individually for each channel. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should be 
capable of recording video at 720p/4CIF, 2CIF, CIF 
and QCIF resolutions (equivalent for mNVR) set 
individually for different channels. 


C-10.1.10 mDVR/mNVR Dual Stream Capability 
Testing 


Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should be capable of 
capturing video in dual stream mode in which both 
streams can be configured separately for each camera 
resolution and frame rate. The video stream at high 
resolution and frame rate is used for recording in local 
storage whereas the other stream at lower resolution 
and frame rate can be transmitted to backend server 
over-the-air, if required. The video recorder will be 


tested for recording of video in dual stream at different 
camera resolutions and frame rates set individually for 
each stream. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should be 
capable of recording video in dual stream, each stream 
at different camera resolution and frame rate. 


C-10.1.11 mDVR/mNVR Recording Modes Testing 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should be capable of 
initiating and stopping recording in the following 
modes: 


a) 


Normal mode — The video recorder records 
continuously. 

b) Schedule based — The video recorder records 
as per the specified schedule. The schedule 
can be configured for different time spans for 
different week days. 

c) Alarm triggered — The recorder starts recording 
in case an alarm is triggered and continues the 
same for a pre-specified duration. 

d) Motion detection — The recorder starts 
recording on detection of motion in the pre 
specified detection zone and continues the 
same for a pre-specified duration. 

e) Event based pre and post recording — In case 
of an event or alarm, the recorder tags the 
recording for a specified duration preceding 
and post event. The durations for tagging of 
recording pre and post event can be configured 
separately in the range of 1 to 30 min in the 
steps of 1 min. 

Shut down delay after ignition off — The 
recorder shuts down after a specified duration 
after the vehicle ignition 1s switched off. The 
shut-down delay duration can be configured 
up to 24 h. In case of deliberate battery cut 
off, the recording up to ‘break point’ to be 
ensured before shut down, without any loss 
of stored data. 


The video recorder will be tested for each ofthe above 
configurations for different values ofthe parameters in 
the steps of 5 min, covering the entire range specified 
for the parameter. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should be 
capable of recording in each of the above modes for 
the entire range of values specified for different modes. 


C-10.1.12 mDVR/mNVR Video Overwriting Testing 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid will have limited storage 
capacity to store the video. So, the video recorder 


43 


IS 16833 : 2018 


should be capable of overwriting the old video on FIFO 
(first in first out) basis. Also, the event tagged video 
recording should not be overwritten for a configurable 
period. The video recorder will be tested for capability 
of overwriting old video on FIFO basis and to retain 
the event tagged video for a minimum period of 15 
days. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should be 
capable of overwriting the old video when the storage 
capacity is about to exhaust. The video recorder should 
be able to retain the event tagged video for a minimum 
period of 15 days. 


C-10.1.13 nDVR/mNVR Data Download Testing 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should support 
downloading of data (video and audio files) from its 
local storage to an external device such as a laptop. It 
should be possible to connect the external device to 
the video recorder through network cable on RJ45 port 
and open its user interface in a standard browser using 
a standard URL such as http://dvr (or any other text 
specified by MoRTH) without having to configure the 
laptop's network settings. 


After entering user-id and password (specified by 
MoRTH), it will be possible to search, view, select and 
download video clips of desired duration and date/time 
in standard formats such as (.ау1) or (.mpg). It will not 
be possible to delete any video or change configuration 
settings using this set of user-id and password. There 
will be a separate set of user-id and password for setting/ 
modifying configuration parameters of the mDVR and 
mNVR. 


The video recorder will be tested for download of video 
and audio data from its local memory, as per the above 
process. Also, it will not be possible for the user to 
delete any video or change any configuration settings. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should support 
the capability of downloading video and audio data as 
per the above process. 


C-10.1.14 mDVR/mNVR Data Communication Testing 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should support data transfer 
to backend server on 3G/2G connectivity. In case the 
vehicle moves to an area where 3G coverage is not 
present, the video recorder should automatically shift 
to GPRS (2G) connectivity to send the system health 
status data. Also, in such case, on press ofan emergency 
button, the video recorder should automatically shift 
to the self-adaptive transmission mode and send the 
video from cameras to the backend server over 3G, 
GPRS (2G). 


IS 16833 : 2018 


The video recorder will be tested for data transfer on 
both 3G, 2G and automatically shift from one 
connectivity to the other. The video recorder will also 
be tested for the capability to shift to the self-adaptive 
transmission mode and send the video from cameras to 
the backend server over 3G, GPRS (2G). 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should support 
data transfer on both 3G, GPRS (2G) and automatically 
shift to lower frame rate and resolution when 3G is not 
available for video transfer to backend. 


C-10.1.15 mNVR Power-over-Ethernet (PoE) Test 
Applicable for: mNVR/Hybrid. 


mNVR/Hybrid will be required to provide power to 
cameras over ethernet. The mNVR will be tested for 
its capability to provide power to all the cameras 
connected to it through. 


PoE, in varying power requirement conditions such as 
camera IRs switched on or switched off. 


Acceptance criteria: The mNVR should be able to 
provide power to all the cameras connected to it over 
PoE for all the power requirement conditions of the 
cameras. 


C-10.1.16 JP Camera and mNVR ONVIF Compliance 
Testing 


Applicable for: IP Cameras/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The IP CCTV cameras and mNVR should be ONVIF 
profile S compliant to ensure integration of IP CCTV 
equipment from different suppliers. The IP CCTV 
cameras and mNVR will be tested for compliance to 
ONVIF profile S standards. 


Acceptance criteria: The IP CCTV camera and mNVR 
should be compliant to ONVIF profile S standards. 


C-10.1.17 SIM Testing 
Applicable for: mnNVR/mDVR/Hybrid. 


This test is to check the suitability of the SIM and 
communication module. The test shall be conducted to 
determine the effectiveness and operation of the GPRS 
module with OTA network switching capabilities on 
demand as well as automatically in real-time. The test 
consists of two type of testing as given below: 


a) The device would be tested to perform as per 
the protocol (see C-10.4) using an embedded 
SIM. 

b) The GPRS module and SIM, shall support: 
1) SMS, data (GPRS, TCP/IP), and 
2) Support multiple network OTA switching 

capabilities (On demand as well as 
automatic switching on real-time basis). 


Acceptance criteria: In the testing, vendors has to 
demonstrate the embedded SIM based tracking and 
multiple network OTA switching capabilities (on 
demand as well as automatic switching on real-time 
basis) for effective network management and 
transmission. 


C-10.2 Performance and Durability Testing 


The CCTV devices (cameras and video recorders and 
optional add on ‘Driver Console) will need to be tested 
for performance in the challenging vehicle 
environments of vibration, dust, fluctuating power 
supply, etc. 


C-10.2.1 Performance Parametric Test (Tri 
Temperature/Tri Voltage) 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR and Optional Add on ‘Driver Console’. 


During testing, device shall be kept inside test chamber 
in power ‘ON’ condition. (System should be stabilized 
for a minimum duration of 5 min at each condition. At 
each test point the system will be powered on and shut 
down five times with a duration of 1 min ‘ON’ and 1 
min ‘OFF’ time). 

The temperatures are: -25°C, Room temperature, 
+70°С. 


Following аге the various voltages: 
For 12V system: 9V, 13.5V, 16V. 
For 24V system: 18V, 27V, 32V. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the performance 
parametric test shall meet the requirements of functional 
tests. 


C-10.2.2 Shock and Vibration Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR and optional add on ‘Driver Console.’ 


The CCTV devices (cameras and video recorders) in 
vehicles are subjected to a harsh environment in terms 
of shocks and vibrations and that too for extended 
period of time. Two tests are recommended based on 
the nature of application environment. 


Shock: Shock test is performed to provide a degree of 
confidence that the device can physically and 
functionally withstand the relatively infrequent, non- 
repetitive shocks encountered in transportation 
environments. This test provides an assessment of the 
effect of the shocks on the performance of the device. 
The test shall be performed as per IS 9000 (Part 7), 
Severity level = 15 g, Impact duration = 11 ms, Impact 
type = Half sine, Total number of impact = 9 (3 on 
each axis). 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the shock test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


Vibration: The test shall be performed as per IS 9000 
(Part 8). The test specimen mounted on a suitable 
support shall be rigidly fixed on a suitable vibrating 
machine constructed to produce simple harmonic 
function (total amplitude of 1.5 mm) and shall be 
subjected to vibration through a frequency range of 10- 
55-10 Hz in a sweep period of 1 min with continuously 
varying frequencies. The vibration shall be applied for 
not less than 1 h in the directions of each of the 3 major 
axes of the light. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the vibration test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.2.3 Ingress Protection (IP) 


Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras, MDVR/NDVR/ 
Hybrid. 


The CCTV cameras must be able to work in dusty 
environment that are typically encountered by the public 
transport vehicles where these would be installed. IP 
rating (IS/IEC 60529) is used for specifying the 
environmental protection characteristics of the CCTV 
cameras. The cameras will be tested for dust and water 
ingress according to IP 66 (without audio) and IP 65 
(with audio) test specification. MDVR/NDVR shall 
comply with IP54. 


Acceptance Criteria: The device should be IPXX (as 
applicable) compliant or better. 


C-10.2.4 Over Voltage Protection Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR. 


Test shall be conducted as per ISO 16750-2. Applicable 
devices shall be connected as a system as per vehicle 
configuration. (This is in case of controller alone being 
powered by vehicle battery). Apply 18 V for 12 V 
system or apply 36 V for 24 system on power lines for 
60 min to units which are powered directly by the 
vehicle battery. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the vibration test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.2.5 ЕМ/ЕМС 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) and 
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) tests are 
performed to assess whether a CCTV device (camera 
or video recorder) performs its intended functions in 
the electromagnetic environment to which it would be 
exposed. Further, the device should not generate 


45 


IS 16833 : 2018 


electromagnetic disturbances that may influence other 
equipment in the vicinity. 


Acceptance criteria: The device should meet the EMI/ 
EMC requirements as per AIS 004 (Part 3). 


C-10.2.6 Load Dump Test, Pulse 5a 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid. 


For 12 V Systems: 


A voltage spike of 65V, 4 О, 200 ms, Pulse-5a as per 
standard ISO 7637-2. 


For 24 V Systems: 


A voltage spike of 123V, 8 Q, 200 ms, Pulse-5a as per 
standard ISO 7637-2. 


Acceptance criteria: Device shall meet the requirements 
of functional tests, after the load dump test. 


C-10.2.7 Reverse Polarity Protection Without Fuse 
Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid. 


The device to be tested should be connected to a 
reversed voltage of 14 V for 12 V systems and 27 V for 
24 V systems for 2 min after connecting the system to 
the suitable circuit. 


Acceptance criteria: Device shall meet the requirements 
of functional tests, after the reverse polarity test. 


C-10.2.8 Test for Wiring Harness 


Applicable for: All wiring for analog cameras, IP 
cameras, mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid. 


Flammability Test: The wiring harness used in the 
device should be tested for flammability as per IS 2465. 


Electrical Properties: The wiring harness used in the 
device should be tested for electrical properties as per 
AIS 028. 


C-10.3 Environmental Test 


The following testing should be carried out as part of 
environmental testing: 


C-10.3.1 High Temperature Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 9000 
(Part 3/Sec 5). The CCTV devices (cameras and video 
recorders) shall be subjected to temperature of 70 + 
2°C for 16 h with device in working condition. The 
recovery period shall be 2 h. 


Acceptance criteria: Device during and after the dry 
heat test shall meet the requirements of functional tests. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


C-10.3.2 Cold Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional Add on 'Driver 
Console’. 


The test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 9000 
(Part 2/Sec 4). The device under test shall be subjected 
to temperature of —10 + 2°C for 2 h with device in 
working condition. The recovery period shall be 2 h. 


Acceptance criteria: Device during and after the cold 
test shall meet the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.3.3 Damp Heat Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The device under test should be tested according to IS 
9000 (Part 5/Sec 2). The test is carried out at +25° to 
+55° C, humidity 95 percent. Six cycles (each test cycle 
of 24 h) should be run with device in off condition. 
Functional test shall be carried out with power in ‘On 
condition’ at start of 2nd, 4th and 6th cycle. 


Acceptance criteria: Device during and after the test 
shall meet the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.3.4 Insulation Resistance Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR 


Test shall be conducted as per ISO 16750-2 after damp 
heat test mentioned in point 4 of the Annexure F. 
System/components shall remain 0.5 h at room 
temperature after the damp heat test. 


Test shall be conducted with a voltage of 500 V d.c. 
Insulation resistance shall be > 1 MQ. 


Acceptance criteria: No arcing or puncturing of 
insulation allowed shall be observed after the insulation 
resistance test. 


C-10.3.5 Thermal Shock 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR. 


Thermal shock test is carried out to determine if the 
CCTV devices (cameras and video recorders) can 
withstand sudden changes in the temperature of the 
surrounding environment without experiencing physical 
damage or deterioration in performance. The device 
shall be tested as per relevant parts of IS 9000 (Part 
14/Sec2). Exposure time would be 3 h/cycle and 
number of cycles would be two. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


46 


C-10.3.6 Salt Spray Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The salt spray test is conducted to check corrosion 
resistance of CCTV devices (cameras and video 
recorders). The device should be tested according 
to 4.8 of IS 10250 for 96 h. 


Acceptance Criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.3.7 High Voltage Test 


Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid; Analog 
cameras and IP cameras (if directly connected to 
battery). 


The test is conducted to ensure service life requirements 
and functionality. The device under test shall be 
operated for 60 min at 18 V for 12 V systems and 36 V 
for 24 V systems. This test is as per ISO 16750-2. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.3.8 USB Port Overloading Test 
Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR. 


The USB port pin and ground pin would be short- 
circuited with external wire in ‘ON’ condition. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.3.9 Endurance Test 


Applicable for: т ОУК and mNVR/Hybrid and optional 
add on ‘Driver Console’. 


The device under test shall be suitably placed at an 
ambient temperature preferably at 27 + 2°C. The system 
shall be connected in a suitable circuit. The test voltage 
at terminals shall be 14 and 28 V for systems rated for 
12 V and 24 V, respectively. The system shall be 
operated for 100 000 cycles. Each cycle shall consist 
of switching ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ the system with dwell 
time as follows: 


Dwell time: 105+ 1 s (“ОМ condition), 45+ 1 s ‘OFF’ 
condition). 


At the end of the test, the system shall be brought down 
to room temperature. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.3.10 Free Fall Test 
Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid. 


The free fall test shall be conducted as per IS 9000 
(Part 7/Sec 4) at 500 mm. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the free fall test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


C-10.4 Protocol Testing 


C-10.4.1 Protocol is a set of rules to be followed by 
the device while sending data to the backend. The 
protocol comprises data update rate, number of fields, 
start character, end character, alert type etc. Protocol 
testing involves checking the compliance of data sets 
received by the backend against the protocol both with 
respect to the data fields as well the format. It is 
expected that the data coming to a central server should 
be exactly as required under the protocol. 


C-10.4.2 The following testing will be performed as 


IS 16833 : 2018 


part of the protocol testing: 


a) The capability of the video recorder to send 
various types of data messages to the server 
in the protocol specified for the corresponding 
message. 

The capability of the video recorder to receive 
and correctly interpret messages from the 
server with respect to configuration update. 
The capability of the video recorder to 
upgrade its firmware over-the-air on receipt 
of the same from server. 


b) 


C- 11 HEALTH STATUS DATA 


The CCTV system device will send the system health 
status data to the backend at specified frequency 
(configurable parameter). The system health status data 
will comprise the data elements as listed in Table 14 
and Table 15. 


Table 14 CCTV System Health Status Parameters 
(Clause C-11) 


SI Data Element 
No. 
(1) (2) 
i) mDVRID 
ii) mDVR Name 
iii) Manufacturer's ID 
iv) Date and Time of Health Status 
Device primary IP 
v) Device secondary IP 
vi) Firmware version 
vii) Protocol version 
viii) IMEI number 
ix) HDD 1 status 
x) HDD 1 memory status 
xi) HDD 2 status 
xii) HDD 2 memory status 
xii) Camera | recording status 
xiv) Camera 2 recording status 
xv) Camera 3 recording status 
xvi) Camera 4 recording status 
xvii) Camera 5 recording status 
xvii) Camera 6 recording status 
xix) Camera 7 recording status 
XX) Camera 8 recording status 
xxi) | Microphone 1 recording status 
xxi) | Microphone 2 recording status 
xxii) Microphone 3 recording status 
xxiv) | Microphone 4 recording status 
xxv) Microphone 5 recording status 
xxvi) Microphone 6 recording status 
xxvii Microphone 7 recording status 
xxvii) Microphone 8 recording status 
xxix) Ignition status 
xxx) Emergency buttons status 


47 


Remarks 


(3) 


Unique identifier for manufacturer 


IMEI number of device 

Whether HDD is functioning properly or has any error 
Whether memory has exceeded the specified threshold 
Whether HDD is functioning properly or has any error 
Whether memory has exceeded the specified threshold 


Whether ignition is ‘ON’ or ‘OFF’ 


IS 16833 : 2018 
C-12 ALERT DATA incident happening in the vehicle is adequately 
covered. The coverage should be sufficient to 
capture the profile of the passengers involved 
in the incident in a way that the same coupled 
with the images captured by the cameras 
covering the doors helps in identification of 
the people involved in the incident. 


In case of press of any emergency button, the mDVR 
will get the input regarding the emergency alert. The 
mDVR will immediately send the emergency alert data 
to the backend. The emergency alert data will be 
prioritized above all other type of data scheduled to be 
sent by the device to the backend. In addition, the 
mDVR will also send alert data in case of specified 
events like SIM card ignition on, ignition off, SIM card 
removed, etc. A list of such alerts that CCTV device 
will send to the backend server is provided in Table 15. 


d) Indicative layouts for different types of 


vehicles are provided below: 
C-13.2 Positioning of Emergency Buttons 


The number of emergency buttons and their positioning 
in different types of vehicles will be based on the length, 
seating and interior layout of the vehicles. One 
Emergency button will be installed within easy reach 


Table 15 Alerts Supported for the CCTV Device 
(Clause C-12) 


= Message Remarks of the driver. Other emergency buttons will be installed 
ii in the vehicle on both sides, in such a way that they are 
(0 (2) (3) within easy reach of the passengers and the distance 
i) Alert — Ignition Indicates that vehicle has started between two buttons is not more than 3 m. 
‘ON’ (ignition ‘ON’) 
i) Alert — Ignition Indicates that vehicle has stopped C-13.3 Power Supply 
ii o s СИВО The mDVR shall be powered from the battery of the 
11 = усе = Я A А Я > 
бее Ы vehicles. Typically in India, the vehicles work on 12 V 
iv) Alert- Emergency When any of the emergency or 24V battery. Thus the mDVR should be capable of 
state *ON' buttons is pressed by any working on a wide range of voltage (say 8 to 32 V), in 
E о also order to account for the fluctuations of the vehicle 
provide location of emergency . 5 
button which is pressed. battery voltage. Also, it should be possible to have a 
vV) Alert — Camera is 25 delayed shut-down after ignition off, so that cameras 
covered can keep on recording for a specified period (say one 
vi) Alert – In case of = hour) after ignition switch-off. 
video loss 


Vehicle power interface shall have: 


C-13 INSTALLATION GUIDELINES a) one common ground linked to vehicle chassis, 
n А b) one permanent power supply (12/24V) 
C-13.1 Number and Indicative Layout of Cameras in connected to the vehicle battery, and 
Different Types of Vehicles . 
с) one non-permanent power line (12/24V) 


The guiding principles on the number of cameras and 
their layout in vehicles will be as follows: 


connect to the battery after ignition. 


p Е | C-13.4 Location and Mounting of CCTV System 
a) Minimum number of cameras in various types 


of vehicles shall be as set out in the table 
below: 


51 Vehicle Type Minimum Number of 
No. Cameras 
i) Standard buses 3 
п) Midi buses 2 
ш) Articulated buses 5 
iv) Double-decker buses 5 


b) All the passenger doors of the bus should be 
adequately covered by CCTV cameras in a 
way that image of each passenger boarding 
the bus is captured. 

c) The overall length of the vehicle is suitably 

covered by CCTV cameras in a way that any 


48 


Safety and security of the CCTV system devices is of 
the primary importance in the surveillance system. 
Vehicle shall be subject to vibration and shocks which 
can damage the mDVR/mNVR and CCTV cameras. 
Even harsh weather, humidity, water and dust ingress 
can also severely degrade the performance of the 
surveillance system. Thus fixing/mounting 
arrangements of mDVRs/mNVR, CCTV Cameras and 
cabling are of prime importance. The key parameters 
which need attention for the safety and security of the 
mDVR/mNVR and CCTV cameras are as mentioned 
below: 


a) Location of mDVR/mNVR — The mDVR/ 
mNVR should preferably be installed out of 
the reach and sight of the passengers. This is 
essential to minimize vandalism/tampering 


IS 16833 : 2018 


ЖЕН 


MEN": 
ias 


Fic. 10 INDICATIVE LOCATION OF CCTV CAMERAS IN STANDARD Bus 


attacks on the mDVR/mNVR. for flammability as per IS 2465. The wiring with battery 
b) Mounting — The mounting of the mDVR/ аѕ well all the accessories should be through proper 
connectors. 


mNVR should be resistant to vibrations and 
shocks. The mounting arrangement of mDVR/ 
mNVR should ensure that it is vandal and C-13.6 Antennas 


tamper proof. Antenna for GSM should be enclosed in a pipe or casing 


to prevent tampering of the cables. 
C-13.5 Electrical Wiring 


The wiring harness used in the device should be tested 


49 


IS 16833 : 2018 


ANNEX D 
(Foreword and Clause 1) 


CCTV SYSTEM WITH AN IN-BUILT TRACKING SYSTEM AND INTEGRATED EMERGENCY 
SYSTEM FOR BUSES 


D-1 This annex primarily covers the functional 
specifications, test and protocol requirements of ‘CCTV 
system with an integrated tracking system and 
emergency system for buses'. 


D-2 FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICATIONS 


This system will consist of: 


a) 
b) 
c) 


Analog camera with mDVR, or 

IP camera with mNVR, or 

In case of more than four channels, Hybrid 
DVR with mix of analog and IP camera may 


be used. In this case relevant specifications 
of mDVR/mNVR will apply to Hybrid DVR. 


D-2.1 Analog CCTV Camera 


l. 


10. 


The CCTV camera shall have analog high 
definition, colour camera (Monochrome in 
night with IR on). 

The CCTV camera shall have PAL video 
format. 

The CCTV camera shall have fixed lens of 
3.6 mm. 


The CCTV camera shall have camera 
resolution of 720p, 1 280 (H) x 720 (V). 
The CCTV camera shall have image sensor 
of 1/3 CCD/CMOS progressive scan. 

The CCTV camera shall support minimum 
illumination 0.01 Lux at F1.2 with IR Off and 
0.0 Lux with IR on. 

The CCTV camera shall have shutter time of 
1/50 sec to 1/100 000 sec. 

The CCTV camera shall have built-in infrared 
LEDs with range of minimum 10 m, auto day 
and night. 

The CCTV camera shall support camera 
ruggedness: 

a) Rugged, vibration, shock and tamper 
proof metal housing, 

b) 


c) 


Aviation connectors installation, and 
Anti-vibration installation with multipoint 
locking mechanism in horizontal and 
vertical direction. 

CCTV Camera shall have image enhancement 
capacity as: 

a) Auto-tracking white balance (ATW), 

b) Automatic gain control, and 


50 


11. 


12. 


13. 


c) Wide dynamic range (WDR) and 
Automatic backlight compensation 
(BLC). 

CCTV camera shall have capability of 

automatic motion detection. 

CCTV camera will have power input from 

mDVR. 

Camera has capacity of built-in microphone 

or separate microphone. 


D-2.2 mDVR 


1. 


10. 


11. 


The mDVR shall support the video format 
PAL. 

The mDVR shall support 4 channels video 
input for vehicle having up to 4 CCTV 
cameras and 8 channels video input for vehicle 
having more than four and up to eight CCTV 
cameras. In case of eight channels, cameras 
and DVR may be hybrid. 

The mDVR shall have | video output. 

The mDVR shall have | audio output. 

The mDVR shall support H.264 video 
compression standards. 

The mDVR shall support G.711 or G.726 
audio compression standards. 


The mDVR shall support dual streams, both 
streams independently configurable for each 
camera resolution and frame rate. 

The mDVR shall support recording resolution 
720p/ACIF/2CIF/CIF/QCIF (can be set 
independently for each channel, for both 
streams). 

The mDVR shall support 1 to 25 fps for all 
channels at 720p (total 50 fps at 720p) — 
resolution and frame rate can be set 
independently for each camera, for both 
streams for vehicle having four CCTV 
cameras and 1 to 25 fps for all channels at 
720p (total 100 fps at 720p) — resolution and 
frame rate can be set independently for each 
camera, for both streams for vehicles having 
four to eight cameras. 


The mDVR shall have minimum four inputs 
(NO/NC, configurable) and two output alarm 
sensors. 

The mDVR shall have storage of: 

a) 500 GB, 2.5" SATA hard disk drive or 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


solid state drive or industrial grade SD 
card with suitable anti-vibration 
mechanism, storage to be pluggable and 
easily removable, secure and protected by 
lock for vehicles up to 4 cameras. 

b) 1 TB, 2.5" SATA hard disk drive or solid 
state drive or industrial grade SD card 
with suitable anti-vibration mechanism 
storage to be pluggable and easily 
removable, secure and protected by lock 
for vehicles having more than 4 cameras 
up to 8 cameras. 

The mDVR will record in normal, schedule 
based, alarm triggered and motion detection 
mode. Alarms triggered modes may include 
alarms triggered via digital I/O input. For 
example, emergency button, emergency door 
open, brake on, reversing, DVR enclosure 
open. 

The mDVR will support event based recording 

and tagging: 

а) Pre-recording — 1 to 30 min, and 

b) Post-recording — 1 to 30 min. 

The mDVR shall support configurable shut 

down delay after ignition off — up to 24 h 

(configurable in hours and minutes). 

The mDVR shall have facility of regulated 

power to CCTV cameras and microphones. 

The mDVR shall have 

communication interfaces as: 

a) LAN- I RJ45 interface, 

b) Wi-Fi — 802.11/b/g/n (optional), and 

c) Built-in 3G module, supporting both 2G, 
3G (at least 900, 1 800 and 2 100 MHz 
frequency bands), Support for SMS, 
voice, data (GPRS, TCP/IP) with multiple 
network OTA switching capabilities. 


network/ 


System shall have provision of secured data 
transmission to the backend from the devices 
through secured channel. Secured channel 
means encrypted data transmission from 
device to backend using a secured tunnel on 
communication medium such as ‘Secured 
dedicated APN or 2G/3G network'. 

Support embedded SIM (As per TEC 
specification released time to time) to cater 
to the automotive operational requirement 
such as vibration, temperature and humidity 
and provide long life span with at least 10 
years life and more than 1 million read/write 
cycles. 

Device shall have built-in/integrated 3 axis 
accelerometer and 3 axis gyroscope for 
accessing driving conditions such as rapid 


51 


20. 


21. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


acceleration, sudden braking & hard turn. 


It will provide the following additional 

information: 

a) GPS data via RS 232/Ethernet to other 
on—bus devices, and 


b) Receive route number information from 
other on-board devices and transmit to 
back end. 


It will support transmission mode: 
Always —On, turned “Оп” by: 

a) Emergency button, and 

b) SMS or telephone or alerts from I/O. 


22. The mDVR shall support the external interfaces 


1 RS232, 1 USB 2.0. 


23. The mDVR have external GSM and GPS 


antenna. 


24. The mDVR shall have minimum 5 configurable 


25; 


26. 


image settings (1 to be the best quality). 

The mDVR shall have tamper-proof 

watermark. 

The mDVR video over-written to be 

configurable to support: 

a) Cyclic overwriting (oldest recording to 
be overwritten), and 

b) Event tagged recording not to be 
overwritten for a longer period (7 to 30 
days, configurable). 


27. The mDVR shall have LED indicators for 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 


32. 


power, recording, 3G/GPRS Network. 


The mDVR shall be capable of 
communicating system health parameters over 
2G/3G/SMS along with: 


a) Capable of sending health parameters 
(cameras not-functioning, cameras 
tamper, storage error, storage full, video 
loss, camera cover) at specified frequency 
to the server. 

b) Capable of sending video and snap shot 
images (of configurable resolution, 720p, 
АСТЕ, CIF, 2CIF, QCIF) from each camera 
to the server at specified frequency 
(configurable). 

The system shall support over the air 

configuration parameters for mDVR and 

cameras. 

The system shall support independently 

configuration of motion detection zones for 

each camera. 

The system shall have built in RTC, drift not 

more than 10 s at any time. 

The mDVR should provide video and audio 

download facility for the desired date/time and 


IS 16833 : 2018 


33. 


duration. It should be possible to connect a 
laptop to mDVR through network cable on 
RJ45 port and open mDVR's user interface in 
a standard browser using a standard URL such 
as http://dvr with no/minimum configuration 
requirement of the laptop's network settings. 
After entering user-id and password, it will 
be possible to search, view, select and 
download video clips of desired duration and 
date/time in standard formats such as (.avi) 
or (.mpg). It will not be possible to delete any 
video or change configuration settings using 
this set of user-id and password. 


The system shall be capable of: 
а) In normal situation, the mDVR will send 
system health status data and images from 
cameras to the backend server, at 
configurable frequency over 3G network. 
b) On press of an emergency button, the 
mDVR will automatically send the video 
from cameras to the backend server over 
3G at configurable frame rate and 


configurable resolution. 

In case the vehicle moves to an area where 
3G coverage is not present, the mDVR 
will automatically shift to EDGE/GPRS 
(2G) connectivity to send the system 
health status data. 

Also, in such case, on press of an 
emergency button, the mDVR will 
automatically shift to a lower frame rate 
and resolution (both configurable/self- 
adaptive) and send the video from 
cameras to the backend server over 3G/ 
EDGE/GPRS (2G). 


с) 


d) 


D-2.3 Additional Specifications for Tracking 
Functionality to be In-Built in DVR 


1. 


The system should support any operational 
GNSS system (Location, speed, heading, time 
stamp) data polling and capable of sending 
this data at a frequency of less than or equal 
to 10 s. The devices installed on or after 1 
September 2017 should also support Indian 
Regional Navigation Satellite System 
(IRNSS). 

The system shall have feature of location on 
demand on minimum 3G and configurable 
backup SMS facility in case of 3G/GPRS 
failure. 

The System shall have external GPS antenna. 


The System shall capable of store minimum 
40 000 positional logs. 

The system’s GNSS module shall have 
acquisition sensitivity better than (-)148 dBm. 


52 


10. 


11. 


The system’s GNSS module shall have 
tracking sensitivity better than (-)165 dBm. 
The System shall have positional accuracy of 
less than 6 m 2DRMS (on ground) or 2.5 meter 
CEP (on ground). 

The system should have: 

a) The capability of hot start «5s, 

b) The capability of warm start «30s, and 
с) The capability of cold start «40s. 

The above timing is applicable after DVR 
boots up. 

The system should have the A-GPS (Assisted 
GPS) support. 

The system shall have the capability to send 
serving and adjacent cell ID as well as network 
measurement report (NMR). 

The system shall have the over the air 
capability as: 

a) Download of firmware as well as 
configuration parameters, 

b) Remote administration and firmware 
update over the air, and 

c) Device should be capable of sending a 
packet to two different IP addresses. 


D-2.4 IP CCTV Camera 


Te 


10. 


11. 


The IP camera should have colour camera 

(monochrome in night with IR on). 

The IP camera shall have fixed, 3.6 mm lens. 

The IP camera shall have minimum 

1 megapixels, 1 280 х 720 pixels camera 

resolution. 

The IP camera shall have '/," CCD or '/," 

CMOS progressive scan image sensor. 

The IP camera shall support H.254 Video 

Compression. 

The IP camera shall support G.711 or G.726 

Audio Compression. 

The IP camera shall support | to 25 fps for 

different resolution. 

The IP camera shall have a minimum 

illumination of 0.01 Lux at F1.2 with IR Off 

and 0.0 Lux with IR On. 

The IP camera shall have shutter time of 1/50 

sec to 1/100 000 sec. 

The IP camera shall have built-in infrared 

LEDs with range of minimum 10 m, Auto Day/ 

Night. 

The IP camera shall have ruggedness of : 

a) Rugged, vibration, shock and tamper 
proof metal housing, and 

b) Anti-vibration installation with multipoint 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


locking mechanism in horizontal and 
vertical direction. 
The IP camera shall have either built-in 
microphone or separate microphone 
The IP camera shall support Image 
enhancement of auto-tracking white balance 
(ATW), automatic gain control, wide dynamic 
range (WDR) and Automatic backlight 
compensation (BLC). 
The IP camera shall receive power from 
mNVR through power-over-ethernet. 
The IP camera shall support automatic motion 
detection. 


The IP camera shall support RJ45 10/100 M 
ethernet interface. 


The IP camera support ONVIF Profile S 
compliant. 


D-2.5 mNVR 


l. 
2. 


10. 


The mNVR shall have one video output. 
The mNVR shall support four channels video 
input for vehicle having up to four CCTV 
cameras and eight channels video input for 
vehicle having more than four and up to eight 
CCTV cameras. In case of eight channels, 
cameras and DVR may be hybrid. 

The mNVR shall have one audio output. 


The mNVR shall support H.264 video 
compression standards. 

The mNVR shall support G.711 or G.726 
audio compression standards. 

The mNVR shall support dual streams, both 
streams independently configurable for each 
camera resolution and frame rate. 


The mNVR shall support 720p/ACIF/2CIF/ 
CIF/QCIF (can be set independently for each 
channel, for both streams) recording 
resolutions. 

The mNVR shall support 1 to 25 fps for all 
channels at 720p (total 50 fps at 720p) — 
resolution and frame rate can be set 
independently for each camera, for both 
streams for vehicle having four CCTV 
cameras and 1 to 25 fps for all channels at 
720p (total 100 fps at 720p) — resolution and 
frame rate can be set independently for each 
camera, for both streams for vehicles having 
four to eight cameras. 

The mNVR shall have a minimum of four 
input (NO/NC) and two output alarm sensors. 


The mNVR shall have storage of: 


a) 500 GB, 2.5" SATA hard disk drive or 
solid state drive or industrial grade SD 


53 


11. 


12. 


13; 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Card with suitable anti-vibration 
mechanism, Storage to be pluggable and 
easily removable, secure and protected by 
lock for vehicles up to four cameras. 

b) 1 TB, 2.5" SATA hard disk drive or solid 
state drive or industrial grade SD card 
with suitable anti-vibration mechanism 
storage to be pluggable and easily 
removable, secure and protected by lock 
for vehicles having more than four 
cameras up to eight cameras. 


The mNVR will record in normal, schedule 
based, alarm triggered, motion detection 
mode. Alarms triggered modes may include 
alarms triggered via digital I/O input, For 
example, emergency button, emergency door 
open, brake on, reversing, dvr enclosure open. 
The mNVR will support event based recording 
and tagging: 

a) Pre-recording — 1 to 30 min, and 
b) Post-recording - 1 to 30 min. 

The mNVR shall support configurable shut 

down delay after ignition off — up to 24 h 

(configurable in hours and minutes). 

The mNVR shall have facility of integrated 

PoE switch supporting peak power 

requirement for four CCTV cameras with 

infrared on and integrated PoE switch 
supporting peak power requirement for eight 

CCTV cameras with infrared on. 

Тһе mNVR shall have 

communication interfaces as: 

a) LAN - 1 RJ45 interface (in addition to 
the camera ports), and 

b) Wi-Fi — 802.11/b/g/n (optional). 

c) Built-in 3G module, supporting both 2G, 
3G (at least 900, 1 800 and 2 100 MHz 
frequency bands), Support for SMS, 
voice, data (GPRS, TCP/IP) with multiple 
network OTA switching capabilities. 

Support embedded SIM (As per TEC 
specification release time to time) to cater to 
the automotive operational requirement such 
as vibration, temperature and humidity and 
provide long life span with at least 10 years 
life and more than 1 million read/write cycles. 


network/ 


Device shall have built-in/integrated 3 axis 
accelerometer and 3 axis gyroscope for 
accessing driving conditions such as rapid 
acceleration, sudden braking and hard turn. 

System shall have provision of secured data 
transmission to the backend from the devices 
through secured channel. Secured channel 
means encrypted data transmission from 


IS 16833 : 2018 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


device to backend using a secured tunnel on 

communication medium such as ‘Secured 

dedicated APN or 2G/3G network’. 

It will provide the following additional 

information: 

a) GPS data via RS 232/Ethernet to other 
on—bus devices, and 

b) Receive route number information from 
other on-board devices and transmit to 
back end. 

It will support transmission mode. 

Always —On, turned ‘On’ by: 

a) Emergency button, or 

b) SMS or telephone or alerts from I/O. 

The mNVR shall have ONVIF profile S 

compliant. 

The mNVR shall support the external 

interfaces 1 RS232, 1 USB 2.0. 

The mNVR have external GSM & GPS 

antenna. 


The mNVR shall have minimum five 
configurable image settings (one to be the best 
quality). 

The mNVR shall have tamper-proof 

watermark. 

The mNVR video over-written to be 

configurable to support: 

a) Cyclic overwriting (oldest recording to 
be overwritten). 

b) Event tagged recording not to be 
overwritten for a longer period (7 to 30 
days, configurable). 

The mNVR shall have all input and output 

connections to be vibration/shock resistant and 

locking as per D-8. 

The mNVR shall have LED indicators for 

power, recording, network. 

The mDVR shall be capable of 

communicating system health parameters over 

2G/3G/SMS along with: 

a) Capable of sending health parameters 

(cameras not-functioning, cameras 

tamper, storage error, storage full, video 

loss, camera cover) at specified frequency 
to the server 

b) Capable of sending images, video and 

snapshot (of configurable resolution, 

720p, 4CIF, CIF, 2CIF, QCIF) from each 
camera to the server at specified 
frequency (configurable). 

c) Capable of detecting failure, error or 

tamper of cameras or any component and 

sending alert to server. 


54 


30. 


31. 


32. 


33. 


34. 


35. 


The system shall support over the air 
configuration parameters for mNVR and 
cameras and over the air upgrade of firmware. 
The system shall support independently 
configuration of motion detection zones for 
each camera. 


The system shall have built in RTC, drift not 
more than 10 s at any time. 
The mNVR should provide video and audio 
download facility for the desired date/time and 
duration. It should be possible to connect a 
laptop to mNVR through network cable on 
RJ45 port and open mNVR’s user interface in 
a standard browser using a standard URL such 
as http://dvr with no/minimum configuration 
requirement of the laptop's network settings. 
After entering user-id and password, it will 
be possible to search, view, select and 
download video clips of desired duration and 
date/time in standard formats such as (.avi) 
or (.mpg). It will not be possible to delete any 
video or change configuration settings using 
this set of user-id and password. 

The system shall be capable of: 

a) Innormal situation, the mDVR will send 
system health status data and images from 
cameras to the backend server, at 
configurable frequency over 3G network. 
On press of an emergency button, the 
mDVR will automatically send the video 
from cameras to the backend server over 
3G at configurable frame rate and 
configurable resolution. 

b) Incasethe vehicle moves to an area where 

3G coverage 1s not present, the mDVR 

will automatically shift to EDGE/GPRS 

(2G) connectivity to send the system 

health status data. Also, in such case, on 

press of an emergency button, the mDVR 
will automatically shift to a lower frame 
rate and resolution (both configurable/ 
self-adaptive) and send the video from 
cameras to the backend server over 3G/ 
EDGE/GPRS (2G). 


D-2.6 Additional Specifications for Tracking 
Functionality (In-built in MNVR) 


1. 


The system should support any operational 
GNSS system (Location, speed, heading, time 
stamp) data polling and capable of sending 
this data at a frequency of less than or equal 
to 10 s. The devices installed on or after 1 
September 2017 should also support Indian 
Regional Navigation Satellite System 
(IRNSS). 


The system shall have feature of location on 
demand on minimum 3G and configurable 
backup SMS facility in case of 3G/GPRS 
failure. 


The system shall have external GPS antenna. 


The System shall capable of store minimum 
40 000 positional logs. 


The system’s GNSS module shall have 
acquisition sensitivity better than (-)148 dBm. 
The System shall have tracking sensitivity 
better than (-)165 dBm. 


The system shall have positional accuracy of 
less than 6 m 2DRMS (on ground) or 2.5 m 
CEP (on ground). 


The system’s GNSS module should have: 

a) The capability of hot start «5s, 

b) The capability of warm start <30s, and 
с) The capability of cold start «40s. 

The above timing shall be applicable after 
MNVR boots up. 

The system should have the A-GPS (Assisted 
GPS) support. 

The system shall have the capability to send 
serving and adjacent cell ID as well as network 
measurement report (NMR). 


10. 


11. The system shall have the over the air 


capability as: 
a) Download of firmware as well as 
configuration parameters, 

Remote administration and firmware 


update over the air, and 


b) 


c) 


Device should be capable of sending a 
packet to two different IP addresses. 


D-3 EMERGENCY BUTTONS 
The emergency buttons will be ‘Normally Closed’ (NC) 


IS 16833 : 2018 


type. The form factor of emergency buttons will be such 
that the button 1s easy to press in the case of an 
emergency, and simultaneously also minimizes the 
possibility of accidental or unintended press thereby 
causing a false alert. 


D-4 SPECIFICATIONS FOR OPTIONAL ADD- 
ON TO CCTV SYSTEM 


The following optional add-ons devices can be installed 
along with CCTV System: 


D-4.1 Driver Console Specifications 


a) Minimum 7" TFT LCD with arrow keys and 
number buttons, 

b) Luminance 400cd/n (minimum), 

c) Viewing angle 70/70/50/70 (L/R/U/D), 

d) Resolution 800 x 480 or better, 

e) Back-light type LED, 

f) Two video inputs, 

g) Live view and play back, and 

h) Power supply from mDVR/mNVR. 


D-4.2 WI-FI AP SPECIFICATIONS 


a) USB 2.0 interface, 

b) Support (802.11b/g/n) 2.4 GHz LAN – 
minimum 10 m range, 

c) Support easy configuration, 

d) Support external SD card for backup, and 

e) Support data export from mDVR/mNVR. 


D-5 COMMUNICATION PROTOCOL 


D-5.1 The CCTV System will communicate with the 
backend server for sending data to the backend server 
as well as to receive data from the backend server. The 
data that will be sent by the CCTV system is listed in 
the table given below: 


SI Data To IP address 1 To IP address 2 Remarks 
No. (Transport (Emergency 
backend) Response backend) 
1) Video data Y Only in case of press of 
Emergency button 
ii) Tracking data Y Y a) Continuous to Transport 
backend 
b) To Emergency Response 
backend, only in case of 
press of Emergency button 
iii) System Health status Y At specified frequency 
iv) Images snapshot data Y At specified frequency and 


specified resolution up to 720p 


55 


IS 16833 : 2018 


D-5.2 Data from CCTV System to Backend System 


D-5.2.1 Video Data in Case of Press of Emergency 
Button 


In case of press of any Emergency button, the video 
recorder (mDVR or mNVR) will get the input regarding 
the alert. The video recorder will start sending the video 
and audio to the backend at a specified frequency and 
resolution (both configurable parameters). The video 
recorder will keep on sending the video data to the 
backend for a specified duration (configurable 
parameter). CCTV system sub-stream will be used for 
transmission. 


The following metadata will also be sent with the video: 
a) Vehicle registration number (Can be 
configured as video recorder’s identifier), 
b) Camera identifier, 
c) Date and time, 
d) Location coordinates, and 
e) Speed. 


The above metadata will also be embedded on the 
video/images as watermark. 


D-5.2.2 Data on Request 


It will be possible to poll a video recorder (mDVR or 
mNVR) from the backend and download live or 
recorded video and/or audio data from the video 
recorder. It will be possible to search and select the 
video and/or audio clip to be downloaded, based on 
date and time. 


D-5.2.3 Tracking Data 


Devices will support minimum fields as mentioned 
below with respect to tracking data. Different devices 
can provide more fields than specified above. Devices 
should be able to support different frequency of sending 
the tracking data, in following states: 


a) Ignition ‘OFF’, 
b) Emergency (Emergency state would supersede 
every other state), and 

c) Ignition ‘ON’. 
Device must transmit the login message whenever it 
establishes its connectivity with backend server, as per 
the fields provided in the table below in universal 
format: 


SI Field Description Sample Data 
No. 
i) $Msg.Server.Login Start of message = 
ii) $DeviceName Vehicle number where the device was DL3CBM9821 
installed 
iii) SIMEI 15 Digit IMEI number 123456789012345 


Version of the 
hardware 


iv) $Firmware 


v) $Protocol 
vi) $LastValidLocation 


firmware used in the 


Version of the frame format protocol 
Last location info saved at the device 


1.0.0 


1.0.1 


$1,220714,050656,28.758963, 
N,77.6277844,E,25 


The tracking data message should have minimum fields as provided in the table below: 


51 Field 
No. 


i) Start Character $ 
i) Header 
ii) Vendor ID 
iv) Firmware Version 
in EX.1.0.0 


v) Packet Type 
NR = Normal 


EA - Emergency alert 


TA = Tamper alert 
HP = Health packet 
IN = Ignition On 
IF = Ignition Off 


Description 


Version details of the Firmware used 


Specify the packet type — 


Sample Data 


The header of the packet/identifier — 
Vendor identification header -- 


1.0.0 


Depending upon the context, every 
frame from tracking device must 
carry a qualification code. This 
helps to determine the state in 
which vehicle is at that time. 


BPD = Battery power disconnect 
BPR = Battery power reconnect 


IS 16833 : 2018 


SI Field Description Sample Data 
No. 
vi) Packet Status L=Live or H= History 
vii) IMEI Identified of the sending unit. 15 digit 123456789012345 
standard unique IMEI No. 
viii) Vehicle Registration Mapped vehicle registration number DL1PC9821 
No. 
ix) Location Module 1 = Location Module fix or 0 = 1 
Fix Location Module invalid 
x) Date Date value as per location module 220714 
date time (ddmmyy format) 
xi) Time Time value as per location module 050656 
date time in UTC format (hhmmss 
format) 
xi) Latitude Latitude value in decimal degrees 28.758963 
(Up to not less than 6 places) 
xil) Latitude Direction Latitude Direction (N=North; N 
S= South) 
xiv) Longitude Longitude value in decimal degrees 77.6277844 
(Up to not less than 6 places). 
xv) Longitude Direction Longitude Direction (E-East; W 
W- West) 
xvi) Speed Speed in km/h (Up to one decimal 25.1 
value) 
xvii) Heading Course over ground in degrees 310.56 
xvii) Altitude Altitude of the device in ‘m’ 183.5 
xix) PDOP Positional dilution of precision 3 
xx) HDOP Horizontal dilution of precision 2 
xxi) Network Operator Name of network operator XYZ 
Name 
xxii) Ignition 1= Ignition On; 0 = Ignition Off 1 
xxiii) Main Power Status 0 = Vehicle battery power 1 
disconnected 
1= Vehicle battery power reconnected 
xxiv) Emergency Status 1= Оп; 0 = Off 0 
xxv) Tamper Alert C = Cover closed; О = Cover open C 
xxvi) GSM Signal Value Ranging from 0 — 31 25 
Strength 
xxvii) MCC Mobile country code 404 
xxviii) MNC Mobile network code 10 
xxix) LAC Location area code 00D6 
xxx) Cell ID GSM Cell ID CFBD 
xxxi) Digital input status Д4 external digital input status (Status 000 
of Input 1 to Input 3 (O=Off; 1=On)) 
xxxii) Digital output status 2 external digital output status 01 
(0=Off; 1=On) 
xxxii) Frame number Sequence number of the messages 000005 
(000001 to 999999) 
xxxiv) Checksum Ensures no error in transmission 16 
(optimal) 
xxxv) Endcharacter Indicated end of the frame * 


57 


IS 16833 : 2018 


However this message composition is indicative only. 
The fields can have different sequence (except for the 
first three fields), different separator, and also the 
message can have additional data other than the 
minimum specified fields. 


D-5.2.4 Health Status Data 


The CCTV system device will send the system health 
status data to the backend at specified frequency 
(configurable parameter). The system health status data 
will comprise the data elements as listed in the table 
below: 


SI Data Element Remarks 
No. 
i) mDVRID — 
i) mDVR Name = 
iii) Manufacturer’s ID Unique identifier for manufacturer 
iv) Date and time of health status — 
v) Device primary IP — 
vi) Device secondary IP — 
vii) Firmware Version — 
viii) Protocol Version — 
ix) IMEI Number IMEI number of device 
x) Storage | status Whether storage is functioning properly or has any error 
Xi) Storage 1 memory status Whether memory has exceeded the specified threshold 
xi) Storage status Whether storage is functioning properly or has any error 
xil) Storage 2 memory status Whether memory has exceeded the specified threshold 
xiv) Camera 1 recording status — 
xv) Camera 2 recording status — 
xvi) Camera 3 recording status — 
xvii) Camera 4 recording status — 
xvii) Camera 5 recording status — 
xix) Camera 6 recording status — 
xx) Camera 7 recording status — 
xxi) Camera 8 recording status — 
xxii) Microphone 1 recording status 
xxii) Microphone 2 recording status 
xxiv) Microphone 3 recording status 
xxv) Microphone 4 recording status ; . 
. ; А Any microphone disconnect 
xxvi) Microphone 5 recording status 
xxvil) Microphone 6 recording status 
xxviii) Microphone 7 recording status 
xxix) Microphone 8 recording status 
xxx) Ignition status Whether ignition is ‘ON’ or ‘OFF’ 
xxxi) Emergency buttons status = 


D-5.2.5 Images Data 


In addition to the system Health status data, the mDVR 
will send image data at configured frequency with 
specific resolution (configurable) from each camera on 
the vehicle to the backend. The images will be 
accompanied with the metadata, as listed below: 


a) 


Vehicle registration number (Can be 
configured as video recorder’s identifier), 


b) Camera identifier, 
c) Date and time, and 
d) Location coordinates. 


The above metadata will also be embedded on the 
images as watermark. 


58 


D-5.3 Alert Data from CCTV System 


In case of press of any emergency button, the mDVR 
will get the input regarding the emergency alert. The 
mDVR will immediately send the emergency alert data 
to the emergency response backend along with tracking 
data. The emergency alert data will be prioritized above 
all other type of data scheduled to be sent by the device 
to the backend. 


In addition, the mDVR will also send alert data in case 
of specified events like ignition on, ignition off, etc. to 
the transport backend. A list of such alerts that CCTV 
device will send to the transport backend server is 
provided in the table below: 


IS 16833 : 2018 


SI Message Remarks 
No. 
1 Alert — Ignition 'ON? Message would be generated when Ignition is ‘ON’ 
Alert — Ignition ‘OFF’ Message would be generated when Ignition is ‘Off 
i) Alert — camera cover Message would be generated if any of the cameras is covered 
ii) Alert - Video loss Message would be generated if video is lost 
iv) Alert - mDVR enclosure opened 
v) Harsh braking Alert indicating harsh braking 
vi) Harsh acceleration Alert indicating harsh acceleration 
vii) Rash turning Alert indicating rash turning 


In case of Emergency Alert ‘ON’ system, the alert simultaneously. Primary alert will go to the Emergency 
message should be sent to dual IP addresses; that is, | Response backend (NERS/MHA) as may be notified 
the device should support minimum two IP addresses Бу the Government of India in the schema below: 


USE IN DANGER 
PRESSES THE 
PANIC BUTTON 


ЕМЕ. MSG 


DEVICE CONTINUE TO 
SEND EMR MSG AT THE 
CONFIGURED INTERVAL 


ЕМЕ. MSG 


EMR MSG 
WHEN THE VICTIM 
RECEIVES THE 

NECESSARY HELP 


STOP MSG 


STOP ACK 


Fic. 11 SCHEMATIC DIAGRAM DEPICTING THE FUNCTIONING EMERGENCY RESPONSE BACHEND SYSTEM 


59 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Primary alert will go to Emergency Response system as notified by the Government of India in the format provided 


Size 


in the table below: 
Sl Attribute Value/Description 
No. 
i) Packet Header EPB, The unique identifier for all messages from 
VTU 
ii) Message Type Message Types supported. Emergency Message 
(EMR) or Stop Message (SEM) 
ш) Vehicle ID Unique ID of the vehicle (IMEI Number) 
iv) Packet Type NM - Normal packet, SP — Stored packet 
v) Date Date and time of the location obtained from the 
location data in YY Y YMMDDhhmmss format 
vi) GPS Validity A — Valid; V — Invalid 
vii) Latitude Latitude in decimal degrees - dd.mmmmmm format 
viii) Latitude Direction N - North; S — South 
ix) Longitude Longitude in decimal degrees - dd. mmmmmm format 
x) Longitude Direction E — East; W — West 
xi) Altitude Altitude in ‘m’ (above sea level) 
xi) Speed Speed in km/h 
xil) Distance Distance calculated from previous GPS data 
xiv) Provider G - Fine GPS 
N — Coarse GPS or data from the network 
xv) Vehicle Regn. No Registration number of the Vehicle 
xvi) Reply Number The mobile number to which test response need to be 
sent 
xvii) CRC The 32 bit checksum of all the characters from the 


header up to the CRC field 


Character, 3 bytes 
Character, 2 bytes 


Character,15 bytes 
Character, 2 bytes 
Character, 14 bytes 


Character, 1 byte 
Double, 12 bytes 
Character, 1 byte 
Double, 12 bytes 
Character, 1 byte 
Double, 12 bytes 
Float, 6 bytes 

Float, 6 bytes 

Character, 1 byte 


Character, 16 bytes 
0 


8 bytes 


NOTE — Above format is indicative only. The Format will be notified by the Government of India time to time. 


D-5.3.1 SMS Fall Back 


In case of emergency state, (that is, on pressing the 
emergency button), the device will shift to the SMS 
mode in case 3G/GPRS connectivity is not available. 
In such case, the device will send the Alert message, 
system health status data and tracking data through SMS 
mode. Since SMS has the limitation of sending only 
160 characters, so the tracking data to be sent in one 
SMS will have fields - IMEI, Latitude, Direction, 
Longitude, Direction, location fix, speed, Cell ID, LAC, 
Date and Time. 


D-5.4 Data to be Sent by Backend System to CCTV 
System 


D-5.4.1 Configuration Parameters update 


There may be a requirement to change the configuration 
parameters of various CCTV System Devices from the 
back-end. The list of such configuration parameters of 
CCTV cameras and mDVR (or mNVR) that could be 
changed from the backend is provided in the table 
below: 


SI Configuration Parameter 


Remarks 


i) Camera main stream video resolution 
i) Camera main stream image quality 


Main Stream will be for local recording 


iii) | Camera main stream bitrate Only for mNVR 
iv) Camera main stream bitrate type Only for mNVR 
v) Camera main stream max bitrate Only for mNVR 
vi) Camera main stream frame rate -- 
vii) Camera main stream I Frame interval Only for mNVR 


60 


IS 16833 : 2018 


SI Configuration Parameter Remarks 
No. 
viii) Camera Sub-stream Video Resolution Camera Sub-stream will be for transmission to backend 
in case of press of Emergency button 
ix) Camera sub-stream image quality = 
x) Camera sub-stream bitrate Only for mNVR 
x1) Camera sub-stream bitrate type Only for mNVR 
xi) Camera sub-stream max bitrate Only for mNVR 
xil) Camera sub-stream frame rate — 
xiv) Camera sub-stream I frame interval Only for mNVR 
xv) Camera video recording enable/disable — 
xvi) Camera audio recording enable/disable m 
xvii) Camera name for display -- 
xviii) Camera schedule based recording — On/Off In case of camera schedule based recording — Off, it 
ill be all-day recording 
xix) Camera record schedule — week day; start In case of camera schedule based recording On onlyCan 
time; end time be different for different days of week 
xx) Camera video expired time (number of days) Time for keeping the recording in local storage. 
Recording will be permanent (will be overwritten on 
cyclic basis), in case, camera video expired time is set 
as 0. 
xxi) Camera record based on motion m: 
detection — On/Off 
xxii) Camera record based on motion == 
detection — Sensitivity 
xxii) | Camera record based on motion — 
detection — Area for Motion Detection 
xxiv) Camera pre-record time for event trigger — 
xxv) Camera post-record time for event trigger — 
xxvi) Resolution of images for sending to backend Video & snapshot of each camera 
xxvii) Frequency of sending images to backend From each camera 
xxviii) mDVR clock time To set the mDVR clock time 
xxix) mDVR post ignition-Off duration = 
xxx) Get mDVR firmware version == 
xxxi) Get mDVR protocol version = 
xxxil) Get mDVR MAC address = 
xxxiii) Get mDVR primary IP address == 
xxxiv) Set mDVR primary IP address E 
xxxv) Get mDVR secondary IP address — 
xxxvi) Set mDVR secondary IP address — 
xxxvii) Set port number — 
xxxviii) Configure vehicle registration number — 
xxxix) Change APN — 
xl) Configure time duration for emergency state E 
xl) | Get IMEI number of mDVR == 
xli)  Reboot/Reset mDVR = 
xlii) | Transmission mode Always – On, Turned = 


‘on’ by a) Emergency Button b) SMS or 
telephone or alerts from I/O 


61 


IS 16833 : 2018 


The above parameters will be applicable for both analog 
CCTV System as well as IP CCTV System. In case of 
IP CCTV system, mDVR will be read as mNVR. 


It will be possible to set the parameters at SI No. (1) to 
(xxxvi), separately for each camera, based on Camera- 
ID. 


In addition to the configuration parameters listed in 
the table above, certain additional parameters can be 
configured for mDVR or mNVR, as provided in the 
table below: 


SI Configuration Remarks 
No. Parameter 

i) Set frequency of Set or | modify 
vehicle tracking data — polling/transmission 
transmission in rate of vehicle 
ignition ‘ON’ state tracking data when 

vehicle ignition 15 
‘ON? 

i) Set frequency of Set ог modify 
vehicle tracking data — polling/transmission 
transmission in rate of vehicle 
Ignition ‘OFF’ state tracking data when 

vehicle ignition 18 
‘OFF’ 
ш) Set frequency of — 


vehicle tracking data 
transmission in 
Emergency state 


For each configuration update message, the mDVR (or 
mNVR in case of IP CCTV System) will return a 
success message on successful update. 


D-5.4.2 CCTV devices firmware upgrade — There may 
be a requirement to upgrade the firmware ofthe CCTV 
System (mDVR, mNVR or IP cameras) for enhancement 
of any functionality or removal of any error. It will be 
possible to upgrade the firmware of the CCTV System 
from the backend over-the-air. This will also include any 
upgrade of protocol of communication between CCTV 
System and backend. For upgrade of CCTV device 
firmware, the backend will first get the current firmware 
version of the CCTV device using command ‘Get mDVR 
Firmware Version’ (or Get mNVR Firmware Version or 
Get IP Camera Firmware Version). In case, the firmware 
version is not matching the latest firmware version and 
needs to be upgraded, the backend will send a message 
to the mDVR or mNVR (for both mNVR firmware as 
well as IP Camera firmware), as the case may be, with 
the new firmware file. 


For each firmware version upgrade message, the mDVR 
(or mNVR and IP Camera in case of IP CCTV System) 
will return a success message on successful upgrade. 


62 


D-6 TYPE TESTS 


The following shall constitute type tests: 


1. Image quality test (see D-8.1.1). 

2. Camera resolution test (see D-8.1.2). 

3. Camera IR test (see D-8.1.3). 

4. IP camera video compression support test 
(see D-8.1.4). 

5. Camera frame rate test (see D-8.1.5). 

6. Camera audio compression support test 
(see D-8.1.6). 

7. mDVR/nDVR video compression support test 
(see D-8.1.7). 

8. mDVR/nDVR audio compression support test 
(see D-8.1.8). 

9. mDVR/nDVR recording resolution test 
(see D-8.1.9). 

10. mDVR/mNVR dual stream capability testing 
(see D-8.1.10). 

11. mDVR/mNVR recording modes testing 
(see D-8.1.11). 

12. mDVR/mNVR video overwriting testing 
(see D-8.1.12). 

13. mDVR/mNVR data download testing 
(see D-8.1.13). 

14. mDVR/mNVR data communication testing 
(see D-8.1.14). 

15. mNVR Power-over-ethernet (PoE) test 
(see D-8.1.15). 

16. IP camera and mNVR ONVIF compliance 
testing (see D-8.1.16). 

17. Performance parametric test (Tri temperature/ 
tri voltage) (see D-8.2.1). 

18. Shock and vibration test (see D-8.2.2). 

19. Ingress protection (IP) (see D-8.2.3). 

20. Over voltage protection test (see D-8.2.4). 

21. EMI/EMC test (see D-8.2.5). 

22. Load dump test, Pulse 5a (see D-8.2.6). 

23. Reverse polarity protection without fuse 
(see D-8.2.7). 

24. Test for wiring harness (see D-8.2.8). 

25. High temperature test (see D-8.3.1). 

26. Cold test (see D-8.3.2). 

27. Damp heat test (see D-8.3.3). 

28. Insulation resistance test (see D-8.3.4). 

29. Thermal shock (see D-8.3.5). 

30. Salt spray test (see D-8.3.6). 

31. High voltage test (see D-8.3.7). 

32. USB port overloading Test (see D-8.3.8). 

33. Endurance test (see D-8.3.9). 

34. Free fall test (see D-8.3.10). 


35. Protocol testing (see D-8.4). 


36. Additional testing for mDVR and mNVR 
(see D-9). 


Criteria for approval: A minimum of three samples shall 
be submitted for testing together with the relevant data. 
The testing authority shall issue a type approval 
certificate if the CCTV system is found to comply with 
the requirements of the type tests. 


The samples shall be tested as per the test sequence in 
Table 16. 


The sequence of tests on sample sets S1 to S3 shall be 
as mentioned in Table 16 and is subject to agreement 
between manufacturer and the test agency. 


In case of failure in one or more type tests, the testing 


IS 16833 : 2018 


authority may call for fresh samples not exceeding twice 
the number of original samples and subject them to 
test(s) in which failure occurred. If, in repeated test(s) 
no failure occurs, the test may be considered to have 
been satisfactory. 


D-7 ACCEPTANCE TESTS 
The following shall constitute acceptance tests: 


a) Functional testing (see C-7.1), and 
b) Protocol testing (see C-7.4). 


D-8 CATEGORIES OF TESTS 
D-8.1 Functional Testing 


Functional testing will be carried out to assess the 
performance of the CCTV devices on important 


Table 16 Sample-Wise Test Sequence 
(Clause D-6) 


= 


SI Sample Set No. 
No. Tests 


(1) (2) 
i) 
ii) 


Image quality test 
Camera resolution test 


— 
e Е Crd 
[ivy ранна 
оаа 
у) ооо 
Сш) [mpvmmDVRvieocompesionsuponws — 1-77 
Сш) | mDVR/mDVR audio compression supporte — — —  — —  — — | X | T Sd 
[ i) руку оон 
[у рукам dual stream capability esting — — — — — | X |_| | 
[ x) | mbVRimNVR recording modestesing — | Х | Too 
[ i | mDVRmNVR ооа 
эш) | mOVR/mNVR data download testing ——  — —  — — — | XT Cd Sd 
[ xivy рукам data communication esting 4 


mNVR power-over-ethernet (PoE) test 


PA] А АБ АБА А OST OS | Ead Eai АЕ АЕ: 


IP camera and mNVR ONVIF compliance testing a | БЕНЕН ШЕШЕНІ 


х 


Performance parametric test (Tri temperature/tri voltage) aa Ea SSS 
Shock and vibration test } 
xix) | Ingress protection (IP) 


x 
x 
ii 
wu) | Reverse polarity protection without ise — ] 


ws 
— 
[ 
rn 
[ 
=== 
о н 
онн 
— 
E 
[ 
— 
[ 
Esc 


Е 


x 
5 

ENE) A] & 
Я 4 4 7 


xxvii) | Damp heat test 
xxviii) | Insulation resistance test 
xxix) | Thermal shock test 
X) | Salt spray test 
xxxi) | High voltage test 

xxxii) | USB port overloading test 

xxxiii) | Endurance test 
Fre fall text Zo es ae 
Protocol testing 


= |5) 
ээм | Additonal testing ортака х 
63 


x 


х 


| 


P 


IS 16833 : 2018 


functional aspects as below: 


‘Supplier provided Application would be used for 
performance verification, wherever required’. 


D-8.1.1 /mage Quality Test 
Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras. 


The CCTV devices in vehicles are subjected to a wide 
range of light condition such as bright light, low light, 
etc. The CCTV cameras will be tested for image quality 
in varying light conditions including bright light at a 
spot, overall bright light, low light and in no light with 
IR on. 


Acceptance criteria: The images captured by the camera 
in different light conditions should be clear without any 
blur or haziness. 


D-8.1.2 Camera Resolution Test 
Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras. 


The CCTV cameras will be tested for meeting the 
camera resolution specification. The analog camera will 
be tested for meeting the requirement of 700 TV Lines, 
720p, 1 280 (H) x 720 (V) resolution. 


The IP camera will be tested for meeting the 
requirement of one megapixel, 720p, 1 280 (H) x 720 
(V) resolution. 


Acceptance criteria: The supplier would provide self- 
certification for the above specification. 


D-8.1.3 Camera IR Test 
Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras. 


The infrared capability of CCTV cameras is used to 
capture images in low light or no light conditions. The 
cameras will be tested for their IR capability. The 
cameras should be able to switch on the IR and shift to 
monochrome image capture automatically in case the 
brightness level is less than 0.01 lux. The camera should 
automatically switch off the IR and shift back to colour 
image capture, in case light conditions improve. 


With IR on, the camera should be able to capture clear 
image for objects up to 10 m range. 


Acceptance criteria: The camera switches IR on and 
off automatically and capture clear images for objects 
up to the specified IR range. 


D-8.1.4 ІР Camera Video Compression Support 
Applicable for: IP cameras. 


The IP CCTV cameras should support H.264, MPEG-4 
and M-JPEG video compression standards. The IP 
CCTV cameras will be tested for supporting all these 
compression standards. The future IP CCTV cameras 
which support H.265 video compression standard will 


64 


be tested for this also. 


Acceptance criteria: The IP CCTV camera should 
support H.264, MPEG-4 and MJPEG video 
compression standards. The future IP CCTV cameras 
should support H.265 video compression standard also. 


D-8.1.5 ІР camera Frame Rate 
Applicable for: IP cameras. 


The ІР CCTV cameras should be able to capture images 
in varying frame rate ranging from 1 fps to 25 fps for 
all resolutions supported by the camera. The capability 
of camera to capture images at different frame rates 
will be tested at different resolutions (equivalent to 
720p/4CIF, 2CIF, CIF and QCIF). 


Acceptance criteria: The IP CCTV camera should be 
able to capture images at varying frame rates ranging 
from 1 to 25 fps at all supported resolutions. 


D-8.1.6 ІР Camera Audio Compression Support 
Applicable for: IP cameras. 


The IP CCTV cameras should support G.711 and G.726 
audio compression standards. The IP CCTV cameras 
will be tested for supporting both these compression 
standards. 


Acceptance criteria: The IP CCTV camera should 
support G.711 and G.726 audio compression standards. 


D-8.1.7 mDVR/mNVR Video Compression Support 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should support H.264, 
video compression standards. 


Acceptance criteria: The supplier would provide self- 
certification for the above specification. 


D-8.1.8 mDVR/mNVR Audio Compression Support 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should support G.711 or 
G.726 audio compression standards. The video recorder 
will be tested for supporting all these compression 
standards. 


Acceptance criteria: The supplier would provide self- 
certification for the above specification. 


D-8.1.9 mDVR/mNVR Recording Resolution 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should be capable of 
recording video at different resolutions which would 
be configurable individually for each channel. The 
video recorder will be tested for recording of video at 
different resolutions individually for each channel. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should be 
capable of recording video at 720p/4CIF, 2CIF, CIF 
and QCIF resolutions (equivalent for mNVR) set 
individually for different channels. 


D-8.1.10 mDVR/mNVR Dual Stream Capability 
Testing 


Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should be capable of 
capturing video in dual stream mode in which both 
streams can be configured separately for each camera 
resolution and frame rate. The video stream at high 
resolution and frame rate is used for recording in local 
storage whereas the other stream at lower resolution 
and frame rate can be transmitted to backend server 
over-the-air, if required. The video recorder will be 
tested for recording of video in dual stream at different 
camera resolutions and frame rates set individually for 
each stream. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should be 
capable of recording video in dual stream, each stream 
at different camera resolution and frame rate. 


D-8.1.11 mDVR/mNVR Recording Modes Testing 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should be capable of 
initiating and stopping recording in the following 
modes: 


a) 


Normal mode — The video recorder records 
continuously. 

b) Schedule based — The video recorder records 
as per the specified schedule. The schedule 
can be configured for different time spans for 
different week days. 

c) Alarm triggered — The recorder starts 
recording in case an alarm is triggered and 
continues the same for a pre-specified 
duration. 

d) Motion detection — The recorder starts 
recording on detection of motion in the pre 
specified detection zone and continues the 
same for a pre-specified duration. 

e) Event based pre and post recording — In case 
of an event or alarm, the recorder tags the 
recording for a specified duration preceding 
and post event. The durations for tagging of 
recording pre and post event can be configured 
separately in the range of 1 to 30 min in steps 


of 1 min. 

Shut down delay after ignition off — The 
recorder shuts down after a specified duration 
after the vehicle ignition 1s switched off. The 
shut-down delay duration can be configured 


65 


IS 16833 : 2018 


up to 24 h. In case of deliberate battery cut 
off, the recording up to ‘break point’ to be 
ensured before shut down, without any loss 
of stored data. 


The video recorder will be tested for each ofthe above 
configurations for different values ofthe parameters in 
the steps of 5 min, covering the entire range specified 
for the parameter. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should be 
capable of recording in each of the above modes for 
the entire range of values specified for different modes. 


D-8.1.12 mDVR/mNVR Video Overwriting Testing 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid will have limited storage 
capacity to store the video. So, the video recorder 
should be capable of overwriting the old video on FIFO 
(first in first out) basis. Also, the event tagged video 
recording should not be overwritten for a configurable 
period. The video recorder will be tested for capability 
of overwriting old video on FIFO basis and to retain 
the event tagged video for a minimum period of 15 
days. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should be 
capable of overwriting the old video when the storage 
capacity is about to exhaust. The video recorder should 
be able to retain the event tagged video for a minimum 
period of 15 days. 


D-8.1.13 mDVR/mNVR Data Download Testing 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should support down- 
loading of data (video and audio files) from its local 
storage to an external device such as a laptop. It should 
be possible to connect the external device to the video 
recorder through network cable on RJ45 port and open 
its user interface in a standard browser using a standard 
URL such as http://dvr (or any other text specified by 
MoRTH) without having to configure the laptop’s 
network settings. 


After entering user-id and password (specified by 
MoRTH), it will be possible to search, view, select and 
download video clips of desired duration and date/time 
in standard formats such as (.ау1) or (.mpg). It will not 
be possible to delete any video or change configuration 
settings using this set of user-id and password. There 
will be a separate set of user-id and password for setting/ 
modifying configuration parameters of the mDVR and 
mNVR. 


The video recorder will be tested for download of video 
and audio data from its local memory, as per the above 
process. Also, it will not be possible for the user to 


IS 16833 : 2018 


delete any video or change any configuration settings. 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should support 
the capability of downloading video and audio data as 
per the above process. 


D-8.1.14 mDVR/mNVR Data Communication Testing 
Applicable for: mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid. 


The mDVR/mNVR/Hybrid should support data transfer 
to backend server on both 3G as well as 2G 
connectivity. In case the vehicle moves to an area where 
3G coverage is not present, the video recorder should 
automatically shift to GPRS (2G) connectivity to send 
the system health status data. Also, in such case, on 
press of an emergency button, the video recorder should 
automatically shift to the self-adaptive transmission 
mode and send the video from cameras to the backend 
server over 3G,GPRS (2G). 


The video recorder will be tested for data transfer on 4 
G and 3G, 2G and automatically shift from one 
connectivity to the other. The video recorder will also 
be tested for the capability to shift to the self-adaptive 
transmission mode and send the video from cameras to 
the backend server over 3G, GPRS (2G). 


Acceptance criteria: The video recorder should support 
data transfer on both 3G, GPRS (2G) and automatically 
shift to lower frame rate and resolution when 3G is not 
available for video transfer to backend. 


D-8.1.15 mNVR Power-Over-Ethernet (PoE) Test 
Applicable for: mNVR/Hybrid. 


mNVR/Hybrid will be required to provide power to 
cameras over ethernet. The mNVR will be tested for 
its capability to provide power to all the cameras 
connected to it through PoE, in varying power 
requirement conditions such as camera IRs switched 
on or switched off. 


Acceptance criteria: The mNVR should be able to 
provide power to all the cameras connected to it over 
PoE for all the power requirement conditions of the 
cameras. 


D-8.1.16 ZP Camera and mNVR ONVIF Compliance 
Testing 


Applicable for: IP Cameras and mNVR/Hybrid. 


The IP CCTV cameras and mNVR should be ONVIF 
profile S compliant to ensure integration of IP CCTV 
equipment from different suppliers. The IP CCTV 
cameras and mNVR will be tested for compliance to 
ONVIF profile S standards. 


Acceptance criteria: The IP CCTV camera and mNVR 
should be compliant to ONVIF Profile S standards. 


66 


D-8.1.17 SIM Testing 
Applicable for: mnNVR/mDVR/Hybrid. 


This test is to check the suitability of the SIM and 
communication module. The test shall be conducted to 
determine the effectiveness and operation of the GPRS 
module with OTA network switching capabilities on 
demand as well as automatically in real-time. The test 
consists of two type of testing as below: 


a) The device would be tested to perform as per 

the protocol (see D-8.4) using an embedded 

SIM. 

The GPRS module and SIM, shall support: 

1) SMS, data (GPRS, TCP/IP), and 

2) Support multiple network OTA switching 
capabilities (On demand as well as 
automatic switching on real-time basis). 


b) 


Acceptance criteria: In the testing, vendors has to 
demonstrate the embedded SIM based tracking and 
multiple network OTA switching capabilities (On 
demand as well as automatic switching on real-time 
basis) for effective network management and 
transmission. 


D-8.2 Performance and Durability Testing 


The CCTV devices (cameras and video recorders) and 
optional add on ‘Driver Console’ will need to be tested 
for performance in the challenging vehicle 
environments of vibration, dust, fluctuating power 
supply, etc. 


D-8.2.1 Performance Parametric Test (Tri temperature/ 
tri voltage) 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR and optional add on ‘Driver Console’. 


During testing, device shall be kept inside test chamber 
in power ON condition. (System should be stabilized 
for minimum duration of 5 min at each condition. At 
each test point the system will be powered on and shut 
down five times with a duration of 1 min ‘ON’ and 1 
min ‘OFF’ time). 

The temperatures are: -25°C, Room temperature, 
+70°С. 


Following are the various voltages: 


a) For 12V System: 9V, 13.5V, 16У. 
b) For 24V System: 18V, 27V, 32V. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the performance 
parametric test shall meet the requirements of functional 
tests. 


D-8.2.2 Shock and Vibration Test 
Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 


and mNVR and optional add on ‘Driver Console’. 


The CCTV devices (cameras and video recorders) in 
vehicles are subjected to a harsh environment in terms 
of shocks and vibrations and that too for extended 
period of time. Two tests are recommended based on 
the nature of application environment. 


Shock: Shock test is performed to provide a degree of 
confidence that the device can physically and 
functionally withstand the relatively infrequent, non- 
repetitive shocks encountered in transportation 
environments. This test provides an assessment of the 
effect of the shocks on the performance of the device. 
The test shall be performed as per IS 9000 (Part 7). 
Severity level = 15g, Impact duration = 11 min, Impact 
type = Half sine, Total number of impacts = 9 (3 on 
each axis). 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the shock test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


Vibration: The test shall be performed as per IS 9000 
(Part 8). The test specimen mounted on a suitable 
support shall be rigidly fixed on a suitable vibrating 
machine constructed to produce simple harmonic 
function (total amplitude of 1.5 mm) and shall be 
subjected to vibration through a frequency range of 10- 
55-10 Hz in a sweep period of 1 min with continuously 
varying frequencies. The vibration shall be applied for 
not less than 1 h in the directions of each ofthe 3 major 
axes of the light. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the vibration test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.2.3 Ingress Protection (IP) 


Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras, MDVR/NDVR/ 
Hybrid. 


The CCTV cameras must be able to work in dusty 
environment that are typically encountered by the public 
transport vehicles where these would be installed. IP 
rating (IS/IEC 60529) is used for specifying the 
environmental protection characteristics of the CCTV 
cameras. The cameras will be tested for dust and water 
ingress according to IP 66 (without audio) & IP 65 (with 
audio) test specification. MDVR/NDVR shall comply 
with IP54. 


Acceptance criteria: The device should be IPXX (as 
applicable) compliant or better. 


D-8.2.4 Over Voltage Protection Test 
Applicable for: Analog and IP cameras. 


Test shall be conducted as per ISO 16750-2. Applicable 
devices shall be connected as a system as per vehicle 
configuration. (This is in case of controller alone being 
powered by vehicle battery). Apply 18 V for 12 V 


67 


IS 16833 : 2018 


system or apply 36 V for 24 system on power lines for 
60 min to units which are powered directly by the 
vehicle battery. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the vibration test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.2.5 EMI/EMC 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) and 
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) tests are 
performed to assess whether a CCTV device (camera 
or video recorder) performs its intended functions in 
the electromagnetic environment to which it would be 
exposed. Further, the device should not generate 
electromagnetic disturbances that may influence other 
equipment in the vicinity. 


Acceptance criteria: The device should meet the EMI/ 
EMC requirements as per AIS 004 (Part 3). 


D-8.2.6 Load Dump Test, Pulse 5a 
Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid. 
For 12 V systems: 


A voltage spike of 65V, 4 О, 200 ms, Pulse-5a as per 
standard ISO 7637-2. 


For 24 V systems: 


A voltage spike of 123V, 8 О, 200 ms, Pulse-5a as per 
standard ISO 7637-2. 


Acceptance criteria: Device shall meet the requirements 
of functional tests, after the load dump test. 


D-8.2.7 Reverse Polarity Protection Without Fuse 
Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid. 


The device to be tested should be connected to a 
reversed voltage of 14 V for 12 V systems and 27 V for 
24 V systems for 2 min after connecting the system to 
the suitable circuit. 


Acceptance criteria: Device shall meet the requirements 
of functional tests, after the reverse polarity test. 


D-8.2.8 Test for Wiring Harness 


Applicable for: All wiring for analog cameras, IP 
cameras, mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid. 


Flammability Test: The wiring harness used in the 
device should be tested for flammability as per IS 2465. 


Electrical Properties: The wiring harness used in the 
device should be tested for electrical properties as per 
AIS 028. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


D-8.3 Environmental Test 


The following testing should be carried out as part of 
environmental testing: 


D-8.3.1 High Temperature Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 9000 
(Part 3/Sec 5). The CCTV devices (cameras and video 
recorders) shall be subjected to temperature of 70 + 
2°C for 16 h with device in working condition. The 
recovery period shall be 2 h. 


Acceptance criteria: Device during and after the dry 
heat test shall meet the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.3.2 Cold Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The test shall be carried out in accordance with IS 9000 
(Part 2/Sec 4). The device under test shall be subjected 
to temperature of —10 + 2°C for 2 h with device in 
working condition. The recovery period shall be 2 h. 


Acceptance criteria: Device during and after the cold 
test shall meet the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.3.3 Damp Heat Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The device under test should be tested according to 
IS 9000 (Part 5/Sec 2). The test is carried out at +25° 
to +55° C, humidity 95 percent. Six cycles (each test 
cycle of 24h) should be run with device in off condition. 
Functional test shall be carried out with power in ‘On’ 
condition at start of 2nd, 4th and 6th cycle. 


Acceptance criteria: Device during and after the test 
shall meet the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.3.4 Insulation Resistance Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


Test shall be conducted as per ISO 16750-2 after damp 
heat test mentioned in point 4 of the Annexure F. 
System/components shall remain 0.5 h at room 
temperature after the damp heat test. 


Test shall be conducted with a voltage of 500 V d.c. 
Insulation resistance shall be > 1 MQ. 


Acceptance criteria: No arcing or puncturing of 


68 


insulation allowed shall be observed after the insulation 
resistance test. 


D-8.3.5 Thermal Shock 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid. 


Thermal shock test is carried out to determine if the 
CCTV devices (cameras and video recorders) can 
withstand sudden changes in the temperature of the 
surrounding environment without experiencing physical 
damage or deterioration in performance. The device 
shall be tested as per relevant parts of IS 9000 
(Part 14/Sec 2). Exposure time would be 3 h/cycle and 
number of cycles would be two. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.3.6 Salt Spray Test 


Applicable for: Analog cameras, IP cameras, mDVR 
and mNVR/Hybrid and optional add on ‘Driver 
Console’. 


The salt spray test is conducted to check corrosion 
resistance of CCTV devices (cameras and video 
recorders). The device should be tested according to 
4.8 of IS 10250 for 96 h. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.3.7 High Voltage Test 


Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid; Analog 
cameras and IP cameras (if directly connected to 
battery). 


The test is conducted to ensure service life requirements 
and functionality. The device under test shall be 
operated for 60 min at 18 V for 12 V systems and 36 V 
for 24 V systems. This test is as per ISO 16750-2. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.3.8 USB Port Overloading Test 
Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid. 


The USB port pin and ground pin would be short- 
circuited with external wire in ‘ON’ condition. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.3.9 Endurance Test 


Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid and 
Optional Add on ‘Driver Console’. 


The device under test shall be suitably placed at an 
ambient temperature preferably at 27 + 2°C. The system 
shall be connected ina suitable circuit. The test voltage 


at terminals shall be 14 V and 28 V for systems rated 
for 12 V and 24 V, respectively. The system shall be 
operated for 100 000 cycles. Each cycle shall consist 
of switching ‘ON’ and ‘OFF’ the system with dwell 
time as follows: 


Dwell time: 105+ 1 5 (“ОМ condition), 45+ 1 s ‘OFF’ 
condition). 


At the end of the test, the system shall be brought down 
to room temperature. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the test shall meet 
the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.3.10 Free Fall Test 
Applicable for: mDVR and mNVR/Hybrid. 


The free fall test shall be conducted as per IS 9000 
(Part 7/Sec 4) at 500 mm. 


Acceptance criteria: Device after the free fall test shall 
meet the requirements of functional tests. 


D-8.4 Protocol Testing 


D-8.4.1 Protocol is a set of rules to be followed by the 
device while sending data to the backend. The protocol 
comprises data update rate, number of fields, start 
character, end character, alert type, etc. Protocol testing 
involves checking the compliance of data sets received 
by the backend against the protocol both with respect 
to the data fields as well the format. It is expected that 
the data coming to a central server should be exactly 
as required under the protocol. 


D-8.4.2 The following testing will be performed as part 
of the protocol testing: 


a) The capability of the video recorder to send 
various types of data messages to the server 
in the protocol specified for the corresponding 
message. 

b) The capability of the video recorder to receive 
and correctly interpret messages from the 
server with respect to configuration update. 
c) The capability of the video recorder to 
upgrade its firmware over-the-air on receipt 


of the same from server. 


D-9 ADDITIONAL TESTING FOR MDVR AND 
MNVR 


D-9.1 In addition to the testing specified in Annex C, 
the following testing will be carried out for mDVR and 
mNVR with respect to vehicle tracking related features. 
The functional tests (a) to (h) mentioned below may be 
done either inside the test lab using a GPS simulator or 
outside the lab by other methods as decided by the 
authorized test agency. 


69 


IS 16833 : 2018 


a) Location accuracy test, 

b) Cold start time to first fix (TTFF) test, 

c) Warm start time to first fix test, 

d) Hot start time to first fix test, 

€) Acquisition sensitivity test, 

f) Tracking sensitivity test, 

g) Interference testing, 

h) Multipath testing, 

j) SIM testing, 

k) Protocol testing with respect to tracking data, 
and 

m) Memory storage test. 


D-9.1.1 Functional Testing 


Functional testing will be carried out to assess the 
performance of the tracking device on important 
functional aspects as below: 


a) Location accuracy test 


The various types of location accuracy tests 
to be performed on the device are as follows: 
1) Location accuracy test compares the 
variation between multiple location data 
obtained by the device under the cold/ 
warm/hot start mode while the device 
remains at the same location. 
Acceptance criteria: 2.5 m СЕР or 6 m 
2DRMS. 


Moving or Dynamic location accuracy 
test compares the variation between the 
location data obtained by the device with 
the true positions at multiple locations 
along a test path. 


2) 


Acceptance criteria: 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 

2DRMS. 
Cold-start time to first fix (TTFF) test —This 
test is used to determine the time taken for 
first fix during a cold start of the device. The 
device in this test is placed into a cold start 
state. The time it takes for the device to 
determine its first good location fix is 
recorded. The cold start test is performed 
several times and the results are averaged. 


b) 


Acceptance criteria: Should be less than 40 s 
at (-)148 dBm. 


c) Warm-start time to first fix test — This test is 
used to determine the time taken for first fix 
during a warm start of the device. In this test 
the device is started in warm start mode and 
time taken by device to determine the first 
valid location fix is recorded. This is done 
several times and results are averaged. 


Acceptance criteria: The warm start TTFF 


IS 16833 : 2018 


d) 


e) 


g) 


should be less than 30 s at (-) 148 dBm. 


Hot-start time to first fix test —This test is 
used to determine the time taken for first fix 
during a hot start ofthe device. In this test the 
device is started in hot start mode and time 
taken by device to determine the first valid 
location fix is recorded. This test is performed 
several times and results are averaged. 


Acceptance criteria: The hot start TTFF 
should be less than 5 s. 

Acquisition sensitivity test —Acquisition 
sensitivity refers to the minimum signal level 
at which the device is able to successfully 
perform a cold start TTFF. The acquisition 
sensitivity test is a simulated signal test. A 
device cold start is performed, and the time 
to acquisition is measured. Signal levels are 
then progressively decreased until the device 
can no longer acquire the location. This signal 
strength is recorded. 

Acceptance criteria: The acquisition 
sensitivity should be equal to or better than 
(-) 148 dBm. 

Test setup for the acquisition sensitivity 
receiver test 1s as shown in Fig. 13. Set the 
simulator to output GPS signal to a particular 
location with a very level so that the tracking 
is not possible. Gradually increase the signal 
level that allows the receiver to successfully 
perform a cold start TTFF within a specified 
time frame. The minimum signal level that 
allows acquisition 1s referred as to the 
acquisition sensitivity. 

Tracking sensitivity test — Tracking sensitivity 
refers to the minimum signal level at which 
the device is able to successfully maintain the 
location fix. The acquisition sensitivity test 1s 
a simulated signal test. Test setup for the 
tracking sensitivity receiver test is as shown 
in Fig. 14. The device under this test is locked 
on to the simulator's output frequency and the 
simulator power output is lowered until the 
lock is lost. Multiple repetition ofthe test with 
different satellite geometries ensures that an 
accurate average measure 1s recorded. 
Acceptance criteria: The tracking sensitivity 
should be equal to or better than (-) 165 dBm. 
Interference testing —Interference testing is 
a type of test, in which cold start/hot start test 
are performed with device exposed to 
interfering signals and the performance as 
recorded. Test setup for the receiver radio 
frequency interference test is as shown in Fig. 
14. In this test, the GPS receiver is turned on 
and allowed to achieve a location fix. The 


70 


h) 


j 


jamming signal is then added to the GPS signal 
at a level that is detectable to the GPS receiver. 
The jamming signal power level is increased 
in 1 dB increments until the first degradation 
ofthe GPS receiver is noticed. This is typically 
a dropped satellite. The jamming signal power 
level is again slowly increased until the GPS 
receiver loses its 3D navigation fix. 
Acceptance criteria: The Interference should 
not result in any degradation ofthe cold start/ 
hot start TTFF times. In addition, it should 
not result in any degradation of the absolute 
location accuracy required and the same 
should be 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 2DRMS. 


Multipath testing — This test is a simulated 
frequency test conducted to determine the 
effect of multipath signals. The signal from a 
single satellite is simulated to arrive at the 
device via two or more paths. One path is 
typically a direct path, and other paths are 
typically a reflection of the same signal from 
building or structure. Multipath testing 1s a 
kind of a meta-test in that some of the above 
tests are done with the addition of multi-path 
simulation of one or more satellites by the GPS 
signal simulator. 
Acceptance criteria: The multipath should not 
result in any degradation of the cold start/hot 
start TTFF times. In addition, it should not 
result in any degradation of the absolute 
location accuracy required and the same 
should be 2.5 m CEP or 6 m 2DRMS. 
SIM testing — This test is to check the 
suitability of the SIM and communication 
module. The test shall be conducted to 
determine the effectiveness and operation of 
the GPRS module with OTA network 
switching capabilities on demand as well as 
automatically in real-time. The test consists 
of two type of testing as below: 

1) The device would be tested to perform 
as per the protocol (see A-7.4) using an 
embedded SIM. 

2) TheGPRS module and SIM, shall support: 
i) SMS, data (GPRS, TCP/IP), and 


i) Support multiple network OTA 
switching capabilities (On demand as 
well as automatic switching on real- 
time basis). 

Acceptance criteria: In the testing, vendors has 
to demonstrate the embedded SIM based 
tracking and multiple network OTA switching 
capabilities (On demand as well as automatic 
switching on real-time basis) for effective 
network management and transmission. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


MEASURING SETUP 
SIMULATOR 


Fic. 12 Location ACCURACY TEST 


R F TEST CHAMBER 


SIMULATOR 


RF ABSORBER 
MATERIAL 


DUAL POLORIZED 
MEASUREMENT 
ANTENNA 


MEASUREMENT 
SIGNAL PATH 


MULTI-AXIS 


POSITIONER 
FROM OPEN 


CONTROL LINES 


AAAA ДААА ДЕХА 
быз л. V жез. Ч бар. Т ДВА V АБ, Y ZUR V ИР Ч Ма ЧЧ QUAL MAL GROS Т O. Т Баң Т ЫА Y ТІГГІГІ 


Fic. 13 ACQUISITION SENSITIVITY TEST 


MEASURING SETUP 
SIMULATOR 


JAMMER 


Fic. 14 INTERFERENCE TESTING 


71 


IS 16833 : 2018 


D-9.1.2 Protocol Testing 


Protocol is a set of rules to be followed by the device 
while sending data to the backend. The protocol 
comprises data update rate, number of fields, start 
character, end character, alert type, etc. Protocol testing 
involves checking the compliance of data sets received 
by the backend against the protocol both with respect 
to the data fields as well the format. It is expected that 
the data coming to a central server should be exactly 
as required under the protocol. Table 17 mentions the 
validation process for the protocol communication. 


The following test would be performed along with the 
protocol testing of the device: 


a) Memory storage — The device should support 
40 000 or more positional logs/packets. This is 
a functional test and the device will be simulated 
to bein поп – GPRS coverage area and the logs 
will be maintained. The capacity of logging will 
be checked by monitoring the logs on the device. 


b) Messages and alerts from devices —Table 18 
contains the listing ofalerts that need to come 
from the tracking devices. These alerts are 
applicable for both live packets as well as the 
history packets. 


D-10 INSTALLATION GUIDELINES 


D-10.1 Number and Indicative Layout of Cameras 
in Different Types of Vehicles 
The guiding principles on the number of cameras and 
their layout in vehicles will be as follows: 
a) Minimum number of cameras in various types 
of vehicles shall be as set out in the table below: 


SI Vehicle Type Minimum 
No. Number of 
Cameras 
1) Standard buses 3 
i) Midi buses 2 
ш) Articulated buses 5 
iv) Double-Decker 5 


buses 


b) АП the passenger doors of the bus should be 
adequately covered by CCTV cameras in a 
way that image of each passenger boarding 
the bus is captured. 

c) The overall length of the vehicle is suitably 
covered by CCTV cameras in a way that any 
incident happening in the vehicle is adequately 
covered. The coverage should be sufficient to 
capture the profile of the passengers involved 
in the incident in a way that the same coupled 
with the images captured by the cameras 
covering the doors helps in identification of 
the people involved in the incident. 


d) Indicative layouts for different types of 
vehicles are provided below: 


D-10.2 Positioning of Emergency Buttons 


The number of Emergency buttons and their positioning 
in different types of vehicles will be based on the length, 
seating and interior layout of the vehicles. One 
emergency button will be installed within easy reach 
of the driver. Other emergency buttons will be installed 
in the vehicle on both sides, in such a way that they are 
within easy reach of the passengers and the distance 
between two buttons is not more than 3 m. 


D-10.3 Power Supply 


The mDVR shall be powered from the battery of the 
vehicles. Typically in India, the vehicles work on 12 V 
or 24 V battery. Thus the mDVRs should be capable of 
working on a wide range of voltage (say 8 to 32 V), in 
order to account for the fluctuations of the vehicle 
battery voltage. Also, it should be possible to have a 
delayed shut-down after ignition off, so that cameras 
can keep on recording for a specified period (say 1 h) 
after ignition switch-off. 


Vehicle power interface shall have, 


a) onecommon ground linked to vehicle chassis, 

b) one permanent power supply (12/24V) 
connected to the vehicle battery, and 

c) one non-permanent power line (12/24V) 
connect to the battery after ignition. 


D-10.4 Location and Mounting of CCTV System 


Safety and security of the CCTV system devices 1s of 
the primary importance in the surveillance system. 
Vehicle shall be subject to vibration and shocks which 
can damage the mDVR/mNVR and CCTV cameras. 
Even harsh weather, humidity, water and dust ingress 
can also severely degrade the performance of the 
surveillance system. Thus fixing/mounting arrangements 
of mDVRs/mNVR, CCTV Cameras and cabling are of 
prime importance. The key parameters which need 
attention for the safety and security ofthe mDVR/mNVR 
and CCTV cameras are as mentioned below: 


a) Location of mDVR/mNVR — The mDVR/ 
mNVR should preferably be installed out of 
the reach and sight of the passengers. This is 
essential to minimize vandalism/tampering 
attacks on the mDVR/mNVR. 


b) Mounting —The mounting ofthe mDVR/mNVR 
should be resistant to vibrations and shocks. The 
mounting arrangement of mDVR/mNVR should 
ensure that it is vandal and tamper proof. 


D-10.5 Antennas 


Antenna for GPS/3G should be enclosed in a pipe or 
casing to prevent tampering of the cables. 


IS 16833 : 2018 


Table 17 Protocol Testing Parameters 


(Clause D-9.1.2) 


SI Field Description 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) 
i) Start Character $ 
ii) Header The header of the packet/identifier 
ii) Vendor ID Vendor identification header 
iv) Firmware Version Version details of the Firmware used in EX.1.0.0 
v) Packet Type Specify the packet type — 
NR = Normal 
EA = Emergency alert 
TA = Tamper alert 
HP = Health packet 
IN = Ignition On 
IF = Ignition Off 
BD = Battery disconnect 
BR = Battery reconnect 
BL = Battery low 
vi) Packet Status L=Live or H= History 
vii) IMEI Identified of the sending unit. 15 digit standard unique IMEI no. 
vii) Vehicle Registration No. Mapped vehicle registration number 
ix) GPS Fix 1 = GPS fix OR 0 = GPS invalid 
x) Date Date value as per GPS date time (ddmmyy) 
xi) Time Time value as per GPS date time in UTC format (hhmmss) 
xii) Latitude Latitude value in decimal degrees (with minimum 6 decimal places) 
xii) Latitude Direction Latitude direction. 
For example, N=North; S= South 
xiv) Longitude Longitude value in decimal degrees (with minimum 6 decimal places) 
xv) Longitude Direction Longitude Direction. 
For example, E=East; W= West 
xvi) Speed Speed in km/h 
xvii) Heading Course over ground in degrees 
xvii) No. of Satellites Number of satellites available for fix 
xix) Altitude Altitude of the device in meters 
xxi) PDOP Positional dilution of precision 
xxii) НООР Horizontal dilution of precision 
xxii) Network Operator Name Name of Network Operator. 
xxiv) Ignition 1= Ign On; 0 = Ign Off 
xxv) Main Power Status 0 = Vehicle Battery Disconnected 
1= Vehicle Battery Reconnected 
xxvi) Main Input Voltage Indicator showing source voltage in ‘У? 
xxvii) Internal Battery Voltage Indicator for level of battery charge remaining 
xxvii) Emergency Status 1= “Оп”; 0 = ‘Off 
xxix) Tamper Alert C = Cover Closed ; О = Cover Open 
xxx) GSM Signal Strength Value ranging from 0—31 
xxxi) МСС Mobile country code 
xxxi) ММС Mobile network code 
xxxii) LAC Location area code 
xxxiv) Cell ID GSM Cell ID 
xxxv) NMR (neighbouring Cell ID) Neighbouring 4 cell ID along with their LAC and signal strength 
xxxvi) Digital Input Status 4 external digital input status (Status of Input 1 to Input 3 (O=Off; 1=On)) 
xxxvii Digital Output Status 2 external digital output status 
(0—'Off; 1=’On’) 
xxxvii) Frame Number Sequence Number of the messages (000001 to 999999) 
xxxix) Checksum Insures No error in transmission (optional) 
xl) Епа Character Indicated end of the frame 


73 


IS 16833 : 2018 


xii) 
xiii) 
xiv) 


xv) 


NOTE — In case of Emergency Alert ON system, the alert message should go in the format given in Table 19. This emergency alert 


Message 


(2) 
Location Update 
Location Update (history) 
Alert — Disconnect from main battery 
Alert — Low battery 


Alert — Low battery removed 

Alert — Connect back to main battery 
Alert — Ignition ON 

Alert — Ignition OFF 


Alert for over the air parameter change 


Alert — GPS box opened 
Alert — Emergency state ON 


Alert — emergency State OFF 
Harsh Braking 
Harsh Acceleration 


Table 18 Messages and Alerts 


(Clause D-9.1.2) 
Remarks 


(3) 
Default message coming from each device 
Would be sent, if GPRS is not available at the time of sending the message 
If device is disconnected from vehicle battery and running on its internal battery 


If device internal battery had fallen below a defined threshold, indicating that device 
need to get a recharge 


Indicate that vehicle internal battery is charged again 
Indicate that vehicle is connected back to main battery 
Indicates that vehicle has started (ignition ‘ON’) 
Indicates that vehicle has stopped (ignition ‘OFF’) 


Alerts for any parameter changed over the air/manually. Shall include the name/value 
of parameter changed and source of command. 


Message would be generated indicating GPS box opened 


When any of the emergency buttons is pressed by any passenger or in case of any 
open circuit, alert should be flashed. 
System should also provide location of emergency button which is pressed. 


When emergency state of vehicle is removed 


Alert indicating for harsh braking. 


Rash Turning 


Alert indicating for harsh acceleration. 


Alert indicating for rash turning. 


message should be sent to dual IPs; that is,. the device should support minimum two IPs simultaneously. 


Table 19 Message Format 
(Clause D-9.1.2) 


SI Attribute Value/Description Size 
No. 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) Packet Header EPB, The unique identifier for all messages from ATD Character, 3 bytes 
ii) Message Type Message Types supported. Emergency message (EMR) or Stop Message (SEM) Character, 2 bytes 
ш) Vehicle ID Unique ID of the vehicle (IMEI Number) Character, 15 bytes 
iv) Packet Type NM — Normal packet, SP — Stored packet Character, 2 bytes 
v) Date Date and time of the location obtained from the location data in Character,14 bytes 
YYYYMMDDhhmmss format 
vi) GPS Validity A — Valid; V — Invalid Character, 1 byte 
vii) Latitude Latitude in decimal degrees - dd.nmmmmm format Double, 12 bytes 
vii) Latitude N - North; S — South Character, 1 byte 
Direction 
ix) Longitude Longitude in decimal degrees - dd.mmmmmm format Double, 12 bytes 
x) Longitude Е — East; W — West Character, 1 byte 
Direction 
xi) Altitude Altitude in ‘m’ (above sea level) Double, 12 bytes 
xi) Speed Speed in km/h Float, 6 bytes 
xii) Distance Distance calculated from previous GPS data Float, 6 bytes 
xiv) Provider G - Fine GPS Character, 1 byte 
N — Coarse GPS or data from the network 
xv) Vehicle Registration number of the vehicle Character, 16 bytes 
RegnNo 
xvi) Reply Number The mobile number to which Test response need to be sent 0 
хуп) CRC The 32 bit checksum of all the characters from the header up to the CRC field 8 bytes 


74 


IS 16833 : 2018 


yis x3 cd 


гы E inii аа i dH "x Ht ai 


Fic. 16 INDICATIVE LOCATION OF CCTV CAMERAS IN STANDARD Bus 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TED 28 (10974). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 С.І.Т. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : СІТ. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


