IS:5476

- 1986

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TE RMS RE LATING TO J UTE (

First Revision )
Sectional Committee,
Represent ing
Jute Com m issioner, Calcu tta

Jute and Jute Products
Chairman
SH RI B. R. BASU

TDC 3

Members
Pesticid es Association of Ind ia, N ew Delhi SH RI U. S. BAID SH RI S. CH ATTER~EE ( Alt ernat e ) Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals SHRI A. T. BASAK (Inspection Wing), N ew Delhi Jute Corporation of Ind ia Ltd , Calcu tta SH RI S. K. BH ATTACH ARYA SH RI A. N . SAN YAL ( Alt ernat e ) Calcu tta Baled Jute Association, Calcu tta SH ~I~&;FH AN D BOTH RA Ind ian Jute Mills' Association, Calcu tta SH RI G. M. BH AN DARI ( Alt ernat e I ) SH RI S. N . MUN DRA ( Alt ernat e II ) N ational Jute Manufacturers' Corporation Ltd , SH RI K. K. CH ATTEIUEE Calcu tta SH RI A. C. BISWAS f Alt ernat e ) `Jute Technological Research Laboratories DR C. R. DEBN ATH . I ICAR ). Calcu tta ExportInspection Cou ncil of Ind ia, Calcu tta SH RI 0. P. DH AMIJA SH RI G. M&A ( Alt ernat e ) SH RI D. K. DUTY SH RI SEKH AR GUH A SH RI KAJAL SEN ( Alt ernat e ) SH RI D. GUPTA Office of the Jute Com m issioner, Calcu tta Eskaps ( Ind ia ) Private Ltd , Calcu tta Jute Manufacturers' Calcu tta Developm ent Council,

SH RI G. SIVARAMAN ( AIt ernat e ) Cem ent Manufacturers' Association, SH RI P. J. JAGUS Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) LT-COL P. N . MALH OTRA SH IU A. N . MUSH RAN ( Alt ernat e ) Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) SH RI A. C. MATH UR SH RI M. L. PAL ( Alt ernat e )

Bom bay

( Cont inued on page 2 ) 0 Copy right 1987 IN DIAN STAN DARDS IN STITUTION This publication is protected und er the Indian Copy right Act (XIV of 1957) and reprod uction in w hole or in part by any m eans except w ith w ritten permission of the publisher shall be d eem ed to be an infringem ent of copyright und er the said Act.

IS : 5 4 7 6- 1 9 8 6
( Cont inued from page 1 ) Members
SHRI S.N., MUNDRA SHRI L. SWAMINATHAN DR V. PACH AIYAPAN SH RI S. K. PATAN KAR Calcu tta Jute Calcu tta ( Alt ernat e) Fertilixer Association Rasht;rm bF;em icals Ind ian Jute Ind ustries' Calcu tta of Ind ia, N ew Delhi and Fertilizers Research Ltd ,

Represent ing
Fabrics Shippers' Association,

L DR S. R. RAN GAN ATH AN

Association,

DR U. MUKH OPADH YAY ( Alt ernat e ) SH RI T. K. ROY CH OWDH URY N ew Central Jute Mills Co Ltd , Calcu tta SH RI AMITAVA SAN YAL Ind ian Institute of Packaging, Bom bay SH RI K. B. GUPTA ( Alt ernat e ) SH RI J. N . SARID Food Corporation of Ind ia, N ew Delhi SH RI JASBIR SIN GH ( Alt ernat e ) SH ~I A. N . SINGH `Ministry of Agriculture SHRI R.I. MIDHA, Director General, ISI ( Ex-oJicio Member ) Director ( Tex )

Secret ary
$H RI.D. R. KOH LI Joint Director ( Tex ), IS1

2

IS :5476-

1986

Indian

Standard

GLOSSARY OF TE RMS RE LATING TO J UTE (

First Revision )
0. F O,REWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 January 1986, after the draft finalized by the J&e and Jute Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. oi2 This stand.ard was first issued in 1969. Itfias,been revised with a view,to make the definitions of various terms included in the standard upto-date and also with a view to eliminate ambiguity or confusion arising from local interpretations and hence to establish a generally recognised The definitions of terms have been ,modified to be in line with usage. the standards in force. 0.3 In the preparation derived from the work Association, Calcutta. of this standard, considerable assistance has been done by the Indian Jute Industries' Research

1. SCOPE

111This standard prescribes definitions of terms commonly used in jute
industry and trade. 2. DEFINITIONS A Assortment of Fibres - Denotes selection, sorting and classification of raw jute fibre according to grade ( see Grading of Jute ). A-Twill Cloth - A double warp, 2/l twill weave sacking jute cloth having 102 ends/dm and 35 picks/dm and weighing 760 g/m2. A*Twill Bag,--- Bags made from A-twill cloth, the standard dimensions being 112x67'5 cm and weighing 1 190 g ( see also IS : 1943-1964* ). *Specification for A-twill jute bags ( rev ised ). 3
-

IS : 5476 - 1986 Australian Bran Bag ( or A-Bran Bag ) - A selvedged hessian bag with 47 ends/dm and 47 picks/dm normally measuring 124'5 X 76 cm and weighing approximately 565 g. Australian Cornsack Cloth - See `Cornsack Cloth'. Australian Cornsack - A double warp hemmed twill sacking bag ( without stripes ) measuring about 104 X 58'5 cm ( normally with 102 ends/ dm and 35 picks/dm ), weighing approximately 1 020 g ( see also IS : 2875-1964* ) ( see also Cornsack Bag ). Australian Woolpack See `New Jute Woolpack'. B Bagging weave. A single or double-warp, heavy jute cloth usually in plain

Bale ( Gunny ) - A rectangular or square shaped compressed rigid package containing jute fabrics or bags wrapped with bale covering with outer layer stitched and bound by metal hoops. Bale ( Fibre Kutcha ) - A package of raw jute consisting of several heads ( MORAHS ) usually weighing 150 or 130 kg. It is compressed in a handoperated press and is bound with jute ropes. Bale ( Fibre Pucca ) - A package of raw jute consisting of several heads ( MORAHS) hydraulically pressed and bound with jute ropes. Its nominal net mass is 180 kg. Baling Hoops Hot rolled steel strips used to fasten or tie bales.

Bar - A colour bar or a band running across the width of cloth, different in appearance or texture or both from the general body of the cloth due to presence of more number of picks or to the use of different types of weft yarn. Batch - Composition of jute mix of different grades and varieties of raw jute for manufacture of particular jute products. Batching - The process of selection and mixing of jute fibres into batches and treating the same with oil-in-water emulsion and piling for a certain time, if necessary, for softening the fibre prior to further processing. Bates Valve - A one-way valve fixed to a bag to facilitate nozzle filling which eliminates sewing after filling. Specification for jute corn sacks. 4

B-Bottom - Indicates a quality of jute ( see Grading of Jute ). Beaming - The operation of warp preparation in which warp ends drawn either from a warping creel or from a set of beams prepared beforehand are evenly spaced in sheet form and wound on a beam. Sometimes beaming and dressing are combined into one operation. Bias - A fabric condition in which warp and weft yarns do not keep at right angles to each other. Bias Bag - Bags fabricated by cutting across the bias tubing according to required size and folding and stitching along with one of the open ends. Bias Tubing - Continuous length of cloth ( usually hessian ) in a cut or roll suitably stitched lengthwise selvedge to selvedge in a biased way to form a bias tubing. Here, the weft yarns do not remain at right angles but are kept at an angle of about 30 to 45" to the length of the tubing. BIMLI lle ). plants, during content forjute. - Fibre obtained from the bast of Hibiscus sabdanya ( RoseThe fibre reeds are associated with underground roots since the exclusively grown in Andhra Pradesh, are generally uprooted harvesting. Chemically, it is different from jute in its low lignin and is in general inferior and coarser than jute. It is a substitute

Bitumen Felt - A hessian cloth saturated in molten bitumen and treated by passage through bituminous coating material and finally given a superficial application of mineral powder like tale, slate and mica. It is used for roofing purposes. Bituminous Surfacing - A sacking or hessian cloth impregnated with low melting point bitumen and coated on both sides with a high melting point bitumen. It is used as a waterproof membrane for canal lining and surfacing air strips and roads. Bleaching - The process of making natural jute fibre or fabric white by chemical means with or without any scouring treatment or removal of natural colouring or extraneous substance. Bolt A lapped and folded cloth with a continuous
5

length.

IS:5476-1986 Book-Fold Bolt -

fold illustrated

A single cut which is lapped and folded into a bookby the heavy line in the figure ( see also IS : 2873-1969*).

4

L
L = Le n g th o f la p . B OOK-F OLD B OLT

C

Bottom -

Indicates a quality of raw jute ( see Grading of Jute ).

Bow - The greatest distance parallel to the selvedges between a weft yarn and a straight line drawn between the points at which this yarn meets the selvedges. The straight line connecting the selvedges is perpendicular to both. Bran Bag See `Australian Bran Bag',

Branding - Marking on fabrics, sacks or bags with inks, dyes or pigment colours to indicate trade-mark, content, weight, etc.

Brattice Cloth - Hessian fabric which after rot and fire-proofing in mines as windscreens and for ventilation purposes.
Breaking

is used

Load - The maximum load which a specimen can bear at the point of break or rupture. It is expressed in gram force ( gf ) or kilogram force ( kgf ) or Newtons (N). Bright Hessian - A special hessian with high brightness index and cleanliness and of good texture.

Brightening - Partial improvement in colour by suitable chemical treatment of the raw jute or jute product. Brusselettee - A jute floor covering made in different weights from jute yarns in plain weave. It is made in different designs, such as prints, stripes, checks and their combinations in different colours. Two beams are generally used; one for the looping yarn and the other for ground yarn. *Specification for packaging of jute products in bales (first rev ision ). 6

IS :5476-

1986

B-Twill Bag - A bag made from B-twill cloth, the standard dimensions and mass being as shown below ( see also IS : 2566-1984" ): 93 kg 75 kg 100 kg i) Size 50 kg 122x 112x 106'5 x 94x ii) Dimensions 67'5 cm 67'5 cm 61 cm 57 cm iii) Mass 1 020 g a) Overhead 111og 880 g 730 g stitched 1115 g 1025g 885 g b) Herakle 735 g stitched B-Twill Cloth - A double warp 2/l twill weave sacking jute cloth with 76 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm and weighing 643 g/m2 ( see also IS : 366719841->. Burlap - A term applied in the American trade to jute hessian.

C
Caddis - Short jute fibre droppings accummulated under different machines during processing. CaIendering - A finishing process in which the cloth which may have been dampened is run under pressure between two or more alternate steel and compressed paper covered cylinders ( bowls ). One of the steel This process flattens the threads and when cylinders is usually heated. a heated cylinder is used, it gives the surface a sheen or glossy finish. When the process has been done once, the cloth is described as calendered or single-calendered and if done twice, the cloth is described as doubleThe machine in which the process takes place is known as calendered. `calender'. Camouflage Garnishing Strips - A variety of narrow hessian strips or tapes with patent selvedge used in Defence Departments ( see also Scrim Garnishing 1. Camouflage Scrim Hessian - A very open weave light hessian cloth, grey or dyed ( see also Scrim Garnishing ). Canvas ( Jute ) - A plain weave cloth made wholly of jute with double warp and single weft interwoven, weighing not less than 407 g/m2. The number of warp threads ( ends/dm ) shall be more than 118 and the number of weft threads ( picks/dm ) shall not be less than 55. Carding - A process of opening out and separating matted mass of fibres. Carpet - See `Matting' and `Needled Felt'.
*Specification tspecification for B-twill jute bags for packing foodgrains for B-twill jute cloth (first rev ision ).

the entangled

or

( second rev ision ).

7

IS :5476-1986
Carpet Backing ( Primary ) - The base fabric on which yarns are inserted and anchored to make a carpet. Carpet Backing ( Secondary ) carpet forming an underlay. Fabric bonded on the backside of the measuring 71 x It is made from ends/dm and 39 : 2580-1982" ).

Cement Bag - Bags made from jute fabric, usually 48 cm and weighing 530 g. It has a valve at the side. double warp plain weave sacking fabric having 68 picks/dm and weighing approximately 685 g/m2 ( see IS Centre Root ( BOOK tics'.
CHAT CHAL ) ( Fibre ) -

See under `Fibre Characteris-

An Indian name for all types of cloth made of jute.

Chesting - A finishing process in which the cloth after passing between all the bowls, usually, five, of a calender from bottom to top is wound upon itself on either of the two upper bowls and later stripped therefrom. This process reduces the size of the interstices between threads. When the process has been done once, the cloth is described as chested or single-chested and if done twice, the cloth is described as doublechested. Clock Length - Length of material fed into the breaker card for one complete revolution of the clock pointer. CocoasackDouble-warp 2/l twill weave sacking bags measuring usually 122 X 73'5 cm ( normally with 102 ends/dm and 81 picks/dm ) weighing approximately 1 360 g, and with 5 cm wide green or blue stripes. It is used for packing cocoabeans. Coffee Twill Bag - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking bag measuring usually 101'5 x 71 cm ( with varying ends/dm and picks/dm ranging from 89 to 102 and 31 to 35 respectively), weighing approximately between 1 135 and 1 600 g, used for packing coffee. Colour ( Fibre ) See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Contract Net Weight ( Bale ) a) Cloth - The weight as obtained from the specified length per bale, nominal width and weight per square metre of cloth. It is calculated as follows: Nominal width (cm) x specified Contract net weight = length (m) x weight ( g/m2 ) lob of a bale (kg) *Specification for jute sacking bags for packing cement ( second
8 rev ision ).

IS:

5476- 1986

b) Bags - The weight as obtained by multiplying the nominal weight of a bag and specified number of bags per bale. Contract Regain -- The percentage moisture regain on the basis of which the corrected net weight is calculated for trading purposes. Cop - A form of cylindrical package of weft yarn tapered used in the shuttle for weaving jute fabric.
Cornsack

at one end

Cloth - A double warp, 2/l twill weave sacking jute cloth having 102 ends/dm and 35 picks/dm and weighing 78 g/m2 (see IS : 3750-1968* ). Cornsack Bag -

measuring

Bags made from Australian cornsack cloth normally 104 X 58'5 cm ( see IS : 2875-1964t 1.

The weight obtained by adjusting the actual net weight on the basis of actual regain to the contract regain. It is calculated as follows: Net weight (kg ) X (100 -!-contract Corrected net weight = regain percent ) of a bale (kg) 100 + average moisture regain, percent Cotton Bagging - Bagging cloth used for wrapping cotton bales (see also IS : 4436-1967$ ).
Cottonsack - A hemmed hessian bag measuring about 216 X 114 cm ( normally with'38 ends/dm and 39 picks/dm ), weighing approximately 1 360 g. The bag is usually without stripes and tar sewn.

Corrected Net Weight ( Bale ) -

Count - See `Grist'. Crisped - A term used in describing an aspect of make-up of jute fabric; it describes a jute fabric folded lengthwise at the middle from selvedge to selvedge. Crop-End ( Fibre ) Cropping the surface blades. See under `Fibre CharacteristiCs'.

A finishing process in which the short protruding fibres on of the cloth are removed by rotating sharpened spiral When one side of the cloth is

a) One Side Single-Cropped cropped once.
*Specification @pecification fSpecification

for jute corn sack cloth, for jute corn sacks. for jute bagging for wrapping

cotton bales.

9

______ .

IS : 5 4 7 6- 1 9 8 6
b) On e S id e Dou ble-Cropped -

When one side

of the

cloth

is

cropped twice. c) B oth S id e S in gle-Cropped cropped once. d) B oth S id e Dou ble-Cropped cropped twice. When both sides of the cloth are When both sides of the cloth are

Cuban Sugar Bag ( Cubans ) - Bags made from double-warp 2/l twilt weave sacking cloth measuring about 122 x 73'5 cm weighing approximately 1 135 g; the cloth normally having 102 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm. Cut Cloth - A continuous length of cloth.
H essian S ack in g

Cut (or full cut) Medium cut

82 m or more 73 m or more 37 m or more but 37 m or more but less than 82 m less than 73 m 18 m or more but 14 m or more but Short piece less than 37 m less than 37 m Cuttings - Hard and barky portion of jute strand cut off from the root end or crop end of the raw jute strands. D Daisee Jute - See `Jute'. Damping - Th- process of moistening of jute fabric to prepare it for calendering or chesting. Dead Weight Volume ( Bale ) - The volume calculated from the contract weight of a bale on th: basis of 1'393 5 cubic metres to a tonne or 50 cubic feet to a ton. Density ( Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Dollop - A specified weight of jute to be spread on the feed cloth of a breaker card or a hackling machine, as the case may be, in a given time usually indicated by one complete revolution of a clock pointer of a machine. Double Hessian Bag - A bag having two layers of cloth on each face. Double Layer Bag - See `Double Hessian Bag'. Double-Warp ( DW ) Cloth - A jute cloth in which warp yarns are woven in pairs. Draft - Ratio of speed between delivery roller and feed roller. Drawing - The process of blending (or doubling) and parallelization of fibres in slivers along with drafting. Dressing - A process of treating warp yarns with size prior to weaving. 10

IS:

5476- 1986

Droppings - Caddies, short fibres and dust particles which come out of jute fibres during the process of manufacture. Dry Sewn - Sewing done with plain yarn or twine. DW ( Double-Warp ) Flour Bag - See `Flour Bag'. DW ( Double-Warp ) Heavy Cee Bag - See `Heavy Cee Bag'. DW ( Double-Warp ) Raisin Bag - See `Raisin Bag'. DW ( Double-Warp ) Salt Bag - See `Salt Bag'.
E Ears E-Bag See `Lugs'.

A double-warp hemmed plain weave sacking bag measuring about 101'5 x 71 cm ( normally with 42'5 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 759 g. The bag is usually without stripes.
Reed Length ( Fibre ) -

Effective

See under `Fibre Characteristics'.

Egyptian Grainsack - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking bag measuring about 152'5 X76 cm ( normally with 76 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm ), weighing approximately 2 270 g or 1 475 g with 5 cm wide magenta s[ripes and tar sewn. Egyptian Sugar Bag -. A double-warp hemmed twill sacking bag measuring about 122X71 cm (normally with 76 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 1 135 g with 5 cm wide blue or magenta stripes ,and tar sewn. Ends - The warp or longitudinally placed yarns or threads in a fabric running parallel to the selvedges.
English Bran - A hemmed hessian bag measuring weighing approximately 5 IO g, without stripes. E-Nitrate - See `Nitrate DW Bag'. F Felt See `Needled Felt'. See `Jute Fibre Board'.

124*5X 68'5 cm

Fibre Boards -

Fibre Characteristics - The following are the principal jute fibre characteristics: 1) Centre Root (BOOK CHAL) - The hard barky region in the middle part of the reed which requires additional softening treatment. 11

IS : 5 4 7 6 - 1 9 8 6

2)

The property of a fibre which distinguishes its appearance such as redness, yellowness, greyness, etc. 3) Crop End - The hard gummy (sometimes barkey) fibre at the :op end of the reed.
Croppy Fibre -

Yolour -

4)

Fibre with apical ends rough and hard (but not

barky). Fibre which is weak and dull in appearance. Mass per unit volume of the fibre including air-spaces. 6) Higher density (heavy body) is a characteristic of better quality of fibre. 7) Effect iv e Reed Lengt h - The length of the reed after defective basal and apical ends have been removed. 8) Fibre Fineness - A measure of diameter or weight per unit length or both. The finer the fibre, the better is the spinning quality.
Densit y 9) FULPAT 5) Daz ed Fibre -

A term used for weak, gummy Closely adhering fibre

and immature strands not

jute easily

fibre.
10) Gummy Fibre -

separable.

11) HUNKA

-The very hard barky fibre running continuously from the basal end to almost the apex of the reed. 12) Leaf - Spots of dry leaf which may appear in the strand. 13) Lust re - It depends on the display of light reflected from the fibre exposed to normal light. Higher lustre in jute is generally a characteristic of better quality fibre. 14) Meshiness 15) 16) 17) 18) 19 20)

The intertwinicg of fibre strands forming loops, genetically inherent in the species from which fibre is obtained. Moss - Presence of dead adventitious roots at the lower or middle part of the reed. O v er-Ret t ed Fibre - Fibre which has lost its strength and brightness. Pliabilit y - The property which determines how easily the fibre can be bent or twisted. Reed - The fibre system from the stem of one individual jute plant (see also Porter). Reed Lengt h - The entire length of the, reed including the base and apex. Reed Tapering - The rate of thinning of the reed from the base to the apex. 12

IS : 5476 - 1986

21) Reed Thickness - The average thickness of the reed.
treatment. Also known as requires additional softening `Cutlings'. 23) Runner - The hard barky fibres running from the lower end to the middle region, more or less continuously. 24) Speck - The bark with a knotty core in the body of the strand which breaks the continuity of fibre. 25) Sticks - Presence of small pieces of wood of jute plant over the body of the reed. stress at which a fibre 26) Tensile Strength - The longitudinal specimen of a specified length ruptures. It is usually represented in gram force per tex. Fibre Fineness - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Fibre Strand - The bast fibre in- the jute plant, situated between the outer bark and the central woody core and running the whole length of the stem as a lace-work sheath usually several layers thick. Fiji Bag - A hemmed hessian bag measuring about 91*5X 56 cm (normally with 47 ends/dm and 59 picks/dm), weighing approximately 455 g, without stripes and dry sewn. Fine Hessian - A term used to describe hessian generally made from fine counts of jute yarn. Finishing - The various operations that a jute fabric undergoes after weaving and prior to packing. Fleece - Carded jute fibre mat before being condensed into sliver form. Flour Bag - Bags made from DW flour jute cloth; the standard dimension being 142X 71 cm and weighing approx 1 135 g ( see also IS : 3984-1967* ). Flour Bag Cloth - A double warp plain weave sacking jute cloth having 68 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm and weighing 539 g/m2 (see IS : 3966-1967t). G Garnishing Scrim - Open weave or mesh hessian, grey or dyed, in the form of strips used for camouflage purposes. Gaw - A gap in the jute cloth caused by missing weft. Grading of Jute - Sorting of jute fibres into various grades according to the fibre characteristics such as WI, Wz, etc, for white raw jute and TD1, *Specification for D W-flour bag?. TSpecification for DW-flour jute cloth. 13

22) Root - The hard barky region at the basal end of a reed which

IS : 5476 - 1986 TDz, etc, for TOSSA daisee raw jute (see IS : 271-1975*).
Grist - The linear density of jute yarn, twine, etc, expressed spindle (14 400 yards) in pounds. Also known as `Count'.

as weight/

Gummy Matter -The pectin type of gummy matter present in jute fibres due to insufficient retting.
Gunny -

A general term applied

to manufactured

jute goods, specially

sacking.
H EfABf JABI - Tangled HUNKA and sticks.

and ravelled

jute

of any description

free of

Hank - Jute yarn or twine in reeled form usually circumference and 274 m ( or 300 yd ) length. Hd -

of 254 cm (or 90 in)

Short form of `Hemmed'. Head - Bundle of jute in a bale of raw jute usually weighing from 2'25 to 4'50 kg. Each head is given a twist and folded prior to packing in the bale. Heavy Cee - A double warp plain weave sacking jute cloth having 68 ends/dm and 35 picksldm and weighing 673 g/m2 (see IS : 3751-1966t). Heavy Cee Bag - Bags made from heavy tee cloth measuring normally 101*5X 71 cm and weighing 1 020 g ( seeIS : 2874-1964$). Heavy Goods ( see Sacking ). A term by which sacking goods are denoted

Hemmed Bag - A bag with raw edges of the cloth at the mouth folded and stitched. Hessian - A single-warp plain weave jute fabric manufactured in varying weights and widths, weighing up to 500 g/m2 [ see also IS : 2818 (Part 1 )-19715 1. Hessian Bag - Bag made from hessian. Hop Cloth -

A very coarse

double-warp

plain

weave fabric

used for

making bags.
HUNKA ( Fibre) See under `Fibre Characteristics'.

*Grading of white, TOSSA and DAISSE uncut Indian jute ( second revision ). tSpecification for heavy tee cloth. $Specification for heavy tee jute bags. SSpecification for Indian hessian: Part 1 General (first revision ).

14

IS: J J AN GL I -

5476-1986

An inferior variety of jute coming A bag fabricated

mainly

from some Bihar
_

districts.
Joined Rag Jute -

out of two pieces of jute cloth.

A multicellular fibre obtained from the bast of various species of Corchorus, of which the round pod jute ( Corch oru s capsu laris or white jute) and the long pod jute (Corch oru s olitoriu s or T OS S A or DAIS &!? The fibre strands are long, usually ju te ) are the most important. varying from 1'5 to 3'5 m in length.
Jute Blanket - A type of blanket made out of woollenized jute mixed with low grade wool or cotton.

jute or with

Jute Fibre Boards - Boards made by impregnating jute fibre with adhesives and other chemicals and consolidating the fibres under heat and pressure. These are used as insulation boards, fibre board drums, packing materials, etc.

Me Matting Jute Mesh -

See `Matting'.

lighter weights ( see Scrim ).
Jute Nettings

An open weave jute cloth used for soil conservation and in for the manufacture of strengthened paper and underfelt

- Nets manufactured with meshes of various sizes and provided with tying lines used for camouflage purposes. Jute Rugs - Jute fabrics of various sizes sometimes cut, printed, hemmed and fringed for use as floor coverings. Jute Stick - Woody centre stem of a jute plant. Jute Stick Boards - Boards made from jute stick particles. These are used for insulation partitioning, packing cases, etc. Jute Twine - A plied yarn made by twisting together two or more strands of yarn. Jutlac - Laminated sheet made of jute and shellac combination capable of being made into drums, boxes and similar articles. K A double-warp hemmed plain weave sacking bag measuring about 101'5~71 cm (normally with 51 ends/dm, 31 picks/dm), weighing approximately 850 g, plain (without stripes), and dry sewn. Kidderminster - Jute carpet with jacquard figures made in double cloth, with 120 to 160 ends/dm and 80 to 120 ,picks/dm. K-Bag 15

IS : 5416 - 1986
L Laminates - Jute fabric, usually hessian with kraft paper or plastic sheets.

and DW tarpaulin,

laminated

Lapped - A term used in describing an aspect of make-up of jute fabric; it describes a jute fabric continuously folded backwards and forwards in predetermined lengths.

The slightly faster surface speed of a roller or a set of sliding bars than that of another roller just behind it is called lead and is usually expressed as a percentage of the speed of the slower roller.
Lead -

bight Cee Bag - A double-warp hemmed plain weave sacking bag measuring about 101'5X 71 cm ( normally with 68 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm ) and weighing approximately 910 g, striped or plain, and dry sewn. Liverpool Twill ( L-Twill ) Cloth - A double warp twill weave sacking cloth having 102 ends/cm and 31 picks/dm and weighing approx 716 g/m2 ( see IS : 3668-1966* ). L-Twill Bag - Bags made from L-twill cloth normally measuring 112X 67'5 cm and weighing approximately 1135 g ( see IS : 3794-19661). Long End - A term used to refer to the extended bottom layer of cloth of a lapped cut which is turned and placed on top of the lap before folding. Lugs ( Ears ) - Strips of cloth stitched or tied to the corners of bags of Also may packages generally in a loop form to facilitate easy handling. be made by stitching the bottom corners of the bags diagonally. Lustre (Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. M
Mangling - A finishing process in which the cloth that has been calendered is rolled on a steel pin and rotated backwards 2nd forwards under pressure, a number of times between two steel bowls. Mangling closes the interstices between threads more effectively than chesting. When the process has been done once, the cloth is described as mangled The and if done twice, the cloth is described as double-mangled. machine in which the process takes place is known as `Mangle'. Matting - Jute floor covering fabric woven in plain, stripped, dobby or jacquard designs. Meshiness ( Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'.
*Specification tspecification for liverpool for liverpool twill ( L-twill ) cloth. twill ( L-twill 1bags.

16

IS : 5 4 7 6 - 1 9 8 6
M ESTA - This fibre which is a substitute of jute is obtained from the bast of Hibiscus cannabinus ( Kenaf ). Chemically, it is different from jute in its low lignin content and is, in general, inferior and coarser than jute.

Middle Moisture

Indicates a quality of raw jute ( see Grading of Jute ).

Content - The mass of moisture in jute or jute goods expressed as a percentage of the total mass. Example: If 100 parts by mass of material contains 20 parts by mass of moisture, the moisture content is 100x 20 p= 20 percent 1 00 Moisture Regain - The mass of moisture percent in jute or jute goods expressed as a percentage of the oven-dry mass Example: If 100 parts by mass of material contains 20 parts by mass of moisture, the regain is 100x 20 ~ = 2 5 percent 80

MO RAH Moss -

See `Head'.

See under `Fibre Characteristics'.

N
Needled Felt - A felt produced on a hessian or scrim base by pricking into it with needles on a lap or sheet or intertwined fibrous material usually obtained from jute caddis or shredded fibre waste. The felt may be needled on one or both sides of the fabric base, that is, can be either single-sided or double-sided. Sometimes needled felt is produced without a hessian or scrim base. It is used as padding material for automobile seats. NEWAR - Heavy jute tape, usuaIly 4 to 10 cm wide, woven in a narrow tape loom. New Jute Woolpack - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking pack (without stripes > with attached top, measuring about 137 X 69 X 69 cm ( normally with 102 ends/dm and 35 picks/dm ), weighing approximately 5 100 g. New Zealand Cornsack - A hemmed twill sacking bag measuring about 117 x 58'5 cm ( without stripes ) normally with 102 ends/dm, and 17

IS:5476 - 1986 35 picksldm weighing 1s : 2875-1964* ). approximately 1 145 g and dry sewn ( see also

New Zealand Woolpack - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking pack with 1'5 cm wide red or blue stripes measuring 137 X 69 X 69 cm (normally with 102 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm ), weighing approximately 5 445 g, and dry sewn (see also N ew Jute Woolpack ). Nitrate DW Bag - A double-warp hemmed plain weave sacking bag measuring approximately 84 x 41 cm ( normally with 68 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm ), weighing approximately 710 g either without stripes or with 1'3 cm coloured stripes.

0 Onion Pocket - A hemmed hessian bag measuring about 101'5 X 57 cm ( normally with 38 ends/dm and 39 picks/dm ), weighing approximately 340 g, with three blue stripes and tar sewn. Ore Pocket - A double warp twill sacking selvedged bag measuring about 76 X 51 cm ( normally with 102 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm ), weighing approximately 680 g, without stripes and dry tar sewn. Oslo Twill - A twill sacking cloth for bag making of about 108 cm width weighing about 534 g/m2 ( normally with 115 ends/dm and 39 picks/dm ). Oven-Dry Mass - The constant mass of a sample as obtained by drying at a temperature of 105 to 110�C. P Packing Allowance - The percentage allowance by which the volume of a bale may exceed the dead weight volume.
Pack Sheet Padding - Jute fabric used as a protective covering trusses of jute fabrics or bags ( see aZso IS : 2873-19697 ). Double-Warp ( or Padding DW ) -

for bales or single weft

A double-warp

fabric in plain weave used as cheap padding. Paper-Lined Bag - Bag made of jute cloth lined with crepe or plain paper by means of bitumen or other adhesive. Paper-Lined Hessian - Hessian laminated or reinforced any particular end use. PAT - The local name of jute ( see Jute ). *Specification for jute corn sacks. "yspecificationfor packaging of jute products in bales 18 with paper for

( f i r s t r e v i s i on) .

IS : 5 4 7 6 - 1 9 8 6 Picks ( or Shots ) Plain DWE The weft or filling thread of a fabric. S'ee `E-Bag'.

Plain DW Flour Bag - See `Flour Bag'. Plain Weave - The type of weave in a cloth in which each warp thread or a pad of warp threads passes alternately over and under each weft thread. Pliability ( Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Polyethylene Extrusion Coated Fabric - Jute fabric extrusion coated with polyethylene to a thickness of 250 to 300 gauge used for packing industrial raw materials, hygroscopic fertilizers, etc. Polyethylene-Lined Hessian - Hessian laminated or reinforced with polyethylene for any particu!ar end use. Porter a) Fabric - Number of warp threads in a porter gauge length ( 1'85 inch ) divided by number of threads drawn through each split in a finished fabric. b) Reed Number of splits per 1'85 inch. Potato Bag - A double-warp hemmed plain weave sacking bag measuring about 91'5 X 81 cm ( normally with 25'5 ends/dm atid 31 picks/dm ) and weighing approximately 454 g. Pre-beaming - The primary operation of warp making in which ends withdrawn from warp creel, evenly spread in sheet form, are wound on a warper's beam. Preparing - The operations, prior to spinning, from carding to the final drawing or roving stage. R sacking bag measuring about Raisin Bag - A double-warp hemmed 86 x 56 cm ( normally with 25'5 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm ), and weighing approximately 454 g. Reed ( Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Reed Length ( Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Reed Tapering ( Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Reed Thickness ( Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Retting - The treatment on the harvested jute plant to make the best fibre strands more easily separable from the woody part ( stick ) of the 19

IS : 5476 - 1986

stem by immersing the plants in water which and biological changes to help the prccess.
Reversed Weave Fabric -

sets up certain

chemical

A type of fabric where double weft and single warp is used, the warp is usually heavier than the weft. Rolled - A term used for describing an aspect of make-up of the jute fabric; it describes a jute fabric made into a roll. Rolls ( Sliver ) - Sliver wound into form of a roll at the delivery of a carding or a drawing machine by roll formers. Roofing-Felt ( Jute Based ) - See `Bitumen Felt'. Root ( Fibre ) - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Rotproofed Hessian - See `Sand Bag'. Rove - A continuous slightly twisted strand roving frame and from which yarn is spun.
Runner ( Fibre ) -

of fibres produced

on a

See under `Fibre Characteristics'.

S
- A range of heavy jute fabrics either in plain or twill manufactured by using coarse jute fibre in larger percentage than used for manufacturing tarpaulin hessian or such light fabrics ( see Tarpaulin and Hessian ). Sacking Big - A sack tailored from coarse jute fabric with either one side opening or a valve device fitted at one corner for filling, storing and conveying the goods. Salt Bag - A double warp plain weave bag measuring 114'5 x 66 cm and weighing approximately 795 g. The sacking cloth has normally 51 ends/dm and 31 picksldm. Sand Bag - A bag made from hessian fabric measuring about x 36 cm and weighing approximately 170 g ( unproofed ) and 190 g Firoofed ) ( see IS : 9685-1981" ). Sand Bag Cloth - Hessian fabric having 38 ends/dm and 39 picks/dm and weighing approximately 245 g/m2 [ see IS : 2818 ( Part 6 )-1977t 1. Swim - A plain weave open mesh, light weignt fabric weighing less than 214 g/m". It is used in the manufacture of bags for large size light articles. It is fixed to tarred brown paper to make waterproof packing and used as tobacco shade cloth. The lighter varieties are also used for the manufacture of underfelt. Sacking

*Specification for sand bags, unproofed and cuprammonium proofed.
@pecification for Indian hessian: Part 6 245 g/m" at 16 percent contract regain. 20

IS : 5476 - 1 9 8 6

Scritn Garnishing - It is a 50 mm or 75 mm hessian strip stitched on both the sides with sewing thread made from plain weave medium weight hessian fabric weighing not less than 305 g/m". It is used for camouflaging purposes by Defence. The hessian is also dyed either in mildbronze shade or grass green shade or light green shade or dark brown shade ( see also Camouflage Garnishing Strips and Camouflage Scrim Hessian ). The various types of seams used in the fabrication of jute bags are given below: 1) Count erlaid Seam - A seam in jute bag formed by the raw edges of cloth turned outwards and sewn through for thicknesses of cloth. The bag is turned after sewing.
Seams -

COUNTERLAID SEAM 2) Flat Seam See `Splay Seam'. 3) Fold O v er Seam -

A seam in jute bag formed by the two edges of cloth folded over and then sewn through for thicknesses of cloth. The bag is used without turning after sewing.

FOLD OVER SEAM 4) Hemming - A seam in jute bag formed by turning over the selvedges of cloth once and sewn through two thicknesses of cloth whiie the raw edges may be turned twice and sewn ( union stitch ) through three or six thicknesses so formed.

A ( On Selvedges) HEMMING

B (

On

Raw Edges )

21

IS :5476 - 1986 5) O v er-Edge Seam on Selv edges - A seam in jute bag, formed with overhead or Herakles machines using heavy twine and sewn through two thicknesses of cloth with selvedges. The bag is used without turning after sewing.

OVER-ED GE SEAM ON SELVED GES

6) O v er-Edge Seam on Raw Edge - A seam in jute bags formed by turning in the raw edges and sewn with overhead or Herakle machines using heavy twines through four thicknesses of cloth. The bag is used without turning.

OVER-ED GE SEAM ON RAW ED GE

7) Laid-In or `M' Seam - A seam in jute bag formed by the cloth edges turned in and the sewing ( lock stitch or union stitch ) is done through four thicknesses of cloth.

LAJD -IN OR `M' SEAM

8) O v erlap Seam - See `Fold-O v er Seam'. 9) Plain Seam - A seam in jute bag formed by sewing ( union stitch) through two thicknesses of cloth. The bag is turned after sewing.

PLAIN SEAM 22

IS : 5476 - 1986

10)

S afety S eam -

( union tierakle

or lock sewing.

A seam with a second inner line of stitching stitch ) over and above the outer overhead or

il)
A (On &h e d g e s ) 6 (On R a w Ed g e s ) S AF ETY S EAM

11) S play

The two selvedges are laid together, one edge projecting about 1'5 cm more than the other and then lock stitched through two folds of cloth. The protruding cloth is then turned over and stitched through two thicknesses of cloth. The bag is then turned after sewing. This type of seam is used in the heavy bags.

S eam On S elved ges -

S P LAY

S EAM ON S ELVED GES

b)

Similar to splay seam on selvedges but.the cloth is sewn ( lock stitch ) at first through two or three folds and then through three folds. The bag is then turned after sewing.
On

E d ges -

S P LAY S EAM ON RAW

EDGES

12)

T u rn -Over S eam -

S ee `Fold -Over S eam '.

Selvd - Short form of `Selvedged'. Selvedged Bag - A bag with selvedge forming the mouth of the bag. Semibrite Hessian - Hessian made from fairly light coloured fibres or chemically treated fibres so as to improve its colour. 23

1S:S476- 1986
Short Piece - See under `Cut ( Cloth 1'. Shot - See `Picks'. Sbotting - The number of weft threads per inch of the finished cloth.
NOTE- Shots per inch=picks per dm x 0.254.

See `Dressing'. Sliver - A condensed assemblage of processed fibres of uniform width without twist. Slub - The short thick portion on a yarn. Smash - A fabric defect where a number of warp threads have been ruptured through the shuttle being trapped in the shed. Snarl - Short length of weft yarn in the cloth that has twisted on itself or bunched together. Special Middle - Indicates a quality of raw jute ( See Grading of Jute ). Special Top - Indicates the best quality of raw jute ( See Grading of Jute ). Speck and Leaf - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Spyndle - A unit of length used in the determination of count or grist of jute yarn; it is equal to 14 400 yd ( or 13 167 m ). Sticks - See under `Fibre Characteristics'. Stitches - The following four types of stitches are commonly used in jute bags: 1) Chain ( Union or Anteus ) Stitch - It has sufficient extensibility to stand stretching under impact loading. Union machine is used and the stitching rate is high. But if there is a fracture anywhere in the stitching twine, it tends to pull out more easily in this stitch compared with other types of stitches. Chain stitch is also used as a safety stitch which is a second line of stitching close to another stitch at the seam.

Sizing -

CHAIN STITCH 24

IS :5416-1986

2)

Herakles St it ch - It is a more complex form of stitch than the other types and the stitching rate is fairly high.

HERAKLES STITCH

3) Lock St it ch -

It is very strong and does not pull out easily if the twine is broken somewhere. But the stitch is not as elastic as the chain stitch and the production rate is low. Jute lock stitch is often applied as a safety stitch which is a second line of stitching close to another stitch at the seam.

4) O v erhead St it ch - It is most commonly

used for heavy duty sacks. Correct lengths of twines are doubled and allowed to pass through the fabric and then round the edge of the fabric. The seam obtained is very strong but the production rate is rather low.

OVERHEAD STITCH

5) Sy dney W oo/pack - A double-warp hemmed twill sacking pack with loose top, measuring 137 X 69X 69 cm ( normally with 102
ends/dm and 3.5 picks/dm ) including top without stripes. T Tape See `NEW AR'. made of Tarpaulin - A made-up article, such as wagon cover, usually tarpauling or other heavy cloth. 25 weighing approximately 521 g

Is : .5476 - 1986 Tarpauling.: Double warp jute tarpaulin cloth in plain weave cloth made wholly of jute with double warp and single weft, interwoven weighing not more than 610 g per square metre ( 18 ounces per sq yard ) having the number of warp threads not more than 118 per dm ( 30 per inch ) and weft threads not more than 55 per dm ( 14 per inch ). Tar Sewn - Sewing done Tensile Strength ( Fibre ) Tex - The primary unit count of yarn; the weight with bitumenized yarn or twine. - See-under `Fibre Characteristics'. in a system of a units expressing the universal in grams of one kilometre of yarn.

NOTE - This system is also intended to be used for expressing the weight per unit length of fibres and other textile products like ropes, rovings, etc.' The following multiple and submultiple units may be used to avoid large numbers and small fractions respectively: 1 ktax ( kilotex ) = I 000 tex 1 mtex ( millitex ) = O%Ol tex

Top -

Indicates a quality of raw jute

( see Grading of Jute ). but

Truss - A bundle. or. small bale, suitably cewred or wrapped neither hooped nor machine-pressed. Tubular Bag - Bags fabricated from continuous tubular cloth. Twill - The weave that produces In the jute industry, the cloth. used.

diagonal patterns on the surface of generally 2 X 1 simple twill weave is

Twill Ore Pocket - A selvedged twill bag measuring about 76 X 51 cm ( normally with 102 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm ), and weighing approximately 794 g used for packing mineral ores. Twill Weave the cloth. Twine A weave that produces diagonal lines on the surface of

See `Jute Twine'. U

Underfelt

-

See &rim'.

Unisa Canvas ( J&/Gotten ) - Closely woven plain weave fabric made with cotton warp and fine jute weft. V Valved Bag - A jute bag with a valve to suit patent ( see Bates Valve ). fiBfling equipment

B3 : 5 4 7 6- 1 9 8 6 W Warp Threads of the fabric which run parallel to the selvedge. See `NE WAR'.

Webbing Weft -

The filling threads which are at right angles to the selvedges.

Woollenized Jute - The fibre when subjected to mercerizing treatment under controlled conditions becomes scrimpy like wool; soft and fluffy. The treated jute with or without further chemical softening treatment is called woollenized jute. Woolpack - See `New Jute `New Zealand Woolpack'. Woolpack', X X-Bottom Indicates a quality of raw jute ( see Grading of Jute ). `Australian Woolpack' and

27

INTERNATIONAL Base Units
Q uant it y

SYSTEM OF UNITS ( SI UNITS )

Unit

Sy mbol

Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity

metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg
S

A K cd mol

Amount of substance Supplementary Units
Q uant it y

Unit

Sy mbol

Plane angle Solid angle Derived Units
Q uanrit y .

radian steradian

rad sr

Unit

Sy mbol N

Dejnit ion

Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive Pressure, stress force

newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

1N 1J 1w 1T 1s 1V 1 Pa

= 1 kg.m/ss = 1 N.m = 1 J/s = 1 Wb/ma = 1 A/V = 1 W/A = 1 N/ma

J W Wb T Hz S V Pa

1 Wb = 1 V.s 1 Hz = 1 c/s(s-`)

AMENDMENT NO. 1 MAY 2013 TO IS 5476 : 1986 GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO JUTE
( First Revision ) (Page 7, B-Twill Bag) -- Insert the following column in the definition of B-Twill Bag: i) Capacity ii) Dimensions iii) Mass: a) Overhead stitched b) Heracle stitched 50 kg 94 � 57 cm 665 g

(Page 7, B-Twill Cloth) -- Substitute the following for the existing definition: `B-Twill Cloth -- A double warp 2/1 twill weave sacking jute cloth, with 76 ends/dm and 31 picks/dm and weighing 643 g/m2 (see also IS 3667 : 1993) or with 76 ends/dm and 28 picks/dm and weighing 579 g/m2 (see also IS 12650 : 2003).'

(TX 31)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

