IRRI HAF IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 
Indian Standard 


mé Ada — starita 
ST 1 Wee anhe 


Smart Cities — GIS 


Part 1 Reference Architecture 


ICS: 35.240.70 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 SEINE TH HN, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2021 Price Group 11 


Smart Infrastructure Sectional Committee LITD 28 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Smart 
Infrastructure Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Electronics and Information Technology Division 
Council. 

The Composition of the panel, LITD 28/P10 and the sectional committee, LITD 28 responsible for the formulation 
of this standard is given at Annex B. 


CONTENTS 


0 INTRODUCTION 


0.1 Current Challenges of GIS in Smart Cities. 
0.2 Key Stakeholder concern 
0.3 Role of GIS in Smart Cities 


1 SCOPE 
2 REFERENCES 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND ABBREVIATIONS 


3.1 Terminology 
3.1.1 Coordinate System 
3.1.2 Datum 
3.1.3 Digital Elevation Model 
3.1.4 Geocode 
3.1.5 Geocoding 
3.1.6 Geoevents 
3.1.7 Geospatial Data 
3.1.8  Georeference 


3.1.9 Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) 


3.1.10 Enteprise GIS 
3.1.11 Layer 
3.1.12 PAN Images 
3.1.13 Raster Data 
3.1.14 RESTFUL APIs 
3.1.15 Shapeñile Or shp 
3.1.16 SOA Architecture 
3.1.17 Topology 
3.1.18 Vector Data 

3.2 Abbreviations 


4 GIS DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURE 


4.1 Key Design Principle 
4.1.1 Scalable 
4.1.2 Secure 
4.1.3 High-Availability 
4.1.4 Standard Based 
4.1.5 Modularity 


4.2 Enterprise GIS — Capabilities and Functional Architecture 


43 Enteprise GIS functional reference model 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


jk 


AA © WW © D ND WN N D NY NY NY NN WN WN N e RRR RRR Re Re Re 


4.3.1 Detailed Functional Capability of the Enterprise GIS System 


for Smart Cities 
4.3.2 Data Integration 


iii 


D 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


4.4 Conceptual Model of Enterprise GIS 


4.4.1 
4.4.2 
4.4.3 
4.4.4 
4.4.5 
4.4.6 
4.4.7 
4.4.8 
4.4.9 
4.4.10 
4.4.11 


Web GIS Apps 
Automation using APIs and Scripts 
Distributed Web GIS 
Enterprise Integration 
Environment Isolation 
High Availability 
Data Management 
Analysis 
Visualization 

Data and Storage 
Patterns of GIS Usage 


4.5 Enterprise GIS Technical Reference Model 


4.5.1 
4.5.2 
4.5.3 


GIS database and Authoring Tier 
Application Tier 
Presentation Tier 


4.6 GIS Information Reference Model 


ANNEX A USE CASES 


A-1 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


A-2 SAFE CITY CAMERAS FEED 


A-3 EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT 


A-4 METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT 


A-5 DYNAMIC MARKET PLACE 


A-6 SMART PARKING 


A-7 PUBLIC BIKE SHARING 


A-8 SMART POLE & SMART LIGHTING 


A-9 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES 


A-10 INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


A-11 MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS CALL CENTRE & MUNICIPAL 


CORPORATIONS SERVICES 


A-12 DIFFERENT TYPE OF APPS 


A-13 WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


A-14 DIAL 100 


A-15 DIAL 108 


A-16 ELECTRICITY 


Page No. 


27 


28 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


A-17 EDUCATION 


A-18 HEALTH 


A-19 INTEGRATION WITH CROWDSOURCING DATA 


A-20 INTEGRATION WITH FIRE BRIGADE CONTROL SYSTEM 


A-21 GREEN BUILDINGS 


A-22 KIOSKS 


ANNEX B COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


LIST OF FIGURES 


Fig. 1 | City Governance Aspect and GIS at Core 
Fig.2 Enterprise GIS 
Fig.3 Conceptual Model of GIS Tools for Spatial Decision Support System 
Fig.4 Enterprise GIS Functional Architecture Model for Integrated ICCC 
Fig.5 Data Ingestions from Different Sources 
Fig.6 Conceptual Model of Enterprise GIS 
Fig.7 Technical Reference Model of Enterprise GIS 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1 Stakeholders requirements from GIS perspective in Smart Cities 
Table 2. Functional Capabilities of Enterprise GIS for Smart Cities 


Table 3 


Reference Data Model 


Page No. 


28 
29 
29 
29 
29 
30 
31 


33 


re OO ON BW K 


viii 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


0 INTRODUCTION 


0.1 Current Challenges of GIS in Smart Cities 


At present, GIS is commonly used as a spatial information and visualisation tool in the existing Smart Cities. The 
utilisation of this powerful technology varies considerably across cities, often limited by non-availability of base 
maps and non adaptability of Enteprise GIS Platforms. GIS will play a significant role in spatial decision making 
in Smart Cities when standards based maps are developed and integrated into routine functioning of the Smart 
Cities. 

Currently, cities are not completely aware about the overall functional requirements of the GIS and the technological 
architecture of the enterprise wide GIS, which is important for collaborative decision making. 


In absence of standards for the GIS layers that need to be adopted, the cities are not able to take the benefits of the 
Enterprise GIS for the decision making in the cities. 


This standard has been developed with the objective of defining the GIS usability for the different stakeholders 
in smart cities. It provides a conceptual GIS architecture with functionalities to use as an enterprise system for 
spatial decision making. 


To guide the cities in the usability of the GIS, the functional requirements are mentioned. 


Lastly GIS application use cases are provided to guide the city in understanding the GIS applicability for the smart 
city in standardized ways. 


This standard has to be read in conjunction with other standards on Smart Cities or Unified Digital Infrastructure 
such as IS 18000, IS 18002, IS 18004, IS 18006 etc. 


Enterprise GIS is an architecture that integrates geospatial data and services and shares them across the 
organization. It can also be viewed as an infrastructure that extends and enables existing systems using geospatial 
data and services. 


Core to enterprise GIS is the ability to meet organizational objectives through the delivery of geospatial capabilities 
that include the following: 


a) Data management — data management is important in an enterprise setting. Enterprise GIS data management 
focuses on the efficient storage and retrieval of all of an organization’s relevant geographic information. An 
enterprise GIS data may be decentralized, with appropriate data management standards and data governance 
processes defined, so as to ensure that the data integrity is maintained and also the data is available for usage 
by everyone in the organization. 


b 


wm 


Visualization — The visualization of information in a geographic context provides an intuitive means for 
accurate and rapid decision making. Visualization is the most obvious manifestation of enterprise GIS, 
however, enterprise GIS should fully exploit visualization capabilities by incorporating them into tasks and 
activities not traditionally associated with GIS like e-Governance applications or Business applications or 
ERP. 


Spatial analysis — exploiting the wealth of geographic information in an organization is the goal of spatial 
analysis for the enterprise. Non-traditional users of GIS will benefit from this capability. A key objective 
of enterprise GIS architects and designers should be the geospatial enabling of other enterprise systems 
(e.g., loT applications) with spatial analytical capabilities. 


c 


<~ 


0.2 Key Stakeholder concern 


The stakeholders in the current environment of the Smart City involves the Special purpose Vehicle (SPV), 
the Municipal Corporation, Citizens, Business, Researchers, Operation and Maintenance Team of cities, State 
Government and Central Government. Table 1 provides a summary of different stakeholders of smart city their 
business processes and their requirements from a GIS perspective. 


vii 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 1 Stakeholders requirements from GIS perspective in Smart Cities 


Stakeholder 


Business requirements 


GIS Requirement 


Municipality 


. City Base Maps including different layers of 


information like Roads, sewerage network, 
public bins, street lights etc. 


. Tracking of different projects in the city for 


construction, maintenance and operations. 


. Strengthening the municipal finance through 


revenue enhancement and expenditure 
monitoring. 


. Tracking the performance of different city 


aspects like pollution, cleanliness, literacy, 
distribution of healthcare facilities in a 
ward/locality etc. 


. Covid-19 related Contentment Zone, 


Vaccination Centre, Covid Center/Hospitals. 


. City Geodata model with defined layers, attributes, 


relationships and cartography. 


. Common Base maps for all departments to collaborate on 


decision making. 


. Collect spatial information from various sources and 


utilise it across the enterprise. 


. Spatial tracking of municipal projects/activities. 
. Spatial tracking of municipal Income and expenditure. 


. Spatial tracking of performance of city as per different 


parameters. 


. Spatial tracking of all city assets and resources. 


. GIS based mobile app with workflow for field operations 


in city level. 


. Survey apps to collect the pandamic related data and 


display as dashboards. 


Smart City SPV 


. Planning the smart city in terms of planning, 


design, construction and operations. 


. Asset Inventory of the smart city and their 


coverage. 


. Real time tracking of the information flow 


and access to different spatial layers for a 
coordinated decision making. 


. Common Base Maps to understand the requirement of 


different stakeholders of smart city. 


. Municipal Assets inventory required for Smart City. 
. Spatial Area Based Development (ABD) planning. 
. Get the virtual view of the city and urban features and 


urban problems. 


. Spatial view of Smart City Components (Cameras, GPS 


enabled Devices, Sensors, loT devices) with geo-spatial 
data for smooth operation and monitoring. 


. Real time vehicle tracking, citizen sentiment 


capturethrough social media integration. 


. Generation of hotspots and analytics of pollution, crime, 


incidents, events, grievances etc. 


. Geospatial dashboards for decision support system 


regarding the performance against the benchmarks or 
thresholds. 


Citizens 


. Location 


. Access to different locational information like 


the amenities in the neighborhood. 


. Access to different spatial information 


like Road closure intimation, or traffic jam 
intimation.Participate in city governance. 


. Raise grievance through mobile Apps using 


location and geotagged images/photos. 


information related to 
Pandemic/disease Spread. 


Information related to hazards. 


. Means to interact with city through GIS based Web Apps 


and Mobile Apps, like neighbourhood services. 


. Participation in governance on Development Plans and 


Smart Developments and different urban issues. 


. Routing services for moving from one place to otherSharing 


location data and features with different people. 


. Mobile Apps for citizen’s grievance management. 


. Apps to report incident or seak help in the event of Medical 


outbreak. 


. Integration with Sensors to cover the real time weather and 


Hard Information for public. 


Utility Services 


. Maps for the existing location of the Assets. 
. The demand of services and supply of services. 


. Real time location of the problem areas and 


quick repair. 


. Common set of base maps for design and construction, 


operation and maintenance and decision making for 
utilities like electricity, water, sewerage, storm water 
drains, street light, piped gas, etc. 


. Utility asset GIS data model to generate inventories of all 


the assets of the utilities. 


. Spatial asset lifecycle management for understanding age 


of the asset. 


. Spatial workflow based asset operation and maintenance 


for addressing the operational problems. 


Business 


. Needs locational intelligence for setting up 


chains, service centers, new business, and 
branches. 


. Platform to integrate with open socio-economic data 


like Population density data, socio economic data, 
administrative boundaries, land use details. 


viii 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 1 ( Concluded) 


Stakeholder Business requirements GIS Requirement 
Researchers 1. Needs access to spatial and non spatial data 1. Platform to get open GIS data/APIs for conducting spatial 
related to urban features/problems. research on urban dynamics and issues. 
Operation and 1. Needs the details of the City properties and 1. Location based workflows for reporting of urban issues 
Maintenance assets. and problems like water leakage or potholes on roads. 
Team of City 2. Need location of the problem areas for quick 2. Location based alert generation as a part of spatial 
service delivery. workflow. 
3. City problem tracking and resolution status. 
4. GIS based dashboard for tracking of O & M performance. 
State 1. Needs to undertake monitoring of the projects 1. Monitoring of the Smart Cities projects in the state. 
Government progress under the mission cities in the state. 2. Smart City projects tracking Geographically with project 
2. Needs to undertake the monitoring of funds management aspects. 
utilization and requirement for mission 3. Smart City fund tracking at state level. 
objectives. 
Central 1. Needs to undertake monitoring of the projects Monitoring of Smart City program progress. 
Government ie under the mission cities in the Geographic Smart Cities project tracking. 
country. 


Cee Geographic Smart City fund tracking. 
2. Needs to undertake the monitoring of funds 


utilization and requirement for mission 
objectives. 


Smart city projects performance monitoring. 


Du ee en rg 


Enable gap based knowledge sharing between smart cities. 


0.3 Role of GIS in Smart Cities 


GIS plays an important role in the complete lifecycle of Smart City, from planning, designing, construction, 
operation and maintenance to management. Smart city GIS shall integrate with different survey tools, modelling 
software, different types of sensors and IoT devices, and other e-governance enterprise systems like land 
management applications, asset management systems etc. for spatial decision support. 


a) 


b) 


Planning and Design of Smart City: GIS helps to analyse the location of the Assets and Properties in the 
city and the Gap in the provision as per population, area and distance norms. It helps to analyse the right 
sites for city development, view legal boundaries, and arrive at a right valuation of the existing or new sites. 
GIS integrates with different survey technologies like DRONE, Aerial Survey, LIDAR, GPR, etc and may be 
associated with design tools like Building information modelling (BIM), Computer Aided Design (CAD) for 
3D analysis. 


Construct: GIS should integrate with the project management and financial management systems and tools 
for construction monitoring of the different smart city projects. 


Operation and Maintenance: GIS based asset Maintenance system create the models of all the assets 
and properties in the city for their maintenance, repair and refurbishment, real time update of functioning 
by integrating with SCADA, Smart Metering, Remote Transmission Unit (RTUs) etc and field operation 
management. 


City Expansion Plan: This is important especially for the Green field Smart cities to create the land banks and 
inventory of infrastructure to attract buyers, tenants, business. Analyze demographics and market conditions 
to provide a more accurate picture of a property’s suitability to needs. 

City Insights: The GIS helps in the city management by creating intelligence of spatial distribution, 
collaborated operation and maintenance, dynamic real time dashboards about city functions, city economics 
(revenue and expenditure) and performances. 


Fig. 1 describes the City functions, how GIS technology and tools can help the city in undertaking the functions 
and the outcomes of the technology application. 


While defining the role of GIS in smart city, the following fundamental concepts should be taken care of: 


a) 


b) 


Standardization: Standardization of urban processes, mobility and logistics, safety and security, information 
and communication, energy uses, and production etc. 


Integration: integration of the different data system, processes, operational workflows, and real-time 
information. 


1X 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


c) 


d) 


e) 


City Functions GIS processes Outcomes 

1. Property Tax 
2. Water Supply <4 Standardization 
3. Sewerage Management 
4. Drains « Collaboration 
5. Urban Road management 
6. Building Permissions <4 Transparency 
7. Solid waste Management 
8. Town Planning i 
9. Detecting Unauthorized 4 Integration 

Constructions haat Sha 
10. Health < Specialization 
11. Horticulture : PT 
12. Electrical « Design Thinking 
13. Civil Works 
14. Licence/Tehbazari < Governance 
15. Education 4 Workflows & SLA’s 
16. E-Governance 
17. Fire and Emergency « Quick Results 
18. Disaster Management 
19. Complaint/ Grievance « Innovation 


20. Mobility planning 
18. Smart enablement 


Fic. 1 CITY GOVERNANCE ASPECT AND GIS AT CORE 


Design thinking: Design thinking is an analytical and creative approach that focuses on the concerns, interests 
and values of the user. In the city’s case, the user could be the citizen, the entrepreneurs, the academia and 
researchers, the builders and urban service providers. 


Collaboration: collaboration should be across municipal departments, line departments, emergency services, 
businesses and NGOs, and most importantly, citizens. As an integral part of smart cities, citizens shall help 
public authorities to work more efficiently together by integrating citizen-sourced data from smart city apps, 
as well as individually reporting incidents or flagging concerns. 


Innovation: City innovation in management, policy and technology. Since the unique context of each city 
shapes the technological, organizational and policy aspects of that city, a smart city can be considered a 
contextualized interplay among technological innovation, managerial and organizational innovation, and 
policy innovation. 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Indian Standards 


SMART CITIES — GIS 
PART 1 REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE 


1 SCOPE 


This Indian standard describes the Enterprise GIS 
reference architecture that comprises the functional 
architecture, technical reference model, and information 
reference model of the enterprise GIS. It also specifies 
the core capabilities and key design principles of the 
enterprise GIS. 


The implementation methodologies and deployment 
architecture of the GIS are excluded from the scope of 
this standard. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of these standards.’ 


IS 18000 Unified Digital Infrastructure — ICT 
Reference Architecture. 


3 TERMINOLOGY AND ABBREVIATIONS 


3.1 Terminology 


For the purpose of this standard, the following shall 
apply. 


3.1.1 Coordinate System 


A reference framework consisting of a set of points, 
lines, and/or surfaces, and a set of rules, used to 
define the positions of points in space in either two 
or three dimensions. Cartesian coordinate system and 
the geographic coordinate system used on the earth’s 
surface are common examples of coordinate systems. 


3.1.2 Datum 


The reference specifications of a measurement system, 
usually a system of coordinate positions on a surface 
(a horizontal datum) or heights above or below a 
surface (a vertical datum). 


3.1.3 Digital Elevation Model 


The representation of continuous elevation values over 
a topographic surface by a regular array of z-values, 
referenced to a common datum. DEMs are typically 
used to represent terrain relief. 


3.1.4 Geocode 


Ageocode is the set of latitude and longitude coordinates 
of a physical address. 


NOTE — It can be done by plotting x,y (lat, long) data. 
3.1.5 Geocoding 


Geocoding is the process of turning a physical address 
into a set of latitude and longitude coordinates which 
can then be plotted or displayed on a map. 


3.1.6 Geoevents 


Geo Events are data in an event stream in order for 
an Input Connector to construct a Geo Event from the 
events coming in, like disaster event, accident event, 
pipe breakage etc. 


3.1.7 Geospatial Data 


A database or file structure used primarily to store, 
query, and manipulate spatial data. Geo Spatial 
databases store geometry, a spatial reference system, 
attributes, and behavorial use data. Allows you to store 
many different data in one packaged file, rather than 
many spatial data associated files in a simple folder. 
Certain operations seem to run more smoothly when 
your data is packaged in a geospatial database. 


3.1.8 Georeference 


An operation in which an image (such as an aerial 
photo/satellite image/radar images/scanned maps) 
is aligned to a known coordinate system so it can be 
viewed and analyzed with other spatial data. Typically, 
georeferencing involves overlaying an image above 
a basemap and aligning known points on the image 
with the basemap (such as an easily identifiable street 
intersection). 


3.1.9 Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) 


Astandard generic term for satellite navigation systems 
that provide autonomous geo-spatial positioning with 
global coverage. This term includes e.g. the GPS, 
GLONASS, Galileo, Beidou, NAVIC and other 
regional system like IRNSS of India. 


3.1.10 Enteprise GIS 


The implementation of GIS infrastructure, processes 
and tools at scale within the context of an organization, 
shaped by the prevailing information technology 
patterns of the day. Enterprise GIS is integrated into, 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


and shaped by the business processes, culture and 
context of an organization. 


3.1.11 Layer 


The visual representation of a geographic dataset in any 
digital map environment. Conceptually, a layer is a slice 
or stratum of the geographic reality in a particular area, 
and is more or less equivalent to a legend item on a 
paper map. When spatial data (such as a shapefile, MIF, 
KML, GML or similar) is added to a GIS application it 
is represented as a layer on a map. 


3.1.12 PAN Images 


Single channel (panchromatic) image producing better 
ground resolution. 


3.1.13 Raster Data 


A spatial data model that defines space as an array of 
equally sized cells arranged in rows and columns. Think 
of these cells as pixels. 


3.1.14 RESTFUL APIs 


An architectural style for an application program 
interface (API) that uses HTTPs requests to access 
and use data. That data can be used to GET, PUT, 
POST and DELETE data types, which refers to the 
reading, updating, creating and deleting of operations 
concerning resources. 


3.1.15 Shapefile Or shp 


This is the Open File format for geographic or spatial 
data. 
NOTE — Shapefile is the most frequently used file type in 
GIS. Shapefiles appears as points (placemarks, cities etc), lines 
(roads, rivers etc), or polygons (state boundaries, counties, 
zones). 


3.1.16 SOA Architecture 


Software architecture consisting of coupled services. 
Service-oriented architecture, defines a way to make 
software components reusable and interoperable via 
service interfaces. 


3.1.17 Topology 


The spatial relationships between connecting or adjacent 
features in a geographic data layer (for example, arcs, 
nodes, polygons, and points). Topological relationships 
are used for spatial modeling operations that do not 
require coordinate information. Think of it as the 
relationships between things that are adjacent or 
connected to one another. 


3.1.18 Vector Data 


A coordinate-based data model that represents 
geographic features as points, lines, and polygons. 


3.2 Abbreviations 
API Application Programming Interface 
DEM Digital Elevation Model 
DRONE Dynamic Remotely Operated Navigation 
Equipment 
GCP Ground Control Points 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GPR Ground Penetrating Radar 
HRSI High Resolution Satellite Image 
IoT Internet of Things 
LIDAR Light Detection and Ranging 
OGC Open GIS Consortium 
UTM Universal Transverse Mercator 


4 GIS DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURE 


4.1 Key Design Principle 


Enterprise GIS is a system that is integrated through 
an entire organization so that a large number of users 
can manage, share, and use spatial data and related 
information to address a variety of needs, including 
data creation, modification, visualization, analysis, and 
dissemination. 


Fig. 2 describes the enterprise GIS concept, there are 
authoritative content creators in an enterprise given 
the right through enterprise user management. These 
contents may be shared over web as maps and data, 
base maps. The contents may be accessed anytime 
anywhere, using desktops, internet, mobiles, tablets 
etc. The workflows may be created, through which the 
field crew can access the alerts and map information 
and undertake the task. 


In addition to the properties described in 7 of 
IS 18000 : 2020, The enterprise GIS shall adhere to the 
Key Design Principles given in 4.1.1 to 4.1.5. 


4.1.1 Scalable 


The solution architecture shall provide the capability 
to scale the system to meet future needs of additional 
functionalities and usage without inherent bottlenecks 
when supported with appropriate infrastructure and 
licenses. GIS capabilities should offer seamless 
integration. The solution should be scalable to support 
minor functional changes or integration through 
standard interfaces. 


4.1.2 Secure 


The architecture shall be designed to secure data from 
unauthorized access, modifications, and manipulation 


Maps & Data 
Products 


Field Edits 
Crowd Sourcing 


Authoritative 
Content 
Producers 


Configurable & Shared 
* Dashboards 

* Workflows 

* Business rules 

* Production tools 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Base Maps 


Fic. 2 ENTERPRISE GIS 


using advanced user and access management tools 
and capabilities. It should follow and support security, 
authentications and authorization including Web tier 
authentications (for example IWA, PKA), GIS tier 
authentications (Built in identity), Enterprise logins 
(for example SAML 2.0), Enterprise groups 
(for example Active directory and LDAP ) etc. 


4.1.3 High-Availability 


The proposed architecture shall have the capability to be 
up and running over long periods to ensure availability. 
Web GIS server should support deployment cluster 
environments: Active-Active, Active-Passive. There 
should be flexibility for deploying the solution on 
premises, on cloud and hybrid architecture. 


4.1.4 Standard Based 


The integration architecture shall be open, interoperable 
and standard based, so that it ensures a seamless 
integration with all city services. The proposed 
Enterprise GIS architecture should support open 
geo-spatial consortium (OGC) and open web 
services such as WMS, WFS, WCS, WMTS, WPS, 
KML, GeoJson & I3S or OGC 3D Tile service for 
3D rendering. GIS system shall follow the open 
service-oriented architecture (SOA). The complete 
system should be developed using standard development 
tools. The technology must be based on open standards 
that can be exchange information with others and able 
to consume and expose services and API’s as per the 
business needs. The software should provide open API 
& SDKs for developers to build/extend custom web 
mapping applications. (ex: Qt, NET, Java, JavaScript, 
etc). 


4.1.5 Modularity 


The entire design of the integrated solution shall be 
modular. All the business processes and sub-processes 


shall structure in a modular way so that any changes, 
modifications, additions or deletions of any process 
do not affect the entire flow of the application. The 
solution shall design to easily accommodate business 
process changes through Change Management. 


4.2 Enterprise GIS — Capabilities and Functional 
Architecture 


Functionally the enterprise GIS system shall provide 
the following capabilities: 


a) Base Maps: Common set of Base Maps, over 
which the city functions can collaborate for a 
spatial decision support system. The Base Maps 
can be topographical, satellite image, street maps 
etc. on which different layers of information can 
be georeferenced, like property, land use, water 
supply etc. 


b) Data ingestion from different sources: 
Government Data bases, Open Data Portal, 
Enterprise systems, sensors, e-Governance 
applications, Survey Tools like GPS, Drones, 
GPR, LIDAR, REST APIs etc. 

Analysis: It shall facilitate different types of 
trend and pattern base analysis, generating 
hotspots, concentration and dispersion patterns, 
interpolations, statistical models, what-if 
modelling and predictive modelling may be 
undertaken. 


d) Workflows: Location based workflows to 
generate alerts with locational intelligence and 
dashboards for status monitoring. The Enterprise 
GIS shall allow to create dynamic dashboards for 
monitoring and evaluation, Enterprise GIS shall 
enable user specific Web Apps and Maps. 


c 


ma 


Visualization and Dashboards: Creation of 
workflow enabled and dynamic dashboards for 
monitoring, tracking and performance analysis of 


€ 


wn 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


different smart city segments against thresholds 
and benchmarks. Enterprise GIS shall facilitate 
visualization of assets above the ground, below 
the ground, patterns in 2D and 3D along with 
Panoramic images. 


Annex A describes a set of Use cases enabled by 
Enterprise GIS within the context of Smart Cities. 


Fig. 3 depicts the functions of enterprise GIS through 
different GIS tools. It provides layers of base maps, 
described in the GIS information model which may 
be accessed by different functions, like smart street 
lights, ERP and e-governance for property and urban 
services, citizen service Apps, ITS/ITMS etc. Different 
Enterprise GIS Tools of Live streaming, Analysis, 
Trends, Patterns, Workflows, Dashboards, Apps and 
Maps, helps in generating desired thematic and spatial 
information, which may help in spatial decision support 
system. 


4.3 Enteprise GIS functional reference model 


The Enteprise GIS functional reference model 
comprises different tiers. The tiers are represented in 
Fig. 4, as to how it integrates with the command and 
control center. 


a) Data Layer: Spatial data and Non-Spatial data 
are foundation layers of Smart Cities. With 
Georeferencing and topology, the Spatial and 
Non-spatial data will speak to each other. This shall 
be integrated into the defined GIS informational 
model, with defined rules based associations, 
cartography and schema. 


b) Sensor Layers: The Sensor Layers feed the data 
to the GIS system through REST APIs or OGC 
standards. The sensors provide three types of 


Smart City Sensors and devices over 
common set of Base Maps 


Smart Street 
Light 
PAS and ECB ERP 8e 
Governance 
ITMS, ITS, 
traffic Ba se M a ps Citizen 
violations, Service Apps 
accidents th rough 
Enterprise 
Solid waste Sr 
Mnaagement ei 
Survelliance, 
Sensors and Cameras 
GPS 
Environment Call Center 
& Weather Dial 1012 & 
sensors 108 


data to the GIS that are static positions, mobile 
positions, and geo-events. 


c) Application Tier: The GIS Application Tier 
is capable of Geo-processing the data and 
generating different types of thematic information 
and statistical analytics. It shall help the cities in 
generating spatial queries, spatial models, trends 
and patterns based on data storages from devices 
and sensors. 


d) Business layers: The GIS business layer provides 
information like locational intelligence, as a 
summary of data, proximity, buffering; hotspots 
of traffic, events and incidents, real-time vehicle 
tracking, web applications for waste generation 
spatial analytics and routing, GIS based 
dashboards for revenue and tax management, 
different workflow oriented dashboards for alerts 
and operation and performance monitoring and 
GIS based grievance management. 


The complete system may adopt different models — 
on premise, cloud or a hybrid cloud model, whereby 
the data may be residing on the premise servers and 
analysis may happen on the cloud. 


The security of the GIS system should be maintained 
at the data level, application level and network level. 


4.3.1 Detailed Functional Capability of the Enterprise 
GIS System for Smart Cities 


Table 2 presents the functional capability of the 
enterprise GIS system of the smart city, which shall 
enable the smart cities to seamlessly integrate spatial 
data from different sources and non spatial data from 
devices and systems for a spatial decision support 
system. 


Enteprise GIS Applications over the Real time 
data feed 


eLive Streaming of Data from different 
sensors and devices 


eCitizen's Mood analysis 


Live 
Streaming 


e GIS based hotspots based on 


Analysis different parameters 


Trends eGIS based trends of events 


Patterns | eidentifying emerging patterns 


ePredictions based on trend and 
patterns 


Predictive 
Modelling 


e Defining Alerts with locational 


Worktlows intelligence and workflows | 


e Analytical Dashboards with workflow | 


Dashboards and Statistics 
Apps and 
Maps eWeb Apps and Maps 


PSS AS 


Fic. 3 CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF GIS TOOLS FOR SPATIAL DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


5 
ë 
E 
E 
£ 


Sensor Layer 


Building 
Automatio 


Integrated Command and Control Room 


Visualization 
and Decision 


Non Spatial Data: Census , Enterpnse data, Economic data, 
Socioeconomic data, Legacy data of Govemment 


Fic. 4 ENTERPRISE GIS FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE MODEL FOR INTEGRATED ICCC 


Table 2 Functional Capabilities of Enterprise GIS for Smart Cities 


SI. No Capability Functional Description 
F1 Data Creation and Geo spatial data modelling — Authoring Tools 
1 Multithreaded architecture of Desktop GIS System shall run as a native 64-bit application and shall support windows 
Data and Parallel processing 64-bit architecture. 

2 2D-3D Conversion 1. There should be a provision to convert between 2D and 3D. 

2. GIS data creation should support 3D city modelling for smart city planning, should 
support in creation of realistic 3D context and should be able to share these various 
planning environments on the web browser. 

3 Base Maps It shall support usage of Base Map as Web Services. 

4 Raster to Vector and Vector to The Desktop GIS should support Conversion of Raster Data into feature data containing 

Raster Conversion Vector-based data. 

5 Interoperability Support It shall support BIM & KML Image Files, interoperability support, LIDAR classification, 
feature extraction and editing. 

6 Animation of 3D views 1. Functionally GIS should facilitate animation to 3D views and able to export video out 

of it with predefined bookmarks or presentations. 

2. On the fly automatic labelling, multi-labelling, interactive labelling, rotation of labels 
from an attribute field, interactive label placement, predefined label styles & finally 
saves labels as a data layer, for analytics and anoytion in Smart City GIS data. 

7 Geoprocessing and Editing There shall be geoprocessing and editing history for testing and/or audit purpose. 

history Version management shall be there in the data model for regular GIS update and archiving 
old data. 

8 Network Modelling There shall be tools for building network data with Multipoint routing ability for shortest 
route, driveway, safest route analysis. 

9 Proximity analysis There shall be tools for the identification of the closest facility. Provision for creation of an 
origin to destination matrix on map. This shall support neighbourhood analysis. 

10 Routing and Geofencing It shall have the facility to share a route layer including all the information for a particular 
route such as the stops assigned to the route as well as the travel directions to route the buses, 
metro rail, solid waste carrying vehicles or for logistics. 

11 Road Network optimizing It should have the option to manage network data set properties for travel modes, costs, and 
route restrictions for traffic management in smart cities. 

12 Data Interoperability Desktop GIS shall support the import and Export of GIS data in various formats for data 


interoperability. 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


SI. No 


Capability 


Table 2 (Continued) 


Functional Description 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 
F2 
28 


Data Model access 


Data Modelling 


Data Indexing 


Overlays 


On Fly projections 


Time Sliders 


Model Building 


Simultaneous Editing facilities 


Relational Spatial Data Models 


Audit trailing of Geo-Data 
Editing 


Spatial Analytics 


Spatial Adjustment capabilities 


Big data Support in data creation 


Animation and space time 
pattern mining 


Integrated Raster Processing 
Web GIS Capabilities 


User Management system 


The data shall be published on the application server for accessing the GIS data model 
through intranet or on the internet. 


Data Modelling model shall support domains, subtype, spatial rules and relationship, joins 
and spatial references etc. GIS Solution shall have a GIS catalog/schema to manage and 
maintain the GIS data modal. It shall support database administration for user creation and 
management for GIS database. 


Features shall support file attachments, which should provide a flexible way to store 
additional information in any format related to the features on a desktop application. 


Enterprise GIS shall create group layers from multiple data sources including vector overlays 
on top of raster data using desktop software. 


The data creation tool shall support on the fly projections transformation for the coordinates 
systems of GIS data for matching the projection of GIS data of different projected coordinate 
system. 


Enterprise GIS should have the facility of time slider user interface controls to visualize 
temporal data. 


Enterprise GIS shall support rule-based Symbology and cartographic representations of map 
entities. Should support scripting language for customisation. 


The data creation activities or the authoring tools by administrators shall support simultaneous 
editing by multiple users and long transactions capabilities with advanced rule-based editing 
in industry standard RDBMS. 


Relational Spatial Data Models shall support data relationship such as one-to-many or 
many-to-many. the rules should allow users to restrict the type of objects in the origin 
GIS data, table etc that can be related to a certain kind of object in the destination GIS data, 
table etc. for integration with different sets of data and information. 


There shall be an audit trail capability for multiple user editing and tracking using multiple 
set of devices, ERP systems, Databases and APIs. The data base administration in GIS shall 
have capability for resolving any conflicts that may have occurred due to multiple users 
editing on data. There should be a complete mechanism for error handling, conflict detection 
and resolution while submitting the final data to the GIS database. 


The GIS data creation system shall allow the spatial analytics for generating different 
thematic information out of spatial and non spatial data integration. The analysis shall pertain 
to spatial analysis, network analysis, 3D analysis and interoperability. 


The data creation shall have different Spatial adjustment tools including Rubber sheeting, 
Transformation, Edge matching, Attribute transfer for seamless data integration. 


To analyze geospatial records with capability of aggregating points based on proximity. It 
should support spatial & temporal joins and trends in the cluster of points densities out of the 
box. System need to be sustainable to handle the load. 


The spatial analytical capabilities should also support animations and space time pattern 
mining. It shall provide Artificial intelligence machine learning & deep learning toolsets to 
support predictive analysis. 


Shall have integrated image processing capabilities 


1. Enterprise GIS shall have a portal for the administration that lets administrators add, 
update, manage and maintain ULB/Town GIS data and user management, Content 
Sharing and capability to build various GIS applications. 


2. Enterprise GIS shall record various service statistics, such as total requests, average 
response time, and timeouts, and reports this information in the Manager console for 
better monitoring and performance optimization of services. 


3. Enterprise GIS shall be capable of GIS content management (like, manages content 
locations and marks relevant content as authoritative) and organization user 
management (for example, user can manage all aspects of inviting and managing user, 
including adding to groups and resetting passwords) for managing content for different 
projects and role-based access management. 


4. Portal administrator shall be able to create and manage groups out of the box to control 
access to the maps, applications, and other geographic information. A group owner can 
decide who can find the group, if others can request to join, and who can contribute 
their content. 


SI. No 


Capability 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 
Table 2 (Continued) 


Functional Description 


29 


30 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


37 


38 


GIS Widgets 


3D streaming and hosting 


Analytical spatial dashboard 


WebApps and Maps 


Geoprocessing and Publishing 
services 


Web responsive for anytime 
anywhere access of the smart 
city data 


Integration of Data from different 
sources 


Map viewer for interactive maps 


Scalability for GIS performance 


Integrations and OGC 
compliance 


5. Shall provide complete web-based single gateway portal out of the box as an 
organizational GIS platform to create, access, analyse, manage, and share and 
disseminate geo-spatial content amongst users for collaborative decision making 
among the smart city stakeholders. In other words, it should provide a map centric 
web portal platform for managing the organization’s geospatial content. Should have 
a facility of user management to create an account, and grant/revoke user rights for 
viewing, publishing or administrator rights to any users across the network. 


6. Shall have a facility to share published GIS content with other users and only 
authorized users can view or modify the shared content. Enterprise GIS system shall 
have capability to change the web pages appearance (UI/UX), and to select services, 
base maps, rule based templates, solution galleries and available groups to be used. 


7. Enterprise GIS shall allow users to sign in with built-in accounts and accounts 
managed in multiple SAML-compliant or similar identity providers configured to trust 
one another to manage users that may reside within or outside your organization. 


8. Enterprise GIS shall provide a web publishing wizard so that registered users can 
publish websites, create GIS applications without the need for programming. Smart 
City users shall be able to insert search tags to assist authorized users to search and 
locate geographic information, web maps, and web GIS applications create and shared 
by other users. The search results shall be helpful to determine the usefulness of each 
item and find related items. 


9. Enterprise GIS shall be capable to display layers dynamically on the map that shall 
dynamically change based on the visibility of layers, on zoom in and out. 


The Enterprise GIS shall have the feature to web apps using widgets that can easily be 
configured. The suggestive widgets can be Attribute Table, Coordinate system, Extent 
navigation, Incident analysis, Scale Bar, Direction, Search, Summary, Temporal Change 
analysis, Analysis, Base Map Gallery, Bookmarking, Business analysis, Chart Creation, 
Coordinate Conversion, Distance, Direction, Draw, Data aggregation, Filter, Geoprocessing, 
Grid Overlay, Measurement, Layer list, Legend, Proximity, Network Trace, Data Reviewer 
Dashboard, Select, Share, Editor, Print, Visibility. 


GIS system should support exporting 3D object layers (Maps/data) files to upload it on the 
web, where a 3D streaming service is created and hosted. Once published, the resulting 
3D scene layer should be viewed or combined with other web layers. 


Shall enable departmental workflow based analytical dashboard for Communicating the 
quality of data used in decision-making. 


Enterprise GIS shall have industry specific templates, apps and maps that can be configured 
as per the needs of a particular city. These maps, apps and templates shall be based on the 
industry specific best practices around the globe that can be localized as per city needs for 
foundational applications. 


The system shall have the capability to process the geo processing on the web where users 
can use multiple geospatial tools to build models and able to publish the processing service 
on the web that define the inputs and outputs criteria to come out for the desired analytic 
results. 


The web application developed by the Enterprise GIS system shall be web responsive in 
nature and shall automatically fit to the size of mobile devices. Users shall be able to display 
maps, get routes and directions, edit and sync data, perform analysis with search & query. 


Enterprise GIS shall be capable to integrate and manage City maps, satellite images, 
DRONE data, GPS data, LIDAR data, CAD Data of various point of interest information, 
infrastructure and assets etc. of the city. It shall provide access to free Online 2D, 3D, Street, 
Base map, imagery Services for location reference on desktop and web. 


The Enterprise GIS shall provide a map viewer to create, save, share maps and provide 
analysis tools for clustering, aggregation, proximity analysis, data enrichment, data summary 
etc. 


Enterprise GIS system shall be scalable both horizontally and vertically. It shall have 
architecture deployment flexibility such as single machine, multiple machine, cluster- 
based environment Active-Active, Active-Passive, multiple sites deployment. GIS platform 
capability should be offered by a single, seamless integration of software based on the same 
technology. 


The enterprise GIS shall have open API & SDKs for developers to build/extend custom 
web mapping applications (for example, Qt, NET, Java, JavaScript). This shall support Open 
Geospatial Consortium (OGC) and open web services: including Map services, WMS, WFS, 
WCS, WMTS, WPS, KML, Geo JSON & 3D tiles for the rendering of 3D data. 


7 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 2 ( Concluded) 


Functional Description 


The GIS application server and database servers shall be supported on Windows and Linux 
platform. Enteprise GIS shall support standard Web server and Application servers like IIS, 
Apache, Tomcat, Web Sphere, Web logic etc. 


GIS System shall support a Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). 


The Enterprise GIS shall support Security, Authentication, and Authorization using Web-tier 
authentication (IWA, PKI and similar), GIS-tier authentication (built-in identity, Enterprise 
logins and similar) Enterprise Groups (Active Directory and LDAP and Similar) and 


The Enterprise GIS shall have Software Development Kits (SDKs) to build and deploy native 
applications on a variety of popular platforms and devices. 


GIS system shall have out of the box Survey application framework for configuring mobile 
apps that authority can configure any time to create form centric solutions for the creation, 
sharing and analyzing surveys as and when required. Enterprise GIS shall help the authority 
to create/configure survey-based forms that are accessible by city stakeholders/outsourced 
vendors for field data collection. One should design a survey with predefined questions with 
logics and easy to fill answers. This should allow embedding audio, images with multiple 


Provide Single integrated collaborative Platform based Software which shall support 
complete workflow for design, development and dissemination of highly accurate spatial 
Records Information. The solution should support Desktop, Server, Mobile and Cloud 


Shall provide Advanced Geo-processing, Geo-tagging, Geo-coding, Geo-referencing tools. 


SI. No Capability 
39 Cross platform support/Platform 
agnostic 
40 SOA Architecture 
41 Security 
TLS/SSL. 
42 SDKs and Survey Application 
Frameworks 
language offering. 
43 Enterprise Wide Platform 
Platform. 
44 Advanced Geoprocessing 
capabilities 
45 GML-XML 


Should enable the GML (simple features) and WFS core standards, and leverage OGC 


formats such as CityGML, WFS, and KML/KMZ. 


4.3.2 Data Integration 


Data Integration is the core function of a data layer that 
focuses on integrating sensors, various governmental 
IT systems and 3" party IT systems which generate 
data. 


Data is generated by various IoT subsystems, video 
cameras from various public and private cameras etc, 
social media data streams, crowd-sourced citizen data, 
enterprise systems, importing of legacy and/or archived 
city data, Survey data from LIDAR, GPS, GPR, 
DRONE, HRSI etc. These systems generate structured 
data (such as JSON, XML, CSV), unstructured data 
(such as variable length textual data, device logs), Map 
related APIs like Google APIs, audio and video data, 
time-series data, binary data, raster data, point cloud 
data etc. 


Data Ingestion is a sub-function of data integration 
and shall support a variety of standards compliant data 
ingestion protocols. Based on the system of concern, 
the data layer may support real time data ingestion, 
streaming data ingestion, batch data ingestion or all of 
them. 


In the enterprise GIS system, the data integration shall 
happen via Service Oriented Architecture, or OGC 
compliance or through REST APIs. 


As shown in Fig. 5 the locational data or Geo Events 
shall be integrated with enterprise GIS via Out of Box 
systems for electronic devices, or from COTS like 
KML, Twitter etc. or from GIS Partner systems via 
sensors, Map services, etc. 


4.4 Conceptual Model of Enterprise GIS 


Fig. 6 provides a conceptual model of an enterprise GIS 
for integration and data access in Smart cities. A brief 
description of different components and sub-systems of 
the enterprise GIS is given below. 


4.4.1 Web GIS Apps 


The top layers talk about the Apps which are created 
using API services of data exchange from different 
sensors, devices and e-Governance applications. The 
Web GIS Apps may be developed using any of the 
following approaches: 


a) Configure Apps using widgets and templates to 
meet business needs. 


b) Extend existing apps — shall also allow modular 
frameworks that allow to create custom widgets 
and plug them into the apps. 


c) Customize apps using APIs and SDKs. These 
APIs and SDKs provide objects like the Identity 
Manager to manage credentials within custom 
apps that expose Web GIS capabilities It may be 
built according to business-focus. 


4.4.2 Automation using APIs and Scripts 


As the volume and velocity of IoT data increases, 
automation becomes both necessary and more valuable 
to the business. Automation allows technology to create 
and maintain infrastructure and programmatically 
execute the steps of a well-defined workflow while 
limiting human interaction. Common tools for 
automation include APIs and scripts. 


Out of Box 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Geo Events 


lala Dalila 


4 N 2eme \ 
Poll on Enterprise GIS server for features Active MQ @ SOI 
Poll on external websites for GeoJSON,ISON,XML or Rest endpoint CAP NIC 
Receive GeoJSON /JSON on a Web Socket Cursor-on-target A| NATMO 
Receive RSS Exploitation support data i| Bhuvan 
Receive Text from TCP or UDP Socket Instagram C| NRSC 
Subscribe to an external WebSocket for GeoJSON/JSON KML t| Airport Authority of india 
tch a folder for new CSV, GeoJSON or JSON files mart | indian metrological 
NMEA | Services 
RabbitMQ cPce 
Sb. OS A 
O| Twitter 


D 


Fic. 5 DATA INGESTIONS FROM DIFFERENT SOURCES 


PORTAL 


INFRASTRUCTURE 
APIs & SDKs 


External Systems And Services 


ociated Best Practices 


* Automation .Capability Delivery . Communicating Success . Geospatial 
Strategy . Governance . Prioritization approach . Publication strategy . 
urity. Workf lo 


FIG. 6 CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF ENTERPRISE GIS 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


4.4.3 Distributed Web GIS 


Distributed web GIS is a modern implementation 
pattern that supports sharing. It facilitates connection 
of multiple GIS deployments together, so users from 
each deployment can share content with others. 


4.4.4 Enterprise Integration 


There may be different approaches to enterprise 
integration, depending upon the utilization of the data. 


a) Geocentric applications, that enhance GIS 
applications with business data and capabilities to 
automate or inform location-centric activities. 

b) Geoenabled applications, that enhance business 

applications with GIS data and capabilities to 

automate or inform business activities. 


Composite applications, that integrate capabilities 
from multiple systems in situations where no 
existing system can or should serve as the hosting 
framework. This pattern typically uses web 
services to integrate data and logic from multiple 
systems to derive new functionality. 


4.4.5 Environment Isolation 


Environment Isolation for production, staging and 
development should be separated for meeting the 
SLAs, data safety, and data usage. 


4.4.6 High Availability 


High availability is a set of strategies for minimizing 
service downtime and maximizing system performance 
and reliability, because GIS is part of critical 
business operations and workflows, it is essential for 
organizations to apply high availability strategies to 
GIS. 


4.4.7 Data Management 


Data Management exposed as web services that 
allow end users to create, maintain, and transform 
geographic data. For example, you can use a 
mobile app to access a web service for data editing, 
allowing you to gather location data in the field. Key 
server-side data management capabilities include short 
and long transaction editing, data replication, and 
extract, transform, load (ETL) procedures. 


4.4.8 Analysis 


Analysis represents web services for performing GIS 
analytics. These analytics can range from simple 
geometric functions (like point-in-polygon) to complex 
geoprocessing models for site selection. Analytics can 
be run on many kinds of data including vector data, 
raster data, linear networks, imagery, 3D data, real-time 
data, and big data. 


4.4.9 Visualization 


Visualization represents web services for creating and 
consuming visual information products like 2D maps 


10 


and 3D scenes. These products can be dynamically 
generated on demand, or pre-rendered and cached. 


4.4.10 Data and Storage 


Data and Storage represents the stored geographic 
information leveraged by GIS servers. Enterprise GIS 
for Smart cities shall allow multiple storage models 
for various data types, formats, and uses. There is 
data store managed by the enterprise applications or 
through relational data stores (for vector data), tile 
cache data stores (for map and 3D scene caches), and 
spatiotemporal big data stores (for big data) Or data 
stored in spatially aware RDBMS (such as Oracle, 
Postgres). Or object-relational model for storing 
geographic data in a relational database management 
system (such as Microsoft SQL Server, IBM DB2, or 
Oracle etc), a file-based structure, or an in-memory 
columnar system like SAP HANA etc. Another model 
is to connect to externally managed data sources like 
Hadoop, IBM Netezza, and Teradata or similar. 


4.4.11 Patterns of GIS Usage 


a) Mapping and Visualization is how people 
understand locations and relationships through 
visual representations. 2D and 3D (above, below 
and panoramic) images, maps and charts bring 
data to life and provide context, so people can 
share and understand information. 

b) Data Management is how people collect, organize, 

and maintain accurate locations and details about 

assets and resources. It is important to persist 
spatial data within storage models optimized for 
its unique characteristics. 


Storage models include the  geodatabase, 
spatiotemporal big data store, relational data store, 
and tile cache. 

d) Field Mobility includes managing and enabling 
a mobile workforce to collect and access 
information in the field. This improves visibility 
into the operational aspects of an organization, 
enhance workforce scheduling, reduce issues 
caused by stale data, and empower personnel with 
the information needed to perform tasks while on 
the move. 


Monitoring allows people to track, manage, and 
monitor fixed and mobile assets and resources in 
real time. This lets organizations tap into, analyze, 
and display streaming data from many sensors, 
devices, and social media feeds. 


Analytics involves applying analytical techniques 
to transform data into actionable information. 
Analytics can be used to discover, quantify, 
and predict trends and patterns to empower 
decision-making and improve business outcomes. 


Design and Planning enables people to evaluate 
alternative solutions and create optimal designs. 


g) 


This supports the design workflow by enabling 
users across organizations and communities to 
collaborate on design decisions. 
h) Decision Support involves combining data, 
metrics, and operational and analytical layers on 
a map or dashboard to better understand activities, 
projects, and operations. This produces valuable 
information for decision-makers. 


Constituent Engagement includes two-way 
sharing of information with the public, partner 
agencies, or other external stakeholders. By 
improving engagement and collaboration with 
communities of interest, you can promote more 
informed decision-making. 


)) 


k) Sharing and Collaboration provides self-service 
capabilities, so people can discover, use, make, 
and share maps. This lets you extend the value of 
location information to the entire organization or 


community. 


4.5 Enterprise GIS Technical Reference Model 


Fig. 7 describes the conceptual technical reference 
model of enterprise GIS. The reference model is 
divided into the following three tiers: 


a) GIS database and authorising tier for user 
management, 


b) Enterprise GIS application tier for the business 
processing using the spatial and non-spatial data, 
and 


c) Presentation tier for access by different 


stakeholders of the smart cities. 


The Enterprise GIS shall be integrated with external 
systems through SOA and Rest APIs. 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


4.5.1 GIS database and Authoring Tier 


The foundational tier, the centralized GIS database 
consists of all the point of interest, spatial and 
non-spatial layers with operational and analytical 
store. It consists of Spatial database including GIS 
data store (Containing the complete data for the Land 
base, Assets, Smart City Properties, Networks and 
Urban Services), this also includes other databases 
received from different departmentssuch as Census, 
Environment, Socio-economic data that are part 
of the overall solution. This tier will support the 
generation of the Smart city geospatial data model. 
The location based Apps will utilize the data model 
for GIS data authoring and management. The database 
integration services will be the mode of connection 
between the data tier and application tier for data 
transaction services. The databases are integrating 
to each other using data Integration Services This 
centralized GIS database will be utilized by all 
the Smart City application for their analysis and 
geo-specific activities. The database tier also includes 
data authoring stations for the administration and 
authoring of map data. 


4.5.2 Application Tier 


The Application Tier consists of the server application 
and Portal providing the necessary functionalities 
such as authentication, geo-processing, metadata 
management, map rendering, web application builder, 
and many ready to use web and mobile applications 
etc. Application interfaces and applications will be 
exposed to the clients using these business processing 
components as specified. 


t 
E 
z 
E 
5 
< 


où 
2 
a 
$ 
â 
2 
© 


Te eee T 
I Third Party | 
c 
Ë fr ffs is oa | 
g 5 if H a l Intelligent | 
s E Department users Citizens Field Users GIS Professional Municipal Operation l Traffic 
v & Admin Officers center Users | Management | 
a 
Internet/Intranet l city | 
F Epa E SS ee + Se Ee SS ES Se Se ee | Surveillance | 
Business Logic Layer Tier | 
qa a we & -E 
5 te) co "B co cH ide eg I | 
= Map Navigation Query/Analysis Locate/Search Editing Geo Routing Reporting Paie Analysis i =| | 
= Management | 
8 Authenticat Route Analysis Map Sey GIs | 
= ii . Cor id & 
$ ion Services Services Services Services oeni Integrati sera a | 
Services on API's l | 
| System 
| 
Geo Coding Catalog Base Map Feature OGC l is ty Tax | 
Services Services Services Services Services l ie | 
| 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| | 
| 


Analytical 
Data Store 


— — — — Gls Architecture Boundary 


— — — — External & Other Existing IT system Boundary 


Fic. 7 TECHNICAL REFERENCE MODEL OF ENTERPRISE GIS 


11 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


4.5.3 Presentation Tier 


The Presentation Tier interface to be used by authorized 
stakeholders like citizens, Municipal officials, SPV, 
utilities, operation and maintenance persons, traffic 
management authorities, etc. The users will access the 
data through the intranet or the internet. Authorized 
users will be able to access the system through multiple 
interfaces including Desktop, Web and/or Mobile. 


4.6 GIS Information Reference Model 


Prepare base map of the city which shall be common 
across all Smart City functions including Surveillance, 
Lighting, Traffic, parking, ICT based solid waste 
management, bus transport, Administration, etc. The 
Base Map of the city shall be prepared at the scale of 
1:1000 with Datum: WGS84 and Projection: UTM. 
For geo-referencing the base maps, there shall be 
1 GCP per 5 Sq Kms. The satellite image used for the 
preparation of the base map shall have a resolution of 
0.5 metre (or better) with PAN sharpened Natural Color 
Composite (NCC). 


The Geo Information Reference Model designed should 
broadly include the following: 


a) Geographic features be represented for each theme 
(for example, points, lines, polygons, or rasters) 
along with their tabular attributes. 


b) Data be organized into datasets, such as feature 
classes (Vector dataset with certain set of criteria), 
attributes, raster datasets, and so forth. 


c) Additional spatial and database elements be 
included for integrity rules, for implementing rich 
GIS behaviour (such as topologies, networks, and 
raster mosaics), and defining spatial and attribute 
relationships between datasets. 


All the layers shall be captured as. Shp files for easy 
integration. 


Table 3 provides indicative GIS layers for Smart City 
which shall be displayed on Enterprise GIS portal of 
Cities and be available for integration with Command 
and Control Room. 


Table 3 Reference Data Model 


GIS Layers Type of Data 


Attributes Requirement 


Administrative 


District Polygon Name 
Area 
LGD 
Code 


Tehsil Name 
Area 


LGD Code 


Polygon 


City Boundary Polygon Name 
Area 
LGD 


Code 


Name 
Area 


Municipal Boundary Polygon 


Zonal Boundaries Polygon 


Area 


Name/Number 


Optional 


Optional 


Mandatory 


Mandatory 


Mandatory 


Mohalla Names 
Zonal Officers 


Ward Boundaries Polygon 


Ward Number 


Mandatory 


Ward Corporator: Name, Photo, Mobile number 


Ward Officers: Name: Phone numbers 


n 


Demographic 


Data: Population, Male, Female, 


Household, Literacy, Sex Ratio, Population growth, 
Projected population (Arthmatic method), Geometric 
Method, (Incremental method) 


Ward Revenue 


Ward Expenditure 


12 


GIS Layers 


Type of Data 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


Attributes 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Requirement 


Village Boundaries 


Plot Boundary 


Parliamentary Constituencies 


Assembly Constituencies 


ABD 


Circle Boundary 


Planning Boundaries 


Master Plan Layers 


City Development plans 


Landuse Existing 


Airport Authority Areas 


Eco-Sensitive Zones 


Archeological protected areas 


Health Districts 


Police Beats 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon, Line, Point 


Polygon, Line, Points 


Polygon Line points 


Polygons 


Polygons 


Polygons 


Polygons 


Polygons 


Village Name 
Population 

Parcel ID 

Right of records (RoR) 
Aadhar Number of Owner 
Type of Use 

Nam 

Area 

Elected Member 
Name 

Area 

Elected Member 
Name 

Area 

Number 

Tax Rate 

Unit 


Landuse Type 
Landuse Subtype 
Landuse_ Type 
Land Use_Sub type 
Landuse_ Type 
Landuse Subtype 
Number 

Height Clearance 
Sensitivity_Type 
Area 

Type 

Area 

Area 

Health Officer 
Number of Facilities 
Area 


Beat Number 


Number of Police Stations and Chowkis 


Number of resources. 


13 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Mandatory 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Mandatory 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


GIS Layers Type of Data Attributes Requirement 
Property 
Property Parcel Polygon PIN Optional 
Type 


Use (Residential, Commercial, Industrial, Public and 
Semi Public) 


Address 

Category 

Year of Construction 
Number of Floors 
Owners name and address 
Adhar Number 
Photograph of Property 
Coverage Area 
Occupancy Type 
Source of water 

Meter Number 

Fire safety measures 
Toilet 

Solid waste management status 
Tax assessed Status 
Tax assessed amount 
Tax Payment status 
Tax Last Paid 

Tax CESS Assessed 
Tax CESS paid 

Tax Last Paid date 


Transport 


Road with all Hierarchies Line Name Mandatory 


Hierarchy (NH, SH, Expressway, ODR, DR, V8, 
BRTS corridor) 


Road centreline 
Road edges 
From and to 
Length 
Width 
Lanes 
Medians 
Condition 
ROW 
Footpaths 
Footpath Width 
Cycle Tracks Line Status (Proposed/Existing) Mandatory 
Width 
Length 
From-To 
Smart Bikes available 
Junctions Polygon Name Mandatory 
Types 
Signalled 


14 


GIS Layers 


Bridges 
Flyovers 
Culverts 


Causeways 


Metro Lines 


Metro Station 


Railways 


Railways Station 


Airport 


Parking Lots 


Rope Ways 
Rope way station 


Bus Stops 


Bus Routes 


Traffic Signals 


CCTV Location 


Type of Data 


Points 
Points 
Lines 


Polygons 


Line 


Point 


Line 


Polygons 


Polygons 


Polygons 


Points 


Lines 


Points 


Point 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


Attributes 
Name 
Year of Construction 
Scheme 
Condition 
Length 
Load bearing capacity 
Status (existing/proposed) 
Route ID 
From-to 
Route No. 
Station name 
From and to 
Under Zone 
Name 
Platforms 
Name 
Flights to 
Location 
Occupancy 
Smart Parking (Yes/No) 
Type (Paid or Unpaid) 
Location (Open, enclosed) 
Ownership (MC/Pvt) 
CCTV Location in Parking 
Route 
Station name 
Name 
Route 
Smart Bus Stop (Yes/No) 
PIS available (Yes/No) 
From and to 
Length 
Number of Buses Plying 
Number 
Existing or proposed 
Type of Signals 
Existing since 
Working or Not working 
Source of Power 
Location 
Type (PTZ, ANPR, CCTV) 
Status (Existing/planned) 
Year of Installation 


Camera Specifications 


15 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Requirement 


Mandatory 


Optional 


Mandatory 


Optional 


Mandatory 


Mandatory 


Mandatory 


Optional 
Optional 
Mandatory 


Mandatory 


Mandatory 


Mandatory 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


GIS Layers Type of Data Attributes Requirement 


Utility 
Storm Water Drainages Lines Name Mandatory 
From and to 
Length 
Width 
Capacity 
Location on RoW 
Type of Drain (Open, Closed) 
Construction Type (Cemented, Kuchca) 
Elevation 
Construction Year 
Inlets Points No. Optional 
Width 


Construction Year 


Sewage Network Line No. Mandatory 
Location on RoW (Left Right middle) 
From-to 
Length 
Width 
Diameter 
Type 
Construction Year 
Depth 
Manholes and Culverts Point No. Mandatory 
Position 
Diameter 


Construction Year 
Elevation line Contour height Optional 


Treatment Plants Points Name Mandatory 


Type (Effluent Treatment Plant, Sewage Treatment 
Plant, C&C Effluent Treatment Plant, Activated 
Sludge Plant) 


Capacity 
Installed Year 
Condition (working, not working) 
Public Conveniences Points ID Optional 
Operated by 
Type 
User Type (Male, female, Both) 
Differentially Abled (Yes, No) 
Year commissioned 


Water availability 


Recycled Water Line Type Optional 
Use 


16 


GIS Layers 


Type of Data 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


Attributes Requirement 


Water Supply System 


Valves 


Pump station 


Over Head Tank 


Underground Reservoir 


Well 


Public Taps 


Smart Meter 


Bulk Meter and Flow Meter 


Lines 


Points 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


No. Mandatory 
Location on RoW (Left Right middle) 

From-to 

Length 

Diameter 

Type (Main/lateral) 

Commissioned on 

Depth 

Flow direction 

Pressure (designed) 

No. Mandatory 
Use 

Location 


Type (Stop, Angle, Concealed stop valve, Gate, Ball, 
Foot, Air relief, Pressure releif, Scour, Gate, Butterfly, 
Float, Bib cock, Fire hydrant 


Contruction Year 

Depth 

No. Optional 
Capacity 

Installed Year 

No. Optional 
Location 

Capacity 

SCADA ID 

Installed Year 

No. Optional 
Location 

Capacity 

Commissioned Year 

No. Optional 
Location 

Depth 

Perineal status 

No. Optional 
Location 

Installed Year 

No. Mandatory 
Location 

CIN 

Owner 

Installed Year 

No. Mandatory 
Location 

Type (Coriolis Meters. 

DP Meters. 

Magnetic Meters. 

Multiphase Meters. 

Turbine Meters. 

Ultrasonic Meters. 

Vortex Meters.) 

Installed Year 


17 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


GIS Layers Type of Data Attributes Requirement 
Electric Substations Points No. Optional 
KVA 
Commissioned Year 
Electric Network Line No. Optional 
From-To 
Underground/Overground 
Length 
Street Light Poles Points Pole No. Mandatory 
Smart Pole Sensors 
Number of Connections 
Type of Bulb 
Installed Year 
OFC Line Line OFC line No. optional 
Installed Year 
OFC Manholes Point Manhole ID optional 
Commissioned Year 
Emergency and Disaster 
Earthquake Prone Areas Polygon Classification Mandatory 
Flood Prone Area Polygon Classification Mandatory 
Cyclone Prone Area Polygon Classification Mandatory 
Thunderstorm Prone Area Polygon Classification Mandatory 
Lightening Prone areas Polygons Classification Optional 
Heat wave prone area Polygon Classification Optional 
Cold wave prone area Polygon Classification Optional 
Fire Stations Points Location Mandatory 
Phone number 
Station head 
Number of Fire Brigades 
Police Stations Points Location Mandatory 
Type (Thana, Chowki, Police station) 
Phone number 
Station head 
Flood Sensors Points Location Optional 
Fire Sensors Points Location Optional 
Education 
University Points Name Mandatory 
Colleges Points Area 
Intercollege Points Facilities 
Schools Points Location 
Skill Development Centers Points ee (OYE PWO 
Levels-(Primary, Secondary, Senior Secondary, 
Intercollege) 
Courses 
Vocational Training Institutes Points 


18 


GIS Layers 
Health Centers 
Health Centers 


Blood Banks 


Financial Services 


ATM 


Banks 


Financial Institutes 


Insurance companies 


Solid Waste Management 
Zones 


Smart Bins 


Community Bins 


Collection points 


Dumping Ground 


Plants for Waste processing 


Weighing Bridge 


Routes of waste collection 


Fuel Stations 


Petrol Pumps 


Type of Data 


Points 


Points 


Points 


Points 


Points 


Points 


Points 


Polygon 


Points 


Point 


Point 


Area 


Point 


Point 


Line 


Point 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


Attributes 


Name 

Type 

Ownership (Govt. or Pvt. Location) 
Level 

Beds 

Resources 

Facilities 

Name 

Capacity 

Name 


Location 


Location 
Bank 

Opening Time 
Location 
Bank 

Opening Time 
Location 


Name 


Location 


Name 


No. 

No./ID 

Location 

Type 

Address 

Capacity 

Sensor Type 

No./ID 

Location 

Type 

Address 

Capacity 

Location 

Location 

Area 

Life 

Type (Processing Plants, Incinerator and 
Bio-methanation Plant) 
Location 

No. 

No. of vehicle Plying 


Location 
Owned by 


19 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Requirement 


Mandatory 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 
Mandatory 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 
Mandatory 


Optional 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


GIS Layers 
Market Places 
Whole sale 
Shopping centers 
Shop 
Hat Bazar 
Malls 
Public Services 


Cremation ground 


Post Office 
Community Hall 


Kiosks 


Government Offices/Buildings 


Religious 


Temples 


Mosques 


Gurudwaras 


Churches 


Residential 


Hotels 


Others 


Tourism and Recreation 
Spiritual 

Historical 

Recreation Centers 


Parks and Gardens 


Restricted Areas 


Defense 


Others 


Type of Data 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Points 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Point 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Polygon 


Table 3 ( Continued) 


Attributes 


Location 
Specialty 


No. of establishments 


Location 


Type (Burial place/Grave Yard/Creamtion ground) 


Type of Facilities Available 
Capacity 

Location 

Location 

Booking Details 

Location 


Owner 


Name 
Central/State/Local 
Offices List 


Location 
Name 
Location 
Name 
Location 
Name 
Location 


Name 


Location 


Name 


Location 


Name 


Name 
Details 


Name 
Area 


Available facilities 


Name 
Area 


Name 
Area 


20 


Requirement 


Optional 
Optional 
Optional 
Optional 
Optional 


Optional 


Optional 
Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


Optional 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Table 3 ( Concluded) 


GIS Layers Type of Data Attributes Requirement 
Smart Integration 
Proposed Smart Traffic light Point Location Mandatory 
points 
Smart Pole Points Location Mandatory 
Sensors 
Lighted 
Type of light 
Working Status 
Bike Sharing Area Location Mandatory 
VMS Point Location Mandatory 
Emergency Boxes Points Location Mandatory 
Cameras Points Location Mandatory 
Camera Number 
IP Address 
SCADA Points Location Mandatory 
SCADA ID 
Sports 
Stadiums Area Location Mandatory 
Name 
Playgrounds Area Location Optional 
Name 
Area 
Urban Poor 
Slums Area Name Optional 
Population 
Households No 
Household with LPG 
Household With in Premise Water Supply 
Household with In Premise Toilets 
Household with Electricity 
Demographics 
Household having waste management Facility 
Services for Urban Poor Points Name Optional 
Type (Education, Health, Shops etc) 
Maintained by 
Condition 
NOTE — The mandatory layers are essential for and archiving facilities. The Rules are to be defined for 


smart cities and opetional layers are “good to have”. 
IS 18000 : 2020 capture the Base map requirments of a smart 
city which are in real sense the mandatory layers. 
The Information Reference Models shall have defined 
Schemas and Taxonomies, which are spatially connected 
and follows topological rules and also Attributes and 
Relationship Rules. It shall have a version management 


21 


Polygon, Networks and Points defining Spatial Joins 
and relationships. The data model shall have validation 
Rules with domains and subtypes, design workflows 
and map properties, Label and Annotations classes, 
network dataset design & rules and tools for Enterprise 
wide base map creation and updation. It shall be directly 
used in the Applications. 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Clause 4.2 ) 
USE CASES 


A-1 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over 
Portal for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


Location of the Traffic Signals. 
The location of Junctions. 


The location of CCTV cameras 
on Junctions. 


The Departmental Integration will help 
in further expansion of the GIS layers 
like integration with Traffic data with 
GIS may help in generation of Travel 
demand, the Volume by capacity of 
the roads, the identification of traffic 
bottlenecks, the accident prone areas. 


GIS enabled maintenance workflow 
e.g. number of potholes on defined road 
stretch. 


A-2 SAFE CITY CAMERAS FEED 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over 
Portal for Use by stakeholders 


Generate Department wise spatial 
queries and output. 
GIS Integration Level 2 


(Integration with Department) 


Video Feed of Traffic through 
ATC controller and link with 
Traffic management server 
in ICCC to visualise the live 
traffic conditions in the city 
and the traffic management. It 
will generate a hotspot of traffic 
in real time and the alternate 
diversion. The time wise 
analysis of the records will show 
different type of analysis: 


Peak hour traffic. 
Traffic accumulation causes. 
The traffic delays. 


This may then be used for 
modelling Traffic management 
plan of the city. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


Location of the Surveillance 


Cameras in the City. 
Location of the Police Beat maps. 


Location of Police stations and 
Chowkis. 


The coverage areas of the cameras. 


The Police beat maps with further details 
of the resources like Thana’s Chowkis 
etc. 


Resource deployment at each beat, 
Patrolling routes. 
Number of vehicle deployed. 


Location details of criminals operating 
in area Generate Department wise spatial 
queries and outputs. 


22 


The dynamic integration with 
the protocols of the Cameras. 
Live feed of a camera can be 
launched from the map. The 
analysis involves Hot Spots of 
Crime, incidents and Accidents, 
different type of clustering of 
type of incidents. 


The patterns of Incidents, 


Dashboards with 
analytical data. 


spatial 


A-3 EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 (Integration 
with Department) 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


The mapping of disaster prone areas 
in the city. 

The location of all the Disaster 
Management related Layers like 
hospitals, police stations, Fire 
Brigade, Disaster Control Rooms, 
Disaster control authorities with 
details, Shelter Sites, Location of 
critical Assets, location of transport 
depots 


The Departmental integration will help 
in creating a resilient City framework 
like the different types of disasters 
expected in the city and it’s impact, 
over lives and properties. 


Using Weather Updates for Cyclones, 
Thunderstorm, Lightning, Heat wave, 
Cold wave, Heavy Rainfall/Snowfall 
etc. and updates for air quality, flood 
management related to these events 
and Alert generation for People through 
Apps, Media, Display and Public 
announcement systems. 


Workflow for Alert generation 
requisite authority for taking actions. 


to 


There should be integration of data 
from MoES with the GIS and web 
GIS platform as well as mobile App 
for all purposes and all stakeholders 
including citizens, Govt and non-govt 
agencies etc. 
The location of Vulnerable Critical 
infrastructure and Vulnerable social 
groups will be identified as part of 
disaster prevention. 
In the incidents of Disaster, the GIS 
system may be used in a crowd 
sourcing workflow management system 
to identify location of disaster. The 
workflow may further generate alerts 
and triggers for the respective authority. 
Social Media linkages with GIS for 
Live data on Disasters and for rapid 
analysis and decision support system 
including: 

1. Shortest Path to reach the Disaster 

prone site. 
. Evacuation Plans. 
. Nearest Hospital. 
. Food Dropping. 
. Public Alerts. 


. Route for water tankers. 


I D À fF © D 


. Critical Asset Restoration plan 
using GIS. 


oo 


. Spread Mapping of disaster. 


9. GIS based Critical Asset 
protection plan. 


23 


The analysis of the Disaster 
related data for the long term 
Disaster prevention plan like 
flood management strategy, 
Fire safety Management 
system, Accident management 
system, Health emergency 
Management, Relocation plans, 
Decongestion plans. 


The climate weather data stored 
over a period of time can be used 
for Meteorological analysis and 
representation over map. Like, 


1. Extreme and Average 
rainfall in the city and 
Drainage Carrying 
capacity. 

2. Temperature Range 
and the Green building 
management plan. 


3. Pollution Concentration 
and Diffusion models. 


4. Pollution and Health 
Models. 

5. Integration with VMS for 
Alerts. 


Predictive analysis of different 
type of disasters. 


Integration with VMS for 
Alerts. 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


A-4 METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT 


GIS Integration Level 1 


(Visualization layers over Portal 


for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


Weather Update on the city map. Using Weather 


Pollution Update on City map. 


Updates for 
Flood Management and Alert 
generation for People through 
Apps, Media and Public 
announcement systems. 


Workflow for Alert generation 
to requisite authority for taking 
actions. 


A-5 DYNAMIC MARKET PLACE 


GIS Integration Level 1 


(Visualization layers over Portal 


for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


The weather data stored over a period 
of time can be used for Meteorological 
analysis and representation over map. 
Like, 
1. Average rainfall in the city and 
Drainage Carrying capacity. 
2. Temperature Range and the Green 
building management plan. 
3. Pollution Concentration and 
Diffusion models. 
4. Pollution and Health Models. 


5. Integration with VMS for Alerts. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


Dynamic Market Place location 


and routes. 


A-6 SMART PARKING 


GIS Integration Level 1 


(Visualization layers over Portal 


for Use by stakeholders 


The departmental integration 
provides the data related to the 
Dynamic market places. And 
generate spatial queries about the 
day of visit in particular locality, 
the frequency and duration of 
visit, the type of commodities 
available. 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


Integration with GPS and Tracking 
Location of the Express. It will be 
integrated with the call centre for 
the query for the products. It will 
have interface with Web and mobile 
GIS application. The data stored may 
be utilised to analyse the demand 
analysis, buyers preferences, the 
demographics of buyers, the location 
analysis in terms of effectivity and 
Business GIS solution. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


Location of the Parking open 
Parking, Multi-Level Parking and 


Closed Parking with Capacity. 


The departmental integration 
will provide the details with data 
like, timings, Rate cards, the 
maintenance authority, the duty 
allocation etc. 


Geo-fencing for parking nearby. 


24 


The real time integration will generate 
a geo fencing with proximity to 
parking and availability of space. 


For Bay parking management using 
sensors. 


In long terms this will be helpful in 
analysing the adequacy of parking 
facilities in the city. 


A-7 PUBLIC BIKE SHARING 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over 
Portal for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


Location of Bike docking Stations The demarcation of the Byke 
and number of bikes available at routes and it’s details. 


each of the location. 


A-8 SMART POLE & SMART LIGHTING 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


Real time bike availability status 
over the map. Analysis of Adequacy 
in compare to demand. The number 
of users, the areas where the usage is 
high. The low usage area and reasons 
for it. The User details, like age group, 
economic status, gender etc. for future 
planning of byke routes. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


Location of Smart Poles with all 
the facilities (sensors) available on 
it along with pole numbers. 


The departmental integration for 
the spatial queries and work flow 
of maintenance. 


The asset details of the poles. 


The number of houses connected 
with the poles. 


Street Light Type. 


A-9 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICES 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


Dynamic Status of the street Light 
(working or not). 


Wi-Fi Hot Spot Coverages, real time 
integration with digital signages. 


Real time environmental conditions 
like concentration of pollution at 
particular points. 

Asset management of Poles. 


Pollution Plume analysis using wind 
direction as dynamic factor. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


Location of the Primary, Secondary 
and Tertiary Waste Disposal 
Sites along with data of capacity, 
frequency of pickup , maintained 
by etc. 


Route map of the waste collection 
vehicles of different types. 


RFID tagging of waste bins and 
real time update of waste lifting 
by the sweeper from the houses. 
GPS based Vehicle tracking 
system of waste carrying trucks 
and vehicle with integration with 
way-bridge. Integration with 
Event Management of the city 
for waste collection rerouting. 


25 


Data will be analysed for total amount 
of waste generated from each location, 
type of waste, recyclable waste per 
location. And optimization of landfill 
capacities. Optimization of the routes 
of the waste carrying vehicles. 


Integration with Waste Bin Sensors 
and Alert of Pickup. 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


A-10 INTELLIGENT TRANSPORT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


Location of All the Transport hubs 
in the city, including Bus terminus, 
Bus Depots, truck terminus, 
Taxi Stand, Auto Rikshaw stand, 


The intelligent Transport System 
integration with departments 
will give details of Bus routes, 
Details of fleet management and 


Rikshaw stand. Location of Bus 
Stops. 


crew Management. The complete 
transportation system including 
the last mile connectivity. The 
areas selected for NMT. The 
spatial queries of the department. 


A-11 MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS CALL CENTRE & 
SERVICES 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


Geo location of the Distress Call Integration with CRM. Analysis 


Maker. of type of calls, time of calls, 
distress type, location wise 
distress calls. 

Create Dashboards. 
A-12 DIFFERENT TYPE OF APPS 
GIS Integration Level 1 GIS Integration Level 2 


(Visualization layers over Portal (Integration with Department) 


for Use by stakeholders 


Automated Vehicle Tracking system 
showing the Bus’s destination 
and expected time of arrival at the 
destination. 


Geo-fencing for Bus Arrival Alert. 


The fleet management system provides 
a lot of data related to commuters. A 
GIS based commuter demand analysis, 
can be undertaken providing better 
fleet management and optimising the 
fleet on routes. 


The speed delay system helps to define 
the alternate route of the buses. 


MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


The call data can be segregated as per 
type of calls, the callers, the false calls, 
the call response time, the efficiency in 
solving the distress. This increase the 
efficiency of the Civic bodies. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and Intelligence) 


Creation of Workflow for field 
crews of different departments. 


26 


Collection of the Data from the apps 
for different level of anaysis and report 
generation, like alerts and number of 
people registering for these apps. The 
dashboards. 


The analysis of the use of the Apps. 


A-13 WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


GIS Integration Level 1 GIS Integration Level 2 (Integration GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Visualization layers over with Department) (Data Analysis reporting and 
Portal for Use by stakeholders Intelligence) 
Map of the entire water 1. GIS based Asset Lifecycle SCADA integration for real 
distribution network from Booster Management of the water supply time update on water pressure, 
pumps to individual connections network and generation of Alerts. flow and network problems. 
at house hold level. 2. Mobile GIS integration and alert Integration with Smart Meters for 
DMA Mapping. system for the field crew for revenue collection. 
maintenance and operation of the The data collected over a period 
assets. of time will help in analysing the 
3. The assessment of water demand causes of Non Revenue and take 
from locations and optimization of decisions accordingly. 
the water supply based on this. 
4. The water quality assessment 
reports. 
5. The Revenue generation vs. 
expenditure on asset management 
location wise. 
6. The locational analysis of 
breakdowns. 
7. The per capita water usage and 
wastage analysis. 8. The analysis 
of the budget on Network, creation, 
extension and O&M. 
9. The analysis of project status. 
10. Dashboard of Performance. 


A-14 DIAL 100 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 (Integration 


with Department) 


Location of all the police station The Automated Call registration in 
and chowkis with the list of police the call center and Computer aided 


personnel and the vehicle details. 


A-15 DIAL 108 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


despatch system based on location of 
the GPS enable patrolling vehicles and 
defining root to the crime locations. 


GIS Integration Level 2 


(Integration with Department) 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 

GIS based analysis and intelligence 
related to the calls, the type of 
crimes, the average response time, 
the rate of crime prevention, the 
crime hotspots and crime pattern 

analysis and trend analysis. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 (Data 
Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


Loaction of all the health centers 
and health centers with ambulance 
facility and proximity analysis. 


27 


The Automated Call registration in 
the call center and Computer aided 
despatch system based on location of 
the GPS enable vehicles and defining 
shortest route to reach the hospital 
facility. It may also be related to the 
automated green light for creating 
green corriders in situation of major 
disasters or incidents. 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


A-16 ELECTRICITY 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


Map of the entire electricity 
distribution network till consumer 
level. This shall include all the 
network components, as well as 
substation locations and drawings 
attached to it. 


A-17 EDUCATION 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


1. GIS based Asset Lifecycle 
Management of the 
electricity network and 
generation of Alerts. 

2. Mobile GIS integration and 
alert system for the field 
crew for maintenance and 
operation of the assets. 


3. Different type of network 


analysis like load 
distribution analysis. 
The analysis of the budget 


spend on infrastructure creation, 
extension and maintenance. 


Analysis of Project status 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


SCADA integration for real time 
update on availability and network 
problems including the voltage drop, 
tripping, outages etc. 


The SCADA integration will also 
support the Smart Grid management 
as per real time demand and supply of 
power 


1. Integration with Smart Meters 
for revenue collection. The 
assessment of power demand 
from locations and optimization 
of the supply. 


2. The power infrastructure 
assessment. 
3. The Revenue generation vs. 


expenditure on asset management 
location wise. 

4. The locational 
breakdowns. 


analysis of 
5. The per capita power usage 


6. The T & D lossess analysis 
location wise. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


Map of all the Schools in the city 
with proximity query and buffer 
query. 


The analyis of the Students 
teachers ratio, the analysis of the 
Students Gender, the analysis 
of the school infrastructure, 
including drinking water and 
Sanitation status. The analysis of 
the performance of the schools 
based on a set of parameter. 


The analysis of the budget. 


28 


The integration with the cameras in 
the government school to monitor 
the real time school education status. 
The real time integration of the school 
helps to generate reports on students 
and teachers attendance. 


The GPS integration with the school 
buses will generate the report on 
speed delay, driver behaviour. 


A-18 HEALTH 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


Location of all the health centres 
in the city-hospitals, dispensary, 
Super speciality hospitals, blood 
banks, clinics, with specialities, 
all the medical stores, proximity 
query, accessibility analysis and 
buffer query. 


The Departmental Integration will 
give a status of different types of 
information spatially like number 
of patients registered per day, 
the ratio of doctor and patients, 


The integration with the cameras 
installed in the government health 
centres to monitor their operations in 
real time. 


In long run the footfall will be 


the infrastructure details, the 
specialities etc. 


The locational data to be assessed 
in analysed in terms of patients 
inflow, health facilities demand 
analysis, the resource adequacy 
analysis. This will support in 
allocation and reallocation of 
health facilities and resources. 


The analysis of the budget. 


A-19 INTEGRATION WITH CROWDSOURCING DATA 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


analysed for the management of the 
patients in hospitals. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


The data can be analysed in terms 


of public opnion and mood and 


participation on different 
related 


issues 


to the city planning, 


administration and management. 


A-20 INTEGRATION WITH FIRE BRIGADE CONTROL SYSTEM 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


Location of fire station with facilities. 


Location of Fire Hydrants. 


A-21 GREEN BUILDINGS 


GIS Integration Level 1 
(Visualization layers over Portal 
for Use by stakeholders 


The departmental integration may 
produce the spatial reports like 
the Fire Brigade at each location, 
Utilization of the Fire Brigade, 
crew at each location, coverage 
of the Fire stations etc. Budget 
allocation and utilization. 


GIS Integration Level 2 
(Integration with Department) 


Real time integration with the 
fire service vehicles and shortest 
route analysis and two way 
communication Analsysis of the 
location data in terms of time to 
reach, the alternate routes and 
number of Fire Brigade serving the 
population as per norms. 


GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Data Analysis reporting and 
Intelligence) 


Location of buildings with Water 
harvesting and solar roof tops and 
energy management practices. 


The analysis of the data will help 
in assessment of the trend of the 
green development in the city and 
the pattern analysis in relation to 
the demand. 


29 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


A-22 KIOSKS 
GIS Integration Level 1 GIS Integration Level 2 GIS Integration Tier 3 
(Visualization layers over (Integration with Department) (Data Analysis reporting and 
Portal for Use by stakeholders Intelligence) 
Location of the Kiosks in the city. Analysis of the coverage of population. 


Type of people accessing the kiosk, 
the service wise categorization in the 
Kiosk. Future demand analysis of the 
new Kiosk. 


30 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Smart Infrastructure Sectional Committee, LITD 28 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 

Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 
(STQC) 

Shrama Technologies Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru 

Treasure Data 

Amravati Smart City Development Corporation 


Limited, Mumbai 
Centre for Development of Telematics, New Delhi 
Criterion Network Labs, Bengaluru 


CyanConnode Private Limited, Bengaluru 


ERNET India, New Delhi 
Ericsson India Private Limited, Gurugram 
Esri India Technologies Private Limited, Noida 


Hawlett Packard Enterprise, 

IEEE India, Bengaluru 

India Smart Grid Forum, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 

Intel India Technology Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


Narnix Technolabs Private Limited, New Delhi 
National Institute of Urban Affairs, New Delhi 


National Smart Grid Mission, Ministry of Power, 
Gurugram 


PHYTEC Embedded Private Limited, Bengaluru 
Qualcomm India Private Limited, Bengaluru 


Renesas Electronics, Bengaluru 


Schneider Electric’s industrial software 
business-AVEVA, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


PROF BHARADWAJ AMRUTUR (Chairman) 
Ms LIPIKA KAUSHIK 


MR AMARJEET KUMAR 
MR KUMAAR GUHAN 
MR SIDDHARTH GANESH 


MR AURINDAM BHATTACHARYA 
Ms ANUPAMA CHOPRA (Alternate) 


MR JAYAPRAKASH KUMAR 
MR KRISHNA KUMAR LOHATI (Alternate) 


MR MANISH WIDHANI 
MR DEEPAK NIMARE (Alternate) 


Mr PAVENTHAN ARUMUGAM 
Mr SENDIL KUMAR DEVAR 


Ms SEEMA JOSHI 
VisAY KUMAR (Alternate) 


Mr DEVARAJAN R. 
MANUKUMAR NAIR (Alternate) 


MR SRIKANTH CHANDRASEKARAN 
Mr Munir MOHAMMED (Alternate) 


MR REJI KUMAR PILLAI 
MS PARUL SHRIBATHAM (Alternate) 


Mr VASANTH RAJARAMAN 


Mr C. SUBRAMANIAN 
MR ANANTHA NARAYANAN (Alternate I) 
MR SIDHARTHA MOHANTY (Alternate II) 


KUNAL KUMAR 
MR Papam VuAY (Alternate) 


MR N. KISHOR NARANG 
Ms LAVANYA NUPUR 


MR MR ARUN MISRA 
SHRIMATI KUMUD WADHWA (Alternate I) 
MR Gyan PRAKASH (Alternate II) 


B. VALLAB RAO 


Dr VINOSH BABU JAMES 
DR PUNIT RATHOD (Alternate) 


RAVINDRA CHATURVEDI 
SAURABH GOSWAMI (Alternate) 


MR Gourav KUMAR HADA 


31 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


Organization 


SESEI, New Delhi 
Secure Meters Limited, Gurugram 


Senra Tech Private Limited, New Delhi 


Siemens Limited, Mumbai 


System Level Solutions (India) Private Limited, 
Anand 


Tata Consultancy Services Limited, Mumbai 
Tata Consulting Engineers Limited, Navi Mumbai 


Tejas Networks Limited, Bengaluru 
Telecommunication Engineering Center, New Delhi 


eGovernments Foundation, Bengaluru 
In personal capacity 

In personal capacity 

BIS Director General 


Representative(s) 


Mr DINESH CHAND SHARMA 


MR UTTAM KOTDIYA 
MR KAUSTUBH PATIL (Alternate I) 
MR PUNEET KHURANA (Alternate II) 
MR ANIL Menta (Alternate II) 


DHIRAJ KUMAR 
ANKUSH KOCHHAR (Alternate) 


MR Manos BELGAONKAR 

MR Ravi MADIPADGA (Alternate I) 

MR PRADEEP KAPOOR (Alternate II) 
MR VIKRAM GANDOTRA (Alternate III) 


MR DIPEN PARMAR 

MR Foram Mopti (Alternate) 
Mr RAMESH BALAJI 

MR Deprasuis MITRA (Alternate) 


Mr JAGDISH SHIVRAJ SHIGE 
Mr Manos Kumar (Alternate) 


Dr KANWAR JIT SINGH 


MR RAJEEV KUMAR TYAGI 
MR SUSHIL Kumar (Alternate I) 
MR UTTAM CHAND (Alternate ID) 


MR KRISHNAKUMAR THIAGARAJAN 
MR ANISH P. K. 
PROF SUPTENDRANATH SARBADHIKARI 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


SHRI MANIKANDAN K. 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (ELECTRONICS AND IT), BIS 


Panel involved in the Finalization-LITD 28/P10 GIS Reference Architecture 


Organization 


Esri India Technologies Ltd 
National Institute of Urban Affairs 
Bengaluru Smart City Ltd 
National Informatics Center 
Wo-Men Geospatial Coterie 
Narnix Technolabs Pvt Ltd 

PwC 

ML Info Map 

TCPO, New Delhi 

HERE Maps 

National Institute of Urban Affairs 


Hexagon 


Representative(s) 


Dr RUMA CHAKRABARTY (Convener) 
Ms LAVANYA NUPUR 

Dr MANJUNATH DALER 

MR VISHNU CHANDRA 

DR YOGITA SHUKLA 

MR N. KISHOR NARANG 

MR FARHAN PATEL 

Dr Manos! LAHIRI 

Mond MONIS KHAN 

MR NIKHIL KUMAR 


DR ARVIND VARSHNEY 


MR VINAYBABU ADIMULAM 


32 


Ms REENA GARG, SCIENTIST ‘F’ AND HEAD (ELECTRONICS AND IT) 


© D I DN FW D 


= = = =e 
Ww N -e © 


14 


15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 


22 
23 


IS 18008 (Part 1) : 2021 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


ISO 19115 (Series) Geographic information — Metadata. 

ISO/TS 19157-2 : 2016 Geographic information — Data quality — Part 2: XML schema implementation. 
ISO 19160-1 Addressing — Part 1: Conceptual model. 

ISO 19162 Geographic information — Well-known text representation of coordinate reference systems. 
ISO 19165-1 (Series) Geographic information — Preservation of digital data and metadata. 

ISO 19136-1 (Series) Geographic information — Geography Markup Language (GML). 

ISO 19103 Geographic information — Conceptual schema language. 

ISO 19142 Geographic information — Web Feature Service. 

ISO 19128 Geographic information — Web map server interface. 

ISO 19130-1 (Series) Geographic information — Imagery sensor models for geopositioning. 

ISO 19131 Geographic information — Data product specifications. 

ISO 19109 Geographic information — Rules for application schema. 


ISO 19150-2 Geographic information — Ontology — Part 2: Rules for developing ontologies in the Web 
Ontology Language (OWL). 


Formulation of GIS based Master plans for Small and Medium Towns — Design and Standards for 
Application of Drone/UAV Technology (http://www.tcpo.gov.in/sites/default/files/newfile/dron-min. 


pdf). 

NSDI Metadata version 2.0. 

Style Layer Descriptor (SLD). 

OGC Geo Package Encoding Standard. 
Web Map Service (WMS). 

Web Map Tile Service (WMTS). 
Catalogue Service on Web (CSW). 


Open GIS City Geography Markup Language (City GML) Encoding Standard for CAD data integration 
in GIS. 


OGC Keyhole Markup Language (KML). 
Indexed 3D scene layers (13S) for streaming 3D BIM data. 


33 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


This page has been intentionally left blank 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: LITD 28 (17250). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


