Wada ATAF IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2021) 


St Tart & Tu ater ch aile 
WT 1 Şa al det A Wen 
( Teen FART ) 


Methods of Test for Dairy Industry 
Part 1 Rapid Examination of Milk 
( First Revision ) 


ICS 67.100.10 


© BIS 2016 


ada AM SKİ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM YAA, 9 age WAL Art, we feeei-110002 
Yemlik MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


September 2016 Price Group 9 


Dairy Products and Equipment Sectional Committee, FAD 19 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Dairy Products and Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Food and 
Agriculture Division Council. 


Milk is one of the most important commodities entering trade and required in every day life as an article of food. 
The basic public health and economic considerations require that consumers should be provided with pure milk, 
free from pathogenic bacteria. To maintain quality standards, control operations have to be performed at all 
stages of the production of milk which include maintenance of sanitary conditions of byres; cleanliness of utensils 
and of the milking machines, if used; and care during storage and handling. Wilful adulteration at the producing 
or supplying centre, by carriers or by middlemen, has to be prevented. The only means of ensuring quality, when 
the purchaser cannot exercise a direct control over the production, transport and handling of milk, is by subjecting 
representative samples to chemical and bacteriological analysis. The need for having uniform methods for assessing 
the quality of milk at the time of purchase or sale is, therefore, obvious. 


It may not be often necessary nor is it possible to subject all the samples of milk to a regular and elaborate 
chemical and bacteriological analysis. At milk collecting centres, rapid examination of milk has to be carried out 
for routine check with the object of ensuring purity of milk, its hygienic quality and fitness for acceptance as raw 
milk or for further processing. In order to provide uniform methods for this purpose, such of the methods as can 
be rapidly employed have been compiled as Part 1 of this standard. 


Besides performing rapid tests, it is often necessary to carry out accurate determinations of various constituents 
for specific purposes. Methods for these chemical tests are covered in Part 2 of this standard [IS 1479 (Part 2) : 1961 
‘Methods of test for dairy industry: Part 2 Chemical analysis of milk’], while elaborate methods for bacteriological 
examination are covered in Part 3 [IS 1479 (Part 3) : 1977 ‘Methods of test for dairy industry: Part 3 Bacteriological 
analysis of milk (first revision)’ ]. 


Apart from the above the following additional Parts have also been published: 


IS 1479 (Part 4): 2009 Methods of test for dairy industry: Part 4 Determination of freezing point of milk— 
Thermistor cryoscopoe method (reference method) 
IS 1479 (Part 5): 1962 Methods of test for dairy industry: Part 5 Methods of dairy plant control 


This standard was first published in 1960. This revision has been undertaken to incorporate the following 
modifications: 


a) In the clause “Detection of Adulterants’, new tests, namely Holde’s test for detection of mineral oil, 
determination of maltodextrins in milk, detection of cane sugar, detection of glucose, detection of 
vegetable oils/foreign fat in milk, test for soluble sulphates and test for detection of soya powder in milk 
have been included; 


b) Inthe clause ‘Detection of Preservatives’, existing turmeric paper test for boric acid has been replaced 
with glycerol test and new test for hydrogen peroxide has been included; 

c) Inthe clause “Detection of Neutralizers’, Rosalic acid test for carbonates has been revised and new tests, 
namely before and after boiling acidity test for neutralizer (NaOH) and test for sodium ions have been 
included; 

d) New direct microscopic somatic cell count has been incorporated for detection of mastitis; 

e) Alizarin-Alcohol test, ten minute resazurin test and test for alkalinity of ash have been deleted as these 
are no longer in use; and 

f) Reference to Indian Standards have also been updated. 

In reporting the result of a test or analysis made in accordance with this standard, is to be rounded off, it shall be 


done in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant 
places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


Indian Standard 


METHODS OF TEST FOR DAIRY INDUSTRY 
PART 1 RAPID EXAMINATION OF MILK 


( First Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 1) specifies rapid methods that 
are normally required for assessing the quality of raw 
milk supplies intended for processing and manufacture. 
The specific test(s) to be employed would depend upon 
the purpose of the analysis. 


1.2 This standard does not include such methods of 
chemical and bacteriological analysis as are used for 
the detailed examination of milk. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following Indian Standards contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards indicated below : 


IS No. 
323 : 2009 


460 (Part 1): 
1985 
1070 : 1992 


1224 (Part 1) : 


Title 

Rectified spirit for industrial use — 
Specification (second revision) 
Specification for test sieves: Part 1 
Wire cloth test sieves (third revision) 
Reagent grade water — Specification 
(third revision) 

Determination of milk fat by the 


1977 gerber method: Part 1 Milk (first 
revision) 
1479 (Part 4): Methods of test for dairy industry: 
2009 Part 4 Determination of freezing 
point of milk — Thermistor 
cryoscopoe method (reference 
method) (second revision) 
3508 : 1966 Method of sampling and test for Ghee 
10083 : 1982 Method of test for determination of 
SNF (solids not fat) in milk by the 
use of lactometers 
16326 : 2015 Ghee — Specification 


3 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


Unless otherwise specified, pure chemicals and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be employed in tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the experimental results. 


4 SAMPLING OF MILK 
4.0 General 


Sampling of milk shall be done by an experienced 
person. It is not possible to lay down a single sampling 
procedure for milk which will be applicable in all cases. 
The method of sampling will vary according to the 
purpose for which the sample is collected and the tests 
which are to be carried out. Proper sampling, however, 
requires the most careful attention to the recommended 
procedures in this standard. 


4.0.1 Samples may be required for chemical or 
bacteriological examination. All precautions shall be 
taken to prevent contamination and adulteration. 


4.0.2 For chemical examination, the sampling 
equipment shall be clean and dry. 


4.0.3 Samples for bacteriological examination shall be 
collected by a person trained in the technique of 
sampling for bacteriological work. 


4.0.3.1 For bacteriological purposes, all equipment 
including plungers, sample bottles, rubber stoppers, 
shall be sterile and the samples shall be collected under 
aseptic conditions. Equipment shall be sterilized by 
one of the following methods: 


a) Heating in a hot air oven for not less than 2 
hours at 160°C, or 
b) Autoclaving for not less than 15 min at 120°C. 
NOTES 


1 Under field conditions, equipment may be sterilized by 
immersion for at least 5 minutes in boiling water. Equipment 
treated by this method shall be used immediately. 


2 Rubber stoppers shall be sterilized in an autoclave as in (b). 
Treatment by immersion in boiling water for not less than 
10 min would be satisfactory if they are used immediately. 


4.0.4 The sample collected for chemical analysis 
should be representative of the entire batch of milk 
that is being sampled. Since milk fat is of lower density 
than the other constituents of milk, it tends to rise to 
the surface. Thorough mixing of milk with a proper 
instrument which will reach the entire depth of the 
liquid is essential to ensure a representative sample of 
the entire batch. In small batches, it should be possible 
to accomplish mixing by pouring the entire quantity 
of milk from one container to another, three or four 
times. Larger batches of milk shall be thoroughly 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


agitated by a hand stirrer, or by mechanical means. 
Milk churns easily at 26.5 to 29.5°C and agitation near 
this temperature shall be avoided. 


4.1 Sampling from Individual Container 


Pour the milk from one container to another, three or 
four times. Where this is not practicable, mix 
thoroughly with a plunger (see 4.6.1). In mixing the 
milk, the plunger shall be allowed to fall to the bottom 
of the container and brought to the top of the milk as 
rapidly as possible not less than 10 times. The position 
of the plunger shall also be moved from place to place 
to ensure that the whole of the milk at the bottom of 
the vessel is thoroughly agitated and mixed with the 
upper layer. Any milk fat adhering to the neck and 
under the shoulder of the can shall be well mixed with 
the remainder of the milk. After thorough mixing, a 
sample shall be drawn immediately. 


4.2 Sampling from Several Containers 


The samples shall be taken after pouring the contents 
of the containers into a vat and mixing. When this is 
not possible, a composite sample is taken in the 
following manner from the containers after milk has 
been agitated and mixed. First, the milk shall be 
distributed as equally as possible among a number of 
containers. The cans shall not be filled, but the same 
quantity shall be placed in each. After mixing the 
contents of each can thoroughly, an equal volume of 
milk shall be taken from each. These portions shall be 
placed in another vessel, thoroughly mixed as described 
in 4.3 and a sample then taken. 


4.2.1 Alternatively, where facilities exist for accurate 
measurements, a composite sample may be obtained 
by taking the same proportion of the milk therein from 
each container in a consignment after thorough mixing, 
collecting this in another vessel and taking a sample 
as described in 4.3. 


4.3 Sampling Bulk Units 


When milk of uniform quality is supplied in bulk units 
(for example, cans filled from storage tanks), the 
number of random units to be sampled shall be as 
follows: 


Total No. of Units No. of Units to be Selected 


1 1 
2-5 2 
6-20 3 
21-60 4 
61-100 5 
Over 100 5 plus one for each additional 


100 units or fraction thereof 


4.3.1 The testing laboratory, may, within its discretion, 
instruct the person who draws the sample to submit: 


a) separate samples from each unit selected, or 


b) one or more composite samples consisting of 
aliquot portions from each unit selected. 


4.3.1.1 The latter course should only be applied where 
the product is likely to be of fairly uniform 
composition, for example, where the consignment to 
be sampled is produced from a quantity of properly 
bulked milk, and where variations in composition from 
unit to unit are, therefore, small. Where there is a 
possibility of wide variations between different units, 
for example, a consignment of milk from individual 
producer, every selected unit shall be separately 
sampled. 


4.4 Sampling from Storage Tanks and Rail and 
Road Milk Tankers 


The method of sampling of milk from storage tanks 
and rail and road tankers is largely governed by storage/ 
transport conditions. 


It is, therefore, difficult to lay down any rigid procedure 
for the sampling, but the following is recommended: 


a) In all cases, the milk in the tank/tanker shall 
be thoroughly mixed by a sufficiently large 
plunger, a mechanical agitator or by 
compressed air; the uniformity of the samples 
being determined, when necessary, by mixing 
till such time as complete agreement is 
obtained between samples taken at the 
manhole and at the outlet cock in respect of 
fat and total milk solids. 


NOTE — When a plunger (see 4.6.1) is used for mixing 
the milk in rail or road milk tankers, a convenient and 
satisfactory method is to insert the plunger in the 
manhole, the operator sitting astride or standing on top 
of the tanker. The plunger is thrust forward and pulled 
back, thrust downwards and pulled back and thrust 
backwards and pulled back. The cycle of operations 
should be repeated for at least 15 min. 


b) After proper mixing of the milk, the sample 
may be taken from the tank, removed through 
the stopcock in the tank door, or from a valve 
in the discharge line from the tank as it is 
being emptied. 


4.5 Composite Milk Samples for Fat Test 


Suppliers of milk are often paid for milk on the basis 
of fat test (see 13). The determination of fat contents 
of the suppliers’ daily deliveries is laborious and 
expensive. Composite samples of the suppliers’ milk 
are taken over a period and then tested. The volume of 
the individual composite sample shall be not less than 
175 ml and it shall be collected during the agreed period 


by placing into the patron’s composite sample bottle 
proportionate amounts of the suppliers’ daily delivery. 
For preserving the composite sample, 0.1 ml of 36 
percent formaldehyde for 25 ml of milk may be used. 
The bottle containing the composite milk sample shall 
be tightly stoppered to prevent evaporation and kept 
in a locker, away from light, till required for analysis. 
The sample shall be analysed on the same day as the 
last portion of milk is transferred to the composite 
sample bottle. 

NOTE — Each time when fresh sample of milk is added, the 


sample shall be mixed by rotating the bottle to prevent the 
formation of solid cream layer or cream plug. 


4.6 Appliances for Sampling 
The following appliances are required for sampling: 


a) Plungers (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 2); 
b) Sampling dippers (see Fig. 3); and 
c) Sampling tube. 


They shall preferably be made of stainless steel, but 
adequately tinned iron may also be used. If solder is 
employed, it shall be capable of withstanding a 
sterilizing temperature of 180°C. All surfaces shall be 
smooth and free from crevices or projections. 


4.6.1 Plungers 


Plungers shall have sufficient area to produce adequate 
disturbance of the product, and sufficiently light in 
weight for the operator to be able to move them rapidly 
through the liquid. In view of the differing shapes and 
sizes of containers, no specific design of plunger can 
be recommended for all purposes. A form of plunger 
recommended as being suitable for the mixing of milk 
in buckets or in cans (see Fig. 1) consists of a disc 
150 mm in diameter, perforated with six holes each 
12.5 mm in diameter on a pitch circle of 100 mm 
diameter, the disc being fixed centrally to a metal rod, 
the other end of which forms a loop handle. The length 
of the rod, including the handle, should be 
approximately 1 m. A suitable plunger (see Fig. 2) for 
use with road and rail tanks has a rod not less than 
1.8 m in length and is fitted with a disc 300 mm in 
diameter perforated with twelve holes each 30 mm in 
diameter on a pitch circle of 225 mm diameter. 


100 mm PCD 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


4.6.2 Sampling Dippers 


Sampling dippers (see Fig. 3) shall be fitted with a solid 
handle at least 150 mm long. The capacity of the 
sampling dipper shall be not less than 80 ml. It is 
advantageous to have a dip and have handle bent over. 
The tapered form of the cup permits nesting of the 
sampling dippers. The arc of the inside bottom corner 
of the sampling dipper shall be defined to assure proper 
cleaning. The body of the sampling dipper shall be of 
one-piece construction with no seams, overlaps, rivets, 
or sharp corners. 


NOTE — When approximate quantity of milk is to be measured, 
dipping measures of convenient quantities may also be used. 


4.6.3 Sampling Tube 


Straight seamless metal tube about 600 mm long, of 6 
mm inside diameter and about 1.6 mm thickness may 
be used for sampling, where convenient. 


4.7 Sample Bottles 


The sample bottles shall be made of good quality glass, 
suitable for sterilization. The sample bottle shall be 
wide mouthed, round with sloping sides on the pattern 
of the milk bottles. Bottles used for collecting samples 
for chemical analysis shall be provided with well-fitting 
caps, or bark corks. Bottles for collecting samples for 
bacteriological examination shall be glass stoppered. 


4.7.1 The capacity of the sample bottle shall 
be 100, 150 or 250 ml. The size of the sample bottle 
selected for taking a sample shall be such that after 
containing the quantity of milk required for analysis, 
only a small space would be left for efficient mixing 
of the sample as a larger space would allow the fat to 
churn during transit. 


4.7.1.1 When samples are collected for bacteriological 
examination, it is desirable to avoid air-space by filling 
the bottles to the top, leaving however, sufficient space 
to allow for expansion of the rubber stopper. 


4.7.2 Bark corks shall not be used for closing milk 
sample bottles for bacteriological examination. 


4.7.3 Sample bottles containing milk which are to be 
examined for flavour subsequently shall be closed with 


1 METER 


Fic. | PLUNGER FOR CANS AND BUCKETS 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


225 mm PCD 


1.8 METER 


Fic. 2 PLUNGER FOR ROAD AND RAIL TANKS 


grease-proof, non-absorbent stopper so that no 
deleterious odour or taste is imparted. 
NOTE — Alternatively, for collecting samples for chemical 


analysis suitable plastic bottles of above capacities may also 
be used. 


Fic. 3 SAMPLING DIPPER 


4.8 Labelling of Samples 


Each sample container shall be sealed air-tight after 
filling and marked with particulars regarding the 
purpose of sampling, the name of the supplier or other 
particulars of the stock, the date and time of sampling, 
the nature of preservatives, if any, added and any other 
relevant information. Samples for bacteriological 
examination shall be marked distinctively. 


4.9 Transport of Samples 


Milk samples which are to be examined for flavour 
(see 5) shall be protected from light and shall not be 
exposed to odours which may be absorbed during 
transport. 


a) Samples for Chemical Examination — It is 


desirable that samples of milk for chemical 
examination are delivered for testing on the 
same day they are taken. The samples shall be 
stored in a refrigerator at a temperature of 0 to 
5°C. Where this is not possible, adequate 
precautions shall be taken to prevent 
deterioration and exposure to high temperature 
and light during transit. In some cases, 
formaldehyde may be added as a preservative 
to prevent deterioration, provided it does not 
interfere with the subsequent analysis. When 
formaldehyde has been added, this fact and the 
quantity added shall be indicated on the lable. 


NOTE — If any, sample is to be used for cryoscopic 
examination, mercuric chloride shall be permissible as 
a preservative, provided the bottle is properly labelled 
as ‘POISON’. 


b) Ifthe tests are to determine the bacteriological 
quality, the milk samples shall be chilled 
immediately and maintained at a temperature 
not exceeding 4.5°C. If the interval between 
sampling and examination exceeds 4 h, the 
time of sampling and examination should be 
recorded on the analytical report. Generally 
the samples should be examined within 4 h 
of collection. The results of analysis of any 
sample, the temperature of which has 
exceeded 7.0°C during a storage period of 4 h, 
may be unreliable. At a storage temperature 
of 0.0 to 4.5°C no detectable increase in 
bacterial counts will occur within 24 h. 


5 ORGANOLEPTIC TEST AND TEMPERATURE 


5.0 Judging the quality of milk by its taste and smell 
requires considerable skill which could only be 
acquired by practice. Organoleptic tests are used in all 
dairies and an experienced person can pick out bad 
samples with a high degree of accuracy. 


5.1 Adopt the following procedure on the receiving 
platform: 


a) Smell the milk in the container immediately 
after removing the lid. In case of foul or 
abnormal smell, reject the milk or hold over 
for subjection to confirmatory test; 

b) Observe the colour of the milk. If abnormal 
in colour, it should be regarded with 
suspicion; and 

c) Examine the milk for the following taints: 

1) Those due to developed acidity. This 
is the most important factor to be 
examined when grading milk by 
organoleptic test. 

2) Those due to feed, or exposure of 
milk to the atmosphere of the stable. 


3) Extraneous matter which might gain 
access to milk after milking. 


4) Oxidized flavour due to exposure of 


milk to light or metallic 
contamination from untinned 
containers. 


d) Determine the temperature of milk with a 
standard thermometer. Bulk raw milk, when 
received from a chilling station in the factory 
shall not have a temperature more than 7°C. 


6 SEDIMENT TEST 


6.0 Sediment test on raw milk reveals the extent to 
which visible insoluble matter has gained entrance to 
the milk and the extent to which such material has not 
been removed from milk by single service strainers. 
Despite the limitations as to the interpretation that may 
be applied when visible sediment is or is not detected 
in milk, the sediment test presents a simple, rapid and 
a quantitative measure of indicating the cleanliness of 
milk with respect to visible dirt. The test is carried out 
by allowing a measured quantity of milk to pass 
through a fixed area of a filter disc and comparing the 
sediment left with the prepared standards. 


6.1 Apparatus 


a) Sediment Tester — with filtering surface 2.5 
cm in diameter. 

b) White Lintine Cotton Discs — 32 mm in 
diameter, exposed filtration area 28 mm in 
diameter. 

c) Sampling Dipper — of 500 ml capacity for 
sampling from milk cans or weigh vats. 

d) Sieves — two, one coarse corresponding to 
850 micron IS Sieve and the other fine 
corresponding to 425 micron IS Sieve [ see 
IS 460 (Part 1)]. 

e) Sediment Disc Ratings — showing 0.0, 0.2, 
0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0 mg sediment, or higher 
concentration as required, per 500 ml of milk. 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


6.1.1 Since sediment encountered in different localities 
may vary in composition, density, colour and other 
physical characteristics thus giving rise to variations 
in the appearance of the discs, it is recommended that 
the standard sediment discs be prepared as follows: 


Make a uniform mixture of oven-dried (100°C) 
materials which meet the following screening 
specifications : 


Cow or buffalo dung passing through 53 parts 
fine sieve [see 6.1 (d)] 
Cow or buffalo dung passing through 10 parts 
the coarse sieve but retained on the fine 
one 
Garden soil passing through the fine 27 parts 
sieve 
Charcoal passing through the fine sieve 8 parts 
Charcoal passing through the coarse 2 parts 
sieve but retained on the fine one 

Total 100 parts 


Accurately weigh 0.1 g of the above mixture and 
transfer to a 1 000 ml flask, using 50 percent sugar 
solution to wash all fine particles down into the flask. 
Make the volume up to the mark with more of the sugar 
solution after most of fine particles have been wetted 
by shaking the half-filled flask thoroughly several 
times. After the volume is made up to the mark, shake 
the contents of the flask vigorously every 5 min for 
sufficient time (for 30 min to 1 h) to saturate particles 
thoroughly. When particles have been thoroughly 
wetted, it will be noted that the sugar solution will hold 
them evenly in suspension and the mixture is ready 
for use in making the standard discs. 


On the basis of 0.1 g per 1 000 ml, 10 ml of the sugar 
solution contains 1 mg of the sediment. Make test discs 
with one of the usual sediment testers, using varying 
volumes of the sediment suspension. Place 150 ml or 
more of filtered skimmed milk in the sediment tester 
and add varying volumes of the sediment suspension. 
After forcing the milk through the disc, run through a 
small quantity of filtered skimmed milk to obtain a 
more even distribution of the sediment on the disc. 


Remove the discs from the tester, mount them 
permanently on a stiff paper, allow to dry, and then 
make permanent by spraying with a strong disinfectant 
such as corrosive sublimate. Below each mounted 
standard disc on the paper, note the quantity of dried 
material that the dirt or filth on the disc represents. 


6.2 Procedure 


Take a milk sample from well-stirred cans or vats of 
milk with the help of the sampling dipper [see 6.1 (c)]. 
Measure the quantity of milk used with reasonable 
accuracy. Filter the milk through a properly adjusted, 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


firm lintine cotton disc (rough side facing milk) held 
in the sediment tester so that a filtration area of 28 mm 
in diameter is exposed. Compare the sediment disc with 
the prepared sediment standard discs and record the 
sediment score. 


6.3 Interpretation 


For the purpose of comparison, it is convenient to use 
about five prepared standard discs so as to classify the 
milk with respect to its sediment content in accordance 
with the specific requirement of the dairy, or the 
milk collection depot. For the former, five discs 
showing 0.0, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 mg may suffice. 
Under rural conditions, discs showing 0.0, 0.5, 2.0, 
5.0 and 7.0 mg sediment may be more convenient to 
start with. In either case, no attempt shall be made to 
estimate the degree of sediment in milk in more than 
five classes, for example, Excellent, Good, Fair, Bad 
and Very Bad. 


No attempt shall be made to grade as sediment any 
hair, flies, pieces of hay or straw, or any large particles 
of dirt. These shall be reported separately. 


The presence of appreciable sediment in unprocessed 
milk supplies indicates careless or insanitary dairy farm 
practice. However, the lack of sediment is not always 
indicative of ideal conditions, since visible sediment 
may be readily removed by straining at the dairy farm. 
Milk that has been divested of visible sediment by 
straining retains essentially the bacterial contamination 
incidental to the original sediment. 


7 DETERMINATION OF pH 


7.0 General 


The pH value, or hydrogen ion concentration, gives a 
measure of the true acidity of milk. The relationship 
between pH and acidity of milk is only approximate. 
In normal cow and buffalo milk, the pH ranges from 
6.6 to 6.8. The value is reduced by the development of 
acidity. On the other hand, the pH value of milk from 
animals suffering from mastitis is alkaline in reaction, 
the value being over 7.0. The pH test is mainly used 
for the detection of abnormal mastitis milk. The pH of 
milk may be determined rapidly by using the indicator 
strips. 


7.1 Indicator Strips 


Indicator paper strips or discs are made by soaking 
strips of absorbent paper in a suitable indicator and 
drying them. A rough estimate of pH is obtained by 
dipping a strip of the prepared paper in milk and 
observing the colour. Bromocresol purple (pH range 
5.2 to 6.8 — colour changes from yellow to purple) 


and bromothymol blue (pH range 6.0 to 7.6 — colour 
changes from straw-yellow to bluish-green), are 
commonly used as indicators. Both narrow and wide- 
range ready-made indicator papers are available over 
the pH range 2.0 to 10.5. 


NOTE — Indicator paper strips shall always be kept in a closed 
glass bottle and in a dry condition. 


7.2 Interpretation 


In normal milk the pH is well below 6.9. On an average 
cow milk gives a pH of 6.6, and buffalo milk 6.8. Milk 
of pH over 6.9 should be regarded with suspicion as 
indication of some diseases of the udder, or of late 
lactation milk. 


8 CLOT-ON-BOILING (C.O.B.) TEST 


8.0 This is a quick test to determine developed acidity 
and the suitability of milk for processing. 


8.1 Apparatus 


a) Test-Tubes — 15.0 cm x 1.9 cm, preferably 
with a mark at 5 ml. 


b) Water-Bath 


8.2 Procedure 


Transfer 5 ml of the sample to the test-tube and smell. 
Place the tube in a boiling water-bath and hold for 
about 5 min, and smell again for any acidic flavour. 
Remove the tube and rotate it in an almost horizontal 
position and examine the film of milk or side of the 
test-tube for any precipitated particles. The formation 
of lot is indicative of a positive test. 


8.3 Interpretation 


The principal features of the boiling test are speed and 
definiteness of results. Milk either remains unchanged 
or coagulates. Milk which gives a positive C.O.B. test 
has an acidity generally above 0.17 percent (as lactic 
acid) and is not suitable for distribution as liquid milk 
or for processing. 


9 ALCOHOL TEST 


9.0 General 


The alcohol test is used for rapid assessment of stability 
of milk to processing, particularly for condensing, and 
sterilization. The alcohol test is useful as an indication 
of the mineral balance of milk and not so much as an 
index of developed acidity. The test aids in detecting 
abnormal milk such as colostrum milk from animals 
in late lactation, milk from animals suffering from 
mastitis, and milk in which the mineral balance has 
been disturbed. 


9.1 Apparatus 


a) Test-Tubes— 15 cm x 1.9 cm, preferably with 
graduation marks at 5 and 10 ml. 


b) Measure for Alcohol — for 5 ml. 


9.2 Reagent 


Ethyl alcohol, 68 percent by weight or 75 percent by 
volume (density 0.867 5 g/ml at 27°C). 


9.3 Procedure 


Place 5 ml of milk in a test tube and add an equal 
quantity of alcohol. Mix the contents of the test-tube 
by inverting several times. Note any flakes or clot. The 
presence of a flake or clot denotes a positive test. 


9.4 Interpretation 


A negative test indicates low acidity and good heat 
stability of the milk sample. Milk showing positive 
test is not considered suitable for the manufacture of 
evaporated milk which has to be sterilized to ensure 
its keeping quality. 


10 HALF-HOUR METHYLENE 
REDUCTION (M.B.R.) TEST 


BLUE 


10.0 General 


The length of time taken by milk to decolourize 
methylene blue is a fairly good measure of its bacterial 
content, and hence of its sanitary and keeping quality. 


10.1 Apparatus 


a) Sterile Test-Tubes Without Rims — 150 mm x 
16 mm, internal diameter 13.5 + 0.5 mm 
accurately marked at 10 ml. If not used 
directly after sterilization, they shall be kept 
in closed boxes protected from dust. 

b) Sterilized Rubber Stoppers — for closing the 
test-tubes. The stoppers are sterilized by 
immersing in a boiling water-bath for not less 
than 10 min. 

c) Sterile I-ml Pipettes — straight-sided, blow- 
out delivery pipettes for measuring the dye 
solution may preferably comply with the 
following specification : 


Overall length 300 mm 
External diameter 7.5 to 8.5 ml 
Internal diameter 2.6 to 3.0 mm 


Graduation One mark only 


at 1 ml level 


Distance of graduation 140 to 180 mm 


from tip 


Distance of graduation 120 to 160 mm 


from top 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


The pipettes shall also be calibrated to 
deliver 1 ml of water at 27°C when the 
contents are blown out with the tip touching 
the side of the vessel, three seconds allowed 
for drainage and the accumulated drop then 
blown out. No pipette should have an error 
of more than + 2 percent, that is, the amount 
delivered should be between 0.98 mlh and 
1.02 ml. 


d) Sterile 10-ml Pipettes — straight-sided, blow- 
out type. 


e) Sampling Dippers — These shall be sterilized 
by keeping in boiling water for 30 min. Water 
shall be changed at frequent intervals when a 
series of samples are to be examined. 


f) Pipette Case — of metal. 


g) Water-Bath — maintained at 37.5 + 0.5°C, 
fitted with a cover to exclude light, and 
containing a metal rack, designed to hold test- 
tubes when immersed in water. The water- 
bath shall preferably be thermostatically 
controlled. The level of water in the bath shall 
be maintained above the level of the milk in 
the tubes. The interior of the bath shall be 
completely dark. 


h) Clock or Watch 

j) Hot Air Oven Autoclave or Steam-Sterilizer 
k) Wire Baskets — for holding test-tubes. 

m) Glass Marking Pencil 

n) Bunsen Burner, or Spirit Lamp 

p) Glass Still — for preparing distilled water, 


q) Comparator with Standard Resazurin Disc — 
The comparator may be provided with 
artificial daylight source of illumination. 


r) Sterile 50-ml Measuring Flask or Cylinder 


10.2 Reagent 


10.2.1 Methylene Blue Solution — Prepare a standard 
solution of methylene blue by dissolving one of the 
good quality methylene blue thiocyanate tablets 
in 200 ml of cold, sterile, glass-distilled water in a 
sterile flask. It is preferable to allow the mixture to 
stand several hours to ensure complete solution. 
Depending on the nature of the methylene blue tablets 
used, sometimes the stock solution is further diluted 
with 800 ml of sterile glass-distilled water. A 
concentration of 1 part of methylene blue thiocyanate 
in 300 000 parts of milk is used to obtain satisfactory 
results. The solution shall be stored in a sterile glass- 
stoppered amber-coloured bottle in a dark place, and 
at no time exposed to light. The solution remains stable 
in the dark for a considerable time but no stock solution 
more than two months old shall be used. 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


The amount of methylene blue required for a day’s 
work shall be poured off from the stock bottle into a 
suitable glass container. On no account shall the pipette 
used for transferring the methylene blue solution to 
the tubes of milk be introduced into the stock bottle. 
Moreover, if at any time during the filling of the tubes 
the methylene blue solution should become 
contaminated with milk carried into it by a pipette 
which has inadvertently come into contact with the 
milk, the methylene blue solution shall be immediately 
discarded and replaced by a fresh stock. 


10.3 Procedure 


Thoroughly mix the sample of the milk by inverting 
and shaking the sample bottle and then pour the milk 
in the test-tube up to the 10 ml mark. While doing this, 
remove the stopper or cap of the bottle under aseptic 
conditions, the pouring-lip of the bottle and the mouth 
of the test-tube being flamed and then pour the milk 
rapidly into the tube up to the 10 ml mark. While 
pouring into the tube, take care to leave one side of the 
interior unwetted with milk. Add 1 ml of methylene 
blue solution to the tube from a pipette taking care 
that the pipette does not come into contact with any of 
the milk in the tube or with the wetted side of the 
interior of the tube. If this occurs, discard the pipette 
immediately. During delivery, hold the tip of the pipette 
against the dry side of the tube about | to 2 cm above 
the level of the milk and expel the methylene blue 
solution by blowing with the mouth or by means of a 
jet in the pipette. After the lapse of 3 s, blow out the 
solution remaining in the tip of the pipette and 
withdraw the pipette. Close the tube with a Sterile 
rubber stopper held and inserted by sterile forceps or 
by the tips of the fingers on the extreme upper end. On 
no account allow the fingers to come into contact with 
the mouth of the test-tube or with the end of the stopper 
which comes into contact with the test-tube. Invert the 
tube slowly once or twice so that the whole column of 
contained air rises above the level of the milk and then 
within 5 min, place the tube in the water-bath. 


Put up the following control tubes with each batch: 


a) 10 ml of mixed milk + 1 ml of tap water, and 


b) 10 mlof mixed milk + 1 ml of methylene blue 
solution. 


The milk for the control tubes shall consist of a mixture 
of milks, preferably from several producers so as to 
have an average fat content and colour. Fit the control 
tubes (a) and (b) with stoppers and immerse for 3 min 
in boiling water in order to destroy the natural reducing 
system present in the milk. Comparison of the 
experimental tubes with control tube (b) will show 
when decolourization begins and comparison with 
control tube (a) will show when it is complete. 


Inspect the tube after 30 min. Regard the milk as 
decolourized when the whole column of milk is 
completely decolourized or is completely decolourized 
up to within 5 mm of the surface. If a trace of colour 
persists at the bottom of the tube and does not extend 
upwards for more than 5 mm, it may be ignored. Record 
the time at which decolourization is observed. Where 
a tube is found not to be decolourized within 30 min, 
the sample satisfies the test. 


10.4 Precautions 
The following precautions shall be taken: 


a) Itis important that the methylene blue solution 
when not in use should be kept in the dark: it 
shall at no time be exposed to sunlight. 

b) It is essential that the interior of the water- 
bath during the progress of the tests shall be 
completely dark since sunlight, diffused 
daylight and even artificial light catalyse the 
reduction of methylene blue. 

c) The sterilization of the rubber stoppers for the 
test-tube and their subsequent satisfactory 
manipulation can be facilitated by employing 
a simple rack for holding a large number of 
rubber stoppers immersed in a suitable vessel 
of boiling water. 


d) The precautions against the contamination of 
the milk sample described in the method for 
carrying out the test shall be carefully 
observed. 


10.5 Interpretation 


The samples which show complete decolourization of 
blue colour on incubation for 30 min or less shall not 
be suitable for acceptance. 


11 DIRECT MICROSCOPIC COUNT 


11.0 General 


The direct microscopic method consists of examining, 
under a compound microscope, stained films of a 
measured volume of milk spread on glass slides over 
specified area. It enables the rapid estimation of the 
total bacterial population of a sample of milk and also 
reveals useful information for tracing the sources of 
contamination in milk. The microscope is first 
calibrated so that the exact area of the microscopic field 
is known. Then a measured quantity of the milk 
(0.01 ml) spread over a measured area (1 cm?) on a 
clean glass slide so that each microscopic field 
examined represents a quantitative aliquot of the 
sample. The milk is allowed to dry, and the film is 
defatted, fixed and stained with a suitable dye. The 
average number of bacteria per microscopic field is 
determined after examining between 5 and 60 fields, 


depending on the microscopic factor and the number 
of bacteria per field. Either the total cells or clumps 
can be counted, but the clump count agrees more 
closely with results obtained by the agar plate method 
than does the total cell count. 


This method offers the most rapid technique for 
determining the extent of bacterial contamination in 
milk and requires 10 to 15 min for examining one 
sample. It has been used for the classification of raw 
milk samples into different grades on the basis of clump 
counts, for screening milk samples for ‘acceptable’ 
quality, and for obtaining information regarding likely 
sources of contamination. The microscopic appearance 
(types and arrangement of cells) of the milk film will 
give indication of any udder infections as well as the 
cause of high counts due to utensil contamination or 
inadequate cooling. 


Estimates of bacterial counts by this method may be 
expected to be relatively more accurate in the case of 
poor quality milks having high bacterial counts. In the 
case of low count samples, examination of a large 
number of fields is necessary to obtain some accuracy 
in the estimates. Other sources of error in this method 
are those caused by (a) variable distribution of bacteria 
in films, especially those prepared from samples of 
high sanitary quality; (b) inaccurate measurement of 
0.01 ml quantities and faulty preparation and staining 
of slides; (c) failure of this method to distinguish 
between the dead and living organisms; and 
(d) mistakes in observation and calculation. 


11.1 Apparatus 


11.1.1 Microscope Slides (optional sizes 2.5 cm x 
7.5 cm, 5.0 cm x 7.5 cm or 5.0 cm x 11.25 cm) of 
clear glass. They may be either — (a) plain or with 
etched margins to permit unmistakable identification 
of films; or (b) with clear, circular one square 
centimetre areas (diameter approximately 11.28 mm) 
delineated on each, with remaining area etched. The 
slides should be clean and dry before use and should 
not contain any finger-prints or other residues on areas 
where milk films are to be placed. 


New slides may be cleaned by soaking in strong 
cleaning solution (bichromate-sulphuric acid solution 
prepared by dissolving 50 g sodium bichromate in 
200 ml of water in glass or earthen container and then 
adding cautiously 300 ml of concentrated sulphuric- 
acid of commercial grade), rinsing in flowing tap water 
and then in distilled water. Used slides should be 
soaked in hot or boiling alkaline detergent solution until 
all residues are removed, then rinsed in flowing tap 
water, dried and properly stored for reuse. Slides may 
be stored submerged in chloroform or alcohol and 
drained and dried at the time of use. 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


11.1.2 Guide Plates, special glass plates or cardboard 
guides, convenient size 5.0 cm x 11.25 cm with 16 or 
24 round or square areas, each one square centimetre, 
inscribed thereon, for use beneath plain slides. 


11.1.3 Pipette or Syringe for Transfer of 0.01 ml of 
Milk 


a) Pipettes (Breed) shall be calibrated to deliver 

0.01 ml of milk. They shall be of straight thick 
wall, capillary tubing with bore of such 
diameter that the single graduation mark is 
40 to 60 mm from tip, and the tip blunt, and 
formed so as to discharge milk cleanly. Pipette 
calibrated to contain 0.139 5 g (approximately 
140 mg) of mercury will discharge 0.01 ml 
of milk at 20°C. 
When not in use, the pipettes may be kept 
submerged in and the bores filled with suitable 
soapless detergent or strong cleaning solution. 
Before use, the bore and exterior are 
thoroughly rinsed in clean water until free 
from detergent or cleaning solution. While 
using the same pipettes for a number of 
samples, the graduated portion of the 
instrument is rinsed each time in clean water 
(at 25 to 35°C) by dipping the tip slightly 
beneath surface and repeatedly drawing in and 
expelling water. 

b) Alternatively, a metal syringe, capable of 
transferring rapidly 0.01 ml of milk with semi- 
automatic, spring-actuated plunger, with 
stainless steel piston sliding in close fitting, 
stainless steel measuring tube, with an 
adjustable set-screw to permit presetting 
instrument for repeated accurate measurements 
of 0.01 ml, may be used. Accuracy of 
adjustment should be determined by analysis 
before use to assure 0.01 ml deliveries (average 
0.0103 g). It should be cleaned only in soapless 
detergents and fat solvents. 


11.1.4 Needle, Bent-Point, suitable for spreading milk 
over an area of one square centimetre. 


11.1.5 Drying Device, level surface at 40 to 45°C, 
clean, dust-free, insect proof (cabinet or metal box over 
electric bulb is satisfactory). 


11.1.6 Forceps or Slide Holders, suitable for dipping 
and holding slides. 


11.1.7 Trays or Jars, equipped with tight-fitting covers, 
of size convenient for holding solvents and stains and 
submerging slides held in partitioned racks. 


11.1.8 Slide Storage Boxes, Cases or Files 


11.1.9 Compound Microscope, binocular (preferably) 
or monocular with 1.8 mm oil-immersion objective, 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


sub-stage and condenser, mechanical stage, and oculars 
for different magnifications. A substage lamp or 
separate microscope lamp may be used as a source of 
artificial illumination in preference to day light, for 
microscopic examination. 


11.1.10 Stage Micrometer, slide ruled in 0.1 and 
0.01 mm. 


11.2 Reagents 


11.2.1 Xylene, or any other fat solvent may also be 
used. 


11.2.2 Ethyl Alcohol, 95 percent. 


11.2.3 Immersion Oil, of refractive index 1.51 to 1.52 
at 20°C. 


11.2.4 Alcoholic Methylene Blue Chloride Solution, 
prepared by adding 0.6 g methylene blue chloride to 
100 ml of 95 percent ethyl alcohol. The mixture is 
shaken for some time, left at room temperature for 24 
to 48 hours shaking at intervals until the dye is 
completely dissolved, and then stored in clean, tightly 
closed container. Alternatively, Newman’s stain 
prepared by dissolving methylene blue powder in a 
mixture of glacial acetic acid, tetrachlorethane and 
ethyl alcohol in the following proportions may be used: 


Methylene blue chloride lg 

Glacial acetic acid 6 ml 
Tetrachlorethane 40 ml 
Ethyl alcohol (95 percent) 54 ml 


11.3 Procedure 


11.3.1 Determination of Microscopic Factor — This 
factor is to be determined for each microscope in the 
following manner: 


Focus on the scale of the stage micrometer with 
the 16 mm objective. Place a drop of immersion oil 
on the micrometer scale and focus with the 1.8 mm 
objective. Move the stage micrometer until one end of 
the scale arc is at the edge of the field. Count the 
number of small spaces (0.01 mm each) in the diameter 
of the field and determine the diameter of the field, 
which may range from 0.146 to 0.206 mm depending 
on the length of the draw tube of the microscope 
(usually American microscopes are adjusted to 160 mm 
and Continental microscopes to 170 mm) and the 
objective and ocular used. The microscopic factor (MF) 
is given by the formula: 


_ __ 10 000 
~ 3.1416xr 
where r is the radius of the microscopic field. 


In effect, the reciprocal of the MF represents the 
fraction of 1 ml of milk actually seen in one 


10 


microscopic field. Thus, if N is the average number of 
cells counted in one microscopic field, the total counts 
per ml of milk will be NX microscopic factor, using a 
10 X ocular with 1.8 mm oil-immersion objective, the 
microscope can be adjusted to give a microscopic factor 
in round numbers ranging from 3 000 000 to 5 000 000 
depending upon the tube length of the microscope. 
Once this microscopic factor has been calculated for a 
definite tube length and combination of objective and 
ocular, it can be used as a constant factor for 
determining direct microscopic counts of all milk 
samples, provided the same adjustment of the 
microscope is followed throughout. 


11.3.2 Preparation of Milk Film on Microscopic 
Slides — Mix the sample of milk thoroughly by 
shaking. If single 0.01-ml pipette is used, rinse it 
thoroughly in sterile water (25 to 35°C) between 
samples. Dip the tip of the pipette into the sample of 
milk and draw in and expel several times to remove 
traces of rinse water. Draw milk into the pipette above 
the graduation mark, wipe the exterior of the pipette 
with clean, dry paper or cloth towel, and adjust the 
volume of the sample to exactly 0.01-ml mark. Touch 
the tip of the pipette to the centre of a 1 cm’ area ona 
slide and expel the entire volume of milk. With a 
flamed bent-point needle, promptly spread the portion 
of milk uniformly over the entire 1 cm? area on the 
slide. Wipe needle between samples on a clean dry 
tissue or towel. 


If a metal syringe is used, rinse the tube as described 
above and with draw milk by holding the tip beneath 
the surface and releasing the plunge fully. Remove 
excess milk from the exterior of the tip with clean paper 
tissue or cloth. Holding the instrument nearly vertical, 
place the tip near the centre of 1 cm? area on the slide 
and expel the 0.01 ml portion of milk. With the plunger, 
held fully depressed and with syringe nearly vertical, 
spread the milk with the tip of extended piston rod 
over the entire 1 cm’. Legibly and indelibly identify 
each sample on slide, using number or other symbol 
on margin of slide. After spreading, dry films at 40 to 
45°C within 5 min on level surface protected from dust 
and insects. Rapid heating may cause the film to crack 
and peel out during later treatments. 


11.3.3 Defatting, Fixing and Staining the Films — 
After the films are dried, submerge the slides in clear 
xylene (or other suitable fat solvent) for 1 or 2 min. 
Drain and air-dry the films. Fix the film in 90 to 95 
percent ethyl alcohol for | min either by submerging 
the slide in alcohol kept in a jar or by gently pouring 
the alcohol over the film. Allow the slide to drain and 
air-dry completely. Dip the slides edgewise in alcoholic 
methylene blue staining solution (in a jar) for 1 or 
2 min. Slowly remove slides, allowing a few seconds 
for stain to drain into staining jar. Wash in fresh tap- 


water in a beaker or large staining jar by raising and 
lowering edgewise a number of times to remove excess 
stain without impairing milk films. The cells will be 
stained deep blue against a faint blue background. 
Allow stained slides to drain and air-dry gradually. 


Alternatively, the slide containing the dried milk film, 
can be directly dipped in Newman’s stain for to 1 min 
without the preliminary treatments for defatting and 
fixing. The composition of Newman’s stain is intended 
to remove fat, fix the cells and stain the organisms in 
one single operation. If the film is over-stained, rinse 
in water and decolourize with alcohol slightly. The 
background will be faintly blue while the cells will be 
stained deep blue. 

NOTE — There are a number of other staining procedures but 


the two methods described above have been found to be quite 
satisfactory. 


11.3.4 Microscopic Examination of Stained Films — 
Place one drop of immersion oil on film and examine 
under the oil-immersion objective. Count the single 
organisms or isolated clumps on a number of 
microscopic fields. Any isolated single cell, pair of cells 
or clump of cells is treated as a ‘clump’. The fields 
counted shall be selected at random and represent all 
parts of the film. The number of fields to be counted is 
determined by the density of bacterial clumps in the 
field in the following manner: 


If the average number of clumps per field is under 
0.5, 0.5 to 1, 1 to 10 and 10 to 30, the number of 
fields to be counted will be 50, 25, 10 and 5 
respectively. If the number of clumps per field is 
over 30, then the counter is recorded as 
uncountable. In such cases, if the actual count is 
required, the milk sample will have to be diluted 
suitably and then the microscopic count 
determined. 


Calculate the average number of the clumps per field 
and multiply by the microscopic factor (WF) to give 
the Direct Microscopic Clump Count per ml. 
(Alternatively, the individual cells in each field may 
be counted and the results reported as total counts per 
ml). 


11.4 Interpretation 


The following are tentatively suggested for assessing 
the bacteriological quality of milk supplies on the basis 
of Direct Microscopic Clump Counts: 


Direct Microscopic Clump Bacteriological 
Counts per ml Quality of Milk 

a) Less than 5 000 00 Good 

b) 5 00 001 to 4 000 000 Fair 

c) 4 000 001 to 20 000 000 Poor 

d) Over 20 000 000 Very poor 


11 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


11.4.1 A careful study of the types of organisms 
predominating in the milk film during microscopic 
examination will reveal valuable information regarding 
the sources of contamination in milk so that suitable 
advisory and regulatory measures may be undertaken 
to improve the quality of milk: 


Microscopic Appearance Probable Causes of 
High Counts or 


Poor Quality 


a) Presence of many cocci and 
rods in clumps and patches 


Improperly cleaned 
milk utensils 


b) Excessive numbers of rod Dusty and dirty 
shaped bacteria (particularly environment 
spore-formers) 

c) Large numbers of cocci in Improper cooling 
pairs or short chains of milk 


d) Large numbers of leucocyte Mastitis infection 
cells (generally exceeding 
500 000 per ml) together 


with long chains of cocci 


11.5 Preservation of Records 


After examination of films and removal of oil (by 
adding a little xylene and gently removing the dissolved 
oil), the slides may be preserved in a special dust-free 
and insect-proof rack or cabinet for future reference. 


12 ACIDITY 


12.0 General 


The titratable acidity test is employed to ascertain if 
milk is of such a high acidity as to reduce its keeping 
quality and heat stability. The acidity of milk is not a 
true measure of lactic acid present but in practice, gives 
a good indication of the quality of milk. The titrable 
acidity test really measures the amount of alkali which 
is required to change the pH of milk from its initial 
value of about 6.6 to 6.8, to the pH of the colour change 
of phenolphthalein added to milk to indicate the end 
point (pH 8.3). In practice, the titration method is 
employed and measures the buffering capacity of milk 
and not true acidity. 


Due to the opacity of milk, the end point of titration is 
not sharp and care has to be taken to adjust the 
conditions to reach the same end-point. Numerous 
techniques are available but the one recommended in 
this standard is the simplest. 


12.1 Apparatus 


a) White Porcelain Basins, hemispherical, 60 ml 
capacity. 

b) Pipette, 10 ml. 

c) Burette, with soda-lime guard-tubes. 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


d) Measuring Cylinder, 25 ml. 
e) Stirring Rods, glass, flattened at one end. 


12.2 Reagents 


12.2.1 Standard Sodium Hydroxide Solution, 0.1 N. 
Prepare a concentrated stock solution of sodium 
hydroxide by dissolving equal parts of sodium 
hydroxide (sticks or pellets) in equal parts of water in 
a flask. Tightly stopper the flask with a rubber bung 
and allow any insoluble sodium carbonate to settle out 
for 3 to 4 days. Use the clear supernatant liquid for 
preparing the standard 0.1 N solution. About 8 ml of 
stock solution is required per litre of distilled water. 
Standardize the prepared 0.1 N solution against 
standard oxalic acid solution (0.1 N). 


12.2.2 Phenolphthalein Indicator Solution — Dissolve 
1 g of phenolphthalein in 100 ml of 95 percent ethyl 
alcohol. Add 0.1 N sodium hydroxide solution until 
one drop gives a faint pink colouration. Dilute with 
distilled water to 200 ml. 


12.2.3 Rosaniline Acetate Solution (Stock Solution) — 
Dissolve 0.12 g of rosaniline acetate in approximately 
50 ml of rectified spirit (see IS 323) containing 0.5 ml 
of glacial acetic acid. Make up to 100 ml with rectified 
spirit. 


12.2.4 Rosaniline Acetate Solution (Bench Solution) — 
Dilute 1 ml of the stock solution to 500 ml with a 
mixture of rectified spirit (see IS 323) and distilled 
water in equal proportions by volume. 


NOTE — The stock solution and the bench solution should be 
stored in dark in brown bottles securely stoppered with rubber 
bungs. 


12.3 Procedure 


Thoroughly mix the milk by pouring several times from 
one container to another avoiding incorporation of air 
bubbles. Measure accurately 10 ml of milk in two 
porcelain basins. Add an equal volume of freshly boiled 
and cooled water. Add 1.0 ml of phenolphthalein 
indicator solution to one of the basins and to the other 
basin, add 1.0 ml of bench solution of rosaniline 
acetate. Titrate the contents of the basin to which 
phenolphthalein has been added, against standard 
sodium hydroxide solution added drop by drop from 
the burette until by comparison the colour matches the 
pink tint of the solution in the basin containing the 
rosaniline acetate solution. Stir vigorously throughout. 
The time taken for complete titration shall not exceed 
20 s. The titration shall be made in north light or under 
illumination from a daylight lamp. 


12.4 Calculation 
Titratable acidity (as lactic acid per 100 ml of milk) 


12 


_ OVN 
= a 
where 
V, = volume in ml of the standard sodium 
hydroxide required for titration; 
N = normality of the standard sodium hydroxide 
solution; and 
V, = volume in ml of milk taken for the test. 


12.5 Interpretation 


The normal range of acidity of milk varies from 0.10 
to 0.17 percent lactic acid. Any value in excess of 0.17 
percent can safely be reckoned as developed lactic acid. 


13 DETERMINATION OF FAT 


Determine fat in the sample (see 4.5) according to the 
method prescribed in IS 1224 (Part 1). 


14 DETERMINATION OF SOLIDS-NOT-FAT 


Calculate the solids-not-fat according to the method 
prescribed in IS 10083. 


15 DETECTION OF ADULTERANTS 


15.1 The modes of adulteration commonly encountered 
in market samples are: 


a) removal of fat by skimming, 

b) addition of separated milk or skim milk to 
whole milk, 

c) addition of water, 

d) addition of starch and cane sugar for raising 
density to prevent detection of added water 
by lactometers, 

e) addition of urea, and 

f) addition of vegetable oils/foreign fat. 


15.2 Detection of Skimming 


An indication of the removal of excess fat from milk 
is given by the following: 


a) Lower percentage of fat, 

b) Higher density reading of the sample at 27°C, 
and 

c) Higher ratio of solids-not-fat to fat. 


15.3 Detection of Milk Mixed with Separated Milk 
or Skim Milk 


When fresh separated milk or skim milk has been added 
to whole milk, it could be inferred from the following 
facts: 


a) Lower percentage of fat (see 13), 


b) Higher density of the toned milk sample at 
21, 


c) Higher percentage of solids-not-fat (see 14), 
and 


d) Higher ratio of solids-not-fat to fat. 
15.4 Detection of Extraneous Water 


Presence of extraneous water in milk is detected by 
the following facts: 


a) Lower percentage of fat (see 13), 

b) Lower density of milk at 27°C, 

c) Lower percentage of solids-not-fat (see 16), 
and 

d) Depression of freezing point [see IS 1479 


(Part 4)]. 


15.5 Detection of Mineral Oil 
15.5.0 General 


The presence of mineral oil in milk fat is indicated by 
the development of turbidity when hot distilled water 
is added to a freshly made alcoholic solution of the 
soap formed by the isolated milk fat/oil. For the 
detection of mineral oils in milk, milk fat needs to be 
separated and converted into Ghee. 


NOTE — Sample of Ghee cane be prepared by taking out cream/ 
butter from milk sample and melting the same into Ghee. 


15.5.1 Apparatus 
Erlenmeyer flask, air condenser/water condenser. 
15.5.2 Reagent 


Potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution (3 parts KOH 
and 2 parts distilled water). 


15.5.3 Procedure 


Place 1 ml oil or melted fat in Erlenmeyer flask, add 
1 ml KOH solution and 25 ml alcohol. Boil under 
reflux air condenser, shaking occasionally until 
saponification is complete (approx. 5 min). Add 25 ml 
water and mix. 


15.5.4 Interpretation 


In presence of >0.5 percent mineral oil on fat basis, 
distinct turbidity appears. 


15.6 Detection of Starch 


Starch or cereal flours, may be added to make up the 
density of milk to prevent detection of added water. 
The presence of starch or cereal flours is detected by 
the following test. 


15.6.1 Reagents, Iodine solution (1 percent) Dissolve 
2.5 g potassium iodide (KI) in 100 ml distilled water, 
add to it 1 g pure iodine crystals, shake well until the 
iodine crystals dissolve. 


13 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


15.6.2 Procedure 


Place in a test-tube about 3 ml of well-mixed sample. 
Bring it to boil by holding the tube over a flame. Allow 
to cool to room temperature. Add a drop of one percent 
iodine solution. Presence of starch is indicated by the 
appearance of a blue colour which disappears when 
the sample is boiled and re-appears on cooling. The 
test can detect presence of starch at 0.02 percent level 
in milk. 


15.7 Detection of Cane Sugar 
15.7.0 General 


Cane sugar may be added to milk to raise the density 
to prevent detection of extraneous water. 


15.7.1 Procedure 


To about 15 ml of milk in a test-tube, add 3 ml of 
concentrated hydrochloric acid and 0.1 g of resorcinol 
and mix. Place the tube in boiling water-bath for 5 min. 


15.7.2 Interpretation 


A white colour or white with slight yellowish tinge is 
considered as negative for cane sugar and development 
of slight red colour to brick red colour is considered as 
positive for added cane sugar. The sensitivity of the 
test is 0.15 percent cane sugar in milk. 


15.8 Determination of Maltodextrins in Milk 
15.8.0 General 


The test method is used to detect added maltodextrin 
in milk. The reaction is due to the formation of 
carbohydrate-iodine complex (brownish) in low pH 
condition. 


15.8.1 Reagents 


a) Iodine solution (1 percent) — Dissolve 2.5 g 
potassium iodide (KI) in 100 ml distilled 
water, add to it 1 g pure iodine crystals, shake 
well until the iodine crystals dissolve. 

b) Lactic acid (5 percent) — Take 5.6 ml of lactic 

acid (90 percent) and dilute to 100 ml. 


15.8.2 Procedure 


Take 5 ml of milk and boil, add 0.5 ml drops of 
5 percent lactic acid, cool and filter. Add 3 drops of 
1 percent iodine solution in filtrate and observe the 
colour. 


15.8.3 Interpretation 


The presence of maltodextrin is indicated if the color 
changes to brown. If the colour remains golden yellow, 
then it will indicate absence of maltodextrin (see 
Fig. 4). 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


NEGATIVE SLIGHT POSITIVE 


Fic. 4 CHEMICAL METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OF MALTODEXTRINS IN MILK 


15.9 Detection of Glucose in Milk 
15.9.1 General 


Generally glucose is added as adulterant to increase 
the specific gravity of milk. General tendency of people 
with vested interest is to add at the rate of 0.5-1.0 
percent to get sufficient increment in Lactometer 
reading. Therefore, this test can be successfully 
implemented in milk collection centers also. 


15.9.2 Apparatus — Water-bath 
15.9.3 Reagents 


a) Barfoed’s reagent — Dissolve 24 g cupric 
acetate in 450 ml boiling water and 
immediately add 25 ml of 8.5 percent lactic 
acid to the hot solution. Shake to dissolve 
almost all precipitate, cool and dilute with 
water to 500 ml. If necessary decant of filter 
to get a clear solution. 

b) Phosphomolybdic acid reagent — Take 35 g 

ammonium molybdate and 5 g sodium 

tungstate in a large beaker; add 200 ml of 10 

percent NaOH solution and 200 ml water. Boil 

vigorously (20-60 min) so as to remove nearly 
whole of ammonia. Check removal of 
ammonia with the help of red litmus paper. 

Cool, dilute with water to about 350 ml. Add 

125 ml concentrated H3PO4 (85 percent) and 

dilute further to 500 ml. 


15.9.4 Procedure 


Take 1 ml of milk and add Iml of Modified barfoed’s 
reagent. Place it in boiling water bath for 3 minutes. 
Cool under tap water (2-3 min). Add 1 ml of 
phosphomolibdic acid. Development of deep blue 
colour is an indication of added glucose. 


14 


SI No. Concentration, Reaction (Reagents) 
percent 
i) Blank (Normal milk) Negative 
ii) 0.05 Change in colour with respect 
to blank 
iii) 0.1 Positive (deep blue colour) 
iv) 02 Positive 


NOTE — From the above results we can clearly state that 
sensitivity of this test starts from 0.05 percent. At 0.1 percent, 
we can clearly detect the presence of glucose using this test. 


15.10 Detection and Determination of Urea in Milk 
15.10.1 General 


Urea content in natural milk varies from 20 mg/100 
ml to 70 mg/100 ml. However, urea content above 
70 mg/100 ml in milk indicates milk containing ‘added 
urea’. The adulteration of milk by ‘added urea’ which 
serves to increase the total solids content of milk, is 
detected and determined by the following test. 


15.10.2 Detection of Urea in Milk 
15.10.2.1 Reagents 


a) p-Dimethyl amino benzaldehyde solution 
(DMAB), 1.6 percent (w/v) — Dissolve 1.6 g 
DMAB in 100 ml ethyl alcohol and add 10 
ml concentrated hydrochloric acid. 
Phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 — 3.403 g of 
anhydrous potassium dihydrogen 
orthophosphate and 4.355 g of anhydrous 
dipotassium monohydrogen orthophosphate 
are dissolved in distilled water and the volume 
is made to | litre. 

Trichloroacetic acid (TCA), 24 percent (m/v) 
— 24 g of TCA is dissolved in distilled water 
and the total volume is made to 100 ml. 


b) 


c) 


d) Diluting reagent — Equal volumes of 24 
percent TCA and phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) 
are mixed to make the diluting reagent. 


15.10.2.2 Procedure 


Take 5 ml of milk sample and add 5 ml of 1.6 percent 
DMAB reagent and mix well. For comparison, 
prepare a control, that is, milk sample containing 
no added urea. A distinct yellow colour if observed 
in milk sample indicates milk containing ‘added 
urea’. The control, however, would show a slight 
yellow colour due to the presence of natural urea in 
milk. 


15.10.3 Determination of Urea in Milk 


15.10.3.1 Preparation of standard urea solution (1 mg/ 
ml) 


Weigh 100 mg of urea and dissolve in phosphate buffer 
of pH 7.0 and make up the volume to 100 ml with 
phosphate buffer. 


15.10.3.2 Procedure 


Take 10 ml of milk sample and mix with 10 ml of 
trichloroacetic acid (24 percent) to precipitate the 
proteins and then filter. Treat 5 ml of the filtrate 
with 5 ml of para-dimethyl amino benzaldehyde 
(DMAB) reagent to develop the colour. Prepare a 
blank by taking 5 ml of diluting reagent and treating 
it with 5 ml of DMAB reagent. Measure the optical 
density of the yellow colour at 425 nm in a 
spectrophotometer. 


15.10.3.3 Calculation 


Prepare standard curve by taking known concentrations 
of urea and treating with DMAB as above. Calculate 
the amount of urea in milk from the standard curve. 


15.11 Detection of Vegetable Oils/Foreign Fat in 
Milk 


15.11.1 Isolation of Fat Using Modified Gerber 
Method 


Take a specially designed dual purpose milk 
butyrometer having both ends open. Close the stem 
side opening of the butyrometer with a good quality 
acid-resistant silicon cork. Then add, in sequence, 
10 ml of Gerber sulphuric acid (90-91 percent, v/v ), 
10.75 ml of milk sample and | ml of iso-amyl alcohol 
from the neck side opening. Close the neck side of the 
butyrometer with a lock stopper. Mix the contents of 
the butyrometer properly to dissolve the proteins and 
centrifuge at 1 100 rpm for 5 min to get a clear fat 
column in the stem of the butyrometer, as done in the 
usual Gerber fat test. Read the fat percentage from the 
butyrometer column. 


15 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


15.11.2 Determination of Butyro-Refractometer (B.R.) 
Reading 


Remove the silicon cork and take out a little quantity 
of fat from the stem of the butyrometer with the help 
of a syringe having a thin and narrow gauge teflon 
tubing attached to the niddle. Apply the liquid fat 
between the prisms of the butyro-refractometer 
maintained at 40°C. Wait for 2 min and note down the 
observed B.R. reading. 


15.11.3 Calculation 
Calculate B.R. reading of the isolated fat as follows: 


Corrected B.R. = 1.08 x Observed B.R. 
15.11.4 Interpretation 


Butyro-refractometer reading of milk fat exceeding 
45.0, indicates the presence of vegetable oils/foreign 
fat. 


15.11.5 Precautions 


Fat column should be clear and transparent. If 
blackening occurs due to charring, repeat the 
experiment to get clear fat, as B.R. reading is affected 
due to blackening of the fat column. 


15.11.6 Determination of Reichert Meissel (RM) Value 


In case of doubtful Butyro-refractometer (B.R.) reading 
the Reichert Meissel (RM) value of milk fat isolated 
by heat-clarification method may be determined by the 
procedure prescribed in IS 3508. The RM value of 
isolated fat should be as per the requirement given for 
ghee (see IS 16326). 


15.12 Detection of Sulphates in Milk 
15.12.0 General 


The test method is used to detect added sulphates in 
milk to increase the solids-not-fat (SNF) content. 
Soluble sulphates present in filtrate forms barium 
sulphate (BaSO,) with barium chloride (BaCl,) 
solution and will give precipitate of white color. 


15.12.1 Reagents 


Five percent lactic acid solution, 1 percent barium 
chloride solution. 


15.12.2 Procedure 


Take 20 ml of milk sample; add 1 ml of 5 percent lactic 
acid, boil and cool. Filter and take filtrate in test tube 
and add 3-4 drops of 1 percent barium chloride 
solution. Observe for precipitate formation. 


15.12.3 Interpretation 


White precipitate confirms presence of sulphate, if 
there is no precipitate, the test is negative. 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


15.13 Test for Presence of Anionic Detergent in 
Milk 


15.13.0 General 


Alkyl benzene sulphonic acid (ABS) or anionic 
detergent may be present in milk due to intentional 
addition of detergent in milk or due to insufficient 
rinsing of dairy equipments. The following method is 
based on the ionic interaction between the anionic 
detergent and cationic dye. Anionic detergents have a 
property to form a complex with cationic dyes. The 
solubility of dye and dye-detergent complex differs 
significantly as dye-detergent complex is relatively less 
polar in comparison to dye alone. Formation of dye- 
detergent complex between cationic dye and anionic 
detergents and subsequently its extraction into the 
hydrophobic solvent layer (lower) is the principle 
behind the method. The method is performed by 
addition of methylene blue dye solution and chloroform 
to milk, mixing of the content followed by 
centrifugation. This results in distribution of dye colour 
in upper layer and lower layers. Relative intensity of 
the colour is noticed in these layers. Appearance of 
relatively more blue colour in lower layer indicates 
the presence of detergent in milk. The developed test 
is sensitive to detect anionic detergent up to 
0.012 5 percent (12.5 mg/100 ml). 


15.13.1 Reagents 


a) Methylene blue dye — 12.5 mg is dissolved 
in 100 ml of distilled water. Protect the 
solution against direct sunlight. 

b) Chloroform (Inflammable and toxic on 


inhalation. Mouth pipetting is not 


recommended). 
15.13.2 Procedure 


Pipette 1 ml of suspected milk sample into a 15 ml test 
tube. Add 1 ml of dye solution followed by addition 
of 2 ml chloroform. Vortex the contents for about 15 s 
and centrifuge at about 1 100 rpm for 3 min. Note the 
intensity of blue colour in lower and upper layer. 
Relatively, more intense blue color in lower layer 
indicates presence of detergent in milk. Relatively more 
intense blue color in upper layer indicates absence of 
detergent in milk. The method can detect presence of 
0.15 percent level of laboratory grade detergent (for 
example labolene) in milk. 


15.14 Detection of Soya Powder in Milk 
15.14.0 General 


Urease enzyme present in soyabean powder converts 
the urea into carbon dioxide and ammonia. Ammonia 
dissolves and makes the medium alkaline which turns 
the colour of phenol red solution to pink. 


16 


15.14.1 Reagent 
15.14.1.1 Soyabean powder detection solution 


Make 0.1 percent phenol red solution by dissolving in 
distilled water. Keep it overnight and filter the solution. 
Dissolve | g urea crystals in 100 ml phenol red solution. 
Keep the solution in cool and dry place. Make fresh 
solution after one week. 


15.14.2 Procedure 


Take 5 ml of well mixed milk in a test tube. Add 1 ml of 
soyabean powder detection solution, mix and allow to 
stand for 10-15 min. Observe the colour. Development 
of pink colour indicates the presence of soyabean 
powder in milk. 


16 DETECTION OF PRESERVATIVES 


16.0 General 


Milk and other dairy products are required by Public 
Health Laws to be free from preservatives. With a few 
exceptions, any preservative added to milk is not 
removed in the process of treatment or manufacture. 
Thus, if milk containing preservatives is accepted, the 
treated milk or milk product when subsequently offered 
for sale may contain preservatives and render the seller 
liable to prosecution besides constituting a hazard to 
health. No preservative shall, therefore, be added to 
milk except in the case of the samples which have to 
be preserved for chemical examination. 


Some of the most common preservatives found in milk 
are boric acid and borax, benzoic acid, formaldehyde 
and salicylic acid. Hypochlorite residues may also be 
found in milk when chlorine sterilizers are used for 
sterilizing milk handling equipment unless such 
equipment is properly rinsed with water. Antibiotics 
used in the treatment of udder diseases of milch animals 
may also find their way in milk if proper precautions 
are not taken. The presence of chlorine or antibiotics 
in milk not only enhances the keeping quality of the 
milk but will reduce the plate counts and also lengthen 
the M.B.R. (see 10). When testing for preservatives, it 
is necessary to carry out a control test with a milk 
sample known to be free from any preservative. 


16.1 Test for Boric Acid Using Glycerol 
16.1.1 Reagents 


a) Phenolphthalein indicator (1 percent) — 
Dissolve 1 g of phenolphthalein in 100 ml of 
95 percent ethyl alcohol. Add 0.1 N sodium 
hydroxide solution until one drop gives a faint 
pink colouration. Dilute with distilled water 
to 200 ml. 

Standard sodium hydroxide solution — 0.1 N. 
Prepare a concentrated stock solution of 


b) 


sodium hydroxide by dissolving equal parts 
of sodium hydroxide (sticks or pellets) in 
equal parts of water in a flask. Tightly stopper 
the flask with a rubber bung and allow any 
insoluble sodium carbonate to settle out for 3 
to 4 days. Use the clear supernatant liquid for 
preparing the standard 0.1 N solution. About 
8 ml of stock solution is required per litre of 
distilled water. Standardize the prepared 0.1 
N solution against standard oxalic acid 
solution (0.1 N). 

c) Glycerol (50 percent) — Take 50 ml glycerol 
and make up to 100 ml with distilled water. 


16.1.2 Procedure 


Take 10 ml milk in a 50 ml beaker. Add 1 ml 1 percent 
phenolphthalein indicator. Titrate against 0.1 N NaOH 
solution till pink colour persist for 10-15 s. Add 3-4 
drops of 0.1 N NaOH. Milk will be pinking in colour. 
Divide the sample in two parts in test tubes. In one test 
tube, add 2.0 ml distilled water and in another test tube, 
add 2 ml glycerol (50 percent). Compare the colour of 
glycerol added test tube with the water added test tube. 
Disappearance of pink) colour or fading of colour in 
the test tube added with glycerol will indicate the 
presence of boric acid and borates. The other test tube 
added with water will remain pink. 


16.2 Hehner Test for Formaldehyde 

16.2.1 Reagent 

Concentrated sulphuric acid, commercial; sp gr 1.84. 
16.2.2 Procedure 


To about 10 ml of milk in a wide mouthed test-tube 
add about half the volume of concentrated sulphuric 
acid pouring the acid carefully down the side of the 
tube so that it forms a layer at the bottom without 
mixing with the milk. A violet, or blue colour, at the 
junction of the two liquids indicates the presence of 
formaldehyde. The test is sensitive to one part in 
10 000. 


NOTE — The test is given only in the presence of a trace of 
ferric chloride or other oxidizing agents. This test may be 
combined with the determination of fat (see 13), noting whether 
a violet colour forms on addition of the sulphuric acid in the 
butyrometer. 


16.3 Test for Benzoic Acid 
16.3.1 Reagents 


a) Dilute hydrochloric acid, 1 : 3 by volume. 
b) Ethyl ether 
c) Ammonium hydroxide, sp gr 0.88. 


d) Ferric chloride solution, 0.5 percent (w/v), 
neutral. 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


e) Sodium hydroxide solution, 10 percent (w/v). 
f) Potassium nitrate, crystals. 
g) Concentrated sulphuric acid, sp gr 1.84. 


h) Ammonium sulphide, freshly prepared and 
colourless. 


16.3.2 Procedure 


Acidify 100 ml of milk with 5 ml of the hydrochloric 
acid. Shake until curdled. Filter and extract the filtrate 
with 50 to 100 ml of ether. Wash the ether extract layer 
with two 5 ml portions of water. Evaporate the greater 
portion of ether in a porcelain dish on a water-bath 
and allow the remainder to evaporate spontaneously. 
If benzoic acid is present in considerable quantity, it 
will crystallize from the ether in shining leaflets and 
give a characteristic odour on heating. 


Dissolve the residue in hot water, divide into two 
portions and test as follows: 


a) Make one portion alkaline with a few drops 
of ammonium hydroxide, expel the excess of 
ammonia by evaporation, dissolve the residue 
in a few millilitres of hot water, filter if 
necessary. Then add a few drops of the neutral 
ferric chloride solution. A salmon coloured 
precipitate of ferric benzoate indicates the 
presence of benzoic acid. 

b) To the other portion, add one or two drops of 
sodium hydroxide solution and evaporate to 
dryness. To the residue, add 5-10 drops of 
concentrated sulphuric acid and a small 
crystal of potassium nitrate. Heat for 10 min 
in a glycerol bath at 120 to 130°C, or for 
20 min in a boiling water-bath. The 
temperature of glycerol bath shall not exceed 
130°C. After cooling, add 1 ml of water, make 
distinctly ammoniacal and boil the solution 
to decompose any ammonium nitrate that may 
have been formed. Cool, pour into a test-tube, 
and add a drop of fresh colourless ammonium 
sulphide, without allowing layers to mix. 

c) A red-brown ring indicates benzoic acid. On 
mixing, the colour diffuses through the whole 
liquid, and on heating finally, changes to 
greenish yellow. This differentiates benzoic 
acid from salicylic acid. The latter forms 
coloured compounds, which are not destroyed 
by heating. 


16.4 Ferric Chloride Test for Salicylic Acid 


16.4.1 Reagents 


a) Dilute hydrochloric acid — 1 : 3 by volume. 
b) Ethyl ether 
c) Ferric chloride — 0.5 percent, neutral. 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


16.4.2 Procedure 


Acidify 100 ml of milk with 5 ml of dilute hydrochloric 
acid. Shake until curdled and filter. Extract with 50 to 
100 ml of ether. Wash the ether layer with two 5 ml 
portions of water. Evaporate the greater portion of ether 
in a porcelain dish on a steam-bath, allow the remainder 
to evaporate off. Add one drop of the ferric chloride 
solution. A violet colour indicates the presence of 
salicylic acid. 


16.5 Test for Presence of Hydrogen Peroxide 
16.5.1 Procedure 


Dissolve 1 g of vanadium pentoxide (V,O;) in 100 ml 
of 6 percent H,SO, (6ml concentrated H,SO, + 94 ml 
distilled water). To 10 ml of sample add 10-20 drops 
of reagent and mix. 


16.5.2 Interpretation 


The development of pink or orange red colour indicates 
presence of H,O, in milk. 


16.6 Detection of Hypochlorite 


16.6.1 Apparatus 
a) Centrifuge 
b) Tubes for centrifuge — each of capacity 
12.5 ml. 
c) Mercury vapour lamp — fitted with a Wood’s 
filter. 
16.6.2 Reagent 


16.6.2.1 Stannous chloride solution — 0.025 percent 
(w/v) in 73.5 percent sulphuric acid (prepared by 
mixing three volumes of concentrated sulphuric acid 
and one volume of water). 


16.6.3 Procedure — Cool about 3 ml of milk taken in 
a test-tube in a freezing mixture of ice and salt to 2 to 
5°C. In another test-tube, take an equal volume of the 
stannous chloride solution and similarly cool and add 
to milk. Shake the tube whilst in the freezing mixture 
and hold for 3 min. Place the mixture in a 12.5 ml 
centrifuge tube and centrifuge for 3 minutes at 
2 500 rpm. A yellow-green colour is produced in the 
presence of hypochlorite. Alternatively, after 
centrifuging, examine the tube in ultra-violet light from 
a mercury vapour lamp fitted with a Wood’s filter, for 
the presence of any yellow fluorescence. 


16.7 Qualitative Detection of Thiocyanates in Milk 
16.7.0 General 


Thiocyanates are added to milk with/without H,O, to 
increase the keeping quality of milk, but such a practice 
of addition of thiocyanates to milk is not only against 
food laws but it can also cause hazardous effect on the 


18 


health of consumers. The natural levels of thiocyanates 
in milk are reported to range between 6 to 10 mg/litre 
with an average of about 8 mg/litre of milk. Thiocyantes 
can be detected in milk, after deproteinization with 
trichloroaceitic acid (TCA). TCA filtrate gives orange 
to orange red color with ferric nitrate in case of added 
thiocanates, but gives yellow color (with slight orange 
tinge) due to the thiocyanates naturally present in milk. 
This test can detect as low as 0.6 mg/litre of added 
thiocyanate (equivalent to 1 mg/litre potassium 
thiocyanate). 


16.7.1 Reagents 


a) Trichloro acetic acid (TCA), 20 percent (w/v) 
— Dissolve 20 g TCA in 10 ml of distilled 
water and filter. 

Nitric acid (HNO,), 2 M — Prepare by 
diluting 138.5 ml of 65 percent HNO, to 
1 000 ml with distilled water. 

Ferric nitrate reagent — Dissolve 16.0 g 
Fe(NO,).9 H,O in 50 ml of 2 M HNO, and 
dilute to 100 ml with distilled water. Filter 
through Whatman filter paper No.1 or 4 and 
store in dark or in amber colored bottle. 


b) 


c) 


16.7.2 Procedure — The thiocyanate test in milk can 
be done in following two ways: 


16.7.2.1 Test applicable to TCA filtrate — Take 6 ml 
of milk sample and add 3 ml TCA (20 percent) to 
precipitate the proteins. Filter through Whatman no. 
40 filter paper. To a clear 1.5 ml filtrate, add 1.5 ml of 
Ferric nitrate reagent. Run the black simultaneously 
using distilled water instead of milk. Observe the 
intensity of colour in case of blank and milk sample 
and compare with the Table 1 to detect the presence of 
extraneous thiocyanate in milk. 


Table 1 The Order of Colour Intensity for 
Detection of Thiocyanate in Milk 
(Test Applicable to TCA Filtrate 

and Directly to Milk) 


(Clause 16.7.2.1) 


SI Sample Level of Thiocyanate Hue and Intensity 

No. Added (mg/litre) of Colour 

i) Blank — Transparent 

ii) Control (milk) — Yellow (with slight 
orange tinge) 

iii) Test sample” 1 Yellowish-orange 

iv) Test sample” 2-4 Orangish-red 

v) Test sample” >5 Red 


DTest sample contains milk and added thiocyanate. 


16.7.2.2 Test applicable directly to milk — Take 5 ml 
of milk sample and add equal quantity of Ferric nitrate 
reagent (5 ml). For blank, take distilled water instead 
of milk. Observe the colour in both the cases. For 


further clarity, filter the milk sample after developing 
colour through Whatman no. 40 filter paper. Observe 
the intensity of colour in case of blank and milk sample 
and compare with Table 1 to detect the presence of 
extraneous thiocyanate in milk. 


17 DETECTION OF NEUTRALIZERS 
17.0 General 


Neutralizers in the form of lime water, or sodium 
bicarbonate may be added to neutralize developed 
acidity before milk is processed. Such a practice is not 
permissible. 


17.1 Rosalic Acid Test for Carbonates 
17.1.1 Reagents 


Rosalic acid solution (0.05 percent rosalic acid) in 
60 percent ethyl alcohol solution (60 : 40 ethyl alcohol 
and water). 


NOTE — The alcohol used for preparation of 60 percent (v/v) 
alcohol is to be distilled or absolute alcohol. 


17.1.2 Procedure 


Take 2 ml rosalic acid solution (0.05 percent rosalic 
acid) in a test tube and add 2 ml of milk. 


17.1.3 Interpretation 


Rose-red colour development indicates neutralizer 
presence in milk. 


17.2 Detection of Added Sodium Salts 
17.2.0 General 


Milk has natural sodium as mineral in milk serum. 
However, in case of added sodium in the form of alkaline 
water or sodium salt, it will be reflected in higher sodium 
ions which can be tested with sodium detection meters. 


17.2.1 Apparatus 


A potentiometeric titrator/ISE meter Hach or Metler 
Toledo or any other manufacturing companies with 
sodium electrodes DX-223 and reference electrodes 
DX-200 in case of instrument No. DL-50 (2.4 version). 


17.2.2 Reagents 


17.2.2.1 Preparation of ion strength adjuster (1.S.A. ) 
buffer 


100 g NH,CI in 250 ml of deionised water + 25 ml of 
NH,OH (Ammonia solution) and make up the volume 
to 500 ml in volumetric flask. 


17.2.2.2 Preparation of sodium standard solution 
(1 000 mgflitre) 


Take 1.2706 g of dried NaCl (dried in oven at 120°C 
for 3 to 4 hours) make the volume to 500 ml in a 
volumetric flask. 


19 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


17.2.2.3 Preparation of sodium standard solution 
(100 mgflitre) 


Take 50 ml of sodium solution (1000 mg/litre) prepared 
as above and make up the volume to 500 ml mark. 


NOTE — Storage of (a) Na* electrode in 0.1 M NaCl solution, 
and (b) Reference electrode in I.S.A. solution. 


17.2.3 Calibration Done at Method I.D. — 104 


a) Stage calibration with 1000 mg/litre [Na*] 
b) Stage calibration with 100 mg/litre [Na*] 


17.2.4 Procedure 


Take 10 ml of milk, dilute to 100 ml with 90 ml distilled 
water. Add 2 ml of ISA buffer and proceed for 
estimation of sodium ions by inserting sodium 
electrodes and reference electrodes in the sample. 


17.2.5 Interpretation 


The normal range of sodium ions in the raw fresh milk 
is between 350 to 600 ppm, if the content is higher 
than the normal, it shows added sodium. 


17.3 Acidity Difference Before and After Boiling 
the Sample for Neutralizer Detection 


17.3.0 General 


Milk is heterogeneous mixture of colloidal particles, 
water, minerals, vitamins and fat soluble constituents. 
It has also absorbed carbon dioxide and other volatile 
compounds which get evolved thereby lowering the 
acidity and increasing the pH slightly. In case of normal 
milk, the difference in acidity before and after boiling 
is upto 0.02 percent and pH also differs by 0.02 unit. 
If the milk is neutralized or stabilized, the acidity 
difference increases from 0.02 to 0.03 and more. The 
difference between before and after boiling acidity 
should not be more than 0.02 percent. 


17.3.1 Reagents 
0.1 N NaOH, Rosalic acid solution. 
17.3.2 Procedure 


Take 10 ml of milk and determine acidity as per the 
normal procedure (see 12). Boil another 10 ml aliquot 
of the milk sample for one to two minutes. Cool to 
room temp and determine acidity again. If the 
difference between normal and after boiling acidity is 
more than 0.02 percent the milk can be doubted for 
neutralization and it will correlate with poor taste, 
slightly high pH and also in the rosalic acid colour. 


18 DETECTION OF MASTITIS 
18.0 General 


Mastitis or inflammation of the udder is caused by 
certain species of streptococci, principally 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


Streptococcus agalactia, staphylococci and a few other 
types of organisms. Though in most cases mastitis is 
caused by the non-pathogenic types of bacteria, their 
occurrence interferes with the efficient secretion of 
milk and is invariably a source of great economic loss. 
It is, therefore, necessary to regularly examine all the 
milking animals in a herd to ensure that none is 
suffering from mastitis, and whenever positive cases 
are detected, to take prompt measures to check and 
eliminate the disease. 


It is essential that the test for the detection of mastitis 
be made on single quarter samples since milk from 
normal quarters may obscure detection of the abnormal 
ones if composite samples are taken. Any quarter 
giving an abnormal reaction should then be followed 
up. The first 2 or 3 streams of milk shall always be 
used for diagnostic tests as these will show the greatest 
change if the quarter is abnormal. 


18.1 Bromothymol Blue Test 


This test is based on the fact that milk from infected 
udders is usually alkaline and shows pH as high as 7.4. 
The indicator solution may be prepared by triturating 
1 g of bromothymol blue powder with 160 ml of 
exactly 0.01 N sodium hydroxide solution, and diluting 
with 590 ml of distilled water and the test carried out 
as follows: 


Place | ml of bromothymol blue solution in a test- 
tube and add 5 ml of milk. Mix and observe the 
colour (see 7). 


18.2 Direct Microscopic Somatic Cell Count 
18.2.0 General 


Bacterial infection causes mastitis or inflammation 
of the mammary glands. Somatic cell counts have 
animal health, milk quality and productivity 
implication. Mastitis causes diminished production 
of milk due to tissue damage of the glands. The 
concentration of the somatic cells in the milk is 
directly related to infection status of udder. If the cell 
count is high, the milch animal has mastitis or 
inflammation of the mammary glands. When the 
bacterial infection starts in the mammary glands, the 
milch animals evolve complex internal body system 
that enables them to defend and get rid themselves of 
disease causing bacteria. They have the ability to 
mobilize and direct bacteria fighting cells to the udder. 
These cells are termed ‘somatic cells or leucocytes’ 
which move to the infection site to minimize the 
infection by surrounding or internalizing the bacteria. 
Finally the somatic cells help eliminate infection. If 
the somatic cell count is more than 5 x 10°, it is an 
indication that the milch animal is infected. Therefore, 


20 


in the day-to-day management of dairy, infection 
status of the milch animal can be controlled 
effectively by monitoring the somatic cell count of 
bulk milk or individual milch animal. 


18.2.1 Principle 


Stained films of a measured volume of milk spread on 
glass slides of specified area is examined under a 
Microscope. The microscope is first calibrated so that 
the exact area of the Microscopic field is known. Then 
a measured quantity of milk (0.01 ml) is spread over a 
measured area of one square cm on a cleaned glass 
slide so that each microscopic field examined 
represents a quantitative aliquot of the sample. The 
milk (0.01 ml) is allowed to dry, and the film is defatted, 
fixed and stained with a suitable dye such as Newman’s 
stain. 


The average number of somatic cells/microscopic field 
is determined after examining between 5 and 60 fields, 
depending upon the microscopic factor and the number 
of somatic cells/field. This method requires 10-15 min 
for examining one sample. Direct microscopic method 
makes it possible for milk to be examined for numbers 
of somatic cells. 


The number of somatic cells in raw milk provides 
measure of the extent of mastitis. Stained somatic cells 
are visible under the Microscope and can be taken as 
way of assessing raw milk quality. 


18.2.2 Apparatus 


18.2.2.1 Microscope — Having 1.8 mm oil immersion 
objective. 


18.2.2.2 Microscopic slides — Size 2.5 cm x 7.5 cm. 


They may be either plane or with clear, circular 1 cm? 
areas (diameter approx. 11.28 mm) or a square of 
1 cm? areas demarcated on the slides. New slides 
should be cleaned and dry. The slides maybe cleaned 
by soaking in cleaning solution of chromic acid 
(prepared by dissolving 50 g of sodium dichromate 
in 200 ml of water in a glass or earthen container and 
then adding carefully 300 ml of concentrated 
sulphuric acid of commercial grade), rinsing in 
flowing tap water and finally in distilled water. Used 
slides should be socked in hot or boiling alkaline 
detergent solution until all residues are removed, then 
rinse in flowing tap water, dried and properly stored 
for re-use. 


18.2.2.3 Micropipette or micro syringe for transfer of 
0.01 ml of milk — Breed’s pipettes which delivers 
0.01 ml or micro syringe delivering 0.01 ml. After use 
these pipettes should be thoroughly cleaned with 
cleaning solution and rinsed with clean water. 


0.1 ml Syringe Breed’s pipette 


18.2.2.4 Guide slide 


Glass or cardboard Guides ruled into round or square 
areas each one of a square cm inscribed thereon, for 
use beneath clean slide so that the milk may spread 
over a space of exactly 1 cm’. The slides having a 
square area engraved on the slides are also available. 


18.2.2.5 Needle, bent point 
Suitable for spreading milk over an area of 1 cm’. 
18.2.2.6 Drying device 


Level surface at 40-45°C or cabinet over electric bulb 
for drying the slides. 


18.2.2.7 Forceps or slide holders 
Suitable for dipping and holding slides. 
18.2.2.8 Jars or beakers 


Of suitable size for staining by submersing the slides 
in the Newman’s stain poured in the jars or beakers. 


18.2.2.9 Stage micrometer 


Having fine graduation measuring in 1/100th mm 
(0.01 mm). 


18.2.3 Reagents 
18.2.3.1 Newman’s stain 


18.2.3.1.1 Reagents for preparation of Newman’s stain: 


a) Methylene blue chloride lg 
b) Glacial acid 6 ml 
c) Methyl Alcohol 54 ml 
d) Tetra chloroethne 40 ml 


18.2.3.1.2 Preparation of Newman stain 


Add the alcohol to tetrachloroethane and heat to 70°C 
in a water-bath and add this warm mixture to methylene 
blue powder and shake vigorously until the dye is 
completely dissolved. Cool and then slowly add acetic 
acid and mixed. Filter the mixture and store in a tightly 
stopper bottle. The purpose of this stain is three fold : 


21 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


to fix the film of the milk on the glass slide, to dissolve 
the fat and to stain the somatic cells. 


18.2.4 Estimation of Microscopic Factor 


First of all, determine the diameter of the field, using a 
stage micrometer. The micrometer is a slide having 
fine graduation measuring in 1/100th mm. 


Suppose the diameter of a field is 0.16 mm, the area of 
the field is 2 7% = 3.141 6 x (0.08)? 

= 3.141 6 x 0.006 4 

= 0.02 mm? approx. 


where 0.08 is the radius of the field. 


The next step is to determine the number of fields in 
the entire film to be examined. The size of this film is 
0.01ml spread over 1 cm? or 100 mm? 


Therefore, number of fields = 100/0.02 
= 100 x 100/2 
= 5 000 

This figure represents 0.01 ml of milk. 


The figure for 1 ml of milk would be = 5 000 x 100 = 
500 000 


This is the microscopic factor. 


The average number of somatic cells counted in several 
fields must be multiplied by this factor to get the 
number of somatic cells in one ml. of milk. Thus, if 50 
fields are examined and the average number of the 
somatic cells found is 0.6, the somatic cell number per 
ml. will be 500 000 x 0.6 = 300 000. 


18.2.5 Procedure 
18.2.5.1 Preparation of milk film on microscopic slides 


Take the well mixed sample of milk using Breed’s 
pipette or micro syringe and discharge the entire volume 
of 0.01 ml of milk on to the center of the one cm square 
area of the slide. Spread the milk uniformly over the 
entire one cm? area and dry the film at level surface at 
40-45°C in warm atmosphere or on cabinet over electric 
bulb as shown in Fig. 5 to Fig. 8. 


18.2.5.2 Defatting, fixing and staining of the smear 


Dip the slides in Newman’s stain for 1/2 to 1 minute. 
Remove the slides and drain off the excess stain and 
allow to dry thoroughly. Rinse the slides in three 
exchanges of water and then drain off excess water 
and air dry before examining the film under microscope 
as shown in Fig. 9 to Fig. 14. 


18.2.5.3 Examination of stained film 


Examine the film with an oil immersion objective after 
placing one drop of immersion oil on the film. The 
fields for counting should be selected at random and 
represent all parts of the film. The following guide can 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


Fic. 5 GUIDE SLIDE RULED INTO cm? AREA AND TO BE 
PLACED UNDER THE SLIDE FOR MAPPING ONE cm ? 
AREA FOR PREPARING SMEAR 


Fic. 7 SPREAD THE MILK UNIFORMLY WITH THE HELP 
OF A WIRE SLIGHTLY TURNED AT THE END AND Dry IT 
IN WARM ATMOSPHERE OR ON LEVEL SURFACE AT 
40-45°C or OVER THE CABINET 


Esi 


Fic. 6 PLacE 0.01 ml MILK AT THE CENTER OF THE 
SQUARE BY PLACING THE SLIDE OVER THE GUIDE 


Fic. 8 Dry SMEAR FOR STAINING 


Fic. 9 Dip THE Fic. 10 Fic. 11 RINSE THE 
SLIDE IN REMOVE SLIDE BY PLACING 
NEWMAN’S STAIN THE EXCESS ITIN WATER FOR 
STAIN AND ONE MINUTE TO 
Dry REMOVE THE 
Excess DYE 


Fic. 14 Air 
Dry THE SLIDE 
AND EXAMINE 
UNDER 
MICROSCOPE 


Fic. 12 


SIMILARLY RINSE THE SLIDE BY 
PLACING IT IN WATER FOR ONE 
MINUTE IN TURN 


Fic. 13 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


Fic. 15 Somatic CELLS PLus LONG CHAIN OF BACTERIA INDICATING MASTITIS 


be used for counting number of fields to be examined. 


Average number Number of fields to 
of cells be examined 
<0.05 50 
0.5-1.0 25 
1-10 10 
10-30 5 


Count only somatic cells with an identifiable stained 
nucleus. For polymorph nucleated cells, count as a 
single cell if it has two or more discernible nucleus 
lobes. For other somatic cells, count the ones that have 
a nucleus which appears to be essentially intact. A large 
number of somatic cells plus long chain of bacteria 
ten or more organism in a chain indicate mastitis as 
shown in Fig. 15. 


Mastitic milk comes from a milch animal shedding 
Streptococcus agalactiae. These long chain 
streptococci and associated leucocytes are frequently 
seen in mastitic milk. The long chains of S. agalactiae 
plus large numbers of leucocytes are typical of mastitis 
(see Fig. 16). However, this is only one of the many 
organisms found in milk from milch animal with 
damage udder condition. 


Fic. 16 APPEARANCE OF STAINED LEUCOCYTES 


23 


18.2.6 Interpretation 


The somatic cell count more than 5 x 10° is an 
indication that milch animal is infected. 


19 HANSA TEST 


19.0 Hansa test is used to detect the adulteration of 
cow milk with buffalo milk. 


19.1 Instructions for Preservation of Sample 


19.1.1 As soon as the serum is received, transfer it to a 
refrigerator or ice box. It should be preserved at a 
temperature of 4°C or as near to this temperature as 
possible. But it should not be frozen. Remember that 
it is a living tissue and its life depends on the care and 
gentleness with which it is handled. It should always 
be thoroughly mixed before use, but not shaken in such 
a way that foam appears. 


19.2 Cleanliness 


19.2.1 Keep all glassware and polytheneware 
thoroughly clean. The slides and pipettes should be 
thoroughly washed in distilled water and spirit, and 
dried before and after use each time. Be most careful 
about the pipettes introduced into the serum, which 
should be absolutely clean and dry. With care it is 
possible to keep the equipment clean even under the 
most primitive village conditions, but without 
cleanliness it is not possible to get good results. 


19.3 Procedure 


19.3.1 Place 2 to 3 ml (accurately measured) of the 
milk sample to be tested in a test-tube. Label it 
according to a convenient code. Add about 19 times 
the quantity of water to the milk, so that the sample is 


IS 1479 (Part 1) : 2016 


diluted 1/20 with water. Take a pipette fitted with a 
rubber bulb. Put a drop of the mixture on the centre of 
a glass slide. With another pipette, take out a drop of 
serum after proper mixing. Place a drop of the serum 
on the drop of milk (without touching the milk with 
the pipette). Mix the two-drops together thoroughly 
with a clean tooth pick or glass rod. Pick up the slide 
and gently rock it in your hand so as to give the whole 
material a swirling motion. Curdy particles develop in 
the milk containing buffalo milk within half minute. 
If such particles do not develop for half a minute, the 
test is negative and there is no buffalo milk present in 
the sample (provided the serum is in good condition 
and the test was carried out properly). 


19.3.2 Control 


Before testing unknown samples, test several known 
samples of pure cow milk, buffalo milk, and cow milk 
containing buffalo milk in the minimum possible 
proportion (say 10 percent). Also, it would be a good 
idea to take another drop of diluted milk and test it 


24 


with a drop of water in place of serum. If flocculations 
or particles are observed, the milk sample is spoilt 
(possibly due to excessive acidity) and is unsuitable 
for the test by the standard technique. 


19.4 Preserved Milk Sample 


Milk preserved with any of the standard preservatives 
and kept in the refrigerator can be used for Hansa test 
for as long as two weeks. Most satisfactory results have 
been obtained with 0.4 percent formalin (mix drops of 
commercial formalin in 28.4 ml). Boiling, addition of 
sugar and other common additives and stabilizers have 
no effect on the test. 


19.5 Life of the Serum 


If all the precautions are observed, and the serum is always 
handled with care, it should be possible to use it up to 
three months. In old sera, precipitates may sometimes be 
found, and these may cause errors in reading the test. 
The particles can be seen when sera are taken in a pipette. 
They can be easily removed by centrifugation. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: FAD 19 (2681). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western O: Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


