**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



IS 2165-1 (1977) : Insulation coordination, Part 1: Phase to 
earth insulation coordination principles and rules [ETD 19: 
High Voltage Engineering] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS : 2165 ( Part 1 ) - 1977 
( Reaffirmed 1W6) 

Indian Standard ■.A..,..,— 

RKAFF1RMED 
INSULATION CO-ORDINATION 

PART 1 PHASE TO EARTH INSULATION CO-ORDINATION, 
PRINCIPLES AND RULES 



( Second Revision ) 

Fourth Reprint APRIL 2000 

( Incorporating Amendment No. 1 ) 



UDC 621.316.91.048 



© Copyright 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

Gr 7 March 1978 



IS: 2165 (Parti) -1977 

Indian Standard 

INSULATION CO-ORDINATION 

PART 1 PHASE TO EARTH INSULATION CO-ORDINATION, 
PRINCIPLES AND RULES 

(Second Revision) 

High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee, ETDC 19 

Chairman Representing 

Shri V. R, Narasimhan Central Electricity Authority, New Delhi 

Members 

Deputy Director ( Alternate to 
Shri V. R. Narasimhan ) 
Shri K. S. Bhardwaj Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala 

Shri A. K. Chopra ( Alternate ) 
Dr S. C. Bhatia Siemens India Ltd, Bombay 

Dr D. P. Sahgal ( Alternate ) 
Da K. Das Gupta The Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd, 

Calcutta 

Shri A. K. Barman ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. B. Desai Jyoti Ltd, Vadodara 

Dr P. Satyanaratana ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. S. Mani Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd, Bombay 

Shri K. S. Madhavak ( Alternate ) 
Shri S. K, Mukherjse National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri D. V. Narkb Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, New Delhi 

Shri B. N. Ghosh ( Alternate ) 

Shri P. N. Shrivastava ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. H. Navkal The Bombay Electric Supply & Transport Under- 

taking, Bombay 
Shri M. L. Donors ( Alternate ) 
Prop G. R. Govinda Raju Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 

Dr B. I. Gurura J ( Alternate ) 
Shri K. S. Sivaprakasam Karnataka Electricity Board, Bangalore 

Shri H. M. S, Linoaih ( Alternate ) 
Shri V. Srinivasan W. S. Insulators of India Ltd, Madras 

Shri K. Thiruyenkadathan ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. V. Subramanian Tamil Nadu Electricity Board, Madras 

Shri S. Kripanidhi ( Alternate ) 
Shri Surendra Singh U. P. Government Pottery Development Centre, 

Khurja 

Shri Komal Sinoh ( Alternate ) 

( Continued on page 2 ) 



® Copyright 1999 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS:2t65(Part1)-1977 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Sum C. R. Varier Crompton Greaves Ltd, Bombay 

Dr G. Parthasarathv ( Alternate ) 
Shhj P. J. Wadia The Tata Hydro-Electric Power Supply Co Ltd, 

Bombay 
Dr R, Ranjan ( Alternate ) 
Shiu S. P. Sachdev, Director General, 1SI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( Elec tech ) 

Secretary 

Sum M. N. MniTiiY 
Assistant Direr! or ( Eke trch ), LSI 



2 



IS: 2165 (Parti) -1977 

Indian Standard 
INSULATION CO-ORDINATION 

PART 1 PHASE TO EARTH INSULATION CO-ORDINATION, 
PRINCIPLES AND RULES 

( Second Revision ) 

0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Second Revision) was adopted by the Indian 
Standards Institution on 27 October 1977, after the draft finalized by 
the High Voltage Techniques Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Electrotcchnical Division Council. 

0.2 This standard covers the principles which govern insulation co-ordi- 
nation and standardizes the levels of insulation of the various items of 
equipment used in a given electrical installation. The values of the test 
voltages to be specified in the equipment specifications shall conform to 
the recommended scale of standardized insulation levels of this standard. 
This standard is supplemented by an application guide ( IS: 3716-1978*) 
which covers the recommended practices for the co-ordination of the 
insulation of electrical equipment. 

0.3 This standard was first issued in 1962 and subsequently revised in 
1973. This revision has been prepared to bring the standard in line with 
the latest developments at the international level. As in the first revision, 
stress is laid on switching overvoltages, a factor which tends to become 
predominant in the range of very high voltages. For equipment having 
highest voltage 300 kV and above, ability to withstand sucn overvoltages 
should be checked by a switching impulse test; and one-minute power- 
frequency test is no longer recommended in this range of voltage for 
insulation co-ordination purposes. Power-frequency tests of one kind or 
another will remain necessary to ascertain the ability to withstand the 
normal voltages and sustained overvoltages as regards ageing of internal 
insulation or behaviour of external insulation in polluted conditions. In 
this highest voltage range, standard test method concerning the appro- 
priate power-frequency tests are expected to be specified in the relevant 
equipment specifications. Only some general indications are given in 
this standard. For voltages lower than 300 kV, no switching impulse test 
has been recommended and both lightning impulse and one-minute 
power-frequency withstand levels are specified. 

* Application guide for insulation co-ordination ( first rtvisitn ) ( under print ), 



IS : 2165 ( Part 1 )• 1977 

0.4 It has been decided to amalgamate the three parts for the sake of 
convenience in use. Hence after publication of this standard the earlier 
version which was in three parts stands withdrawn. 

0.5 Probabilistic concepts and a probabilistic language introduced into 
some procedures of insulation co-ordination in the first revision have 
been retained. This acknowledges the fact that engineers, particularly 
those who work with very high voltage field equipment, with the help of 
computers, are now in a position to make use of such concepts, which 
afford a better knowledge of system and equipment behaviour and should 
contribute to a more economical design. 

0.5.1 The traditional approach to insulation co-ordination was and 
still is, to evaluate the highest overvohage to which an equipment may 
be submitted at a certain location on a system, and select from a table of 
standardized values the withstand voltage presenting a suitable safety 
margin. 

Both overvohage evaluation and safety margin selection are largely 
empirical and, in many cases, the choice of the insulation level is still 
more readily based on the previous experience in the system or other 
similar systems. 

0*5*2 In a more elaborate process, it is recognized that overvoltages are 
random phenomena and that it is uneconomical to design plants with 
such a high degree of safety that they can sustain the most infrequent 
ones. It is also acknowledged that tests do not ascertain a withstand 
level with a 100 percent degree of confidence. In consequence, it is 
realized that insulation failures can occur occasionally in well-designed 
plant, and that the problem is to limit their frequency of occurrence to 
the most economical value, taking into account equipment cost and 
service continuity. Insulation co-ordination should be more properly 
based upon an evaluation and limitation of the risk of failure than on 
the a priori choice of a safety margin. 

0.5.3 It may be noted that the ratio between the * rated withstand 
voltage ' which has to be applied to an equipment under specified condi- 
tions, and the particular c statistical overvohage * retained as representa- 
tive of a population of overvoltages on the system, works in the same way 
as a Safety factor 1 , so that the ' statistical ' procedure, at least in this 
simplified form, does not differ materially from traditional or ' conven- 
tional ' one. But it is expected that the new language offered in the 
standard will make it easier for the engineers to appreciate the random 
and uncertain character of the phenomena. 

0.6 Significant modifications have been introduced in the list of standard 
values among which impulse withstand test voltages shall be chosen, and 
the range of recommended rated lightning impulse withstand voltages 
associated with '\e highest voltage for equipment of 220 kV has been 
extended. 

4 



IS : 2165 ( Part 1 ) - 1977 

&7 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from 
IEG Publication 71-1 ( 1976 ) 'Insulation co-ordination, Part I : Terms, 
definitions, principles and rules' issued by International Electrotechnical 
Commission. 

041 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this stan- 
dard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it 
shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard covers the principles of insulation co-ordination and 
applies to equipment for three-phase ac systems, having a highest voltage 
for equipment above 1 kV. 

Notjs — At prevent this standard covers only 'phase-to-earth* insulation. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall 
apply. 

2.1 Nominal Voltage of a Three-phase System — The rms phase- 
to-phase voltage by which the system is designated and to which certain 
operating characteristics of the system are related. 

2.2 Highest Voltage of a Three-Phase System — The highest rms 
phase-to-phase voltage which occurs under normal operating conditions 
at any time and at any point of the system. It excludes voltage transients 
( such as those due to system switching ) ahd temporary voltage varia- 
tions due to abnormal system conditions ( such as those due to fault 
conditions or the sudden disconnection of large loads ). 

2.3 Highest Voltage for Equipment — The highest rms phase-to- 

{mase voltage for which the equipment is designed, in respect of its insu- 
ation as well as other characteristics which are referred to this voltage 
in the relevant equipment specification. 

This voltage is the maximum value of the highest voltage of the 
system for which the equipment may be used. 

In this standard, the highest voltage for equipment will be 

represented by I/m. 

Notk — In systems with highest voltage for equipment equal to or greater than 
123 kV, this voltage tfm in general does not materially differ from the highest value of 
the system operating voltage. Below 100 kV, the voltage Um may be higher than the 
highest system voltage since each standard value of Um •PPjj e » to different systems, 
the nominal voltage of which may differ by as much as 20 percent ( for instance : 
Vm - 24 kV covers 20 kV and 22 kV ), and thus also to different values of the 
highest operating voltage. 

• Rules for rounding off numerical values ( mis$d ). 



IS: 2165 (Parti). 1977 

2.4 External Insolation — The distances in atmosphere and the 
surfaces in contact with open air of solid insulation of the equipment, 
which are subject to dielectric stresses and to the effects of atmospheric 
and other external conditions, such as pollution, humidity, vermin, etc. 

2.5 Internal Insolation — The internal solid, liquid or gaseous parts 
of the insulation of equipment, which are protected from the effects of 
atmospheric and other external conditions, such as pollution, humidity, 
vermin, etc. 

2.6 Indoor External Insolation — The external insulation which is 
designed to operate inside buildings and consequently not exposed to the 
weather. 

2.7 Outdoor External Insolation — The external insulation which is 
designed to operate outside buildings and consequently exposed to the 
weather. 

2*8 Self-Restoring Insulation — Insulation which completely 
recovers its insulating properties after a disruptive discharge caused by 
the application of a test voltage; insulation of this kind is generally, but 
not necessarily; external insulation. 

2.9 Nonself-Restoring Insulation — An insulation which loses its 
insulating properties or does not recover them completely after a disrup- 
tive discharge caused by the application of a test voltage; insulation of 
this kind is generally but not necessarily internal insulation. 

2.10 Isolated Neutral System — A system which has no intentional 
connection to earth except through indicating, measuring, or protective 
devices of very high impedance. 

2.11 Resonant Earthed System or System Earthed Through an 
Arc-Soppression Coil — A system in which the neutral is earthed 
through a reactor, the reactance being of such value that during a single 
phase-to-earth fault, the power-frequency inductive current passed by this 
reactor substantially neutralizes the power-frequency capacitance 
component of the earth-fault current. 

Note — With resonant earthing of a system, the residual current in the fault is 
limited to such an extent that an arcing fault in air in self-extinguishing. 

2.12 Earthed Neutral System — A system in which the neutral is 
connected to earth, either solidly, or through a resistance or reactance of 
low enough value to reduce materially transient oscillations and to give 
a current sufficient for selective earth fault protection. 

2*13 Earth-Fault Factor — At a selected location of a three-phase 
system ( generally the point of installation of an equipment ) for a given 



IS: 2165 (Parti) -1977 

system layout, the ratio of the highest rms phase-to-earth power- 
frequency voltage on a sound phase during a fault to earth ( affecting 
one or more phases at any point ) to the rms phase-to-earth power- 
frequency voltage which would be obtained at the selected location with 
the fault removed. 

Notr 1 — This factor is a pure numerical ratio ( higher than one ) and 
characterizes in general terms the earthing conditions of a system as viewed from the 
selected location, independently of the actual operating value of the voltage at that 
location. The ' earth-fault factor * is the product of \/3 and the * coefficient of 
earthing ' which has been in general use up to now. 

Note 2 — The earth-fault factors are calculated from the phase-sequence 
impedance components of the system, as viewed from the selected location, using for 
any machines the subtransient reactances. 

Note 3 — The earth- fault factor does not exceed 1*4, if, for all system configura- 
tions, the zero-sequence reactance and resistance are less than three and one time( s ) 
the positive-sequence reactance, respectively. 

2.14 Overvoltage — Any time-dependent voltage between one phase 
and earth or between phases with peak value or values exceeding the 

corresponding peak value Um \/2/\/ 3 or U m \/2 respectively, derived 
from the highest voltage for equipment. 

Note — Overvoltages are always transitory phenomena. A rough distinction 
may be made between highly damped overvoltages of relatively short duration 
( set 2*17 and 2.18 ) and undamped or only weakly damped overvoltages of relatively 
long duration ( se$ 2.21 ), The border line between these two groups cannot be 
clearly fixed. 

2.15 Phase-to-Earth per Unit Overvoltage — The ratio of the 
peak values of a phase-earth overvoltage and of the phase-to-earth 
voltage corresponding to the highest voltage for equipment ( that is, 

2.16 Phase-to-Phase per Unit Overvoltage — The ratio of the 
peak values of a phase-to-phase overvoltage and of the phase-to-phase 
overvoltage corresponding to the highest voltage for equipment ( that is, 
again f/ m /2//3 ). 

This ratio will be expressed by K \/T, K being the ratio of the peak 
value of the phase-to-phase overvoltage to the peak value of the highest 
voltage for equipment ( that is, U m y/ 2"). 



IS : 2165 ( Part 1 ) - 1977 

The peak value of the highest voltage for equipment ( that is, the 
lowest per unit value of a phase-to-phase overvoltage ) shall thus be 
expressed in per unit value as 1 X V1T* 

Note — The per unit overvoltages defined in 2.15 and 2.16 for the purpose of 
insulation co-ordination studies are referred to the peak value of the phase-to-earth 
voltage corresponding to the highest voltage for equipment as the fixed reference 
basis. When overvoltages are measured in various conditions during tests on a system 
or an equivalent model, it may be convenient to refer these overvoltages to the phase- 
to-earth voltage either prior to or after the switching operation, as appropriate. In 
such cases, the term ' overvoltage factor f should be used for the ratio, and as the 
over-voltages are not always proportional to the system voltage, it is necessary to 
state the latter as well as all conditions of the test. 

2.17 Switching Overvoltage — A phase-to-earth or a phase-to-phase 
over-voltage at a given location on a system due to one specific switching 
operation, fault, or other cause, the shape of which can be regarded for 
insulation co-ordination purposes as similar to that of the standard 
impulse ( see 7#2 ) used for switching impulse tests. Such overvoltage are 
usually highly damped and of short duration. 

. Note — For the purpose of insulation co-ordination switching and lightning over* 
voltages are classified according to their shapes, regardless of their origin. Although, 
considerable deviations from the standard shapes occur on actual systems, in this 
standard it is considered sufficient to describe such overvoltages by their classification 
and peak value. 

2.18 Lightning Overvoltage — A phase-to-earth or a phase-to-phase 
overvoltage at a given location on a system, due to one specific lightning 
discharge or other cause, the shape of which can be regarded, for insula- 
tion co-ordination purpose, as similar to that of the standard impulse 
( see 7.2 ) used for lightning impulse tests. Such overvoltages are usually 
very highly damped and of very short duration. 

Notk — For the purpose of insulation co-ordination switching and lightning, over- 
voltages are classified according to their shapes, regardless of their origin. Although, 
considerable deviations from the standard shapes occur on actual systems, in this 
standard, it is considered sufficient to describe such overvoltages by their classification 
and peak value. 

2.19 Statistical Switching ( Lightning ) Overvoltage — Switching 
( lightning ) overvoltage applied to equipment as a result of an event of 
one specific type on the system ( line energization, reclosing, fault occur- 
rence, lightning discharge, etc ), the peak value of which has a probabi- 
lity of being exceeded which is equal to a specified 'reference 
probability'* 

Note — A reference overvoltge probability of 2 percent feas been used in this 
standard. 

2.20 Conventional Maximum Switching ( Lightning ) Over* 
voltage — A switching (lightning) overvoltage, which is conventionally 
considered as the maximum overvoltage in the conventional procedure of 
insulation co-ordination. 

8 



IS:2165(Part1)-1977 

2.21 Temporary Overvoltage — An oscillatory phase-to-earth or 
phase-to-phase ovcrvoltage at a given location of relatively long duration 
and which is undamped or only weakly damped. 

Temporary overvoltages usually originate from switching operations 
or faults ( for example, load rejection, single-phase faults ) and/or from 
non-linearities ( ferro- resonance effects, harmonics ). They may be 
characterized by their amplitude, their oscillation frequencies, their total 
duration or their decrement. 

2.22 Statistical Switching ( Lightning ) Impulse Withstand 
Voltage — The peak value of a switching ( lightning ) impulse test 
voltage at which insulation exhibits under specified conditions a probabi- 
lity of withstand equal to a specified reference probability* 

Nora i — Thii reference probability is chosen as 90 percent in this standard. 

Notb 2 — The concept of statistical withstand is at present applicable only to self- 
restoring insulation. 

2.23 Conventional Switching ( Lightning ) Impulse Withstand 
Voltage — The peak value of a switching ( lightning ) impulse test 
voltage at which an insulation shall not show any disruptive discharge 
when subjected to a specified number of applications of this impulse, 
under specified conditions. 

Note — The concept applies particularly to nonsel&restoring insulation. 

2.24 Rated Switching (Lightning) Impulse Withstand Voltage— 

The prescribed peak value of the switching ( lightning ) impulse with- 
stand voltage which characterizes the insulation of an equipment as 
regards the withstand tests. 

Notb 1 — Depending on the kind of insulation and conforming to what Is 
specified in the relevant equipment specification, dielectric tests are made to verify 
that: 

a) the statistical switching ( lithtning ) impulse withstand voltage is not less than 
the rated impulse withstand voltage ( u$ S.6.2 ), and 

b) the conventional switching ( lightning ) impulse withstand voltage is equal to 
the rated impulse withstand voltage ( sa 3.&S ), 

Nora 2 — Standard impulse shapes used for withstand tests on equipment as well 
as test procedures are defined in 7. 

2.25 Rated Short Duration Power-Frequency Withstand Vol- 
tage — The prescribed rms value of sinusoidal power-frequency voltage 
that the equipment shall withstand during tests made under specified 
conditions and for a specified time usually not exceeding one minute* 

9 



IS: 2165 (Parti)- 1977 

2.26 Rated Insulation Level 

a) For equipment with highest voltage for equipment equal to 

or greater than 300 kV, the rated switching and lightning 
impulse withstand voltages. 

b) For equipment with highest voltage for equipment lower than 
300 kv, the rated lightning impulse and short duration power- 
frequency withstand voltage. 

2.27 Statistical Safety Factor — The ratio for a given type of event, 
of the appropriate statistical ( switching or lightning ) impulse with- 
stand voltage and the statistical overvoltage, established on the basis of a 
given risk of failure, taking into account the statistical distributions of 
withstand voltages and overvoltages. 

Nora — Indications regarding the correlation between the minimum value of the 
statistical safety factor and the risk of failure not to be exceeded is given in 
IS: 3716-1978*. 

248 Conventional Safety Factor — The ratio of a conventional 
switching or lightning impulse withstand voltage to the corresponding 
conventional maximum overvoltage, established on the basis of experi- 
ence and which takes into account the possible deviations of the actual 
withstand voltage and overvoltages from their conventional values as 
well as any other factors. 

249 Protection Level of a Protective Device — The highest peak 
voltage values which should not be exceeded at the terminals of a protec- 
tive device when respectively switching impulses and lightning impulses 
of the standard shapes and rated values are applied under specified 
conditions. 

Nora — Either the statistical or the conventional impulse protection level can be 
considered, with the same meaning as in 2.1S and 2.20. 

2 JO Protection Factors of a Protective Device — The ratios of 
the switching impulse and lightning impulse values of the protection 
level of a protective device. 

Nora — In the case of spark gaps, the phase-tc-earth voltage corresponding to the 
highest voltage for equipment is used conventionally as the rated voltage. 

S. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF INSULATION CO-ORDINATION 

3.1 Insolation Go-ordination — Insulation co-ordination comprises 
the selection of the electric strength of equipment and its application, in 
relation to the voltages which can appear on the system for which the 
equipment is intended and taking into account the characteristics of 
available protective devices, so as to reduce to an economically and 
operationally acceptable level the probability that the resulting voltage 
stresses imposed on the equipment will cause damage to equipment 
insulation or affect continuity of service. 

• Application guide for insulation co-ordination ( first rtvub* ) ( under print ). 

10 



IS: 2165 (Parti) -1977 

3.2 Voltage Stresses and Other Factors Affecting Insolation — The 

following classes of dielectric stresses may be encountered during the 
operation of an equipment: 

a) Power-frequency voltages under normal operating conditions, 
that is, not exceeding the highest voltage for equipment; 

b) Temporary overvoltages; 

c) Switching overvoltages; and 

d) Lightning overvoltages. 

For a given voltage stress, the behaviour of internal insulation may 
be influenced by its degree of ageing, and that of external insulation by 
its degree of atmospheric contamination. 

3.3 Ranges of Highest Voltages for Equipment — For the purpose 
of this standard, the standardized values of the highest voltage for 
equipment are divided into three ranges: 

a) Range A : above 1 kV and less than 52 kV, 

b) Range B : from 52 kV to less than 300 kV, and 

c) Range G : 300 kV and above. 

3.4 Dielectric Test 

3.4.1 Types of Dielectric Test — The following types of dielectric tests 
are considered in this standard: 

a) Short duration ( 1 minute ) power-frequency tests; 

b) Long duration power-frequency tests; 

c) Switching impulse tests; and 

d) Lightning impulse tests. 

Switching and lightning impulse tests may be either withstand tests 
with a suitable number of voltage impulses at rated impulse withstand 
voltage applied to the insulation ( see 7.4 and 7.5 ), or 50 percent disrup- 
tive discharge tests in which the ability of the insulation to withstand 
impulses at the rated impulse withstand voltage is inferred from the 
measurement of its 50 percent disruptive discharge voltage ( see 7.3 ); 
this, of course, is only possible in the case of self-restoring insulation. 

Short duration power-frequency tests are withstand tests. 

Recommended values of the short duration power-frequency test 
voltages and of the switching and lightning impulse withstand voltages 
are given in this standard. For long duration power-frequency tests 
however, only a general guidance is given in 3.5 to the relevant Equip 
ment Committees. 

11 



IS: 2165 (Parti) -1977 

3.4.2 Selection of the Dielectric Tests — The selection of the dielectric tests 
according to this standard is different in voltage ranges A, B and C, It 
can also be influenced by the type of equipment. 

3.4.2.1 Ranges A and B — The performance under power-frequency 
operating voltage, temporary overvoltages and switching overvoltages is 
checked in general by a short duration power-frequency test. 

The performance under lightning overvoltages is checked by a lightn- 
ing impulse test. 

Ageing of internal insulation and contamination of external insula* 
tion, when they may affect performance under power-frequency operating 
voltages and overvoltages, generally require long duration power- 
frequency tests. 

Note — Within these ranges of voltages, it is accepted that the traditional one- 
minute power-frequency test generally gives a suitable safety margin with respect to 
■witching overvoltages and to the highest temporary overvoltages ( the duration of 
which is much shorter than one minute ), as well as to normal operating voltage or to 
moderate temporary overvoltages ( the duration of which may be longer but with a 
lower amplitude ) # This one-minute test with the voltage values in Tables 1 and 2 
thus appears as a compromise, since overvoltages comparable both in duration and 
amplitude with the values in the test rarely occur on normal systems. If for some 
types of internal insulations this test may be found inappropriate, the relevant equip, 
ment specification may specify the voltage level or the duration of the test. 

3.4*2.2 Range C — In this voltage range, the performance of insula- 
tion under power-frequency operating voltages and temporary over- 
voltages on one hand, and under switching overvoltages on the other, is 
demonstrated by different tests* 

The performance under power-frequency operating voltages and 
temporary overvoltages is checked by long-duration power-frequency 
tests, aiming at demonstrating the suitability of the equipment with respect 
either to ageing or to contamination, according to which is the case* 

The performance under switching overvoltages is checked by switch- 
ing impulse tests. 

The performance under lightning overvoltages is checked by 
lightning impulse tests. 

Nora — Up to this time 9 the values of traditional short duration power-frequency 
withstand test voltages have been high enough in this range, to take some account 
also of the effects of switching overvoltages and temporary overvoltages. With the 
introduction of tests specific to switching impulses for equipment having highest 
voltage equal to or greater than 300 kV and the availability of tests specific to partial 
discharges, the valties of the power-frequency test voltages can be reduced, and their 
nature reconsidered so as to be more representative of normal operating voltages and 
temporary overvoltages only; this point should be considered while updating the 
relevant equipment specifications. Until this can be done the power-frequency tests 
at present prescribed in the relevant equipment specification will continue to apply, 

12 



IS:2165(Part1)-1977 

3.5 Co-ordination for Voltages Under Normal Operating 
Conditions and for Temporary Overvoltages — When the 
behaviour of equipment under normal operating voltages and temporary 
overvoltages has to be demonstrated by a short duration power-frequency 
test, that is in voltage ranges A and B, the recommended values of the 
test voltage will be found in Tables 1 and 2 (see pages 16 and 19 
respectively ). 

Long duration power-frequency tests, intended to demonstrate the 
behaviour of equipment with respect to ageing of internal insulation or 
to contamination of external insulation should be prescribed in the rele- 
vant equipment specifications. The following general indications are 
given for guidance. 

In specifying tests representative of stresses under normal operating 
conditions and temporary overvoltages, it should be assumed that: 

a) As regards the voltage under normal operating conditions, the 
insulation shall withstand permanent operation at the highest 
voltage for equipment. 

b) Power-frequency tests intended to verify the ability to withstand 
surface contamination should be carried out at the appropriate 
voltage, that is either Um/^3 or Um in case of a system which 
may operate with a phase earthed for long periods. The 
contamination conditions must be specified in the appropriate 
standards. 

c) As regards the temporary phase-to-earth overvoltages in range C, 
their peak value will not exceed 1 '5 p.u. ( per unit ) in usual 
cases and their duration will not exceed {one second on each 
occasion; special consideration may be required when system 
conditions are more severe. 

Power-frequency tests intended to verify, as far as 
practicable, that there will be no significant deterioration of the 
insulation due to partial discharges during the expected working 
life of equipment and that in the most severe conditions the 
insulation is not liable to thermal instability, should be performed 
at some voltage above t/m/^f phase-to-earth and for a duration 
appropriate to the system conditions, and in such a manner that 
all elements are stressed in the same proportions as in service. 

All specifications concerning the values of the test voltages, 
as well as the test procedure and the test conditions, should be 
decided by the relevant Equipment Committee in agreement with 
these indications and conforming to IS: 2071 (Part I )-1974* 
and IS : 2071 ( Part II )-1974*. 



♦Methods of high voltage testing: 

Part I General definitions and test requirements ( first rmsion ), 
Pkrt II Test procedures ( first rmsion ). 

13 



IS : 2165 ( Part 1 ) - 1977 

S.6 Co-ordination for Switching and lightning Overvoltages — In 

voltage ranges A and B, co-ordination for switching overvoltages can 
generally be disregarded, as indicated in 3.4.2 and no switching impulse 
test is recommended in the present standard. In voltage range C, 
co-ordination has to be considered for switching and for lightning 
overvoltages, which have to be treated separately. 

Whatever be the case, insulation co-ordination presupposes some 
knowledge of the magnitude of the overvoltages to be expected at the 
equipment location, considering credible system contingencies, the 
electrical parameters of the system and of the equipment and experience 
of comparable systems as well as the limiting effect of any protective 
devices. 

Where surge arresters are installed, their choice must take into con- 
sideration the magnitude and duration of the temporary overvoltages 
during which they may be required to operate satisfactorily while 
continuing to provide an adequate margin of protection ( see also 
IS: 4004-1978* ). 

The insulation strength of equipment for switching and lightning 
stresses must then be chosen on the basis of the predicted overvoltages to 
ensure that the requisites of insulation co-ordination are satisfied. 

A statistical or a non-statistical procedure may be considered. Some 
general rules for procedure in statistical and conventional approaches to 
insulation co-ordination will be found in IS : 3716-1978J. 

3.6.1 Choice of the Procedure — The need for thorough studies of system 
overvoltages, as well as the need to carry out tests based on the appli- 
cation of a rather high number of impulses, set practical limits to the use 
of the statistical procedure of insulation co-ordination. 

A statistical approach is particularly valuable where there is a strong 
economic incentive towards a reduction of insulation strength especially 
when switching overvoltages are a problem. For these reasons the 
statistical procedure is mainly appropriate to voltage range C and is not 
usually carried out in ranges A and B. 

Furthermore in all voltage ranges, when the equipment insulation is 
essentially nonself-restoring, only a small number of impulse applications 
( for instance, three for each test condition as specified in 7.5 ) can often 
be accepted to check that the withstand strength is assured and, therefore, 
at the present state of the art, it is impossible to consider failure probabi- 
lity as a design variable subject to quantitative control. Thus the use of 
the statistical procedure is at present practically restricted to self-restoring 
insulations. 

•Application guide for non-linear resistor-type lightning arresters for alternating 
current systems ( first rtvisien ) ( under print ). 

{Application guide for insulation co-ordination ( first rtvisien ) ( under print ). 

14 



IS : 2165 ( Part 1 ) - 1977 

3.6.2 Statistical Procedurt — The statistical procedure acknowledges the 
fact that insulation failures may occur; it attempts to quantify the risk of 
failure and to use it as a safety index in insulation design. 

A rigorous determination of the risk of failure for a given category of 
overvoltagc requires that both the overvoltage stresses of this category 
and the equipment withstand be described in terms of their respective 
frequency distributions. 

In a simplified form of this procedure, assumptions are made on 
the general shapes of the probability curves ( for example normal 
frequency distribution and given standard deviation ) which permit the 
representation of each curve by a single point corresponding to a given 
value of probability. Such points are designated as ' statistical overvol- 
tages' ( 2.19) in the case of overvoltage probability curves and as 'statis- 
tical impulse withstand voltages' ( 2.22 ) in the case of withstand proba- 
bility curves. The reference probability for equipment impulse withstand 
voltages has been established as 90 percent. The choice of a 2 percent 
overvoltage reference probability mentioned in 2.19 will be discussed in 
IS : 3716-1978*. 

Insulation co-ordination for a given category of bvervoltages, in this 
simplified statistical context, consists in the selection of a margin, charac- 
terized by the statistical safety factor, between the statistical impulse 
withstand voltage and the statistical overvoltage, which will result in a 
probability of failure ( capable of numerical expression ) deemed to be 
acceptable from the point of view of system reliability and cost. 

The mininum acceptable values of the statistical switching and light- 
ning impulse withstand voltages having thus been determined, the rated 
switching and lightning impulse voltages will be selected from the 
standard values given in 6. Tests requiring a rather large number of 
impulse applications are then needed to verify, with an acceptable degree 
of confidence, that the actual statistical withstand voltages are equal to 
or higher than these rated impulse withstand voltages. 

The verification can be done by means of a 50 percent disruptive 
discharge voltage test, from which the actual statistical ( 90 percent ) 
withstand voltage can be derived with a good degree of confidence in the 
case of self-restoring insulation which continues to behave as such at the 
corresponding test voltages, which are somewhat higher than the rated 
withstand voltage, or for which the probability of damage in such condi- 
tions, in spite of a relatively large number of impulses and an increased 
impulse voltage, can be economically accepted ( for instance, support* 
insulators, isolators ). 



* Application guide for insulation co-ordination ( first rtvimn ) ( under print ). 

15 



IS: 2165 (Parti)- 1977 

The verification has to be done at the rated withstand voltage in the 
case of insulation which might not be self-restoring at the rated 50 per- 
cent disruptive discharge voltage but is self-restoring at the rated with- 
stand voltage, and for which the application of a number of impulses in 
such conditions to the nonself-restoring parts of the insulation can be 
accepted ( for instance, some types of bushing, some types of instrument 
transformer and switchgear ). 

3&3 Conventional Procedure — In this procedure, the criterion of insula- 
tion co-ordination for switching or lightning overvoltages is the margin 
between an overvoltage conventionally accepted, but not necessarily 
ascertained, as approximating the maximum value to be expected at the 
equipment location ( 2.20 ) and a withstand voltage derived from an 
impulse test which may not be rigorously demonstrable but derived from 
an impulse test ( 2.23 ). 

This margin determines a safety factor which should not be less 
than an adequate value based upon experience. The corresponding 
impulse test voltage has to be selected from the standard values listed in 
the following chapters. 

4. STANDARD INSULATION LEVELS FOR EQUIPMENT IN 
RANGE A 

4.1 General Indications — This chapter specifies insulation levels 
associated with standard values of the highest voltage for equipment in 
range A. 

43 Tablet of Standard Insolation Levels — The standard insulation 
levels are given in Table 1 . 

TABLE 1 STANDARD INSULATION LEVELS FOR I kV < U m < 52 kV 

( CUmsts 3.5 and 4.2 ) 

Highest Voltage Rated Lightning Impulse Rated Power-Frequency 
job Equipment Withstand Voltage ( Peak ) Short Duration With- 

Um ( **» ) t — — - — * — - — , stand Voltage ( ems ) 

List 1 List 2 ' 

0) (2) (3) (4) 

kV kV kV kv 

3*6 20 40 io 

TZ 40 60 20 

if" 60 75 28 

17-5 75 95 M 

24 95 125 50 

]R[ 145 170 70 

Note — The underlined values are preferred values in IS : 585-1962* 

•Specification for voltages and frequency for ac transmission and distribution systems 

( rn isti ). 

16 



IS: 2165 (Parti) -1977 

In addition to the rated power-frequency withstand voltage, two 
values of rated lightning impulse withstand voltages, Lists 1 and 2, are 
given in Table 1 for each highest voltage for equipment. Intermediate 
test voltages should not be employed. Impulse tests are included in 
order to check the ability of insulation, and in particular of windings, to 
withstand lightning overvoltages and steep switching cvervoltagcs, parti- 
cularly those which result from chopping due to restrikes across the arc 
gaps of switching devices. 

Under special conditions of usage, the relevant equipment specifica- 
tion may specify reduced test voltages in power frequency and/or impulse 
tests, or even to delete impulse tests. But, in that case, it shall be proved 
either by tests, or by a combination of tests and calculation, that insula- 
tion requirements are fulfilled for the essential stresses in service. 

The choice between Lists 1 and 2 should be made by considering 
the degree of exposure to lightning and switching overvoltages, the type 
of system neutral earthing and, where applicable, the type of overvoltage 
protective device. 

Equipment designed to List 1 is suitable for installations such as the 
following: 

a) In systems and industrial installations not connected to overhead 
lines: 

1) where the system neutral is earthed either solidly or through an 
impedance which is low compared with that of an arc-suppression 
coil. Surge protective devices, such as surge arresters are 
generally not required; and 

2) where the system neutral is earthed through an arc-suppression 
coil and adequate overvoltage protection is provided in special 
systems, for example an extensive cable network where surge 
arresters capable of discharging the cable capacitance may be 
required. 

b) In systems and industrial installations connected to overhead 
lines only through transformers where the capacitance to earth of 
cables connected to the transformer lower voltage terminals is at 
least 005 pF per phase. When the cable capacitance to earth is 
insufficient, additional capacitors may be added on the trans- 
former side of the switchgear, as close as possible to the trans- 
former terminals, and so that the combined capacitance to earth 
of the cables plus the additional capacitors is at least 0*05 pF per 
phase. 

17 



IS :2165( Parti) -1977 

This covers the cases: 

1) where the system neutral is earthed either solidly or through an 
impedance which is low compared with that of an arc-suppression 
coil. Overvoltage protection by means of surge arresters 
may be desirable, and 

2) where the system neutral is earthed through an arc-suppression 
coil and where adequate overvoltage protection by surge 
arresters is provided. 

c) In systems and industrial installations connected directly to 
overhead lines: 

1) where the system neutral is earthed either solidly or through an 
impedance which is low compared with that of an arc-suppression 
coil and where adequate overvoltage protection by spark gaps or 
surge arresters is provided depending on the probability of 
overvoltage amplitude and frequency; and 

2) where the system neutral is earthed through an arc-suppression 
coil and where adequate overvoltage protection by surge 
arresters is provided. 

In all other cases, or where a very high degree of security is required, 
equipment designed to List 2 has to be used. 

5. STANDARD INSULATION LEVELS FOR EQUIPMENT IN 
RANGE B 

5.1 General Indications — This chapter shows the recommended com- 
bination of the highest voltage for equipment in range B and the two 
components of insulation level as stated in 2.26: 

a) rated lightning impulse withstand voltage, and 

b) rated power frequency short duration withstand voltage. 

5.2 Table of Standard Insulation Levels— Table 2 is based on the 
preposition that, in this range of voltages, lightning surges have first 
consideration in the selection of insulation levels. 

5.3 Choice of the Insulated Level — The table associates one or more 
recommended insulation levels with each standard value of the highest 

voltage for equipment. 

* 
Intermediate tests voltages shall not be employed. When more than 
one insulation level is given the highest level is appropriate for equipment 
located in resonant-earthed systems or where the earth-fault factor is 
higher than 1*4 ( see 2.13 ). 

18 



IS : 2165 ( Part 1 )- 1977 

Several insutation levels may exist in the same system, appropriate to 
installations situated in different locations or to various, equipment 
situated in the same installation. A discussion of the selection of insula- 
tion level in relation to the particular conditions of the installation will 
be given in IS : 3716-1978*. 



TABLE 2 STANDARD INSULATION LEVELS FOR 52 kV< U m < 300 kV 




( Clauses 3.5 and 5.2 ) 




Highest Voltage 


Babe won r. u. 


Rated Lightning 


Rated Power- 


roR Equipment 


Values 


Impulse With- 


Frequency Short 


Um ( RMS ) 


V2 
Um-~ 


stand Voltage 


Duration With- 




( Peak ) 


stand Voltage 




•3 




(rms) 




( Peak ) 






0) 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


kV 


kV 


kV 


kV 


52 


425 


250 


95 


72-5 


59 


325 


140 


123 


100 


450 


185 






550 


230 


145 


118 


450 


185 






550 


230 






650 


275 


170 


139 


550 


230 






650 


275 






750 


325 


245 


200 


650 


275 






750 


325 






850 


360 






950 


395 






1050 


460 



Note 1 —The underlined values are preferred values in IS : 585-1962*. 

Note 2 — From 145 kV upwards, two or more lower values of insulations are 
given. The choice of a lower value of insulation supposes that the equipment is 
adequately protected against surges, 

♦Specification for voltages and frequency for ac transmission and distribution systems 
( fivistd ). 

6. STANDARD INSULATION LEVELS FOR EQUIPMENT IN 
RANGE C 

6.1 General Indications 

6.1.1 This chapter specifies insulation levels associated with standard 
values of the highest voltage for equipment in range C. These levels arc 
the same whether the statistical or the conventional procedure for 
determining insulation levels is adopted, depending on the type of 
equipment under consideration. 

'Application guide for insulation co-ordination ( first revision ) ( under print ), 

19 



IS: 2165 (Parti) -1977 

€.1.2 The standard values of rated impulse withstand voltages shall be 
taken from the following series, which is applicable to both switching and 
lightning impulse voltages: 

950, 1050, 1175, 1300, 1425, 1550, 1675,1800, 1950,2100, 
2 250, 2 400, 2550, 2 700, and 2 900 kV. 

Intermediate values shall not be employed. 

6.1.3 Table 3 gives recommended combinations of highest voltages for 
equipment and insulation levels. When, due to the design of the system 
or the methods chosen for the control of switching or lightning over- 
voltages, combinations other than those given in Table 3 are technically 
and economically justifiable, the values shall be selected from the series 
given above. 

6.1.4 Several insulation levels may exist in the same system, appropri- 
ate to installations situated in different locations or to various equipment 
situated in the same installation. A discussion of the selection of the 
insulation level in relation to the particular conditions of the installation 
will be given in IS : 3716-1978*. 

6.2 Table of Standard Insulation Levels for Highest Voltage for 
Equipment Equal to or Greater Than 300 hV — Table 3 shows the 
recommended combinations of the highest voltage for equipment and the 
two components of insulation level: 

a) rated switching impulse withstand voltage, and 

b) rated lightning impulse withstand voltage. 

The table is based on the proposition that, in this range of voltages, 
switching surges should have first consideration in the selection of 
insulation levels. 

In col 3 the per unit ( p.u. ) value of the rated switching impulse 
withstand voltage of col 4 is indicated for convenience of comparison 
with per unit ( p.u. ) switching over voltages expected in the system for 
which the equipment is intended; these per unit ( p.u. ) overvoltages must 
of course always be less than the per unit ( p.u. ) withstand voltage by an 
appropriate margin. 



* Application guide for insulation co-ordination ( first revision ) ( under print ). 

20 



IS : 2165 ( Part 1 ) - 1977 



TABLE 3 STANDARD INSULATION LEVELS FOR U n > 300 kV 

( Clauses 6.1 and 6.2 ) 



Highest 
Voltage 
for Equip- 
ment Um 

( RMS ) 


Base poi» p. u. 
Values 

•3 
(Peak) 


Rated Switch* 

ino Impulse 

Withstand 

Voltage 

(Peak) 

r- * — > 


Ratio Between 
Rated Lightn- 
ing and Switch- 
ing Impulse 
Withstand 
Voltaoe 


Rated Lightn- 
ing Impulse 
Withstand 
Voltage 
(Peak) 


(1) 


(2) 


(3) (4) 


(5) 


(6) 


kV 


kV 


p.u. kV 




kV 


420 


343 


2*76 950 


111 
1-24 


1050 
1 175 






306 1050 


112 
1-24 
136 


1 175 
1 300 
1425 


525 


429 


2-45 1050 


1'12 
1-24 
136 


1175 
1300 
1425 






2-74 1 175 


111 
1-21 
1*32 


1300 
1425 
1550 


765 


625 


208 1300 


1*10 
119 
1-38 


1425 
1550 
1800 






228 1425 


109 
1-26 
1-47 


1550 
1800 

2 100 






2-48 1550 


116 
1-26 
155 


1800 
1950 
2400 



Note I — The underlined value is preferred value in IS : 585-1962*. 

Note 2 — For power frequency test the present short duration withstand test will 
continue till such time sufficient experience is gained on the long duration test, 

♦Specification for voltages and frequency for ac transmission and distribution systems 
( uviud). 



21 



IS :2165( Parti)- 1977 

6.3 Rated Switching Impulse Withstand Voltage — In Table 3 the 
range of rated switching impulse withstand voltages associated with a 
particular highest voltage for equipment has been chosen in consideration 
of the following: 

a) For equipment protected against switching overvoltages by surge 
arresters: 

1 ) the expected values of temporary overvoltages; 

2) the characteristics of presently available surge arresters; and 

3) the margins generally considered advisable between the pro- 
tection level of the surge arresters and the switching impulse 
withstand voltage of equipment. 

b) For equipment not protected against switching overvoltages by 
surge arresters: 

1) the acceptable risk of flashover considering the resultant range 
of overvoitage occurring at the equipment location; and 

2) the degree of overvoitage control generally deemed economi- 
cal, obtained through different expedients, in the switching 
devices and in the system design. 

A discussion of the selection of rated switching impulse withstand 
voltage will be given in IS : 3716-1978*. 

6.4 Rated Lightning Impulse Withstand Voltage — The range of 
rated lightning impulse withstand voltages associated in Table 3 with a 
particular rated switching impulse withstand voltage has been chosen in 
consideration of the following: 

a) For equipment protected by surge arresters, the two lowest values 
of lightning impulse withstand voltage arc applicable. They were 
chosen by taking into account the ratio of lightning impulse pro- 
tective level to switching impulse protective level likely to be 
achieved with surge arresters, and by adding appropriate margins 
which may be particularly necessary in view of the greater effect 
of separation between the surge arresters and the protected ap- 
paratus on the protection level achieveable for lightning impulses 
as compared with that for switching impulses. 

b) For equipment not protected by surge arresters ( or not effectively 
protected), only the highest value of lightning impulse withstand 
voltages should be used. These highest values are based on the 
ratio that is normally obtained between the lightning and switch- 
ing impulse withstand voltages of the external insulation of 
apparatus ( for example, circuit breakers, disconnecting switches, 
instrument transformers, etc). They were chosen in such a way 
that the insulation design will be determined mainly by the ability 
of the external insulation to withstand the switching impulse test 
voltages. 

•Application guidr for insulation co-ordination ( first revision ) ( under print ). 

22 



IS: 2165 (Parti)- 1977 

c) In a few extreme cases provision has to be made for a higher value 
of lightning impulse withstand voltage. This higher value should 
be chosen from the list of standard values given in 6.1.2* 

7. GENERAL TESTING PROCEDURE 

7.1 General — This chapter sets out the procedures for switching and 
lightning impulse tests; also, where maintained, the procedure for a 
one-minute power- frequency withstand test. The procedure for all other 
tests at power-frequency ( see 3.5 ) shall be specified by the relevant 
equipment specification. 

The purpose of the tests is to verify that an equipment complies with 
the rated withstand voltages that determine its insulation level. 

For each type of test and each type of equipment, reference may be 
made to IS : 2071 ( Part II )-1974* or the relevant equipment specifi- 
cation may specify the methods of detecting insulation failures and the 
criteria of failure of the insulation during the tests. 

S3 far as is practicable, the tests shall be made in accordance with 
the following recommendations. Minor deviations are permissible in keep- 
ing with the special characteristics of a particular type of equipment 
provided that the standard insulation levels arc not modified. 

7.2 Switching and Lightning Impulse Withstand Testa — The 

switching and lightning impulse test voltages shall be expressed by the 
prospective peak value of the standard impulses of positive and negative 
polarities. In the case of external insulation reference is made to standard 
atmospheric conditions and, for wet tests, to rain conditions standardized 
in IS: 2071 ( Part II )-1974*. 

The standard lightning impulse has a front time of T2 /lis and a time- 
to-half-value of 50 /xs as specified in IS : 2071 ( Part II )-1974*. 

The standard switching impulse has a time-to-crest of 250 /xs and a 
timc-to-half-valuc of 2500 /xs as specified in IS : 2071 (Part II )-1974*. 
The equipment specifications may specify a different test impulse shape 
where it is shown that it is necessary to establish the lowest withstand of 
a particular apparatus, or where the standard impulse shape cannot be 
achieved for a particular test object with presently available test equip- 
ment. 

In what follows, three types of impulse test are recommended: the 
statistical tests referred to in 3.6.2 being detailed in 7,3 and 7.4 and the 
conventional test referred to in 3.6.3 being detailed in 7.5. The appli- 
cability of the tests to a particular equipment shall be specified in 
equipment specifications and shall be within the general guidelines set 
forth in this standard. 



•Methods of high voltage testing: Part II Test procedures ( first revision ). 

23 



IS: 2165 (Parti) -1977 

7.3 Fifty-Percent Disruptive Discharge Teet 

7.3.1 This test is made at voltages above the rated impulse withstand 
voltage, using a procedure and a number of impulses which will establish 
the 50-percent disruptive discharge voltage of the insulation with accept- 
able accuracy. From this, it can be demonstrated with a high degree of 
assurance that the statistical withstand voltage is, as required, not less 
than the rated impulse withstand voltage. Because many disruptive dis- 
charges are required this test is only suitable for essentially self-restoring 
insulation ( see penultimate paragraph in 3.6.2 ). 

Note — There are a number of procedures available, and any of these may be 
used providing that the accuracy of the determination is within one half of the 
standard deviation with a confidence level of 95 percent. 

7.3*2 Switching and lightning 50- percent disruptive discharge tests 
shall be made as type tests. 

7.3*3 Switching 50-percent disruptive discharge tests shall be made with 
the equipment dry for indoor equipment, wet tests and dry tests shall be 
made for outdoor equipment. For the latter, however, where it is known 
which condition, wet or dry, gives the lower disruptive voltage, it is suffi- 
cient to test with that condition. 

7.3.4 Lightning 50-percent disruptive discharge tests shall be made with 
the equipment dry, for both indoor and outdoor equipment. 

7.3.5 The equipment shall be tested by applying standard switching and 
lightning impulses of positive and negative polarities, except where it is 
known which polarity will give the lower disruptive discharge voltage, in 
which case it is sufficient to test with that polarity. 

7.3.6 The 50-percent disruptive discharge voltage for any of the above 
conditions, determined in accordance with IS : 2071 ( Part II )-1974* 

shall not be less than -rr r^ — \t times the rated impulse withstand volt- 

(1 — r3o)' r 

age, where a is the relative standard deviation of the disruptive discharge 

voltage. Unless otherwise recommended by the relevant Equipment 

Committee, the following values will be assumed for air insulation: 

— switching impulse tests: a — 0'06 

— lightning impulse tests: o ■■ 0'03 

7.4 Fifteen-Impulses Withstand Test 

7.4.1 The test is made at the rated withstand voltage with 15 impulses 
of standard shape. If the number of disruptive discharges in the self- 
restoring insulation does not exceed two and if no disruptive discharge 
occurs in the nonself-restoring insulation of the equipment, the insulation 
of the equipment shall be considered to have passed the test successfully. 

* Methods of high voltage testing : Part II Test procedure!. 

fThis value of the 50-percent disruptive voltage corresponds for the rated impulse 
voltage to the reference withstand probability ( 90 percent ) in a Gaussian distribution. 

24 



tSi 2165 (ParM) -1977 

This test demonstrates that the true statistical withstand voltage of 
the self-restoring insulation of the equipment is not less than the rated 
withstand voltage, but with a degree of assurance considerably lower 
than that which the 50-percent disruptive discharge test allows. 

The validity of such tests will be discussed in IS : 3716-1978*. 

7.4.2 Switching and lightning impulse tests shall be made as type 
tests. 

7.4.3 Switching impulse tests shall be made with the equipment dry 
for indoor equipment. Wet and dry tests shall be made for outdoor 
equipment. For the latter, however, where it is known which condition, 
wet or dry, gives the lower disruptive discharge voltage, it is sufficient to 
test with that condition. 

7.4.4 Lightning impulse tests shall be made with the equipment dry, 
for both indoor and outdoor equipment. 

7.4.5 The equipment shall be tested by applying switching and lightning 
impulses of the standard shapes of positive and/or negative polarity. 
The polarity or polarities to be used shall be specified in the equipment 
specifications. 

7.5 Conventional Impulse Withstand Test 

7.5.1 This test, so called because it applies to the conventional 
procedure of insulation co-ordination, restricts the number of impulses 
in order to avoid possible damage to nonself-restoring insulation* It is 
considered suitable for apparatus in which this aspect predominates, in 
accordance with 3.6.3. 

7.5.2 The conventional switching and lightning impulse withstand 
voltages are verified by means of switching and lightning impulse with- 
stand tests in which the test voltage applied shall be equal to the rated 
impulse withstand voltage in question. 

7.5.3 Switching and lightning impulses shall be of the standard shapes 
and of positive or negative polarity or both. The polarity or polarities 
to be used shall be specified by the relevant Equipment Committee. 

7.5.4 If not otherwise specified by the relevant Equipment Committee 
the withstand test shall be performed by applying three impulses for each 
polarity required. The requirements of the tests shall be deemed to be 
satisfied if no indication of failure is found, msing the methods of 
detection specified by the relevant Equipment Committee or IS* 2071 
(PartII)-1974f. 

•Application guide for insulation co-ordination ( first revision ) ( under print ) 
f Methods of high voltage testing ; Part II Test procedures ( first revision ). 

25 



IS:2165(P«rt1)-1»77 

7*5.5 Switching and lightning impulse withstand tests shall be made as 
type tests. They may also be specified as routine tests by the relevant 
Equipment Committee. 

7*5.6 If an additional chopped-wave lightning impulse withstand test is 
considered for transformers and reactors the specification for such tests 
shall be laid down by the relevant Equipment Committee. 

7.6 Short Duration Power-Frequency Voltage Withstand Test. 

7.6.1 The 1 min power-frequency test voltage is specified as the rms 
value of the voltage which the insulation shall be capable of withstand- 
ing for 1 minute. If the test voltage is non-sinusoidal, the peak 
value divided by ^2 i* deemed to be the test voltage. 

7.6.2 The dry power-frequency withstand test shall be made as a rou- 
tine test, except where otherwise specified by the relevant Equipment 
Committee. 

7.6.3 The wet power-frequency withstand test with respect to earth 
which applies to external outdoor insulation shall be made as a type test. 



26 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 

Telephones: 323 0131, 323 3375, 323 9402 

Fax : 91 11 3234062, 91 11 3239399, 91 11 3239382 

Telegrams : Manakaanstha 
(Common to all Offices) 

Contnl Laboratory: 

Plot No. 20/9, Site IV, Sahibabad Industrial Area, SAHIBABAD 201010 

Regions! Offlem: 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, NEW DELHI 110002 
'Eastern : 1/14 CIT Scheme VII M, V.I.F. Road, Maniktola, CALCUTTA 700054 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 
tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 Behind Marol Telephone Exchange, Andheri (East), 
MUMBAI 400093 

Srancn Oflffcee; 

Puahpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEDABAD 380001 

fPeenya Industrial Area, 1st Stage, Bangalore -TUmkur Road, 

BANGALORE 560058 
Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, BHOPAL 462003 
Plot No. 62-63, Unit VI, Ganga Nagar, BHUBANESHWAR 751001 
Kalaikathir Buildings, 670 Avinashi Road, COIMBATORE 641037 
Plot No. 43, Sector 16 A. Mathura Road, FARIDABAD 121001 
Savitri Complex, 116 G. T Road, GHAZIABAD 201001 
53/5 Ward No. 29, R. G. Barua Road, 5th By-lane, GUWAHATI 781003 
5-8-58C. L. N. Gupta Marg, Nampatly Station Road. HYDERABAD 500001 
E-52. Chitaranjan Marg. C-Scheme, JAIPUR 302001 
117/418 B. Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 
Seth Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Behind Leela Cinema, Naval Kishore Road, 

LUCKNOW 226001 

PatJiputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 

T. C. No 14/1421, University P. O. Palayam, 
THIRUVANANTHAPURAM 695034 

NIT Bulking, Second Floor, Gokulpat Market, NAQPUR 440010 

Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building, 1332 Shivaji Nagar, PUNE 411005 



'Sales Office is at 5 Chowringhee Approach, P. O. Princep Street, 

CALCUTTA 700072 
fSales Office is at Novelty Chambers, Grant Road, MUMBAI 400007 

fSales Office Js at 'F' Block, Unity Bulking. Narashimaraja Square, 
BANGALORE 560002 



Telephone 


8-77 00 32 


323 76 17 


337 86 62 


60 38 43 


235 23 15 


832 92 95 


550 13 48 


839 49 55 


55 40 21 


40 36 27 


21 01 41 


8-28 88 01 


8-71 19 96 


54 11 37 


20 10 83 


37 29 25 


21 68 76 


23 89 23 


26 23 05 


6 21 17 


52 51 71 


32 36 35 


27 10 85 


309 65 28 


222 39 71 



Printed at New India Printing Press, Knurls, kidta 



