IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 
(Reaffirmed 2018) 


Uda HAF 
we wa sera Uae wera 


ATT 4 Sole STS 


( ZARI Yate ) 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO 


IRON AND STEEL 
PART 4 FLAT PRODUCTS 


( Second Revision ) 


ICS 01.040.77; 77.140.01 


© BIS 2013 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 


October 2013 Price Group 6 


Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee, MTD 04 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) (Second Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Wrought Steel Products Sectional Committee had been approved by the Metallurgical Engineering 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1962 and subsequently revised in 1975. While reviewing this standard, in the 
light of experience gained during these years, the Committee decided to revise it to bring in line with the present 
practices being followed by the Indian industry and corresponding International Standards on terminology. 


In this revision the following changes have been made: 


a) 
b) 


c) 
d) 
e) 


All the 4 amendments have been incorporated. 


The requirements of IS 10340 : 1982 ‘Glossary of terms for cold-reduced tinplate and cold reduced 
blackplate’ have been incorporated. 


Plates have been defined. 
Definitions of uncoated, metallic coated and other coated steel has been included. 


Clause 3.1 covers process related definitions, clause 3.2 covers product related definitions and clause 3.3 
covers defects related definitions. 


This standard is published in eight parts. The other parts in the series are as follows: 


Part 1 General metallurgy, heat treatment and testing 


Part2 Steel making 


Part3 Long products (including bars, rods, sections and wires) 


Part 5 Bright steel bar and steel wire 


Part 6 Forging (including drop forging) 
Part 7 Wrought iron 
Part 8 Steel tubes and pipes 


Hence, IS 10340 : 1982 shall be withdrawn. 


In the formulation of this standard assistance has been derived from the following International Standards: 


ISO 6929 : 1987 Steel products — Definitions and classifications 
BS EN 10079 : 2007 Definitions of steel products 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


Indian Standard 


GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO 
IRON AND STEEL 
PART 4 FLAT PRODUCTS 


( Second Revision ) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard (Part 4) is intended to convey the 
meanings of the terms commonly used related to 
process, product and defects in the field of flat steel 
products, uncoated and coated. All dimensions given 
in this standard are nominal. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards contain provisions which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this 
standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated 
were valid. All standards are subject to revisions and 
parties to agreements based on these standards are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


513 : 2008 Cold reduced carbon steel sheets and 


strips (fifth revision) 


1079 : 2009 Hot-rolled carbon steel sheet and 
strip (sixth revision) 
3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS 


For the purpose of this standard the following terms 
shall apply. 


3.1 Process Related 


3.1.1 Ageing — It is susceptibility to changes in the 
properties with the passage of time. Ageing may result 
in an increase in yield strength and/or decrease in 
ductility during storage at room temperature. 


3.1.2 Annealing — It is the process of heat treatment 
which involves heating the cold reduced steel to above 
the recrystallization temperature, maintaining for a 
suitable time, and then cooling under controlled 
conditions. Different annealing cycle may cause 
different changes in structure and thereby properties. 


3.1.3 Batch Annealing — Annealing of cold-reduced 
strip in coil form, under a protective atmosphere. 


3.1.4 Black Annealing — Annealing without use of 
any protective covering or controlled atmosphere. It is 
also termed as open annealing. 


3.1.5 Blanking — Shearing/punching/piercing out flat 
pieces of any desired shape from sheet or strip. 


3.1.6 Blank Holder — The device used to hold the 
blank-top to prevent wrinkling of the edges during 
pressing or drawing. 


3.1.7 Coiling — The process of laying or winding the 
product in the form of coils. 


3.1.8 Cold-Reduction — Reduction in thickness of sheet 
and strip by cold-rolling (see also 3.1.9, 3.1.10, 3.1.49 
and 3.1.54). 


3.1.9 Cold-Rolling (Cold-Reduction) — Rolling steel 
(generally sheet or strip) below its recrystallization 
temperature with the degree of reduction being usually 
above 5 percent (see also 3.1.8, 3.1.10, 3.1.48 
and 3.1.53). 


3.1.10 Cold- Working — Substantial mechanical working 
(usually above 5 percent), for example, drawing, rolling, 
forging, etc, of a metal or alloy below its recrystallization 
temperature (see also 3.1.8, 3.1.9, 3.1.48 and 3.1.53). 


3.1.11 Continuous Annealing — Annealing of cold- 
reduced strip in a single thickness within a protective 
atmosphere. This produces relatively stiffer product 
which exhibits a finer grain size than batch annealed 
material. 


3.1.12 Cropping — Shearing off discard from the ends 
of products (see also 3.1.17). 


3.1.13 Cross Rolling — Rolling in the direction 
transverse to the longitudinal axis of the ingot or slab, 
as in the production of plate or sheet. 


3.1.14 Cutting — Shearing into desired length or width 
of coiled strips after straightening. This also refers to 
the cutting of the edges of sheets. 


3.1.15 Descaling — Removal of surface scale from a 
reheated/hot rolled/hot-worked/heat-treated metal 
stock by application of steam under high pressure/ 
water/coal dust/brushwood/pickling/shot blasting/oil or 
pickling, shot blasting, etc. 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


3.1.16 Scarfing — The removal of surface defects from 
ingots/slabs or semi-finished products using an oxy- 
gas flame and/or grinding. 


3.1.17 Discard — Those portions corresponding to the 
top and bottom of the ingot which are removed to 
ensure that the remainder of the material is of 
satisfactory quality. Also defective material produced 
in rolling or forging, to be cut off from one or both 
ends of the semi-finished or finished product (see 
also 3.1.12). 


3.1.18 Doubling — Folding a sheet or sheet-pack on 
itself, about the middle, before further rolling. 


3.1.19 Dressing — Removing surface defects of an 
ingot, bloom, slab, etc, by chipping, scarfing, grinding 
or other methods. 


3.1.20 Edging — The application of rolls to the edges 
of a flat product, for example, slab, plate, strip or flat, 
etc, with the object of controlling the width, and giving 
a smooth edge of desired contour during the rolling 
process. 


3.1.21 Electrogalvanizing — It is a process in which a 
layer of zinc is deposited to steel electrolytically. 


3.1.22 Finishing Temperature — The temperature at 
which hot-working is completed. 


3.1.23 Flow Brightening — Process used to produce a 
bright surface on tin plated sheet by rapid melting of tin 
under controlled conditions of heating and quenching. 


3.1.24 Galvanizing — Classically refers to zinc 
deposition process to steel articles to prevent rusting. 


3.1.25 Heat Treatment — It is the process wherein a 
microstructure of the material is altered by predetermined 
heating and cooling cycle, causing changes in its 
properties such as strength and hardness. 


3.1.26 Hot-Dip Galvanizing — It is a form of 
galvanizing. In this process, zinc coating is deposited 
by dipping/passing through its molten bath at 460°C. 


3.1.27 Hydraulic Flattening — Levelling effected by 
means of stretching using hydraulic pressure. 


3.1.28 Line Inspection — Final inspection of the 
finished product prior to its classification into the 
different quality grades. Inspection may be performed 
by instruments and/or visual examination. 


3.1.29 Matching — In pack-rolling, the operation of 
placing parted sheets together to form a new pack in 
order that it can be so rolled that all the sheets in the 
pack are of the required gauge. 


3.1.30 Mill Shearing — Edge shearing of sheet-pack 
to approximate size. 


3.1.31 Normalizing — A heat treatment process that 
has the object of relieving internal stresses, refining 
the grain size and improving the mechanical properties. 
The steel is heated to austenizing temperature (>800°C) 
according to its chemical composition, soaked at that 
temperature for requisite time and then air cooled. 


3.1.32 Normalizing Rolling — A hot rolling process in 
which the final rolling passes are carried out at temperature 
above AR3 (Austenitic to ferritic transformation 
temperature), followed by cooling in natural air to a 
ambient temperature, in order to produce a structure 
analogous to that obtained by normalizing treatment of 
hot rolled product. 


3.1.33 Oiling — Coating the steel with oil for 
temporary rust prevention. 


3.1.34 Oiling-Electrostatic — Application of a very 
thin uniform oil film (generally dioctyl sebacate) to 
the surface of electrolytic tinplate by electrostatic 
deposition of fine oil particles from a mist. 


3.1.35 Opening — Separating individual sheets 
processed by pack-rolling. 


3.1.36 Pack-Rolling — Rolling two or more sheets at 
a time, in one pack. 


3.1.37 Passivation — It is the process of making a 
material surface ‘passive’ to environment. Chemical 
or electrochemical treatment is applied to produce a 
stabilized surface of improved resistance to surface 
discoloration and superior lacquering and lithographic 
properties. An example of passivation process involves 
dipping of metallic coated steel item in chromate 
solution and making the surface passive and delay 
storage stain/white rust. 


3.1.38 Pickling — The removal of scale/oxide by 
chemical or electrochemical treatment with dilute acids 
or other chemicals followed by washing. 


3.1.39 Pre-treatment — The essential first stage 
treatment to a substrate before the application of 
coating. The adhesion performance of a coating is 
significantly influenced by it. 


3.1.40 Punching — The process to punch through the 
material to create a hole of required size and shape in it. 


3.1.41 Resquaring (Reshearing ) — Shearing sheets to 
desired finished dimensions with right-angled edges. 


3.1.42 Roller Levelling (Mangling) — Flattening of 
sheets by passing them through staggered rolls. 


3.1.43 Rolling — The shaping of metal by passing it 
between rotating rolls and application of force. 


3.1.44 Roll Pass (Pass) — Opening of definite shapes 
formed between a set of rolls through which steel 


passes for taking up the given shape or undergoing a 
desired amount of reduction in sectional area. This term 
also applied to a single passage through a pair of rolls 
for the purpose of altering the shape and/or reducing 
the cross-sectional area. 


3.1.45 Scale Breaking — Breaking up of scale layer 
on slabs, blooms or billets during rolling by the 
application of water jets under pressure (descaling). 
This term is also used for the operation of breaking 
the scale by repeated reverse bends to the steel by 
passing through a suitable machine. 


3.1.46 Shearing — This term is often used for 
‘cropping’ which is done with shears (see 3.1.12). 


3.1.47 Side Shearing (Edging) — Shearing off the 
edges to obtain the desired width. 


3.1.48 Skin Passing (Pinch Passing) — Light cold 
rolling of hot rolled/annealed/normalized/coated steel 
sheet/strip for improving surface quality, removing 
kinks stretcher strains or similar conditions on surface 
only (the cold reduction being very light, usually less 
than 5 percent) (see also 3.1.8, 3.1.9, 3.1.10 
and 3.1.53). The skin pass suppresses yield point 
elongation besides improving flatness. Some increase 
in hardness and some loss in ductility may result from 
skin passing. 


3.1.49 Slitting — Cutting a strip into a number of 
narrower strips by means of rotary cutters. 


3.1.50 Strain Ageing — Ageing which occurs 
subsequent to the cold working of an alloy. Strain 
ageing in steel is predominantly due to the presence of 
uncombined nitrogen, and results in a marked decrease 
in ductility. 


3.1.51 Stress Relieving — Heating the metal below its 
recrystallization temperature and if required holding 
at that temperature followed by cooling for the sole 
purpose of removing internal stresses. 


3.1.52 Stretcher Levelling (Patent Flattening, Stretcher 
Flattening) — Flattening of sheet/strip and thereby 
taking away buckles, warpage, kink, etc, by applying 
tension at a stretching machine/leveler. 


3.1.53 Temper Rolling — Cold-rolling operation 
following annealing to produce different tempers/ 
hardness (see also 3.1.8, 3.1.9, 3.1.10 and 3.1.48). 


3.1.54 Thermo-mechanical Rolling/Processing — It is 
also known as thermo-mechanical treatment (TMT) is 
a metallurgical process which incorporates controlled 
deformation under specific thermal/heated condition. 


3.1.55 Trimming — Cutting of a sheet/strip at one or 
both edge along the length by means of rotary cutters. 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


3.1.56 White Pickling (Bright Pickling) — The pickling 
of annealed sheets intended for tinplate and tern plate. 


3.2 Terms and Definitions — Product Related 


3.2.1 Bar Weight — Weight per unit length of sheet 
bar. 


3.2.2 Bare/Base Metal Thickness — This is also termed 
as BMT (Base metal thickness). It is the thickness of 
hot/cold rolled strip in cut-length or coil form without 
any coating on it. In case of coated steel, it is measured 
after removing the coating. This is the thickness on 
which structure is designed and should be used while 
ordering the coated steel. 


3.2.3 Billet — A semi-finished product obtained by 
forging, rolling or continuous casting, usually square 
and not exceeding 125 x 125 mm in cross section and 
is intended for further processing into suitable finished 
products by forging or re-rolling. 


3.2.4 Blackplate (see also 3.2.14) — Unalloyed, low 
carbon steel sheet or strip, which has been single or 
double cold reduced. Single reduced blackplate is 
typically manufactured in thicknesses from 0.17 mm 
up to and including 0.49 mm, and double reduced 
blackplate in thicknesses from 0.14 mm up to and 
including 0.29 mm. 


NOTE — Blackplate is normally used to manufacture tinplate 
or electrolytic chromium/chromium oxide coated steel (ECCS), 
but in certain packaging applications it may be used as such. 
In such cases the product must be suitable for varnishing 
(lacquering) or printing. 


3.2.5 Black Sheet or Strip — Hot-rolled sheet or strip 
that is not descaled. 


3.2.6 Black Softened — Hot or cold-rolled sheet and 
strip softened by black annealing, but not yet descaled 
(and usually refers to stainless variety). 


3.2.7 Backer Coat/Bottom/Reverse Side — The surface 
of the pre-painted sheet, which is opposite to the 
exposed weathering surface (see also 3.2.78). 


3.2.8 Bulk Package (Sometimes Erroneously Termed 
‘Stillage’) — Pack or multiple packing unit comprising 
stillage, tinplate and packaging material for the 
shipping of tinplate. 


3.2.9 Cast (Heat Melt) — Usually the product of a 
single furnace charge. Sometimes the furnace contents 
are tapped into two or more ladles then the product of 
each ladle may be called a separate cast. 


3.2.10 Coated Steel — Products which have been 
surface treated with a permanent coating. The 
permanent coatings may be applied: 


a) on both surfaces of sheet/strip/plate: 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


1) of equal coating mass/thickness on each 
surface; 
2) of different mass/thickness (differential 
coating); and 
b) on one surface only. 


3.2.11 Coated Thickness — Thickness of coated sheet 
in cut-length or coil form. This is also termed as TCT 
(Total Coated Thickness). This includes thickness of 
steel base and metallic coating and excludes the paint 
thickness, if any. 


3.2.12 Coil Coating — A continuous process by which 
paint and other coatings are applied and oven-baked 
onto moving steel strip. The painted product of this 
process is referred to as pre-painted steel. 


3.2.13 Coiled Strip (Hot Rolled or Cold Rolled) — A 
rolled flat strip product which is wound into regularly 
superimposed laps so as to form a coil with almost flat 
side. It shall have at least 50 laps. 


3.2.14 Cold-Reduced Blackplate (see also 3.2.4) — 
Low carbon mild steel strip/sheet produced by 
continuous or semi-continuous cold reduction of hot- 
rolled steel strip/sheet. 


3.2.15 Cold-Reduced Hot-Dipped Tinplate — Cold- 
reduced low carbon mild steel strip/sheet which has 
been tinned by the hot-dip tinning process. 


3.2.16 Cold-Reduced Electrolytic Tinplate — Low 
carbon mild steel cold reduced strip/sheet which has 
been tinned by the electrolytic process. 


3.2.17 Cold Rolled — Products generally obtained by 
the cold rolling of hot rolled finished products during 
which it would have undergone a reduction in cross- 
section of at least 25 percent without prior reheating. 
In the case of flat products of a width less than 600 mm 
and for certain qualities of special steel, levels of 
reduction of cross-section less than 25 percent may be 
included. It is further classified as follows: 


a) CRFH — Cold rolled full hard produced by 
cold reduction of more than 50 percent. 


b) CRCA — Cold rolled closed annealed. 


c) Skin passed — Cold rolled and annealed have 
been given a very light cold rolling pass, 
normally less than 5 percent. 

d) Temper rolled — Cold rolled and annealed 
have been given cold reduction of 5 percent 
to 50 percent. 


3.2.18 Commercial Quality Steel — Steel intended for 
general fabricating purposes where it is used in the 
flat condition, or for bending or moderate forming. 


3.2.19 Composite Products — It comprises the 
following: 


a) Steel plate, sheet and strip cladded with steels 
or alloys in order to resist wear, chemical 
corrosion or heat distortion. Bonding is 
usually achieved by rolling, and more rarely 
by spraying, welding or explosion; 

b) Sandwich steel sheet formed from two steel 
sheets bonded together by means of a 
synthetic insulating layer; and 

c) Sandwich panels fabricated from two ribbed 
steel (usually coated steel) sheets bonded with 
an insulating layer inside. 


3.2.20 Conversion Coating — A chemical treatment 
normally applied to a metal surface prior to final 
finishing, which is designed to react with and modify 
the metal to produce a surface suitable for painting. 


3.2.21 Deep Drawing (DD) Steel — A quality low 
carbon steel possessing high ductility/formability, 
desirable grain size and shape, texture, etc, which 
permits deep drawing (see IS 1079 and IS 513). 


3.2.22 Differential Coating — Coating having a coating 
mass/thickness on one surface that is significantly 
different from the coating mass/thickness on the other 
surface. 


3.2.23 Doubles — Sheets hot-rolled after doubling. 


3.2.24 Drawing Steel — Steel intended for parts where 
drawing or severe forming may be involved 
(see IS 1079 and IS 513). 


3.2.25 Electrical Steels — Flat products which are 
distinguished from other flat products by the fact that 
they are intended for electromagnetic applications and 
their principal characteristic lies in the specified 
requirements with regard to specific permissible watt 
losses and sometimes magnetic induction and buckling 
factor. Their thickness is generally equal to or less than 
3 mm and width equal to or less than 1 500 mm. There 
is a distinction between the following. 


3.2.25.1 Grain oriented products — These show 
significantly improved magnetic properties in the 
rolling direction compared with those in the transverse 
direction, and are always supplied with an insulation 
coating on both surfaces. 


3.2.25.2 Non-grain oriented products — These show 
similar magnetic properties in both the rolling and 
transverse directions, and may be supplied either 
uncoated or with an insulating coating on one or both 
surfaces. 


NOTE — These may be supplied either; 


a) inthe semi-processed state with the required specific 
total loss achieved after the material has been 
annealed by the user according to a reference heat 


treatment; or 


b) inthe finally annealed state with specific total loss. The 
product may be supplied uncoated or with an insulating 
coating on one or both surfaces. 


3.2.26 Extra Deep Drawing (EDD) Steel — A superior 
quality low carbon deep drawing steel (see IS 1079 
and IS 513). 


3.2.27 Extra Latten — Hot-rolled sheet having 
thickness under 0.4 mm, that is, thickness under those 
for latten. 


3.2.28 Finish Coat — Paint coat on the top surface of 
the pre-painted steel. This is also known as top-coat 
(see also 3.2.75). 


3.2.29 Finished Product — Rolled or forged products 
whose transformation in an iron and steel plant is 
completed. There cross-section is uniform and is often 
defined by a standard which fixes the ranges of nominal 
dimensions as well as the tolerance of form and 
dimensions. The outline of the cross-section and the 
surface finish is such that quite often the user has only 
to cut to the required dimensions. 


3.2.30 Flat Rolled Finished Products — Products 
which have been manufactured generally by rolling 
and which are normally not further hot/cold worked in 
the steel works. Finished rolling mill products are of 
almost rectangular cross-section and with a width much 
greater than the thickness. The cross-section is uniform 
over the whole length. The size range and the tolerances 
on shape and dimensions are usually defined by product 
specific standards IS 1852 and IS 1730. The surface is 
generally smooth, but floor/chequerred plate, for 
example, may have a regularly raised or indented 
pattern. 


3.2.31 Gauge — Thickness in terms of a standard gauge 
number or in any accepted unit. 


3.2.32 Gloss — The luster, shine or reflecting ability 
of a surface. 


3.2.33 Grades 


3.2.33.1 Standard grade (prime) — Materials which 
at the time of despatch are free from defects readily 
visible to the unaided eye. Under normal conditions 
of storage and use, they are suitable for lacquering and 
painting over the whole surface. 


3.2.33.2 Second grade — Seconds is the grade 
designation given to material which at the time of 
despatch have a minimum of 75 percent of usable area. 


3.2.33.3 Unassorted grade (standard) — Unassorted 
(UA) is the grade designation given to material, 
normally produced in line using usual inspection and 
classification procedures. These contain primes and 
seconds. The quality of seconds may be up to 
15 percent at the time of despatch. 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


3.2.33.4 Menders — Hot dipped or electrolytic tinplate, 
initially rejected for surface blemishes, which can be 
repaired or made good by re-tinning in the hot-dipping 
process. 


3.2.33.5 Unmended menders — Electrolytic menders 
which have not been repaired by hot-dipped tinning. 
They have superficial defects mainly affecting the 
surface appearance, but they conform to the specified 
tin coating weight. 


3.2.33.6 Waste-waste 


3.2.33.6.1 Assorted waste-waste (hot dipped and 
electrolytic) — Tinplate which at the time of despatch 
may have visible imperfections of moderate magnitude 
or frequency, and is supplied assorted to size, gauge, 
tin coating and temper. 


3.2.33.6.2 Unassorted waste-waste (hot dipped and 
electrolytic) — Tinplate which at the time of despatch 
may have visible imperfections of moderate magnitude 
or frequency. This material is generally supplied in 
mixed sizes, tempers and thickness and may be off the 
tolerance in tin coating masses and can be a mixture 
of bright, matt or stone finish. 


3.2.33.6.3 Mill excess or mill over runs — These are 
tinplates of standard grade (unassorted grade) 
accumulating in the mills as a result of production 
having exceeded specific order, cancellation of orders, 
etc, and supplied assorted in terms of size, gauge and 
temper. 


3.2.34 Hot Rolled — Products obtained by hot rolling 
of semi-finished products and, more rarely, by hot 
rolling of crude products. This hot rolled could be with/ 
without pickling and oiling. Hot rolled pickled and 
oiled is termed as HRPO. Hot rolled flat products also 
include those which have been given a very light cold 
rolling pass, normally less than 5 percent, known as a 
skin-pass or dressing pass. HRSPO stands for Hot 
rolled pickled, oiled and skin passed. 


3.2.35 Inorganic Coated Sheet and Strip — It comprise 
of, 


a) Chromated sheet/plate and strip — The mass 
of the coating of chromate varies from 1 to 
20 g/m? per surface; 


b) Phosphated sheet/plate and strip — The mass 
of the coating of phosphate varies from | to 
20 g/m’ per surface; and 


c) Sheet/plate and strip with miscellaneous 
inorganic coatings — For example vitreous 
enameled products. 


NOTE — Products with a lesser coating thickness of chromate 
or phosphate are described as passivated by chromating or 
phosphating. They do not belong to the category of products, 
which have undergone surface treatment, but to the category 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


of products, which have not undergone surface treatment 
(see also 3.2.10). 


3.2.36 Lattens — A measure of thickness and refers to 
those hot-rolled sheets having thickness from 0.56 mm 
to 0.4 mm. 


3.2.37 List Edge (or Drip) — The trailing edge of the 
sheet during passage through the hot-dip tinning bath. 
Due to the effect of tin flow and surface tension, the 
plate, on emergence from the molten tin, carries a 
thicker tin coating at this edge. Generally the list-edge 
is deemed to start at the point where the thickness of 
the sheet has increased by 0.10 mm. 


3.2.38 Metallic Coated Steel — Steel having metal or 
alloy coating covering its major surface area for 
example, Galvanised steel, 55 percent Al-Zinc alloy 
coated steel, etc. 


3.2.38.1 Tinplate — Low carbon steel sheet and strip 
of thickness less than 0.50 mm, and coated on both 
surfaces with tin either by hot dipping (dipping in a 
bath of molten tin) or electrolytically. 


3.2.38.2 Tin coated sheet and strip — Low carbon 
steel sheet or strip of thickness 0.50 mm or over, and 
Tin coated on both surfaces. 


3.2.38.3 Electrolytic chromium/chromium oxide-coated 
sheet and strip (ECCS) — Low carbon steel sheet or 
strip of thickness less than 0.50 mm, and coated on 
both surfaces with a duplex film of metallic chromium 
adjacent to the steel substrate with an outer layer of 
hydrated oxide or hydroxide. 


NOTE — Electrolytic chromium/chromium oxide coated steel 
sheet or strip is normally supplied with a protective coating of 
oil and is suitable for varnishing (lacquering) or printing. 


3.2.38.4 Zinc coated sheet and strip — Sheet and strip 
coated with zinc: 


a) By dipping in a bath of molten zinc — The 
mass of the zinc varies in general between 
120 and 600 g/m? total on both surfaces. 


1) The Zinc coating may have a spangle 
finish, minimized spangle or be without 
spangle. This product is generally called 
as Galvanised Iron (GI). 


2) The coating through thickness may have 
varying amount of Iron with Zinc. This 
is usually called as Galvannealed steel. 


b) Electrolytically — The mass of the Zinc varies 
in general between 7 and 107 g/m’ per surface, 
which corresponds to a coating thickness of 
1 to 15 micrometer (um) per surface. 


After zinc coating, the surfaces may be passivated by 
chromate or phosphate and/or resin coated. This surface 
treatment does not alter the classification of these products 
in the category of zinc coated steel sheet and strip. 


3.2.38.5 Aluminium/aluminium-silicon alloy coated 
sheet and strip — Sheet and strip coated with 
aluminium or an aluminium-silicon alloy by dipping 
in a molten bath. The mass of the alloy varies in general 
between 80 and 300 g/m’ total both surfaces, which 
corresponds to a coating thickness of 15 to 55 um per 
surface. 


3.2.38.6 Lead-tin alloy coated sheet and strip (terne 
coated steel) — Sheet and strip coated with lead-tin 
alloy either by dipping in a bath of molten alloy or 
electrolytically. In general, the highest nominal mass 
specified for the coating corresponds to a minimum of 
120 g/m? total of both surfaces. 


3.2.38.7 Aluminium-zinc alloy coated sheet and strip 
— Sheet and strip coated with aluminium-zinc alloy 
by dipping in a bath of molten alloy. The mass of the 
alloy coating varies in general between 70 and 450 g/m? 
total of both surfaces. According to the aluminium 
content a distinction is made between: 


a) Aluminium-zinc alloys (aluminium >50 
percent); and 

b) Zinc-aluminium alloys (aluminium over 3 
percent to 50 percent). 


3.2.38.8 Zinc-nickel alloy coated sheet and strip — 
Sheet and strip coated electrolytically with a zinc-nickel 
alloy, with a coating thickness generally between 1 and 
8.5 um per surface. 


3.2.39 Mill Coil — The long narrow hot-rolled strip 
produced from one single billet or slab. 


3.2.40 Mill Edge — The edge as obtained from the 
normal practice of rolling without the use of edge rolls. 


3.2.41 Mill Finish — The surface finish on sheets 
corresponding to the ground finish of rolls used. 


3.2.42 Mill Pack — Sheets from pack-rolling. 


3.2.43 Minimized Spangle — Finer metallurgical 
coating formed as a result of treatment to restrict the 
formation of the normal coarse-grain coating structure. 


3.2.44 Narrow Strip — A hot or cold rolled strip of 
width normally less than 600 mm. 


3.2.45 Normal Spangle — Coating formed as a result 
of unrestricted growth of aluminium/zinc crystals 
during normal solidification of metallic coating. 


3.2.46 Organic Coated Sheet and Strip — Uncoated 
or metallic coated (for example Zinc/Zn-Al coated) 
sheet and strip, subsequently coated with an organic 
material or a mixture of metal powder and organic 
material by either of the following continuous 
processes: 


a) By the application of one or more coats of 
paint (termed as pre-painted) or other type of 
product; after drying, the thickness of the 
coating varies according to its character from 
2 to 400 m per surface. 

b) By the application of an adhesive film, 
whether or not followed by a coating of 
organic materials. The coating may have 
different surface designs and a thickness 
generally between 35 and 500 m per surface. 


3.2.47 Pairs — Two sheets hot-rolled together. 


3.2.48 Plate and Sheet — A hot or cold-rolled flat 
product rolled in rectangular cross-section. The edges 
being allowed to deform freely, supplied flat in straight 
lengths and generally in a square or rectangular shape, 
but also in any other shape, for example circular or 
according to the design sketch. The edges may be as- 
rolled (mill edge) or trimmed or sheared or flame-cut 
or chamfered. The product may also be delivered pre- 
curved. Plate and sheet may be produced, 


a) directly on a reversing mill, or by cutting from 
a parent plate rolled on a reversing mill; and 


b) from strip by cutting it to length. 
NOTES 


1 Plate produced on a reversing mill is known generally 
as quarto plate. 


2 Plate and sheet produced on a continuous mill is 
known generally as plate and sheet. 


3 Plate and sheet are defined according to the thickness 
as below: 

1) Plate — Thickness 5 mm or over. 

2) Sheet — Thickness less than 5 mm. 


3.2.49 Primer — The first complete layer of paint of a 
coating system applied to metallic surface. This serves 
as the bond between the substrate and topcoat/backer- 
coat and offers added corrosion prevention. 


3.2.50 Primes — Products of good quality, free from 
harmful defects. 


3.2.51 Profiled Sheets — Products having various 
cross-sectional shapes, constant along their total length, 
made from coated or uncoated hot or cold rolled flat 
material by cold-forming process (for example roll 
forming, crimping, etc). These have a cross-section 
distinctly greater in width than height and normally 
showing along their total length several parallel 
undulations of constant cross-section. 


NOTE — A distinction is made between, 


a) Corrugated sheet — Products showing large or small 
longitudinal corrugations, mainly used for cladding, 
flooring and roofing (Fig. 1A); 


Weves see 6etaveuseeegugl a 


1A Corrugated Sheet 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


b) Ribbed sheet — Products with rectangular or trapezoidal 
longitudinal ribs (Fig. 1B). 


Pe A ee ee Oe) 


1B Ribbed Sheet 


Fic. 1 PROFILED SHEETS 


3.2.52 Rolled Edge — Edge which is finished 
accurately to desired shape by using rolls at the edges. 


3.2.53 Rolling Width — The dimension at right angles 
to the rolling direction. 


3.2.54 Shear Out Dimension — The dimension parallel 
to the rolling direction. 


3.2.55 Sheared Edges — Edges detached by shearing 
(and at times by slitting wheel). 


3.2.56 Sheet (see 3.2.50) 


3.2.57 Sheet Bar (Slab Bar) — Semi-finished product 
of rectangular section, of thickness not less than 6 mm, 
width not less than 150 mm and of such dimensions 
that the thickness does not exceed one quarter of the 
width. This term also includes the product tin plate 
bars. 


3.2.58 Sheet Bar, Multiple — A sheet bar of such length 
as to give a desired number of smaller sheet bars after 
shearing or cutting with minimum wastage (due to short 
length). 


3.2.59 Short (Cut Bar) — The portion left out after 
specified lengths/widths are cut out or sheared from a 
hot/cold rolled products. 


3.2.60 Singles — Sheets hot-rolled individually, that 
is, not in pack. 


3.2.61 Skelp — Skelp is Narrow strip (see 3.2.65.1). 


NOTE — Skelp is historically coined from the word ‘skelping’ 
an operation in which long narrow strip was beaten into the 
shape of a tube which was heated to a very high temperature 
and rolled, resulting in forge welding of the seam. 


3.2.62 Slab — Flat semi-finished products in 
rectangular section of thickness generally equal to or 
greater than 150-250 mm and with a ratio of width to 
thickness equal to or greater than 2. Slabs with a ratio 
of width to thickness greater than 4 are called ‘flat 
slabs’. 


3.2.63 Smooth Finish — Smooth coating produced by 
skin passing the coated material in order to achieve an 
improved surface condition compared with the normal 
as-coated product. 


3.2.64 Soft Temper — In a soft condition (as induced 
by annealing) (see also 2.2.71). 


3.2.65 Strip — A hot or cold rolled flat product and 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


rolled approximately in rectangular cross-section with 
mill, rolled, trimmed or sheared edges and supplied in 
coil form. 


3.2.65.1 Narrow Strip — A hot or cold rolled strip of 
width normally less than 600 mm. 


3.2.65.2 Wide Strip — A hot or cold rolled strip of 
width normally equal to or greater than 600 mm. 


3.2.66 Substrate — Base of coated steel on which 
coating has been applied. 


3.2.67 Standard Unit Area of Tinplate (SITA) — Area 
of 100 m? of tinplate is equal to one SITA (System 
International Tinplate Area). 


3.2.68 Stillage (Sometimes Erroneously Termed ‘Bulk’) 
— Wooden base platform on which tinplate sheets are 
stocked to facilitate packing and ready transportation. 


3.2.69 Temper — A characteristic condition, associated 
with the mechanical properties and structure which are 
induced by mechanical or thermal treatment (or both). 
A given product may be fully annealed (that is of soft 
temper) or subjected to a very drastic cold deformation 
(hard temper), or treated to a condition intermediate 
between these two extremes to bring about the desired 
temper (namely, quarter hard, half hard and three- 
quarter hard) depending on treatment. 


3.2.70 Thin Slab — Slabs with thickness of 35 mm- 
50 mm (see also 3.2.62). 


3.2.71 Tinplate Strips — In coated low carbon steel 
sheets in which the length is many times the breadth. 
These are essentially cuttings/arisings from unassorted 
and assorted waste-waste quality tinplate and are 
generally sold without specifications excepting for the 
range of thickness and dimensions. 


3.2.72 Tolerances — The permitted deviation from a 
specified dimension or weight usually expressed as plus 
or minus on that quantity. 


3.2.73 Top-Coat — The surface of the pre-painted steel, 
which is/will be exposed to external or internal 
weathering (see also 3.2.28). 


3.2.74 Uncoated Steel — Products which have not 
undergone any surface treatment, apart from those 
products which may have been pickled/mechanically 
cleaned/received a simple coating for protection against 
corrosion or mechanical damage in handling or storage, 
or to facilitate their use. 


The simple protective coating may be produced, for 
example, by one of the following methods: 


a) Passivation (with chromic or phosphoric 
acid) — The product is electrochemically or 
chemically coated with a layer of chromate 


or phosphate; as distinct from surface 
treatment by chromating or phosphating 
(see 3.2.35), the layer deposited is so thin as 
to be hardly discernible by optical means (7 
to 10 mg/m’ per surface); 

b) Application of an organic coating — the 
coating itself offers no protection against 
corrosion but serves as a surface preparation 
for the subsequent application of other 
undercoats or coatings forming part of an anti- 
corrosion system; 

c) Application of protective films, for example 
adhesive coating, adhesive paper, lacquer; and 


d) Application of a film of grease, oil, tar, asphalt, 
lime or any soluble material. 


3.2.75 Unit (Packaging) — Given No. of sheets of 
specified dimensions. 


3.2.76 Wash-Coat — A thin paint on the bottom surface 
of the pre-painted steel. This is also known as backer- 
coat (see also 3.2.7). 


3.2.77 Wide Flat — Hot rolled flat product of width 
greater than 150 mm and a thickness generally over 
4mm, always supplied in lengths, that is not coiled. The 
edges are sharp; the wide flat is not rolled on the four 
sided (or in box passes) or produced by shearing or 
flame-cutting wider flat products. Wide flats rolled on 
all four sides are sometimes termed as universal plate. 


3.2.78 Wide Strip — A hot or cold rolled strip of width 
normally equal to or greater than 600 mm. 


3.2.79 Wrap — The single turn in a coil. 


3.3 Terms and Definitions — Defects Related 


3.3.1 Acid Brittleness — Brittleness induced in sheet 
and strip pickled in acid solution to remove scale or 
during electroplating. This is commonly attributed to 
absorption of hydrogen. 


3.3.2 Black Edges — The black colouration at the edge 
of annealed sheets and strips caused by oxidation or 
due to soot deposit. 


3.3.3 Black Patches — Patches of scale left on sheet 
and strip surface due to unsatisfactory pickling. 


3.3.4 Blister — A layer of steel with a protuberance 
on the surface underneath which is a cavity due to 
accumulated gas. 


3.3.5 Blued Edges — Blue or bluish-black discoloration 
at the edges of sheets and strips arising due to oxidation 
during heat treatment in the absence/lack of protective 
medium. 


3.3.6 Bow — The greatest deviation from a straight 
line along a longitudinal edge in a sheet or strip. 


3.3.7 Buckling — The bending of sheet or plates under 
compressive load. 


3.3.8 Burnt Edges — Broken edges occurring during 
hot-rolling and caused by overheating or burning (see 
also 3.3.16). 


3.3.9 Burr — The sharp fringe of metal left on a sheared 
or saw cut bottom edge (see also 3.3.22). 


3.3.10 Burst Edges — Edges of sheet or strip ruptured 
due to excessive cold rolling. 


3.3.11 Butt — Short-ingot or portions removed by 
sheering, cutting or punching from rolled, forged or 
pressed products for obtaining near correct size or shape. 


3.3.12 Camber — The curvature observed in long 
rolled products caused by differential cooling or faulty 
setting of the rolls. It is measured by the maximum 
deviation of the middle region from the straight line 
joining the corresponding points on the two bounding 
sides. 


3.3.13 Chalking — The formation on a pigmented 
coating of a friable powder evolved from the film itself 
at or just beneath the surface. 


3.3.14 Checked Edges — Cracked edges in sheet 
bars and strips (occurring during hot-rolling) 
(see also 3.3.16). 


3.3.15 Coil Breaks (Cross Breaks) — The transverse 
kinks developing during straightening of coils of strips 
(hot-rolled or annealed). 


3.3.16 Cracked Edges — Cracks across the edges (that 
is, at right angles to the direction of rolling) of rolled 
products. The term “broken edges’ is used in connection 
with large sections such as blooms, billets and slabs 
(see also 3.3.8). 


3.3.17 Cross Breaks — See 3.3.15. 
3.3.18 Dings — Kinks on sheet surface. 


3.3.19 Dog Leg — ‘Bow-legged’ strip, that is, a strip 
which has been curved in opposite directions in two 
adjoining portions. 


3.3.20 Ears — The wavy projections formed in deep- 
drawing which normally occur in geometric positions 
either at 45° or at 0° and 90° to the direction of rolling. 
These are caused by directional properties in the sheet. 


3.3.21 Fading — Loss in colour intensity experienced 
by paint over time, generally due to the effect of ultra- 
violet radiation. 


3.3.22 Flash (Burr, Flash) — Sharp and jagged edges 
left after shearing or sawing (see also 3.3.9). 


3.3.23 Flatting (Kinking )— The sudden yielding, with 
simultaneous appearance of stretcher strain markings, 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


taking place in hot-rolled or annealed sheet or strips 
when deformed. 


3.3.24 Full Strip — Strip in which the edges are shorter 
than the middle, thus causing distortion of the cross- 
section. 


3.3.25 Galling — Galling, often referred to as ‘Road 
burn’ in the transport industry is a roughened area on 
the strip or sheet surface that can vary in size, severity 
and extent. It is the unintentional roughening or 
abrasion of metal or organic finished steel surfaces 
where rubbing (under pressure) results from relative 
movement of adjacent strip or sheet surface during 
transportation by road, rail, etc. These roughened areas 
can be individual spots, patches of spots or areas. In 
the worst case galling can result in total removal of 
metallic coating and paint film in the galled area. 


3.3.26 Ghost — A segregated streak, usually containing 
a concentration of sulphide, phosphide, oxide, etc, 
which have become elongated during rolling or forging. 
This looks different in colour than the rest of the sheet 
when sheet is tarnished. 


3.3.27 Grease Mark — Marking on the rolled surface 
caused by the presence of grease patch. 


3.3.28 Guide Mark (Guide Score, Guide Scratch, Guide 
Shearing) — A surface defect resulting from abrasion 
between the steel/iron and a guide used for ensuring 
location in rolling. 


3.3.29 Inclusion (Non-metallic inclusions) — Particles 
of oxides, sulphides, silicates, refractories, etc, 
embedded in the metal. These are the products of 
deoxidation. 


3.3.30 Inverse Segregation — See 3.3.53. 


3.3.31 Kisser — Patches of scale left on sheets after 
pickling. This results from two sheets having remained 
in close contact during pickling. 


3.3.32 Lamination — A defect in rolled materials, 
characterized by a tendency to split into layers along the 
direction of rolling usually due to the presence of non- 
metallic inclusions or other discontinuity in the steel. 


3.3.33 Marring — Marring is characterized by a 
surface pattern of small shiny areas (higher gloss) 
generally over the entire surface. These shiny areas 
can vary in shape and size depending on the surface 
finish being painted, paint type and gloss. The rougher 
the surface finish on the material to be painted, the 
more prone it is to marring. It is caused by, 


a) rougher than normal paint finish due to poor 
paint flow, and 

b) painted strip being recoiled too hot. Marring 
is more prone on certain paint types. 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


3.3.34 Off gauge — Outside the permissible tolerance 
in thickness. 


3.3.35 Out of Squarness — Sheet diagonals are not 
same. 


3.3.36 Orange Peel — Characteristic roughening over 
the surface of cold-rolled or cold-deformed sheet or 
strip due to coarse grain size. 


3.3.37 Over-Pickled — Pickled longer than necessary, 
resulting in pronounced chemical attack causing pitting 
and roughness on the surface. 


3.3.38 Phosphide Streak — An elongated area of 
segregated phosphides which is revealed on etching. 


3.3.39 Pick-off — Pick-off are small irregular shaped 
areas up to 1-5 mm in size where the metal coating has 
been completely removed from the strip surface 
exposing the steel/alloy base. They only occur on the 
bottom surface and mainly in the centre which is the 
hottest part of the strip and can be continuous 
throughout a coil varying in severity and frequency. 


3.3.40 Pickup/Pickup Mark — It is a repetitive crater 
or depression on one or both surface of the strip and 
can be throughout the coil. It is a result of bits of metal 
or other foreign matter adhering to or embedding on 
any roll in the manufacturing line and imprinting into 
the strip surface once per revolution of the roll involved. 
The distance between the depressions is determined 
by the roll diameters. 


3.3.41 Pickle Stain — Surface stain after pickling due 
to inadequate washing and drying. 


3.3.42 Pinch — An overlap in a sheet caused by uneven 
heating of a pack of sheets prior to pack-rolling. 


3.3.43 Pinchers — Surface disturbances which result 
from the rolling process and which ordinarily appear 
as fernlike ripples running diagonally across the 
direction of rolling. 


3.3.44 Pinholes — Pinholes are small spots, which can 
occur anywhere over the coated strip surface in patches 
or clusters. It is caused by coating not adhering to 
material due to the roughness or other imperfection 
on the surface. Coating fails to wet the substrate surface 
causing a pinhole defect. 


3.3.45 Pipe (Contraction Cavity, Shrinkage Cavity) — 
An axial cavity caused by contraction during 
solidification of an ingot and also the defect arising 
from the axial cavity in semi-finished or finished 
products. 


3.3.46 Roke (Roak) — A longitudinal surface defect 
(an elongated fissure), caused by a blow-hole which is 
not welded up during rolling and has perforated the 
surface and become oxidized. 


10 


3.3.47 Rolled-in-Scale — Local areas of scale pressed 
into the surface of the stock during rolling. 


3.3.48 Roll Marks — Periodic surface defects due to 
some imperfection on the surface of a roll or due to 
particles of matter picked up by rolls. 


3.3.49 Rust — Rusting is the most common corrosion. 
Different metals may undergo equivalent corrosion, but 
the resulting oxides are not commonly called rust. 
Rusting is the term used for corrosion of iron and steel 
products only. 


3.3.50 Sand Marks — Patches of furnace refractory 
material embedded on the surface of hot steel and rolled 
subsequently. 


3.3.51 Scraped Edge — An edge with abrasion 
markings due to incorrect setting of guides. 


3.3.52 Seam — Long shallow groove or striation 
formed during rolling by the elongation of oxidized 
surface or subsurface blow-holes. Seams may also be 
caused by rippled surfaces or by recurrent teeming laps. 


3.3.53 Segregation — A non-uniform distribution of 
some constituents and/or impurities, in a cast product 
characterized by the mode of solidification of alloys. 
Segregation usually persists through subsequent hot and 
cold working. Generally the concentration of low 
melting constituents tends to be higher at the centre than 
the surface. Sometimes, the reverse of this phenomenon 
takes place and is known as inverse segregation. 


3.3.54 Shell (Scab, Sliver, Spill) — A relatively thin 
film, or tongue of metal imperfectly attached to the 
surface of steel. The defect on the sides of the ingot, 
caused by metal splashed during teeming, having 
solidified and stuck to mould wall is also called shell 
or splash. 


3.3.55 Short (Cut Bar) — The portion left out after 
specified length/width are cut out or sheared from hot/ 
cold rolled products. 


3.3.56 Sticking — The joining up of two adjacent 
surfaces, due to partial welding of pack-rolled or batch- 
annealed sheets. 


3.3.57 Stretcher Strains (Luder Lines) — The 
roughening and somewhat furrowed appearance on the 
surface of low carbon sheets or strips as a result or 
uneven spreading in the initial stages of cold- 
deformation after annealing, normalizing or after hot- 
rolling, though being not so marked in the last two 
cases. 


3.3.58 Swarf Staining — Swarf stains are minor 
manifestations of corrosion of the left over metallic 
particles/swarf on the surfaces of coated materials. Severe 
case can lead to reduced life of the coated material. 


3.3.59 Sweep — Controlled deviation in dimensions 
in any particular region or place with respect to the 
remainder of the material. In rolls, sweep refers to the 
camber at the middle. In sheets, sweep refers to 
controlled dishing of a load of sheets for annealing to 
ensure flatness in the finally processed sheets. 


3.3.60 Trickle Scale (Tail Scale) — Loose scale which 
flakes off from the ends during hot-rolling or packs of 
pairs of sheets and finds its way in between the sheets 
and is rolled in during further pack-rolling. 


3.3.61 Twisted Strip — A strip with deformed and 
irregular cross-section. 


3.3.62 Uncoated — Uncoated are areas devoid of 


11 


IS 1956 (Part 4) : 2013 


coating. This could be in varying in size, shape and 
frequency on one or both surfaces of the strip and can 
be continuous or patchy throughout the length. 


3.3.63 Undercutting (Painted Product) — Corrosion 
of the substrate under a paint film at a score mark or 
sheared edge where corrosive agents can gain access 
to the metal. 


3.3.64 Wedge Section (Wedge Shape) — Strip with 
gradual change in thickness along the width. 


3.3.65 White Rust — White rust is corrosion of zinc in 
coating on steel. It occurs due to formation of a basic 
zinc carbonate complex on zinc surfaces in moist 
atmosphere when unprotected by surface passivation. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MTD 04 (5042). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 
VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


