( Reaffirmed 2002 )

METHODS FOR CALIBRATION OF PRESSURIZE-DSTORAGE TANKS

(First Revision)
Petroleum Measurements Sectional Committee, CDC 32

DR M. S. Nms,arn ( Altam~ to Shri M. Ramabrahmua ) Smu N. A. DR X. ALPHOXSO Ministry ofI%uncc ( &tar N. R. &SNJAUlN
DR K. s. BHATrA-YA
Smu S. N.

Sxr~x S. K. GANCXLI t Alenate )
&iMTACWRih .

N. SETYIt ( Ahada SHWV. DUWJW
?mrr P.

Oil & Natural Gas Commiwiorr, D&a

Dun

)

Bunnab-Shell Oil Storage & Dlntributing Go of India ~Ltd,Barnb8Y Directorate Gem4 Ind~~O~wporat of Givil Aviation, fJew Delhi Ltd (Rciiacna Division), New Delhi New Delhi

S~~IV.BHUS~UN(&~~J&) Smu K. B. GANEEAB SXRI M. GoPAL

SHRI A. G. BHA,I-CA~AR~RS ( Altmute ) hfiniatry of Petroleum B CYlumi& SHRX J. M. GUHA Sinu M. K( Altmafs) Directorate of Weights & Meuura, DR S. V. GUPTA
SIiRI s. HAQUE ( ditrsmotr )

calta(Iadi4)Ltd,Bombay Ssru V. H. KHAKHAR SHIU M. BAUKRISRNA ( Aknate ) Directorate of Supplia and Transport, New Delhi COLB. D. MXSRA LT-GOLK. K. -OTRA ( dkrnatr ) Indian Instltute of Iktrokum, Dchra Dun SHIUH. K. MULC-ANI Soar S. B. GROWSR ( Alkmah ) Railway Board, New Delhi StiRlo. P. PANDYA Gochin Rdkrlea Ltd, Go&in SHRI K. RAJAN PAYER Minisay ofFinulce ( Deputwnt of Revulue) SHRX v. s. RU8ANATn.w smu P. P. asew ( Aknot ) (f%lU*npQg82)'

@ f&righr 1977 INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian C@Y@~ def j XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any mana except wth written pamtiion of the publisher &all be deemed to be an infringement of copyrieht under the said Act.

(Glntinfud~#JIpgs1) Manbsrs
SXRI H. N. SEN

/

*

&w--h

Ix&a-~PetrolcumcOLtd,~y SXIUD. K. CHAUD&JR~ ( Al&mate ) Assam oil CoLtd, Digti DR B. S. SUBMMANY~ SHRIG. C. GQ.~WAMI ( Altcmab ) Central Public Works Departma~t, New Delhi SUPB~~NTEND~NO ENGIN~~ER
DR

G. hi. SAXZNA, Diicctor ( them )

&FSGTIVE

?hGINRRR

(.&@iWtS).

Direct& ckmal,

IS1 (aqjkio

Ma&T)

histaut

sMBls.cKam Diitor ( than

), ISI

Calibration and Computation of Ca city Tables of Tanks Subcommittee, CD cp" 32 : 2 coSHBIH. J. RXBSLLO
MdWS
i%fRI SHRI

Hindustan -~tion Ministry of Finance ( Ikpartmau

Ltd. Bombay of Rcvemae )

N. R. B~JAHIN A. ~~MTCIPADHAYA Sum V. K. DESHPMDE

Central P+lic Works. Department, NT Dell+. . hdii~~dc&porabon Lrd ( Refincne~ fhw#~on),

SHRI J. D. CUMJDUURY ( Alkmaa ) Bum&Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co of SliRt v. DnAwNe Indi8 Ltd, Bombay Smu V. BHU~IUX(A&II& ) Dkctome of Weigh 8t MUNIU, New Delhi DR S. V. GUPTA SHRIS. HAQ~ (Al&mate) Calta (India) Ltd, Bombay Smu V. H. KSHRIM. B-A (Al&ma&) SEW s. s. RAcmMwa Arm)lHadguprten.~~Deceacc Oil&NauralG~Colrmurnon,~Dua &RIP. %SXiWAt@Alli h0 Iht B. S. SHAM AuBmoilcoLtd,Digboi

2

ItSr2827-1976

Indian Standard
METHODS FOR CALIBRATION OF PRESSURIZED STORAGE TANKS

(First Revision)
0.
0.1This Indian Standard

FOREWORD

(First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 6 September 1976, after the draft finalized by the Petroleum Measurements Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council.

It is being revised in the 0.2 This standard was first published in 1964. In this revision conditions light of experience gained and data collected. for recalibration and volume correction factor due to effects of temperature have been dealt in detail. 0.3 The problem of accurate measurement of bulk quantities of liquid petroleum products is not a simple one. Its solution involves accurate ~engineering and mathematical work, the skill of experienced oil gauger, and Accuracy in the use of carefully standardized and calibrated equipments. measurement is essential in the sale, purchase and handling of oil. It not only obviates possible disputes between the buyer and the seller, but also provides the only reliable means of maintaining adequate control over storage and distribution losses. 0.4 The measurement of bulk quantities of liquid petroleum products involves various processes, such as temperature measurement of oils in tanks, calibration and computation of capacity tables of tanks, gauging of tank8 and calculation of bulk quantities of oils in tanks. The need Sor accurate calibration of tanks cannot, therefore, be overemphasized. The object of this standard is to lay down methods to be adopted uniformly in the country which will enable accurate calibration of pressurized storage tanks. 0.5 In the preparation of this standard due consideration has been given to the prevailing trade practices in the countrv and to the need for intcrnational co-ordination among standards prevailing in different countries of the world in this field. These considerations led the Sectional Committee to base this standard on Petroleum Measurement Manual issued by the Institute of Petroleum ( IP ), London: and standards and other publications of the American Society for Testing and Materials ( ASTM ), Philadelphia, USA. 3

0.6 This standard is one of a series of fndian Standards on methods for calibration of vessels used for bulk storage of liquid petroleum and petroleum products. It covers methods to be adopted for calibration -of pressure vessels of the type (a) vertical cylinders, (b) horizontal cylinders (c) spheres, and (d) plain spheroids and noded spheroids. 0.7 In reporting the result of a test made in accordance with this standard, if the final value, observed or calculated, is to be rounded off, it shall be done in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard prescribes methods for calibration and recalibration of the following~types of vessels which are normally used for the bulk storage of liquid petroleum and ~petroleum products under pressure: a) b) c) d) Vertical tanks, Horizontal tanks, Spherical tanks, and Spheroidal tanks - plain and noded. FOR MEASUREMENTS

2. CONDITIONS

2.1 When drawings for the tank are available, all measurements shall be compared with those obtainable from the drawings and any measurements which show appreciable discrepancies on this comparison greater than the tolerances specified in 8.3.7 shall be verified. 2.2 Measurements shall be taken only after the tank has been filled at least once at its present location with the product to be stored to its maximum working capacity or with water to its equivalent height and such product or water has been held in the tank for at least 24 hours to allow for settling of foundation. 2.3 Liquid calibration is preferred for any tank or portion of a tank not susceptible to adequate or accurate measurement. Similarly when the vessel is visibly distorted, it is best to adopt liquid calibration method. 3. RECALIBRATION AND INTERRUPTED MEASUREMENTS

3.1 The tank shall be recalibrated if: a) it h repaired or changed in a manner which may afikct -the total or incremental volumes of the tank, b) the deadwood is changed or additional deadwood such as concrete is installed inside the tank, and c) thetankismovedS

3.2 If the calibration of a tank requires be resumed with minimum delay without completed provided that: a) any condition b) there is no change of tank calibrators, c) all records of work done are complete

to be interrupted, it may repetition of work previously. is not violated,

laid in 3.1 for recalibration

and legible,

and

d) previous

level is left undisturbed in case of liquid calibration. In case of fluctuation in level from the previous level as a result of change in liquid temperature, liquid will have to be added or withdrawn to restore the original level.

4. DE6CRIPTlVE DATA

.
should be entered on the tank measure-

4.1 Complete

descriptive data ments record form being used;

4.2 Supplemental pencil sketches or notations, each completed, identified, dated and signed will form an important part of field data. These shtill be made to indicate typical horizontal and vertical joints; number of plates per course ( ring ); location of courses ( rings ) at which thickness of plates changes; location and sizes of pipes and manholes; dents and bulges in shell plates; direction of lean from vertical; method used in by-passing a large obstruction, such as clean-out or insulation box located in the path of a circumferential measurement; location of tape path; location and elevation of datum plate; and all other items of interest and value which will be encountered. 4.3 All measurements site and not subjected 5. ACCURACY made by the tank calibrator to subsequent correction. shall be recorded on

5.1 In order to achieve accuracy in calibration tables, adjustments effects of the following variables shall be incorporated in the tables:
a) Tilt from upright position, and b) Tar& bottoms that are irregular in shape.

for

SECTION I 6. GENERAL

CALIBRATION BY STRAPPING

6.1 Thismethod is based on the meas urement of external
which are subsequently corncted -to yield the true intcmal 3

circumferences circumferences,

62 The rtipulatcd number of external circumf~ce meanveaents together with subsidiary measurements, where necessary, to correct for deviation of the tape from the true circular path, shall be obtained as described under strapping procedures for the respective types of tanks.
6.3 Other measurements prepared are:
a) shell thickness;

required

to enable a table of capacities

to be

1) for 2)

the calibration of old tanks, f&h shell thickness measurements should be obtained preferably by non-destructive methods; for external strapping whenever the shell thickness is taken from drawings or by non-destructive techniques, the paint film thickness as well as the number of coats of paint applied should be recorded in the-data sheet;

b) the dimensions of any deadwood, that is, any fitting or object which adds to or subtracts from the capacity of the tank, together with the levels affected. 6.4 It may be necessary in practice torefer all tank dips to a datum point other than the datum point used for the purpose of tank calibration. If so, its position with reference to the original datum point shall be correctly determined. 6.5 A sketch assists in showing what is required, and if the tank shape is in any way abnormal, notes explaining this shall be made, with supporting measurements where necessary. Alternatively, any measurements which give the required dimensions or allow them satisfactorily to be calculated, shall be taken. 7. EQUIPMENT

AND TOOLS
The tape shall be well-greased before use.

7.1 Steel Strapping Tape - shall comply with the requirements given in
Appendix A of IS : 2007.1974*. 7.2 Spring B&lance - graduated to show every 0.1 kg from 0 to 10 kg for measuring the tension applied to the tape. For detailed specifications refer to A-I.2 of IS : 2007-1974*. 7.3 Step-Over8 - as described in A-I.3 of IS : 2007-1974*. This is to correct deviations of the tape from its normal circular path, namely, passing over fittings or joints between plates. 7.4 Dip-Tape and Dip-Weight i complying with the specifications given in A-l.1 and A-1.2 of IS : 1518-1960t.
t&?ethd

*Method for calibration of vvtical oil storage taub (fist nvision ), for-puging of petroleum and liquid petroleum productr,

6

x8:2827-1976
725 Guide and Chaia -a guide sliding freely on the tape, and manipulated by light chains from each side; the guide to be passed around the tank in order to even out the tension in the tape. 7.6 Clampto grip the tape, without kinking, at intermediate in order to facilitate application of the necessary tension. 7.7 Steel Rule 8. CIRCUMFERENCE MEASUREMENTS procedure described in 11 of IS : 2009positions,

8.1 Horizontal Tanks -The 1975' shall be followed.

8.2 Vertical Tanks -The procedure described in 11 of IS : 2007-19747 shall be followed. For measurements of dished ends, the procedure described in 14 of IS : 2009-1975* shall be followed. 8.3 Spherical Tanks 8.3.1 A spherical tank is a liquid storage tank in the shape of a sphere generally supported on columns so that the entire tank shell is above ground ( see also 14.2 of IS : 1518-1960$ ). There are usually no internal structural members ( see Fig. lA ). 8.3.2 Practical difficulties limit tape paths for measuring great circles on the sphere where the tape will lie flat and not tend to slip sidewise. Three representative great circles are chosen - one at the horizontal equator and two passing vertically through the poles at right angles to each other. The total volume is calculated based on these three measurements. 8.3.3 To facilitate the measurement of the horizontal circumference, the builder should tack-weld short rods perpendicular to the shell at the point where the shell is tangent to a vertical line. These may be spaced three metres apart so that the tape may be properly supported at that location. 8.3.4 The columns supporting a sphere may extend above the equator. If the number of supports is 4 or less, then step-overs may be used. A preferred method is to take the circumference measurement at a location just above the top of the columns where the path is clear. When this is done, the vertical distance of the chosen path above the equator should be accurately recorded. 8.3.5 The tank shall be strapped by either of the methods described below. In either case a tension of 4.5 f 0.5 kg shall be applied to the tape and transmitted throughout its length by suitable means, namely,
*Method for calibration of horizontal and tilted oil storage-tanks (jirsl w&ion ). tMethod for calibration of vertical oil storage tanks (_Erst revision ). ,$Method for gauging of petroleum and liquid petroleum products,

7

.I8 i-2827 L 1976

1A

Spherbd

Tank

PDINTS FOR CWCUMFERENTUL MEAYREMNTS SlRUCTUlb/ WPPDRTS

1B Smooth -Spheroidal Tank

PDNTS FOR C,RCUMfERENTlA MEASWEWNTS

-DATUM

PLAlE

1C

Noded Spheroidal Tank

FIG. 1

PRESSURIZED STORAGE TANK

a guide sliding on the tape, the guide being passed around with the aid of -light chains: a) If the tape to be used is not long enough to encircle the tank completely, the circumfixence may be measured in sections. Fine a

lSr2827-1976
lines shall be scrii on the shell perpendicular to the chosen path and the'total circumference is then computed as the su m of the lengths between the scribed lines. b) If the tape to be used is long enough to encircle the tank completely, then after the tape path has been chosen, the tape is passed around, aligned properly with the help of the guide, proper tension applied and the measurement taken. 83.6 All readings shall be repeated by shifting the tape a little around. The final reading shall be the arithmetic -average of the two readings. 83.7 Measurements shall be read to one millimetre and shall he considered satisfactory if repetition as in 8.3.6 shows agreement within the following tolerances:

Circumfcrmcr
m to 30 UP over 30 to 50 ,, 9, ;, 56 ,, 76 76 ,, 90 30

Tol+?nnw
mm a2 *4 *6 A8 f10

8.3.8 The total inside height at the vertical centre line of the sphere shall be measured. If the path is obstructed, the vertical inside height shall be measured at convenient distance from the centre line. This distance shall be accurately noted. The height measurement shall be made with a dip weight and tape. Measurements shall be read correct to one millimetre. The reading shall be repeated and shall be within the tolerances given in 8.3.7. The total inside height ( D) at the vertical central line of the sphere in case of off-&k measurements shall be calculated as follows:

D~c/Dd+4rn~
where

Dm = inside vertical height in metre at m metre off the centre
line, and m = distance in metre off the centre line.

8.3.9 The instructions given in IS : 2007-1974, and dynamometer are wholly applicabk.

for the use of step-over-s

8.3.19 All items contributing towards deadwood shall be noted down. These items seldom depart from the dimensions given in their detail drawings and hence field measurements are normally not necessary. %l&od fat ctlwatioa
Qf

verticaloil storagetanks(Jr& I&ion),

9

8.4 Spheroidal

Tanks

8.4.1 A spheroidal tank is a liquid storage tank having a shell of double Any horizontal cross-section is circular and a vertical crosscurvature. section is a series of circular arcs. The height is reduced as compared with that of a sphere. The bottom rests directly on a prepared grade. The ade and projecting beyond spheroidal tank has a base plate resting on the the shell. Structural members rest on the %r ase plate and support the over-han ing part of the shell for a short distance above the plate. A drip bar is weK ded to the shell in a horizontal circle just above the structural supports to intercept rain-water. 8.4.1.1 A smooth spheroidal tank usually has no inside structural members to support the shell or roof ( SGG Fig. 1B ). 8.4.1.2 A noded spheroidal tank has abrupt breaks in the vertical curvature ,cdled nodes which are supported by a circular girder and structural members inside the tank ( see Fig. 1C ). 8.4.2 Practical difficulties prohibit measuring a spheroid except at two locations. One of these is on the shell at the upper edge of the drip bar and the other at the largest horizontal circumference where the shell is tangent toga vertical line. At other locations it would be dificult, if not impossible, to support the measuring tape. 8.4.3 The strapping spherical tanks. procedure remains the same as in the case of

8.4.4 The elevation of the datum plate relative to the bottom capacity line shall be measured. 8.4.5 The elevation of the top of the drip bar relative to the bottom capacity line shell be measured. The measurements shall be taken at four points equally spaced around the spheroidal tank. SECTION 9. GENERAL 9.1 Liquid calibration is preferred for any tank or portion of a tank not susceptible to adequate or accurate measurements. 9.2 Liquid calibration is done either by introducing or withdrawing measured volumes of liquid and noting the corresponding change in level. 9.3 Liquid calibration may be performed either by a positive displacement meter or by a proving tank. However, calibration by meter is generally found to be more convenient since the same meter, within its range, can bc easily adopted to calibrate different sixes of tanks, 10 2 LIQUID CALIBRATION

ust262l-1976 9.4 Procedure given in 22 shall be followed before liquid calibration undertaken. 9.5 Any minor variation in calibrating calibration period shall be neglecgd. medium temperature is

over the

9.6 A capacity table should be prepared in any desired increments, preferably 2 cm, using graphs or mathematical methods to establish a smooth curve. 10. EQUIPMENT AND TOOLS equipped with suitable scales.

10.1 Dip-Tape and Dip-Weight - as in 7.4.
10.2 Gauge Glass 10.3 Positive Displacement Meter - Preferably equipped with a set stop-valve and calibrated in accordance with the procedure prescribed in IS : 2801-1967*. 10.4 Large Capacity Proving Measures accurately calibrated ( see IS : 2341-19637). shall be~adequate for the purpose. Z0.5 Pumping draw water. - Each measure shall be The capacity of the measures

System - a suitable pumping system to add or to with-

11. CALIBRATION BY METER 11.1 The tank may be initially either empty or full. Calibration is done either by introducing or withdrawing liquid. For convenience, it may be preferable to equip the meter with a set stop-valve so that a predetermined quantity can be added or withdrawn. For the differential volume filled or withdrawn the corresponding change in height of the liquid shall be measured by means of a gauging apparatus as prescribed in IS : 1518-1960$. This volume shall be such that readings are obtained for each 2 cm of the upper and lower 25 percent of the height between the bottom and top capacity lines and for each 4 cm for the intervening height.
12. CALIBRATION - MEASURES

BY LARGE CAPACITY

PROVING

capacity line. The water shall then be discharged measure where it is accurately measured.

12.1 The tank $0 be calibrated shall be filled with water to the top
into the proving

*Accuracy requirements for bulk meters used in petroleum trade. Specification for large metric capacity calibrating measures ( non-tilting type ), $Met!.wd for gau&ing of petroleum and liquid petroleum products,

11

12.1.X The proving tank shall be not seller than one half of the largest 2 cm increment of the sphere or spheroid and shall have a ma:dmum capacity of the largest 2 cm increment of the sphere or spheroid. Each proving -tank should have been accurately eahbrated. For the volume discharged the corresponding change in height of the liquid shall be measured -by means of gauging apparatus as prescribed in IS : 1518-1968*. 13. VOLUME CORRECTIONS TEMPERATURE DUE TO EFFECTS OF are carried

13.1 The volume corrections due to the effects of temperature lout as follows:

4 The dfect of expansion or contraction of tanks- containing liquids
at normal temperature may be disregarded except under conditions of use requiring extremely accurate results as to the partial or total volumes of heated or refrigerated contents.

b) When corrections for temperature effect are required, it is necessary to estimate the service temperature of the contents and compute volume correctionsdue to the ~difference in temperature from 15'C, the normal calibration temperature. The volume corrections can be computed as follows:

Volume correction percent L X ( tr - 15 ), where 11"is a coefhcient of thermal expansion and :, is the service temperature of the tank shell ia "C. The coefficient R is based upon a low carbon steel having a coefficient of thermal expansion of O*OOO 011 7 per degree centigrade. When the tank is constructed ofa diffuent metal, K shall be calculated in accordance with Appendix A. c) For non-insulated tanks the temperature of the shell shall be taken as the mean of the adjacent liquid and ambient air temperatures on the inside and outside of the shell at the same location. In applying these principles to botb spheres and spheroids only the horizontal dimensions arc functions of tank calibration corrections. The liquid height measurement is a function of gauging the liquid level; accordingly the efkt of thermal expansion or coutmction on innage and outage gauge readings shall be considered separately.
and liquid pat&ma prod\rcb..
I

*Mathod fm gauging of parrohm

I2

APPENDI-X
[ Clause 13.1 (b) ]

A

PROCEDURE FOR COMPUTING THE VOLUME CORRECTION FOR THERMAL EXPANSION OR CONTRACTION OF SPHERICAL AND SMOOTH SPHEROIDAL TANKS A-l. DETAILS

A-l.1 The graph ( see Fig. 2 ) gives coefficient 4-l based on a mean 011 7 per degree centrigrade. thermal expansion coefficient, am, of O*OOO The value Kr taken from the curve shall be adjusted to the actual thermal expansion am, 0f the tank material at the actual tank temperature t. The adjustment shall be done by using the following formula: Corrected coefficient K = Kr o.~~l when am = the mean coefficient of linear expansion between temperatures t and 15�C (see Tables 1 and 2 ). After adjusting R for the actual am, the corrected value R should be substituted in the equation for volume correction as given in 13.1(b).
TABLE 1 VALUES OF am FOR LOW CARBON STEEL TANKS~_mr~~~A~urui - 56.5to - 29.5 - 290 ), 2.0 VALUEOFamPER "c

17

o-ooo 01080
WOO0 01098 OWC911 16 OWO 01134 O-000 01152 OmO 011 70 Owe 011 88 0900 01206 OWO,O12 24 DO0001242

1.5 ,, +25*5 26 54 81 ,, 1) ,. 53 80.5 108 135-5 163 191

109 * 136 ,I 164 ,,

192 ss 218

13

D
CO-EFFICIENT
0 0 b 0"
l

K'FOR
0 0 b 0 b 0 b b b 0 0 . 0 . 0 0 . 0 0 0 .

dm = 1.17~ II$%(FJEKEN~~~x

OF CORRECTIONS)

E;.

0 b 0 0

0 .

Fa

r

b 0 -

0

b
0

:

xSr2627TABLE2

1976

VALUESOF

E-

FOR STRUCMJRAL ALUMINIUM

(CfanreA-1.1)

T-s=%-0

\`ALUE

OF 8e

PER "c

- 56.5 to - 24 - 23 + 10 77 110 177 I, + ,, ,, ,, 95 43 76 109 143 176 209

090002196 OwoO2232 MlOo 022 68 ooo0 023 04 O~OOO 023 40 QOOWO23 76 oaoo 024 12 Oft00 024 48

43.5 ,,

143.5 ,, "

