NAT HIAF IS 6433 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


miin sumo — AN 


( TEAM JAQ ) 


Guniting Equipments — 
Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 91.220 


© BIS 2021 


anda HIS Sm 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 serere TH AMT, ay fref — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


February 2021 Price Group 4 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering 
Division Council. 

The guniting equipment is quite often used for specialized reinforced concrete works, such as lining of pressure 
mains and tunnels, resurfacing of reservoirs and river and sea walls. It is also used for repair and maintenance 
work, such as the restoration of reinforced concrete, exposed reinforced cement concrete and masonry structures 
and repair of reinforced concrete bridges. 

In view of the increasing use of guniting equipment, more and more application in the field and also in view of 
the fact that the manufacture of guniting equipment has already been increased in the country by the manufacturers, 
it has been considered necessary to lay down the revised standard specifications for guniting equipment. 


This standard was originally published in 1972. The major changes in this revision are: 
a) Terminologies are added, 
b) Construction has been modified, 
c) New Clause on ‘equipment requirement for handling of the material and guniting application’ has been 
added, and 
d) A new clause on 'specification for rubber sand blast hose' has been added. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2: 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 6433 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


GUNITING EQUIPMENTS — 
SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard lays down the requirements for sizes, 
dimensions and performance of concrete guniting 
equipment. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed in Annex A contain provisions, 
which, through reference in this text, constitute 
provisions of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards. 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply. 


3.1 Shotcrete — Mortar or concrete conveyed through 
a hose and projected at high velocity on to a surface, 
also known as air-blown mortar, also pneumatically 
applied mortar or concrete, sprayed mortar and gunned 
concrete. 


3.2 Dry-Mix-Shotcrete — Pneumatically conveyed 
shotcrete in which most of the mixing water is added 
at the nozzle. 


3.3 Gunite (Trade Name) — Method of applying dry- 
mix shotcrete. 


3.4 Wet-Mix Shotcrete — Shotcrete wherein all 
ingredients, including mixing water, are mixed in 
the equipment before introduction into the delivery 
hose, it may be pneumatically conveyed or moved by 
displacement. 


3.5 Cement Gun — Device employed in the application 
of cement mortar in spray form, pneumatic operation. 


3.6 Pneumatic Guniting / Shotcreting Machine — 
Equipment consists of a twin chamber gun and a twin 
water tank and is powered by an air motor. The material 
is deposited on the desired surface through a placing 
nozzle under a compressed air. These machines can 
also be used for sandblasting work by fitting on a sand 
blasting nozzle. 


3.7 Spray Guniting Machine — The single axle 
strongly built machine works on the principle of dry 
conveyance. The dry mix is transported from the feeding 
hopper through the rotors to the material exit. Different 
rotors are available for a variety of applications. Water 
is added in the spraying nozzle at the end of the hose. It 
is provided with about 2.2 KW (3HP) and a.c. electric 
motor of 440 Volt. It is supplied with 31 to 50 mm dia 
hoses and maximum conveying distance of about 250 m 
and maximum conveying height of 60 to 75 m. 


3.8 Hosepipe — A flexible pipe for conveying a liquid 
or gas/air. A hose is generally a flexible hollow tube 
designed to carry fluids from one location to another. 
Hoses are also sometimes called pipes (the word pipe 
usually refers to a rigid tube). 


3.9 Vessel — A container (as a cask, bottle, kettle, cup, 
or bowl) for holding something. 


3.10 Air Motor — A device in which the pressure 
of confined air causes the rotation of a rotor or the 
movement of a piston. 


3.11 Nozzle Operator — Nozzle operator means 
the worker on the shotcrete crew who manipulates 
the nozzle, controls consistency with the process and 
controls final placement of the material. 


4 MATERIALS 


4.1 All materials used in the construction of guniting 
equipment shall conform to the requirements of relevant 
Indian Standards. The guniting equipment shall consist 
of the following: 


a) Cement gun, 
b) Water tank, 
c) Material hose pipe, and 
d) Accessories. 
4.2 Cement Gun 


It shall be of two interconnecting circular vessels fixed 
one above the other and having airlock valves operated 
by hand. 


4.2.1 Air Motor 


The air motor shall be connected to the reduction gear 
and the capacity of the same shall be sufficient to throw 


IS 6433 : 2021 


material at the rate of 2 | per h at a distance of 30 m and 
head of 3 m. 


4.3 Water Tanks 


Twin cylindrical water tanks connected in parallel with 
arrangement for feeding water to the material hose 
pipe of one tank at a time shall be provided. The water 
tank shall be fabricated out of steel plates conforming 
to IS 2062 and shall be tested against a pressure of 
15 kg/cm?. Each water tank shall have an inlet water 
pipe at the top and a cleaning mouth at the bottom and 
both shall be made watertight by stoppers. 


4.4 Hose Pipes 


A material hose pipe of sand blasting quality of diameter 
30 mm and of length 15 m with couplings at two ends 
shall be provided with each machine along with an air 
hose and a water hose of 15 m length each and diameter 
20 mm and 12 mm respectively. 


4.5 Accessories 
Accessories shall include the following: 
a) 25 mm air hose with clamps to take compressed 
air to the gun; 


b) Two nozzle bodies complete with 25 mm internal 
dia tip ( to suit 20 mm internal dia, rubber liner ); 


c) Two’ nozzle tips 20 mm ( to suit 12 mm inside dia 
rubber liner); 


d) One dozen tip liners 20 mm (inside dia 12 percent 
mm); 
e) One dozen tip liners 25 mm (inside dia 20 mm); 
f) Two cone valve gaskets; 
g) Two air hose couplings; 
h) Two extra rubber liners for water outlet valves; 
j) Three gun operating keys; 
k) One socket wrench; 
m) One oil can; and 
n) One grease gun. 


The whole equipment when assembled shall be airtight 
and mounted on wheels to make it mobile (see Fig. 1). 


The top vessel shall be suitable for feeding of sand- 
cement mix and shall work as tank storage. The bottom 
vessel shall have a valve at the top and feeder at the 
bottom rotated by means of a worm and worm wheel 
drive attached to the lower part of the bottom vessel. 
The bottom vessel shall be fitted with a 30 mm material 
hose of sand blasting quality conforming to IS 5894 
and IS 6416. 


At the discharge end of the material hose, a nozzle 
made of gunmetal with arrangement for water mixing 
with cement-sand mix shall be provided. 


4.6 Vessels 


The vessels shall be made from mild steel conforming 
to IS 2062. The minimum thickness of the vessel shell 
shall be 5 mm. The top vessel shall be provided with 
a hopper on the top of a capacity of about 55 litres 
when filled up to heaping and shall have a disc valve 
closely fitting on to the rubber packing fitted to the 
bottom of the hopper and operated by means of a lever. 
The capacity of the top vessel shall be 140 litres. The 
bottom of the upper vessel shall fit tight on the top of 
the bottom vessel and fixed by means of bolts with a 
rubber packing in between and shall have a disc valve 
also firmly fitting on to the same. The valves shall be 
operated by levers mounted on the top and bottom 
vessels. The lever operation shall be done by means 
of handles fixed on to shafts which pass through the 
vessels and shall be made airtight by providing rope of 
lands. The bottom vessel shall be mounted on wheels 
so that the base of the bottom vessel is sufficiently 
above ground level to enable it to move and to remove 
it without touching the ground. 


4.7 The top vessel shall be provided with the 
following: 


a) Pressure gauge to indicate the pressure of the air in 
the vessel; 


b) Safety valve, tested to 10.5 kg/cm? and capable of 
blowing off at 7 kg/cm’; 


c) Blow off valve; 

d) Cleaning valve; 

e) Air inlet valve; 

f) Air connection to the air motor; 

g) Moisture and oil separator; and 

h) Air release. 
4.8 The bottom vessel shall be provided with the 
following: 

a) An inlet valve for the air. 


b) An outlet valve for the material hose pipe which 
should have an airtight coupling on it. 


c) A fan mounted at the bottom of the inside of the 
vessel which shall be operated through a reduction 
gear. The fitting between the reduction gear and 
the fan shall also be made tight against leakage of 
air and sand. The fan and the reduction gear shall 
be operated by means of an air motor so that the 
speed of the fan is about 10 to 15 rev/mm. 


d) Hand hole for cleaning of the inside of the gun. 
e) Air inlet point or the outlet point to put the material 
into the material hose. 


4.9 All valves shall be tested to a pressure of 
20 kg/cm’. 


5 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS 


5.1 General 


The design of the delivery equipment shall be such 
that it shall be capable of discharging the sand-cement 
mixture into the delivery hose and shall deliver a 
continuous smooth stream of uniformly mixed material 
at a proper velocity to the discharge nozzle. 


5.2 Discharge Nozzle 


The discharge nozzle shall be equipped with a 
manually operated water injection system (water ring) 
for directing an even distribution of water through the 


OPERATING 
LEVER 


AIR TO FEEDING 
CHAMBER 


RUNNING 
WHEEL 


NN 
C—LNC-INS 


<> v R 


WORKING CHAMBER 
AGITATOR 


MATERIAL PIPE TO 


IS 6433 : 2021 


sand-cement mixture. The water valve shall be capable 
of ready adjustment to vary the quantity of water, and 
shall be convenient to the nozzle man. 


5.2.1 The nozzle shall be capable of delivering a 
conical discharge stream of uniform appearance 
throughout. Distortion of this stream or any non- 
uniform appearance, indicates a worn nozzle liner or 
mal-functioning of water injection system. 


NOTE — The delivery equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned 
at the end of each shift. Equipment parts, especially the nozzle 
liner and watering, shall be regularly inspected and replaced as 
required. 


FEEDING 


CHAMBER DISC VALVE 


AIR MOTOR 


PLACING NOZZLE 


Fic. 1 GENERAL ARRANGEMENT FOR GUNNITING MACHINE 


IS 6433 : 2021 


6 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENT FOR 
HANDLING OF THE MATERIAL AND 
GUNITING APPLICATION 


6.1 Materials 


6.1.1 Cement 


The cement used shall be any of the following, with the 
prior approval of the engineer-in-charge: 
a) Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) 33 grade, 
43 grade, and 53 grade conforming to IS 269; 


b) Rapid hardening Portland cement conforming to 
IS 8041; 


c) Portland slag cement conforming to IS 455; 


d) Portland Pozzolana cement 


IS 1489; 
e) *Hydrophobic cement conforming to IS 8043; 


conforming to 


f) *Composite Cement conforming to IS 16415; and 


g) *Low heat Portland cement conforming to 
IS 12600 . 


* Cements shall be used with adequate precautions with regard to 
removal of formwork, etc. 


6.2 Dry Mix Process 


6.2.1 Batching and Mixing Equipment 


Batching by mass is recommended. Sand and smaller 
size coarse aggregates shall be batched by weight and 
periodic checks are also made to ensure that the masses 
are maintained within the required tolerance. IS 4926 
and IS 4925 may be followed. 


The moisture content of the aggregates shall be such 
that the aggregate-cement mixture shall flow at a 
uniform rate, without segregation, through the delivery 
hose. The optimum moisture content will depend upon 
the delivery equipment being used, but it is generally 
within the range of 3 to 6 percent. The sand shall be 
moistened or dried as required to bring the moisture 
content to a satisfactory level. Fluctuations in moisture 
content shall be avoided. 


The mixing equipment shall be capable of thoroughly 
mixing the aggregates and cement in sufficient quantity 
to maintain continuity of placing. The mixing time 
shall be not less than 1 min in a drum-type mixer, 
where other mixers are proposed, satisfactory evidence 
shall be presented that they are capable of thorough 
mixing. The mixer shall be self-cleaning, capable of 
discharging all mixed material without any carryover 
from one batch to the next. It shall be inspected and 
thoroughly cleaned at least once a day (and more often 
if necessary) to prevent accumulations of batched 
material. 


6.2.1.1 Delivery equipment or guniting equipment 


The working of delivery equipment shall comply with 
the application requirements given in IS 9102. 


6.2.2 Air Supply 


Properly operating air compressor of ample capacity is 
essential for a satisfactory shotcreting operation. The 
compressor shall be jetted with a moisture extractor 
to keep up a supply of clean, dry air adequate for 
maintaining a sufficient nozzle velocity for all parts of 
the work while simultaneously operating a blow pipe 
for clearing away rebound. 


The operating pressure is the pressure driving the 
material from the delivery equipment into the hose, and 
is measured by a gauge near the material outlet of the 
gun. The air pressure shall be uniformly steady (non- 
pulsating). 


For lengths of hose up to 30 m, air pressure at the gun 
shall be 0.3 N/mm? or more. Where the length exceeds 
30 m, the pressure shall be increased by 0.035 N/mm? 
for each additional 15 m of hose required, and by 0.035 
N/mm? for each 7.5 m that the nozzle is raised above 
the gun. 


6.2.3 Water Supply 


The water pressure at the discharge nozzle shall be 
sufficiently greater than the operating air pressure to 
ensure that the water is intimately mixed with the other 
materials. If the line water pressure is inadequate, a 
water pump shall be introduced into the line. The water 
pressure shall be uniformly steady (non-pulsating). 


6.3 Wet Mix Process 


6.3.1 Batching and Mixing Equipment 


Batching by mass is recommended. Aggregates may 
be batched by volume if periodic checks are made to 
ensure that the masses are maintained within a required 
tolerance. Water may be batched either by mass or by 
volume. 


The mixing equipment shall be capable of thoroughly 
mixing the specified materials in sufficient quantity 
to maintain continuous placing. The required mixing 
time will depend on the mix being used and the 
efficiency of the mixer. Delivery of concrete at the 
desired workability and uniformity from batch to batch 
is essential to a good shotcreting/guniting operation 
especially in vertical and overhead applications. 


6.3.2 Delivery Equipment 


The pneumatic feed type of wet mix delivery equipment 
is capable of applying high quality, low-slump mortar 
or concrete with the reliability needed for general 
construction and repair work. From a pressurised 
vessel in the equipment, the premixed materials and 
compressed air are discharged into the delivery hose. 
The material and air pass through the hose to the 
gunning nozzle which is fitted with an air ring for 
injecting additional compressed air. 


The wet mix delivery equipment shall be of a design 
and size which, have given good results in similar work. 


It shall be capable of delivering the premixed materials 
accurately, uniformly and continuously through the 
delivery hose. The size of the hose is generally within 
the range of 32 to 65 mm. 

Recommendations of the equipment manufacturers 
shall be followed with regard to the type and size of 
nozzle to be used, and the cleaning, inspection, and 
maintenance of the equipment. 


6.3.3 Air-supply 


The air compressor shall be capable of keeping up a 
supply of clean air adequate for maintaining sufficient 
nozzle velocity for all parts of the work and for 
simultaneous operation of a blow pipe for clearing 
away rebound. 


7 MARKING 


7.1 The following information shall be permanently 
and conspicuously marked on the machine: 


a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark and serial 
number of the machine; 


b) Year of manufacture; 
c) Rating of the power unit; and 
d) Total weight of the machine (empty and filled with 
materials). 
7.2 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 


IS 6433 : 2021 


of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


8 SPECIFICATION FOR RUBBER SAND 
BLAST HOSE 


For more details on specification for rubber sand 
blast hose with braided textile reinforcement, 
specification for rubber sand blast hose with 
woven textile reinforcement and specification for 
structural steel (standard quality) following IS may be 
referred: 
a) IS 10660: 1983 ‘Rubber hydraulic hose with 
textile reinforcement’ ; 
b) 185894: 2007 * Rubber hose for sand blasting’ ; 
and 


c) IS 226 : 1975 * Specification for structural steel 
standard quality (fifth revision)’. 


8.1 Contractual 
Equipment 


Conditions of Shotcrete 


Alist of equipment and accessories to be used, including 
the following information, shall be submitted to the 
client/users at least 14 days prior to the application of 
shotcrete: 

a) Equipment type and capacity; 

b) Nozzle type and size; and 

c) Continuous feed predampener details, only when 

the dry mix process is used. 


IS 6433 : 2021 


IS No. 
2062 : 2011 


5894 : 2018 


6416 : 1988 


269 : 2015 


8041 : 1990 


455 : 2015 


1489 (Part 1) : 
2015 


1489 (Part 2) : 
2015 


ANENEX A 
( Clause 2 ) 


LIST OF REFERRED INDIAN STANDARDS 


Title IS No. 
Hot rolled medium and high tensile 8043 : 1991 
structural steel (seventh revision) 
Rubber hose for sand and grit 16415 : 2015 
blasting — Specification. (third 12600 : 1989 
revision) 
Methods for measuring case depth 4926 : 2003 
of steel (first revision) 
Ordinary Portland cement — 4925 : 2004 
Specification (sixth revision) 
Specification for rapid hardening 9102 (Part 1 
Portland cement (second revision) and 2) : 1979 
Portland slag cement | — 
Specification (fifth revision) 
Portland Pozzolana cement — 
Specification: Part 1 Fly ash based 
(fourth revision) 10660 : 1983 


Portland Pozzolana cement — 
Specification: Part 1 Calcined clay 
based (fourth revision) 


Title 


Specification for hydrophobic 
Portland cement (second revision) 


Composite cement Specification 


Specification for low heat Portland 
cement 


Code of practice ready-mixed 
concrete (second revision) 


Concrete Batching and Mixing 
Plant (first revision) 

Rubber blankets for shrinkage 
range: 


Part 1 Requirements for rubber 
blankets 


Part 2 Recommendations for 
maintenance 


Rubber hydraulic hose with textile 
reinforcement 


ANNEX B 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Plant and Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 18 


Organization 


Ministry of Defence, CQAE, Pune 

AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 

Airport Authority of India, New Delhi 

Atlas Copco (India) Ltd, Pune 

Ammann Apollo India Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 
Caterpillar India Pvt Ltd, Chennai 

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 


Directorate General Border Roads, New Delhi 
Escorts Construction Equipment Ltd, Faridabad 


In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 
In personal capacity, New Delhi 


Indian Construction Equipment Manufacturers' 
Association, Bangalore 


Ircon International Ltd, New Delhi 

Jaypee India Ltd, Kolkata 

John Deere India Pvt Ltd, Pune 

KYB Conmat Pvt Ltd, Vadodara 

L&T Ltd, Coimbatore 

M/s B. G. Shirke Construction Technology Pvt Ltd, 


Pune 


Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, 
New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence, CQAE, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
Bric P. K. SunivASTAVA (CHAIRMAN) 
Cor Manyunatu B. T. (Alternate) 


SHRI ROHITASH BARUA 
Suri K. K. V. Yasas (Alternate) 


Suni G. K. CHOUDHARY 
Suri R. L. SHARMA (Alternate) 


SHRI VIJAY SHARMA 
SHRI YOGESH TULJAPURKAR (Alternate) 


Suri D. MASHRU 
SHRI ANAND Pate (Alternate) 


Suri K. REJI JOSE 
Suni Buu KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


Dr Suvir SINGH 
Dr Rajiv Kumar (Alternate) 


SHRI ATUL JAIN 
SHRI PRADEEP KuMaR (Alternate) 


Suni P. R. Ray 


Suri Faiz AHMAD 
Suri LAXMI CHAND Tyaai (Alternate) 


SHRI HANSRAJ 

Suri S. N. MAHAJAN 
SHRI RAJENDRA JEE 
SHRI SATANDER KUMAR 


Suri K. V. KRISHNAMURTHY 


SHRI RANDHEER GUPTA 
Suri S. K. Ray (Alternate) 


SHRI KuMAR M. MEHTA 
Suri R. K. Teotia (Alternate) 


SHRI K. KALIAPPAN 
SHRI VIVEK Josui (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESH Kupva 
SHRI KALPESH Son! (Alternate) 


Suri K. KEsHAVA 

Suri M. SuresH Kumar (Alternate) 
SHRI A. D. BHOSALE 

SHRI SUNIL KEDAR (Alternate) 
Suri K. C. SHARMA 

Suri Routt SINGH (Alternate) 


Cor SURESH KUMAR 
Lt Cor A. K. Maurya (Alternate) 


IS 6433 : 2021 


IS 6433 : 2021 


Organization 


National Council for Cement and Building 
Materials, Ballabgarh 


Shapoorji Pallonji & Co Ltd, Mumbai 


Universal Construction Machinery & Equipment 
Ltd, Pune 
Volvo Construction Equipment, Banglore 


Wirtgen India Pvt Ltd, Pune 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 
SHRI KAPIL KUKREJA 
SHRI S. BHATNAGAR (Alternate) 
SHRI NEERAJ KAPOOR 


SHRI RANJEET MORE 
Suri Ravi CHAVAN (Alternate) 


Suri V. R. S. P. PoLIPALLI 
SHRI RAGHURAMAN (Alternate) 
SHRI DEEPAK BHOIR 
SHRI PARUL ARORA (Alternate) 
SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


Ms KuasHBOO KUMARI 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 18 (11657). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


