IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 ( Reaffirmed 2003 )

as3

+

f%y YTIC 1

sf%Tm +i;gi;T 8TtJ

aTd )

afer %ffkrc.

tif$?TT

( %FffiTT `@bWT

Indian Standard
TRAINING
PART 1 (

OF WELDERS PRACTICE
MANUAL METAL ARC

CODE OF

WELDING

Second Revision )

UDC

621-791-753 : 658.386

@

BIS 1992

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STAND.QRDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHl 110002

September 1992

Price Group 9

Welding

General

Sectional

Committee,

MTD

11

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( Second Revision) was adopted the draft finalized by the Welding General Sectional Metallurgical Engineering Division Council. by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after Committee had been approved by the

As a part of steel economy programme, it was recommended that welding should be used as a This standard was first prepared in 1957 to lay mode of fabrication in preference to riveting. down a scheme for training and testing in welding to a trainee in order to enable him to undertake normal welding jobs. The standard was first revised in 1966 simplifying the course and making directly related to the As a result Section 3 of the standard was split into the following actual requirement of the job. three sub-sections: Sub-section Sub-section Sub-section 3A 3B 3C Butt welds in flat position positions; and fillet welds in flat and horizontal-vertical and butt welds in

Butt and fillet welds in vertical up and down position horizontal vertical position; and Butt weIds and fillet welds in overhead position. of the welding industry

In view of the experience gained and to cater the needs the Committee has decided to revise this standard. In this revision provisions relating to Additional parts only have been covered. lated in due course: Part Part Part Part 2 3 4 5 Oxyfuel TIC Welding Welding Welding

more

effectively

training of welders for of the standard as under

manua1 metal are proposed

arc welding to be formu-

Welding

MXG/MAG Mechanised

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

Indian Standard
TRAINING
PART

OF WELDERS PRACTICE
1 MANUAL METAL ARC

-

CODE

OF

WELDING

( Second Revision j
1 SCOPE 1.1 This code prescribes minimum requirements for a course of instruction in the training of a welder for manual metal arc welding as applied to mild steel and also stipuIates certain standard tests, at the end of the course of instruction. IS No.

818 : 1968

2062 : 1984

Tit Ie Code of practice for safety and health requirements in electric and gas welding and cutting operations Specification for welding structural steel ( third revision )

1.2 The principal objectives for the course of instruction covered by the code are : trainee in the fundamental teehniques and the safe practices of Manual Metal Arc Welding; b) to give the trainee of a good understanding of the proper methods of manual metal arc welding as applied to mild steel using rutile, low hydrogen and cellulose class of electrodes; c) to enable the trainee to acquire enough skills in welding to pass the qualification tests prescribed in this code; and d) to provide the trainee with a basic knowledge of welding theory. 1.2.1 The course of instruction is not expected to produce an experienced welder, but rather a welder with enough skill and knowledge so that he will have immediate value of industry as a welder on less difficult work, and will be able, by gaining experience in industry, to progress rapidly to works of greater difficulty and responsibility.
SECTION 2 REFERENCES IS No. 812 : 1957 Title 1 GENERAL a) to coach the

3 TERMINOLOGY

For the purpose of this code, all terms relating to arc welding, unless otherwise defined in this code, shall have the meaning assigned to them in IS 812 : 1957. 4 SYMBOLS For the purpose of this code the symbols used shall have the meaning assigned to them in IS 813 : 1986 unless defined in this code. 5 MATERIAL
5.1 Steel

Steel used as parent metal for testing, according to the provisions of this code, shall conform to IS 2062 : 1984. 5.2 Electrodes Electrodes, used for all tests, according vision of this code, shall conform requirements of IS 814 : 1991. 6 SELECTION OF TRAINEES to proto the

813 : 1986
814 : 1991

Glossary of terms welding and cutting Scheme of symbols ( revised ) Covered electrodes arc welding of mild

relating to of metal for welding for metal steels 1

Trainees selected to receive the instruction recommended in this code shall have the following qualifications: a) ability to understand the language of instruction; no b) physical or metal disability that precludes safe operation of welding equipment or interferes with full performance of duties in industry; and the minimum age requirements prescribC> ed in the State and Central Labour Laws applicable in the State in which the instruction is conducted.

IS 817 ( Part 1 )

:1992
shop class ( see 7.1 for actual welding time for trainees ). Each welding machine shall have a rated current of 200 A or more. It is desirable that at least one machine having a manual continuous hand welding current rating of 300 A at minimum of 55 percent duly cycle or more be available. 8.4 Electrodes

7 LENGTH OF COlJRSE, HOURS OF INSTRUCTION AND TRIAL PERIOD INSTRUCTION
7.1 Length of Course [t is recommended. that each trainee is put to a minimum of 8 weeks of training for subsections 3A, 3B and 3@.
NOTE-The above time is to receiving practical instructions, welding. be spent only 011 joint taking and

7.2 Length of Instruction

in Welding Theory devotes in wel-

There shall be an adequate supply of covered metal arc welding electrodes of the types and sizes required for the exercises prescribed in Section 3. 8.5 Material for Welding

Jt is recommended that each trainee 48 hours total to theoretical instruction ding theory prescribed in Section 3. 7.3 Trial Period of Instruction

An adequate supply of mild steel plate of the required quality shall be provided for the exercises prescribed in Section 3. 8.6 Testing Apparatus

In the beginning of the course there shall be a trial or probationary period not exceeding 3 hours. Trial period other than the stipulated may however be determined by the training department, during which the instructor shall observe the aptitude and interest of the trainee and determine whether in the interest of all shall continue the concerned, the trainee course. SECTION 2 EQUIPMENT AND FAClLlTBES FOR THE TRAINING ESTABLISHMENT 8 EQUIPMENT, CONSUMABLES 8.1 Welding Booths ACCESSORIES AND

The training establishment shall possess apparatus suitabIe for preparing and testing the test specimens as prescribed in Section 3 or shall have facilities for having these test specimens prepared and tested elsewhere. 8.7 Miscellaneous In addition to the foregoing, the training establishment shall provide all other apparatus and equipment necessary for the safe and proper execution of the welding course prescribed herein. A list of accessories and equipment recommended for a training establishment is given in Annex A. 9 SUPERVISION 9.1 Number of Trainees per Instructor Each shop more than instructor. class should 12 trainees be restricted to not in attendance per

Each welding booth shall have a minimum area of 3 square meter. All four sides of the welding station shall provide complete protection to persons and property on the outside against fire, personal injury or other damage. Internally each booth shall be so constructed, lighted and ventilated as to provide ease of demonstration and practice and also protection to Suitable ventilation, adequate to pretrainee. vent the accumulation of welding fumes shall be provided. Any state or local regulations that are applicable shall be complied with. 8.2 Positioning Suitable facilitate Jig to

9.2 Record of Trainees

Progress

A record shall be kept of each trainee's prothe number of hours of indigress, showing vidual practice and the results of all test prescribed in Section 3. A recommended form of trainee progress chart is given in Annex B. 10 REFERENCE MATERIALS

positioning jigs shall be provided the execution of the welding tests.

8.3 Arc Welding Machine The training establishment with as many acldc arc ( power sources ) as there shall be equipped welding machines are trainees in the 2

10.1 Outline of the Course At the start of the course a prepared outline indicating the syllabus of the course, the tests required, subjects to be covered and the related

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992

instruction shaI1 be made available to the trainees. A specimen syllabus for the course is given in Annex C. 10.2 Welding Publications The training establishment shall make avaireference trainee's use suitable lable for material consisting of books, manuals, periodicals, code, standards, etc.
11 QUALIFICATIONS INSTRUCTOR 11.1 General AND DUTIES OF

in view the following instruction :

four basic steps of new ins-

1) Preparing
truction;

the trainee for

methods for presenting the new instruction ( demonstration, illustration, explanation, discussion, etc ); proper supervision and 3) Providing criticism as the trainee applies his new knowledge and skill; and 4) Supervising the check tests assigned to trainees.

2) Using appropriate

The instructions prescribed in this code may be given by one or more instructors, provided each instructor in welding practice possesses the qualifications prescribed under 11.2.1 and each Instructor in welding theory possesses the qualification prescribed under 11.2.2. In addition, each instructor shall have the ability to present effective demonstrations and explanation of those portions of the course which he is to teach. 11.2 Qualification of Instructor

b) Instructing C>Observing

the trainee to work safely, emphasizing the training establishment's safety regulations. acceptable shop management practice, such as (i) care, control and conservation of materials and equipment, and (ii) shop cleanliness and orderliness. records and recording trainees progress.
3 COURSE OF INSTRUCTION

d) Keeping attendance
SECTION

11.2.1 Each instructor giving any portion of the instruction in welding practice ( see 13 ) shall possess the following qualifications: a) A minimum of three years experience in welding technology with basic educational qualification equivalent to SSC; b) A practical knowledge of the physical properties of the metals and the welding process; c) Familiarity with the topics in welding theory covered in Section 3; and d) Familiarity with the codes and specifications used in welding and capability to read simple drawings relating to welding of structures. 11.2.2 Each instructor giving any portion of the instruction in welding theory shall have a thorough knowledge of the subject on which he gives instructions. 11.3 Duties of Instructor The instructional staff shall be charged with the responsibility of giving instruction in welding practice and welding theory, as prescribed in Section 3. The duties shall include the following: a) Planning instruction in accordance with the course outlined in this code keeping 3

12 GENERAL 12.1 lYhe instruction shall consist of welding practice and lectures in theory. The practical and theoretical training should be suitably interspersed and related one to the other. The training shall start with instruction in safety precautions, protection of person and protection and care of equipment. This instruction coming at the very commencement of the course will reduce the risk of disablement of the trainees from such causes as are-eye, electrical shocks, etc, and help in preventing damage to equipment which might be caused by ignorance of its proper use.

12.1.1 The instruction in safety shall be given before the trainees are permitted to use any regular welding equipment. A list of recommended safety rules is given in Annex D, and should be used in this instruction. instructions for safety and health requirements in electric and gas welding cutting operations reference should be made to IS 818 : 1968.
13 INSTRUCTION 13.1 Instruction IN WELDING PRACTICE 12.1.2 For detailed

in welding practice shall be given by means of a series of exercises which shall conform at least to the requirement

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 prescribed in this section. The exercise shall be performed on steel plates of various thicknesses as appropriate for each individual exercise. The steel shall be reasonably free from scale, rust, paint and other defects which adversely affect welding. Por the execution of each exercise, the trainee shall have a welding unit for his exclusive use. 13.1.1 The importance of maintaining uniformity of voltage and current condition in order to attain uniformity and good quality of welds and the importance of proper cleaning and deslagging during the welding process shall be emphasized during each exercise. The trainee should select the current, polarity and OCB as recommended by the electrode manufacturer on the carton under the guidance of welding instructions. 13.1.2 In the list of suggested welding exercise no specific recommendations are made with respect to the number of times each exercise should be repeated. The trainee should be required to perform each exercise to the satisfaction of the instructor before being allowed to advance to the next exercise. 13.1.3 It is recommended that the trainee should test as many of his welds as possible as soon as they have been cooled in still air. Further, the instructor should inspect the tested weld and point out to the trainee any defects that may be in evidence and the reason for The techsuch defect or failure of the joint. niques of testing shall be as prescribed for the check tests ( see 14 ). 13.1.4 It is recommended that the size of specimen as indicated in the various illustrations, be maintained wherever possible. 13.1.5 It is recommended that the pieces be set up and tack welded before welding. 13.1.6 After completing each group of exercices the trainees shall be required to pass the check that group designed to tests prescribed for demonstrate whether he has acquired a satisfactory degree of skill in the techniques covered by that group of exercises.
SUB-SECTION 3A BUTT WELDS IN FLAT POSITION AND FILLET WELDS IN FLAT AND HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITION 13.2 Group A Exercises

and weld metal, and deposit consistently beads of the correct length, width and profile with various sizes of electrodes. All the exercises shall be uerformed with electrodes of sizes ranging fromL3*15 mm to 6.3 mm. The following exercise shall be included in this group:
Welding Lesson Welding Procedure

a) Striking the arc b) Running beads ( flat position )

method and Tapping method ( see Fig. 1 )

scratch

With 3*15,4*5 and 6.3 mm electrodes, deposit continuous beads with craters properly filled and without excessive deposits of metals at the points of restriking arc, then practice making long continuous beads in all directions ( see Fig. 2B and 3 ) Practice different weaving techniques ( see Fig. 4 ) advancing in all directions, that is, from left to right, right to left, towards and away from the operator, using 3.15, 4.5 and 6.3 mm electrodes. Resurfacing on a mild steel plate by depositing a metal pad with three layers using four or five mm size electrodes. The area to be built up may be fixed as 200 mm x 100 mm. While carrying out this pad weld deposit in such a way so that l/3 portion of a weld run falls on the preceding run and crater groove, if any, must be filled up. The trainee should produce pad free from porosity and inclusions and more or less of uniform width and height with f 1 mm tolerance. While welding the pad, weaving should be restricted to minimum A shall be

c) Bead weldsweaving technique ( flat position ) d) Resurfacing

13.2.1 All the exercise in Group performed in the flat position.

Striking Group trainee correct

Arc and Bead Welding - Exercises in A shall be designed to instruct the to readily strike the arc, maintain the arc length, achieve full control of slag 4

13.2.2 Check Tests on Exercise in Group A -.No specific tests are prescribed for this group. The trainee should be able to strike the arc by either method at any desired point. He should be able to apply the different and weaving techniques ( see Fig. 4 ) advancing from left to right, right to left and towards and away from the operator, and obtain beads of uniform width. He should be able to deposit a weld metal pad with several layers, using different weaving techniques and obtain fair uniformity in thickness, width and appearance.

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992

IA

TAPPING
START

METHOD

PATH

OF FINISH

IB

SCRATCH

METHOD

FIG. 1 6mm

STRIKINGTHE ARC
OR HEAVIER 150 mm

FIG. 3

RESTRIKING THE ARC

-

c

r-

-7 f 100 mm

r

6 mm

OR

HEAVIER 150 mm

/`

JOINTS

START

4

(A) -

I---

75-h

7
100
JOINTS-

START 4 mm START (6)

-

FILL

CRATER&

2A

DISCONTINUOUS CONTINUOUS

BEAD BEAD

START

_f

-

28 PIG.

4
FIG. 4

(0)

2

BEAD TECHNIQUE

WEAVING TECHNIQUE

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992 13.3 Group B Exercises 13.3.1 Welding
Flat Position

of Butt

Joints and Fillet Joints in

with a suitable weld gauge and then ruptured examination ( see Fig. 9 ). Each for internal weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions under 14. 13.4 Group C Exercises 13.4.1 Welding o#fFillet Joints in the HorizontalVertical Position The exercises in Group C shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of mak ing fillet welds in the horizontal-vertical position. All the exercises shall be performed with 3.15 mm or larger electrodes, leading to the use of 4 and 5 mm electrodes for check tests. Exercises as given in Table 3 for types of welds shall be included in this group.

The exercises in Group B shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making corner, fillet, and butt welds in the flat position. Exercises as given in Table 1 for types of welds shall be included in this group. 13.3.2 Check Tests on Exercises in Group B The trainee shall be required to make two specimen welds conforming to the requirements stated in Table 2. 13.3.2.1 The weld shall be inspected visually for appearance, checked for size and contour

Table 1

Exercises for Corner, Fillet and Butt Welds in Flat Position ( Clause 13.3.1 )

Types of Welds a) Corner welds

Position of Welding A;ii&trated in

Joint Preparation As illustrated Fig. 8B in

Procedure of Welding Weld the joint with two runs first with a 4 mm electrode and the second one with a 5-mm electrode using weaving technique Weld the joint with a 4-mm electrode to obtain a 6-mm fillet Weld the joint with a 4-mm electrode for the first run and a 6.3 mm electrode for the second run to obtain a IO-mm fillet Weld the joint in three runs first run with a 4-mmi3.15 mm electrode and the subsequent runs with 5-mm electrodes Made the joint by welding one run on each side using a 5-mm electrode

b) c)

Fillet welds single run Fillet welds multi-run

As illustrated in Fig. 5C or 5D As illustrated in Fig. 5C or 5D

As illustrated Fig. I As illustrated Fig. 7

in in

d)

Butt-welds

As illustrated Fig. 5A As illustrated Fig. 5A

in

As illustrated Fig. 8A As illustrated Fig. 6

in

e)

Butt welds multi-run

in

in

Table 2

Specimen Welds for Check Tests on Exercises in Group B ( Clause 13.3.2 )

Specimen No. 1 2

Joint Preparation As illustrated Fig. 7 As illustrated Fig. 8A in in

Po&tio~gof As illustrated in Fig. 5C or 5D As illustrated in Fig. 5A or 5B

Procedure of Welding Welds to be made in a single-run with a 5-mm electrode

Weld to be made in multi-runs with a 4-mm electrode for the root-run and a 5-mm electrode for the succeeding runs

6

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 Table 3 Exercises for Fillet Joints to Horizontal-Vertical ( Clause 13.4.1 )
Types of Welds a) Fillet welds b) Fillet welds multi-run Position of Welding As illustrated and 5H As illustrated and 5H in Fig. 5G
in

Position

Joint Preparation As illustrated As illustrated in Fig. 7 in Fig. 7

Procedure of Welding Deposit a single run fillet of 6 mm size using 4-mm and 5-mm electrodes Deposit a 10 mm filled weld runs with 4-mm electrodes in three

Fig. 5G

; 24 Iua
70; ? 3

BUTT BUTT JOINT

WELD CORNER JOINT TEE JOINT

FILLET

WELD LAP JOINT

5 (51

5 tF1

5 IGI

5

(H)

G
U E w >

5

(J)

5tto

5 IL)

5(M)

;": 0 5tNl

~

5 IP)

5 ca,

5 tR)

FIG. 5

ILLUSTRATIONS OF POSITIONS OF WELDING

7

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992 13.42 Check Tests of Exercises in Group C fos appearance and checked for size and contour with a suitable weld gauge and ruptured for internal examination ( see Fig. 9 ) Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of provisions mentioned under 14. in Group C

The trainee will be required to make two specimen welds conforming to requirements stated in Table 4. 13.4.2.1 Each weld shall be inspected visually Table 4 Specimen

Welds for Check Tests on Exercises ( Clause 13.4.2 )

Specimen Joint Preparation No. 3 As illustrated in Fig. 7 4 As illustrated in Fig. 7

Position of Welding As illustrated in Fig. 5G and SH As illustrated in Fig. 5G and 5H

Procedure of Welding Weld to be made in a single run with a 4-mm electrode Weld to be made in a single run with 5-mm electrode

FIG.6

BUTTWKLD ( SQUAREEDGE)

10mm

OR PLA

I-----

125 --w 7 (A) Iloo `1

10mm

OR PLATE

THICKER

FIG.7

FORMS OF JOINTFOR FILLET WELD SPECIMEN
8

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992

9A FOR FORM

OF JOINT

ILLUSTRATED

IN FIG. 7A

8A

SINGLE

V-BUTT

JOINT 9B FOR FORM OF JOINT ILLUSTRATED IN FIG. 8

LENGTH OF WELDED PLATE

PLATE CKNESS 9C 8B DETAIL OF CORNER JOINT FOR FORM OF JOINT ILLUSTRATED IN FIG. 7B

FIG. 8

FORMSOF JOINT FOR BUTT WELD SPECIMEN

FIG. 9

METHODOF RUPTURINGCHECK TJXST SPECIMENS

SUB-SECTION 3B BUTT AND FILLET WELDS IN VERTlCAL UP AND DOWN POSITION AND BUTT WELDS IN HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITION 13.5 Group D Exercises 13.5.1 Welding in Vertical Position The exercises in Group D, shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making

bead, fillet and butt welds in the vertical position. All the exercises shall be performed with 3.15 mm or larger electrodes, leading to the use of 4-mm electrodes for the check tests. For the exercises requiring welding in the vertical down direction, eIectrodes suitable only for this purpose shall be selected. Exercises as given in Table 5 types of welds shall be included in this group.

Table 5
Types of Welds a) Bead welds vertical up and vertical down b) Fillet welds single-run, vertical-up c) Fillet welds multi-run, vertical-up d) Butt welds e) Corner welds down direction

Exercises for Butt and Fillet Welds in Vertical IJp and Down Position and Butt Welds in Horizontal-Vertical Position
Position of Welding As illustrated in Fig. 2 As illustrated in Fig. 5L and 5M As illustrated in Fig. 5L and 5M As illustrated in Fig. 5J As illustrated in Fig. 3~ Joint Preparation As illustrated in Fig. 2 As illustrated in Fig. 7 As illustrated in Fig. 7 As illustrated in Fig. 8A As illustrated in Fig. 8B Procedure of Welding Practice bead welds both vertical and down and using 3.15 mm, 4-mm and 5mm electrodes

Weld the joint 4-mm electrode

with

a 6.3 mm

fillet weld using a

Weld the joint in two runs to obtain a IO-mm filletfirst run with 4-mm electrode and the second with a 5-mm electrode Weld the joint in three runs first run with 3.15 mm, second and third with 4-mm electrodes Weld vertical down with a 3.15 mm and 4-mm electrode

9

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992 13.52
Check Tests on Exercises in Group D

The trainee shall be required to make two specimen welds conforming to the requirements stated in Table 6. 13.5.2.1 The weld shall be inspected visually checked for size and contour for appearance, with a suitable weld gauge and then ruptured for internal examination ( see Fig. 9 ). Each weld shall meet the requirements specified under 14. 13.6 Group E Exercises 13.6.1 Welding in Horizontal-Vertical
Position for

The exercises in Group E shall be designed to instruct the trainee in the technique of making vertical bead and butt welds in horizontal position. All the exercises shall be performed with 3,15 mm or larger electrodes, leading to the use of 3.15 mm and 4-mm electrodes for check tests. Exercises as given in Table 7 for types of welds shall be included in this group. 13.6.2 Check Tests m Exercises
in Group E

Butt Welds

The trainee shall be required to make one to the following specimen weld conforming requirements stated in Table 8.

Table 6

Specimen Welds for Check Tests Exercises in Group D ( Clause 13.5.2 )

Specimen
No. 5

Joint Preparation

Position of Welding As illustrated in Fig. 5L and 5M

Procedure of Welding Weld as spccifi-d in Fig. 7 to be made in a single-run with a 4.mm electrode. After visual inspection and gauging, weld shall be increased in size by one or more additional runs to fora a IO-mm fillet weld Weld to be made in multi-runs with a 3.15 mm electrode fol the first run and 4-mm electrode for the subsequent runs

f;iy;s;rated

6

As illustrated in Fig. 8A

As illustrated in Fig. 55 and 5K

Table 7

Exercises for Butt Welds in Horizontal-Vertical Position ( Clause 13.6.1 )

Types of Welds a) Bead welds and reinforcing pad in horizontal/ vertical position b) Butt welds

Position of Welding As illustrated in Fig. 2 As illustrated in Fig. 5E

Joint Preparation As illustrated in Fig. 2 As illustrated in Fig. 10

Procedure of Welding Practice deposition of beads using 3.15 n'm and 4-mm electrodes Weld the joint by building up the weld with required number of straight beads ( approximately 4 ) deposited without weaving. First run to be made with 3.15 mm and the subsequent runs with 4-mm electrodes Weld the joint by building up the field with the required number of runs ( approximately 3 j deposited without weaving first run with 3.15 mm and the subsequent runs with 4-mm electrodes

c) Butt welds

As illustrated in Fig. 14 ( alternative horizontal vertical position )

Table 8

Specimen Welds for Check Tests Exercises in Group E ( Clause 13.6.2 )

Specimen No. 7

Joint Preparation As illustrated Fig. 10 in

Position of Welding As illustrated in Fig. 5E and 5F

Procedure of Welding Weld to ba made in multi-runs with 3.15 mm electrode for the first run and 4-mm electrode for the subsequent runs

10

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

All dimensions

in millimetres.

FIG. 10 EDGE PREPARATION FOR BUTT WELDS

13.6.2.1 Each weld shall be inspected for appearance and checked for contour with a suitable weld gauge tured for internal examination ( see Each weld shall be assessed on the provisions mentioned under 14.
SUB SECTION FILLET WELDS

visually size and and rupFig. 9B ). basis of

instruct the trainee in the technique of making bead, fillet and butt welds in the overhead position. All the exercises shall be performed with 3.15 mm or 4-mm electrodes, leading to the use of 4-mm electrodes for the check tests. Exercise as given in Table 9 types of welds shall be included in this group. 13.7.2 Check Tests on Exercises
in Group F

3C BUTT WELDS AND IN OVERHEAD POSITION

13.7 Group F Exercises

13.7.1 Welding in the Overhead Position The exercises in Group F shall be designed to

The trainee shall be required to make two specimen welds conforming to the requirements stated in Table 10.

Table 9

Exercises for Butt Welds and Fillet Welds in Overhead Position ( Clause 13.7.1 )

Types of Welds a) Read welds overhead posit ion b) Fillet welds single run C) Fillet welds multirun d) Butt welds

Position of Welding As illustrated Fig. 2 in

Joint Preparation As illustrated Fig. 2 As illustrated Fig. 7 As illustrated Fig. 7 As illustrated Fig. 8A in

Procedure of Welding Practice striking the arc and depositing with 3.15 mm and 4-mm electrodes beads

As illustrated in Fig. 5pand 5R As illustrated in Fig. 5Q and 5R As illustrated in Fig. 5N

in in in

Make a 5-mm fillet weld with 4-mm electrode Make a lo-mm fillet weld building up the weld in three runs using 4-mm e!ectrode Weld the joint in three layers using weaving techniques for the last two layers. Initial two layers with 3.15 mm electrode and the final layer with 4-mm electrode

11

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

Table 10 Specimen Welds for Check Tests on Exercises
( Clause 13.7.2 )
Specimen Joint Preparation As illustrated in Fig. 7 Position of Welding As illustrated in Fig. 5Q and 5R

in Group F

Procedure of Welding Weld as specified in Fig. 7 to be made in a single-run with a 4.mm electrode After visual inspection and gauging, weld shall be ir.creased in size by one or more additional runs to form a IO-mm fillet weld Weld to be made with 3.15.mm electrode for first run and 4-mm electrode for subsequent runs in multi-runs

.
8

9

As illustrated in Fig. 8

As illustrated in Fig. 5N and 5P

13.7.2.1 The weld shall be inspected visually for appearance, checked for size and contour with suitable weld gauge and then ruptured for internal examination ( see Fig. 9 ). Each weld shall be assessed on the basis of the provisions specified under 14. 14 ASSESSMENT OF CHECK TEST WELDS

occurrences may be disregarded, provided that such undercut is not in the form of a sharp notch. 14.1.5 Factor 5 Smoothness Welding is Recommended
of Joint where

14.1 Inspection Before Fracture 14.1.1 Factor 1 Shape of Profile The shape of the profile shall be checked by measuring dimensions of the weld. The finished weld may be slightly over rather than under the specified size. 14.1.2 Factor 2 Shape of Profile The profile of the weld is affected by the type of filler material or electrode used, the position of j oint and the welding technique. 14.1.2.1 In butt welds the surface should be slightly convex. Typical profile views for butt welds have been illustrated in Fig. 11. 14.1.2.2 In fillet welds the contour may vary from concave to convex, according to the type of electrode or filler material, the welding position and technique. Typical profile views for normal fillet welds have been illustrated in Fig. 12. 14.1.3 Factor 3 Uniformity of Surface Uniformity of height and spacing of the `ripples' are an indication of the quality of workmanship. The shape and appearance of ripples in the weld surface vary according to the class o f welding. 14.1.4 Factor 4 Degree of Undercut Undercutting is a particularly undesirable fault. When present it is evident as a notch of depression parallel and adjacent to the sides of the weld. The welded joint should be reasonably but slight intermittent free from undercut, 12

The joint in a weld run where welding has been recommended should show no pronounced lump or recess in the weld surface. 14.1.6 Factor 6 Freedom and Trapped Slag
from Surface Cavities

Smoothness of finish and general freedom from surface cavities and trapped slag are desirable. Surface cavities in a weld deposit may be caused by lack of fusion, gas bubbles or trapped slag, due to the use of unsuitable Where suita material of incorrect technique. ble materials are used, the presence of those defects may be considered attributable to the quality of workmanship. 14.1.1 Factor 7 Disposition Multiple
of Runs, Single and

Where multiple runs are deposited they should at the surface, be of approximately equal width and there should be no deep notch or groove between adjacent runs nor should the edge of one run produce a sharp ridge or recess in the surface of another run. 14.1.7.1 The disposition of the lower runs in a multiple run weld can only be ascertained by examination of an etched cross section of the weld. 14.1.8 Factor 8 Penetration Bead in Butt Welds The size of the penetration bead, that is, fused metal projecting on the reverse side of the joint, varies according to the materials being welded, the type of joint, the welding process the welding technique and the skill of the Where a penetration bead is required, welder. it should be reasonably uniform in width and appearance ( see Fig. 13 ).

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

IIA

DESIRABLE

PROFILE

IN V-BUTT

a) Concave, Equal Leg Lengths b) Convex, Equal Leg Lengths 12A
DESIRABLE PROFILES

NOTCH IIB

J

L L&CK&I&

PENETRATION

UNDESIRABLE

PROFILE

IN V-BUTT

TOO

Convex

No root penetration Notch effect at sides of weld 12B
UNDESIRAB'_E PROFILE

Undercut Notch effect due to overlap at lower toe Unequal leg lengths
12C UNDESIRABLE PROFILE

L RUNS EACH IIC DESIRABLE

PENETRATE OTHER BUTT

PIG. 12

TYPICAL PROFILESIN FILLET WELDS

PROFILE IN UNPREPARED WELD EACH SIDE

WELDS

INCORRECTLY

POSITIONED 7

G.Lizz2
AT CENTRE IID UNDESIRABLE PROFILE IN UNPREPARED BUTT K OF PENETRATION AT CENTRE L IIE UNDESIRABLE UNDER CUT IN UNPREPARED BUTT PROFILE

4
13A SINGLE

c-w
VEE JOINT

,-g?-1
138 1'6 mm to 6.5 mm SQUARE BUTT no backing one run where is deposited

FIG. 13 FIG. 11 TYPICAL PROFILE IN BUTT WELD

TYPICAL SHAPE OF PENETRATION BEADS IN BUTT WELD

13

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992 14.1.9 Factor 9 Quality of Weld Metal@ Arc Welding In the case of weld Metal

14.2.4 Factor 13 Quality of Weld Metal Inferior quality of weld metal may be caused by incorrect welding technique. In metal arc welding the defects may generally be due to the excessive arc length or speed or inThe fracture does not possess correct current. but reveals its customary clean appearance If voids, oxide films and slag inclusions. present to a considerable extent, they may result in a rough, porous, discoloured and lusterless appearance in the fracture.
SECTION 4 ASSESSMENT WELDS OF TEST

deposits on good quality material made with covered electrodes, the use of incorrect current or incorrect arc length usually made evident by porosity both in the body if the weld and in the crater accompanied by a poor surface finish and an irregular A deep crater is not i&elf a criterion profile. of overheating nor of the use of excessive current but may depend upon the characteristics of the electrode. 14.2 Inspection of Weld Fracture Inspection of weld fractures gives information concerning the disposition of runs and the following faults, if present at the section or fracture: incorrect profile, undercut, slag inclusions, poor root penetration and other lack of fusion, as described in the following factors. 14.2.1 Factor 10 Degree of Fusion Pusiqn should be complete of the joint surfaces. over the whole area

15 PENETRATION

OF TEST PIECES

15.1 General 15.1.1 The steel shall be reasonably free from scale, rust, oil, paint and other defects which may adversely affect welding. 15.1.2 Position of welding for the test pieces may be decided according to the subset tions 3A, 3B or 3C, as relevant. 15.2 Butt Weld Test Piece The test pieces shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 14. The edges to be welded shall be prepared preferably by machining or by smooth flame cutting. The joint preparation shall be unbacked V. The plates should be slightly preset so that they are reasonably flat after welding. The runs should be deposited as per the guidelines of the respective sub-sections namely 3A, 3B and 3C. The plate welds are to be back chipped or flame gouged to a semicircular groove to a depth of 3 mm. The center line of the cback chip groove' should essentially coincide with weld center line. After back chipping the sealing run shall be deposited. Each run of weld shall be stopped and restarted with a fresh Gller rod within the central 50 mm of the test piece.
15.3 Fillet Weld Break Test Piece

14.2.1.1 The fracture should be inspected for lack of fusion. This may occur at the surfaces lo be joined between layers of weld metal. Lack of fusion at the joint surfaces is indicated by the retention of the original form and surface markings; between layers of weld metal it will appear as lines between the layers. 14.2.2 Factor 11 Degree Butt and Fillet Welds
of Root Penetration for

Defects are most likely to occur at the root of the weld in this position they are liable to have the maximum effect in reducing the strength of the weld. A close examination of the root shall, therefore, be made, In V-butt welds the first run should normally penetrate right to the underside of the plates, producing a penetration bead of the size required. In normal fillet welds with good root penetration the weld metal should reach the corner ( see Fig. 11 and 12 ). 14.2.3 Factor 12 and Gas Cavities
Nonnletallic ( slag ) Inclusion

Nonmetallic inclusions mav consist of matter from the rod and flux useh or from electrods. Unless they are causea by use of unsuitable materials, they are attributed to the quality of workmanship, the desired result being to achieve a uniform appearance and freedom from cavaties.

The test piece shall conform to the requirements of Fig. 15. The test weld should be deposited using 4 mm filler rods to deposit a weld of 6 mm leg length. The weld should be stopped and restarted with a fresh filler rod within the central 50 mm of the test piece.
NOTE -Weld fresh electrode to be stopped within central and restarted 50 mm. with a

14

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

RESERVE REPEAT

FOR TEST

WELD TO BE STOPPED AN0 RESTARTED WITH A FRESH ELECTRODE w,TH,N CENTRAL Somm OF TEST PIECE

RESERVE REPEA?

FOR TEST

METHOD

OF

All dimensions FIG. 15

in millimetres.

METHOD OF MAKING FILLET WELD BREAK TEST SPECIMEN

I

Position F H-V V (UP) V (DOWN) 0

a
60" 60" 70" 70" 8@ 65" 65" 75" 75" 85"

I

17 ASSESSMENT 17.1 By Visual Examination

Test pieces shall be visually following:

examined

for the

Dimensions of Weld Deposit a> sions of the weld shall be

I

Weld to be Stopped and Restricted with a Fresh Electrode within Central 50 mm

- The dimenchecked. The finished weld should be slightly over rather than under the specified size. Shape of Profile -

All dimensions PIG.

in millimetres.

b)

14 METHOD OF MAKING BUTT WELD BEND TEST SPECIMEN FOR INITIAL QUALIFICATION TEST AND ANNUAL TEST

In butt welds, the surface should be slightly convex. Typical profile views for butt welds have been illustrated in Fig. 11.

16 MARKING

OF TEST PIECES

test plate shall be indelibly marked in such a manner as to identify each specimen that will be removed therefrom. The marking shall identify: a) the trainee, b) the position of welding, and c) the size of electrodes used.

16.1 Each completed

In fillet welds the contour may vary from concave to convex, according to the type of electrode or filler material, the welding position and technique. Typical profile views for the normal fillet welds have been shown in Fig. 12.
Uniformity of Surface -

The height spacing of ripples shall be uniform.

and

4

Degree of Undercut -

The welded joint shall be free from undercut, but slight intermittent occurrences may be disregarded provided that such undercut is not in the form of a sharp notch.

15

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992

e)

Smoothness o-f Joint where Weldirrg is Recommended - The joint in the weld

run where welding has been recommended shall be as smooth as practicable and shall show no pronounced lump or recess in the weld surface.

f > Freedom
sZag -

from Surface Cavities and Trapped

free slag.

The surface of the weld shall be from porosity, cavities and trapped

17.2 By Testing 17.2.1 Butt Welds After external visual assessmenl of the butt weld test pieces, two bend test specimens each 40 mm wide shall be cut from the test piece by sawing or machining ( see Fig. 14 ). The upper and lower surfaces of the weld shall be filed ground or machined, level with respective original surfaces of the plates. Tool marks should be avoided as they lead to localization of stresses and may cause premature failure. For this reason the direction of machining of the surfaces should be along the specimen and transverse to the weld. The sharp corners of the test specimen shall be rounded to a radius not exceeding 1 mm. The specimen shall then be bent to an angle of 180" over a former having a diameter equal to four times the thickness of the specimen as shown in Fig. 16. One test specimen shall be

ccsted with the face of weld in tension and the other with the root of the weld in tension. A good weld should show no crack or defect of a dimension greater than 3 mm measured along the weld and I.6 mm measured across the weld. Premature failure at the corner of test specimen shculd rot bc regarded as cause for rejection. Prier to bending: the edges should be etched to reveal the weld, if this is not su& ciently discernible to ensure that the bending takes place at the center line on the weld. 17.2.2 Fillet Weld Break Test After external-visual assessment of the fillet weld break test piece, the test piece shall be cut into three equal portions by sawing or machining and break open along the weld and the weld fracture examined ( see Pig. 15 ). The weld fracture shall be examined, keeping in view the following factors: a) Degree of fusion - Fusion should be complete over the whole area of the joint surfaces. The fracture should be inspected for lack of fusion. This may occur at the surfaces to be joined and between layers of weld metal. Lack of fusion at the joint surfaces is indicated by the retention of the original form and surface markings; between layers of weld metal it would appear as lines between the layers.

I- I_PIG. 16 METHOD OF CARRYINGOUT BEND TEST
16

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992

b) Degree of root penetration - Defects are most likely to occur at the root at the weld. In normal fillet welds with good root penetration the weld metal should reach the corner ( see Fig. 11 and 12 ).

The fracture shall have a clean uniform appearance and the weld metal should be free from cavities and slag inclusions.

ANNEX A ( Clause 8.7 )
ACCE&SORIES AND EQUIPMENT RECOMMENDED ESTABLISHMENT FOR WELDERS A-l SHOP MACHINES EQUIPMENT A-l.1 AND ACCESSORY FOR TRAINING

r) First aid kit; s) Provisions mets; for sterilizing welding hel-

The training establishment shall be provided with the following shop and accessory equipment:

t) Anvil 45 kg or heavier; u) Display board for sample welding exercises; and v) Hot metal quenching
film strips assistance. and slides have

specimens of

4 Heavy work bench

b)

blacksmith's vice more; Gas cutting torch ( manual or machine type ) or plate shear for preparing plates for welding and for cutting test specimen;

with machinist's or weighing 30 kg or

tank.
been motion found pictures, to be of

NOTE - Facilities for showing

cl Two-ended 4

pedestal grinder with 25 x 3 cm ( or larger ) coarse wheels and wheel dresser; Heavy power hacksaw ( preferably 25 mm width capacity ) or horizontal metal band saw; Equipment for machining test specimens; Guided-bend test device with hydraulic jack of 8 tones or larger capacity; device with hydraulic jack of 8 tones or larger capacity; chemical type; water;
buckets with

4-2 SMALL TOOLS AND ACCESSORIES 4-2.1 While

each trainee shall be welding, supplied with the following equipment: a) Sledge hammer for specimens; b) Ball peen hammer; c) C-clamps; d) Cold chisels; e) Center punches; f) Scribers; g) Metal rules; h) Try squares; marking steel stamps j) Sets of metal ( letters and figures of 5 mm height ); rupturing check test

e) Portable or flexible shaft grinder;

f)
8)

h) Break or rupture

j) Fire extinguishers,
k)
m) Fire

4

Sand bags of fire protection; Scrap box 90 x 60 x 30 cm; instrucweighing

P) Chartboard for progress chart, tional charts and notices; platform 4) Small electrodes, etc; scales for

k) Small steel wedges; m) Medium coarse files for rounding of test specimen; and n) Soapstone 17 marking crayon. edges

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992 A-3 REQUIREMENTS WHILE WELDING FOR EACH TRAINEE

f ) Slag-chipping

hammer; and tongs or heavy gas

A-3.1 While welding, each trainee shall supplied with the following equipment:

be

g) Pair of short pick-up pipe pliers.

a) Helmet

coloured glass;

or hand shield with suitable filter lens and clear cover

A-4 EQUIPMENT FOR TRAINEE OBSERVERS AND INSTRUCTORS WHILE OBSERVING instructor and A-4.1 While welding each trainee shall be supplied with the following equipment: a) Helmet or hand shield with suitable coloured filler glass and clear cover glass, and (see BIS Handbook of b) Weld gauges Manual Metal Arc Welding for Welders ).

b) Welding and cutting torches; C>Ground clamp ( where necessary leather
gloves, or gauntlets );

d) Safety
Wire e>

goggles for use while chipping and cleaning welds and for flash protection; scratch brush;

ANNEX B ( Clause 9.2
RECOMMENDED )

FORM OF TRAINEE PROGRESS

CHART

I

Sl No.

i

Name . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... Address.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~.......................................... Local Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Employer's Name & Address L..............................................,.............................................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ............

Courses required

( see Note j: Position,

1. Butt Welds in Flat Position and Fillet Welds in Plat and Horizontal-Vertical
2. Butt and Fillet Welds in Vertical Position, and Position and Butt Welds

in Horizontal-Vertical

3. Butt Welds in Fillet Welds in Overhead
NOTE These courses correspond to Sub-section

Position.
3.

3A, 3B, and 3C of Section

Special remarks,

if any . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Cash/Credit/Free out . . . . . . . . . . . . b.............. 18 Total Period ( weeks ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Terms of payment Date

in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Date

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992

Lesson 1 Butt Welds in Fiat Position and Fillet Welds in Flat and Horizontal-Vertical Position

Dates

Days

Total No. of Hours of Actual Welding Practice

Estimated Time Observing Weld and Test Specimens

Striking the arc and bead welding Striking the arc I/II//! Running position beads ( flat
I I

Bead welds weaving technique ( flat position Status of progress

)

Welding of butt joints and fillet joints in flat position Corner weld fillet weld fillet weld

Single-run Multi-run

I I I 1i i I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I 1 I I I I ! I

I

Butt weld ( see Fig. 8A ) Butt weld ( see Fig. 6 ) Making check test specimen No. 1 Making check test specimen No. 2 Status of progress

I

I

I

I

I

i

I

IIIIIII

1

i

Ii//i/l

I

I

Welding of fillet joints in the horizontal-vertical Single-run fillet weld II/II/I

position
I I

Multi check test specimen No. 3 Making check test specimen No. 4 Status of progress

IIIIIII

I

1

19

JS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

Lesson 2 Butt and Fillet Weld in Vertical Position Welds in Flat and Horizontal-Vertical Position

Dates

Days

Total No. of Hours of Actual Welding Practice

Time Observing Weld I and Test Specimens
~

~ Estimated

I

Welding in vertical Bead welds and reinforcing pad in horizontal-vertical position Butt welds ( see Fig. 10 ) Butt welds ( see Fig. 14 ) Making check test specimen No. 5 Mak.ing check test specrmen No. 6 Status of progress Welding in horizontal-vertical Bead welds-vertical and vertical down up IIiIIIl IIIIIII l/lIll IIIIIII IIIIIII

position

//lIlIl

illllll

/HIIll/

I

:I

i

!

position

for butt welds

i
I I

I

Single-run fillet weldsvertical up Multi-run fillet weldsvertical up Butt welds Corner welds-down direction Making check test specimen No. 7 Status of progress

I

I

I

1

!

I

20

IS 817 ( Part 1) : 1992

Lesson 3 Welding in Overhead Position Welds in Flat and HorizontalVertical Position

Dates

Days

Total No. of
' Hours of Actual

Welding Practice

Estimated Time Observing Weld and Test Specimens

Bead welds in overhead position Single-run Multi-run Butt weld Making check test specimen No. 8 Making check test specimen No. 9 Status of progress fille Neld

1

/IllI!

I

I

fillet weld

/l1I1l! I!!II/I !!I1111

i
I I

I

I

I

ANNEX

c'

(

Clause

10.1

)
COURSE IN

RECOMMENDED SYLLABUS FOR A S-WEEK TRAINING VARIOUS SUB-SECTIONS OF SECTION 3 C-l BUTT WELDS IN FLAT POSITION AND FILLET WELDS INITIAL AND HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITIONS ( See 13 ) Periods: 72 hrs 1 Actual welding practice 2 Theory 2.1 Safety of oxy-acetylene, electric weld- 4 hrs ing and cutting and other operations 2.2 Blue print reading, welding symbols, 4 hrs etc 2.3 Basic electricity for welding 4 hrs C-2 BUTT AND FILLET WELDS IN VERTICAL POSITIONS AND BUTT WELDS IN HORIZONTAL-VERTICAL POSITION ( See 13 ) Periods: 1 Actual welding practice 72 hrs 21

2 Theory 2.1 Manual metal arc welding, arc charac- 6 hrs teristics, power sources, electrodes and techniques of air arc gouging 2.2 Oxy-acetylene welding and gas 2 hrs cutting C-3 WELDING IN OVERHEAD POSITION ( See 13 ) Periods: 48 hrs 1 Actual welding practice q Theory L 2.1 Classification of steels, basic 4 hrs welding metallurgy, macro and micro examinations 2.2 Effect of various weld defects, 4 hrs their causes and remedies
NOTE guidance The number only. of hours mentioned are for

IS 817 ( Part 1 ) : 1992

ANNEX D ( Clause 12.1.1 )
RECOMMENDED DO
1 Wear leather

SAFETY RULES DON'T

2 3

4

5 6

gloves, adequate clothmg and heavy shoes, tightly laced. Wear a helmet or use a shield when in the vicinity of welding or flash arc. Remove combustible materials from the vicinity of welding or gas cutting operations. Get prompt first aid if burned or if your eyes have been injured by a flash or flying scale. Wear safety goggles when chipping, grinding, peening or removing slag. Keep booth and floor clean and clear of electrode stubs, scraps of meLal and carelessly disposed tools. Know how to use the fire extinguishers and memorize their location. See that hose connections are tight and that cables do not become hot. Make proper provision for venting exhaust gases when operating the tip of the torch in confined spaces.

Look at a welding flash with the naked eye. Use cracked or defective helmets or shields. on regulators or

Hang a torch with its hose cylinder valves. Pick up hot objects. IJse electrode

holders with defective

jaws.

Leave the electrode holder on the table or in contact with a grounded metallic surface. Replace it on the support provided for that purpose. Weld on closed containers or on containers that have held combustible materials. Secure permission from the instructor before welding on any container. Weld in the vicinity of flammable bustible materials. or com-

22

Standard Mark The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.
Revision of Indian Standards

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be possession of the latest amendments or edition. sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : No. MTD 11 ( 3269 )

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone 331 01 31 ( 331 13 75 37 84 99, 1 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 15 19, 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 37 85 61, 37 86 62 53 16 40, 235 04 42, 235 23 15 632 78 58, 632 78 92

Regional Offices : Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern Southern Western : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH 160036

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD, BANGALORE, BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR, COIMBATORE, FARTDABAD, GHAZIABAD, GUWAHATI, HYDERABAD, JAIPUR, KANPUR, LUCKNOW, PATNA, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Printwell Printers. Aligarh, India

