NAT HA IS 17645 : 2021 
Indian Standard 


AT fea aia & few rinri utao 
va waite Aurea HaT 


Code of Acceptance Tests and 
Purchase Performance for Web 
Offset Machines 


ICS 37.100.10 


© BIS 2021 


anda AM Sat 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH HM, ay Reef — 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2021 Price Group 3 


Printing Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 25 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Printing 
Machinery Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard defines the various types of waste that are generated in web offset machines. It also specifies the test 
requirements, acceptance test criteria and purchase performance for offset machines. The parameters for ‘saleable 
copy quality’ has also been included in this standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of the standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17645 : 2021 


Indian Standard 


CODE OF ACCEPTANCE TESTS AND PURCHASE 
PERFORMANCE FOR WEB OFFSET MACHINES 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers the requirements of the acceptance 
test and purchase performance for newspaper web 
offset machine. 


2 DEFINITIONS 


2.1 Definition of Waste According to the Saleable 
Quality 


All printed copies which are press-related outside the 
defined tolerances of the criteria described as “saleable 
quality” are recorded as waste. 


The “saleable quality” varies according to a quality 
accepted by the customer however it does not conform 
to the optimum product quality which can be produced 
by the installed product described here. 


2.2 Definition of Start-up Waste 


Those copies which occur between the first completely 
printed copy in the folder delivery up to the first saleable 
copy are treated as “Start-up waste”. 


2.3 Definition of Production Run Waste 


Those copies, which generate additional copies outside 
the defined tolerance ranges after the first saleable copy 
(net counter switched on) during the current production 
run is described as production run waste. This includes 
copies which are press-related. The production run 
waste counter stops when “saleability” (net counter 
switched on again) has been obtained. 


2.4 Definition of White Waste 


tli "m 
Start “Impression on” 


1st completely printed 
copy in the folger delivery 


Webbing-up tart-up white waste 


waste 


“1st saleable copy” 


Start-up waste 


2.4.1 Webbing-up Waste 


Webbing-up waste is the amount of web required 
between the reel stand/splicer and the first folded 
product in the delivery. It is specified by the longest 
web path in the press. 


2.4.2 Start-up White Waste 


Start-up white waste includes all copies from the 
start-up of the press to the first completely printed copy 
in the folder delivery. 


2.5 Definition of Paste-Up Waste 


Paste-up waste includes all copies which are caused 
by a reel change and are outside the defined “saleable 
quality” tolerances. This includes the reel paste itself 
which runs through the press as well as all copies which 
exhibit tolerance deviations caused by this paste in 
the cut-off compensator, colour register and ink feed 
until the “saleable quality” defined in the following is 
obtained again. 


2.6 Definition of Delivery Waste 


Delivery waste is the number of cylinder revolutions 
which occur between the last saleable copy and the 
final press stop. 


2.7 Definition of Packaging Waste 


This includes cover and jacket packaging material, the 
reel core and the first layers removed from a reel. This 
is not press-related and is to be determined by weighing 
only. 


2.8 Diagram of Waste 


Process diagram of waste is shown in Fig. 1 


“Impression off” “Stop” 


1st copy in target Last completely printed 


quality copy in the folder delivery 


Any production run Delivery waste | 


waste / paste-up 


Fic. 1 PROCESS DIAGRAM OF WASTE 


1 


IS 17645 : 2021 


2.9 Test Requirements of the Press 
General requirements from the press for the acceptance 
tests are 


a) Well maintained and adjusted press as well as 
trained personnel with consistent operating 
method according to training; 

b) There must be an adequate number of technically 
experienced printers who can immediately 
make any required corrections and adjustments 
following start-up of the press without disregarding 
relevant amounts of waste; 

c) Central control consoles with required centralised 
access; 

d) Proofing speed is between 6000 and 8000 cyl. 
revs/h according to press type; 

e) Ink has been preset according to subject; 

f) Water/register has been preset; 

g) Web tension preset; 

h) Inking couples washed and pre-inked, coloured 
inks not over-inked; 

j) Test form with proofing control strips; 


k) Offset-process consumables as per 
recommendations; and 
m) Standardised plate production. 
The ink/water balance, colour register, cut-off 


compensator and web tension are adjusted according to 
the specified parameters of the seller during make ready 
process. Once the initial press proofing completes then 
press should reach to production speed in a continuous 
acceleration process. 


3 QUALITY ASSESSMENT 


3.1 Requirement for 


Assessment 


an Objective 


Quality 


a) Test form is to be used to formulate, define and 
check the quality parameters. 


b) To verify the technical function of the press, the 
seller and the purchaser will agree on the important 
influencing factors such as blankets, printing 
inks, plates, paper grade and densitometer. These 
must be suitable, commercially available and 
process-suitable. 


Cc 


wa 


The ink densities, dot gains and all other 
directly dependent parameters are determined 
densitometrically with suitable and calibrated 
measuring equipment according to the test 
procedure specified by Seller. 


3.1.1 Production Start Criteria for Saleable Copies 


The agreed tolerances must apply to 90 percent of the 
evaluated test copies (from production run). 


3.1.2 Acceptance Test Criteria 


a) The agreed tolerances must apply to 95 percent of 
the evaluated test copies (measuring points). 


b) The criteria are measured using a test form. The 
acceptance criteria are defined in 5. 


3.2 Ink Densities (Solid Ink Densities) 


All quality requirements are based on the solid 
ink density values specified in “normal inking” 
(100 percent area coverage, D ). 


If normal inking values have not been specified, the 
following values can be used as an alternative: 


a) Black — D, = 1.10 +/-0.1 
b) Cyan — D, = 0.90 +/-0.1 
c) Magenta — D, = 0.90 +/-0.1 
d) Yellow — D, = 0.90 +/—0.1 
These values refer to newsprint target quality, 


40*—48 g/m? (* Provided that absorbency of the paper 
is satisfactory). 


4 PARAMETERS FOR WEB OFFSET PRESS 
ACCEPTANCE TEST CRITERIA FOR 
TARGET QUALITY 


Target quality represents the obtainable product quality. 
Products in “target quality” are within the following 
defined tolerances. 


4.1 Ink Density Profile and Production Run Stability 


a) When started in right operational conditions 
(including temperature), the densities obtained 
through the ink presetting values from 
RIP/scanner, should not exceed a tolerance of 
AD, =+0.14 D, plus measuring instrument 
tolerance and density tolerance in the paper, over 
the web width in an axial direction. 


b 


wm 


When started with manual setting conditions, the 
densities set by the operating personnel should not 
exceed a tolerance of AD == 0.20, plus measuring 
instrument tolerance and density tolerance in the 
paper, over the web width in an axial direction. 


c 


wm 


At the same measuring point measured ink 
densities may deviate from the measured initial 
value of the first copy without any external 
intervention by not more than D, =+0.10 at a 
constant and also maximum production speed 
over a period of at least 10 min within one reel. 


4.1.1 Characteristic of the Ink Densities When there 
are Changes in the Speed 


a) The acceleration curves of the inking and 
dampening units have been set to retain the 
ink/water balance when the press accelerates from 
proofing speed to the max print speed. 


b) Changes to the solid ink density, at speed changes 
from 60 percent to 100 percent of the max. 
print speed measured at the same point, of max. 
D =+ 0.15 are permitted. 


v 


4.2 Dot Gain 


The dot gain describes the effect of the dot increase 
from the paste-up to the impression. 


The dot gain is affected by the parameters like plate 
exposure, paper quality, ink film thickness (solid ink 
density), ink viscosity, ink temperature, pressure of the 
plate cylinder on the blanket cylinder, pressure of the 
blanket cylinder on the web, blanket type, water supply, 
colour sequence. 


As the influencing factors on the dot gain are not 
all press-related, the dot gain is excluded from the 
press-related quality parameters. 


4.3 Gradual Fading in the Direction of Printing 


Changes to the ink density in the circumferential 
direction are caused exclusively by a variable blanket 
adjustment around the circumference and are therefore 
not press-related. 


4.4 Ghosting/Starvation 


4.4.1 Ghosting 


Ghosting is specified by measuring the density of the 
vertical solid ink rail and within the ghosting area. The 
maximum density difference between the two points is 
0.2 D. 


4.4.2 Starvation 


Densities are measured on the horizontal solid ink rail 
under the vertical solid ink rail and at a point next to the 
rail. The values of the first measurement are subtracted 
from the values of the second measurement. The 
maximum density difference is 0.2 D. 


4.5 Slurring and Doubling 


No slurring or doubling can be seen with the naked eye. 


4.6 Smearing/Offsetting 


Press-related smearing does not occur if suitable paper 
and inks are used. Draw elements must run in the 
print-free area of the webs, otherwise, smear-free 
printing is not possible. This normally also applies to 
tape guides in the folder if tape guides are clean. 


An unavoidable marking of the jaws in the case of solid 
areas and unfavourable subjects is tolerated. 


4.7 Colour Register 


The accuracy of the colour register is determined with 
suitable measuring instruments. 


a) The maximum differential of the colour register is 
at a constant press speed, measured in the middle 
area of the web, within one reel (without register 
control system): 


IS 17645 : 2021 


1) Circumferential register 
within the H printing unit: + 0.07 mm 
2) Circumferential register 


from H printing unit to 


H printing unit: + 0.08 mm 
3) Circumferential register 
within the 8-couple tower: +0.15 mm 


4) Lateral register within the 
8-couple tower: +0.12 mm 


b) The maximum difference of the colour register 
is at speed changes ranging from 60 percent to 
100 percent of the maximum production speed 
according to the performance graph, measured 
in the middle area of the web, within one reel 
(without register control system): 


1) Circumferential register 
within the H printing unit: +0.10 mm 


2) Circumferential register from 
H printing unit to H printing 


unit: + 0.20 mm 
3) Circumferential register 
within the 8-couple tower: + 0.30 mm 


4) Lateral register within the 
8-couple tower: +0.12 mm 


4.8 Folder Performance Test 
4.8.1 Tolerances for the Fold 


a) Former fold/cylinder fold 
(first cross fold) +2.0 mm 


b) Condition: There is no cut-off 
register variation 


c) Up to 24 pages broadsheet/48 
pages tabloid +2.0 mm 


4.9 Cut-off Compensator 


4.9.1 At Constant Speed (with and without register 
control system) +2.0 mm 


4.9.2 At Speed Changes (without register control 


system) 
a) Up to 3 webs: +5.0 mm 
b) For each subsequent web: +1.5 mm 


4.10 Lateral Web Offset 


The maximum lateral web offset is without the use of 
web edge control from the delivery of the last printing 
unit to the former entry: 


At constant speed: +1.0mm 


With speed changes: +2.0 mm 


IS 17645 : 2021 


5 PARAMETERS 
QUALITY 


FOR “SALEABLE COPY 


The term “saleable copy quality” is used to determine 
the waste. 


Products in the “saleable quality” are within tolerances 
defined under “target quality” except following 
deviations. 


5.1 Ink Density Profile 


The densities set by the operating personnel should not 
exceed a tolerance of AD, = + 0.20 over the web width 
in an axial direction. 


5.2 Colour Register 


The maximum differential of the colour register is at a 
constant press speed, measured in the middle area of 
the web, within one reel: 


a) Circumferential register within 
the H printing unit: + 0.10 mm 


b) Circumferential register from 
H printing unit to H printing unit: +0.15 mm 


c) Circumferential register within 


the 8-couple tower: +0.18 mm 
d) Lateral register within the 
8-couple tower: +0.15 mm 


6 PRODUCTION SPEED 


The maximum production speed of the press is as per 
the manufacturer’s product specification. 


The effective production speed depends on the 
operator’s skill, maintenance practices, settings of the 
press, the number of pages of the product, the section 
lead, the type of fold, the quality and combination of 
the utilised materials as well as the environmental 
conditions. 


Provided that operating and maintenance regulations 
are observed, that suitable commercially available and 
process-suitable materials are used, that the ambient 
temperature is between 20 °C and 22 °C and that 
the relative air humidity is between 40 percent and 
60 percent. 


IS 17645 : 2021 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Printing Machinery Sectional Committee, MED 25 


Organization 


Former Director, Directorate of Printing, New Delhi 
All India Federation of Master Printers, New Delhi 


Autoprint Machinery Manufacturers Private Limited, 


Coimbatore 


Department of Printing Technology, Haryana 


Government of Karnataka Department of Printing 
Stationery and Publication, Bengaluru 


Indian Printing Packaging and Allied Machinery 
Manufacturers Association, Noida 


Karnataka State Printer Association, Bengaluru 


Manugraph India Limited, Kolhapur 


Office of Development Commissioner (MSME), 
New Delhi 


Savitribai Phule University, Ganeshkhind, Pune 


TechNova Imaging Systems India Private Limited, 
Mumbai 


The Printers House Private Limited, Ballabhgarh 


In Personal Capacity (A-302, Srabasti Cooperative 
Housing Society Limited, B-13 Sammilani Park, 
Kolkata 700 075) 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri A. K. BANSAL (Chairman) 


SHRI HARJINDER SINGH 
PRESIDENT AIFMP (Alternate) 


SHRI K. G. SURESH 
SHRI P. S. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


PROF ANJAN KUMAR 
SHRI ANKIT BOORA (Alternate) 
SHRI BIJENDER (Young Professional) 


SHRI RAVISHANKAR 


SHRI S. DAYAKAR REDDY 
SHRI PRASHANT VATS (Alternate) 


Suet T. V. MUKUND 
SHRI B. L. SRINIVASA (Alternate) 


SHRI MAHESH MADHUKAR 


SHRI UMESH SHUKLA 
SHRI K. SINGH SoDHI (Alternate) 


Dr DATTATRAYA KUTE 


SHRI [YER MURALI KRISHNAN 
SHRI SHIVA SUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


SHRI S. K. DIXIT 
Suri D. P. DaBas (Alternate) 


SHRI DIPTENDU CHOWDHURY 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA, SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-officio ) ] 


Member Secretary 


SHRI LOKRAJ MEENA 
SCIENTIST ‘B’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 25 (13991). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


