Indian Standard

PLANNINGAND DESIGN OFBARRAGE POWERHOUSES - GUIDELINES
PART 1 INVESTIGATION, PLANNING AND LAYOUT

ICS 27.140

0 BIS 1998

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARC

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI I 10002

October

I998

Price Group

4

Barrages

and Weirs

Sectional

Committee,

RVD 20

FOREWORD This Indian Standard (Part 1) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Barrages and Weirs Sectional Committee had been approved by River Valley Division Council. Hydroelectric power is the most easily available renewable source of energy, not depending on any non-renewable inputs like coal, petroleum or nuclear fuels. It does not cause any pollution to the atmosphere. Once a hydropro.ject is established, little running and maintenance cost is involved. India, having been blessed with considerable rainfali and extensive snow-clad mountains, has very good potential for hydroelectric power generation. Hydro-electric power can be generated along a river mainly by three different methods namely:

a) By constructing short water b) By constructing and

high dam to create a reservoir, conductor system, a low diversion structure

with power house at the toe of dam or an a long/

and a water conductor

system leading

to a power house,

c) By constructing one or cascade of barrages with a power houses on the down stream river bed or on a short diversion channels using the run-off from the river with relatively small storage. Sometimes the barrages constructed for irrigation can also generate hydro-electric power as a secondary benefit, if a constant flow can be passed down the barrage for downstream requirements. This code deals with the barrage power houses [alternate (c) above]. In this type of power houses energy can be generated during a major part of the year. Reduced generation is also available during medium flood stage. During the high flood period in the river, if the difference between the upstream and the downstream water level reduces to less than 2 m, it is desirable to stop power generation. Thus for a very short period these power houses may not generate any power, during which time, the annual repair or maintenance of the machines can be carried out. Only general guidelines giving investigation, planning with barrages are dealt with in this standard. and layout requirements of the power houses combined

I!3 14592 (Part 1) : 1998

hdian Standard

PLANNINGANDDESIGNOFBARRAGE POWERHOUSES - GUIDELINES
PART 1 IN\EEWMATION,
1 SCOPE

PLANNINa AND LAYOUT approach channel, intake structure, power ho&se, water conductor system (only for bypau power house), switchyard (substation), tailrace, bank protection area, colony, conamtction plant and machinery yard, storage godowns, etc. The distances to be covered on the country side on either sides of the bank and on the upstream and downstream sidaa of the barrage axis may be decided on the basis of the size of the project and topography of the area. Normally contours up to 2.5 m above HFL and up to 5 km on the upstream and downstream of`barrage axis would be desirable. 3) Cross-sections of the river at the proposed axis at intervals of 200 m, both on the upstream and downstream up to at least 1 km from the proposed axis. A plan of the river shall be prepared showing the bank lines, spot levels and locations at all the above cross-sections. 4) Longitudinal sections of the river connecting the lowest water levels, average bed levels and the bank lines normally from 5 km upstream to 3 km downstream of the proposed axis. 5) In case the power house is to be on a bypass channel, longitudinal section along the channel alignment from the intake end to the tail end, with ground levels, ground water levels, proposed channel bed levels, full supply level, and maximum and minimum river water levels at both ends of the channel. b)
Hydrological

This standard covers investigation, planning and layout of barrage hydra-electric power houses. 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts to this standird: IS No. 2914 : 1964 Title Recommendations for estimation of discharge by establishing stagedischarge relation in open channel

Code of practice for structural 4247 (Part 1) : 1993 design of surface hydel power stations: Part 1 Data for design (second revision) 6966 Guidelines for hydraulic design of (Part 1) : 1989 barrages and wein: Part 1 Alluvial reaches ytrst revision) 7720: 1991 Criteria for investigation, planning and layout of barrages and weirs
(first revision)

10060 : 1981

Code of practice for subsurface investigation for power house sites

12800 Guidelines for selection of turbines, (Part 3) : 1991 preliminary dimensioning and layout of surface hydro-electric power house: Part 3 Small, mini and micro power houses 3 INVESTIGATION AND DATA COLLECTION

As soon as project is taken up for consideration, detailed investigations shall be carried out for planning, design and financial evaluation of the proposed barrage power houses, to get the following data which is essential: a) Topographical 1) Index map showing the catchment area upstream of the proposed barrage axis, covering important irrigation systems, power projects, villages and towns, roads and railway networks, gauge and discharge sites, and rainfall observation sites in the neighbourhood.

1) Daily stage and discharge data of the river
at or near the proposed axis for at least 5 years. A stage and discharge observation site shall be established at the proposed barrage axis, if not already existing, as soon as the project proposal is initiated. Two more stage observation sites, one on the upstream and one on the downstream, are to be established. All the sites are to be connected to G.T.S Bench Marks. Stage and discharge observations are to be made according to IS 29 14. If discharge data are available at distant upstream or downstream established gauging sites, over a number of years, the flow at the proposed site may be estimated by developing statistical correlation between the two sites.

2) Contour plan, of the area, both in river bed
and banks in and around the barrage and powerhouse sites on a suitable scale, with contour intervals of not more than 0.5 m, covering the proposed barrage abutments,

IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998

2) Information regarding high flood level, from
flood marks and from local enquiry.

3) Geological sections of all the strata existing below the river bed, as revealed from the above explorations. 4) Geophysical characteristics, for example, solution cavities, seams, bedding planes, possibility of rock fall, etc. 5) Permeability characteristics of the soil and the rocky formations at different depths. 6) Load test and dynamic characteristics of the foundation strata below the power house and the intake. 7) Standard penetration tests at intervals of 30 m and up to depth of 10 m below piers and abutment. 8) Coefficient of friction between concrete and soil or rock and cohesion or unit shear strength under dry and submerged conditions along the foundation planes of the power house and of the barrage bays. If weak shear zones and bedding planes exist below the proposed foundation levels, the above characteristics shall be obtained also, along these weaker planes. For preliminary design, the values given in Table 1 may be used. f) Seismological Maximum seismic acceleration (vertical and horizontal) and direction as shown by the seismograph situated nearest to the site. g) Ground Water 1) In case the proposed power house is to be located in a by-pass channel, ground water levels along the proposed channel alignment and the power house site, immediately after the monsoon and during the dry weather. 2) The subsoil water table in the region in general. h) Backfill Material Physical characteristics like, cohesion, angle of
and Coef'fkients
Unit Shear Strength C, NIllUll
3 3 0.7 0 0 0.07 0.02

3) IO-daily irrigation withdrawals, at the proposed
barrage, if any.
4) Gauge (stage) and discharge relation curve up

to the design flood, based on data of at least 5-years, but preferably by observations and acceptable extrapolation.
c) Meteorological

1) Daily rainfall data from all the rainfall
gauging stations in and around the catchment area, for as many years as possible.

2) Monthly

minimum maximum and temperatures of the river water and of the ambient air.

3 Average monthly rainfall at the site and
maximum intensities. 4) Maximum value and direction velocity at the site. of wind

5) Maximum depth of snowfall, if any. d) Sedimentation Bed load and suspended load concentration during high and low flow conditions along with gradation analysis and abrasive characteristics.
e) Geological

1) `Log of drill holes samples up to lo-15 m
for alluvial river beds and up to 5 m for rocky beds, below the deepest foundation level, depending on the geological condition. Holes shall be drilled at 15 m centre to centre staggered all over the proposed site of the power house and approach and tail channel.

2) Properties of the soil and rock samples of
different strata encountered in the drill hole.
Table 1 Values of Unit Shear Strength

of Friction
Coeffkient of Friction

[Clause 3(e)(8)] SI
No. Material

0
ii) tii) iv) v) vi) vii)

Rock (massive and structurally sound) Concrete Rock (fractured, jointed) Gravel Sand Clay (firm) Clay (soft)

0.80 0.80 0.60 0.50 0.40 0.30 0.20

2

IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 friction, density and permeability of the backfill material to be placed behind the abutments of the barrage and the power house and to be used in the guide banks and the approach embankments. j) Construction Material 4) Demand in the region for river transportation, sizes of boats to ply, size of navigation'lock necessary, etc. p) Irrigation Needs

1) Possible demand by existing agricultural areas
which can be irrigated barrage pond. by gravity from the

1) Physical characteristics,

suitability, available quantity, lead distances and lift heights of stone and sand aggregates for concrete from different possible sources. reaction test results of

2) Possible irrigation demand in monsoon season.
where pump 3) Possible demand by areas irrigation system may be introduced by lifting from the pond. 4) Area which may be served by tubewell irrigation, using the power generated at the barrage power house. 5) Approximate q) Environmental The following as possible: 1) Unfavourable aspects to be quantified as far revenue expected.

2) Alkali-aggregate
aggregate.

3) Boulders

for pitching on the upstream and downstream aprons of the barrage, guide bank, etc.

4) Suitable filter material for guide bank slope and toe protection, and barrage apron protection. k) Financial

1) Cost of suitable

construction materials including transportation up to the construction site, crushing, screening, etc.

Aspects or fully

2) Costs of turbines, generators, various electrical
and mechanical equipment, cranes, switchyard equipment, pumps, barrage gates, power house valves, etc, of the required sizes and specifications including transportation up to the site.

0 Number of villages getting submerged
water-logged, ii) Number of people getting or partially, iii) Agricultural iv) Adverse v) Adverse vi) Effects 2) land getting affected affected,

3) Cost of the transmission

system including transformers, etc, up to the poles, cables, nearest grid line, if it is to be connected to the grid. Otherwise, cost of the local distribution network, transmission system and feeder lines.

effect on forest and wildlife, effect on fish in the river, and on plying of boats.

Favoumble Aspects

m) Fish Growth Existing migratory characteristics of the fish available, their sizes and species. Need of fish-ladder and type of fish-ladder suitable for the fish. Possibility of utilizing pisci-culture. n) Navigation Existing Number monthly, boat plying of boats etc. system in the river. the site daily, the barrage pond for

i) Reduction
firewood

in forest destruction for due to availability of electricity. of Pisci-culture by village

ii) Development cooperatives.

iii) Rise in the ground water table, thereby improving the drinking water facilities in the neighbouring villages. iv) Drinking water facility from the pond for wild life and domestic animals. v) Improvement in the transportation facility in the neighbourhood due to the bridge over the barrage. vi) Sport and recreation vii) Tourist attraction. facilities.

crossing

Possibility of developing an inland waterway by constructing a series or cascade of barrages as additional utility other than power generation. 3

viii) Reduction of landslide in the hilly region due to reduction in toe scour because of ponded water.

IS 14592(Part 1) : 1998 4 PLANNING AND LAYOUT 4.1 It is generally advantageous to locate a power house at a barrage close to a dam situated on the upstream, which will ensure a continuous flow throughout the year. Rivers having apprcciablc flow, even at the minimum, are also preferred locations, 4.2 In rivers with appreciable minimum flows barrage power house may prove attractive. 4.3 The power houses are to be located preferably near the end bays and not at the centre of the barrage (see Fig. 1). 4.4 It is necessary to locate the axis of the barrage in such a way that, a natural deep channel exists on the bank where the power house is proposed. 4.5 Rivers carrying abrasive coarse sand, stones and floating logs would require sediment exclusion devices and adequate trash rack arrangements. 4,6 The power house can also be located in a byepass channel cut through the bank and a sediment excluder provided at the mouth of the channel (see
Fig. 2).

4.7 Suitable arrangements shall be provided across the entrance channel to divert the rolling stones and coarse bed sand to the adjacent undersluice bays, if the power house is located in the river bed itself.

9
DIVIDE

FLOW

WALL \

SLUICE

BAYS

LOW BAFFLE

WAL 1 1 POWER HOUSE BAY

r

FIG. 1 TYPICAL BARRAGE POWER HOUSE IN RIVER BED
4

IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 4.8 If the canal head regulator and the river power house are located on the same end of the barrage, their operations are to be properly synchronized. It may be possible to construct one common sediment excluder for both of them (see Fig. 3). 4.9 In flat and wide rivers, necessary storage may be available in the pond for diurnal peaking, if the barrage gates are kept slightly higher than the Full Reservoir Level. 4.10 During high flood, when the barrage power houses are shut down due to low head difference, sediments may deposit and form shoals in the approach and tail channels. Such condition is to be tested in 3 dimensional models and preventive measures like long divide walls, etc, to be provided in the design. 4.11 In alluvial rivers, the approach and exit velocities into and from the power house shall be restricted to the limit of river bed scouring. 4.12 Suitable training walls and river bank protection measures are to be decided after model studies. 4.13 The road bridge, if provided across the diversion channel shall preferably be located between downstream of the power house and upstream of the draft tube gate axis. 4.14 When a hydro-power scheme is to be introduced in an existing barrage, the power house can be located by replacing one of the weir bays if the waterway is not adversely affected. Otherwise, it can be located in one of the barrage abutments. If neither of the

c3

FLOW

DIVIDE

WALL

,SEDIMENT

HEAD

REGULATOR

/tcF

RAY

FIG. 2

TYPICAL BARRAGE POWER HOUSE IN BYE-PASS CHANNEL 5

IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998

two is possible, the power house can be constructed by replacing a portion of the barrage embankment. If none of the above alternatives is feasible, a longer water conductor through the bank, even by constructing a short tunnel may be provided (see Fig. 4). 5 HYDROLOGICAL
STUDIES

.optimum installation for the proposed scheme. 5.2 Design flood for the barrage has to be very carefully calculated after obtaining actual observed high flood discharges in the river for at least 5 years. For preparing a feasibility report, a simulated design flood can be used from the meteorological observations in the neighbourhood and also using catchment characteristics for surface flow. 5.3 A 50 year frequency design flood is normally adopted for the waterway of the barrage. For the freeboard, for approach embankments, guide banks, road bridge, etc, a 500 year frequency flood or standard projected flood [see IS 6966(Part l)] may be desirable.

5.1 Power potential studies are to be carried out either from actually observed or from the developed 10 daily discharge data. The power studies may include preparation of monthly energy tables, obtaining the pattern of power generation and corresponding energy in the 90 percent dependable year for different installation and determining the

c3
DIVIDE

FLOW

WALL

/-I-

SEDIMENT

EJECTER

HEAD

REGULATOR

T\RIRRIGATION CANAL \\_ ' \\

CROSS

REGULATOR

FIG.

3 TYPICAL BARRAGE POWER HOUSE IN BYE-PASS COMBINED WITH IRRIGATIONCANAL
6

IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 5.4 Irrigation withdrawals from the barrage, where it is for multi-purpose use, shall be compiled for at least 5 years and average 10 daily withdrawals to be computed. the bearing capacity. If boulders are present in the bed, plate bearing tests will be necessary after excavating open pits up to the foundation level, after pumping out water from the pit.

5.5 During dry weather, with lean inflow into the barrage, if peaking of generation is carried out by releasing outflow only in certain part of the day, a minimum continuous release may be ensured for the daily need of the down stream villages. For this, environmental studies shall be undertaken. 6 GEOLOGICAL
STUJMES

6.2 In rocky bed, logs from the bore holes are to be carefully examined while deciding the design foundation levels. If the bed rock is not strong enough to take the load of the superstructure through individual piers and column footings, reinforced concrete raft may be provided. 6.3 If the river bed is composed of predominantly fine sand or sandy silt material at the foundation level, possibility of liquefaction shall be investigated and preventive measures planned.

6.1 In alluvial bed, standard penetration

tests at intervals of about 30 m are to be carried out up to at least 15 m below the foundation levels to ascertain

FLOW

DIVIDE

WALL J--

HEAD

REGULATO

FIG. 4 TVPICALBARRAGE POWER HOUSEIN BYE-PASSTUNNEL

`IS 14592 (Part 1) : 1998 6.4 In foundations of alluvial or rocky nature, insitu permeability test has to be carried out while drilling bore holes. Groutability tests are also to be conducted below the proposed foundation level. 6.5 The rolling and suspended sand in the stream flows has to be petrographically analysed for abrasive quality, so that thz turbine blades may be suitably protected against abrasion, 6.6 The stone aggregates to be used in the concrete shall be tested for alkali-aggregate reaction. 7 TECHNO-ECONOMIC STUDY 8.2 Shallow depressions on the country side of marginal embankments may become water logged during rainy seasons and, as such, adequate provision for pumping and drainage channels shall be provided in the estimate. If the depressions even otherwise get submerged under high flood, these may be allowed to act as flood detention basins and need not be protected by the marginal embankments. 8.3 If the barrage and the power house obstruct the migration of fish, fish ladder shall be provided. 8.4 In case an existing navigational facility, even for small country boats, is affected, locks or ramps shall be constructed. 8.5 Attempt shall be made to harmonize the architecture of the power house roof and external appearance with the natural surroundings. Huge gantry cranes, if exposed, shall be shifted to an inconspicuous position. 8.6 Villagers shall be encouraged to develop pisciculture in the barrage pond on co-operative basis. 8.7 Beautiful tourist resorts with boating and fishing facilities may be built on the banks of the pond. These however, shall be built quite upstream from the barrage and the power house. 8.8 Natural parks with wild life may be developed on the banks.

Techno-economic studies for generation and transmission shall be carried out considering cost of electrical and mechanical equipment and transmission lines. 8 ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECT AND AESTHETICAL

8.1 Low head in-stream power stations are quite environment-friendly. It is, however, necessary to evaluate the cost of rehabilitation of the people residing in villages (cultivated lands and forest lands), if any, which may get permanently submerged under the pond. It is desirable to construct marginal embank ments and ring bunds if possible to save the villages, temples, schools, market places, etc, on the river bank with proper communication facilities instead of shifting them to new places for rehabilitation.

8

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of hdim Stmdurds Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BI,S has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course ol' implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS. Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the hasis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes arc needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest nmendmcnts or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions* This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. RVD 20 (13% Amendments Amend No. Date of Issue Issued Since Puhlic~tion Text Affected

BUREAU Headquarters:

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 32376 17,3233841 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 { 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 2351519,2352315 832 92 95,832 78 58 { 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central
Eastern

: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI 110002
: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road; Maniktola

CALCUTTA Northern Southern Western Branches

700054 160022

: SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A CHANDIGARH : CIT.

Campus, IV Cross Road, C!IENNAI 600113

: Manakalaya,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

: AHMADABAD.

BANGALORE. BHGPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi, India

