( Reaffirmed 2006 )

IS : 2976 - 1964

Indian

Standard

SPECIFICATION FOR OPTICAL THEODOLITE
Optical and Mathematical
Chainnan DB. C. S. RAO lUem68rS Indian Navy LT-CDB D. K. BEANDA~I Sam HAX~BEAJAI~SIN~H ( Altemak ) Chief Inspectorate of instruments [Ministry of MAJ N. BHA~ACHABYA Defence ( DC1 ) J Directorate General of Technical Development SHBI P. N. DEOBEAKTA SHRI V. KBI~HNAMOORTHY( Al&mate) DR. S. P. V~SXA ( Alternate ) Standards Organisation Research, . Designs & SHRI M. W. DESAI ( Muustry of Railways ) Central Public Works Department SHRI J. L. HUMAR Survey of India ( Ministry of Scientific Research & COL R. S. KALHA Cultural Affairs ) LT-COL K. L. KHOSLA ( Ahmate ) The Koh-i-Noor ( India ) Private Ltd., Varanasi S~HRI B. R. MANXEAND Central Scientific Instruments Organisation ( CSIR ), DR. K. N. MATHUR Chandigarb National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR ), New Delhi SHBI PREV PRAKAEE SHBIOYI PRAKASS (Alfamak) Raj-Der-Kar & Co., Bombay SERI E. B. RAJDERKAR SHRI SUBEASE RAJDXRKAR ( Altemale ) P. Orr & Sons Private Ltd., Madras SHBI K. P. RAMSAMI SHRI A. M. B. SUBRAMANIAM ( Alfanrate ) In personal capacity [ Orissa Small Industries COT@Da. I. RAYAKRISHNA RAO ration, Industrial Estotc, Bnhampur ( Gangam Distt ), Orissa 1 The Andbra Scientific Co. Ltd., Masulipatam Sasr P. V. SUBBA RAO SHRI M. PANDURANQA RAO ( Al&ma& ) Madras Institute of Technology, Madras REPRESENTATIVE Directorate General, Ordnance Factories ( Ministry Sam B. N. ROY of Defence ) SHRI S. K. GEOSH ( AIfemnfr ) Office of the Development Commissioner, Small Scale SEBI P. L. SAH~AL Industries ( Ministry of Commerce & Industry ) National Instruments Ltd., Calcutta SHRI A. N. SEN SARI R. R. CHAKRA~ORTY ( Atfcrnate ) Quality Marked Goods Manufacturers' Co-operative SHRI V. P. VAIf3Fl Association Ltd., Roorkee SBRI S. K. GAUTAM ( Alternate ) ( Confinrrtd on 6a,oc 2 )

Instruments Sectional Committee,
Rspnwnfing Defence Research & Development ( Ministry of Defence )

EDC 36
Organization

INDIAN
MANAK

STANDARDS
BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

INSTITUTION
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

ISr!2976-1964
( Gmtimeedfrompage 1 ) MnnbCrS
SHRI M. N. VENKATESAN SERI K. S. CHEZTY ( Altcrnak) SERI H. C. VERMA SHRI D. NI~DY ( Alternate ) SERI M. V. PATANKAR, Deputy Director ( Mech Eng ) RcpIesmting Central Watt & Power Commission Irrigation & Power ) ( Ministry of

Associated Instrument Manufacturers' Private Ltd., New Delhi Director, IS1 ( Ex-o$icio Member)

( India)

Secretafp SERI S. M. RAZVI Assistant Director ( Mech Eng ), IS1

Surveying
Convener COL R. S. KALHA

Instruments

Subcommittee,

EDC 36 : 3
Research &

Survey of India ( Ministry of Scientific Cultural Affairs )

LT-COL K. L. KEOSLA ( Ahnate to Cd R. S. Kalha ) Central Public Worlds Department SERI BHANU PRATAP CONTROLLER OF WEIQHTS 8r Revenue Department, Government of Kerala MEASURES Directorate General of Technical Development SHRI P. N. DEOBHAKTA SHRI V. KRISRNA~~OORTXY ( Abernate) Instrumens Research & Development Establishment SHEI S. S. DI~ARMAYYA ( Mini:!ry of Defence ) SHRI P. K. SARMA ( Alternate ) Precision Government Instruments Fat tory, SH~I S. K. MAEESWARI Lucknow Central Scientific Instruments Organisation ( CSIR). DR. K. N. MATHUR Chandigarh Associated Iustrumrnt Manufacturers' ( India ) PriS.HR~D. NIZ~DY vate I.td., New Delhi National Physical Laboratory ( CSIR), New Delhi SHRr PREM PRAKASH SHRI P. C. JAIN ( Al!ernn!c ) Indian Navy CAPT S. RAJENDKA L-r-CDR I. J. BIIARDWAJ ( Alfernale ) National Instruments Ltd., Calcutta SHRI .%. N. SEN

2

IS : 2976-1964

Indian

Standard

SPECIFICATION FOR OPTICAL THEODOLITE
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 6 December 1964, after the draft finalized by the Optical and Mathematical Instruments Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 0.2 Theodolite is an instrument for precise measurements of horizontal and vertical angles. An optical theodolite is a precision instrument, easy in manipulation, much lighter in weight, and giving greater accuracy as The optical theodolite may be compared to other types of theodolites. used for all types of surveys required for small and large scale mapping and for geodetic surveys. 0.3 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards dealing with A separate Indian Standard has also been prepared optical instruments. * to cover the requirements of vernier theodolites ( IS : 2988-1965 ). 0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standand is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the functional and general requirements of optical The theodolite shall be referred to not by the size of its theodolites. horizontal circle but by the least count of its micrometer, such as optical theodolite of one second. A typical optical theodolite is shown in Fig. 1.
2.

TERMINOLOGY

2.0 For the purpose of this standard, the following definitions shall apply. 2.1 Alidade - The term alidade is applied to the whole of that part of the theodolite that rotates with the telescope.
*Rules for rounding 05 numerical values ( revised),

3

lS : 2976 - 1964

FIG. 1

OPTICAL

TIIRODOLITE

glasses 2.2 Dark Glasses - Coloured tllr e)e during o/Iscrvation of the sun.

used over the eyepiece

to protect

2.3 Diagonal Eyepiece - An eyepiece fitted with a reflecting prism to rellrcr rhc ~a)-s of light at right angles to the ordinary line of sight and is uscti 1b1, nslrononlical and lligh angle observations. 2.4 Limb --.- `1'1~ limb consists and the illumirlntion s!.stenx of the vertical axis, the horizontal circle the

2.5 Standard -TT\v~ vertical arms of the theodolite which bear transit axis, tcltwopc, vertical circle and the optical reading device.

2.6 Striding Level - 11 sensitive level mounted at right angle to the teleobservations for levelling the scope nsis AIICI used mainly in astronomical horizollt;tl asis or nlras~~ring any error in the level of the axis. 2.7 Transit, Horizontal or Trunnion telescope ~icl ~~3tical circle rotate. 2.8 2.9 2.10 Tribrach Trivet Axis The axis about the levelling which the screws. to the

Tile part of the theodolite of thr theodolite nbour 4

carrying

I\U underpart Axis -

tripod

top \vitll \vllich the toes of the levclling
Vertical `l'he :nis

which may be secured screws make contact. rotates.

which the nlidade

IS : 2976 - 1964 3. ENERAL REQUREMENTS of suitable

3.1 Each part of the theodolite shall be made from material strength and shall be suitably finished.

3.1.1 Different parts of the theodolite as far as possible shall be made of metals with similar thermal expansion, so that its accuracy is unaffected by large variations in temperature. 3.1.2 Coating and plating on each part shall be durable colouration, wear and rust. to resist dit-

3.2 The theodolite shall be carefully adjusted so that it rotates unifomxly on its axes. It shall be thoroughly tested by the manufacturers, particularly against vibration and variation in temperature. 3.3 The optical parts shall be clear of fog and moulds. The optical parn shall conform to IS : 988-1959*. The telescope shall be hermetically sealed to avoid fungus growth. The optical system shall be reasonably free from aberrations. 33.1 The coating. optical parts shall preferably be coated with antireflection

3.4 The clamps shall be positive and shall not strain the axes of the theodolite. To avoid inadvertent wrong handling, the heads of different screws, which are placed together, shall have different designs. 4. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS

4.0 The essential parts of the instrument shall meet the following requirements. 4.1 Tribrach - This shall be so designed as to accommodate the theodolite or a target or a subtense bar, without affecting the centring and levelling of the tribrach. 4.1.1 A clamp which should be firm and non-slipping shall be provided for locking the tribrach with the theodolite or the target or the subtense bar. 4.1.2 A foot screw tension plate shall be provided to keep the foot screws firm in the sleeves of the base plate. 4.1.3 The foot screws shall operate smoothly and enclosed so as to be dust-tight. and be adjustable in run

4.1.4 A suitable fixing arrangement shall be provided for clamping the trivet to the head of the tripod ( spe nlso 4.4 ). 4.1.5 A circular bubble shall be provided on the tripod stand or tribrach to allow for quick pre-levelling of the instrument. 4.2 Limb The limb shall turn smoothly about the vertical axis. *General requirementsfor optical components. 5

fS:2976-1961 4.2.1 The horizontal glass circle shall be so enclosed in the limb as to make it dust-tight. A setting knob, where provided for orientation of the by a suitable cap to prevent horizontal glass circle, shall be protected accidental turning. 4.2.2 The glass circle shall be graduated ciockwise to 360" at convenient Each degree division shall be numbered and be longer than the intervals. sub-divisions. 4.2.3 An illuminating window shall be provided for illuminating horizontal and vertical circles. The window shall be so constructed as to allow the use of mirror or an electric lamp. 4.2.4 It will be preferable both the circles. However, illuminating the horizontal illumination does not change to have only one window for illuminating if separate windows are provided, the one circle should be on the limb so that the as the theodolite is moved in azimuth.

4.3 Alidade - It shall be secured to the limb or to the base. A springloaded slow motion screw, without backlash, shall be fitted for fine setting of the theodolite in azimuth. 4.3.1 An azimuth bubble shall be mounted, preferably at the middle of the vertical supports. Capstan screw working against spring shall be provided at one end of the bubble for adjustment, the other end being hinged. A bubble guard shall be provided. 4.3.2 The movement of the telescope about the horizontal axis shall be Two concentric rings shall be provided on the horizontal axis on smooth. either side of the telescope on to which a striding level may be fitted. 4.3.3 Telescope, free to transit from both ends, shall be mounted on the horizontal axis. A spring-loaded slow motion screw, without backlash, shall be fitted to the telescope for its fine setting in altitude. 4.3.3.1 The telescope shall have internal focussing mechanism capable of smooth movement. It shall be provided with a graticule, with cross lines and stadia lines, as shown in Fig. 2. The telescope shall be of astronomical type. 4.3.3.2 To control illumination of the graticule at night, the telescope shall be provided with an adjustable internal reflector which could be operated by a knob from outside. 4.3.3.3 telescope.
axis

Sighting

vanes

or

optical

sights

shall

be provided

on the

4.3.4 The vertical circle shall be mounted enclosed, so as to make it dust-tight. telescope. 6

concentrically with horizontal It shall be coupled to the

-a3
I I

IS:2976-1964

I

I

Fm. 2 GRATIOU~JE

4.3.5 The altitude bubble shall be capable of adjustment by a tilting screw and a rotatable prism shall be provided so that the altitude bubble may be viewed by the observer from either side, without changing his position.
4.3.6 To read the horizontal and vertical circles, a microscope shall be mounted adjacent to the telescope to facilitate sighting and reading from the same position of the observer. 4.3.6.1 The horizontal and vertical readings shall be read through the same microscope, preferably by an arrangement of simultaneous viewing of both circles or separately, through the operation of a selector prism which may be actuated from either side of the vertical supports. 4.3.6.2 The optical micrometer shall be graduated to one second of an arc. The reading of circles shall preferably be by the method of coincidence of graduations, 180" apart. tripod may be 1 600 mm in length and shall be made Tripod shall be either of of well-seasoned wood or light and strong alloy. telescopic or of rigid design. The tripod shall be fitted with a metal stirrup to mount the battery case and with a provision for mounting illuminating unit. 4.4.1 An arrangement for centring the theodolite to an extent 30 to 50 mm shall be provided either on the stand or in the instrument. 5. TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS and mm field
X.

4.4 Tripod-The

of

5.1 The magnification of the telescope shall be between 25 x and 36 x the resolving power of the telescope shall be l-3 mm and 1 mm for 35 and 45 mm free aperture of the objective respectively, at 100 m. The of view shall be 2" f 5 percent for 25 x and 1" 40' f 5 percent for 30 7

I6:2976-1964 5.1.1 The minimum shall have the stadia zero. focussing distance shall be l-5 m and the telescope multiplication constant 100 and addition constant shall nut be less bubble fixed to

5.2 The sensitivity of azimuth bubble and altitude bubble The sensitivity of the circular than 20 seconds per 2 mm. the tribrach shall be 10 minutes per 2 mm. 5.2.1 The optical plummet shall be of the following 2.5 x distance 0.5 m 6" Not to exceed 10 m axis strain

specifications:

Magnification Shortest Error sighting Field of view in centring

1 mm at a height

of

5.3 The error due to vertical

shall not exceed one second.

53.1 The horizontal axis shall be accurate when an elevated point 1.5 m away at an altitude of45" is transferred on the ground, the error in transfennce shall not exceed 0.02 mm. 5.53 Horizontal and vertical circle graduation errors shall not exceed In micrometer, error due to its graduations and run f 1 reeond of arc. error shall not exceed f 1 second of arc. 5.4 The gtaticule line thickness shall be such that it subtends an angle one seeand of arc f25 percent at the objective of the telescope. 6. ACCE6SORIES 6.1 The following accessories eyepiece shall be provided with each theodolite: the of

4 Diagonal

Two (one for telescope and other for micrometer ) Three (dark green, and light blue ) One One One Two One One 8 light

b)

Dark glasses ( to be so designed as to fit on eyepiece without change of eyepiece adjustment ) Waterproof cover durable waterproof Plumb-bob Adjusting Cleaning spanner pins brush ( made material of )

green

4
4 f) g)

with adapter

plug

e) Tripod .h)

Screw driver

IS : 2976 - 1964
j) m) Oil bottle illuminating unit may One packet instruments may be provided Six One One One One One ( if desired Desiccating material which be reactivated (silicagel ) One One

k) Electrical

6.2 The following complementary by the indentors ):

4 Beacon lamps b) Centring rod Cl Compass ( desirable ) 4 Spare graticule e) Striding level f ) Subtense bar base plate g> Suitable

with a centring pin to enable observations from a pillar instead of a tripod tape fitted with longitudinal levels, with tripods and plumbbobs

One One

h) 3 Targets, .
7. TESTS

Levelling

Two

7.1 The theodolite external fault:
a) Loose,

shall

initially - be examined

for the following

possible

missing

or damaged

screws, nuts and other small parts;

broken or dirty object glass, eye lenses, bubble and b) Scratched, dark glasses, deterioration of balsam in the optical components; tribrach and c) Damage to telescope body, standards, eye cups, focussing heads, open sights and ray shades; damaged d) Bent or otherwise levelling screws; and e) Damage to general movement external and clamps, finish. associated controls shall be tested as slow motion trivet screws stage, and

7.2 The follows:

azimuth

the azimuth a) Tighten are properly secured. the movement should

clamp and see if the respective assemblies Release the clamp and rotate the alidade; be smooth.

the clamp and turn the slow motion screw in each b) Tighten The screw should turn smoothly and be free from any direction. 9

I6~t!2976-1964
play and backlash. The spring-loaded plunger should maintain the lug in firm contact with the screw whichever dire&on the screw is rotated. 7.3 The elevation as follows: movements and associated controls shall be tested

a) Tighten the telescope clamp and see that the telescope is properly secured. Release the clamp; the telescope shodd elevate or Friction of the trunnion bearings should be depress smoothly. just sufficient to maintain the telescope in any position. b) Tighten the clamp and turn the telescope slow motion screw in each direction. The screw should turn smoothly and be free from any play or backlash. The s ring-loaded plunger should maintain the lug in firm contact wit the screw whichever direction the screw is rotated.

R

7.4 The levelling screw assemblies shall be tested as follows: a) Turn all the levelling screws through their full range of movement, turning each one about half a turn at a time. Each screw should turn smoothly and be free fmm play or backlash in any position. b) The toes of the levelling screws should be held in firm contact with the trivet stage by spring plate or locking plate. 7.5 The centring movement shall be tested as follows: Tighten the clamp without using force; this should secure the theodolite firmly ,againt lateral movement. Release the clamp and it should be possible to slide the theodoljte late&v to any position within the limits -of the movement. The movement should be smooth in all positions. 7.6 The focussing movements shall be tested. as follows: a) Turn the telescope focussing head or collar through its full range. The movement should be sinooth and free from play or backlash. b) The telescope focussing eyepiece shoulul move smoothly and be free from play or- backlash. c) Focussing-eyepiece for the circle Ming microscope should mov; smoothly ad be free from play or backlash. 7.7 The tripod shU Parts* be dxaniined for stability, damage to legs and other

7.8 3%~ carrying use shall be exa&ned for the gcueral condition of the booI, binga, catihcs, locks, and Eerrying strap, internal fittings antI auxmork 10

IS : 2976- 1964 7.9 The mechanical examination of the theodolite shall be completed as follows: Mount the theodolite firmly on its tripod; direct and focus the telescope on to a distant object. Ensure that all clamps are tightened. Observe while gently twisting the tribrach in each direction. The cross wires shall move off the object but should spring back when the hands are removed. 7.10 To test that the tangent to the plate vial curve is normal vertical axis, proceed as under: to the

Make a rough levelling of the instrument with the tripod legs This will save time and also with the help of the circular bubble. Next proceed as follows: wear oxi the footscrew threads. a) Turn the plate so that the bubble is parallel to a line joining two of the footscrews; b) Turn these two screws in opposite directions until the bubble is in the exact centre of its run; c) Turn the plate through 90" to bring the bubble at right angles to its previous position and operate the third screw until the bubble If the bubble is displaced considerably, is once more centred. repeat (a), (b) and (c); and d) Now return to the first position and make whatever correction is necessary as at (a) above. Turn the plate through 180" and if the bubble moves away from the centre tangent to the curve of the bubble vial, it is not correctly set to the vertical axis of rotation. This may easily be adjusted by taking half the indicated error by means of the footscrews and half by, means of the adjusting screws or nuts of the bubble case. The above adjustment should be carried with the horizontal circular plate clamped. 7.11 TO test that the tangent to the altitude vial curve is normal to the vertical axis, proceed as follows: Having obtained verticality of the main axis of rotation, bring the altitude bubble to the centre of its run by means of the index setting screw, and relevel the instrument by this more sensitive bubble. 7.12 To eliminate parallax, proceed as follows: Focus the eyepiece on the cross wires by first screwing outwards and then inwards, until the cross wires are clearly focussed. Thi$ eyepiece setting will now be correct for objects at all distances. Pick up a distant object by means of the open sight and see that the inverted image of the same object is seen in the field of view of the telescope. Focus the image of the distant object until a movement of the eye 11

IS : 2976 - 1964
sideways ca.; . 10 appreciable relative movement between the image and the cross N-. ZS. This adjustment shall, of course, be made for every It shall be ensured that there is no parallax. object distance. 7.13 Collimation of the telescope shall be done as follows: The line of collimation is the line of sight of telescope, passing through the optical centre of the objective system and the point of intersection of the vertical and horizontal cross wires situated in the focal plane. The direction of this line will, therefore, depend on the position of the cross wires, and the latter should be adjusted until the line of sight is normal to the transit axis. It is also required t at the transit axis and the line of sight shall meet in a point and t 5:at The line of point shall lie on the prolongation of the vertical axis. collimation, as the telescope is turning, sweeps out a plane normal to the transit axis, and if the latter is !lorizontal, it is coincident with the vertical axis of rotation. 7.14 After the instrument has been tested and adjusted in the manner prescribed in 7.1 to 7.13, it should be subjected to the following tests to ascertain the accuracy of the adjustments: a) To test for collimation in azimuth: ( that is the plane of vision through the vertical line is perpendicular to the transit axis ). 1) Diiect the telescope to sdme*small clearly defined object situated 60 to 90 metres away, and by means of the slow motion screws, cause the vertical cross wire to bisect it. Let this point be X; 2) Transit the telescope, and observe the exact position of the same wire upon au object ( for example, a staff held horizontally) situated at about the same distance and level, but in Let this reading be3T; opposite direction. 3) Turn the upper part of the instrument through approximately 180" to sight X again; and 4) Transit the telescope, and note where the vertical cross wire now appears with reference to 2Y Let this point be Y. If Y and Y' coincide, the collimation is correct. 1~) Tc, test collimation in azimuth by reference to the horizontal circle: I) Set the circle to read zero on the horizontal circle, and sight a distant target X; and 2) Turn the alidade exactly through 180", as indicated by the circle; transit the telescope to bring the target on the horizontal wire. The vertical wire will now be at Y. If there is no error, X and rshall
circle.

coincide. and mounting the

NOTE-This

method

assumes the absence of errors in dividing

12

I!3 : 2976- 1964 7.14.1 A repetition of either of the tests given in 7.14 on a near object should give results which correspond with those obtained on a distant object. Any discrepancy would be due to the lack of parallelism of the sides along which the focussing lens is translated with the line of collimation. Only the vertical cross wire shall be used for these tests.
a) Test for collimation in altitude ( for all focussing distances ): 1) Direct the telescope to some small clearly defined object situated 60 to 90 metres away and make the horizontal cross wire coincide with the target; 2) Set up a vertical scale at the nearest focussing distance, and without unclamping in altitude, read against the point of intersection of the horizontal wire; 3) Transit the telescope and rotate it through 180' and bring the horizontal cross wire on to the distant point and close the altitude clamp; and 4) Refocus the scale, and again read the point of intersection, The absence of coincidence in the two readings indicates error. b) To check centring altitude bubble: of the vertical circle and alignment of the

1) Check the verticality of the axis before proceeding further; 2) Adjust the altitude bubble and set the zero of the vertical circle exactly against the zero of the micrometer using the slow motion screw; 3) Sight on a staff held vertically at such a distance that it can be accurately read, and take the reading (A) of the horizontal cross wire; 4) Release the clamp screw, transit the telescope and again set the zer'o or 180" of the circle exactly to the zero of the micrometer; and 5) Turn the hand of the instrument through 180" in azimuth and again read the staff (B). If the readings are the same, the index setting is correct, c)

Optical Plummet - Direct the optical plummet against a cross marked on the ground. When the alidade is rotated in azimuth through 360", the cross should always be seen in the centre of the plummet.

7.15 Climatic and Durability Tests - These tests are type approval tests and shall be carried out only when agreed to between the manufacturers and the purchasers. These are not to be used in routine testing for performance of instrument during bulk production, although these may be used for control testing of batch samples by arrangement between the manufacturer and the purchaser. The tests shall be carried out in accordance with

13

183297611964 IS : 2352-1963*. The outline of tests and degree of severity shall be as given below or as agreed to between the manufacturer and the purchaser.
theodolite shall be put in the rain chamber with 7.15.1 Rain Test -The The water taps on, and allowed to remain there for at least 10 minutes. spray shall be adjusted to represent a heavy shower of rain. No damage should be done to any part of the instrument ineluding its telescope, the interior of which should not show any sign of moisture. 7.15.2 Vibration Tat-The theodolite in its case shall be clamped on vibrating table giving approximately 450 vibrations per minute with an amplitude of 3 mm, for a period of 5 minutes. The direction of the The vibrations should be parallel to the line of sight of the telescope. telescope should be in correct adjustment after this test. 7.153 Joltiag Test - The theodolite housed in its case shall be held in a vertical position and dropped over from a height of 300 mm on to a The 225-mm layer of sand contained in a box and covered with a cloth. telescope shall be in correct adjustment after this test. 8. ACCURACY REQ-MENTS 8.1 The following accuracies Sl are expected in an ordinary theodolitez

Test
Diopter scale f@5

Eqkcted Accuracy D

NO.
1 2 Definition Should be very good at least for the 2/3 of the field of view in the centre and fair elsewhere According to IS : 1632-196Ot ,, ,, 1 second 1 second Combined error 1 second

3 4 5 6 7 8 9

Azimuth bubble sensitivityt ( 20" 1 AI ti tude bubble sensitivityt (20") Bubble spacing? ( 2 mm div ) Dividing of circles Dividing of verniers Circles for concentricity and misplacement of vernier Perpendicularity of cross lines

Line thickness of graticule

l Pracedkre for bmic climatic and durability tats for optical inatruntentr. tSrr IS : 1632-1960 Spccikation for hbbla.
14

IS : 2976 -

1964

Sl
A-0.
10 Collimations

Test

Expected Accuracy

i) Ref to distant object ( in 7 ) f 10 seconds azimuth ) ii) Ref to horizontal circle J iii) All focussing ( in azi- 1 0.75 muth ) > iv) All focussing ( in altitude ) J Of 11 12 Adjustment of the vertical circ!e index and altitude bubble Concentricity of the trunnion axis and fitting carrying altitude bubble Sighting vane mm
fbcus

between
and distant

nearest
object

point

f 10 seconds

4 division of bubble 10 minutes

spacing

13

9. WEIGHT 9.1 The weight of the theodolite shall not be more than 8 kg. shall not exceed

9.2 The weight of the metal container of the theodolite 3 kg and the weight bf the tripod shall not exceed 6 kg. 10. MARKING

tripod and other attachments, which are packed 10.1 Theodolite, The maker's name or trade-mark separately, shall be suitably numbered. and the year of manufacture, if desired by the purchaser, shall be legibly and indelibly marked on each instrument and their container. 10.2 The theodolite and ISI Certification Mark. its attachments may also be marked with the

'

NOTE- The use of the IS1 Certification Mark is governed by the provisiona of the Indian Standards Institution ( Certification Marks ) Act, and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. Presence of this mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard, under a well-defined system of inspection, testing and quality control during production. This system, which is devised and supervisrd by IS1 and operated by the producer, has the further safeguard that the products as actually marketed are continuously checked by IS1 for conformity to the standard. Details of conditions, under which a licence for the use of the ISI Certilication Mark may be granted to manufacturers or processors, may be obtained from the Indian Standards Institution.
11. PACKING container shall be provided for protecting the theodo-

11.1 A light metal lite.

15

l6r2376-1964 11.2 A convenient carrying device, which may be preferably slung on the back, for the theodolite with the container shall be provided. 11.3 A padded wooden box with locking arrangement for transporting the theodolite over long distances.
shall be provided

11.4 The metal container and the padded wooden box shall be so designed that the theodolitc may be fitted only in one position. 11.5 Attachments and any accessories, which cannot be accommodated with the theodolite or the tripod, shall be suitably packed separately. 11.6 An instruction booklet containing the broad features of the instrument, the reading devices, the system of adjustments, and the like shall be provided with each theodolite.

16

