**************** 



-k t^^ 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11430 (1985) : Code of practice for the packaging of ball 
and roller bearings [TED 24: Transport Packages] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y>K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



Indian Standard 



\Bi 11430' 13S& 

( Reaffirmed 2004 ) 



CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR THE PACKAGING OF 

BALL AND ROLLER BEARJNGS 



UDC 621 '798 : 621*82288 : 006-76 




(g) Copyright \QS6 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZATAR MAHti 

NEW DELUJ IIOCNJS 



rS: 11430 -1985 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR THE PACKAGING OF 

BALL AND ROLLER BEARINGS 

Packaging of Engineering Goods Sectional Committee, MCPD 19 

Chairman Representing 

Capt p. K. Sen The Shipping Corporation of India Limited, Bombay 

Members 
Shbi R. p. Aoarwaj> The Association of Small Tool Mfrs, Madras 

Shri R, J. Agarwal ( Alternate ) 
Shri p. G. Deshmxtkh Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay 

Shri P. L. Nagarsekar ( Alternate ), 
Shri D. P. Ghosh Ministry of Defence ( PGI ) 

Shri Nibmal Singh ( Alternate ) 
Shbi Guruswamy -Development Commissioner, Small Scale Industries, 

New Delhi 
Capt A. W. Kirtikar The Scindia Steam Navigation Company Limited, 

Bombay 
Shri T. M, Obhan Indian Federation of Transport Operator's, Bombay 

Shri Habkirat Singh Kohli 
( Alternate ) 
Shut R., C. Palhak Export Inspection Council of India, New Delhi 

Shri S. C Goel ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. R. Parakjape Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd, Vadodara 

Shri M. M. Piplani The Shipping Corporation of India Limited, Bombay 

Shbi V, P. Pxjnj Engineering Export Promotion Council, Calcutta 

Shri R, N. Saxena Railway Board ( Ministry of Railways ), New Delhi 

Shri P. D. Shah Federation of Corrugated Box Manufacturers of 

India, Bombay 
Skri Skeslog AoMeks ( Alternate ) 
Shri B. L. Raina, Director General, ISI ( Ex-qfficio Member ) 

Director ( MCPD ) 

Secretary 

Shri S. P. Abbey 
Joint Director ( MPCD ), ISI 



© Copyright 1986 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Mian Copyright Act {^W of 1957 ) and 
reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the 
publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act, 



IS ! 11430 - 1965 

Indian Standard 

CODE OF 

PRACTICE FOR THE PACKAGING OF 

BALL AND ROLLER BEARINGS 

0, FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 11 October 1985, after the draft finalized by the Packaging 
of Engineering Goods Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 

0.2 Proper packaging is an essential requirement for protection of 
contents against transport, handling and storage hazards. Rolling bear- 
ings are precision components v^^hich must be protected to keep them fit 
for use at the ultimate destination. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This code of practice lays down guidelines for the packaging of 
rolling bearings, 

2. PRE-PACKING PRESERVATION AND LUBRICATION 

2.1 All bearings and bearing parts shall be thoroughly cleaned with 
kerosene and rubbed dry prior to the application of the preservative. 

2.2 During and after cleaning, care shall be taken to prevent handling 
in a manner which may result in contamination of the surfaces of the 
bearings or bearing parts, with any foreign matter, particularly, 
perspiration. 

2.3 Properly cleaned bearings or bearing parts, except those pre- 
lubricated, shall be protected by a suitable preservative. The preservative 
shall be applied in such a manner as to produce a uniform and 
continuous coating on all surfaces. 

2.3.1 Pre- lubricated Bearings — Exterior surfaces of pre-lubricated bear- 
ings shall be coated with the same lubricant as used to pre-iubricate the 
bearings. Other suitable preservative which is not deleterious to the 
lubricant already employed may also be used. 



IS : 11430 - 1985 

2.4 Under proper storage conditions, the anti-corrosive treatment given 
to bearings shall be effective for at least 12 months in order to ensure 
satisfactory functioning of the rolling bearings, unless otherwise required 
by the purchaser. For proper storage conditions, the purchaser may 
consult the manufacturer. 

3. PACKAGING 

3.1 The bearings for retail outlets shall be packed individually in unit 
cardboard or duplex board cartons. The bearings shall be wrapped in 
grease-proof paper or a LDPE bag to protect them from moisture. 
These unit packs shall be packed in retail cartons made of fibreboard or 
tin. Recommended materials for the packaging of bearings are as 
under: 

a) For primary packing — greaseproof paper conforming to 
IS : 6622-1972* or plastic packs made of LDPE films covered in 
IS : 2508-1984t. 

b) Cartons — tin cans conforming to IS : 21 34- 1981 J or fibreboard 
boxes conforming to IS : 2771 ( Part 1 )-1977§ or IS : 2771 
( Part 2 )-1975||. Composite containers may also be used. 

c) External shipping container — wooden boxes or crates conforming 
to IS : 1503-19791 or IS : 307M981**. 

3.2 For proper identification, the packages shall always carry suitable 
labels, 

3.3 In a multiple packing unit, beaiings of the same designation shall be 
packed. 

3.4 Collective package may be used for a number of packs in a common 
bigger container, provided a separately packed unit products can be 
identified easily by means of the labels. 

3.5 T_he external dim.ensions of the package shall conform to IS : 8470- 
1977tt to permit utilization for easy handling in transportation. 

3.6 The number of items in one case shall be such that the gross mass 
does not exceed 50 kg. The sizes of wooden cases may be suitably 
selected from IS : 1503-1979^. 



*Specification for greaseproof paper. 

fSpecification for low density polyethylene films ( second revision ). 
jSpecification for round tins for general purposes { second revision ). 
§Specification for fibreboard boxes: Part I Corrugated fibreboard boxes (first 
revision ) . 

llSpecification for fibreboard boxes: Part 2 Solid fibreboard boxes {first revision ). 
^Specification for wooden packing cases ( second revision ). 
♦♦Specification for wooden crates {first revision ). 
tJ-Dimensions of rigid rectangular transport packages. 



IS : 11430 - 1985 

3.7 For selection of proper cushioning materials to be used in packing 
cases, the guidelines given in IS ; 10106 ( Part 3/Sec' 1 )-1984* shall be 
followed. 

3.8 Packing cases shall be sealed by means of suitable tensional strap- 
ping. 

4. TESTING 

4.1 The packed cases or boxes shall be subjected to the following type 
test as per the requirements prescribed. 

4.1.1 Drop Test — To be tested for drop resistance on two adjacent 
sides as well as on one edge and two diagonally opposite corners from a 
height of one metre in accordance with the procedure given in IS : 7028 
( Part4)-I973t. 

5. PACKAGE MARKING 

5.1 The unit packages shall be marked clearly and legibly with the 
following information: 

a) Manufacturer's name or trade-mark, 

b) Designation of the bearings, 

c) Code indicating the date of manufacture, and 

d) Quantity. 

5.2 The exterior shipping container shall be marked with: 

a) customer's name aiid station; 

b) customer's purchase order; 

c) case number; and 

d) colour code, if any, specified by the customer. 



♦Packaging code: Part 3 Ancillary materials, Section 1 Cushioning materials. 
tPerformance tests for complete, filled transport packages: Part 4 Vertical impact 
drops tests. 



