**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 13826-4 (1993) : Bitumen based felts - Method of test. 
Part 4: Pressure head test [CED 41: Waterproofing and 
Damp-Proofing] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 13826 (Part 4) : 1993 

( Reaffirmed 2003 ) 

Indian Standard 

BITUMEN BASED FELTS — METHODS 

OF TEST 

PART 4 PRESSURE HEAD TEST 



UDC 691-165 : 620-173 



© BIS 1993 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 

.September 1993 Price Groap 1 



Water-proofing and Damp-proofing Sectional Committee, CED 41 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Water-proofing and Damp-proofing Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil 
Engineerirg Division Council. 

Bitumen felts may be of different types depending upon the raw material used and their cons- 
truction. IS 1322; 1993 'Specification for bitumen felts for water proofing and damp-proofing 
{fourth revision )' and IS 7193 : 1993 ^Specification for glass fibre base coal tar pitch and bitumen felts 
( first revision )\ covers bitumen felts of hessian based and glass fibre base respectively. The above 
standards require amongst other requirements, detailed testing of these products. Various methods 
of test relating to each product for determination of physical properties have been included in the 
separate standards. All types of felts have to satisfy some common essential physical requirements 
for which methods of test are same. A series of standards covering methods of test have therefore 
been formulated to cover the determination of various physical requirements of bitumen ielt. 
This standard covers pressure head test. Other parts of the standard are as follows: 

Part 1 Breaking strength test 

Part 2 Pliability test 

Part 3 Storage sticking test 

Part 5 Heat resistance test 

Part 6 Water absorption test 

Part 7 Determination of binder content 

The composition of the technical committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is 
given in Annex A. 

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the 
final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off 
in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 'Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)'. The number 
of significant places retained in the rounded oflF value should be the same as that of the specified, 
value in this standard. 



IS 13826 ( Part 4 ) : 199S 



Indian Standard 



BITUMEN BASED FELTS — METHODS 

OF TEST 



PART 4 PRESSURE HEAD TEST 



1 SCOPE 



This standard ( Part 4 ) covers the method for 
determination of any leakage under a constant 
pressure head of water. 

2 REFERENCE 

The Indian Standard IS 4911 : 1986 'Glossary of 
terms relating to bituminous water-proofing and 
damp-proofing of building' is necessary adjunct 
to this standard. 

3 TERMINOLOGY 

3.0 For the purpose of this standard, the defini- 
tions given in IS 4911 : 1986, shall apply. 

4 APPARATUS 

4.1 An arrangement to put a circular test piece 
of dia 200 mm under a constant pressure head of 
^ater of 300 mm ( for a typical arrangement of 
the apparatus, see Fig. 1 ). 



HA.ND WMEtL~7 




UJ 



Fig. 1 Arrangement for Pressure Head Test 



4.2 An arrangement to condition the sample at 
a temperature of 5°C and 65 ± 2°C. 

5 PROCEDURE 

5.1 Preparation of Test Pieces 

Six test pieces, at least 200 mm in diameter, shall 
be cut from each of the samples selected in such 
a manner that when the test piece is clamped 
down, a part of it is always extending beyond 
the clamping plate. 

5.2 Conditioning 

a) Three test pieces shall be conditioned for 
3 h at 65 ± 2^C. 

b) Three test pieces shall be conditioned at 
S^'C or lower temperature as per require- 
ment for 3 h and immediately tested. 

5.3 Procedure 

Test pieces conditioned as explained in 5.2 
shall be placed one by one as shown in Fig. 1 
and shall be subjected to constant pressure head 
of 300 mm high and checked periodically for 
any leakage for one hour. 

6 REPORTING 

Reporting shall include the following: 

a) Date of testing, 

b) Type of conditioning, and 

c) Observation. 



IS 13826 ( Part 4 ): 1993 



ANNEX A 

( Foreword ) 

COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 

Water-Proofing and Damp-Proofing Sectional Committee, CED 41 



Chairman 
Prof M. S. Shetty 



Representing 
In Personal Capacity ( No^ 4^ Sapan Bang, Near Empress Garden ), 
Pune 411001 
Members 
Capt Ashok Shastry 

Shri S. K. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri T. Chaudhury 

Shri B. Mandal ( Alternate) 
Director (Design ) 
"Shri D. C. Goel 
Shri A. K. Gupta 

Shri D. Moudgil ( Alternate ) 
Shri A. K. GupTA 

Shri K. Rajgopalan ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. B. Jayawant 
-Shri Moiz S. Kagdi 

Shri Suren M. Thakker ( Alternate ) 
1Shri M. K. Kanchan 

Shri K. D. Narula ( Alternate ) 
Brig V. K. Kanitkar 

Shri C. S. S. Rao ( Alternate ) 
Shri M. H. Khatri 

Shri A. Bose ( Alternate ) 
Shri Y, P. Kapoor 

Shri V. Natrajan ( Alternate ) 
Shri H, C. Matai 
Shri M, M. Mathai 
Shri R. D. Nayak 

Shri P. C. Srivastava ( Alternate ) 
Col D. V. Padsalgikar ( Retd) 
Shri R. P. Punj 

Shri A. K. Sen ( Alternate) 
Shri Ravi Wig 

Shri K. K. Madhok {Alternate ) 
Shri T. K. Roy 

Shri B. B. Banerjee ( Alternate ) 
Shri Samir Surlaker 

Shri Jayant Deogaonkar ( Alternate ) 
Shri R. Sarabeswar Integrated Water-proofing Ltd, Madras 

Sr Deputy Chief Engineer Public Works Department, Government of Tanail Nadu 

SupTDG Engineer ( Madras Circle ) 
( Alternate ) 
Shri A. Shariff FGP Ltd. Bombay 

Shri D. Kushwaha ( Alternate ) 
Shri J. S. Sharma Central Building Research Institute ( CSIR ), Roorkee 

Shri R. S. Rawat ( Alternate ) 
Shri Sramal Sengupta Project and Development India Ltd. Dhanbad 

Shri U. R. P. Sinha ( Alternate ) 



Osnar Chemical Pvt Ltd, Bombay 

National Test House ( ER ), Calcutta 

National Building Organization, New Delhi 
Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 

Metro Railway, Calcutta 

Synthetic Asphalts, Bombay 

Polyseal India Engineering Centre, Bombay 

Central Public Works Department, CDO 

Engineer-in-Chief s Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delhi 

Overseas Water-Proofing Corporation Ltd. Bombay 

Fosroc India Ltd, Bangalore 

Building Material & Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 

Cempire Corporation, Madras 

Bharat Prtroleum Corporation Ltd, Bombay 

B. G. Shirke&Co, Pune 

Lloyd Bitumen Products Pvt Ltd, Calcutta 

MES Builders Association of India, New Delhi 

STP Ltd, Calcutta 

MC-Bauchmic ( India ) Ltd, Bombay 



Standard Mark 

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on 
products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced 
to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, 
testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the pro- 
ducer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to 
that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a icence for the use 
of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from 
the Bureau of Indian Standards. 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institutione stablished under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of 
goods and atten ding to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications maybe reproduced in 
any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in 
the course of implementing the standard, of necessary detlails, such as symbols and sizes, type or 
grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are 
also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review 
indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken 
up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the 
latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of *BIS Handbook' and 'Standards 
Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard May be sent to BIS giving the following 
reference : 

Doc : No. CED 41 (5141) 

Amendments Issued Since Publication- . 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

( Common to all OflBices ) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 



Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
NEW DELHI 110002 



f331 01 31 
1331 13 75 



Eastern : 1/14 C, I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola f37 84 99, 37 85 61 



f37 
CALCUTTA 700054 \37 86 26, 37 86 62 

Northern : SCO 445-446, Sector 35-C. CHANDIGARH 160036 \^l ^^ ^^' ^^ ^^ "^^ 

{53 23 84 

Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113 IP^ ^^ J^» ^35 04 42 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) r632 92 95, 632 78 58 



16 



BOMBAY 400093 (.632 78 91 632 78 92 

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL, BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. 



Printed at Paragon Enterprises, Deltii, India. 



