IS 13908 : 1993 (Reaffirmed 2003)

?Tpr

EpTf VT-T sfkd - m$Gk m TKf&-FT T&T - FTM f-m
0

Tpft

Indian Standard

AIRCRAFTUNITLOADDEVICES-LOADING ANDSECURINGCARGO-GUIDELINES
UDC 621'869.427'5 : 656'7'073

0

BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

.

December

1993

Price Group 2

Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee,

HMD 13

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Air Cargo Handling Sectional Committee had been approved by the Heavy Mechanical Engineering Division Council. The purpose of this standard is to provide guidelines for making proper use of aircraft unit load devices, so that the maximum safe handling of cargo and equipment is obtained. It is of utmost importance that the very stringent conditions for aircraft equipment and safety are satisfied at all times. For this, it is necessary that all personnel involved in the preparation of these loads be properly instructed and trained. In preparing this standard, assistance has been derived from the following publications: ULD Technical Manual, Section III - `Loading requirements', issued by the International Transport Association ( IATA ).

Air

for interlining of ULD's: ULD Technical Manual, IATA 50/O - `Condition requirements Part II Acceptance standards for the interchange of alrcraft unit load devices', issued by the International Air Transport Association ( IATA ). For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the Enal value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

IS 13908 : 1993

Indian Standard

AIRCRAFT UNIT LOAD DEVICES -.- - LOADING AND SECURING CARGO - GUIDELINES
`I SCOPE .This standard provides guidelines -and securing cargo in aircraft unit ( ULD's). .2 REFERENCES The Indian Standards listed below are necessary adjuncts to this standard:
litle IS No. 7073 Glossary of terms ( Part 1 ) : 1973 air cargo pallets tainers : Part 1 pallets Glossary of terms 7073 ( Part 2 ) : 1983 air cargo pallets tainers : Part 2 containers

4.3 Nets for loading load devices 4.3.1 The net is an integral part of the aircraft restraint system; the pallet and net(s) are approved by the airworthiness authority as one unit, therefore only those nets approved with specified pallets shall be`used together. 4.3.2 Each fitting for attaching the net to the pallet is to take certain loads. Therefore, all fittings shall be secured to their corresponding place on the pallet. 4.3.3 Each package comprising the load shall be secured by the net(s) and prevented from breaking loose in any way. After the net has been placed over the load and fitted to the pallet edge member, it shall be tensioned firmly in all directions. However, tensioning shall not bend the pallet. Special consideration shall be given to securing low profile loads. 4.3.4 Loaded pallets are often exposed to the weather, awaiting loading or in transit. A waterproof sheeting shall, therefore, be placed over the whole load top and sides underneath the net(s) to prevent wet damage. 4.4 Igloos 4.4.1 Igloos are intended to protect the interior of aircraft from damage and to provide a framework container into which cargo can be loaded. When not in use they shall be kept on a pallet on a properly supported surface. 4.4.2 A net non-structural shall always be used to secure a igloo to the pallet.

relating to and conAir cargo relating to and conAir cargo

11437 : 1985

Ground equipment requirements for compatibility with air craft unit load devices

3 TERMINOLOGY For the purpose of this standard, the terms and definitions laid down in IS 7073 (Part 1 ) : 1973 and IS 7073 ( Part 2 ) : 1983 shall apply. 4 USE OF EQUIPMENT 4.1 General Aircraft pallets, nets, igloos and containers are an integral part of the aircraft and shall be designed and manufactured to very exacting standards. The following guidelines shall be complied to make the best use of the volume and weight capabilities of the units and at the same time, to make them last for a longer period. All loading and handling operations of units shall be carried out with reasonable care to ensure inllight safety, reliability and maximum equipment life. 4.2 Pallets Loaded pallets shall always be fully supported at its base with roller sections, ball mats or inverted casters. If insufficient support is provided, the pallet will break or bow to an extent of permanent deflection so that it will not fit into the aircraft. The recommended minimum acceptable support criteria during ground handiing of fully loaded pallets shall be as laid down in IS 11437 : 1985.

4.4.3 The contents in the igloo shall be properly secured to prevent load shifting. High density items shall be individually secured with tie-down, stowage or dunnage. 4.5 Containers (Aircraft Type) 4.5.1 Containers shall be provided base support as specified in 4.2. with proper

4.5.2 Maximum weight per container is inscribed on the container marking plate. This shall not be exceeded and the maximum shelf weight limit shall also be observed. Maximum loading densities for the floor shall not be exceeded (see 7 ). 5 MAXIMUM ACCEPTABLE WEIGHT OF ULDs All aircrafts have structural GROSS . limitations which

IS 13908 : 1993

determine the maximum In addition, each ULD limitation ( see 7 ). 6 SRRVICEABILITY

weights acceptable. has a floor loading

missing door securing and operating mechanisms. Where internal shelves are used they shall be examined for damaged or missing attachment and locking devices. 6.3.2 Sandwich Structures When not otherwise specifically mentioned, sandwich laminated structures shall nut exhibit separation or delamination in excess of 152 mm. There shall not be more than 2 damaged areas in any 1 500 mm length of panel. 6.3.3 Base ( or Pallet ) An unladen pallet sitting on a flat surface shall not bow to the extent that the edge rail bottom corner would be more than 51 mm above the surface. This dimension will be average of two points directly opposite each other. The top surface of the pallet edge rail shall be not more than 32 mm above the conveying surface when in the loaded condition. There shall be no missing, cracked worn or otherwise damaged restraint or handling provisions. 6.3.4 Body Wall panels shall not have punctures in excess of 25 mm diameter. A puncture shall not be less than 305 mm from another area of damage. There shall not be more than two damaged areas in any 1 500 mm length of panel. Roof panel shall have no punctures distortion is permitted beyond normal shape. and no external

LIMITS

Aircraft unit load devices shall conform to the following Serviceability Limit. If there is any doubt on the serviceability of a unit, a licensed aircraft engineer shall be consulted on its acceptance for service. All damaged equipments ' shall be returned for repair. 6.1 Pallets 6.1.1 Limits Applicable to All Pallets The pallet shall be examined for gouges, depressions, delaminated or dented panels, cracked edge rails or missing corners and rivets. Edge a> rails are not acceptable if there are any cracks, missing corners, or missing/ broken net attachment points.

b) An unladen pallet sitting on a flat surface

shall not bow to the extent that the edge rail bottom corner would be more than 51 mm above the surface. This dimension will be an average of two points directly opposite each other.

cl The top surface of the pallet edge rail

shall be more than 32 mm above the conveying surface when in the loaded condition. worn or hand-

4 There shall be no missing, cracked,
or otherwise damaged restraint ling provisions. Igloo

6.2 Non-structural

The igloo shell is not subject to airworthiness requirements but is always used in conjunction with aircraft pallet and net. The shell shall be examined for cracks, holes and damaged hardware and shall conform to the following requirements: The shell shall not have large splits or punctures which would allow ingress of water or collapse of rigid contour shape.

Structural framework shall be free from cracks and permanent distortion. Minor indentations are permissible. There shall be no loose or missing rivets, screws, or other attaching devices. in the framework. 6.3.5 Doors Door panels shall not be distorted so that the safe and secure closing and latching of the door is affected, or so that when latched they bow beyond the normal external shape. There shall not be any damaged or missing door catches, hinge mechanisms or other restraint devices used to secure that door in a closed and latched position. Door panels shall not have punctures completely through in excess of 25 mm diameter. Punctures shall not be less than 305 mm from any other area of damage. There shall not be more than two damaged areas in any one panel. 3

b) The shell shall not exhibit any damage
causing protrusions external contour. outside the established

4 Some damaged or missing shell to pallet

attachments are permitted provided the shell position on the pallet is maintained by the remaining attachments to ensure proper contour clearances.

6.3 Aircraft Container 6.3.1 General Examination The container shall be examined for punctures, distorted or delaminated panels and damaged or

IS 13908 :1993
6.3.6 Interior Shelves

The shelves shall be free from cracks, skins shall not be delaminated from the core areas or exhibit separation from shelf edge member. There shall not be any damaged or missing shelf attachment or locking devices. Permanent distortion or bowing of shelves shall not be such that safe attachment or locking of the shelves is impaired. 6.3.7 Corner Fiftings Missing, cracked, worn loose or damaged fittings are not acceptable. 7 LOADING PREPARATION 7.1 When stacking cargo, spread load evenly over the entire floor of unit load device and ensure that the heavy items are at the bottom and lighter items above to prevent crushing. Delicate or exposed extremities of machinery shall be protected from other cargo. Because of the requirement to secure net fittings into the edge of the pallet, cargo shall not be placed within approximately 50 mm of the outside edge of the pallet. otherwise

7.2 Pallet load shall conform to the contour of the aircraft fuselage. The load shall, therefore, be either built-up within a loading gauge or passed through it before netting down. The gauge will allow only the narrowest clearance of the aircraft structure, therefore, no tolerance on the contour can be permitted. 7.3 Consignments for interline transfer will have to conform to the weight and contour restrictions of each carrier concerned. 7.4 Container/Pallet tags identifying the unit load device shall be completed and securely fastened. 7.5 The floor loading limitations of pallets. and bases vary considerably. When the established maximum floor loading is exceeded, the items of cargo concerned shall be loaded onto wooden boards (spreaders) to distribute the weight over a greater area. If spreaders are used, ensure that they satisfactorily distribute the weight within the established limits. Floor loading shall be checked as follows. Divide weight of article by total area of contact between article and floor ( pallet or container base ).

3

Standard Mark Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to Details of conditions under which a licence for the use that standard as a further safeguard. of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards. The use of the Standard
Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations

I

I

I

Bureau of Indian Standards IBIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standurds Act, 2986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all any form without the prior the course of implementing grade designations. Enquiries Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Dot : HMD 13 ( 0965 ) Amendments Amend No. Issued Since Publication Date of Issue! Text Affected its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications ), BIS.

BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 75

OF INDIAN

STANDARDS

Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) Telephone

Regional Offices: Central
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg

NEW DELHI

110002

t 331 01 31 331 13 75 37 84 99, 37 86 26, I 53 38 43, 53 23 84 235 02 16, 235 15 19, ( 632 92 95, 632 78 91, 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 632 78 92

Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH
: C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road,

160036 600113

Southern

MADRAS

Western g Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 40093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR, LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Paragon Enterprises, Delhi, India

NO. 1 MAY 1998 TO IS 13908 : 1993 AIRCRAFI' UNIT LOAD DEVICES LOADING AND SECURING CARGO - GUIDELINES [ Page2, clause 6.1.1(c)] -Substitute the following for the existing:
`c) The top surface of the pallet edge rail shall not be more than 32 mm above the conveying surface when in the loaded condition.'
(Page 2, cZause 6.35 ) -Insert the following matter at the end:

AMENDMENT

`Alternately, flexible doors can be used for containers in view of flexibility, tightness and avoidance of door closing which can occur due to door panel distortion. Flexible doors are made of highly tear-resistant plastic fabric stiffened by hollow square of section extrusions and steel wire cables. The steel wire cables support the door diagonally across the door area. Locks are inserted into the stiffener at the lower end. There shall be no damage to diagonal cables or attaching hardware. Flexible doors shall be examined for the following: 1) Door cover - There shall be no holes or cuts in the fabric. 2) Door stiffener beam: a) There shall be no holes or cracks on the door stiffener, b) Maximum deformation must not exceed the container outside section; and c) Latch bolt or lock pin or any of their attaching rivet shall not be :__*___ _..ueLcL;LIvc. >_P__AZ_._ rlusslllg or.

Reprography Unit, BIS,NewDelhi, India

