**************** 



*■ fe^K 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live" 



(2001): Plastics - Vocabulary [PCD 12: Plastics] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New' 



■K^y / 1 juaaaws^fea rs^^TTF^ 



2*S< W I *>S*V2^NK^ 



^frcvvv^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



?TR TJ^ ^TT teMHI | ^t ^Wt ^m\ ^f ^TT ^T^?TT \' 

Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
"Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




.^^_ 



• 




BLANK PAGE 



*rt*2V^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472: 1999 



( Wen iprftem ) 

Indian Standard 

PLASTICS — VOCABULARY 

( First Revision ) 



ICS 83.080:01;01.040.83 



© BIS 2001 

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI 110002 



July 2001 Price Rs 500.QQ 



Plastics Sectional Committee, PCD 12 



FOREWORD 

This Indian Standard (First Revision) which is identical with ISO 472:1999 'Plastics — Vocabulary* 
issued by the International Organization for Standardization was adopted by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards on the recommendation of the Plastics Sectional Committee and approval of the 
Petroleum, Coal and Related Products Division Council. 

This standard was first published in 1964 under the title 'Glossary of terms used in the plastics 
industry'. As the industry was progressed manifolds since then, a need was felt to revise the standard 
to bring in newer terms. This standard has been prepared with a view to eliminate the ambiguity 
arising from different interpretation of terms used in plastic trade and industry and to establish a 
generally recognized usage. These considerations led the Committee to revise the standard so as to 
align the same with corresponding International Standard namely, ISO 472:1999 'Plastics — 
Vocabulary* under dual numbering system. Consequently, the title of the standard has also been 
modified as 'Plastics — Vocabulary'. Since the International Standard is bilingual, only the English 
version has been retained in this standard. 

The text of ISO standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without 
deviations. Certain conventions are, however, not identical to those used in Indian Standards. 
Attention is particularly drawn to the following: 

a) Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear referring to this standard they should be 
read as 'Indian Standard'. 

b) Comma (,) has been used a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, the current practice is 
to use a point (.) as the decimal marker. 

In this standard, Index of alphabetic list of French synonyms with corresponding preferred term 
(P 182-185), Index of all French terms, with English equivalents (P 186-198), Index of all English 
terms, with Russian equivalents (P 199-217) and Index of Russian terms with English equivalents 
(P 218-232) as given in ISO 472:1999 have been left out. 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



Indian Standard 

PLASTICS — VOCABULARY 

( First Revision ) 



1 Scope 

This International Standard defines terms used in the 
plastics industry, in English and French. The terms are 
listed alphabetically in English with definitions, and 
facing the French terms with definitions. 

All terms are listed in a French-English index and, 
when available, in English-Russian and Russian- 
English indexes in normal word order; some terms are 
also listed in reverse word order. 

When a term has one or more synonyms, the syn- 
onymous terms follow the preferred term. Further- 
more, the synonyms are listed in the correct order of 
the alphabetical enumeration. Deprecated terms are 
indicated by "(deprecated)". The sign -> is used after a 
term without definition to indicate where the definition 
may be found. 



The abbreviation "cf." indicates, that the user may 
refer to another term (not a synonym), definition or 
note which contains information related to the term 
following the sign. 

NOTE 1 For terms involving olefins, the (scientific) name 
approved by IUPAC is given in square brackets following 
the name used commonly in the plastics industry, for 
example polyethylene [polyethene]. 

NOTE 2 IUPAC rules for source-based names of polymers 
specify that when "poly** is followed by more than one word 
enclosing marks are used. The IUPAC practice is followed 
in this International Standard. In common use, the enclosing 
marks are often omitted. 

NOTE 3 Some terms in this International Standard have 
information added, in parenthesis, to indicate specific limi- 
tation of the term to a particular field. 

NOTE 4 In the English text, terms are indicated to be 
M noun", •Verb" or "adjective". 

NOTE 5 The sign -► means: for definition, refer to. 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



2 Terms and definitions 



absolute modulus, I A/I, (Pa) 
absolute compliance, Id, (Pa~ 1 ) 



|a/| = Vm 



*0 



a 

where 

a is the maxihium stress 
£q is the maximum strain 

NOTE The measurement may be in tension, shear, bulk 
compression or longitudinal compression. 

EXAMPLE Absolute value of complex shear modulus 

kr|=<r=V<72+c"2 (Pa) 



acrylic plastic 

plastic based on polymers made with acrylic acid or a 
structural derivative of acrylic acid, or their copolymers 
with other monomers, the acrylic monomer(s) being in 
the greatest amount by mass 



acrylonitrile/butadiene/styrene plastic 
ABS plastic 

plastic based on terpolymers and/or blends of poly- 
mers and copolymers made with acrylonitrile, buta- 
diene and styrene 



acrylonitrile/methyl methacrylate plastic 
A/MMA plastic 

plastic based on copolymers of acrylonitrile and methyl 
methacrylate 



cf. modulus, complex compliance, complex 
modulus and compliance 



activator 

substance used in small proportion to increase the 
effectiveness of an accelerator 



accelerator 
promoter 

substance used in small proportion to increase the 
reaction rate of a chemical system (reactants, plus 
other additives) 

cf . activator and catalyst 



accuracy of the mean 

closeness of agreement between the true value and 
the mean result which would be obtained by applying 
the experimental procedure a very large number of 
times 

NOTE The smaller the systematic part of the experimen- 
tal errors which affect the result, the more accurate is the 
procedure. 



addition polymer 

polymer made by addition polymerization 



addition polymerization 

polymerization by a repeated addition process 

NOTE The repeated addition process takes place without 
the splitting off of water or other simple molecules. 



cf. polyadditlon 



additive 

substance added to polymers to improve or modify 
one or more properties 

NOTE In a narrow sense, the term additive includes only 
ingredients added in small amounts; in such cases the term 
modifier is used for an ingredient added in relatively-large 
amounts. 



acetone resin 

resin made by polycondensation of acetone with 
another compound, for example formaldehyde or 
phenol 



adhere, intransitive verb 
to be in a state of adherence 



cf. condensation 



cf. bond, verb 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1900 



adherence 

state in which two surfaces are held together by inter- 
facial forces 

NOTE Adherence can be achieved with or without the 
use of an adhesive. 

cf. adhesion and cohesion 



adherend 

body that is held, or is intended to be held, to another 
body by an adhesive 



adhesion 

state in which two surfaces are held together by 
chemical or physical forces or both, with the aid of an 
adhesive 



afterf lame time 

length of time for which a material continues to flame, 
under specified test conditions, after the ignition 
source has been removed 



afterglow 

persistence of glowing of a material after cessation of 
flaming or after the ignition source has been removed 



ageing 

entirety of all irreversible chemical and physical proc- 
esses occurring in a material in the course of time 

cf. deterioration 



cf. adherence and cohesion 



adhesion failure 
adhesive failure 

rupture of an adhesive bond in which the separation 
appears visually to be at the adhesive/adherend inter- 
face 

cf. cohesion failure 



adhesive 

glue (deprecated) 

substance capable of holding materials together by 

adhesion 



air-assist vacuum thermoforming 

vacuum thermoforming process in which partial pre- 
forming of a heated sheet is accomplished by air pres- 
sure before vacuum pulldown 



air-slip vacuum thermoforming 

vacuum thermoforming process in which a male mould 
is enclosed in a box, providing an air cushion to keep 
the advancing mould from contacting a heated sheet 
until the end of its travel, at which point vacuum is 
applied to destroy the air cushion and pull the sheet 
against the mould 



NOTE The term glue was used originally for an adhesive 
prepared from a hard gelatin. Through general use, the term 
became synonymous with the term adhesive in referring to 
adhesives prepared from synthetic resins. The term adhe- 
sive now is the preferred general term. 



alloy 

two or more immiscible polymers united, usually by 
another component, to form a polymeric composition 
having enhanced performance properties 



adhesive line 

glue line (deprecated) 

space filled with adhesive between two parts to be 

bonded or in a bonded product 

cf. bond line and joint (in adhesive bonding) 



allyl polymer 

polymer or resin made by polymerization of chemical 
compounds containing the allyl group 



afterflame 

persistence of flaming of a material, under specified 
test conditions, after the ignition source has been 
removed 



alpha loss peak 

first peak in the damping curve below the melting 
range, in order of decreasing temperature at constant 
frequency or increasing frequency at constant tem- 
perature 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1990 



alternating copolymer 

copolymer in which two species of monomeric units 
are distributed in alternating sequence 



angular velocity, o) (rad s _1 ) 
where /is the frequency 



alternating copolymerization 

polymerization in which an alternating copolymer is 
formed 



alternating stress 

vibrating stress with equal values but with opposite 
signs 



cf. vibrating stress 



aniline-formaldehyde resin 

amino resin made by polycondensation of aniline with 
formaldehyde 

cf. condensation 



antiblocking agent (for films) 

substance incorporated in or applied to films to pre- 
vent their sticking together during manufacture, stor- 
age or use 



amino resin 

resin made by polycondensation of a compound con- 
taining amino groups, such as urea or melamine, with 
an aldehyde, such as formaldehyde, or an aldehyde- 
yielding material 

cf. condensation 



aminoplastic 

plastic based on amino resins 



antioxidant 

substance used to retard deterioration caused by 
oxidation 



antistatic agent 

substance added in small proportion to a material or 
applied to its surface to counteract the build up of an 
electrical charge on the material 



amorphous, adjective 

non-crystalline, or devoid of crystalline structure 



apparent density 

mass divided by the volume of a sample of material, 
including both permeable and impermeable voids 
normally present in the material 



amorphous regions 

those regions within a polymeric material that, on the 
basis of X-ray diffraction or other suitable techniques, 
do not show any evidence of crystalline structure 



anaerobic adhesive 

adhesive that cures spontaneously in the absence of 
oxygen, the curing being inhibited by the presence of 
oxygen and catalyzed by metallic ions 



apparent molar mass 

apparent relative molecular mass, M app 

molar mass calculated from experimental data without 

the application of appropriate corrections, such as for 

finite polymer concentration, association, preferential 

solvation, compositional heterogeneity or constitutional 

heterogeneity 1 ' 

cf. molar mass 



angle-head 

extruder head fixed at an angle to the axis of the 
extruder barrel 

cf. crosshead 



1) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical definitions 
rotating to polymers — Part 1:1966 Definitions of terms 
relating to individual macromolecules, their assemblies and 
dilute polymer solutions. 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1990 



area burning rate 

rate of burning (deprecated) 

surface area of a material burned divided by 

under specified test conditions 



time 



cf . linear burning rate, mass burning rate and flame 
spread rate 



A-stage 

early stage in the preparation of certain thermosetting 
resins, in which the material is still soluble in certain 
liquids, and fusible 

cf. B-stage, C-stage and resol 



aromatic polyester 
polyarylate 

polyester derived from monomers in which all the 
hydroxyl and carboxyl groups are linked directly to 
aromatic nuclei 



artificial weathering 

exposure to cyclic laboratory conditions involving 
changes in temperature, relative humidity and radiant 
energy, with or without direct water spray, in an 
attempt to produce changes in the material similar to 
those observed after long-term, continuous, outdoor 
exposure 

NOTE The laboratory exposure conditions usually are 
intensified beyond those encountered in actual outdoor 
exposure in an attempt to achieve an accelerated effect. 
This term does not cover exposure to special conditions, 
such as ozone, salt spray, industrial gases, etc. 



assembling 

fabricating operations involved in fastening parts 
together by mechanical devices, adhesives, heat 
sealing, welding or other means 

cf. fabricating and machining 



assembly (for adhesives) 

group of materials or parts, including adhesives, which 
has been placed together for bonding or which has 
been bonded together 



assembly time 

time interval between the end of application of the 
adhesive on the adherend and the initiation of the 
setting time 

NOTE The assembly time is the sum of the open and 
closed assembly times. 



atactic block 

regular block that has equal numbers of the possible 
configurational base units in a random sequence dis- 
tribution 



atactic polymer 

regular polymer, the molecules of which have equal 
numbers of the possible configurational base units in a 
random sequence distribution 



attenuation constant, a (nrH) 

1 Kd 

n A 
where 

A is the wavelength; 

d is the loss factor; 

n - 1 for longitudinal or torsional waves; 

n - 2 for bending waves 

NOTE The attenuation constant determines the spatial 
decay of a damped vibration: 

A = A e ~ aK 
where 

A is the amplitude; 



is the initial amplitude; 
is the spatial coordinate. 



autothermal extrusion 
adiabatic extrusion 

method of extrusion in which the sole source of heat is 
the conversion ot the drive energy through viscous 
resistance of the plastic mass in the extruder 



average degree of polymerization, X* 

average of the degree of polymerization for a polymer 

cf. degree of polymerization 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



back draft 
back taper 
counterdraft 
reverse taper 

slight taper in a mould wall tending to impede removal 
of a moulding 

cf. draft 



beamed yarn 

large and determined number of glass yams wound 
parallel on to a large cylindrical carrier spool (beam) 



benzylcellulose 

benzyl ether of cellulose 



backing plate 
support plate 

in a mould, a plate that supports the cavity block, 
guide pins, etc. 



beta loss peak 

second peak in the damping curve below the melting 
range, in order of decreasing temperature or increas- 
ing frequency 



baffle 

in a mould, a plug or other device fitted in a steam or 
water channel to divert the flow and direct it to a 
required path 



binder (in adhesive compounds) 

component of an adhesive composition that is 

responsible primarily for the adhesion 



bag moulding 

process of moulding reinforced plastics in which the 
consolidation of a material placed over or in a rigid 
mould is accomplished by the application of uniform 
pressure through a flexible membrane, for example a 
rubber bag 

NOTE Also called autoclave moulding, pressure-bag 
moulding, vacuum-bag moulding, depending on the means 
used to force the bag against the material. 



binder (glass) 

binding agent (textile glass) 

material(s) applied to staple fibres and to strands in 

order to hold them in a desired arrangement, for 

example, in glass mats, surfacing mats and veils or 

non-woven fabrics (non-wovens) 



biodegradable plastic 

degradable plastic in which the degradation process 
results in lower-molecular-weight fragments produced 
by the action of naturally occurring microorganisms 
such as bacteria, fungi and algae 



cf. degradable plastic 



bar mould 

multi-impression mould in which the impressions are 
arranged in rows on separate bars which may be 
removed individually 



bipolymer 

polymer derived from two species of monomer 



barrel 
cylinder 

tube of steel that forms the housing around (an) 
extruder screw(s) and injection screw(s) or plunger 



bead polymerization 
pearl polymerization 

polymerization in which the monomer is dispersed as 
relatively large droplets In water or other suitable inert 
diluent, resulting in a beadlike product 



blast finishing 

process of removing flash from mouldings and/or dull- 
ing their surfaces by impinging media, such as steel 
balls, walnut shells or plastic pellets, against them with 
sufficient force to fracture the flash or to dull the sur- 
face 



blister 

elevation of the surface of varied contour and dimen- 
sions, with a cavity beneath it 



cf. suspension polymerization 



cf. pimple 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



block 

portion of a polymer molecule, comprising many con- 
stitutional units, that has at least one constitutional or 
configurational feature not present in the adjacent 
portions 

NOTE The definitions that relate to polymer may also be 
applied to block. 

cf. block polymer 



block polymerization 

polymerization in which a block polymer is formed 



block press 

press to prepare thicker sheets from thin ones 



block copolymer 

block polymer derived from more than one species of 
monomer 

cf. block polymer 



blocked curing agent 

curing or hardening agent temporarily rendered unre- 
active, which can be reactivated as desired by physi- 
cal or chemical means 



block copolymerization 

polymerization in which a block copolymer is formed 



blocking 

unintentional adherence between materials 



block polymer 

polymer, the molecules of which consist of blocks 
connected linearly 

NOTE The blocks axe connected directly or through a 
constitutional unit that is not part of the blocks. In the poly- 
mer molecule 

A, — B, — A m — B„ 

A*. B/, A m and B n are blocks, and the individual blocks are 
regular. In this block polymer molecule, A and B may be for 
example: 



— CHChfe— and -CHCI^r- 
C0 2 Chfe OCOCB, 



(A)' 



(B) 



The block polymer of which the molecules consist of these 
blocks is a block copolymer because A and B arise from 
different monomer species. On the other hand, A and B 
may be, for example: 



fH| 



-C-CH>-and — c- 
I ^ I 

C0 2 CH3 CH3 

(A) 



<p0 2 CB3 (p^ 



Chfe— C— CH> 
C0 2 CH3 

(B) 



These blocks are stereoblocks and the block polymer with 
molecules consisting of these blocks is not a block copoly- 
mer because A and B arise from the same monomer spe- 
cies. 

cf . block copolymer 



bloom 

visible exudation or efflorescence on the surface of a 
plastic 

NOTE Bloom may be caused by lubricant, plasticizer, 
etc. 



blow moulding 

method of forming hollow objects by inflating a parison 
into a mould with compressed gas 



blowing agent 

substance used to cause expansion in the manufac- 
ture of hollow or cellular articles 

NOTE Blowing agents may be compressed gases, vola- 
tile liquids or chemicals that decompose or react to form a 
gas. 



blow-up ratio 

1) in blow moulding, the ratio of the diameter of the 
parison to the maximum diameter of the cavity in 
which it is to be blown; 

2) in tubular extrusion blowing of film, the ratio of the 
extrusion die diameter to the diameter of the blown 
tube 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1900 



bole (of a calender) 

one of a set of rolls forming the essential part of a cal- 
ender 



breakaway torque, 7ba 

initial torque required to break the bond measured at 
the first movement between the nut and the bolt, when 
unscrewing an unseated assembly 



bond (in adhesion), noun 

attachment at the interface between an adhesive and 

an adherend 



bond (in adhesion), verb 

to unite surfaces of materials by means of an adhesive 

NOTE The bonding operation may involve several 
stages: application of the adhesive, open assembly time, 
closed assembly time and curing or setting time. 

cf. adhere 



bond line 

interface between an adhesive and an adherend 



breaker plate (in an extruder) 

perforated plate which may support a screen pack 



breaking stress 

stress at the moment of rupture of a specimen 



breakloose torque, 7bl 

initial torque required to decrease or eliminate the 
axial load in a preloaded assembly 



bond strength (in adhesion) 

force required to break a bonded assembly, with fail- 
ure occurring in or near the adhesive/adherend inter- 
face 



breathing 

operation of opening of a mould or press for a very 
short period of time at an early stage in the process of 
cure 

NOTE Breathing allows the escape of gas or vapour from 
the moulding material and reduces the tendency of thick 
mouldings to blister. 



boss 

functional raised area on the surface of a moulding 



braid 

planar or tubular fabric structure made by interlacing 
several textile or glass yarns in such a manner that all 
yarns lie at an angle other than 0° or 90° to the length 
direction of the fabric 



branch 

oligomeric or polymeric offshoot from a macromolecu- 
lar chain 



branched polymer 

polymer composed of molecules having a branched 
structure, chainlike either between branch junctions or 
between each chain end and a branch junction 

NOTE The branches are composed of mers. 



bristle 

relatively thick, short section cut from a monofilament 



brittleness temperature 

temperature at which there is a 50 % probability of 
brittle failure in a specimen when tested by the method 
specified in ISO 974 



B-stage 

intermediate stage in the reaction of certain thermo- 
setting resins in which the material swells when in 
contact with certain liquids and softens when heated, 
but may not dissolve or fuse entirely 

cf . A-stage, C-stage and resitol 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



bulk compression 

volume compression 

isotropic compression, X (dimensionless) 

relative decrease in volume caused by hydrostatic 

pressure 



AV 



* = — 



bulk density 

apparent density of powders, pellets, granules, etc. 



burning behaviour 
fire behaviour 

all the physical and/or chemical changes that take 
place when a material, product and/or structure burns 
and/or is exposed to fire 



butt joint 

joint made by bonding two surfaces that are perpen- 
dicular to the main surfaces of the adherends 



cf. lap joint and scarf joint 



bulk factor 

ratio of the volume of a given mass of moulding mate- 
rial to its volume in the moulded form 

NOTE The bulk factor is also equal to the ratio of the 
density of the material in its moulded form to its apparent 
density in the unmoulded form. 



butylene [butene] plastic 

plastic based on polymers made by the polymerisation 
of butylene [butene] or copolymerisation of butylene 
[butene] with other monomers, the butylene [butene] 
units being in the greatest amount by mass in the 
copolymer 



bulk modulus, K (Pa) 

quotient of hydrostatic pressure (P) by bulk compres- 
sion (X) 



K = 



cabled yam (textile glass) 

two or more folded yarns (or alternatively folded and 

single yarns) twisted together in one or more folding 

operations 



bulk polymerization 

polymerization in which the monomer (gas, liquid or 
solid) is in a homogeneous phase without solvent or 
dispersing medium 



burn, noun 

trace of local thermal decomposition resulting in a 

variation of colour which can go as far as blackening 

NOTE Such a defect can cause distortion or destruction 
of the surface of a moulded part or an extruded section. 



burn, intransitive verb 
to undergo combustion 



calender 

machine that has a series of rolls (boles), of which 
each adjacent pair turns in opposite directions 

NOTE The machine is used to produce film, sheeting, 
coated substrates, or laminates with thickness determined 
by adjustment of the gap between the last pair of heated 
rolls. 

cf. bole (of a calender) 



calendering 

process of making film, sheeting, coated substrates, or 
laminates by passing thermoplastics through a cal- 
ender 



burned area 

area of a material that has been destroyed by com- 
bustion or pyrolysis, under specified test conditions, 
excluding any area damaged only by shrinking 



capacitance of a capacitor 

charge on one of the capacitor plates divided by the 
potential difference between them, the influence of any 
other conductor being negligible 

IUPAP symbol: C 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



carbon fibre 

fibre containing at least 90% by mass of carbon, 
obtained by pyrofysis of organic-fibre precursors 

NOTE Carbon fibres are traditionally categorized accord- 
ing to their mechanical properties, with particular reference 
to their tensile strength and modulus, as follows: 

general-purpose fibre: fibre used for the reinforcement 
of plastics to confer improved electrical, electrostatic, 
electromagnetic, thermal or tribological properties, This 
type has lower tensile properties. 

high-tenacity (HT) fibre: fibre with a tensile strength 
exceeding 2 500 MPa and a tensile modulus between 
200 GPa and 280 GPa. This type is also known as 
"high-strength (HR)", "high-strain (HS)" or "standard- 
grade fibre". 

intermediate-modulus (IM) fibre: fibre with a tensile 
modulus between 280 GPa and 350 GPa. In this cate- 
gory, there are also fibres of very high tenacity equal to 
or greater than 5 000 MPa. 

high-modulus (HM) fibre: fibre with a tensile modulus 
between 350 GPa and 600 GPa. 



casein 
CS 

protein material precipitated from skimmed milk by the 
action either of rennet or dilute acid 



cast film 

film made by depositing a layer of plastic, which is 
molten in a solution or in a dispersion, on to a surface, 
solidifying, and then removing the film from the surface 



cf. film casting 



casting 

process in which a liquid or viscous material is poured 
or otherwise introduced into a mould or on to a pre- 
pared surface to solidify without the use of external 
pressure 



ultra-high-modulus (UHM) fibre: fibre with a 
modulus in excess of 600 GPa. 



tensile 



casting resin 

resin in liquid form that can be poured or otherwise 
introduced into a mould and shaped without pressure 
into solid articles 



carbon fibre precursor 

organic fibres which by pyrolysis can be converted to 
carbon fibres 

NOTE Precursors are usually in the form of continuous 
yarn, but can be woven or knitted fabric, braid, mat or felt. 

cf. PAN-based carbon fibre, pitch-based carbon 
fibre and viscose-based carbon fibre 



catalyst 

substance used in small proportion, that augments the 
rate of a chemical reaction, and in theory remains 
unchanged chemically at the end of the reaction 

cf. accelerator, activator, inhibitor, initiator, regula- 
tor and retarder 



carbonization 

heat treatment in an inert atmosphere to convert a 
carbon fibre precursor into carbon fibre 



cavity (of a mould) 

space within a mould to be filled to form the moulded 

product 

cf. impression 



carboxymethyl cellulose 
CMC 

glycolic acid ether of cellulose 



cell 

single small cavity surrounded partially or completely 
by its walls 



10 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



cellular adhesive 
foamed adhesive 

adhesive the density of which is reduced by the pres- 
ence of numerous small cavities (cells) dispersed 
throughout its mass 

cf . foaming adhesive 



centrifugal casting 

process of forming hollow cylindrical products by rotat- 
ing about one axis at high speed a mould containing a 
fluid monomer, prepolymer, or polymer dispersion and 
maintaining the rotation while solidifying the polymeric 
material by suitable means, such as heating 

cf. centrifugal moulding, rotational casting and 
rotational moulding 



cellular plastic 
expanded plastic 
foamed plastic 

plastic the density of which is reduced by the presence 
of numerous small cavities (cells), interconnecting or 
not, dispersed throughout the mass 

NOTE A cellular plastic (foamed plastic) often is called 
simply a foam. 



centrifugal moulding 

process of forming hollow cylindrical products by rotat- 
ing about one axis at high speed a mould containing a 
dry fusible powder and maintaining the rotation while 
fusing the polymer by the application of heat 

cf. centrifugal casting, rotational casting and rota- 
tional moulding 



cellular striation 

layer within cellular plastics that differs from the char- 
acteristic cell structure 



cellulose acetate 
CA 

acetic acid ester of cellulose 



cellulose acetate butyrate 
CAB 

mixed acetic and butyric acid ester of cellulose 



chain length 

total length of a chain molecule measured from atom 
to atom along the chain 

NOTE This term should not be used for the direct dis- 
tance between the ends of the molecule. 



chain transfer 

chemical reaction usually occurring during chain 
polymerization, in which an active macromolecule 
transfers the reactive functional species to another 
molecule and becomes itself inactive 



cellulose acetate propionate 
CAP 

mixed acetic and propionic acid ester of cellulose 



chain-transfer polymerization 

chain polymerization in which the 
reaction frequently proceeds through a 
process 



chain-growth 
chain-transfer 



cellulose nitrate 
CN 

nitric acid ester of cellulose 



chalking 

deterioration evidenced by the appearance of a pow- 
dery residue on the surface 



cellulose propionate 
CP 

propionic acid ester of cellulose 



cellulosic plastic 

plastic based on derivatives of cellulose 



chase 

bolster 

frame 

that part of the structure of a mould which secures the 
impression or the punch 

NOTE Chase, impressions and punches may be so 
designed that a standard chase may be used to hold a 
variety of impressions and punches. 



11 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



chemically-foamed plastic 

cellular plastic in which the cells are formed by gases 
generated from thermal decomposition or chemical 
reaction of the constituents 

cf. mechanically- and thermally-foamed plastic 



chill roll extrusion 

process of extruding film and sheeting in which a 
molten extrudate is cast on to a cooled roll 



chirality 

property of non-identity of a molecule with its mirror 
image 

NOTE A molecule in a given configuration or conforma- 
tion is termed chiral when it is not identical with its mirror 
image. All asymmetric molecules are chiral; however, not all 
chiral molecules are asymmetric, since some molecules 
having axes of rotation are chiral. Chiral and prochiral 
atoms are sites or potential sites, respectively, of stereoi- 
somerism. 



chopped strands (textile glass) 

short strands cut from continuous filament strands, not 

held together by any means 



closed assembly time (in adhesive bonding) 
time between the assembling of adhesive-coated sur- 
faces and the application of heat and/or pressure to 
cure or set the adhesive 

NOTE During closed assembly time, the assembly may 
be under relatively low pressure to ensure intimate contact 
of the adhesive-coated surfaces and the adhesive may 
undergo partial curing or setting to attain mechanical char- 
acteristics permitting handling of the assembly. 

cf. open assembly time, cure time and setting time 



closed cell 

cell enclosed totally by its walls and hence non-inter- 
connecting with other cells 



chlorinated polyvinyl chloride) 
PVC-C 

polyvinyl chloride) modified by chlorination of the 
polymer 



closed-cell cellular plastic 

cellular plastic in which almost all the cells are non- 
interconnecting 



chlorinated polyethylene 
PE-C 

polyethylene modified by chlorination of the polymer 



coated fabric 

fabric with an adherent layer of polymeric material on 
one or both sides, the coated product remaining flexi- 
ble 



chopped fibre 

short fibre cut from yarn, not held together by any 
means 



coating (product) 

thin layer of a material applied by a coating process 



NOTE The chopped fibre may be sized for incorporation 
in injection-moulding powders. 



chopped strand mat (textile glass) 
mat formed of strands cut to a short length, randomly- 
distributed, without intentional orientation, and held 
together by a binder 



coating (process) 

process of applying a thin layer of a material in the 

form of a fluid or powder upon a substrate 

NOTE Laminating is not considered to be coating. 



12 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



coefficient of friction 

ratio of the frictlonal force to the normal force, acting 
perpendicular to the two surfaces in contact 



cold moulding 

special process of compression moulding in which the 
moulding is formed at room temperature and baked 
subsequently at elevated temperatures 



coefficient of linear thermal expansion 

reversible change in length of a material per unit 
length per degree change in temperature 

IUPAC symbol: a 



NOTE 
ranges. 



The value may vary for different temperature 



cold pressing (in adhesion) 

bonding operation in which an assembly is subjected 

to pressure without the application of heat 



cold setting 

curing a thermosetting material at room temperature 



coefficient of twist contraction (as applied to glass 

fibre) 
change in length of a yarn attributable to the twist, 
expressed as a percentage of the length of the 
untwisted yarn 



cold-setting adhesive 

adhesive that sets without the application of heat 

cf. hot-setting adhesive 



cohesion 

state in which the particles of a single substance are 
held together by intermolecular forces 

cf. adhesion failure 



cold-slug well 
slug well 

space provided directly opposite the sprue opening in 
an injection mould to trap the material injected initially 
(cold slug) that has cooled below the effective mould- 
ing temperature 



cohesion failure 
cohesive failure 

rupture of a bonded assembly in which the separation 
appears visually to be in the adhesive or the adherend 

cf. adhesion failure 



collapse (of cellular plastics) 

inadvertent densification of cellular plastics during 
manufacture, resulting from breakdown of cell struc- 
ture 



cold-crack temperature 

temperature at which 50 % of the test specimens 
break or exhibit damage when tested by the method 
specified in ISO 8570 



colour bleeding 

movement of colorants or coloured constituents out on 
to a surface as a result of blooming, exudation or 
migration 

cf. bloom, exudation and migration 



cold drawing 

process of stretching unheated thermoplastics 

cf. drawing 



colour fading 

colour change that involves a lightening or weakening 
of the colour 

cf. colour-fastness on exposure to light and dis- 
coloration 



13 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1090 



colour-fastness on exposure to light 

light fastness (of colour) 

resistance to colour changes due to exposure to light, 

without direct atmospheric effects (therefore, not 

"weather resistance ") 

NOTE Colour-fastness commonly is evaluated by visual 
assessment using standard reference colour standards (or 
by instrumental assessment). 

cf. colour fading and discoloration 



colour heterogeneity 

unintentional variation of colour in the same piece 



complex compliance, C (Pa~ 1 ) 
reciprocal of complex modulus: 

C* = C'-iC M 

where i = </-1 

NOTE It may be measured 

in tension: D* = 1/E*; 

in shear: f = 1/C*; 

in bulk compression: b* = MK*\ 

in longitudinal compression: O* = ML*. 

Owing to the delayed equilibrium behaviour of these mate* 
rials, the compliances D, J, B and O of linear-viscoelastic 
material subjected to a non-periodic strain are time- 
dependent. 



comb chain 

macromolecule consisting of a main chain from which, 
at regular intervals, linear chains, all of comparable 
length, emanate 



comb polymer 

polymer, the molecules of which are comb chains 



complex modulus, AT (Pa) 

dynamic modulus (deprecated) 

stress-strain ratio of a viscoelastic material that is 

subjected to sinusoidal loading: 

where 



combination reinforcement 

combination of several forms of one reinforcement that 
are bonded mechanically or chemically 

NOTE Generally such reinforcements include a rein- 
forcement with chopped strands and another with 
unchopped strands. 



combustible 

capable of burning 



combustion 

exothermic reaction of a substance with an oxidizer, 
accompanied by flames and/or glowing and/or emis- 
sion of smoke 



compatibility 

state in which a substance in admixture in plastics will 
not exude, bloom, or separate in similar manner 



NOTE 1 The definition of M* takes into account the phase 
shift between stress and strain. 

NOTE 2 The complex modulus may be measured in ten- 
sion (E*), shear (G*) f bulk compression (fC) or longitudinal 
compression (//): 

E" = E'+iE" 

G" = G'+iG" 

K* = Ar*+i/r 

V = L'+iL" 

The storage modulus (£' or C or X" or L') portion of the 
complex modulus is the ratio of the steady-state stress in 
phase with the strain to the magnitude of the strain. The 
loss modulus (£" or G" or K" or L H ) portion of the complex 
modulus is defined similarly, but uses the component that 
leads to the steady-state stress at an angle 90° out of 
phase from the steady-state strain. 

The storage moduli are measures of the energy stored and 
regained during a loading cycle, whereas the loss moduli 
are proportional to the energy lost (dissipated) during this 
time. 

The moduli £, G, K and L of linear viscoelastic materials 
subjected to a non-periodic stress are time-dependent 
because of the delayed equilibrium behaviour of these 
materials. 

cf. loss modulus and storage modulus 



14 



complex viscosity, rj c (Pas) 

the quotient of complex stress (<f) to complex rate of 

strain (e * ) in the forced oscillation of a material 

NOTE 1 The strain (e) and stress (a) of the forced oscilla- 
tion are given by the expressions: 

e = £q sin cot 
and 

cr= a cos (cot + 6) 
and the rate of strain 

e = co£q cos a>r 

NOTE 2 The complex rate of strain e* is given by 
e* = io^e'"' 

= \coCq (cos a;/ + i sin cot) 
where 

NOTE 3 The complex stress <f is given by 

= o [cos (ror + (5) + i sin (ojj -f $)] 

NOTE 4 The complex viscosity is related to the dynamic 
and out-of-phase viscosities by the equations: 

q c = <fle* 

= a (cos 6 -h i sin 5)/\coe () 

= rT-irf 

NOTE 5 The dynamic and out-of-phase viscosities are 
related to the storage modulus (M') and the loss modulus 
(AT) by the equations: 

n c = r ?*- j ^" 

= AT/iw 

= (M'+\M h )/\q) 
so that 

rj* = M7a) 
and 

NOTE 6 The complex viscosity may alternatively be 
expressed as 

= (a e i<5 )/ioj^ 
= M*/io) 
where AT is the complex modulus. 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472:1909 



compliance, C(Pa~ 1 ) 
quotient of strain by stress: 

C = c/a= MM 

D is the tensile compliance; J is the shear compliance; 
B is the bulk compliance; O is the longitudinal com- 
pression compliance 



composite 

1) solid product consisting of two or more distinct 
phases, including a binding material (matrix) and a 
particulate or fibrous material; 

NOTE Examples: moulding material containing reinforc- 
ing fibres, particulate fillers or hollow spheres. 

2) solid product consisting of two or more layers (often 
in a symmetrical assembly) of plastic film or sheet, 
normal or syntactic cellular plastic, metal, wood, com- 
posite according to definition 1), etc., with or without 
adhesive interlayers 

NOTE Examples: film composites for packaging, sand- 
wich cellular composite for structural applications, laminates 
made with paper, fabric, etc. 



composite mould 

multicavity mould containing dissimilar impressions 
with a common chase 



compound 

intimate admixture of a polymer or polymers with other 
ingredients such as fillers, plasticizers, catalysts and 
colorants 



compression moulding 

process of moulding a material in a confined cavity by 
applying pressure and usually heat 



compression-moulding pressure 

in compression moulding, the fluid pressure applied to 
the material in the mould 



cf. moulding pressure 



15 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1009 



compressive strain 

quotient of the reduction in thickness of a specimen 
under compressive stress, by its initial thickness 



conditioning 

whole series of operations intended to bring a sample 
or specimen into a reference state with regard to tem- 
perature and humidity 



compressive strength 

maximum compressive stress carried by the test 
specimen during a compressive test 



compressive strength of cellular plastics 

quotient of the maximum compressive force reached 
when the relative deformation is less than 10 %, by the 
initial surface area of the cross-section of the test 
specimen according to ISO 844 

NOTE If the value of the maximum stress corresponds 
with a relative deformation of less than 10 %, it is noted as 
the "compressive strength". Otherwise, the compressive 
stress at 10% relative deformation is calculated and its 
value noted as the "compressive stress at 10% relative 
deformation". 



compressive stress 

normal stress arising from a compressive force 
applied perpendicular to the plane in which it acts 

cf. normal stress 



conditioning atmosphere 

atmosphere in which a sample or test specimen is 
kept before being subjected to test 

cf. reference atmosphere and standard atmos- 
phere^) 



configurational base unit 

constitutional repeating unit the configuration of which 
is defined at one or more sites of stereoisomerism in 
the main chain of a polymer molecule 

NOTE In a regular polymer, a configurational base unit 
corresponds to the constitutional repeating unit. In the 
regular polymer molecule 

- [CH(CH 3 )CH 2 ]„ 

— (polypropylene) 

the constitutional repeating unit is — CH(CH 3 )CH 2 — and the 
configurational base units are: 



V 9^ 

<p — Chfe— and — <p — Ofe 
CHb H 



These two configurational base units are enantiomeric to 
each other. 



compressive viscosity 
bulk viscosity, rf K 

ratio of compressive stress to compressive strain rate 
on a continuous hydrostatic compression or decom- 
pression at a constant compressive strain rate 



condensation polymer 
polycondensate 

polymer made by condensation polymerization 



configurational repeating unit 

smallest set of one two, or more successive configu- 
rational base units that prescribes configurational 
repetition at one or more sites of stereoisomerism in 
the main chain of a polymer molecule 

cf. notes to isotactic polymer and syndiotactic 
polymer 



condensation polymerization 
polycondensation 

polymerization by a repeated condensation process 
(i.e. with the elimination of simple molecules) 



configurational sequence 

defined portion of a macromolecule comprising con- 
figurational units with relative or absolute configuration 
of one or more types at the sites of stereoisomerism in 
the constitutional units 



16 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



configurational unit 

constitutional unit having one or more sites of defined 
stereoisomerism 



continuous-filament/staple-fibre woven fabric 

glass fabric woven from filament yams in one direc- 
tion, usually the warp, and staple fibre yarns in the 
other 



constitutional repeating unit 

smallest constitutional Gnit'the repetition of which 
describes a regular polymer 



NOTE: The polymer chain 
CHCH^ CHCHg 



k 



'CHCHk— 

k 



can provide the following constitutional units: 



-CHCH2-. -CHgCH- 



• CM?— ■ - CH— . ~ CHCHUCH - • etc. 
I II 

R R R 



The first and the second constitutional units are the smallest 
describing completely this polymer chain. Either of these 
two constitutional units is a constitutional repeating unit and 
the polymer, the molecules of which can be described by 
the polymer chain shown above is a regular polymer. 



continuous-filament woven fabric 

fabric woven from glass filament yarns in warp and 
weft 



continuous strand mat (textile glass) 
mat formed of uncut strands, without intentional orien- 
tation, and held together by a binder 



co-oligomer 

oligomer derived from more than one species of 
monomer 



constitutional sequence 

defined portion of a macromolecule comprising consti- 
tutional units of one or more types 



co-oligomerization 

oligomerization in which a co-oligomer is formed 



constitutional unit 

species of atom or group of atoms present in a chain 
of a polymer or oligomer molecule 

cf. constitutional repeating unit 



cooling jig 
cooling fixture 
shrinkage block 
shrinkage jig 

form on which mouldings are cooled for the purpose of 
obtaining controlled dimensions of specific parts 



contact adhesive 

adhesive that is applied to both adherends and 
allowed to become dry, and then develops a bond 
when the adherends are brought together without 
sustained pressure 

cf. pressure-sensitive adhesive and dry tack 



contact moulding 
contact pressure moulding 

process of making reinforced plastic mouldings in 
which minimal pressure is applied during the forming 
and curing operations 



copolycondensation 

polycondensation in which more than one species of 
monomer is involved 

NOTE Polymers made by condensation polymerization of 
two ingredients (or "monomers"), each containing two iden- 
tical reactive groups, can be visualized readily as reacting 
on a 1:1 basis to give an "implicit monomer" the 
homopolymerization of which would give the actual product 
Such a polymer can be represented as possessing a single 
constitutional repeating unit and thus can be named as a 
homopolymer. Note that this rule is applicable only to cases 
in which the ratio of initial ingredients is 1:1. Poly(ethy!ene 
terephthalate) and polyamide 66 are examples of such 
polymers. 



17 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472: 1999 



copolymer 

polymer derived from more than one species of 
monomer 

cf. copolycondensation 



coupling size 

plastic size (textile glass) 

size designed to obtain a good bond between the 

glass surface and resins, and in a broader sense to 

other materials, generally containing ingredients to 

facilitate subsequent operations of conversion or 

application (winding, chopping etc.) 



copolymerization 

polymerization in which a copolymer is formed 

cf. copolycondensation 



cord 

strong glass fibre structure made by twisting, plying, 
cabling, or braiding filament or staple fibre yarns 



cored mould 

mould incorporating passages for circulating heating 
or cooling media 

cf. hot runner mould 



crack 

fissure that may or may not penetrate the external 
surface of the material or its entire thickness, the 
polymeric material being separated completely 
between the crack walls 

NOTE This note does not concern the English version, 
cf. craze 



crater 
pit 

small shallow surface cavity 

NOTE In general this cavity is larger in dimensions than a 
pinhole and has a less-regular shape. 



cf. pinhole 



cored screw 

extruder screw incorporating lengthwise passages for 
circulating heating or cooling media 



co-solvency 

dissolution of a polymer in a solvent comprising more 
than one component, each component of which by 
itself is a non-solvent for the polymer 



coumarone resin 

resin made by polymerization of one or more com- 
pounds of a type represented by coumarone, indene, 
their homologues, and their derivatives 



coupling agent 

substance that promotes or establishes stronger bond 
at the interface of the resin matrix and the reinforce- 
ment 

NOTE The coupling agent may be applied to the rein- 
forcement, added to the resin, or both. 



craze 

defect at or under the surface of a plastic attributable 
to apparent cracks, bridged by polymeric material of 
reduced (apparent) density 

cf. crack 



creaming (of dispersions) 

increasing the concentration of at least one dispersed 
phase at the top of a dispersion by a partial and 
reversible separation 



creaming (of PUR cellular plastics) 
initiation of expansion in the 
polyol/isocyanate mixture 



reaction of a 



NOTE This stage is marked by a change in the reaction 
mixture from a clear to a cloudy (creamy) appearance. 



crease 

wrinkle (in reinforced plastics) 

folds moulded into the reinforcement of a reinforced 

plastic 



18 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



creep 

cold flow (deprecated) 

time-dependent strain resulting from stress 

NOTE Instantaneous strain is excluded. 



crosslinklng agent 

substance that promotes or regulates intermolecular 
covalent or ionic bonding between polymer chains 

NOTE Crosslinking also may be produced by radiation. 



creep recovery 

time-dependent decrease in strain following removal of 
stress 

NOTE Instantaneous recovery is excluded. 



crosswise 

the direction at 90° to the lengthwise direction 

cf. lengthwise 



cresol resin 

resin of the phenolic type made by the poly-condensa- 
tion of cresol with aldehydes or ketones 



cresol-formaldehyde resin 
CF resin 

resin of the phenolic type, made by the polycondensa- 
tion of cresol with formaldehyde 



crosshead 

extruder head fixed at a right angle to the axis of the 
extruder barrel 



crosswise laminate 

laminate in which anisotropic layers are arranged at 
right angles to one another 



crown (of a calender roll) 

increased diameter at the centre of a calender roll to 
compensate for the deflection of the roll under pres- 
sure 



cf. angle-head 



crystalline polymer 

polymer showing crystallinity 2 ) 



crystallinity 

presence of three-dimensional order at the level of 
molecular dimensions 2 ) 



crosslink, verb 

to form multiple intermolecular (covalent or ionic) 

bonds between polymer chains 



crosslink, noun 

constitutional unit connecting two parts of a macro- 
molecule that were earlier separate molecules 

cf. crosslink, verb and crosslinking 



crystallite (polymer) 
small crystalline domain 2 ) 

NOTE 1 A (polymer) crystal is a crystalline domain usually 
limited by well-defined boundaries. 

NOTE 2 The definition is not identical with that used in 
classical crystallography. 



crosslinking 

process of multiple intermolecular covalent or ionic 
bonding between polymer chains 



2) IUPAC Recommendations: 1987 Definitions of terms 
relating to crystalline polymers. 



19 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1W3 



C-stage 

final stage in the reaction of certain thermosetting 
resins, in which the material is practically insoluble and 
infusible 

NOTE The resin in a fully-cured thermoset moulding is in 
this stage. 

cf. A-stage, B-stage and resite 



cure, noun (of a polymer and adhesive) 
process of converting a prepolymeric or polymeric 
composition into a more stable, usable condition by 
polymerization and/or crosslinking; for adhesives this 
finds expression in developing strength properties 

NOTE 1 This note does not concern the English version. 

NOTE 2 For example, the cure of a bifunctional urethane 
system takes place by polyaddition, that of a rubber system 
by crosslinking, and that of a phenol-formaldehyde system 
by both polycondensation and crosslinking. 



curing agent 

substance that promotes or regulates curing reaction 

cf. cure and hardening agent 



cut layers 

as applied to laminated plastics, a condition of the 
surface of machined or ground rods and tubes and of 
sanded sheets in which cut edges of the surface layer 
or lower laminations are revealed 



cycle ratio, nIN 

ratio of the number of applied cycles (n) to the service 
life (N) 

NOTE This ratio is used in tests with load bearings, 
together with an SN curve (Woehler's curve). 



cure, verb (a polymer, an adhesive) 
to convert a prepolymeric or polymeric composition 
into a more stable, usable condition by polymerization 
and/or crosslinking; for adhesives this finds expression 
in developing strength properties 

NOTE This note does not concern the English version. 



damping (mechanical) 

measure of the energy dissipated as heat by a mate- 
rial or a material system subjected to an oscillatory 
load 

NOTE In the case of free oscillation, damping is the 
decrease with time of the amplitude of a system. 



damping coefficient, c (N-s-nrr 1 ) 
component of applied force that is 90° out of phase 
with the deformation, divided by the velocity of defor- 
mation 



cure temperature 
curing temperature 

temperature at which an adhesive, an assembly or a 
polymeric composition achieves its cure 

cf. cure, drying temperature, and setting tempera- 
ture 



cure time 
curing time 

period of time necessary for an adhesive in an 
assembly or for a polymer composition to cure under 
specified conditions of temperature or pressure, or both 

cf. cure 



damping ratio, /i (dimensionless) 
ratio of actual to critical damping, where critical 
damping is that required for the borderline condition 
between oscillatory and non-oscillatory behaviour 

NOTE Damping ratio is a function of the logarithmic 
decrement, A: 



A/271 



r = sin arctan(/\/2rc) 



Ju(A/2k)2 
For small values of A, fj - Al2n. 
cf. logarithmic decrement 



20 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472: 1999 



daylight 

distance, in open position, between the moving and 
fixed platens of a press 

NOTE In the case of a multiplaten press, daylight is the 
distance between adjacent platens. 



deflocculation agent 

substance that breaks down agglomerates into pri- 
mary particles or prevents the latter from combining 
into agglomerates 



decay constant, p (s~ 1 ) 

coefficient that determines the dependant decay of a 

damped free vibration time A(t): 

A(t) = A e~P l sin (o) d / - <p) 

where 

A is the initial amplitude; 

a\j is the angular velocity of the damped vibra- 
tion; 

<p is the phase angle 

NOTE p is related to the loss factor d by: 
P = dco 6 /2 



decorative laminate 

laminate consisting of bonded layers of sheet material 
(for example paper, film, foil or fabric), a layer or layers 
on one or both sides having decorative plain or varie- 
gated colours or designs 



deep drawing 

process of forming a thermoplastic sheet in a mould 
involving a high draw ratio 



degate 

in injection and transfer moulding, to separate the 
sprue (and runner in a multicavity mould) from the 
moulded part 



degradable plastic 

plastic designed to undergo a significant change in its 
chemical structure under specific environmental con- 
ditions, resulting in a loss in some properties that may 
vary as measured by standard test methods appro- 
priate to the plastic and the application in a period of 
time that determines its classification 

cf. deterioration, biodegradable plastic, hydrolyti- 
cally-degradable plastic, oxidatively-degradable 
plastic and photodegradable plastic 



degradation 

change in the chemical structure of a plastic involving 
a deleterious change in properties 

cf. deterioration 



deflashing 

process of removing flash or sharp edges and corners 
mechanically or manually from a moulding 

cf. blast finishing 



deflection temperature under load 

temperature at which a test specimen will deflect a 
given distance under a given load in flexure under 
specified conditions of test 

NOTE Formerly this property was called heat distortion 
temperature, a term that now is deprecated. 



degree of polymerization 

1) average number of base units per molecule if the 
molecules are composed of regularly repeating units; 

2) average number of mers (real or hypothetical) per 
molecule if the molecules have been (or hypothetical^ 
could be) produced by polymerization from identical 
monomers 

NOTE The two definitions are not necessarily equivalent; 
for example, for polyethylene, the base unit is CH 2 ; the mer 
is C 2 H 4 . 



degree of polymerization of a molecule of a 
polymer 

number of monomeric units in a molecule of a polymer 



21 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



degree of polymerization of a polymer 

average value of the degree of polymerization of the 
molecules of a polymer 

NOTE The method of averaging must be stated; for 
example number-average or mass-average degree of 
polymerization. 



delamination 

separation of layers in a laminate because of failure in 
or near the adhesive joint 



dendrite 

crystalline morphology produced by skeletal growth, 
leading to a "tree-like" appearance 



die cutting 

process of cutting shapes from film and sheets by 
pressing a knife-edge die through one or several 
layers of plastics 



die plate 

main support plate for the punch or impression of a 
mould 



dielectric dissipation factor 
dissipation factor 
loss tangent 
tangent of loss angle 

tangent of the loss angle (tan S) 



depolymerization 

reversion of a polymer to its monomer(s) or to a poly- 
mer of lower relative molecular mass 



depth 

in the case of a flexural test of a bar (beam) specimen, 
the dimension parallel to the direction in which the load 
is applied 

cf. width 



desized fibre 

fibre from which the size has been removed by extrac- 
tion with suitable solvents or by pyrolysis 



dielectric loss angle 

angle by which the phase difference between applied 
voltage and resulting current deviates from n/2 rad, 
when the dielectric of the capacitor consists exclu- 
sively of the dielectric material 



differential scanning calorimetry 
DSC 

technique in which the difference in energy inputs into 
a substance and a reference material is measured as 
a function of temperature while the substance and ref- 
erence material are subjected to a controlled tem- 
perature programme 

NOTE Two modes, power compensation differential scan- 
ning calorimetry (power compensation DSC) and heat flux 
differential scanning calorimetry (heat-flux DSC), can be dis- 
tinguished, depending on the method of measurement used. 



deterioration 

permanent change in the physical properties of a plas- 
tic evidenced by impairment of these properties 



die (in extrusion) 

metal block with a shaped orifice through which plastic 

material is extruded 



die (in punching) 

tool to punch sheet or film material 



cf. punch 



differential thermal analysis 
DTA 

technique in which the temperature difference 
between a substance and a reference material is 
measured as a function of temperature while the sub- 
stance and reference material are subjected to a con- 
trolled temperature programme 

NOTE 1 The record is the differential thermal or DTA curve; 
the temperature difference (A7~) should be plotted on the 
ordinate with endothermic reactions downwards and tem- 
perature or time on the abscissa increasing from left to 
right. 

NOTE 2 The term quantitative differential thermal analysis 
(quantitative DTA) covers those uses of DTA where the 
equipment is designed to produce quantitative results in 
terms of energy and/or any other physical parameter. 



22 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



diffusion of light 

light scattering (deprecated) 

process by which the spatial distribution of a beam of 
radiation is changed when it is deviated in many direc- 
tions by a surface or by a medium, without change of 
frequency of its monochromatic components 

NOTE The frequency is unchanged only if there is no 
Doppler effect attributable* to 1he motion of the materials 
from which the radiation is returned. 



\ 



diluent 

thinner (deprecated) 

liquid additive, the sole function of which is to reduce 
the concentration of solids and the viscosity of a com- 
position (e.g. adhesive, coating, varnish) 



cf. extender and reactive diluent 



discoloration 

colour change that involves either lightening or dark- 
ening and/or change in hue 

cf. colour fading and colour-fastness 



dished 

applied to a defect, a symmetrical distortion of a flat or 
curved section of a plastic object such that, as nor- 
mally viewed, it appears concave 

cf. domed and warp 



dispersion 

heterogeneous system in which a finely-divided mate- 
rial is distributed in another material 



dimensional stability 

constancy of dimensions of a plastic part or specimen 
under environmental conditions 

NOTE Dimensional stability of plastics is influenced by 
creep, post-cure, post-shrinkage, evaporation or migration 
of additives, and water sorption. 



dimer 

oligomer composed of two units of a single species of 
monomer 

NOTE A dimer can be the product of oligomerization or of 
scission of a larger molecule. 



dip coating 

coating process in which a substrate is dipped into a 
fluid polymer, solution or dispersion, then withdrawn 
and subjected to heating and drying to solidify the 
deposited film 



disruptive voltage 
breakdown voltage 
dieletric breakdown voltage 

voltage necessary to produce a disruptive discharge 
between two conductors 



distribution function 

normalized function giving the relative amount of a 
portion of a polymeric substance with a specific value, 
or a range of values, of a random variable or vari- 
ables 3 ) 



doctor blade 
doctor knife 
doctor bar 

mechanism (bar or blade) on application equipment to 
spread a material evenly on the application rolls or on 
the surface being coated and to control its thickness 



direct roving (textile glass) 

roving obtained by winding directly from a bushing a 

large and predetermined number of filaments 

cf. roving 



3) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical definitions 
relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of terms 
relating to individual macromolecules, their assemblies and 
dilute polymer solutions. 



23 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



doctor roll 

roller mechanism that revolves at a different surface 
speed and/or in a direction opposite to that of the 
spreader roll, resulting in a wiping action to control the 
amount of material supplied to the spreader roll 



draft 

amount of taper allowed for the purpose of facilitating 
the removal of a moulding from a mould 



domed 

as applied to a defect, a symmetrical distortion of a flat 
or curved section of ? plastic object such that, as nor- 
mally viewed, it appears convex or more convex 

cf. dished and warp 



double-skin sheet 
DSS 

sheet having two parallel external skins, differently 
spaced and jointed by ribs of different shapes 



drape vacuum thermoforming 

vacuum thermoforming process in which a sheet is 
clamped in a movable frame, heated, lowered to con- 
tact and hang over the high points of a male mould 
and then pulled against the mould by vacuum 



draw ratio 

measure of the degree of stretching during a drawing 
operation, expressed as the ratio of the cross-sectional 
area of the undrawn plastic to that of the drawn plastic 



draw-down ratio 

in extrusion, the ratio of the thickness of the die open- 
ing to the final thickness of the product 



double-strand chain 

macromolecule that can be described by constitutional 
units joined so as to form an uninterrupted sequence 
of rings through two atoms 



double-strand copolymer 

copolymer, the molecules of which are double-strand 
chains 



double-strand polymer 
ladder polymer 

polymer, the molecules of which are double-strand 
chains 



dowel bush 
dowel bushing 

hardened steel insert in the portion of a mould that 
receives the dowel pin 



drawing 

process of stretching a thermoplastic sheet, rod or 
filament to reduce its cross-sectional area and/or 
improve its physical properties by orientation 



dry blend 
powder blend 

free-flowing mixture prepared without fluxing or addi- 
tion of solvent 



dry patch 
dry spot 

area where the reinforcement has not been wetted 
sufficiently with resin 

cf . fibre streak and visible fibre 



downstroke press 

press in which the pressing device is situated above 
the moving platen, pressure being applied by a down- 
ward movement of this device 



dry strength 

strength of an adhesive joint determined after drying 
under specified conditions 

cf . wet strength 



24 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 19M 



dry tack 

property of certain adhesives, particularly non-vulcan- 
izing elastomeric adhesives, to adhere to themselves 
on contact at some stage in the evaporation of volatile 
constituents, even though they seem dry to the touch 

cf. contact adhesive 



drying temperature 

temperature to which an adhesive or an assembly is 
subjected to dry the adhesive 

cf. curing temperature and setting temperature 



drying time 

period of time during which an adhesive or an assem- 
bly is allowed to dry, with or without the application of 
heat or pressure, or both 



cf. setting time and curing time 



dynamic friction 

friction which has to be overcome as a "threshold 
value" at the onset of sliding motion 



dynamic mechanical analysis 
DMA 

technique in which either the modulus or damping, or 
both, of a substance is measured as a function of 
temperature, frequency and/or time, while either load 
or displacement is varied with time 



dynamic resistance to cleavage 

force per unit width, necessary to bring an adhesive 
joint to the point of failure by means of a stress applied 
by a wedge moving between the two substrates of the 
joint, and thus separating the adherends in a peeling 
mode; it is expressed in kilonewtons per meter 



dynamic stress 

stress resulting from forces the value of which and/or 
direction vary in the course of time 



dwell 
dwelling 

pause in the application of pressure to a mould to 
allow the escape of gas 



dynamic coefficient of friction, /jq 

An 



Vq 



dynamic thermomechanical measurement 

technique in which the dynamic modulus and/or 
damping of a substance under oscillatory load is 
measured as a function of temperature while the sub- 
stance is subjected to a controlled temperature pro- 
gramme 

NOTE Torsional braid measurement is a particular case 
of dynamic thermomechanical measurement in which the 
material is supported on a braid. 



where 
fo 

^P 



is the dynamic frictional force, expressed in 
newtons; 

is the normal force acting perpendicular to 
the surfaces in contact, expressed in new- 
tons 



NOTE 1 The coefficient of friction of films usually ranges 
between 0,2, and 1 . 

NOTE 2 Ideally, the coefficient of friction is a characteristic 
independent of the test equipment and the test conditions. 
Since films generally do not behave ideally, all test parame- 
ters are specified in the appropriate international standard 
(for example, for films and sheeting see ISO 8295). 

cf. frictional force 



dynamic viscosity, r)* (Pa s) 

quotient of the stress in phase with the rate of strain 
(oosin6) to the amplitude of the rate of strain (cot'o) in 
the forced oscillation of a material: 

rj* = (rr sin <5)/(w£b) 

NOTE The strain (?) and stress (a) of the forced oscilla- 
tion are given by the equations 

e = *,Q s ' n cot 
and 

a- Oq sin(w/ + <5) 
so that 



£ = CO£q COS 0)t 



and 



a- Oq sin 8- cos cot + a cos S sin cot 



25 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



ease of ignition 

ease with which a material can be ignited under speci- 
fied test conditions 

cf. minimum ignition time 



edge gate 

very thin rectangular gate with a length equal to the 
width of the moulding, situated in the meeting surface 
of the mould 



cf. tab gate 



edgewise (of a laminate) 

parallel to the layers of a laminate, a direction in which 
a load or electric stress may be applied in testing 
laminated plastics sheets 



elasticity 

property of recovering original size and shape when 
deforming forces are removed 

NOTE 1 If the strain is proportional to the applied stress, 
the material is said to exhibit Hookean or ideal elasticity. 

NOTE 2 The mechanism may be either rubberlike elasticity 
(entropy elasticity) or steel-like elasticity (energy elasticity). 



elastomer 

macromolecular material which returns rapidly to its 
initial dimensions and shape after substantial defor- 
mation by a weak stress and release of the stress 

NOTE The definition applies under room temperature test 
conditions. 



ejection 

process of removing a moulding from the mould cavity 



electric strength 
dielectric strength 

property of a dielectric which opposes a disruptive dis- 
charge 

NOTE It is measured by the intensity of the electric field 
which will break down the dielectric. 



ejector 

mechanical or pneumatic device to remove a moulding 
from a mould 



elongation 

increase in length of a specimen under tension, usu- 
ally expressed as a percentage of the original length 



elastic deformation 

part of the total strain of a stressed plastic which dis- 
appears upon removal of the stress 

cf. creep recovery, elasticity and plastic deforma- 
tion 



emanation thermal analysis 

technique in which the release of radioactive emana- 
tion from a substance is measured as a function of 
temperature while the substance is subjected to a 
controlled temperature programme 



elastic limit 

greatest stress which a material is capable of sustain- 
ing without any permanent strain remaining upon 
complete release of stress 

NOTE In practice, measurements of strain usually are 
taken using a small load rather than zero load as the initial 
and final reference. 



embedding 

process of encasing completely an article in a polymer 
by pouring a monomer, prepolymer, or polymer dis- 
persion over it in a mould, curing or solidifying the 
polymer, and removing the encased article from the 
mould 

NOTE In the case of electrical components, lead wires or 
terminals may protrude from the embedment. 

cf. encapsulation and potting 



26 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



embossed sheet 

sheet with a textured pattern on one or both sides 



end group 

constitutional unit with only one attachment to a por- 
tion of a polymer chain 



embossing 

process of producing contoured patterns on surfaces 



emulsifying agent 
emulsifier 

surface-active substance that promotes and maintains 
the dispersion of two incompletely miscible liquids or a 
solid and a liquid by reducing the interfacial tension 
between the two phases 



emulsion 

heterogeneous system in which a liquid is distributed 
in fine drops in another liquid 

NOTE In industry there are systems called emulsions 
which really are suspensions, for example PVAC emulsion. 

cf. dispersion and suspension 



energy loss 

unit damping energy, W (J m-3) 

energy that is lost in a deformation cycle divided by 

the volume of the material. 

NOTE It is the hysteresis loop area, calculated with ref- 
erence to coordinate scales: 

where 

£q is the maximum strain; 

o is the maximum stress. 
In the case of sinusoidal tensile load 

VV=7U^/:"=7icT 2 /r 

cf. hysteresis loop 



emulsion polymerization 

suspension polymerization in which emulsifying agents 
are used to disperse and stabilize the monomer as 
very fine droplets, resulting in the production of a latex 



epoxy plastic 

plastic based on epoxy resins 



epoxy resin 

resin containing epoxy groups capable of crosslinking 



enantiomeric configurational unit 

either one of two configurational units that are mirror 
images at the plane containing the main-chain bonds 



encapsulated adhesive 

adhesive in which the particles or droplets of one of 
the reactive components are enclosed in a protective 
film (microcapsules) to prevent cure until the film is 
destroyed by suitable means 



encapsulation 

process of applying a thermoplastic or thermosetting 
protective or insulating coating to enclose an article by 
suitable means, such as brushing, dipping, spraying, 
thermoforming, or moulding 

cf. embedding, microencapsulation and potting 



ester plastic 

plastic based on polymers in which the repeated 
structural units in the chains are of the ester types, or 
on copolymers in which ester and other types of 
repeated structural units are present in the chains, the 
ester component(s) being in the greatest amount by 
mass 



ethylcellulose 

ethyl ether of cellulose 



ethylene [ethene] plastic 

plastic based on polymers of ethylene [ethene] or 
copolymers of ethylene [ethene] with other monomers, 
the ethylene [ethene] being in the greatest amount by 
mass 



27 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



evolved gas analysis 
EGA 

technique in which the nature and/or amount of volatile 
product(s) released by a substance is (are) measured 
as a function of temperature while the substance is 
subjected to a controlled temperature programme 



NOTE 
clearly. 



The method of analysis should always be stated 



evolved gas detection 
EGD 

technique in which the evolution of gas from a sub- 
stance is detected as a function of temperature while 
the substance is subjected to a controlled temperature 
programme 



extensional viscosity 
elongational viscosity, rj^ (Pas) 
quotient of the difference between the longitudinal 
stress (a,j) and the lateral stress (o\\) and the elonga- 
tional strain rate (e^) in steady uniaxial flow 



external plasticizer 

plasticizer incorporated as an additive in a plastic 
compound 



cf. internal plasticizer 



extruder head 

part of an extruder situated between the barrel and the 
die 



expandable plastic 

plastic formulated in such a way that it can be trans- 
formed into a cellular plastic by thermal, chemical or 
mechanical means 



extended-chain crystal 

polymer crystal in which the chains are in an essen- 
tially fully extended conformation 



NOTE In some cases the head may be part of the die. 



extruder screw 

shaft with one or more helical ribs often divided into 
different zones, with different depths of the channel 
and sometimes different pitch, usually having a cylin- 
drical part at one end and a curved or pointed surface 
at the other, to drive the plastic mass along the barrel 

cf. cored screw 



extender 

liquid or solid inert substance added to a resin, plastic 
or adhesive primarily to reduce cost 



extrusion 

process whereby heated or unheated plastic forced 
through a shaping orifice becomes one continuously 
formed piece 



extendibility 

extent to which fillers or extenders can be incorpo- 
rated in a plastic compound without affecting 
adversely a given end property 

cf. extensibility 



extrusion coating 

coating process in which a molten plastic is extruded 
continuously on to a moving substrate 



extensibility 

extent to which a material can be elongated under 
specified tensile loading conditions 

cf. extendibility 



exudation 

bleed out (deprecated) 
sweat out (deprecated) 
migration of liquid constituents to the surface 

cf. bloom 



28 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 19M 



fabricating 
fabrication 

manufacture of products from moulded parts, rods, 
tubes, sheeting, extrusions or other forms, by appro- 
priate operations such as machining and assembling 

cf. assembling, machining 



feeding (of plastics) 

supplying of plastic material to a processing machine 
(for example in the form of powder, granules or pel- 
lets) 

cf. volumetric feeding, weight feeding, feed 



fancy yarn 

novelty yarn (textile glass) 

yarn that has been manufactured specially so that its 
appearance differs significantly from that of conven- 
tional yarn in order to give it a decorative effect 



felt 

structure characterized by the densely matted condi- 
tion of most or all of the fibres of which it is composed 



fatigue 

process of progressive localized permanent structural 
change occurring in a material subjected to fluctuating 
stresses and strains, which may culminate in cracks or 
complete fracture 



fibre 

unit of matter of relatively short length, characterized 
by a high ratio of length to thickness or diameter 



fatigue life 
fatigue strength 

number of cycles of stress or strain of a specified 
character that a given specimen sustains before fail- 
ure of a specified nature occurs 



fibre streak 
fibre whitening 

accumulation of internal fibres incompletely wetted by 
resin in translucent reinforced plastics, appearing as a 
whitish defect 

cf. dry patch and visible fibre 



fatigue limit, r D 

limiting value which the stress amplitude r a 
approaches when the number of cycles becomes very 
large, for a given mean stress r m or stress ratio R z 

NOTE For some materials, stress amplitude versus the 
number of cycles does not reach a limiting value but 
decreases constantly on increasing the number of cycles. In 
this case it is useful to determine a limit of endurance. 



feed (in extrusion or injection moulding) 
material placed in the hopper 



filament 

single textile element of small diameter and very long 
length, considered as continuous 



filament winding 

method of forming reinforced plastic products by 
winding resin-coated continuous strands of reinforcing 
material on to a mandrel or mould under controlled 
tension and in a predetermined pattern 



feed system 

1) passages between the heating cylinder or transfer 
chamber and the gate; 

2) moulding material in the passages referred to in 1) 



filler 

relatively inert solid material added to a plastic to 
modify its strength, permanence, working properties or 
other qualities, or to lower costs 

cf. reinforced plastic 



29 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



filler rod 

rod of thermoplastic material used in hot-gas welding 
to provide a source of softened material when it is 
necessary to fill a welded joint 



film extrusion 

process of making film by extruding a heated thermo- 
plastic through a die 

cf. film blowing and slot-die extrusion 



filler sheet 

sheet of deformable or resilient material which, when 
placed between an assembly to be bonded and the 
pressure applicator or when distributed between a 
stack of assemblies, aids in providing uniform applica- 
tion of pressure over the area to be bonded 



fillet 

portion of an adhesive that fills the corner or angle 
formed where two adherends are joined 



finishing 

process of developing desired surface characteristics 
on plastic products by appropriate operations such as 
tumbling, grinding, sanding, polishing, coating and 
electroplating 

cf. blast finishing 



film 

thin planar product of arbitrarily-limited maximum 
thickness in which the thickness is very small in pro- 
portion to length and width, generally supplied in roll 
form 



finishing (in textiles) 

application of a coupling agent to glass textile prod- 
ucts, in order to improve the bond between the glass 
fibre surface and matrix 

cf. size 



NOTE The arbitrary thickness limit differs from country to 
country and often from material to material, but in some 
cases is 0,25 mm. 

cf. sheet 



fire resistance 

ability of an element of building construction, compo- 
nent or structure, to fulfil for a stated period of time the 
required stability, integrity, thermal insulation and/or 
other expected duty, specified in a standard fire resis- 
tance test 



film adhesive 

adhesive in film form, with or without a carrier, usually 
set by means of heat and pressure 



first-order transition 

change of state, associated 
melting in a polymer 



with crystallization or 



film blowing 

process of making film by extruding a thermoplastic 
tube kept inflated continuously by internal gas pres- 
sure during stretching and cooling 



fish-eye 

small globular mass that has not blended completely 
into the surrounding material 

NOTE This defect is apparent particularly in a transpar- 
ent or translucent material. 



film casting 

process of making film by distributing a fluid polymer, 
polymer dispersion or solution on a suitable substrate 
and then solidifying the polymeric material by suitable 
means 

cf . cast film 



fixed plate 
fixed platen 
fixed table 

plate that is fixed to a press frame, used to hold a part 
of a mould or being part of a multiplaten press 

cf. floating platen and moving plate 



30 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



flaking 

local breakage and detachment of the surface layer 

cf. delamination 



flame, noun 

zone of combustion in the gaseous phase from which 

light is emitted 



flammabillty 

ability of a material or product to burn with a flame 
under specified test conditions 

NOTE Broadly, flammability includes characteristics that 
pertain to its relative ease of ignition and capacity of sus- 
taining combustion. 



flame, verb 

to undergo combustion in the gaseous phase with 

emission of light 



flammable 

capable of burning with a flame under specified test 
conditions 



flame retardance 

property of a substance or treatment applied to a 
material of retarding markedly the propagation of a 
flame 



flame retardant (product) 

substance that retards markedly the propagation of a 

flame 

NOTE Flame retardaots may be incorporated in plastics 
as additives (external flame retardant) or as chemical 
groups in the base polymer by use of reactive intermediates 
in the polymerization process (internal flame retardant). 



flash 

1) that portion of the charge which escapes from the 
moulding cavity during moulding; 

2) excess plastic that is formed between mating mould 
surfaces 



flash groove (of a mould) 
spew groove 

groove in a mould designed to allow surplus material 
to escape during the moulding operation 



flame spray coating 

coating process in which a powdered polymer is 
heated to fusing temperature in a cone of flame placed 
between the spray gun orifice and the substrate 



flash line 
spew line 

raised line appearing on the surface of a moulding and 
formed at the junction of mould parts 



flame spread 

propagation of a flame front 



flame spread rate 

distance travelled by a flame front during its propaga- 
tion, divided by time, under specified test conditions 



flame spread time 

time taken by a flame on a burning material to travel a 
specified distance or surface area under specified test 
conditions 



flash mould 

mould that is designed to allow the excess of the 
charge to escape in the form of a flash 

NOTE This flash sustains part of the total applied pres- 
sure. 



flash ridge 
flash area 
spew area 
spew ridge 

that part of a flash mould where clearance is provided 
between the mating surfaces through which excess 
material can escape, thus facilitating closing of the 
mould 



31 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



flat PMMA sheets 

sheets of PMMA with two plane, substantially parallel 
surfaces 



flexural stress at conventional deflection 

flexural stress at a deflection equal to 1,5 times the 
thickness of the specimen 



flatwise (of a laminate) 

perpendicular to the layers of a laminate; a direction in 
which a load or electric stress may be applied in test- 
ing laminated plastic sheets 

cf. edgewise and crosswise 



flexibility 

that properly of a material by virtue of which it may be 
flexed or bent repeatedly without rupture or the devel- 
opment of visible defects 

cf. semi-rigid plastic and non-rigid plastic 



floating platen 

platen located between the main head and the press 
table in a multiplaten press and capable of being 
moved independently 



Flory-Huggins theory 

thermodynamic theory of polymer solutions, first for- 
mulated independently by Flory and by Huggins, in 
which the thermodynamic quantities of the solution are 
derived from a simple concept of combinatorial 
entropy of mixing and a reduced Gibbs-energy 
parameter, the "or parameter (side parameter)" 4 ) 



flexible 

easily hand-folded, twisted and bent 

cf. non-rigid plastic and rigidity 



flexible adherends 

adherends having dimensions and physical properties 
that permit bending through any angle up to 90° with- 
out breaking or cracking 



flexural strength 

maximum flexural stress developed in a specimen 
during a flexural test to rupture 

cf. flexural stress 



flow line 

visible line in a 
caused by, flow 



moulding in the direction of, and 



fluidized bed coating 

coating process in which either: 

1) a part to be coated is preheated, dipped into a bed 
of powdered plastic particles kept in a state of flotation 
by an upward air current and usually heated subse- 
quently to fuse the adhering particles, or 

2) a part to be coated, which is at least slightly con- 
ductive electrically and earthed (grounded), is dipped 
cold into a fluidized bed of electrostatically-charged 
powdered plastic particles which adhere to the part, 
and is heated subsequently to fuse the particles 



flexural stress (in flexural testing) 
maximum nominal stress in the outer surface of the 
test specimen, measured at mid-span, at any given 
time during the test 

cf. flexural strength 



4) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical definitions 
relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of terms 
relating to individual macromolecules, their assemblies and 
dilute polymer solutions. 



32 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



fluoroplastic 

plastic based on polymers made with monomers con- 
taining one or more atoms of fluorine, or copolymers of 
such monomers with other monomers, the fluoro- 
monomer(s) being in the greatest amount by mass 



fractionation 

process by means of which macromolecular species 
differing in some characteristic (chemical composition, 
relative molecular mass, branching, stereoregularity, 
etc.) are separated from each other 6 * 



foam in situ 
foam-in-place 

preparation, deposition and curing of a cellular plastic 
mix at the site where it is used 



foaming adhesive 

adhesive designed to foam in situ, after application, in 
order to provide extensive gap filling properties 

cf. cellular adhesive 



folded-chain crystal 

polymer crystal consisting predominantly of chains 
that traverse the crystal repeatedly by folding as they 
emerge at its external surfaces 5 ) 



free vibration measurement 

technique for performing dynamic mechanical meas- 
urements in which the specimen is deformed, released 
and allowed to oscillate freely at the system's natural 
resonant frequency 

NOTE The storage modulus is calculated from the natural 
resonance frequency, and the loss modulus from the rate of 
decay of amplitude of oscillation. 



frequency profile 

plot of the dynamic properties of a material, at a con- 
stant temperature, as a function of test frequency 



friction 

resistance that two surfaces lying in contact with each 
other build up against sliding; a distinction is made 
between static friction and dynamic friction 



folded yarn 

plied yarn (textile glass) 

general term designating yarn formed by twisting two 

or more single yarns in one folding operation 



forming 

process in which the shape of plastic pieces such as 
sheets, rods, or tubes is changed to a desired configu- 
ration 



cf. thermoforming 



friction welding 
spin welding 

pressure welding process in which the surfaces to be 
united are softened by heat generated by friction 



frictional force 

force necessary to overcome friction; a distinction is 
made between the static frictional force h'$ and the 
dynamic fricitonal force Fp 



5) IUPAC Recommendations: 
relating to crystalline polymers. 



1987 Definitions of terms 



6) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical definitions 
relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of terms 
relating to individual macromofecules, their assemblies and 
dilute polymer solutions. 



33 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



fringed-micelle model 

model for crystallinity in which the crystallized seg- 
ments of a macromolecule belong predominantly to 
different crystals 7 ) 



frosting 

as applied to a defect, 
resembling fine crystals 



a light-scattering surface 



cf. chalking, haze and bloom 



gas transmission rate 

volume of gas which, under steady conditions, passes 
through a unit area of a specimen in unit time under 
unit pressure difference and at constant temperature 



NOTE 
men. 



The rate depends on the thickness of the speci- 



gate (in injection and transfer moulding) 
channel or orifice through which material is injected 
from the sprue (or runner in a multicavity mould) into a 
mould cavity 



furan plastic 

plastic based on furan resins 



furan resin 

resin in which the furan ring is an integral part of the 
polymer chain, the furan monomer being in the great- 
est amount by mass 



furfural resin 

resin made by the polymerization or polycondensation 
of furfural alone or with other compounds, the furfural 
being in the greatest amount by mass 



gamma loss peak 

third peak in the damping curve below the melting 
range in order of decreasing temperature or increasing 
frequency 



gauge length 

original length of that portion of the specimen over 
which strain or change of length is determined 



gauge marks 
bench marks 
reference marks 

marks of known separation applied to a specimen, for 
example, to measure strain 



gel, noun 

initial jellylike solid phase that develops during the 

formation of a resin 



gel coat 

outer layer of resin, sometimes containing a colorant, 
applied to a reinforced plastic part to improve surface 
properties 



gap 

opening between two adjacent rolls of a calender or 
other similar machine 



gel point 

stage at which a liquid begins to exhibit pseudoelastic 
properties 

NOTE This stage may be observed conveniently from the 
inflection point on a viscosity-time plot. 



7) IUPAC Recommendations: 1987 Definitions of terms 
relating to crystalline polymers. 



gel strength 

measure in arbitrary units of the rigidity modulus of a 
gel prepared and matured under standard conditions 



34 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1990 



gel time 

time required for a liquid material to form a gel under 
specified conditions of temperature 



gelation 
gelling 

conversion of a material to the gel state 



cf. gel 



graft copolymer 

graft polymer derived from more than one species of 
monomer 

cf. note to graft polymer 



graft copolymerization 

polymerization in which a graft copolymer is formed 



glass transition 

reversible change in an amorphous polymer or in 
amorphous regions of a partially-crystalline polymer 
from (or to) a viscous or rubbery condition to (or from) 
a hard and relatively brittle one 



glass transition temperature 

approximate midpoint of the temperature range over 
which the glass transition takes place 

NOTE The glass transition temperature (T g ) varies sig- 
nificantly, depending upon the specific property and the test 
method and conditions selected to measure it. 



cf. glass transition 



glass veil 

thin layer made from glass filaments (continuous or 
chopped) held together with a binder 

NOTE This veil generally is stiffer and has often a higher 
mass per unit area than surfacing mat. 

cf. surfacing mat 



gloss 

degree to which a surface approaches perfect optical 
smoothness in its capacity to reflect light 



graft polymer 

polymer, the molecules of which have one or more 
species of block connected to the main chain as side 
chains, these side chains having constitutional or con- 
figurational features different from the constitutional 
units comprising the main chain, exclusive of junction 
points 

NOTE In the graft polymer molecule 
AAA/WWWWV 

the A-chain, B„,and B„ are regular blocks, the A-chain is the 
mam chain, and B m and B n are the side-chain grafts. The 

-A- units are junction points and are considered to be part 

i 

of the main chain. Where A and B are derived from the 
same monomer, for example: 

- CH = CHCH^CHr- and - CH^CH- 

CH=CH> 

(A) (B) 

the polymer is a graft polymer. The graft polymer with mole- 
cules consisting of 

~ CHCH,— and - CHCH,— 
C0 2 CH3 OCOCH3 

(A) (B) 

is a graft copolymer, 
cf. graft copolymer 



glowing combustion 

combustion of a material in the solid phase without 
flame but with emission of light from the combustion 
zone 

cf. incandescence 



graft polymerization 

polymerization in which a graft polymer is formed 



35 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



granulator 

machine for reducing large pieces of material or 
rejected moulded articles into a granular state 

cf. granule and pelletizer 



granule 

relatively small particle produced in various sizes and 
shapes in operations such as cutting, grinding, crush- 
ing, precipitation and polymerization 

NOTE These operations also yield material in the form of 
powder; in some precipitation and polymerization processes 
material in the form of beads is produced. 

cf. pellet 



hardness 

resistance of a material to indentation or scratching 

NOTE Different methods of evaluating hardness give 
different ratings because they are measuring somewhat 
different quantities and characteristics of the material. To 
express hardness quantitatively each type of test has its 
own scale of hardness defined arbitrarily. For example, 
Mohs' scale evaluates hardness by resistance to scratching 
with minerals (talc = 1 to diamond = 10). For ball indentation 
methods, see ISO 2039. 



haze 

cloudy appearance within or on the surface of a plastic 



heat-activated adhesive 

dry adhesive that is rendered tacky by application of 
heat 



graphitization 

heat treatment in an inert atmosphere usually carried 
out after and at higher temperatures than carboniza- 
tion 

NOTE The process is known in the industry as 
"graphitization" as it has the effect of modifying the physical 
and chemical properties of the carbonized fibre even though 
graphitic structure rarely can be observed in practice. 



half-width of the resonance curve, A/ (Hz): 
difference in frequencies measured at the amplitudes 
A R and A [A = (1/V2) ^r = 0,707 A R ] of the resonance 
curve, where ,4 R is the resonance amplitude 

NOTE Provided that damping is not too large, A/ is 
related to the loss factor d by 

cf. resonance curve 



heat of combustion (mass) 
calorific potential 

calorific energy which could be released by the com- 
plete combustion divided by the mass of a material 



heat mark 

extremely shallow depression or groove in the surface 
of a plastic, having practically no depth (its area being 
very large compared with its depth) and visible 
because of a sharply-defined rim or a roughened sur- 
face 

cf. sink mark 



heat sealing 

process of bonding two or more thin layers of materi- 
als, at least one of which is a thermoplastic film, by 
heating areas in contact with each other to the tem- 
perature at which fusion of the thermoplastic film(s) 
occurs, the bonding usually being completed by the 
application of pressure 



hardening agent 
hardener 

agent that promotes or regulates the curing reaction of 
resins or adhesives by taking part in the reaction 

cf . curing agent 



heater band 
heater blanket 
heater strip 

electrical heating devices for barrels, dies and moulds 

NOTE Bands and strips are more or less flexible; blan- 
kets are rigid. 



36 



heating-curve determination 

technique in which the temperature of a substance is 
measured as a function of the programmed tempera- 
ture, while the substance is subjected to a controlled 
temperature programme in the heating mode 

NOTE 1 Sample temperature should be plotted on the 
ordinate increasing upwargls^and programmed temperature 
or time on the abscissa from left to right. 

NOTE 2 When the temperature programme is in the cool- 
ing mode, this becomes cooling-curve determination. 

NOTE 3 Two derivative curves can be obtained: heating- 
rate curve (for (6T/6t against T or t) and inverse heating-rate 
curve (for tit/dT against T or /)• 



high-frequency welding 

pressure welding process in which the surfaces to be 
united are softened by heat produced by a high-fre- 
quency field 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



high-pressure moulding 

method of moulding or laminating in which the pres- 
sure used is greater than 5 MPa 



cf. low-pressure moulding 



homopolymer 

polymer derived from one species of monomer 



homopolymers and copolymers of methyl 
methacrylate (MMA) 

PMMA homopolymers and copolymers of MMA con- 
taining at least 80 % (///////) of MMA and not more than 
20 % (tfi/fn) of acrylic ester or other suitable monomers 

NOTE They include both unmodified materials and mate- 
rials containing lubricants, processing aids, UV absorbers, 
pigments and colorants. They do not include PMMA modi- 
fied with elastomers. 



homopolymerization 

polymerization in which a homopolymer is formed 



high polymer 

substance composed 
molecular mass 



of polymers of high relative 



NOTE In general, a linear polymer of a given series is 
considered a high polymer if its physical properties 
(especially its viscoelastic properties) do not vary markedly 
with the relative molecular mass. Often this term is short- 
ened to "polymer" . 



high-pressure decorative laminate(s) 
HPDL or HPL 
high-pressure laminate 
HPL 

sheet(s) consisting of layers of fibrous sheet material 
(for example, paper) impregnated with thermosetting 
resins and bonded together by means of heat and a 
pressure of at least 5 MPa, the outer layer or layers on 
one or both sides having decorative colours or designs 



cf. laminated sheet 



hopper 

funnel-like container placed on the feed opening of a 
moulding machine, e.g. an extruder 

cf. feeding (of plastics) 



hot-gas welding 

pressure welding process in which the surfaces to be 
united are softened by a jet of hot air or inert gas 



hot-melt adhesive 

thermoplastic adhesive that is applied in a molten 
state and forms a bond on cooling to a solid state 



hot-runner mould 

in injection moulding, a mould in which the runners are 
kept at a temperature that is higher than the solidifica- 
tion temperature of the material 



37 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1W9 



hot-setting adhesive 

adhesive that sets only with the application of heat 

cf. cold-setting adhesive 



ignition temperature 

minimum temperature of a material at which sustained 
combustion can be initiated under specified test condi- 
tions 

cf. spontaneous ignition temperature 



hot stamping 

process of decorating or marking plastics in which a 
pigmented or metallized film is pressed against the 
plastic by a hot die, thereby transferring and bonding 
firmly the pigment or the metal to the plastic 



impact strength 

in Charpy (ISO 179) and Izod (ISO 180) impact tests, 
the energy absorbed in breaking a specimen, under 
shock loading, referred to the cross-section of the 
specimen 

NOTE The specimen may be unnotched or notched; in 
the latter case, the cross-section is that at the bottom of the 
notch. 



hybrid 

assembly manufactured with two or more different 
types of fibre materials (for example, glass and car- 
bon) 



hydrolytically-degradable plastic 

degradable plastic in which the degradation results 
from hydrolysis 



cf. degradable plastic 



cf. relative impact strength 



impact value 

energy absorbed by a specimen of standard design 
when sheared by a single blow of a testing-machine 
hammer; the impact value is expressed in joules per 
square metre 



impregnation 

process of incorporating polymers or monomers, in the 
form of liquids, melts, dispersions or solutions, into a 
substrate by way of pores or voids 



hysteresis loop (in dynamic mechanical 

measurement) 
closed curve plot of stress against strain (or of func- 
tions of these) produced during cyclic deformation of a 
material 

NOTE The area of each loop is proportional to the energy 
lost in each cycle. 



impression 

female portion of a mould 

cf. cavity 



ignite 

1) transitive verb: to initiate combustion; 

2) intransitive verb: to catch fire with or without the 
application of an external heat source 



ignition 

initiation of combustion 



impulse sealing 
thermal impulse sealing 

bonding process in which the surfaces to be united are 
subjected to non-continuous rapid heating, pressure 
being maintained after heating 



incandescence 

glowing produced without combustion or other chemi- 
cal reaction, for example, glowing produced by electri- 
cal beating of a tungsten filament 



cf. glowing combustion 



38 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



inching 

reduction in the rate of mould closing just before the 
mating surfaces touch each other 



injection blow moulding 

blow moulding process \n which a parison is formed 
over a mandrel by injection moulding and blown to its 
final form and dimensions in a second mould 



indentation hardness 

ability of a material to resist indentation 

NOTE The term "indentation hardness" has no quantita- 
tive meaning except in terms of a particular test in which the 
size and shape of the indenter, the indenting load, and 
other conditions of the test are specified. 



injection moulding 

process of moulding a material by injection under 
pressure from a heated cylinder through a sprue 
(runner, gate) into the cavity of a closed mould 



inherent viscosity, rj, nh 

logarithmic viscosity number, r] in 

ratio of the natural logarithm of the re)aitve viscosity to 

the mass concentration of the polymer c 



tynn - *?in ~ 



lnr) r 



NOTE See notes to reduced viscosity. 
cf. relative viscosity 



injection-moulding pressure 

in injection moulding, pressure applied to the cross- 
sectional area of the barrel containing the moulding 
material 



inorganic polymer 

polymer without carbon atoms in the main chain 

NOTE Examples: polydichlorophosphazene; polydi- 
methylsiloxane. Organic group side chains may be present 
in inorganic polymers; in this case the polymers sometimes 
are referred to as "semi-organic". 



inhibitor 

substance used in small proportion to suppress a 
chemical reaction 



cf. catalyst and retarder 



initial stress in stress relaxation 

stress immediately occurring upon straining a speci- 
men in a relaxation test 



input torque, 7| N 

torque applied to introduce or increase the axial load 
in the assembly 

NOTE It is used to overcome friction in the thread and 
under the bolt head. 



NOTE Since it is nearly impossible to obtain stress read- 
ings at the instant of straining, the stress at a specified 
small increment of time after straining is a more reproduci- 
ble value. 



initiator 

substance, used in small proportion, that starts a 
chemical reaction, for example, by providing free radi- 
cals 

cf. catalyst 



insert 

part consisting of metal or other material which may be 
moulded into position or may be pressed into the 
moulding after !he completion of the moulding opera- 
tion 



insert pin 

pin used to locate and maintain an insert in position 
during moulding 



39 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



instantaneous strain in creep 

strain occurring immediately upon loading a specimen 
before any creep occurs 

NOTE Since it is nearly impossible to obtain strain read- 
ings at the instant of loading, the strain at a specific incre- 
ment of time after loading is a more reproducible value. 



intrinsic viscosity 
limiting viscosity number 

limiting value of the reduced viscosity or the inherent 
viscosity at infinite dilution of the polymer: 



[ij]= lim -i= lim r] inh 

(->0< r->0 



insulation resistance 

insulation resistance between two electrodes which 
are in contact with, or embedded in, a specimen, is the 
ratio of the direct voltage applied to the electrodes to 
the total current between them at a given time after the 
application of that voltage 

NOTE It is dependent upon both the volume and surface 
resistance of the specimen. 



NOTE 1 See NOTES to reduced viscosity. 

NOTE 2 This term is also known in the polymer literature 
as the Staudinger index. 

cf. inherent viscosity 



ionic polymerization 

chain polymerization in which the reactive functional 
species is an ion 



internal friction, WIU (dimensionless) 

the ratio of the energy loss VV to the unit storage 

energy U 

NOTE If the internal friction is small, it may be considered 
equal to twice the logarithmic decrement ,\: 

W/U = 2 A 

cf. energy loss, logarithmic decrement and unit 
storage energy 



lonomer 

polyelectrolyte with very few ionic groups 



irregular block 

block that cannot be described by only one species of 
constitutional repeating unit in a single sequential 
arrangement 



internal plasticizer 

chemical group incorporated by chemical reaction in a 
polymer to plasticize it 

cf. external plasticizer 



international rubber hardness degree 
IRMD 

measure of hardness, the magnitude of which is 
derived from the depth of penetration of a specified 
indenter into a test piece under specified conditions 

NOTE International rubber hardness degrees are meas- 
ured so that degrees represents a material showing no 
measurable resistance to indentation and 100 degrees 
represents a material showing no measurable indentation. 
The scale is described completely in ISO 48. 



irregular polymer 

polymer, the molecules of which cannot be described 
by only one species of constitutional unit in a single 
sequential arrangement 

NOTE The polymer with molecules consisting of a ran- 
dom arrangement of the constitutional units 

— CHCBr- and — CH^CH- 

R R 

as in the fragment 

R R R R R 

is an irregular polymer. 

cf. regular polymer 



40 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 19M 



isobaric mass-change determination 

technique in which the equilibrium mass of a sub- 
stance at constant partial pressure of the volatile 
product(s) is measured as a function of temperature 
while the substance is subjected to a controlled tem- 
perature programme 

NOTE The record is the isobaric mass-change curve: the 
mass should be plotted on the ordinate decreasing down- 
wards and temperature on the abscissa increasing from left 
to right. 



isocyanate polymer 

1) isocyanate resin: prepolymer of relatively low 
molecular mass, used for the production of (mostly 
thermoset) polyurethane polymers e.g. cellular plastics 
and casting resin articles; 

2) in some countries, isocyanate plastic designates 
polymers made by reactions of polyfunctional isocy- 
anates with other compounds 

NOTE 1 In other countries, these products are called 
polyurethanes and polyureas. 

NOTE 2 Reaction of isocyanates with hydroxyl-containing 
compounds produces polyurethanes having the urethane 
group -NH-CO-0-. Reaction of isocyanates with amino- 
containing compounds produces polyureas having the urea 
group-NH-CO-NH-. 



isotactic polymer 

regular polymer, the molecules of which can be 
described in terms of only one species of configura- 
tional base unit (having chiral or prochiral atoms" in the 
main chain) in a single sequential arrangement 

NOTE In an isotactic polymer molecule the configura- 
tional repeating unit is identical with the configurational 
base unit. In the polymer - [CH(C0 2 R)CH(CH 3 )]„ - if only 
one mam-chain stereoisometric site of each constitutional 
repeating unit is defined, as in 

V 

-C-CKChy- 
C0 2 R 

it is a configurational repeating unit, and the corresponding 
polymer 

V 

-C-CH(CB>)- 

C0 2 R j n 

is an isotactic polymer. It is not a stereoregular polymer 
because the configuration at the stereoisometric centre - 
CH(CH 3 ) - is not defined. The following dnsotactic poly- 
mers are stereoregular: 



■c- 



H 



V 



and 



C0 2 R CH3 

<fo 2 R y 
-c c — 

H ^ 



Cr-U COoR 



C0 2 R 

T 



v 
r 

CHj 



-c- 

l 



cf. note to stereorepeating unit 

cf. chirality and sequential arrangement 



41 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



isothermal mass-change determination 

technique of obtaining a record of the dependence of 
the mass of a substance on time (r) at constant tem- 
perature 

NOTE The record is the isothermal mass-change curve; it 
is normal to plot mass on the ordinate with mass decreasing 
downwards and / on the abscissa increasing from left to 
right. 



joint (in adhesive bonding) 

junction of two adjacent adherends held together by 

an adhesive 



laminate, noun 

product made by bonding together two or more layers 

of material or materials 



laminated moulded rod (as applied to thermosets) 
rod formed by rolling impregnated layers of material on 
a mandrel, removing the mandrel, curing in a cylindri- 
cal or other suitable (see note) mould under heat and 
pressure, and then grinding to size 

NOTE In languages other than English, rod is used also 
for products with other than circular cross-sections e.g. 
square, rectangular, hexagonal, oval. 



kiss roll (in coating) 

rotating cylinder of a coating machine, used for the 
deposition of a coating material, transferred to the 
cylinder's surface from another cylinder immersed in 
the coating fluid, on to a substrate to be coated 

cf. reverse roll 



kneader 

machine for mixing materials intensively by severe 
shear action 



laminated moulded tube (as applied to thermosets) 
tube formed by rolling impregnated layers of material 
on a mandrel, curing the assembly in a cylindrical or 
other suitable (see note) mould under heat and pres- 
sure, and then removing the mandrel 

NOTE In languages other than English, tube is used also 
for products with other than circular cross-sections e.g. 
square, rectangular, hexagonal, oval. 



knitted fabric (textile glass) 

planar or tubular structure made by the intermeshing 

of loops of glass yarns 



laminated rolled tube (as applied to thermosets) 
tube formed by rolling impregnated layers of material 
on a mandrel between heated pressure rolls, curing in 
an oven, and then removing the mandrel 



ladder polymer 
double-strand polymer 

polymer that has a double-stranded main chain 



lamellar crystal 

type of crystal with a large extension in two dimen- 
sions and a uniform thickness 8 ) 



laminated sheet (as applied to thermosets) 
sheet consisting of superimposed layers of paper, 
fabric, veneer, or felt (mat) that have been impreg- 
nated substantially with a thermosetting or curable 
resin, and bonded together under pressure, with or 
without heat, to form a single piece 

NOTE Other ingredients, for example colouring matter, 
may be incorporated. 



laminate, verb 

to bond layers of material(s) 



laminating 

lamination (process) 

process of bonding two or more layers of material(s) 



8) IUPAC Recommendations: 1987 Definitions of terms 
relating to crystalline polymers. 



lamination (of a laminate) 
layer of a laminate 



42 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472:1999 



land (of a compression or injection mould) 
land area 
mating surface 

surface of contact, perpendicular to the direction of 
application of the pressure, of the seating faces of the 
mould, i.e. those faces that come into contact with one 
another when the mould is closed 



land (of an extruder die) 

surface parallel to the flow of material in the die 



let-go 

applied to a defect in laminated safety glass, an area 
over which an initial adhesion between interlayer and 
glass has been lost 



let-off (a device) 
pay-off (a device) 

device used to suspend a coil or reel from which the 
material to be processed is fed under controlled ten- 
sion to a machine, such as for a coating operation by 
calendering or extrusion 



lap joint 

joint made by placing one adherend partly over 
another and bonding together the overlapped portions 

cf. butt joint and scarf joint 



lift (in moulding) 
complete set of 
moulding cycle 



mouldings produced in a single 



lignin plastic 

plastic based on lignin resins 



latex 

colloidal aqueous dispersion of a polymeric material 



lignin resin 

resin made by heating lignin or by reaction of lignin 
with chemicals or resins, lignin being in the greatest 
amount by mass 



lay-up, noun (as applied to reinforced plastics) 
assembly of layers of resin-impregnated material 
ready for processing 



lay up, verb (as applied to reinforced plastics) 
assemble layers of resin-impregnated material for 
processing 



lengthwise 

direction optionally specified or selected, for example: 

1 ) the longer direction of the sample; 

2) the machine direction, i.e. the direction in which the 
material is formed and travels in or on the machine 
during the process of manufacture; 

3) the direction in which the sample is known to be 
stronger in a designated property; 

4) a direction selected arbitrarily, particularly when the 
property to be measured is expected to be uniform in 
the plane of measurement 



limit of endurance, tq (<v f ) 

shear stress determined at a specific number of fault 

test cycles /V F ; it is expressed in megapascals (MPa) 

NOTE Depending on whether the tests are carried out at 
a constant mean stress, r m or at a constant stress ratio, K r> 
the results should be presented in the form: 

r D (/V F , r m ) in megapascals (MPa) 
or 

r D (yV F , R T ) in megapascals (MPa) 

cf. fatigue limit 



limiting oxygen index 

minimum concentration of oxygen in a mixture of oxy- 
gen and nitrogen that will just support flaming com- 
bustion of a material under specified test conditions 



linear burning rate 

linear distance of burning divided by time under speci- 
fied test conditions 



43 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



linear chain 

polymer chain that contains no short-chain or long- 
chain branches 



loading tray 

device used to load the moulding compound simulta- 
neously into each cavity of a multi-impression mould 
by the withdrawal of a sliding bottom from the tray 



linear copolymer 

copolymer, the molecules of which are linear chains 



linear density (as applied to textile glass) 

mass per unit length of desized oven-dried glass yarn 

or roving 



linear expansion 

the change in a dimension of a test specimen under 
specified test conditions 

cf. volume expansion, swelling and coefficient of 
linear thermal expansion 



logarithmic decrement, A (dimensionless) 
natural logarithm of the ratio of any two (or more) suc- 
cessive amplitudes of like sign, in the decay of single 
frequency oscillations: 

k A n + k 

where 

A„ and ,4,,+* are amplitudes (in radians of rotation) 
of two oscillations; 

k is the number of oscillations separat- 

ing the two amplitude measurements 

NOTE Provided that damping is not too large, A is related 
to the loss factor d by 

A-iul 



linear polymer 

polymer in which the mers are bound to each other in 
a chain having no branches 



long chain 

linear macromolecule or a linear portion of a macro- 
molecule long enough to be considered as polymeric 



living polymerization 

chain polymerization in which the reactive functional 
species is stable enough, under the appropriate condi- 
tions for synthesis, that a typical macromolecule is 
active for a period many times longer than the duration 
of the synthetic procedure 



load-deflection curve 

diagram in which corresponding values of load and 
deflection in a flexural test are plotted against each 
other 



long-chain branch 

polymeric offshoot from a macromolecular chain 9 ) 



longitudinal sheer strength 
lap joint strength 

force necessary to rupture an adhesive joint by means 
of stress applied parallel to the plane of the bond 



loading chamber 

space -in a mould additional to that occupied by the 
mould cavity provided to accommodate excess 
unpressed moulding material where the moulding 
material remains for an appropriate time to reach melt 
flow temperature 

cf . transfer chamber 



9) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical definitions 
relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of terms 
relating to individual macromolecules, their assemblies and 
dilute polymer solutions. 



44 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



longitudinal wave modulus, L (Pa) 

modulus of longitudinal waves propagating through a 

laterally extended plate: 

L=de 

NOTE A longitudinal wave normally is a compressional 
wave. With lateral extension or dilatation 

E x = f v = 



lot 

definite quantity of some commodity manufactured or 
produced under conditions that are presumed uniform 



low-pressure moulding 

method of moulding or laminating in which pressure 
used is 5 MPa or less 



loss angle (in damping), 5(rad) 

phase angle <p between stress and strain, the tangent 

of which is the loss factor d 

cf. loss factor (in damping) 



loss factor (in damping), d 

loss tangent 

tan delta (dimensionless) 

1) tangent of the loss angle S between stress and 
strain; 

2) ratio of the loss modulus (loss compliance) to the 
storage modulus (storage compliance) measured in 
tension, shear, compression, or longitudinal compres- 
sion: 



tan 8^ 
tan <S r , 



E"IE' 

:G"/C 



tan Sk = K"/K' 
tan S L = L"/L' 

NOTE 1 It is given by the quotient 
tan (5= M"/M'= C'/C 

NOTE 2 Commonly d = tan 6 is used as a measure of the 
damping of a system subject to forced vibrations. 



cf high-pressure moulding 



lubricant 

substance added in small proportion in the formulation 
of a plastic to facilitate processing or to prevent stick- 
ing 



lubricant bloom 

cloudy, greasy exudation of a lubricant on the surface 
of a plastic 



machining 

fabricating operations such as drilling, grinding, milling, 
punching, routing, sanding, sawing, tapping and 
threading 

cf fabricating and assembling 



macrocycle 

cyclic macromolecule or a cyclic portion of a macro- 
molecule of high relative molecular mass 



loss index, e" 

with a dielectric material, it is equal to the product of its 
dielectric dissipation factor (tan S) and its relative 
permitivity (*>) 



loss modulus, M" (Pa) (in damping) 

imaginary part of the complex modulus [compliance] 

NOTE It is a measure of the energy lost (dissipated) 
during a loading cycle. 

cf. complex modulus and complex compliance 



macromer 
macromonomer 

monomer that itself can be described as a polymer, or 
at least as an oligomer 



macromolecule 

very large molecule (organic or inorganic) 



cf. polymer and high polymer 



45 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



main chain 
backbone 

that linear portion of a macrornolecule to which all 
other chains (long, short or both) may be regarded as 
being pendant; where two or more chains equally 
could be considered to be the main chain, the one 
selected leads to the simplest geometrical representa- 
tion of the molecule 



mandrel (in extrusion) 

centre member of an extrusion die that determines the 

internal shape and dimensions of a hollow product 



mass per unit area (as applied to textile glass) 

ratio of the mass of a specimen of mat or fabric of 

specified dimensions to its surface area 



masterbatch 

well-dispersed mixture of a polymer and high percent- 
ages of one or more component(s) (colorants and/or 
other additives) in known proportions for use in blend- 
ing in appropriate amounts with the basic polymer in 
the preparation of a compound 



Mark-Houwink equation 
Mark-Houwink-Sakurada equation 
N-H-S equation 

equation describing the dependence of the intrinsic 
viscosity of a polymer on its relative molecular mass 
and having the form 

[nl-K (a7> 

where 

K and a are constants, the values of which 
depend on the nature of the polymer and 
solvent as well as on the temperature; 

A/ r usually is one of the relative molecular 

mass averages 10 ) 



mat 

product made of filaments, staple fibres or strands, cut 
or uncut, oriented or not, held together in the form of a 
sheet 



matt spot 

local reduction in gloss of a part 



maximum stress, r max 

greatest algebraic value reached at regular intervals 
by the stress; it is expressed in megapascals (MPa) 



mass-distribution function 
weight-distribution function 

distribution function in which the relative amount of a 
portion of a substance with a specific value, or a range 
of values, of the random vanable(s) is expressed as a 
mass fraction 10 ) 



mean stress, r m 

algebraic mean of the maximum and minimum 
stresses; it is expressed in megaspascal (MPa): 



+ r n 



mass burning rate 

mass loss of burning material divided by time under 
specified test conditions 



mechanically-foamed plastic 

cellular plastic in which the cells are formed by the 
physical incorporation of gases 

cf. chemically foamed plastic 



10) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



melamine-formaldehyde resin 
MF resin 

amino resin made by the polycondensation of mela- 
mine with formaldehyde or a compound that is capable 
of providing methylene bridges 



46 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



melamine plastic 

plastic based on amino resins, melamine being the 
amine present in the greatest amount by mass of the 
amines or amides involved in the polymerization 

cf. aminoplastic and melamine-formaldehyde resin 



microencapsulation 

process of coating individual minute particles of matter 
as a means of separating and storing them for later 
release under controlled conditions 

cf. encapsulation 



melt flow rate 

quantity of thermoplastic material extruded in a given 
time under specified test conditions 



microgel 

network of microscopic dimensions 1 1 ) 



melting behaviour 

phenomena accompanying the softening of a material 
under the influence of heat (including shrinking, drip- 
ping, burning of molten material, etc.) 



migration 

transfer, usually undesiraTTle, of a constituent of a 
plastic material to another contacting material 

cf exudation 



melting temperature 

temperature, measured under specified test condi- 
tions, at which crystallinity disappears in a semi-crys- 
talline polymer on heating 

cf. softening temperature 



milled fibres 

fibres broken into very short lengths by processing 
through a size-reduction mill 



minimum film-forming temperature (of dispersions) 
limiting temperature above which a continuous, homo- 
geneous film without cracks is formed 



metallized plastic 

plastic part or film on which a metal has been depos- 
ited, generally by vacuum sublimation, but also by 
chemical reaction 

NOTE Metallizing by vacuum sublimation and chemical 
reaction generally gives deposits about 0,1 pm thick; then 
the metal thickness commonly is increased by electroplat- 
ing. 



minimum ignition time 

minimum time of exposure of a material to an ignition 
source to obtain sustained combustion under specified 
test conditions 

cf. ease of ignition 



minimum stress, r min 

smallest algebraic value reached at regular intervals 
by the stress; this stress shall always be positive and 
is expressed in megapascals (MPa) 



metering device 

device of a machine allowing a material or component 
to be measured in predetermined quantities 



metering zone 

final zone of a screw, in which the melt is advanced at 
a uniform rate to the breaker plate or die 



11) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



47 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



modulus, M (Pa) 
quotient of stress by strain: 

M = ale 

E is the tensile modulus; 

G is the shear modulus; 

K is the bulk modulus; 

L is the longitudinal compression modulus 



modulus of elasticity 
elastic modulus 

ratio of stress to corresponding strain in a material 
below the proportional limiT 



cf. proportional limit 



molecular-mass distribution 

relative amounts of molecules of different molecular 
mass that are present in a polymer 

NOTE The molecules of commercial polymers do not 
have a single molecular mass; the molecular mass distribu- 
tion follows statistical considerations. The distribution 
observed is dependent on the method of analysis used, 
which therefore needs to be stated. The ratio of the mass 
average molecular mass to the number-average molecular 
mass often is used as an indication of the distribution. The 
molecular-mass distribution may influence processing 
behaviour considerably. 



monofilament 

single filament that is strong enough to function as a 
yarn in commercial textile operations or as an entity in 
other applications 



molar mass, M 

mass divided by amount of substance 12 ) 



molar-mass average 

relative molecular-mass average 

molecular-weight average 

any average of the molar mass or relative molecular 
mass (molecular weight) for a polydisperse polymer 

NOTE 1 The unit gram per mole (g/mol) is recommended in 
polymer science for molar mass M because then the 
numerical values of the molar mass and the relative molar 
mass of a substance are equal. 

NOTE 2 Three types of average commonly used are num- 
ber-average, mass average (weight-average) and viscosity- 
average. 



cf. molecular-mass 
molecular mass 



distribution and relative 



monomer 

compound consisting of molecules each of which can 
provide one or more constitutional units 



monomeric unit 
mer 

largest constitutional unit contributed by a 
monomer molecule in a polymerization process 



single 



mould 
die 

assembly of parts enclosing the space (cavity) from 
which the moulding takes its form 

cf. punch 



mould clamping force 
locking force 
locking pressure 

force which is applied to the mould to keep it closed 
during the moulding process 



12) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



mould mark 

blemish on the surface of a moulding, derived from the 
mould 



48 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



mould team 

line on a moulded or laminated piece, caused by the 
parting line of the mould, differing in colour or appear- 
ance from the general surface 



multicavlty mould 
multi-impression mould 
gang mould 

mould permitting the production of several parts in a 
single cycle 



moulding (process) 

process of shaping a material with a die or mould by 

applying pressure and usually heat 



multifilament 

class of textile materials consisting of assembled fila- 
ments 



moulding (product) 

object produced in a closed mould (for example by 

compression moulding, transfer moulding, injection 

moulding) 



multigated 

entry provided to the mould cavity by more than one 
gate 



moulding compound 

compound that can be shaped by a moulding process 



multiplaten press 
multidaylight press 

press with floating platens between the upper and 
lower platens, thus providing more than one space for 
mould or laminate assemblies 



moulding cycle 

1) complete sequence of operations in the moulding 
process requisite for the production of one set of 
mouldings; 

2) time to complete the operations described in 1) 



multiple wound yarn (textile glass) 

yarn formed from two or more yarns wound together 

but not twisted together 

NOTE Single, folded or cabled yarns are used to make 
multiple wound yarn. 



moulding pressure 

pressure acting on the moulding material during the 
moulding process 

cf. mould clamping force 



moulding shrinkage 

difference in dimensions between a moulding and the 
mould cavity in which it was moulded, both the mould 
and the moulding being at normal room temperature 
when measured 



cf. post-shrinkage 



moving plate 
moving table 

plate that holds a part of the mould and moves to a 
fixed plate to close the mould 

cf. fixed plate and floating platen 



multi-strand chain 

macromolecule that can be described by constitutional 
units joined so as to form an uninterrupted sequence 
of polycyclic structures through more than two atoms 



narrow fabric with selvages 13 ) 

textile glass fabric, with selvages, between 100 mm 
and 300 mm in width 



cf. tape with selvages 



narrow fabric without selvages 13 ) 

textile glass fabric, without selvages, between 100 mm 
and 300 mm in width 



cf. tape without selvages 



13) "Selvedges" is the preferred spelling in the United 
Kingdom 



49 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1M9 



necking 
striction 

localized reduction in cross-section that may occur in 
a material under tensile stress 



non-rigid plastic 

plastic that has a modulus of elasticity in flexure or, if 
that is not applicable, then in tension, not greater than 
70 MPa under stated conditions 

NOTE Materials usually are classified at standard tem- 
perature and relative humidity in accordance with ISO 291. 



needled mat 

mat formed of strands cut to a short length, felted 
together in a needle loom, with or without a carrier 



network 

interlacing structure produced by crosslinking of poly- 
mer chains 



cf. network polymer 



network polymer 

polymer in which a three-dimensional structure 
formed by interchain covalent bonds 



is 



non-uniform polymer 
polydisperse polymer 

polymer comprising molecules non-uniform with 
respect to relative molecular mass, constitution or 
both 14 ) 



non-woven scrim 

non-woven open-mesh textile glass fabric in which two 
or more layers of parallel yarns are bonded to each 
other by chemical or mechanical means, the yarns in 
successive layers lying at an angle to the yarns in pre- 
ceding layers 



nip 

line of tangency between two rolls in contact with one 
another, or between either of the rolls and the surface 
of an object passing between them 



nominal diameter of filaments or staple fibres 

filament or staple fibre diameter used in the designa- 
tion of glass products, and corresponding approxi- 
mately to the mean real diameter of the filaments or 
staple fibres, expressed in micrometres and rounded 
to a whole number 



normal force, F 

force acting perpendicular to the surfaces in contact 



normal stress, <j\\ (Pa) 

force, perpendicular to its original working area, 
divided by the cross-section of the specimen meas- 
ured in this area 

IUPAP symbol: a 

NOTE A normal stress may be either a tensile stress or a 
compressive stress, depending upon the direction of the 
force. 



non-modified cast PMMA sheets 

sheets based on homopolymers of MMA, or copoly- 
mers of MMA with acrylic or methacrylic monomers, 
produced by bulk polymerization in the presence of 
suitable initiators 



no-twist roving (for over-end unwinding) 
roving in which intentional twist was placed during 
assembly, so that when pulled from a designated end 
of the package the twist is removed 



non-resonant forced vibration technique 

technique for performing dynamic mechanical meas- 
urements in which the test specimen is oscillated 
mechanically at a fixed frequency 

NOTE Storage modulus and damping are calculated from 
the applied strain, the resultant stress, and the phase angle 
shift. 



14) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



50 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



novolak 

phenolic resin containing less than a 1:1 ratio of for- 
maldehyde to phenol so that normally it remains ther- 
moplastic until heated with an appropriate amount of a 
compound (for example formaldehyde or hexamethyl- 
enetetramine) capable of giving additional linkages, 
thereby producing an infusible material 

cf. resol 



oligomer molecule 

molecule of intermediate molecular weight, the struc- 
ture of which can be described in terms of a number of 
constitutional units 



oligomerization 

process of converting a monomer or a mixture of 
monomers into an oligomer 



nozzle 

device at the end of an injection or extruder barrel, 
through which the moulding material flows to the 
mould or die 



on torque, 7qn 

maximum torque required to screw the nut onto a bolt 
precoated with adhesive 



NOTE A nozzle may have a valve for controlling the flow 
of the moulding material. 



nucleation 

formation of the smallest crystalline entity, the further 
growth of which is favoured thermodynamically 15) 



offset yield point 

point on a stress-strain curve that identifies the offset 
yield stress 



open assembly time (in adhesive bonding) 

time during which adhesive-coated surfaces are 

exposed to the air before being brought into contact 



open cell 

cell not enclosed totally by its walls and hence inter- 
connecting with other cells or with the exterior 



offset yield stress 

stress at which the stress-strain curve departs from 
linearity by a specified percentage of strain (offset) 

NOTE It is essential to give the value of the offset when 
this property is reported. 



oligomer 

substance composed of molecules containing a few of 
one or more species of atoms or groups of atoms 
(constitutional units) repetitively linked to each other 

NOTE The physical properties of an oligomer vary with 
the addition or removal of one or a few of the constitutional 
units from its molecules. 



open-cell cellular plastic 

cellular plastic in which almost all the cells are inter- 
connecting throughout 



optical density of smoke 

measure of the degree of opacity, i.e. the negative 
common logarithm of the transmission of light 



optical distortion 

any apparent alteration of the geometric pattern of an 
object when seen either through a material or as a 
reflection from a surface of a material 



15) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



orange peel 

irregular surface of pock-marked appearance exhib- 
ited in the form of an accumulation of pimples, pin- 
holes, and craters, somewhat resembling the surface 
of orange peel 



51 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1990 



organosol 

suspension of a finely-divided polymer in a mixture of 
plasticizer and a volatile organic liquid 

cf. plastisol 



oscillating stress 

stress with a value varying as a periodical function of 
time 

cf. vibrating stress 



out-of-phase viscosity, 7] n "(Pas) 
quotient of the stress 90° out of phase with the rate of 
strain (o cos$) to the amplitude of the rate of the 
strain (coeq) in the forced oscillation of a material: 

y7 n "=(ooCOs5)/( we- ) 

NOTE The strain (f) and the stress (cr) of the forced 
oscillation are given by the equations 

£ = £q sin cot 
and 

a - o $\r\((ot + 5), 
so that 



€ = CO£q COS CO 



and 



o = a sin 5 cos cot + a cos d$in cot 



overcure 

state of cure of a polymeric system when the curing 
conditions (time, temperature, radiation, amount of 
curing additives, etc.) have exceeded those that would 
produce a satisfactory cure 

cf. undercure 



package 

yarn, roving, etc., in the form of units capable of being 
unwound and suitable for handling, storing, shipping 
and use 

NOTE Packages may be unsupported as skeins or 
cakes, or prepared with various winding patterns on bob- 
bins, cops, cones, pirns, spools, tubes or beams. 



PAN-based carbon fibre 

carbon fibre produced from polyacrylonitrile (PAN) 
precursor 

NOTE A range of tensile strengths and moduli of elastic- 
ity may be obtained by adjusting the conditions of carboni- 
zation. 

cf. carbon fibre precursor 



parallel laminated 

pertaining to a laminate in which all the layers of 
material are oriented approximately parallel with 
respect to the grain or strongest direction in tension 



parison 

shaped plastic mass, generally in the form of a tube, 
used in blow moulding 



peel strength 

force per unit width necessary to bring an adhesive 
joint to the point of failure and/or maintain a specified 
rate of failure by means of a stress applied in a peeling 
mode 



oxidation 

thermal treatment in air of PAN, pitch or viscose car- 
bon fibre precursor designed to oxidize the fibre in 
order to make it suitable for subsequent carbonization 
and graphitization 



oxidatively-degradable plastic 

degradable plastic in which the degradation results 
from oxidation 



pellet 

small mass of preformed moulding material, having 
relatively uniform dimensions in a given lot, used as 
feedstock in moulding and extrusion operations 

NOTE This note does not apply to English text. 

cf. granule 



cf. degradable plastic 



52 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



pelletizer 

machine in which extruded rods or other shapes are 
cut into pellets of relatively uniform dimensions for use 
as feedstock in moulding and extrusion operations 

cf. pellet 



phenol-furfural resin 

resin made by the polycondensation of phenol with 
furfural 



perfluoro (ethylene/propylene) plastic 
FEP plastic 

plastic based on copolymers of tetrafluoroethylene and 
hexafluoropropylene 



periodic copolymer 

copolymer consisting of macromolecules comprising 
more than two species of monomeric units distributed 
in ordered sequence 



periodic copolymerization 

polymerization in which a periodic copolymer is formed 



phenolic plastic 

plastic based on phenolic resins 



phenolic resin 

generally, a class of resins made by the polyconden- 
sation of phenol, its homologues and/or derivatives, 
with aldehydes or ketones 



photodegradable plastic 

degradable plastic in which the degradation results 
from the action of natural daylight 

cf. degradable plastic 



permanence 

resistance to appreciable changes in characteristics 
with time and the environment 



permeability 

property of a material of transmitting gases and liquids 
by passage through one surface and out at another 
surface by diffusion and sorption processes 

NOTE Not to be confused with porosity. 

cf. gas transmission rate and porosity 



pimple 

small hard protuberance of varied shape on the sur- 
face of a part 

cf. blister 



pinhole 

hole of very small diameter in the surface of a material 

NOTE In the case of films, the hole usually penetrates 
the entire thickness. 



cf. crater 



phase inversion (in polymerization) 
phenomenon of the continuous and dispersed phases 
replacing one another when a given stage of conver- 
sion is reached in some types of heterogeneous 
phase polymerization, for example in the preparation 
of rubber-modified polystyrene 



pin-point gate 

injection channel or orifice of very small circular cross- 
sectional area, leaving almost no sprue on the 
moulded part 



phenol-formaldehyde resin 
PF rtsln 

resin of the phenolic type, made by the polycondensa- 
tion of phenol with formaldehyde 



pipe 

rigid or semi-rigid tube 

cf. tube, tubing and rigidity 



53 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 19W 



pitch-based carbon fibre 

carbon fibre produced from anisotropic or isotropic 
pitch precursors 

NOTE The carbon fibres produced from isotropic pitch 
precursors have a lower modulus of elasticity than those 
obtained from anisotropic pitch precursors, which can be 
processed to give a high modulus of elasticity. 

cf. carbon fibre precursor 



plastic, noun 

material which contains as an essential ingredient a 
high polymer and which at some stage in its process- 
ing into finished products can be shaped by flow 

NOTE 1 Elastomeric materials, which also are shaped by 
flow, are not considered as plastics. 

NOTE 2 In some countries, particularly in the United King- 
dom, it is a permitted option to use the term "plastics" as the 
singular form as well as the plural form. 



plasticize 

to render a polymeric material softer, more flexible 
and/or more workable by the addition of a plasticizer 
or by chemical modification of the polymer 

cf. plasticate 



plasticizer 

substance of low or negligible volatility incorporated in 
a plastic to lower its softening range and to increase 
its workability, flexibility or extensibility 



plasticizer limit 

maximum amount of plasticizer that is compatible with 
a given material under specified conditions 

cf. external plasticizer 



plastic deformation 

that part of the strain in a stressed plastic which 
remains after the applied stress has been removed 

cf. creep, creep recovery and elastic deformation 



plastigel 

a gel-like suspension of a finely-divided polymer in a 
plasticizer 



plasticate 

to render a thermoplastic compound more process- 
able by means of mechanical working and/or heat 

cf. plasticize 



plastisol 

a suspension 
cizer 



of a finely-divided polymer in a plasti- 



NOTE The polymer does not dissolve appreciably in the 
plasticizer at room temperature but does so at elevated 
temperatures to form a homogeneous plastic mass 
(externally plasticized polymer). 

cf. organosol 



plasticating capacity (of an extruder) 

maximum amount of material of a given type that an 

extruder can plasticate per unit of time 

cf. plasticate 



plasticity 

tendency of a material to remain deformed after 
reduction of the deforming stress to or below its yield 
stress 



plastisol fusion 

process in which, in the course of heating, the polymer 
particles in plastisols (and organosols) are dissolved in 
the plasticizer(s), so that, upon cooling, a homogene- 
ous solid results 

NOTE Plastisol gel refers to the state attained when, in 
the course of heating or ageing, the plasticizer(s) in plasti- 
sols (and organosols) has (have) been absorbed by the 
polymer particles to an extent that a weak gel mass is 
formed. 

cf. organosol and plastisol 



54 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



plate 

smooth, flat piece of material of uniform limited thick- 
ness and area 



polyacrylate 

polymer of an ester of acrylic acid or of esters 
acrylic acid homologues or substituted derivatives 



of 



plate mark 

as applied to a defect, an imperfection in a pressed 
plastic sheet resulting from the surface of the pressing 
plate 



polyacrylic plastic 

acrylic plastic based on polymers in which the 
repeated structural units in the chains are essentially 
all of the acrylic type 



plug-assist vacuum thermoforming 

vacuum thermoforming process in which a male mould 
or plug is used to preform partially the heated sheet 
before forming, which is then completed by means of 
vacuum 



Poissons ratio 

absolute value of the ratio of the transverse strain to 
the corresponding axial strain resulting from uniformly- 
distributed axial stress within the proportional limit of 
the material 



polyacrylonitrile 
PAN 

polymer of acrylonitnle 



potyaddition 

broadly, synonymous with addition polymerization; in a 
restricted sense, the chemical reaction in which poly- 
mers are formed by addition of monomers other than 
those containing carbon-carbon unsaturated bonds 
(for example, reactions of epoxy, isocyanate, or lac- 
tam monomers) 



NOTE In the case of an anisotropic material, Poissons 
ratio varies with the direction of application of the stress. 
Above the proportional limit, this ratio varies with the stress 
and really should not be regarded as Poisson's ratio; if this 
ratio nevertheless is reported, it is necessary to state the 
stress value for which it has been determined. 



polyailyl plastic 
allyl plastic 
allyl resin 

plastic based on allyl polymers 



polyacetal 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is of the acetal type 

cf. polyoxymethylene 



polyacetal plastic 
acetal plastic 

plastic based on polymers in which the repeated 
structural units in the chains are of the acetal type, or 
on copolymers in which acetal and other types of 
repeated structural units are present in the chains, the 
acetal component(s) being in the greatest amount by 
mass 

cf. polyoxymethylene plastic 



polyamide 
PA 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is of the amide type 



polyamide plastic 
PA plastic 

plastic based on polymers in which the repeated 
structural units in the chains are essentially all of the 
amide type 



polyaryletherketone 
PAEK 

polymer in which aryl groups are connected by one or 
more ether as weil as one or more ketone linkages 



55 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1009 



polybutylene [polybutene] 
PB 

polymer of butylene [butene] 



poly(diallyl phthalate) 
PDAP 

polymer of diallyl phthalate 



polybutylene [polybutene] plastic 
PB plastic 

butylene [butene] plastic based on polymers made 
with butylene [butene] as essentially the sole mono- 
mer 



polyelectrolyte 

macromolecule with a large number of ionic groups 



poly(butylene terephthalate) 
PBT 

polymer made by the polycondensation of butylene 
glycol and terephthalic acid or dimethyl terephthalate 



polycarbonate 
PC 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is of the carbonate type 



polyester 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is of the ester type 



polyester plastic 

alkyd plastic (deprecated) 

plastic based on polymers in which the repeated units 
in the chains are of the ester type, or on copolymers in 
which ester and other types of repeated structural 
units are present in the chains, the ester component(s) 
being in the greatest amount by mass 



polycarbonate plastic 
PC plastic 

plastic based on polymers in which the repeated 
structural units in the chains are essentially all of the 
carbonate type 



polyether 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is of the ether type 



polychlorofluorocarbon plastic 
chlorofluorocarbon plastic 

plastic based on polymers made with monomers com- 
posed of chlorine, fluorine and carbon only 



polychlorofluorohydrocarbon plastic 
chlorofluorohydrocarbon plastic 

plastic based on polymers made with monomers com- 
posed of chlorine, fluorine, hydrogen and carbon only 



polyetheretherketone 
PEEK 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is 



o^o-o- 



polyethersulfone 
PES 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is 



polychlorotrifluoroethylene 
PCTFE 

polymer of chlorotrifluoroethylene 




56 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



polyethylene [polyethene] 
PE 

polymer of ethylene [ethene] 



polyisobutylene [poly-2-methylpropene] 
PIB 

polymer of isobutylene [2-methylpropene] 



poly(ethylene oxide) 
PEOX 

polymer of ethylene oxide 



polyethylene [polyethene] plastic 
PE plastic 

plastic based on polymers of ethylene [ethene] or 
copolymers of ethylene [ethene] with other monomers, 
the ethylene [ethene] being in the greatest amount by 
mass 



polyisocyanurate plastic 
isocyanurate plastic 

plastic based on polymers in which trimerization of 
isocyanates incorporates six-membered isocyanurate 
ring groups in a chain 

NOTE In commercial polyisocyanurate cellular plastics, 
10% to 30% of the available isocyanate groups are 
reacted with polyols to introduce urethane groups into the 
chain. 



poly(ethylene terephthalate) 
PET 

polymer made by the polycondensation of ethylene 
glycol and terephthalic acid or dimethyl terephthalate 



polyfluorocarbon plastic 
fluorocarbon plastic 

plastic based on polymers made with monomers com- 
posed of fluorine and carbon only 



polymer 

substance composed of molecules characterized by 
the multiple repetition of one or more species of atoms 
or groups of atoms (constitutional units) linked to each 
other in amounts sufficient to provide a set of proper- 
ties that do not vary markedly with the addition or 
removal of one or a few of the constitutional units 



polyfluorohydrocarbon plastic 
fluorohydrocarbon plastic 

plastic based on polymers made with monomers com- 
posed of fluorine, hydrogen and carbon only 



polyhalocarbon plastic 
halocarbon plastic 

plastic based on polymers from monomers composed 
only of carbon and a halogen or halogens 



cf. polyfluorocarbon plastic 



polymer chain 

portion of a polymer molecule bounded at each end by 
a terminal group or a branch 



polymer morphology 

1) form or shape, usually related to aspects of struc- 
ture having dimensions larger than the unit cell, but 
requiring microscopic examination to be observed; 

2) distribution of phases in a material; the shape and 
size of a line, an area or a volume; the texture or 
topography of a surface; or the habit of a crystal 



polyhydrocarbon plastic 
hydrocarbon plastic 

plastic based on polymers made with monomers com- 
posed of carbon and hydrogen only 



polymerization 

process of converting a monomer or a mixture of 
monomers into a polymer 



57 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1090 



polymer-poor phase 
dilute phase 

that phase of a two-phase equilibrium system, consist- 
ing of a polymer and low-molecular-weight material, in 
which the polymer concentration is lower 

NOTE The use of the name "sol phase" is discouraged 1 6) 



polyolefin 

polymer of an olefin (or olefins) 



polyolefin plastic 

plastic based on polymers made with an olefin (or ole- 
fins) or copolymers of such monomers with other 
monomers, the olefin monomer (or monomers) being 
in the greatest amount by mass 



polymer-rich phase 
concentrated phase 

that phase of a two-phase equilibrium system, consist- 
ing of a polymer and low-molecular-weight material, in 
which the polymer concentration is higher 



NOTE The use of the name 
aged 16 ). 



"gel phase" is discour- 



polyoxymethylene 
polyformaldehyde 
POM 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is oxymethylene 

NOTE Polyoxymethylene theoretically is the simplest 
member of the generic class of polyacetals. 



poly(methyl methacrylate) 
PMMA 

polymer of methyl methacrylate 



poly(methyl methacrylate) plastic 
PMMA plastic 

acrylic plastic based on polymers made with methyl 
methacrylate as essentially the sole monomer 



poly(4-methyl pentene) 
PMP 

polymer of 4-methyl-1 -pentene 



polyoxymethylene plastic 
POM plastic 

polyacetal plastic based on polymers in which oxy- 
methylene essentially is the sole repeated structural 
unit in the chains 

cf. polyacetal plastic 



poly(phenylene oxide) 
PPO 

polymer in which the constitutional repeating unit is 
phenylene oxide 




polyol 

polyol alcohol 
polyhydric alcohol 

alcohol having many hydroxyl groups 

NOTE In cellular plastics usage, the term polyol includes 
compounds containing alcoholic hydroxyl groups such as 
polyethers, glycols, polyesters and castor oil used in poly- 
urethane cellular materials. 



16) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



NOTE 1 A commercial polymer of this type has a constitu- 
tional repeating unit of 2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide. 

NOTE 2 The symbol PPO is not acceptable in the USA 
because it is a registered trademark. Consequently, the 
symbol PPE derived from the chemical name 
poly(phenylene ether) is used in the USA. 



poly(phenylene sulfide) 
PPS 

polymer in which the constitutional repeating unit is 
phenylene sulfide 




58 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



poly(phenylene sulfone) 
PPSU 

polymer in which the constitutional repeating unit is 
phenylene sulfone 



-©-•*- 



polystyrene/butadiene plastic 
styrene/butadiene plastic 

plastic based on copolymers of styrene and butadiene 



polytetrafluoroethylene 
PTFE 

polymer of tetrafluoroethylene 



polyphthalamide 
PPA 

polyamide in which the terephthalic group, the 
isophthalic group, or a combination of the two, is part 
of the repeating structural unit in the polymer chain 



polyterephthalate 

thermoplastic polyester in which the terephthalate 
group is a repeating structural unit in the polymer 
chain 



polypropylene [polypropene] 
PP 

polymer of propylene [propene] 



polyterephthalate plastic 

thermoplastic polyester in which the terephthalate 
group is a repeating structural unit in the polymer 
chain, the terephthalate being present in greater 
amount than other dicarboxylates which may be pre- 
sent 



polypropylene [polypropene] plastic 
propylene [propene] plastic 

plastic based on polymers of [propene] or copolymers 
of propylene [propene] with other monomers, the pro- 
pylene [propene] being in the greatest amount by 
mass 



poly(propylene oxide) 
PPOX 

polymer of propylene oxide 



polyureas 

polymers produced by the reaction of polyfunctional 
isocyanates with primary or secondary diamines 

NOTE Polyureas are mostly used for producing fibres. 

cf. isocyanate polymer 



polystyrene 
PS 

polymer of styrene 



polystyrene plastic 
PS plastic 

plastic based on polymers of styrene or copolymers of 
styrene with other monomers, the styrene being in the 
greatest amount by mass 



polystyrene/acrylonitrile plastic 
styrene/acrylonitrile plastic 

plastic based on copolymers of styrene and acryloni- 
trile 



polyurethane 
PUR 

polymer in which the repeated structural unit in the 
chain is of the urethane type 

cf. isocyanate polymer 



polyvinyl acetal) 

1) generically, a class of polymers derived from poly- 
vinyl esters in which some or all of the acid groups 
have been replaced by hydroxyl groups and some or 
all of these hydroxyl groups have been reacted with 
aldehydes to form acetal groups; 

2) specifically, polyvinyl acetal) made by the reaction 
of the hydroxyl group with acetaldehyde 



59 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



polyvinyl acetate) 
PVAC 

polymer of vinyl acetate 



poly(vinyl formal) 
PVFM 

poly(vinyl acetal) made by the reaction of the hydroxyl 
groups with formaldehyde 



polyvinyl acetate) plastic 
PVAC plastic 

vinyl acetate plastic based on polymers made with 
vinyl acetate as essentially the sole monomer 



poly(vinylidene chloride) 
PVDC 

vinylidene chloride plastic based on polymers made 
with vinylidene chloride as essentially the sole mono- 
mer 



polyvinyl alcohol) 
PVAL 

polymer of the hypothetical vinyl alcohol; in practice, it 
is prepared by the hydrolysis of polyvinyl esters, usu- 
ally polyvinyl acetate) 



poly(vinylidene fluoride) 
PVDF 

polymer of vinylidene fluoride 



polyvinyl butyral) 
PVB 

polyvinyl acetal) made by the reaction of the hydroxyl 
groups with butyraldehyde 



poly(vinylcarbazole) 
PVK 

polymer of vinylcarbazole 



polyvinyl pyrrolidone) 
PVP 

polymer of /V-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone 



poromeric, adjective 

having properties similar to leather, essentially water- 
proof, but capable of transmitting water vapour to 
some practical degree 



polyvinyl chloride) 
PVC 

polymer of vinyl chloride 



polyvinyl chloride) plastic 
PVC plastic 

plastic based on polymers of vinyl chloride or copoly- 
mers of vinyl chloride with other monomers, the vinyl 
chloride being in the greatest amount by mass 



polyvinyl chloride-vinyl acetate) 
PVC/PVAC 

copolymer of vinyl chloride and vinyl acetate 



polyvinyl fluoride) 
PVF 

polymer of vinyl fluoride 



porosity 

property of a material that contains very fine continu- 
ous holes which allow passage of gases, liquids and 
solids through one surface and out at another surface 

NOTE Not to be confused with permeability. 

cf. permeability 



positive mould 

mould in which the total applied pressure rests only 
and continuously on the moulding and in which there 
is no provision for escape of excess moulding material 



postcure 
after bake 

heat treatment of articles moulded from thermosetting 
materials to complete the cure 



60 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



postforming 

forming cured or partially-cured thermosetting plastics 

cf. forming 



post-shrinkage 

shrinkage of a plastic product after moulding during 
post-treatment, storage, or use 

cf. moulding shrinkage 



precision 

closeness of agreement between the results obtained 
by applying the experimental procedure several times 
under prescribed conditions 

NOTE The smaller the random part of the experimental 
errors which affect the results, the more precise is the pro- 
cedure. Repeatability and reproducibility are special cases 
of precision 



preform 

coherent, shaped mass of powdered, granular or 
fibrous plastics moulding compounds, or of a fibrous 
filler material with or without resin 



pot life 
working life 

period of time during which an adhesive or resin, pre- 
pared for application, remains usable 



premix 

admixture of resin, reinforcement, fillers, etc., not in 
web or filamentous form, usually prepared by the 
moulder shortly before use 



potting 

embedding process in which the 
attached to the resin-encased article 

cf. embedding and encapsulation 



mould remains 



prepolymer 

polymer of degree of polymerization intermediate 
between that of the monomer or monomers and the 
final polymer 



powder moulding 

general term for pressureless moulding processes in 
which dry, fusible powders are caused to fuse into a 
uniform layer against a mould wall 

cf. rotational moulding 



prepreg 

admixture of resins (with or without fillers), additives, 
and reinforcements in woven or filamentous form, 
ready for moulding 



power factor 

ratio of the active power to the apparent power 



pressure break 

as applied to a defect, an apparent break in one or 
more outer sheets of the paper, fabric, or other base 
of a laminated plastic, visible through the surface layer 
of resin which covers it 



power loss, AP (W-m-3) 

energy that is transformed into heat through hystere- 
sis, divided by the voiume of the material 

NOTE It is the product of energy loss W by frequency/. 



pressure pad 

device designed to reduce the pressure on the land 
areas of a mould when the mould is closed 

NOTE Normally it consists of hardened steel blocks 
suitably located to bear a proportion of the pressure applied 
by the press. 



61 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1M0 



pressure-sensitive adhesive 

adhesive which in a dry (solvent-free) state is tacky 
permanently at room temperature and adheres tena- 
ciously to diverse surfaces by simple contact under 
light manual pressure 

NOTE Tapes coated with these adhesives are well- 
known commercial products. 

cf. contact adhesive 



pressure thermoforming 

thermoforming process in which air pressure is used 
to form a heated sheet against the mould surface 



cf. vacuum thermoforming 



profile 

extruded plastic product, excluding film and sheet, 
having a characteristic constant axial section 

NOTE Profiles include only sections other than rectilinear 
or circular, such as U-shaped, T-shaped, L-shaped, etc. 



proportional limit 

greatest stress that a material is capable of sustaining 
without any deviation from proportionality of stress to 
strain (Hooke's Law) 



pull-back ram 

hydraulically operated ram that returns the main ram 
of a hydraulic press to the open position, or returns 
ejector gear to its normal position 



pressure welding 

welding method depending essentially on using pres- 
sure and also applying heat, e.g. to produce thick 
plates or blocks from thermoplastic sheets 



NOTE Unlike laminates, such plates show only a 
anisotropy. 



low 



pulled surface 

as applied to a defect, imperfections in the surface of a 
laminated plastic ranging from slight breaking or lifting 
of surface in spots to pronounced separation 



prevailing torque, 7> 

torque measured after the initial breakage of the bond 
at a specified angle of rotation of the nut 

NOTE 1 For testing against a specification, the angle is 
normally be 180°. 

NOTE 2 A round-robin test programme, recently per- 
formed, showed there is no significant difference between 
prevailing torque measured at 180° and prevailing torque 
determined as the mean of the four torque readings deter- 
mined at 90°, 180°, 270° and 360°. 

NOTE 3 For quality control or purposes other than testing 
the adhesive against a specification, other angles may be 
agreed between the manufacturer and the purchaser of the 
adhesive. 



pultrusion 

process of making continuous lengths of reinforced 
plastic profiles with high unidirectional strength by 
pulling continuous strands of resin-impregnated rein- 
forcing material through a heated die and then through 
a heating chamber if necessary, to postcure the resin 



punch 

force (deprecated) 

1) male part of a mould; 

2) tool used in punching 
cf. die (in punching) 



primer (for adhesives) 

coating applied to the surface of an adherend, prior to 
the application of adhesive, to improve adhesion 
and/or durability of the bond 

cf . surface treatment 



purging 

removal of one colour, type or grade of material from 
an injection or extrusion machine by forcing it out with 
the compound to be used in production subsequently, 
or with another suitable material 



62 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



quality factor, Q (dimensionless) 
ratio of storage modulus to loss modulus, measured in 
tension, shear, bulk compression or longitudinal com- 
pression 

NOTE The quality factor Is the reciprocal of tan S. 



quantitative differential thermal analysis 

differential thermal analysis in which the equipment 
used is designed to produce quantitative results in 
terms of energy and/or other physical parameters 



quasi-single-strand chain 

linear chain that can be described by constitutional 
units which are joined to each other through one single 
common atom only on one of the two termini of the 
unit 



quaterpolymer 

polymer derived from four species of monomer 



radical polymerization 

chain polymerization in which the reactive functional 
species is a radical 



reactive diluent 

low-viscosity liquid added to a high-viscosity solvent- 
free thermosetting adhesive which reacts chemically 
with the adhesive during curing 

NOTE The advantage of lowered viscosity is gained with 
minimum loss of other properties. 

cf. diluent 



rebound resilience, R (dimensionless) 
after a succession of impacts, the ratio of the output to 
the input energy of a moving mass that collides with 
the specimen 



recrystallization 

process following melting by which 

1) amorphous or poorly-ordered regions of a polymer 
specimen become incorporated into crystals; 

2) change to a more stable crystal structure takes 
place; 

3) defects within the crystals decrease; 

4) any of the above occur in combination 17 ) 



ram 

piston (of a press) 
device that transforms 
mechanical force 



hydraulic pressure into 



random copolymer 

copolymer in the molecules of which two or more spe- 
cies of monomeric units are distributed in random 
sequence 



random copolymerization 

polymerization in which a random copolymer is formed 



recycled plastic 

plastic prepared from discarded articles which have 
been cleaned and ground 

NOTE 1 In a broad sense the recycling of plastics covers 
any re-use of scrap material or discarded articles, including 
pyrolysis to recover useful organic chemicals. 

NOTE 2 Recycled plastics may or may not be reformulated 
by the addition of fillers, plasticizers, stabilizers, pigments, 
etc. 

cf. reprocessed plastic and reworked plastic 



reaction injection moulding 
RIM 

injection moulding process in which reactive multi- 
components, with or without fillers, are mixed by high- 
pressure impingement in a mixing chamber 
immediately prior to being injected into a closed mould 



17) IUPAC Recommendations: 
relating to crystalline polymers. 



1987 Definitions of terms 



63 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



reduced viscosity 
viscosity number 

ratio of the relative viscosity increment rjj to the mass 
concentration of the polymer c: 

NOTE 1 The unit must be specified; the unit cubic centime- 
tre per gram (cm 3 /g) is recommended. 

NOTE 2 Reduced viscosity, inherent viscosity and intrinsic 
viscosity are not viscosities or pure numbers. The terms are 
to be looked on as traditional names. Any replacement by 
consistent terminology would produce unnecessary confu- 
sion in the polymer literature. 

cf. relative viscosity increment 



reference atmosphere 

agreed atmosphere with which test results determined 
in other atmospheres may be corrected or compared 

cf. standard atmosphere(s) and test atmosphere 



reinforced plastic 

plastic with high-strength fibres embedded in the com- 
position, resulting in some strength properties greatly 
superior to those of the base resin 



reinforced-reaction injection moulding 
RRIM 

process of using solid reinforcements, such as glass 
fibre, mica or talc, in the reaction-injection moulding 
process 



reinforcing filler 

filler added to a plastic to improve one or more 
mechanical properties 

NOTE As a reinforcing filler may or may not be made 
from contain fibres, the addition of a reinforcing filler to a 
polymer material does not necessarily lead to a reinforced 
plastic. 



cf. reinforced plastic 



regenerated cellulose 

cellulose regenerated from a 
from a cellulose derivative 



solution of cellulose or 



relative impact strength 

notch sensitivity (deprecated) 

ratios of the impact strengths of notched and 
unnotched specimens or of specimens with two types 
of notch, for specimens of the same type 



regular block 

block that can be described by only one species of 
constitutional repeating unit in a single sequential 
arrangement 

cf. note to block polymer 



relative molecular mass, A/ r 
molecular weight, M w 

ratio of the average mass per formula unit of a sub- 
stance to 1/12 of the mass of an atom of nuclide 12 C 

NOTE Relative molecular mass (molecular weight) is a 
pure number and is not to be associated with any units. 



regular polymer 

polymer, the molecules of which can be described by 
only one species of constitutional unit in a single 
sequential arrangement 

cf. note to constitutional repeating unit and irregu- 
lar pojymer 



regulator 

substance used in small proportion to control relative 
molecular mass during polymerization 



relative permittivity 
dielectric constant (relative) 

ratio of the capacitance of a capacitor in which the 
space between and around the electrodes is filled 
entirely and exclusively with the insulating material to 
the capacitance of the same configuration of elec- 
trodes in vacuum 

IUPAP symbol: t> 

NOTE The relative permittivity of air at normal atmos- 
pheric pressure is equal to 1 ,000 53, so that in practice, the 
capacitance of the configuration of electrodes in air nor- 
mally can be used to determine the relative permittivity with 
sufficient accuracy. 



64 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 1000 



relative rigidity (dimensionless) 
ratio of modulus at any temperature, frequency, or 
time to the modulus at a reference temperature, fre- 
quency or time 



relative viscosity, rj r 
viscosity ratio 
solution/solvent viscosity ratio 

ratio of the viscosity of the solution r\ to the viscosity of 
the solvent r\ s : 



n f =n /rj s 



relative viscosity increment, rjj 
viscosity ratio increment 

specific viscosity (deprecated) 
ratio of the difference between the viscosities of solu- 
tion and solvent to the viscosity of solvent: 



fi = 



n-ls 



NOTE The use of the term specific viscosity for this 
quantity is discouraged, because the relative viscosity 
increment does not have the attributes of a specific quantity. 

cf. relative viscosity 



relaxation time, r re i (s) 

decay time of a relaxation process: 

M=A e- ( ' /r <e<> 



cf. retardation time 



reproducibility 

closeness of agreement between individual results 
obtained with the same method on identical test mate- 
rial but under different conditions (different operators, 
different apparatus, different laboratories and/or differ- 
ent times) 



reprocessed plastic 

thermoplastic prepared from scrap industrial plastic by 
other than the original processor 

NOTE Reprocessed plastics may or may not be reformu- 
lated by the addition of fillers, plasticizers, stabilizers, pig- 
ments, etc. 

cf. recycled plastic and reworked plastic 



resilience 

ratio of energy output to energy input in a rapid (or 
instantaneous) recovery of a deformed specimen 



resin 

solid, semisolid, or pseudosolid organic material that 
has an indefinite and often high relative molecular 
mass, exhibits a tendency to flow when subjected to 
stress, usually has a softening or melting range, and 
usually fractures conchoidally 

NOTE In some countries, the term is used in a broad 
sense to designate any polymer that is a basic material for 
plastics. 



release agent (in moulding) 

substance put on a mould or added to a moulding 
material to facilitate removal of the moulded product 
from the mould 



resin pocket 

accumulation of resin, localized in the interior of a rein- 
forced plastic 



relieve (in moulds), verb 

to reduce the contact area between the sealing faces 
of a mould to provide escape for gas or excess 
moulding material 



resin streak 

streak of excess resin in the surface of a reinforced 
plastic 



repeatability 

closeness of agreement between successive results 
obtained with the same method on identical test mate- 
rial, under the same conditions (same operator, same 
apparatus, same laboratory and short intervals of 
time) 



resistance to chemicals 
chemical resistance 

resistance to change of mass, dimensions or other 
properties of plastics after immersion into chemicals, 
when tested by the method specified in ISO 175 



65 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



resite 

phenol-formaldehyde resin in the final state of the 
curing process 

NOTE In this stage it is insoluble in alcohol and acetone, 
and infusible. 



cf. C-stage 



retardation time, r ret (s) 

decay time of a retardation process: 



A =/4 [1 -e 
cf. relaxation time 



'] 



resltol 

phenol-formaldehyde resin in the transition state of the 
curing process 

NOTE Under heating, it softens to rubberlike consistency, 
but without melting. It swells when it is immersed in alcohol 
or acetone, but does not dissolve. 

cf. B-stage 



resol 

fusible, soluble, phenolic resin containing sufficient 
reactive methylol groups to enable the resin to 
become infusible on further reaction 

cf. A-stage and novolak 



resonance curve, A(f) (dimension of the amplitude A) 
curve of frequency dependence of the amplitude of a 
damped system subjected to forced vibrations near 
the resonance frequency 



resonance frequency, / R (Hz) 

frequency of the maximum amplitude of the resonance 

curve 

NOTE /r is proportional to the square root of the storage 
modulus M' of a viscoelastic system. 

cf. resonance curve 



resonant forced vibration technique 

technique for performing dynamic mechanical meas- 
urements in which the test specimen is oscillated 
mechanically at the natural resonant frequency of the 
system 

NOTE The amplitude of oscillation is maintained constant 
through the addition of make-up energy. Storage modulus is 
calculated from the measured frequency. Damping is calcu- 
lated from the additional energy required to maintain con- 
stant-amplitude oscillation. 



retarder 

substance used in small proportion to reduce the 
reaction rate of a chemical system 

cf. catalyst and inhibitor 



reverse roll (in coating) 

rotating cylinder of a coating machine, used for the 
deposition of a coating material premetered to the 
surface of the cylinder, on to a substrate to be coated 

NOTE The surface of the cylinder moves in the opposite 
direction to the substrate. 

cf. kiss roll (in coating) 



reworked plastic 

thermoplastic prepared from trimmings or rejected 
mouldings that has been reprocessed in a fabricator's 
plant after having been processed previously in that 
plant by moulding, extrusion, etc. 

NOTE In many specifications the use of reworked mate- 
rial is limited to clean plastic that meets the requirements 
specified for the virgin material and yields a product essen- 
tially equal in quality to one made from only virgin material. 

cf. recycled plastic, reprocessed plastic and virgin 
plastic 



rigid plastic 

plastic that has a modulus of elasticity in flexure or, if 
that is not applicable, then in tension, greater than 
700 MPa under stated conditions 

NOTE Materials usually are classified at standard tem- 
perature and relative humidity in accordance with ISO 291. 



rigidity 

resistance to bending 

NOTE Modulus of elasticity is an inherent property of a 
material which, in conjunction with thickness, determines 
rigidity. 

cf. rigid plastic and semi-rigid plastic 



66 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



ring gate 

injection channel that extends around the whole 
periphery of the moulding 



rotary moulding 

process of moulding by injection, transfer, compres- 
sion or blowing, in which multiple moulds mounted on 
a rotating table are cycled automatically through the 
moulding operations 



ring-opening polymerization 

polymerization in which a cyclic monomer molecule is 
incorporated into 1he macromolecule, yielding a 
monomeric unit which is acyclic 



rise time 

time required for a free-rise cellular plastic to achieve 
its ultimate expansion under controlled conditions 



rotational casting 

process of forming hollow articles from fluid materials 
by rotating a mould containing a charge of the material 
about one or more axes at relatively low speed, until 
the charge is distributed on the inner mould walls by 
gravitational force and then solidified by suitable 
means 

cf. centrifugal casting, centrifugal moulding and 
rotational moulding 



roll coating 

coating process in which a coating material is trans- 
ferred to the substrate from a roll on which the fluid 
material is spread 



room temperature 

ambient temperature in the range of 15 °C to 35 °C 

NOTE The term room temperature usually is applied to 
an atmosphere of unspecified relative humidity, atmos- 
pheric pressure, and air motion. 



root-mean-square strain (dimensionless) 

square root of the mean value of the square of the 

strain over one cycle of deformation 

NOTE For a symmetrical sinusoidal stress, the root- 
mean-square strain equals the strain amplitude divided 
by V2. 



root-mean-square stress (Pa) 

square root of the mean value of the square of the 

stress over one cycle of deformation 

NOTE For a symmetrical sinusoidal stress, the root- 
mean-square stress equals the stress amplitude divided 
by V2. 



rotational moulding 

process analogous to rotational casting in which dry, 
fusible, finely-divided powders are distributed against 
the mould walls and fused 

cf. centrifugal casting, centrifugal moulding and 
rotational casting 



roving (textile glass) 

collection of parallel strands (assembled roving) or 
parallel filaments (direct roving) assembled without 
intentional twist 

cf. direct roving 



rubber 

elastomer which can be, or is already, modified to a 
state in which essentially it is insoluble (but can swell) 
in boiling solvent such as methyl ethyl ketone and 
ethanol-toluene azeotrope 

NOTE A rubber in its modified state cannot be easily 
remoulded to a permanent shape by the application of heat 
and moderate pressure; free of diluents, it retracts within 
1 min to less than 1,5 times its original length after being 
stretched at normal room temperature (18 °C to 29 °C) to 
twice its length and held for 1 min before release. 



67 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



runner 



1) secondary feed channel in an injection or transfer 
mould that runs from the inner end of the sprue to the 
cavity gate; 

2) moulding material in this secondary feed channel 



selective solvent 

medium that is a solvent for at least one component of 
a mixture of polymers, or for at least one block of a 
block or graft polymer, but a non-solvent for the other 
component(s) or block(s) 18 ) 



sample 

small portion of a material or group of units taken from 
a larger quantity of material or collection of units, 
intended to be representative of the whole 

cf. specimen 



self-extinguishing (deprecated) 

it is recommended that this term not be used because 

of risk of misunderstanding 

NOTE It is the characteristic of a material ceasing to 
burn, under specified test conditions, when the external 
supporting source of ignition is removed. In lieu of this term 
report, where applicable, afterflame time under the test 
conditions (specify). 



scarf joint 

joint made by cutting identical angular segments at an 
angle less than 45° to the major axis of two adherends 
and bonding the adherends with the cut area fitted 
together to be coplanar 

cf. butt joint and lap joint 



self-heating 

exothermic reaction within a material resulting in a rise 
in temperature in the material 



semi-crystalline polymer 

polymer containing crystalline and amorphous phases 



screen pack 
filter pack 

wire gauze at the entrance to the extrusion head used 
for filtering molten plastics and/or building up back 
pressure 



semi-positive mould 

mould designed to allow a small amount of 
moulding material to escape when it is closed 

cf. positive mould 



excess 



seam welding 

pressure welding process in which overlapping por- 
tions of the surfaces to be united are softened by heat 
or solvent 

cf. heat sealing and solvent bonding 



semi-rigid plastic 

plastic that has a modulus of elasticity in flexure or, if 
that is not applicable, then in tension, between 70 MPa 
and 700 MPa under stated conditions 

NOTE Materials usually are classified at standard tem- 
perature and relative humidity in accordance with ISO 291. 



seizing (of a mould) 

unwanted binding of two parts of a mould, 

their separation 



preventing 



NOTE The binding may be because of cohesion between 
metal parts or adhesion to the moulding material. 



18) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their 
assemblies and dilute polymer solutions. 



68 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



sequential arrangement (in polymer molecules) 
arrangement of constitutional units in a polymer chain 

NOTE The constitutional unit 

— CHCK) — 
I 
R 

in the polymer molecule represented by the fragment 

-CHChfe- T CHChfe"| - CHCH2- 

R 



is in one sequential arrangement only (head-to-tail). In the 
polymer molecule represented by the fragment 

-Cr^CHCHgCHCHC^CHCI^CHCHg-- 

there is more than one sequential arrangement of the con- 
stitutional unit. 



setting temperature 

temperature to which an adhesive or an assembly is 
subjected to set the adhesive 

cf. cure temperature and setting 



setting time (of adhesives) 

period of time necessary for an adhesive in an 
assembly to set under specified conditions of tempera- 
ture or pressure, or both 



cf. setting 



setting time (of plastics) 

time taken for a plastic material to harden sufficiently 

for handling 



service life, N 

number of stress cycles applied to a specimen until it 
has reached the chosen end of the test 

NOTE Where it has not failed, the service life is not 
defined but is termed greater than the test duration. 



sewing thread (textile glass) 

strong smooth glass yarn made from filament and 

usually having a high twist 



shear modulus, G (Pa) 

quotient of shear stress by shear strain: 

G = a lj /y 



set 

strain remaining after complete release of the load 
producing the deformation 

NOTE Because of practical considerations, such as 
distortion in the specimen and slack in the strain-indicating 
system, measurements of strain at a small load rather than 
zero load often are taken. Set often is referred to as perma- 
nent set if it shows no further change with time. The time 
elapsing between removal of load and final reading of set 
should be stated. 

cf. setting 



setting (process) 

set (of an adhesive) 

process by which adhesive and/or cohesive strength is 

developed by chemical or physical action, for example 

polymerization, oxidation, gelation, hydration, cooling, 

or evaporation of volatile constituents 

cf . setting time (of plastics) 



shear rate, / (s 1 ) 

time rate of change of shear strain: 

y =dy/dr 

NOTE For a one-dimensional shear flow, it is the velocity 
gradient. 



shear strain, y(dimensionless) 
tangent of the angular change, attributable to force, 
between two lines originally perpendicular to each 
other, through a point in a body 



shear strength 

maximum shear stress sustained by a specimen dur- 
ing a shear test 

cf. shear stress 



69 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



shear strength (adhesives) 

maximum shear stress sustained by an adhesive joint 

during a shear test 



shear stress, <r v (Pa) 

force, parallel to its original working area, divided by 

the cross-section of the specimen measured in this 

area 



Shore hardness 

arbitrary measure of hardness, in which the penetra- 
tion of a specified indenter forced into the material is 
determined under conditions specified in ISO 868 

cf. indentation hardness 



short (in a moulding) 

incompletely filled-out condition in a moulding 



shear stress (adhesives) 

force applied parallel to a flat adhesive joint, divided by 
the bond area of the joint, it is expressed in megapas- 
cals (MPa) 



short chain 

linear oligomer molecule or a linear portion of a mac- 
romolecule short enough to be considered oligomeric 



sheet 
sheeting 

thin, generally plane product in which the thickness is 
small in proportion to length and width 

cf. film 



sheeter line 
knife line 

parallel scratches or projecting ridges distributed over 
a considerable area of a sheet of plastic, such as 
might be produced during a slicing operation 



short-chain branch 

oligomeric offshoot from a macromolecular chain 19 ) 



shot 

amount of material delivered to the mould assembly in 
one moulding cycle 



shot capacity 

maximum quantity of a material that an injection 
moulding machine can inject per cycle into a mould 



sheeting 

1) sheet made in continuous lengths and generally 
supplied in roll form; 

2) synonym for sheet 



shrink packaging 
shrink wrapping 

process of enclosing an article in a protective enve- 
lope by heat sealing it within pre-stretched film and 
then heating to cause the film to shrink tightly around 
the article 



shelf life 
storage life 

storage time under specified conditions during which a 
material may be expected to retain its essential prop- 
erties, for example working properties and specified 
strength 



shell moulding resin 

resin used in admixture with sand or a ceramic powder 
in the foundry industry to make thin-walled moulds in 
which to cast metals 



19) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



70 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



shrinkage (of cellular plastics) 

inadvertent dimensional decrease of cellular plastics 

without breakdown of cell structure 



size 



material applied to glass fibres or filaments during the 
course of their manufacture 

cf. finishing 



side group 

offshoot from a macromolecular chain which is neither 
oligomeric nor polymeric 



sieve retention 

in sieve analysis, the percentage of the mass of mate- 
rial remaining on the sieve after the test 



silicone plastic 
Si plastic 

plastic based on polymers in which the main polymer 
chain consists of alternating silicon and oxygen atoms 



size-exclusion chromatography 

SEC 

gel-permeation chromatography 

GPC 

separation technique in which separation, mainly 
according to the hydrodynamic volume of the mole- 
cules or particles, takes place in a porous non- 
adsorbing material with pores of approximately the 
same size as the effective dimensions in solution of 
the molecules to be separated 

NOTE The term "gel-permeation chromatography" should 
be used only when the porous non-adsorbing material is a 
gel. The term "size-exclusion chromatography" is preferred. 



single-strand chain 

linear chain that can be described by constitutional 
units which are always: joined to each other through a 
single common atom 



skin (of cellular plastics) 

relatively dense layer at the surface of cellular plastics 



single yarn 

simplest continuous strand of glass material com- 
posed of one of the following: 

1) a number of discontinuous fibres, held together by 
twist; such yarns are described as spun yarn or staple 
fibre yarn; 

2) a given number of continuous filaments (one or 
several strands), held together by twist; such yarns 
are described as continuous filament yarn or filament 
yarn 

NOTE The definition of single yarn a) and b) in ISO 1 139 
provides that twist may be absent or present. In the glass 
industry, however, twist is always present in single yarn. 



sleeving 

tubular structure of glass yarns with a collapsed width 
not exceeding 100 mm 

cf tubing 



slenderness ratio 

ratio of the length of a solid of uniform cross section 
(column) to its least radius of gyration 

NOTE Slenderness ratio is used for the calculation of 
dimensions of specimens in the determination of compres- 
sive strength. 



sink mark 
shrink mark 

depression in the surface of a moulding 

NOTE This defect occurs where the material has 
retracted from the mould, often in a region where there is a 
considerable change in thickness. 



slip 

term denoting the ease with which two surfaces slide 
in contact with each other 

NOTE In a sense, slip is the antithesis of friction, in that 
high coefficient of friction denotes poor slip and low coeffi- 
cient of friction good slip. 



71 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



slip thermoforming 

thermoforming process in which a sheet clamping 
frame, provided with tensioned pressure pads, permits 
the heated sheet to slip inwards as the part is being 
formed 



smouldering 

slow combustion of a material without light being visi- 
ble and generally evidenced by smoke and an 
increase in temperature 



slippage 

movement of adherends with respect to each other 
during the bonding process 



slitting 

conversion of a given width of plastic film or sheeting 
to several smaller widths by means of knives 



sliver 

continuous assembly of slightly bonded staple fibres in 
a practically parallel arrangement 



SN curve 

curve, allowing the resistance of the material to be 
seen, which indicates the relationship observed 
experimentally between service life N, shown conven- 
tionally in abscissa (logarithmic scale) and the stress 
amplitude r a or the maximum stress r max shown in 
ordinates in linear scale or in logarithmic scale 

NOTE This curve is established by keeping either mean 
stress r m or stress ratio R T constant. The SN curve is 
defined by the relationship between amplitude of stress and 
service life. 

On this curve we can distinguish 

— the endurance zone where, for a given stress, failures as 
well as non-failures for a number of fault test cycles Np can 
be identified; 

— the fatigue zone where, for a given stress, all the speci- 
mens fail at the end of a number of cycles less than the 
number of conventional fault test cycles Np mentioned 
above. 



slot-die extrusion 
slit-die extrusion 

process of extruding film or sheet in which a heated 
thermoplastic compound is forced through a straight 
die orifice 



slush casting 
slush moulding 

process of forming articles from fluid materials, such 
as vinyl plastisols, in which a layer of the material oi 
desired thickness is gelled against the inner surface of 
a heated mould, after which the excess fluid material 
is poured out and additional heat is applied, if neces- 
sary, to fuse or cure the plastic 



softening range 

temperature interval over which a plastic changes 
from a rigid to a soft state (glass transition) or under- 
goes a rather sudden and substantial change in hard- 
ness 

NOTE Softening of plastics is measured under arbitrary 
test conditions, for example by the Vicat softening tempera- 
ture test, the torsion pendulum test or the temperature of 
deflection under load. 

cf. glass transition 



softening temperature 

temperature, measured under specified test condi- 
tions, at which a material has a specified amount of 
deformation 



smoke 

visible suspension of solid and/or liquid particles 
gases resulting from combustion or pyrolysis 



in solids content 

percentage by mass of non-volatile matter, determined 
under specified test conditions 



72 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



solubility parameter (of a polymer), 5 

characteristic of a polymer used in predicting solubility 

of that polymer in a given solvent 20) 



solution polymerization 

polymerization in which the monomer, dissolved in a 
solvent, reacts to form a polymer which may be solu- 
ble or insoluble in the solvent 



spectrum of relaxation times, H(x) (Pa) 
[spectrum of retardation times, L{x) (Pa 1 )] 
H(x)/x is the contribution of the time intervals between 
r and r + dr to the elementary modulus of a continu- 
ous model representing a viscoelastic material 

NOTE H(t) determines the time and frequency depend- 
ence of the macroscopic moduli. L(v) determines the time 
and frequency dependence of the macroscopic compliance. 



solvent-activated adhesive 

dry adhesive on an adherend that is rendered tacky 
just prior to use by application of a solvent 

cf. solvent bonding 



spherulite 

polycrystalline, roughly spherical morphology consist- 
ing of crystals emanating from a common centre 21 ) 



solvent bonding 
solvent welding 

process of bonding thermoplastic products by applying 
a solvent capable of softening the surfaces to be 
united, pressing the softened surfaces together, and 
removing the solvent by evaporation, absorption, or 
polymerization 



split mould 

mould in which the cavity is formed of two or more 
components (called splits) held together by an outer 
chase during moulding, but separable for ejection 



spontaneous combustion 

combustion resulting from self-heating without exter- 
nally applied heat 



solvent polishing 

process for improving the gloss of thermoplastic arti- 
cles by immersion in or spraying with a solvent to dis- 
solve surface irregularities, followed by evaporation of 
the solvent 



specimen 
test piece 

piece or portion of a sample used to make a test 



cf. sample 



spontaneous ignition temperature 

minimum temperature at which a material will ignite 
under specified test conditions 



spot welding 

pressure welding process in which relatively small 
areas of the surfaces to be united are softened at 
spaced intervals by heat 



spray (in injection moulding) 

complete set of mouldings, with the associated solidi- 
fied sprues and runners, from a multi-impression 
injection mould 



20) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



21) IUPAC Recommendations: 
relating to crystalline polymers. 



1987 Definitions of terms 



73 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



spray gun 

device used for spray application of single or multi- 
component liquids to substrates or enclosed spaces 

NOTE The components, with or without fillers, are con- 
veyed separately to an impingement-type mixing chamber 
and dispensed in a fan or conical pattern. Reinforcing fibres 
also may be incorporated externally in the spray. 



sprue lock 

undercut in a cold-slug well that allows the sprue to be 
pulled out of the bushing as the mould is opened 



sprue-puller 
anchor 

device in the mould provided with a recess for with- 
drawing the sprue positively from the sprue bush 



spray-up 

1) in processing reinforced plastics, the simultaneous 
spraying of prepolymer, catalyst, and chopped fibres 
on to the mould or mandrel; 

2) in processing cellular plastics, such as epoxy and 
polyurethane types, the spraying of fast-reacting resin- 
catalyst systems on to a surface where they react to 
foam and cure 

NOTE In both processes, the resin and catalyst usually 
are sprayed through separate nozzles so that they are 
mixed during the spray-up operation. 



spun roving 

glass fibre strand repeatedly doubled back on itself to 
form a roving, sometimes reinforced by one or more 
straight strands 



stabilizer 

substance used in the formulation of some plastics to 
assist in maintaining the properties of the material at 
or near their initial values during processing and serv- 
ice life 



spread 

mass of adhesive or coating per unit of area applied 
on a substrate 



standard atmosphere(s) 

temperature(s) and humidity(ies) used for the condi- 
tioning and/or testing of test specimens or samples as 
specified in the appropriate international standards 

cf. reference atmosphere 



sprue 

1) primary feed channel that runs from the outer face 
of an injection or transfer mould, to the mould gate in a 
single cavity mould or to the runners in a multicavity 
mould; 



staple fibre 
discontinuous fibre 

single textile element of small diameter and short 
length 

NOTE This forms the basis for glass staple fibre prod- 
ucts. 



2) moulding material in this primary feed channel 



staple-fibre woven fabric 

fabric woven from glass staple fibre yarns in warp and 
weft 



sprue bush 
sprue bushing 

hardened steel insert in an injection mould that con- 
tains the tapered sprue hole and has a suitable seat 
for the nozzle of the injection cylinder 



staple yarn 

yam spun from staple fibres, bound together by twist 



74 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1W3 



star chain 

macromolecule consisting of a constitutional unit from 
which linear chains of comparable length emanate 



statistical copolymerization 

copolymerization in which a statistical copolymer is 
formed 



star polymer 

polymer, the macromolecules of which are star chains 



stereoblock 

regular block that can be described by one species of 
stereorepeating unit in a single sequential arrange- 
ment 



starved joint 

joint that has an insufficient amount of adhesive to 
produce a satisfactory bond 



stereoblock polymer 

polymer, the molecules of which consist of stereob- 
locks connected linearly 

cf. note to block polymer 



static coefficient of friction, //g 



^s=- 



where 



is the static frictional force, expressed in 
newtons; 

is the normal force acting perpendicular to 
the surfaces in contact, expressed in new- 
tons 



stereoregular polymer 

regular polymer, the molecules of which can be 
described in terms of only one species of stereore- 
peating unit in a single sequential arrangement 

NOTE A stereoregular polymer is always a tactic poly- 
mer, but a tactic polymer is not always stereoregular since a 
tactic polymer need not have every site of stereoisomerism 
defined. 

cf. notes to stereorepeating unit, isotactic polymer 
and syndiotactic polymer 



cf. frictional force 



static friction 

friction which has to be overcome as a "threshold 
value" at the onset of sliding motion 



static shear strength, r§ 

average static shear stress at rupture as determined in 
accordance with ISO 4587, and it is expressed in 
megapascals (MPa) 



statistical copolymer 

copolymer consisting of macromolecules in which the 
sequential distribution of the monomeric units obeys 
known statistical laws 



stereorepeating unit 

configurational repeating unit having defined configu- 
ration at all sites of stereoisomerism in the main chain 
of a polymer molecule 

NOTE In a stereoregular polypropylene, the three sim- 
plest possible stereorepeating units are: 
H CB3 H CH3 CH3 H 

The corresponding stereoregular polymers are: 



H 
-p-Chfe- 

6hb 



r PH3 h 



in, 



(isotactic polymer) (syndiotactic polymer) 

CH3 H 

•Ofe- 
H H CHj 



CH3 

I I I 

-C-Ofe-C-CHt-C- 



75 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1090 



stereoselective polymerization 

polymerization in which a polymer molecule is formed 
from a mixture of stereoisomeric monomer molecules 
by incorporation of only one stereoisomeric species 



strand 

assembly of parallel glass filaments produced simulta- 
neously, slightly bonded and without intentional twist 



stereospecific polymerization 

polymerization in which a tactic polymer is formed 



streaming birefringence 
flow birefringence 

birefringence introduced by flow in liquids, solutions 
and dispersions of optically anisotropic, anisometric or 
deformable molecules or particles attributable to a 
non-random orientation of the molecules or parti- 
cles 22) 



storage modulus, M'(Pa) 
[storage compliance, C'(Pa~ 1 )] 
elastic modulus (deprecated) 
real part of the complex modulus 

NOTE It is a measure of the energy stored and regained 
during a loading cycle. 

cf. complex modulus and complex compliance 



stress, a (Pa) 

intensity at a point in a body of the internal forces or 
components of force that act on the unit area of a 
given plane through the point 

NOTE Stress at a point is defined by six components of 
stress: three normal components and three shear 
components referred to a set of coordinate axes. As used in 
tension, compression or shear tests prescribed in product 
specifications, stress is calculated on the basis of the 
original dimensions of the cross-section of the specimen. 



strain, e (dimensionless) 

change, attributable to force, in the linear size or 

shape of a body, referred to its original size or shape 

NOTE Strain at a point is defined by six components of 
strain: three normal components and three shear compo- 
nents referred to a set of coordinate axes. 



stress amplitude, cx a 

alternating stress equal to half the algebraic difference 
between the maximum and minimum stresses: 



o* = 



^max ^min 



strain amplitude 

ratio of the maximum deformation, measured from the 
mean deformation, to the free length of the unstrained 
test specimen 

NOTE The strain amplitude is measured from zero to 
peak on one side only. 



it is expressed in megapascals (MPa) 



strain rate, e (s~ 1 ) 

rate of change of strain with time: 



22) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemical defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their as- 
semblies and dilute polymer solutions. 



76 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



stress crack 

external or internal crack in a plastic caused by 
stresses less than its short-time mechanical strength 

NOTE Frequently the development of such a crack is 
accelerated by the environment to which the plastic is 
exposed. The stresses which cause cracking may be 
present internally or externally, or may be combinations of 
these stresses. 



stretch thermoforming 

thermoforming process in which the heated sheet is 
drawn over a mould and cooled subsequently 



stripper plate 

part of a mould that makes possible a special ejection, 
e.g. the removal of bottle caps with internal threads 
from the mould 



stress cycle 

smallest part of the stress/time function which is 
repeated at regular intervals and is of sinusoidal form 
with undulating shear 



stripping 

removal of a moulding from a mould 



stress ratio, R a 

algebraic ratio of the minimum stress to the maximum 
stress in one cycle: 



K n - 



stress relaxation 

time-dependent decrease in stress 



stress-strain curve 

diagram in which corresponding values of stress and 
strain are plotted against each other 

NOTE Values of stress usually are plotted as ordinates 
and values of strain as abscissa. 



stretch ratio 

1) in blow moulding, the ratio of the length of the pari- 
son to the length of the cavity in which it is to be 
blown; 

2) in filament and film stretching, the ratio of the length 
of the stretched to the unstretched filament or film 

cf. blow-up ratio and draw-down ratio 



stroke 

travel of the ram of a press 



structural adhesive 

adhesive of proven reliability in engineering structural 
applications in which the bond can be stressed to a 
high proportion of its maximum failing load for long 
periods without failure 



structural foam moulding 

process of moulding articles with a cellular core and 
an integral solid (non-cellular) skin 



structures with twist (textile glass) 

general term designating a very long and relatively thin 

assembly of filaments (called continuous filament yarn 

or filament yarn) or staple fibres (called staple fibre 

yarn or spun yarn) to which twist has been applied 

intentionally 

NOTE The yarn may be produced in one twisting opera- 
tion (single yarn) or in several succeeding operations 
•(folded yarn, cabled yarn). The twist in single yarns is 
capable of being removed by a single untwisting operation. 



styrene/o-methylstyrene plastic 
S/MS plastic 

plastic based on copolymers of styrene and a-methyl- 
styrene 



77 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



styrene-rubber plastic 

plastic based on styrene polymers and rubbers, the 
styrene polymers being in the greatest amount by 
mass 



surface tack 

stickiness of the surface of a plastic 



submarine gate 
tunnel gate 

injection channel situated underneath the mating sur- 
face, so that the sprue is pulled off with the ejection 
operation 



substrate 

object or semi-manufactured product (e.g. wire, 
extruded metallic section or plastic profile, sheet, film, 
paper, textile product) on which a coating or layer of 
another material is applied from the gas, liquid or solid 
phase by coating, laminating or generated by a chemi- 
cal process 

NOTE 1 In adhesion, substrate often is a synonym of 
adherend. 

NOTE 2 The substrate or the applied layer or both may be 
of polymer material. 

cf. coating, laminating and primer 



surface treatment 

prebond treatment (deprecated) 
treatment applied to the fibre to improve the adhesive 
bond between it and the resin component of the com- 
posite 

NOTE Oxidation of the fibre surface carried out under 
controlled conditions is an example of such a surface treat- 
ment. 

cf. primer 



surfacing mat 

thin compact sheet of bonded staple fibres or continu- 
ous filaments, used as the surface layer of composites 

NOTE The fibres may be of glass or organic material. 

cf. glass veil 



surface burn 

combustion limited to the surface of a material 



suspension 

dispersion of a solid in a liquid 

cf. dispersion 



surface resistance 

quotient of the direct voltage applied between two 
electrodes in contact with the surface of a specimen, 
divided by that part of the current flowing through a 
thin layer on the surface of the specimen (for instance, 
moisture or other poorly-conducting materials) 



suspension polymerization 

polymerization in which the monomer is dispersed as 
fine droplets in water or other suitable inert diluents 

cf. bead polymerization 



surface resistivity 

quotient of the d.c. electric field strength, divided by 
the linear current density in the surface layer of the 
specimen 

NOTE The surface resistivity of a material is equal to the 
surface resistance between two electrodes forming opposite 
sides of a square. The size of the square is immaterial. 



syneresis 

contraction of a gel accompanied by the separation of 
a liquid 



swelling 

increase in volume of a test specimen immersed in a 
liquid or exposed to a vapour 



78 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



syndiotactic polymer 

regular polymer, the molecules of which can be 
described in terms of alternation of configurational 
base units that are enantiomeric 

NOTE In a syndiotactic polymer, the configurational 
repeating unit consists of two configurational base units that 
are enantiomeric. An example is the configurational repeat- 
ing unit: 



-c- 



ic 



CQ>R 
CH(CH 3 )-C CKChy- 



'O2R H 

and the corresponding polymer is 



<pOfeR 
- CH(CH 3 >- C CH(CH3^- 



2 R 



H 



It is not a stereoregular polymer because the configuration 
at the stereoisomeric centre u — CH(CH3) — " is not defined. 
Similarly 



I 

-CH(CO ? R — C 



CH(CO R)— C — CH(CO R)— C 

2 i 2 i 



are not stereoregular polymers because of the lack of 
knowledge about the configuration of the stereoisometric 
centre — CH(CC>2R) — The following disyndiotactic polymer 
is stereoregular: 



Q0 2 R CH 3 H H 

-C C c- 

H H tOpR thlq 



2 R 
^cf. note to stereorepeating unit 



'J n 



tactic block 

regular block that can be described by only one spe- 
cies of configurational repeating unit in a single 
sequential arrangement 



tactic block polymer 

polymer, the molecules of which consist of tactic 
blocks connected linearly 



tactic polymer 

regular polymer, the molecules of which can be 
described in terms of only one species of configura- 
tional repeating unit in a single sequential arrangement 

cf. note to stereoregular polymer 



tacticity 

orderliness of the succession of configurational 
repeating units in the main chain of a polymer mole- 
cule 



take-off 

device for conveying extruded or calendered material 
away from the machine 



take-up 

device for winding extruded or calendered material 



tape with selvages 23 ) 

glass fabric, with selvages, not exceeding 100 mm in 
width 

cf . narrow fabric with selvages 



syntactic cellular plastic 

cellular plastic In which hollow microspheric fillers are 
used as the low-density element 



tab gate 

ve<y thin rectangular gate with a length being only a 
part of the width of the moulding 



cf . edge gate 



tape without selvages 23 ) 

glass fabric, without selvages, not exceeding 100 mm 
in width 

cf. narrow fabric without selvages 



23) "Selvedge" is the preferred spelling in the United 
Kingdom 



79 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



tear, verb 

to divide or disrupt by the pull of contrary forces 

cf. tear strength 



test atmosphere 

atmosphere to which a sample or specimen is 
exposed throughout the test 

cf. reference atmosphere and standard atmos- 
phere^) 



tear propagation force 

force required to continue the growth of an initiated 
tear in a plastic film 



tear propagation resistance 

tear propagation force divided by the thickness of the 
specimen 



textile glass 

generic term designating all products woven from 
glass and based on staple fibres and/or continuous 
filaments 



textile glass multifilament products 

class of textile glass products, consisting of filaments 
(multifilaments) 



tear strength 
tear resistance 

force required to tear a test specimen of a thin material 



textile glass staple fibre products 

class of textile glass products, consisting of staple 
fibres 



telomer 

polymer composed of molecules having terminal 
groups incapable of reacting with additional mono- 
mers, under the conditions of the synthesis, to form 
larger polymer molecules of the same chemical type 



cf. staple fibre 



textile size (product) (textile glass) 

size designed to facilitate subsequent operations 

(twisting, folding, weaving, etc.) 



telomerization 

polymerization in which a telomer is formed 



texturized yarn 

textile glass continuous filament yarn (single or folded) 
in which the filaments have been separated deliber- 
ately and permanently to increase the bulk of the yarn 



tensile strength 

maximum stress sustained by a material before failure 
in tension 

NOTE When the maximum stress occurs at the yield 
point, it is designated tensile strength at yield. When the 
maximum stress occurs at break, it is designated tensile 
strength at break. 



terpolymer 

polymer derived from three species of monomer 



thermal analysis 

group of techniques in which a physical property of a 
substance is measured as a function of temperature 
while the substance is subjected to a controlled tem- 
perature programme 

NOTE 1 The adjective corresponding to "thermal analysis" 
is Ihermo-analyticaf (for example: thermo-analytical tech- 
niques). 

NOTE 2 When two or more techniques are applied to the 
same sample at the same time, they should be identified as 
"simultaneous multiple techniques'*, for example, simultane- 
ous thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis. The 
term "combined multiple techniques" would indicate the use 
of separate samples for each technique. 



80 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1099 



thermal break 

solid or cellular material or a combination of materials 
of low thermal transmission, placed between compo- 
nents of high thermal transmission in order to reduce 
heat flow across the assembly 



thermally-foamed plastic 

cellular plastic produced by applying heat to effect 
gaseous decomposition or volatilisation of a constitu- 
ent 

cf. chemically- and mechanically-foamed plastic 



thermal conductivity (of a homogeneous material not 

affected by thickness) 
rate of heat flow under steady conditions through unit 
area, per unit temperature gradient in the direction 
perpendicular to the area 

IUPAP symbol: X 



thermoacoustimetry 

technique in which the characteristics of imposed 
acoustic waves are measured as a function of tem- 
perature after passing through a substance while the 
substance is subjected to a controlled temperature 
programme 



thermal degradation 

entirety of all deleterious chemical modifications of a 
plastic at elevated temperature 

NOTE It is essential to report the temperature and other 
environmental conditions at which the phenomenon is 
studied. 

cf. ageing, degradation and deterioration 



thermal diffusivity 

ratio of the thermal conductivity of a substance to the 
product of its density and specific heat 

IUPAP symbol: a 

NOTE The SI unit for this property is the square metre 
per second. 



thermodilatometry 

technique in which a dimension of a substance under 
negligible load is measured as a function of tempera- 
ture while the substance is subjected to a controlled 
temperature programme 

NOTE 1 The record is the thermodilatometnc curve: the 
dimension should be plotted on the ordinate increasing 
upwards and temperature or time on the abscissa increas- 
ing from left to right. 

NOTE 2 Linear thermodilatometry and volume thermodila- 
tometry are distinguished on the basis of the dimensions 
measured. 



thermoelasticity 

rubberlike elasticity resulting from an increase in tem- 
perature 



thermal expansion 

change of dimensions or volume of a specimen attrib- 
utable to a change in its temperature 

cf. linear expansion and volume expansion 



thermal stability 

property of a material to resist degradation under the 
action of heat 

NOTE It is determined by arbitrary test methods based 
on change in colour, electrical or mechanical properties, or 
by loss of mass. 



therm oelectrometry 

technique in which an electrical characteristic of a 
substance is measured as a function of temperature 
while the substance is subjected to a controlled tem- 
perature programme 

NOTE The most common measurements are of resis- 
tance, conductance or capacitance. 



thermoforming 

process of shaping heated thermoplastic sheets or 
other profiles, generally on a mould, followed by cool- 
ing 



cf. thermal degradation 



cf. forming 



81 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1900 



thermogravimetry 
TG 

technique in which the mass of a substance is meas- 
ured as a function of temperature while the substance 
is subjected to a controlled temperature programme 

NOTE The record is the thermogravimetric or TG curve: 
the mass should be plotted on the ordinate decreasing 
downwards and temperature (T) or time (/) on the abscissa 
increasing from left to right. 



thermomagnetometry 

technique in which a magnetic characteristic of a sub- 
stance is measured as a function of temperature while 
the substance is subjected to a controlled temperature 
programme 



thermoplastic elastomer 

elastomer that remains thermoplastic when it is heated 
and cooled repeatedly within the temperature range 
characteristic for the material in processing and use 



thermoptometry 

technique in which an optical characteristic of a sub- 
stance is measured as a function of temperature while 
the substance is subjected to a controlled temperature 
programme 

NOTE Measurement of total light, light of specific wave- 
length^), refractive index and luminescence give thermo- 
photometry, thermospectrometry, thermorefractometry and 
thermoluminescence, respectively: observation under the 
microscope leads to thermomicroscopy. 



thermomechanical measurement 

technique in which the deformation of a substance 
under non-oscillatory load is measured as a function of 
temperature while the substance is subjected to a 
controlled temperature programme 

NOTE The mode, as determined by the type of stress 
applied (compression, tension, flexure or torsion), always 
should be stated. 



thermoparticulate analysis 

technique in which the release of particulate matter 
from a substance is measured as a function of tem- 
perature while the substance is subjected to a con- 
trolled temperature programme 



thermoset, noun 

plastic which, when cured by heat or other means, 

changes into a substantially infusible and insoluble 

product 

NOTE This term includes both thermosetting plastics and 
thermoset plastics. 



thermoset plastic 

plastic that has been cured by heat or by other means 
such as radiation, catalysts, etc., into a substantially 
infusible and insoluble state 



thermosetting 

capable of being changed into a substantially infusible 
and insoluble product when cured by heat or by other 
means such as radiation, catalysts, etc. 



thermoplastic, adjective 

capable of being softened repeatedly by heating and 
hardened by cooling through a temperature range 
characteristic of the plastic and, in the softened state, 
of being shaped by flow repeatedly into articles by 
moulding, extrusion or forming 



thermosetting plastic 

plastic that has thermosetting properties 

cf. thermosetting 



thermoplastic, noun 

plastic that has thermoplastic properties 

cf. thermoplastic, adjective 



thermosonimetry 

technique in which the sound emitted by a substance 
Is measured as a function of temperature while the 
substance is subjected to a controlled temperature 
programme 



82 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



thickener 

substance that increases the viscosity of a liquid 
polymeric system 



thiourea-formaldehyde resin 

amino resin made by the polycondensation of thiourea 
(thiocarbamide) with formaldehyde 



toughness 

that property of a material by virtue of which it can 
absorb energy, generally implying absence of brittle- 
ness and relatively high elongation to break 

NOTE Toughness often is evaluated as the energy 
required to break a material, proportional to the area under 
the stress-strain curve. 



time profile (in dynamic mechanical analysis) 

plot of the modulus and/or damping of a material 

against time 

cf. dynamic mechanical analysis 



tow 

large number of filaments collected into a loose strand 
or assemblage substantially without twist 



torpedo 

streamlined metal device placed in the path of flow of 
the plastic material in the heating cylinders of injection 
moulding machines, extruders, or in extrusion dies, to 
spread the melt into thin layers and force it into contact 
with the heating areas 



torsion pendulum 

device for performing dynamic mechanical analysis in 
which the specimen is deformed torsionally and 
allowed to oscillate in free or forced vibration 

NOTE Shear modulus is determined by the frequency of 
the resultant oscillation. Damping is determined by the 
decreasing amplitude of the oscillation (i.e., by the loga- 
rithmic decrement a). 

cf. logarithmic decrement 



torsional stress (Pa) 

shear stress on a transverse cross section, resulting 

from a twisting action 



tracking 

formation of a conducting path across the surface of 
an insulating material by current discharge or leakage 



transfer chamber 
transfer pot 

heating chamber used in transfer moulding 



cf. loading chamber 



transfer moulding 

process of moulding a thermosetting material by pas- 
sage from a heated pot into the cavity of a closed, 
heated mould 



transfer-moulding pressure 

in transfer moulding, the pressure applied to the cross- 
sectional area of the transfer chamber 

cf. moulding pressure 



total volume shrinkage (in resin casting) 
sum of the shrinkage during curing of a resin com- 
pound and the shrinkage of the cured casting during 
the cooling from curing temperature to room tempera- 
ture 



translucency 

property of a material by which a large portion of the 
transmitted light undergoes scattering, making it diffi- 
cult or impossible to distinguish objects beyond the 
material 

ct. diffusion of light and transparency 



83 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 19W 



transparency 

property of a material by which a negligible portion of 
the transmitted light undergoes scattering, thereby 
enabling objects to be distinguished clearly through 
the material 

cf. translucency 



tumble polishing 
barrel polishing 

removal of flash and sharp edges from mouldings and 
improvement of finish by allowing them to tumble in a 
loosely-packed condition in a rotating or vibrating 
container 



trimer 

oligomer composed or three units of a single species 
of monomer 

NOTE A trimer can be the product of oligomerization or of 
scission of a larger molecule. 



triple-skin sheet 
TSS 

sheet having three skins, two of which are external 
and one internal; this latter is parallel and properly 
spaced by ribs from the external ones 



true stress 

stress calculated from the supporting area at the time 
of measurement rather than from the original area 



turbidity 

apparent absorbance of incident radiation attributable 
to scattering 24 ) 



ultrasonic welding 

pressure welding process in which the surfaces to be 
united are softened by heat produced by intramolecu- 
lar vibratory mechanical motion at ultrasonic frequen- 
cies 



undercure 

state of cure of a polymeric system when the curing 
conditions (time, temperature, radiation, amount of 
curing additives, etc.) have been insufficient to pro- 
duce a satisfactory cure 

cf. overcure 



tube 

1) hollow cylinder; 

2) squeeze container for creams or paste 
cf. pipe and tubing 



tubing 

flexible tube 

NOTE Examples: laboratory tubing to convey water and 
gases to equipment; tubing for medical applications. 



undercut 

depression in the side wall of a moulding cavity that 
necessitates deformation of the moulding or the use of 
special mould construction for ejection 



unidirectional fabric (for example unidirectional 

woven fabric, unidirectional woven roving fabric) 
fabric with a great number of glass yarns or roving in 
one direction (usually the warp) and fewer and gen- 
erally finer yarns in the other direction, resulting in a 
fabric much stronger in the first direction than in the 
other 



cf. pipe and tube 



tubing (in textiles) 

tubular structure of glass yarns with a collapsed width 

greater than 100 mm 

cf. sleeving 



24) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemcial defini- 
tions rotating to polymers — Part 1: 1966 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromdecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



84 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



uniform polymer 
monodisperse polymer 

polymer composed of molecules uniform with respect 
to relative molecular mass and constitution 2 ^) 



upstroke press 

press in which the pressing device is situated below 
the moving table, pressure being applied by an 
upward movement of this device 



unit storage energy 

oscillation energy, U (J-nrr 3 ) 

energy stored during one loading cycle divided by the 

volume of the material 



urea-formaldehyde resin 
UF resin 

amino resin made by the polycondensation of urea 
(carbamide) with formaldehyde 



NOTE The unit storage energy of a linear viscoelastic 
material subject to a sinusoidal load is 



U = 



M'e 2 _ CcT 2 





2 2 


In tensile deformation 


U = 


D'a 2 _E'e 2 
2 2 


where 




°o 


is the maximum stress; 


£o 


is the maximum strain. 



unplasticized polyvinyl chloride) 

polyvinyl chloride) without any plasticizer 

NOTE Ingredients added to polyvinyl chloride), such as 
stabilizers, lubricants, etc., are not considered as 
plasticizers in the usual technical sense. 



unsaturated polyester 
UP 

polyester characterized by carbon-carbon unsaturation 
in the polymer chain, which permits subsequent 
crosslinking with an unsaturated monomer or pre- 
polymer 



untreated fibre 

fibre that has not been subjected to the process of 
surface treatment 



urea plastic 

plastic based on amino resins, urea being present in 
the greatest amount by mass of in amines or amides 
involved in the polymerization 

cf. aminoplastic, urea-formaldehyde resin aid 
polyureas 



urethane plastic 

plastic based on polymers in which the repeated 
structural units in the chains are of the urethane type, 
or on copolymers in which urethane and other types of 
repeated structural units are present in the chains 



vacuum bag 

flexible bag by which pressure may be applied to an 
assembly inside the bag by means of evacuation of 
the bag 

cf. bag moulding 



vacuum snap-back thermoforming 
snap-back thermoforming 

vacuum thermoforming process, particularly useful for 
very deep draws, in which a heated sheet is drawn 
into a concave shape by means of vacuum, a male 
plug is lowered into the concavity, and the sheet is 
pulled rapidly upward against the surface of the plug 
by means of vacuum drawn through the plug 



25) IUPAC Recommendations: Physico-chemcial defini- 
tions relating to polymers — Part 1: 1986 Definitions of 
terms relating to individual macromolecules, their assem- 
blies and dilute polymer solutions. 



vacuum thermoforming 

thermoforming process in which a vacuum is used to 
form a heated sheet against the mould surface 

cf. pressure thermoforming 



85 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



veneer 

thin wood sheeting used to make plywood or to serve 
as a decorative surface layer on a laminate 



viscoelasticity 

stress response of a material acting as though it were 
a combination of an elastic solid and a viscous fluid 
with flow dependent on time, temperature, load, and 
rate of loading 



vent 

hole, slot or groove provided in a mould or machine to 
allow air and gas to escape during moulding, extrusion 
or forming 



vibrating stress 

stress with a value varying as a function of time 

cf. alternating stress and oscillating stress 



viscose-based carbon fibre 

carbon fibre produced from viscose precursor 

NOTE Production of carbon fibre from viscose precursor 
has virtually ceased apart from small-scale production from 
viscose fabrics. 

cf. carbon fibre precursor 



vinyl acetate plastic 

plastic based on polymers of vinyl acetate or copoly- 
mers of vinyl acetate with other monomers, the vinyl 
acetate being in the greatest amount by mass 



vinyl chloride plastic 

plastic based on polymers of vinyl chloride or copoly- 
mers of vinyl chloride with other monomers, the vinyl 
chloride being in the greatest amount by mass 



vinyl resin 

resin made by polymerization of monomers containing 
the vinyl group 

NOTE In some countries vinyl resin also is used for non- 
resinous vinyl polymers. 



viscosity 

coefficient of viscosity 

shear viscosity, r\ (Pas) 

quotient of shear stress (ojj) 

steady, simple shear flow 



and shear rate ( y ) in 



NOTE 1 For non-Newtonian liquids, <r M is directly propor- 
tional to y and r\ is constant. 

NOTE 2 For non-Newtonian liquids, when <r,j is not directly 
proportional to y , r\ varies with y and is termed the non- 
Newtonian viscosity. 

NOTE 3 Some experimental methods, such as capillary 
flow and flow between parallel plates, employ a range of 
shear rates. The value of rj at some nominal average value 
of y is termed the apparent viscosity and given the symbol 
^app- 

NOTE 4 Extrapolation of t] or rjapp for non-Newtonian fluids 
to zero y gives the zero-shear viscosity and is given the 
symbol rfi. 



vinylidene chloride plastic 

plastic based on polymers of vinylidene chloride or 
copolymers of vinylidene chloride with other mono- 
mers, the vinylidene chloride being in the greatest 
amount by mass 



virgin plastic 

plastic material in the form of pellets, granules, 
powder, floe, etc. that has not been subjected to use 
or processing other than that required for its initial 
manufacture 

cf. reworked plastic 



viscosity coefficient (Pas) 

shearing stress necessary to induce a unit velocity 

flow gradient in a material 

NOTE In actual measurement, the viscosity coefficient of 
a material is obtained from the ratio of shearing stress to 
shearing rate. This assumes the ratio to be constant and 
independent of the shearing stress, a condition which is 
satisfied only by Newtonian fluids. Consequently, in all other 
cases, values obtained are apparent and represent one 
point of the flow curve. 

cf. viscosity 



86 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



viscosity/density ratio 

r)/p 
where 

r] is the viscosity of the polymer solution; 
p is the density of the polymer solution 



volume resistivity 

volume resistivity of a material is the quotient obtained 
when the potential gradient is divided by the current 
density 

NOTE In the metric system, the volume resistivity of a 
material, in ohm centimetres, is equal to the volume resis- 
tance between opposite faces of a 1 cm 3 of the material. 



visible fibre 
fibre show 

fibre wetted incompletely with resin, appearing on the 
surface of a reinforced plastic 

cf . dry patch and fibre streak 



void (in noncellular plastics) 

enclosed cavity of an undefined shape, containing air 

or some other gas 

NOTE 1 The term bubble refers to a more or less spherical 
void. 

NOTE 2 In cable insulation, voids may contain water. 
cf. void (in cellular plastics) 



volumetric feeding 

in moulding, the way of feeding in which the charge is 
controlled volumetrically 



vulcanized fibre 

nearly homogeneous material consisting of hydrated 
cellulose, made by subjecting cellulose to a parch- 
mentizing process 



warp 
warping 

dimensional distortion of a plastic object after mould- 
ing or other fabrication 

cf. dished and domed 



void (in cellular plastics) 

cavity formed unintentionally in cellular plastics and 

substantially larger than the characteristic individual 

cells 



volume expansion 

change in volume of a test specimen under specified 
test conditions 

cf. linear expansion and swelling 



volume resistance 

quotient of the direct voltage applied between two 
electrodes which are in contact with, or embedded in, 
two opposite sides of a specimen, divided by that por- 
tion of the current flowing through the volume of the 
specimen, excluding current flowing along the surface 

cf. surface resistance 



water absorption 
moisture absorption 

amount of water absorbed by a material under speci- 
fied test conditions 

NOTE The conditions may be immersion in water or 
exposure to a humid atmosphere; in the latter case the 
process is also referred to as water vapour absorption. 



wear 

cumulative action of all the deleterious mechanical 
influences encountered in use that tend to impair a 
serviceability of a material 



weathering 

effects of exposure of a material to outdoor conditions 

cf. ageing and artificial weathering 



87 



IS 2826:2001 
ISO 472 : 1990 



web 

assembly of thin fibres, with or without orientation, 
held together by the adherence of the fibres and/or by 
other appropriate physical means 



width 

in the case of a flexural test of a bar (beam) specimen, 
the shorter dimension perpendicular to the direction in 
which the load is applied 

cf. depth 



weight feeding 

in moulding, the way of feeding in which the charge is 
controlled gravimetrically 



weld line 
knit line 
weld mark 

mark on a moulded plastic formed by the union of two 
or more streams of plastic flowing together 



welding 

process of uniting softened surfaces of materials, 
generally with the aid of heat 

NOTE In some countries, particularly Canada, UK and 
USA, the term "sealing" is used rather than "welding" for 
processes in which the surfaces of films are united by the 
application of heat and pressure: for example, dielectric 
sealing, high-frequency sealing, RF sealing and ultrasonic 
sealing. 



window 

tiny, colourless, transparent area or speck in a sheet 
of coloured or opaque plastic, which looks like a hole 
when the sheet is held to the light 

cf. fish-eye 



woven fabric 

glass fabric made by interlacing two sets of threads 
(single, folded, or cabled yarns, rovings) perpendicular 
to each other or at some other specified angle, such 
interlacing being formed during weaving on a loom or 
weaving machine 



woven roving (textile glass) 

fabric formed by the weaving of roving 



wet strength 

strength of an adhesive joint determined immediately 
after removal from a liquid in which it has been 
immersed, under specified conditions of time, tem- 
perature, and pressure 

cf. dry strength 



woven scrim 

woven open-mesh glass fabric in which both warp and 
weft yarns are spaced widely 



xylenol resin 

resin of the phenolic type made by the polycondensa- 
tion of a xylenol with an aldehyde or a ketone 



whisker 

short, fibrous, 
material 



single-crystal, inorganic reinforcing 



"white point" temperature (of dispersions) 

limiting temperature below which an opaque mass, 

and above which a transparent film, is formed 



yarn 

general term covering specific types of structures, with 
or without twist, made of staple fibres or filaments 

NOTE Structures without twist include multifilament, 
strand, sliver, roving (assembled or direct), no-twist roving, 
and spun roving. Structures with twist include single yam, 
folded yam, cabled yam, multiple wound yam, and fancy 
yam. 



88 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 19M 



yield point 

first stress in a material, which may be less than the 
maximum attainable stress, at which an increase in 
strain occurs without an increase in stress 



Youngs modulus, E (Pa) 
modulus of elasticity in tension 

quotient of stress and strain (secant modulus) or tan- 
gent to the stress-strain curve (tangent modulus): 

E-o/e 
or 

£ = dcr/d£ 
where 

e is the strain; 

a is the stress 



NOTE 1 In general, both are time-dependent for 
viscoelastic materials. 

NOTE 2 £ = cr 2 /f z 

or 



a x = cr y = ; 



and 



*x =e v = ~» e z 

where fj. is Poisson's ratio. 



zone (of 3n extruder screw) 

part of an extruder screw where the pitch is designed 
in such a way as to perform a specific function, e.g. 
feeding, compressing, venting, mixing, metering, etc. 



89 



18 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



Index of alphabetic list of English synonyms, 
with corresponding preferred term 



absolute compliance ICI (Pa- 1 ) -> absolute modulus 

acetal plastic -> polyaceral plastic 

adhesive failure -> adhesion failure 

adiabatic extrusion -> autothermal extrusion 

after-bake -> postcure 

allyl resin -► polyallyl plastic 

allyl plastic -► polyallyl plastic 

anchor -> sprue-puller 

apparent relative molecular mass -» apparent molar mass 

autoclave moulding -» bag moulding 



back taper -> back draft 

backbone -> main chain 

barrel polishing -» tumble polishing 

bench marks -> gauge marks 

binding agent (textile glass) -> binder (glass) 

bleed out -» exudation 

bolster -» chase 

breakdown voltage -> disruptive voltage 

bulk viscosity -> compressive viscosity 



calorific potential -> heat of combustion 

chemical resistance -» resistance to chemicals 

chlorofluorocarbon plastic -> polychlorofluorocarbon plastic 

coefficient of viscosity -► viscosity 

cohesive failure -> cohesion failure 

cold flow -> creep 

concentrated phase -> polymer-rich phase 

contact pressure moulding -> contact moulding 

cooling-curve determination -» heating-curve determination 

cooling fixture -> cooling jig 

counterdraft -> back draft 

curing temperature -> cure temperature 

curing time -> cure time 

cylinder -> barrel 



die -> mould 

dielectric breakdown voltage -* disruptive voltage 
dielectric constant -» relative permittivity 
dielectric sealing -> welding 



90 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 1999 



dielectric strength -> electric strength 

dilute phase -* polymer-poor phase 

discontinuous fibre -» staple fibre 

dissipation factor -> dielectric dissipation factor 

doctor bar -+ doctor blade 

doctor knife -» doctor blade 

double-strand polymer -> ladder polymer 

dowel bushing -> dowel bush 

dry spot -> dry patch 

dwelling -► dwell 

dynamic modulus -» complex modulus 



elastic modulus -> modulus of elasticity 
elastic modulus (deprecated) -> storage modulus 
elongation viscosity -» extensional viscosity 
emulsifier -> emulsifying agent 
expanded plastic — ► cellular plastic 



fabrication -» fabricating 

fatigue strength -> fatigue life 

fibre show -> visible fibre 

fibre whitening -» fibre streak 

filter pack -> screen pack 

fire behaviour -> burning area 

fixed platen -+ fixed plate 

fixed table -> fixed plate 

flash area -> flash ridge 

flow birefringence -» streaming birefringence 

foam-ln-place -> foam /n situ 

foamed adhesive -> cellular adhesive 

foamed plastic -> cellular plastic 

force (deprecated) -> punch 

frame -> chase 



gang mould -> multicavity mould 

gel phase -> polymer-rich phase, note 

gelling -> gelation 

gel-permeation chromatography -> size-exclusion chromatography 

glue (deprecated) -+ adhesive 

glue line -> adhesive line 

glue line (deprecated) -> adhesive line 



H 

halocarbon plastic -► poiyhalocarbon plastic 

hardener -> hardening agent 

heat distortion temperature -> deflection temperature under load 

heating-rate curve -> heating-curve determination 

heater blanket -+ heater band 



91 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1900 



heater strip -> heater band 

high-frequency sealing -> welding 

high-pressure laminate -► high-pressure decorative laminate 

hydrocarbon plastic -> polyhydrocarbon plastic 



inverse heating-rate curve -* heating curve determination 
isocyanurate plastic -* polyisocyanurate plastic 
isotropic compression *'-> bulk compression 



knife line -► sheeter line 
knit line -* weld line 



ladder polymer -► double-strand polymer 

lamination (process) -» laminating 

land area -> land (of a compression or injection mould) 

lap Joint strength -> longitudinal shear strength 

light fastness -> colour fastness on exposure to light 

limiting viscosity number -> intrinsic viscosity 

linear thermodilatometry -> thermodilatometry 

locking force -> mould clamping force 

locking pressure -* mould clamping force 

logarithmic viscosity number -* inherent viscosity 

loss compliance -> loss factor 

loss modulus -> loss factor 

loss tangent -* dielectric dissipation factor/loss factor 



M 

macromonomer -* macromer 

Msrk-Houwink-Sakurada equation -> Mark-Houwink equation 

mating surface -> land 

mer -* monomehc unit 

modifier -» additive 

modulus of elasticity in tension -> Young's modulus 

moisture absorption -> water absorption 

molecular weight -> relative molecular mass 

molecular weight average -> molar-mass average 

monodisperse polymer -> uniform polymer 

moving table -* moving plate 

multidaylight press -> multiplaten press 

multi-Impression mould -> mutticavity mould 



M-H-S equation -> Mark-Houwink equation 
novelty yam -» fancy yam 



N 



Q9 



IS 2828:2001 
ISO 472 : 1990 



olefin plastic -> polyolefin plastic 
oscillation energy -> unit storage energy 



pay-off -> let-off 

pearl polymerization -> bead polymerization 

piston -> ram 

pit -> crater 

plastic size -> coupling size 

plastisol gel -> plastisol fusion, note 

plied yarn -» folded yarn 

polyacrylate -> aromatic polyester 

polyalcohol -> polyol 

polyarylate -> aromatic polyester 

polycondensate — > condensation polymer 

polycondensation -> condensation polymerization 

polydlsperse polymer -> non-uniform polymer 

polyformaldehyde -> polyoxymethylene 

polyhydric alcohol -> polyol 

powder blend -> dry blend 

prebond treatment (deprecated) -> surface treatment 

promoter -> accelerator 

propylene [propene] plastic -> polypropylene [polypropene] (PP) plastic 

propylene plastic -> polypropylene plastic 



R 



rate of burning -> area of burning rate 

reference marks -> gauge marks 

relative molecular-mass average -> molar-mass average 

reverse taper -> back draft 



shear viscosity -> viscosity 

sheeting -> sheet 

shrink mark -> sink mark 

shrink wrapping -> shrink packaging 

shrinkage block -> cooling jig 

shrinkage jig -> cooling jig 

snap-back -» vacuum snap-back thermoforming 

snap-back thermoforming -> vacuum snap-back thermoforming 

slit-die extrusion -> slot-die extrusion 

slug well — ► cold-slug well 

slush moulding -> slush casting 

solution/solvent viscosity ratio -» relative viscosity 

solvent welding -> solvent bonding 

specific viscosity (deprecated) -> relative viscosity increment 

spectrum of retardation times -> spectrum of relaxation times 

spew area -> flash ridge 

spew groove -* flash groove 



93 



IS 2828 : 2001 
ISO 472 : 1009 



spew line -> flash line 

spew ridge -> flash ridge 

spin welding -> friction welding 

sprue bushing -► sprue bush 

storage compliance — ► storage modulus 

storage life -> shelf life 

striction -► necking 

styrene plastic -> polystyrene [PS] plastic 

styrene/acrylonitrile plastic -> polystyrene/acrylonitrile plastic 

support plate -> backing plate 

sweat out -> exudation 



tan delta -> loss factor (in damping) 

tangent of loss angle -► dielectric dissipation factor 

tear resistance -» tear strength 

tensile strength at break, at yield -> tensile strength 

test piece -► specimen 

thermal impulse sealing -> impulse sealing 

thermoforming -* vacuum snap-back thermoforming 

thermoluminescence -> thermoptometry 

thermomicroscopy -> thermoptometry 

thermophotometry -> thermoptometry 

thermorefractometry -> thermoptometry 

thermospectrometry -> thermoptometry 

thinner (deprecated) -» diluent 

torsional braid measurement -> dynamic thermomechanical measurement 

transfer pot -> transfer chamber 

tunnel gate -» submarine gate 



U 



ultrasonic sealing -> welding 

unit damping energy -> energy loss 



vacuum-bag moulding — ► bag moulding 

viscosity-average molar mass — > molar-mass average 

viscosity number -» reduced viscosity 

viscosity ratio -> relative viscosity 

viscosity ratio increment -> relative viscosity increment 

volume compression -> bulk compression 

volume thermodilatometry -> thermodilatometry 

W 

warping -> warp 

weight-distribution function -» mass-distribution function 

weld mark -» weld line 

working life -> pot life 

wrinkle -» crease 



94 



Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
'BIS Catalogue' and 'Standards: Monthly Additions'. 

This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. PCD 12 (1778). 



Amendments Issued Since Publication 

Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

Headquarters : 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 1 10 002 Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 33 75, 323 94 02 (Common to all offices) 

Regional Offices : Telephone 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 323 76 17 

NEW DELHI 1 10 002 \323 38 41 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 1*337 84 99, 337 85 61 

CALCUTTA 700 054 L337 86 26, 337 91 20 



Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160 022 f 60 38 43 

60 20 25 



{: 



Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600 1 13 J"254 12 16, 254 14 42 

\_254 25 19,254 13 15 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) f 832 92 95, 832 78 58 

MUMBAI 400 093 \832 78 91, 832 78 92 



Branches : AHMEDABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. 
LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. TH1RUVANANTHAPURAM 



Printed at Prabhat Offset Press , Darya Ganj, New Delhi-2 



