**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 11471 (1985) : Method for Determination of Dimensional 
Changes Due to the Effects of Varied Water and Heat 
Conditions for Machine-Made Carpets [TXD 4: Wool and Wool 
Products] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi f 7ui^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS: 11471 -1985 

UDC 677'643-ai7: 635-2 ISQ 2551-1981 



E 
o 
O 



Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2003) 

METHOD FOR 

DETERMINATION OF DIMENSIONAL CHANGES DUE TO THE 

EFFECTS OF VARIED WATER AND HEAT CONDITIONS 

FOR MACHINE-MADE CARPETS 

( ISO Title: Machine-Made Textile Floor Coverings — Determination of 
Dimensional Changes Due to the Effects of. Varied Water and 

Heat Conditions ) 

National Foreword 

This Indian Standard which is identical with ISO 2551-1981 'Machine-made textile floor 
coverings — Determination of dimensional changes due to the effects of varied water and heat 
conditions' issued by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ), was adopted by 
the Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendation of Textile Floor Coverings Sectional 
Committee and approval of the Textile Division Council. 

In the adopted standard certain terminology and conventions are not identical with those used 
in Indian Standards; attention is especially drawn to the following: 

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while In Indian Standards the current practice 
is to use a point ( . ) as the decimal marker. 

Wherever the words 'International Standard' appear, referring to this standard, they should 
be read as 'Indian Standard'. 

Cross Reference 

The Textile Floor Coverings Sectional Committee has reviewed the provisions of the following 
ISO Standard and has decided that the same is acceptable for use in conjunction with this Indian 
standard: 



ISO 1957-1973 Machine-made textile floor coverings — Sampling and cutting specimens 
o) for physical tests. 

> 
o 
U 

o 
o 



Adopted 12 August 1985 



© July 1988, BIS 



Gr 2 



BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 

NEW DELHI 110002 



As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank 



18:11471 -1985 
ISO 2551 -1981 



1 Scope and field of application 

This international Standard specifies a procedure for the deter- 
mination of the dimensional changes that take place when 
machine-made textile floor coverings are subjected to varied 
water and heat conditions. 

The method is applicable to all machine-made textile floor 
coverings. 



2 Reference 

ISO 1957, Machine- made textile floor coverings 
and cutting specimens for physical tests. 



Sampling 



3 Principle 

Comparison is made between dimensions of a test specimen 
after conditioning in the standard atmosphere for testing tex- 
tiles and then after being subjected to specified varied water 
and heat conditions. 



4.6 Container, to hold water at 20 ± 2 °C, of dimensions at 
least 20 mm greater than the test specimen and deep enough to 
accommodate the submerged test specimen 



5 Test specimen 

5.1 Sampling 

Select the specimens according toihe directions in ISO 1957. 

5.2 Number and dimensions 

Take at least three test specimens each measuring not less than 
250 mm x 250 mm, noting the direction of manufacture. 



5.3 Conditioning 

Condition the test specimens until they are in equilibrium v/ith 
the standard atmosphere for testing textiles. 



4 Apparatus 

4.1 Instrument capable of measuring length to the 

nearest 0,05 mm; for example, optical bench or mechanical 
device with gauge. 

4.2 Plate glass sheet, marginally smaller than the test 
specimen, or other means of keeping the specimen flat while 
measurements are made. This will not be required if the instru- 
ment in 4.1 incorporates such a glass or metal plate. 

4.3 Ventilated drying oven, capable of being controlled at 
60 ± 2 °C, with perforated and lacquered shelves that can be 
placed in the oven. 

4.4 Steel pins, or other appropriate means of indicating the 
reference points on the test specimen, if necessary. 



4.5 Enclosure, 

testing textiles. 



to provide the standard atmosphere for 



6 Procedure 

6.1 Initial measurement of the specimen 

Make all measurements on the conditioned specimen when it is 
completely flat; this can be achieved by use of the glass plate 
(4.2) or other means. 

On the conditioned specimen, measure the distance between 
the edges parallel to the direction of manufacture and between 
the edges at right angles to the direction of manufacture, each 
at two locations approximately 200 mm apart. If required by the 
method of measuring adopted, mark the pair of reference 
points, for example by the use of steel pins (4.4), approximately 
2(X) mm apart on the edge parallel to the direction of manufac- 
ture and also on the edge at right angles to the direction of 
manufacture. Make all measurements on the back of the 
specimen to the nearest 0,05 mm. 

NOTE — Products made of discrete layers, for example foam-backed 
constructions, should be measured on both the backing and the use 
surface, and the results of both measurements given in the test report. 



#: 11471- *l 985 
m 2551 -1981 



6.2 Determination 

Place the test specimen, lying freely on the perforated and lac- 
quered shelves, in the drying oven (4.3), controlled at 60 ± °C, 
Keep the specimen in the drying oven for 2 h, then remove it 
and measure the distance between the two parallel edges or the 
two sets of marks to the nearest 0,05 mm, within between 6 
and 7 min of removing the specimen frijm the oven. 

Immerse the test specimen, laid flat, in water at a temperature 
of 20 ± 2 °C and allow it to soak in the water for 2 h. Remove 
the specimen from the water, taking precautions to avoid 
distorting its shape. Excess moisture may be removed by plac- 
ing the specimen between sheets of blotting paper. AA/ithin 
5 ± 1 min of removing the specimen from the water, again 
measure the distance between the two parallel edges or the 
two sets of mar]<s as specified in 6.1. 

Dry the test specimen for 24 h in the drying oven at 60 ± 2 **C 
in the same conditions as before. Within between 6 and 7 min 
of removing the specimen from the oven again measure the 
djstancei)etween the two parallel edges or two sets of marks as 
specified in 6.1. 

Finally, leave the test specimen for 48 h in the standard at- 
mosphere for testing textiles. Measure the distance between 
the two parallel edges or the two sets of marks to the nearest 
0,06 mm, note the final appearance of the test specimen, and 
assess the degree of cockling. 



7 Expression of results 

Calculate the arithmetic nr)ean of the dimensions obtained for 
all specimens in the direction of nnanufacture and in the direc- 
tion at right angles to this for each of the stages referred to in 
clause 6. 



Calculate in each case the variations observed and express as a 
percentage using the formula 



'm *o 



X 100 



where 

Iq is the arithmetic mean of the initial measurements; 

Ijy^ is the arithmetic mean of frteasurements at each of the 
stages referred to In clause 6. 

Indicate shrinkage by a minus sign, and an increase in dimen- 
sions by a plus sign. 



8 Test report 

The test report shall include the following particulars : 

a) a statement that the procedure was conducted in accor- 
dance with this International Standard, and details of any 
operations not included, or optional; 

b) the individual values for each specimen of the 
measurements made in the direction of manufacture and in 
the direction at right angles to the direction of manufacture, 
together with the results obtained as specified in clause 7, 

c) a description of the final appearance of the test 
specimens, i.e. whether they exhibit mild, moderate or 
severe cockling; 

d) an indication of the type of measuring instrument used. 



Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India 



