NAT HA IS 17100 : 2019 
Indian Standard 


atra SATT Ur RT 
Or, Aranor Ue TAT (AT SE) 


Separation, Handling and 
Usage of Underground Coal 
Gasification (UCG) 


ICS 75.020 


© BIS 2019 


ada Ae ST 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR IT, 9 TEE TH HM, ay eeft- 110002 


A et Y MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


March 2019 Price Group 6 


Methods and Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional Committee, 
MED 37 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Methods and 
Equipments for Underground Coal Gasification and Coal Bed Methane Sectional Committee had been approved 
by the Mechanical Engineering Division Council. 


This standard provides for composition of syngas (synthetic gas) generated through UCG technique. This Standard 
is relevant for designers, producers, users and most importantly - the regulatory authorities, so as to identify and 
evaluate parameters which are of prime importance for separation, handling and usage of Underground Coal 
Gasification. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given at Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 “Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised). The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 17100 : 2019 


Indian Standard 


SEPARATION, HANDLING AND 
USAGE OF UNDERGROUND COAL 
GASIFICATION (UCG) 


1 SCOPE 


This standard covers; 


a) Composition of syngas (synthetic gas) generated 
through UCG technique; 


b) Impurities produced and purification requirement; 
c) The applicable processing techniques; and 
d) Potential end usages of the syngas. 


2 TYPICAL SYNGAS COMPOSITION 


2.1 Underground coal gasification yields the following 
main components: 

a) Hydrogen (H,), 

b) Carbon monoxide (CO), 

c) Carbon dioxide (CO,), 

d) Methane (CH), 

e) Nitrogen (N,), and 

f) Water vapour (H,O). 


2.2 In addition, a range of minor components is also 
produced (depending largely on the trace elements and 
compounds present in the feed coal/lignite coal): 


a) Nitrogen compounds, 

b) Sulphur compounds, 

c) Alkali, 

d) Heavy metals, 

e) Organometallic species, and 


f) Various hydrocarbons resulting from pyrolysis 
reactions which occur in the absence of oxygen. 


2.3 The composition of raw syngas from a UCG 
operation is broadly comparable with that obtained from 
surface gasification, conducted at low temperatures. 
When gasification occurs at lower temperatures, it is 
observed that higher concentrations of methane and 
carbon dioxide are generated and since UCG operation 
is at lower temperatures, it is expected that UCG 
syngas will be higher in these species than syngas from 
conventional surface gasification. 


2.4 The oxyblown fluidized bed gasification generates 
higher concentration of carbon dioxide (CO,) than 
carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen (H,). High 
temperature surface gasification whether carried out in 


entrained flow or slagging gasifiers, has significantly 
higher carbon monoxide (CO) content and less carbon 
dioxide (CO,) and methane. Syngas resulting from 
high temperature gasification is easier to process in 
downstream equipment. 


3 SYNGAS PURIFICATION AND TREATMENT 


3.1 Syngas Purification Requirements 


Raw syngas from coal gasification contains many 
undesirable components including acid gases, heavy 
metals, nitrogen compounds and halides. The required 
level of treatment and optimal technologies will vary 
according to the ultimate disposition of the syngas. 


There are two major consumption pathways for syngas: 
a) Combustion for heat or power generation, and 


b) Catalytic processes for production of chemicals 
and liquid fuels. 


3.1.1 The processes used for purification are similar, 
the difference being the extent of syngas purification 
required, depending on the end use of the gas. 
Requirements for combustion and power generation are 
aimed at achieving regulatory emission requirements 
and to protect the equipment such as boilers and gas 
turbines. Requirements for chemicals and fuels are 
generally more stringent in order to avoid damage to 
the catalyst which may impact upon its efficiency, life, 
activity or conversion. 


3.1.2 Some of the technologies employed for removing 
acid gas contaminants such as sulphur may also readily 
be used for bulk removal of carbon dioxide. Some 
processes (such as ammonia and methanol production) 
require removal or reduction of the carbon dioxide in 
syngas. Integrated Gasification and Combined Cycle 
power generation (IGCC) can also be adapted for 
removal of carbon dioxide (CO). 


3.1.3 Syngas applications where a concentrated stream 
of carbon dioxide is produced may be particularly 
suited to carbon capture and storage (CCS), depending 
on availability of a sales outlet or storage sink (such 
as geological or biological sequestration). Although 
the commercial viability and long-term integrity of geo 
sequestration is yet to be established, the combination 
of gasification and CCS is of growing interest as 
it offers the potential for significant reductions in 


IS 17100 : 2019 


atmospheric greenhouse gas emissions when compared 
with conventional coal fired power generation. 


The following sections outline syngas treatment 
requirements according to end use. 


3.2 Power Generation 


3.2.1 The extent of syngas clean-up for Gas turbine 
generator use will be largely driven by the emission 
regulations of the regulatory body holding jurisdiction 
over the facility site and the fuel specifications ofthe gas 
turbine supplier. These requirements typically address 
permissible levels of sulphur, oxides of nitrogen, and 
particulates and present no-special difficulties for UCG 
syngas. 


3.2.2 Raw syngas is corrosive and in order to reduce 
the need for expensive corrosion resistant alloys will 
generally require some level of treatment including 
means to avoid condensation before it can be 
economically transported via pipeline. 


3.3 Gas to Liquids Processes 


3.3.1 Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis 


The feed gas specifications for Liquid hydrocarbon 
synthesis via the Fischer Tropsch (FT) pathway 
are extremely stringent due to the sensitivity of the 
reaction catalyst. In particular, sulphur compounds 
and metals should be removed to very low levels. In 
practice, requirements vary according to process, 
catalyst, and licensor, and are subject to economic trace 
offs and so it is not possible to provide a single and 
universal specification. However, a typical FT feed gas 
specification is given in Table 1. 


3.3.2 In Addition 


a) High concentrations of inert components will 
result in lower yields due to purging requirements; 
and 


b) The hydrogen (H,) to carbon monoxide (CO) 
ratio requirement of the syngas varies from 
about 1.3 to 3 depending on the GTL technology 
employed. 


3.4 Methanol to Gasoline (MTG) 


The methanol to gasoline pathway also employs 
catalytic processes that require similar feed gas 
specifications and therefore similar syngas purification 
and processing to the GTL pathway. The optimum 
hydrogen (H,) to carbon monoxide (CO) ratio for 
methanol production is typically close to 2, depending 
on carbon dioxide (CO,) content. 


3.5 Syngas Purification Technology 


3.5.1 Particulates 


The particulates present in the raw syngas can be 
removed using a variety of methods depending on the 
syngas end use. 


3.5.2 Wet Scrubbing 


Hot syngas is cooled and then scrubbed in a tower 
or wet venturi scrubber, removing particulates as 
well as a portion of highly water-soluble 
contaminants such as chlorides and nitrogen 
compounds. The gas can be cooled either in a waste 
heat boiler to produce high pressure steam, or by 
direct water contact. 


3.5.3 Simple Quenching 


In a similar process to wet scrubbing the hot syngas can 
be quenched with water to below the dew point. The 
particulates are then removed from the condensate by 
filtration or other means. 


3.5.4 Candle Filtration 


Ceramic candle filtration can remove particulates in 
hot syngas and has been successfully used in power 
generation (IGCC) facilities. 


Table 1 Typical Fischer-Tropsch Feed Gas Specifications 
( Clause 3.3.1 ) 


SI No. Impurity Feed Concentration 
a) (2) (3) 
1) Sulphur compounds < 1 ppm volume 
11) Nitrogen compounds < 1 ppm volume 
iii) Halogen compounds < 10 ppb volume 


iv) Alkaline metals 


v) Solids(including shoot, ash and dust) 
vi) Organic compound (tars including BTX”) 


vii) Class 2 organic compounds" 


* BTX (Benzene, Toluene, Xylene). 


<10 ppb volume 
Total removal 
Removed below dew points? 


<1 ppm volume 


> Removal to a level at which no condensation will occur during FT compression. 
“Class 2 tars comprise of phenol, pyridine, and thiophene. 


3.6 Hydrocarbon and Water Condensate 


After syngas has been cooled to its dew point, liquid 
hydrocarbons and water condensate will form and 
may be separated as liquid phases. The water will 
generally contain dissolved gases and ionic species 
including ammonia, chlorides and cyanides and after 
suitable treatment may be recycled within the process, 
or treated and discharged in accordance with local 
regulations. The hydrocarbon phase can be burned 
as fuel or processed further according to available 
dispositions. 


3.7 Carbonyl Sulphide Hydrolysis 


Carbonyl sulphide (COS) may be removed via hydro- 
desulphurisation in fixed catalyst beds in which COS 
is rapidly hydrolysed to carbon dioxide (CO,) and 
hydrogen sulphide (H,S) in the presence of steam. 


The reaction involved in the removal of COS is: 
COS + H,O > CO, + H,S 


Since the hydrolysis reaction produces the acid gas 
components carbon dioxide (CO,) and hydrogen 
sulphide (H,S), carbonyl sulphide (COS) removal is 
generally performed prior to acid gas removal. 


3.8 Acid Gas Removal 


Solvents are widely used for acid gas removal and fall 
into either the chemical, physical or mixed categories. 
The two major components generally targeted for 
removal are carbon dioxide (CO,). and hydrogen 
sulphide (H,S). However, depending on the acid gas 
source other species may be present in greater or lesser 
quantities including oxides of nitrogen and sulphur, 
cyanides, halides including hydrogen chloride, and 
other sulphur compounds such as mercaptans and 
thiophenes. The relative quantities of these impurities 
and downstream process requirements will influence 
selection of both the solvent and technology employed. 
A final selection will typically be made in conjunction 
with process licensors and solvent vendors. 


3.9 Chemical Solvents 


3.9.1 Aqueousamine solvents such as MDEA (methyl 
diethanolamine) are intimately contacted with raw 
syngas in a multi-stage absorber. The solvent stream 
rich in acid gas is regenerated by heating (usually with 
steam) and recycled to the absorber. These processes 
are suited to high flow and low-pressure applications, 
such as post combustion capture for power stations. 
They feature a lower electrical power demand but 
higher heat energy requirements than physical solvents. 


3.9.2 MDEA is ineffective in removing COS because 
the two are unable to chemically bind, therefore, 
prior Carbonyl sulphide (COS) removal or catalytic 
conversion to hydrogen sulphide (H,S) is required. 
MDEA may also be unsuitable if significant amounts 
of nitrogen oxides (NOx) are present as the reaction 
to nitric acid (HNO,) with water can decompose the 


IS 17100 : 2019 


amine, and hydrogen chloride (HCI) if present can also 
de-active the amine. 


3.10 Physical Solvents 


3.10.1 The two most common physical solvents are 
methanol (as used in the Rectisol process) and glymes, or 
dialkyl ethers of polyethylene glycol (as used in the Selexol 
and Genosorb processes). Physical solvents are preferred 
for high selectivity of hydrogen sulphide (H,S) removal 
relative to carbon dioxide (CO,). Their performance is 
proportional to the system pressure allowing for high 
loadings at high acid gas partial pressures. 


3.10.2 Physical solvents are particularly attractive for 
syngas applications because hydrocarbon co-absorption 
is minimal due to the typically low hydrocarbon 
concentration in syngas. 


3.10.3 Rectisol can effectively remove hydrogen 
sulphide (H,S), carbonyl sulphide (COS) and metal 
carbonyls. Selexol and Genorsorb are less effective in 
carbonyl sulphide (COS) removal and generally require 
prior catalytic conversion of carbonyl sulphide (COS) 
to hydrogen sulphide (HS). 


3.10.4 Despite the high selectivity towards hydrogen 
sulphide (H,S), carbon dioxide (CO,) recovery is still 
possible using physical solvents. In the case of Selexol, 
two stages are used to remove firstly hydrogen sulphide 
(HS) and then carbon dioxide (CO,) in the secondary 
stage. For carbon dioxide (CO,) recovery using a 
Rectisol solvent a two-stage process is also employed. 
The selective removal of sulphur components occurs in 
the first stage followed by a dedicated carbon dioxide 
(CO,) removal step. 


3.11 Mixed Chemical/Physical Solvents 


Both chemical and physical solvents can be combined 
to take advantage of the best features of each. The 
Sulfinol process combines the chemical solvent MDEA 
or DIPA (diisopropanolamine with another amine, 
Sulfolane (tetramethylene sulfone). This combination 
allows for higher solvent loadings at high acid gas 
partial pressures. Higher carbonyl sulphide (COS) 
removal can also be achieved when compared to pure 
amine chemical solvent. 


3.12 Sulphur Recovery 


3.12.1 The processes used for acid gas removal 
generally produce a tail gas stream containing a 
high concentration of H,S. Sulphur recovery from 
H,S is possible via a Sulphur Recovery Unit (SRU) 
utilising the claus process and its variants or the 
liquid redox LO-CAT process both producing 
elemental sulphur. 


3.12.2 The LO-CAT process produces a less pure 
sulphur product than does Claus and requires re-melting 
to obtain saleable quality sulphur. However, LO-CAT 
is better suited to smaller capacity applications, the 


IS 17100 : 2019 


breakpoint being around 30 tonne/day of sulphur and 
can be integrated into the overall process. LO-CAT is 
also suited where the H,S concentration is low, whereas 
clause units require a higher feed concentration 


3.13 Trace Component Removal 


3.13.1 Metals such as arsenic, mercury and metal 
carbonyls (nickel and iron in particular) can be 
present in raw syngas in trace concentration. These 
components have the potential to poison the catalyst 
used in processes such as Fischer Tropsch synthesis. In 
addition, metal carbonyls have the ability to decompose 
and plate out on the surface of gas turbine generator 
blades. Although they are removed to an extent in 
upstream purification units, the further removal of such 
contaminants represents the final syngas purification 
step for liquids and chemical synthesis. 


3.13.2 Activated carbon impregnated with sulphur has 
been used extensively in the gas processing industry 
for removal of mercury. Mercury reacts with sulphur to 
form a solid which is then retained within the adsorbent 
bed. Other trace components such as arsenic and metal 
carbonyls may also be captured. 


3.13.3 Regenerative adsorbents are also proven for 
mercury removal in the gas processing industry based 
on molecular sieves. Safe recovery can be achieved 
using conventional regeneration equipment and 
operation methods. In addition, dedicated adsorbents 
for the removal of metal carbonyls are an option in 
certain situations. 


3.14 Syngas Composition Adjustment-Gas Shift 
Reaction 


The water gas shift reaction converts carbon monoxide 
(CO) and steam addition to generate further hydrogen 
(H,) and carbon dioxide (CO,). This reaction is used 
to increase hydrogen (H,) content, to *decarbonise” the 
syngas by conversion to carbon dioxide (CO,) which 
may be subsequently removed by acid gas treatment, 
and it provides a controllable means to achieve a 
desired hydrogen (H,) to carbon monoxide (CO) ratio 


which is key for technologies that are ratio specific. 
Some typical requirements of hydrogen (H,) to carbon 
monoxide (CO) ratio for various end uses are shown in 
Table 2. 


3.15 UCG By-products-Uses and Waste Management 


3.15.1 The impurities present in the syngas derived 
from underground coal gasification are dependent on 
the ultimate analysis of the coal resource. For example, 
if the coal has high sulphur content then higher amounts 
of sulphur containing species such as hydrogen sulphide 
and sulphur oxides will be present in the syngas. 


3.15.2 The main issues far gasification relate to carbon 
dioxide (greenhouse gas emissions, corrosively) and 
hydrogen sulphide (toxicity, acid rain, corrosively and 
catalyst deactivation). 


3.15.3 Sulphur recovered from the SRU will typically 
be sold as fertilizer or possibly for sulphuric acid 
manufacture. 


3.15.4 Waste gas with useful calorific value will 
generally be burned as fuel. Other purge and waste 
gases are either sent to flare or otherwise destroyed. 
All gaseous emissions will be dealt with in accordance 
with local air quality regulations. 


3.15.5 A very significant advantage of UCG is that 
solid wastes including ash and char largely remain 
underground and hence do not incur handling and 
disposal costs. Particulate dust/ash that reaches the 
surface with the syngas can be removed in the initial 
syngas treatment and could potentially be re injected 
into the well. The net volume of solid waste requiring 
disposal should be assessed during the pilot burn 
phase. 


3.15.6 Contaminated process aqueous effluent from 
syngas treating may contain solvents, hydrocarbons, 
particulates and catalyst. This stream may be treated 
to acceptable standards using conventional waste 
treatment processes and re-used within the plant or 
disposed of according to local regulations. 


Table 2 H, : CO Ratio for Various Syngas End Sages 
( Clause 3.14 ) 


Process Requirements 
H, : CO Ratio Comments 
Power Generation = p an Max H, specification, 
SNG 3-4:1 Depending on operating conditions 
Methanol MTG 2-2.1:1 Based on the stoichiometric number. Correct concentration 
of CO, is essential. 
Fischer-Tropsch 1-3:1 Desired ratio depends on the catalyst being used 
Ammonia n/a Pure H,.CO is not required and is a catalyst poison 


4 UCG SYNGAS HANDLING 


4.1 Handling of Toxic Product Gases and 


Condensates 


4.1.1 Toxic Effects of Syngas and Condensate 


UCG process involves in-situ conversion of solid 
un-mineable coal into syngas. Thus, solid fuel gets 
converted to gas which is essentially a mixture of carbon 
monoxide (CO), hydrogen (H,), hydrogen cyanide 
(HCN), nitrogen oxides (NO), hydrogen sulphide 
(H,S), phenols etc. Condensates obtained from heat 
exchanger mainly contain tar and phenolic compound. 
The impact of major compounds is described below. 


4.1.2 Carbon Monoxide (CO) 


a) This gas is a chemical asphyxiant causing acute 
symptoms rapidly at 1000 ppm and above and in 
1 h at about 500 ppm; 


The symptoms are generally those of hypoxia. The 
intoxication is reversible but hypoxemia is sufficient 
to cause unconsciousness and may leave permanent 
damage. Susceptibility varies considerably, being 
increased by any condition predisposing to cellular 
hypoxia, especially of the central nervous system; 


b 


wn 


wa 


The hazards of chronic low-level exposure are not 
to be ignored. In particular there is some indication 
of cardiovascular effects; 


c 


d) Particulate concentration is measured in terms of: 


(1) TWA (Time weighted average) is the maximum 
concentration of particulate in air to which 
workers can be exposed without adverse health 
effect for a period of 8 h a day. 


(2 


— 


Ceiling limit refers to the concentration of a 
chemical or material that no person should be 
exposed to for any period of time to prevent ill 
effects or death; 


e) The OSHA standard is a TWA (time weighted 
average) limit of 50 ppm; and 


f) NIOSH (National Institute of Occupational Safety 
and Health) has recommended a 35 ppm TWA 
limit and a 200 ppm ceiling limit. 


4.1.3 Hydrogen Cyanide (HCN) 
a) This is found as a liquid or gas (boiling point 
26° C); 
b) It acts as a chemical asphyxiant by inhibiting a 
cellular respiratory enzyme; 


c) Possible acute effects include immediate death at 
270 ppm and death after 10 min at 181 ppm; 

d) Exposure at 18 to 36 ppm is said to cause slight 
symptoms after several hours; 

e) Chronic effects are those of moderate hypoxia, 
including symptoms such as weakness, vertigo, 
nausea, rapid pulse, headache, flushing of the face, 


IS 17100 : 2019 


and gastric distress. Also, skin penetration by the 
vapor can be dangerous; 


f) The OSHA standard is a 10 ppm TWA limit; and 
g) The NIOSH-recommended standard is a 5 ppm/ 
10 min ceiling limit. 
4.1.4 Hydrogen Sulphide (H,S) 


a) This gas is a dangerous acute poison at 
concentrations of about 100 ppm and up; it 
therefore calls for emergency protection where 
such concentrations might occur, such as in the 
immediate vicinity of hydrogen sulphide (H,S) 
rich process streams. It affects the nervous system 
and induces respiratory failure. 


b 


we 


Chronic low-level exposure may induce various 
symptoms of malaise. 


c) The gas is a strong irritant of the eye and 
respiratory tract at about 100 ppm and above, and 
a slight irritant at 10 ppm. 


d) The OSHA standard is a 20 ppm ceiling limit, 
50 ppm/10 min peak limit. 


e) NIOSH has recommended a 10 ppm/10 min 
ceiling limit and continuous monitoring in areas 
where a concentration of 50 ppm (70 mg/m?) may 
occur, requiring evacuation. 


4.1.5 Nitrogen Oxides (NO) 


a) Nitrogen dioxide is generally the most conspicuous 
hazard. It is an irritant of insidious effect because 
it can penetrate the lung deeply without immediate 
severe discomfort and induce a delayed pulmonary 
edema, which may be fatal; 


b) However, nitrogen oxides are likely to be produced 
only if there is high temperature combustion (coal 
fired steam plant or combustion of wastes) and 
even then, only in low concentrations; 


c) The OSHA standard for nitrogen dioxide is a TWA 
limit of 5 ppm; and 
d) NIOSH recommends a | ppm ceiling limit. 


4.1.6 Phenols (-C,H,-OH) 


a) These may be either solids or liquid mixtures of 
moderate to high boiling point. 


b) Phenol and related aromatic hydroxy compounds 
can be absorbed through the skin and some (for 
example, phenol) are sufficiently volatile to be 
possible respiratory hazards; others (cresols) are 
less volatile and present an unlikely vapor hazard. 
Their toxic effect is primarily on the central 
nervous system and they are also strong irritants. 
It is the latter property which is likely to be the 
more significant in coal conversion plants, in 
the enhancement of carcinogenicity through the 
presence of phenols in skin contamination by tars 
or oils or in inhaled particles. 


c 


wm 


IS 17100 : 2019 


d) The OSHA standard is a TWA limit of 5 ppm. 


e) NIOSH has recommended a 20 mg/m? TWA limit 
and a 60 mg/m*/15-min ceiling limit. 


4.2 Control Methods 


a) To prevent sudden breakthroughs from the 
boreholes the heads of the wells are provided with 
the covers, gate valves and nipples with taps, to be 
pressurized before the start of UCG process under 
the pressure 1.25-1.5 times higher than an air blast 
working pressure. A borehole head pressurizing is 
made together with pipe casing of the well before 
cement plug redrilling or on a special bed. A high 
pressure air pipeline is equipped by a back-flow 
valve and a gate valve. 


b 


wm 


Condensate formed while gas cooling is non- 
combustible. But because of chemical substances 
and compounds in condensate contents the 
explosion-hazard concentration of stream can be 
formed in reservoir air space while storage of 
condensate. 


c 


wa 


The persons without suitable breathing device and 
those who do not undergo safety rules training are 
not allowed to be in these zones. 


d) Guidelines on the test, operation and storage of 
protective means should be displayed at working 
places. 


e) At a gas hazardous area, there should be an 
emergency means for protection from gas. Its type 
and amount are specified in accordance with the 
number of workers, area remoteness and specific 
character of the activities performed. 


f) Apart from industrial safety certification managers 
and specialists should pass knowledge assessment 
in regulations requirements in terms of population 
and territory protection from emergency situations, 
sanitation-and-epidemiological population 
security, environmental protection and labour 
safety. 


g) In gas hazardous places display warning sign 
board should be available like: “Toxic Gas 
hazard” in the regional language along with Hindi 
and English. 

Condensate formed as a result from gas cooling in 
heat exchanger should be collected and stored in 
tanks by means of pumps. 


h 


wn 


wa 


There is also provision of heating the condensate 
by steam while gasifier is in operation in the 
tanks to reduce its viscosity. When gasifier is not 
in operation, steam is to be arranged through an 
alternate means. 


j 


k) The tanks are located on the waterproof covered 
site and bund. The coating is provided to reduce 
the possibility of condensate seeping through the 


bund and preventing soil ground and underground 
water pollution. 


m 


we 


To control possible leakages from the tank bottom 
there is an outside drainage pit in a base of each 
tank with an outlet pipeline going to the inspection 
tank. 


Liquid in the inspection tank means an emergency 
situation: - leakage in tank bottom. The urgent 
steps should be taken to solve an emergency 
situation. To empty an emergency tank there 
should be provision of transfer of liquid to another 
tank. 

p) Water-resistant floor of the site where storage 
tanks are located is considered at a slope towards 
drains. 


n 


= 


q) There are outlets from water drains as steel pipes 
of 200 mm diameter with shut-off valve, meant for 
ground drainage from the site where storage tanks 
are located. In normal position shut-off valve is 
closed. 


r 


— 


In case of condensate leakage from pipelines or 
from storage tanks, leakage is contained within 
the fencing (bunding) of the storage and with the 
help of an in-tank pump liquid is transferred to the 
storage tank. 


s) A regular control over the state of water drains, 
pipe culverts and shut-off valves ensures safe 
maintenance of the reception enter for collecting, 
storage and shipping of condensate. 


t) While operating circulating water supply system, a 
need of its blow-down may occur. Water carrying 
off from the circulating system blow-down is sent 
to the dump wells. 


5 SYNGAS USES 


Syngas represents an extremely useful intermediate that 
serves as feedstock for numerous processes including 
heat and power generation, production of transportation 
fuels and chemical synthesis. 


5.1 Heat and Power 


Syngas can be burnt directly to produce heat, raise 
steam, or generate electricity; or it can be converted 
into synthetic natural gas (essentially fungible with 
natural gas) for transmission via pipeline to end users. 


5.2 Raw or Purified Synthesis Gas 


5.2.1 Supplying syngas in either its raw or purified 
form for combustion to generate heat or power is the 
most basic use of syngas. Purification of the synthesis 
gas will involve some of the techniques outlined in 
section discussed above. 


5.2.2 Conversion of syngas to hydrogen using the 
water gas shift reaction can provide a clean low carbon 


Oxygen/air 


Raw 


Syn gas 


Syngas clean - 
: 


energy source provided the by-product carbon dioxide 
is captured and stored. Hydrogen is also a key feedstock 
in a range of processes in the petroleum and chemical 
industries ( for example, hydrocracking, hydro treating, 
and ammonia production). However, Syngas and 
hydrogen are expensive to store in other than small 
quantities, and expensive also to transport over long 
distances. Therefore, it is expected that hydrogen and 
syngas consumers will generally be located adjacent or 
nearby to the UCG facility. 


—— 


IS 17100 : 2019 


Power generation 
(IGCC), direct fuel 


Gas combustion 


| Fuel gas | 


— >| Natural gas synthesis SNG 


Purified 
Syn gas 


Olefins 


Gasoline via 


> Methanol synthesis > 


MTG Process 
DME 

MTBE 
Formaldehyde 
Acetic acid 


Water gas shift Hydrogen 
Ammonia 
Urea 


Ammonia nitrate 


Fischer Tropsch Transport 


Fuel 


synthesis 


5.3 Electricity Generation 


5.3.1 There are three main electricity-generation 
options: syngas combustion to produce steam for a 
steam turbine generator (STG), syngas combustion in 
a gas turbine generator (GTG), and combined cycle 
applications which employ a combination of GTG and 
STG to improve overall efficiency. 


5.3.1.1 Simple cycle steam turbine power generation 
option is considered less attractive due to inherent 
efficiency losses of steam production. 


IS 17100 : 2019 


5.3.1.2 A GTG system can operate in two different 
ways: as an Open Cycle (OC); or more efficient, 
Combined Cycle (CC), which has a higher capital 
cost. In OC, turbine exhaust gases are vented to the 
atmosphere, while CC incorporates sending the turbine 
exhaust gases through a heat recovery steam generator 
for additional power generation or production of utility 
steam or process heat. 


5.3.2 Power can be generated adjacent to the UCG 
production facility as part of an integrated coal to 
power plant or alternatively syngas can be supplied 
to a third party generator via pipeline subject to safety 
and economic assessment. A considerable number 
of gas turbines have been fabricated for Integrated 
Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) applications 
with Low Calorific Value (LCV) syngas as a feedstock 
derived from a range of gasification raw materials. 


5.3.3 Syngas used as a feedstock for power generation 
in a gas turbine generator has to meet environmental, 
Combustion and gas turbine requirements. 
Environmental requirements address nitrogen oxide 
(NOx) and sulphur oxide (SOx) emissions. SOx 
emissions can be reduced by an acid gas processing unit. 
NOx emission limits may be met by the use of flame 
combustors, dry low NOx (DLN) systems and flame 
temperature reduction methods. Selective Catalytic 
Reduction (SCR) may be used to further reduce NOx 
content; however, this process requires more thorough 
upstream sulphur removal to avoid the formation of 
undesirable by-products. 


5.3.4 Carbon dioxide (CO,) removal from raw syngas 
via water gas shift and acid gas removal can reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and result in a H, rich 
syngas being fed to a GTG. However, the operation 
of gas turbine generators using high purity H, fuel is 
still under research. Gas turbines also impose certain 
specifications on minimum heating value, density, 
concentration of contaminants and absence of liquids. 
And finally, efficient gas turbine operation requires 
removal of substances (such as metal carbonyls) 
that can deposit on the turbine blades. All of these 
requirements can, in principle, be readily met using 


commercially available processes and technologies to 
treat the syngas produced via UCG. 


5.4 Synthetic Natural Gas 


The reactions to convert syngas to methane, as 
seen below, are exothermic reactions and the feed 
temperature to each reactor is between 250°C and 
400°C with hot effluent exiting the reactor as high as 
730°C. The effluent is then quenched to achieve the 
desired inlet temperature for the next reactor. 


CO + 3H, > CH, + H,O + Heat 
CO, + 4H, > CH,+ 2H,O +Heat 
CO + H,O > CO, +H, 


Methanation process of Haldor topsoe called TREMP™ 
is the technique usually used for conversion of SNG as 
shown in Table 3. A near stoichiometric blend of H,, 
CO and CO, is used and sent to a set of reactors. g 


5.5 Transport Fuels 


Syngas may be converted to liquid transport fuels such 
as gasoline (via Methanol to Gasoline technology), and 
diesel (via Fischer-Tropsch synthesis). 


5.6 Methanol to Gasoline (MTG) 


5.6.1 Methanol is synthesised catalytically at 
temperatures of 200 to 250°C and pressures of 40 to 
70 bar via two methanol producing reactions and the 
water gas shift reaction. The reactions are given by 
Twigg as: 


CO + 2H, > CH,OH + Heat 
CO, + 3H, > CH,OH + H,O + Heat 
CO + H,O > CO, + H, + Heat 
The subsequent conversion of methanol to 


hydrocarbons occurs in two steps, the first of which 
involves dehydration of a portion of the methanol to 
DME over an alumina catalyst as follows: 


2 CH,OH CH,OCH, + H,O 


— 


5.6.2 The next step involves oligomerisation of the 
DME/methanol mixture into gasoline over a shape- 
selective zeolite catalyst. The reaction products contain 


Table 3 Typical Gas Composition and Heating Value for Substitute 
Natural Gas Produced by the TREMP™ Process 


( Clause 5.4 ) 
SI No. Component Mole Percent 
a) (2) 6) 
i) Methane 94 - 98 
ii) Carbon dioxide 0.2-2 
iii) Hydrogen 0.5-2 
iv) Carbon monoxide < 100 ppm 
v) Nitrogen + argon 2-3 
vi) Higher heating value, KJ/Nm? 37,380 - 38,370 


over 85 percent (dry basis) hydrocarbon products of 
C5 and higher. After cooling, the hydrocarbon phase 
is separated from the un-reacted feed gas and produced 
water and purified by simple distillation. 


5.6.3 Gasoline produced by this process is of high 
quality, almost free of sulphur, and containing lower 
levels of olefins and benzene than conventionally 
refined gasoline. MTG makes gasoline of 92 octane so 
in some cases blending may be required to meet higher 
pool octane requirements. 


5.6.4 The production of gasoline via MTG has the 
significant advantage of providing an easily stored 
intermediate product (methanol), which improves the 
overall reliability of the process; since in the event of a 
problem in either the syngas or methanol unit, the other 
section may continue to operate using the methanol 
storage inventory as a buffer. 


5.6.5 Methanol is a widely traded chemical product and 
with the addition of a methanol purification section the 
MTG plant may produce both gasoline and chemical 
grade methanol, depending on market demand and 
relative prices. 


5.6.6 Oxygen blown UCG derived syngas will be 
preferred for methanol production to reduce the level of 
inert gases in the synthesis loop, which otherwise would 
incur higher purge rates and lower per-pass reactor 
conversions. However, the co-generation of both power 
and methanol using air blown UCG syngas may be an 
option in a methanol and power co-production facility. 


5.7 Fischer-Tropsch Liquid Synthesis 


5.7.1 In the 1920’s German researches Franz Fischer 
and Hans Tropsch of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute 
developed the original process of the synthesis of liquid 
hydrocarbons from syngas. The simplified Fischer- 
Tropsch (FT) reaction is shown below and it consists 
of chemical reaction of the carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen present in syngas: 


CO + 2H, > -(CH,)- + H,O + Heat 


5.7.2 Materials produced by the FT process range from 
light gases to heavy waxes. Light gases can be used 
as a fuel within the production facility or to produce 
hydrogen. Waxes can be either directly sold or further 
treated to produce saleable transport fuels including 
synthetic diesel fuel, synthetic naphtha and synthetic 
kerosene. The quality of the synthetic diesel is higher 
compared with conventionally refined diesel derived 
from petroleum sources - it has high cetane, low sulphur 
and aromatics, and superior cold flow characteristics. 


5.7.3 Synthetic naphtha is highly paraffinic, with a low 
content of naphthenes and aromatics, and a very low 
content of sulphur. It has poor octane and needs to be 


IS 17100 : 2019 


upgraded for blending into gasoline pools but is an 
excellent chemical feedstock for olefin production. 


5.7.4 The synthetic kerosene fraction is an excellent 
blending component for aviation turbine fuels due to 
the absence of aromatics and its very high smoke point. 


5.8 Chemicals and Polymers 


Syngas can be used to produce ammonia and methanol 
which in turn are the basic building blocks for a 
wide range of other chemicals including fertilisers, 
explosives, plastics, and oxygenates. 


5.8.1 Ammonia 


Ammonia is the basic building block for the world’s 
nitrogen industry and is a major chemical feedstock 
for the production of fertilisers and explosives. The 
technology used today is still based directly on the 
original synthesis route developed by Haber and Bosch. 


Ammonia synthesis via the Haber process is obtained 
by reacting hydrogen obtained from the syngas and 
nitrogen from either air or from an air separation unit 
using an iron oxide catalyst. 


N,+ 3H, 2NH, + Heat 


The hydrogen to nitrogen ratio is one of the critical 
parameters for design and operation of the ammonia 
synthesis loop. In practice a ratio in the range of 
2.2-3 hydrogen to 1 nitrogen gives the most efficient 
operating point within the limits imposed by overall 
optimisation. 


=> 


5.8.2 Methanol 


5.8.2.1 The methanol synthesis reactions have already 
been presented in Section above. The process to 
synthesise methanol from carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen was introduced in 1923 some ten years after 
the Haber process. This process was the outcome of 
extensive research of the hydrogenation of carbon 
monoxide which showed that depending on process 
conditions and selection of catalysts, hydrogen and 
carbon monoxide could react at pressures between 
100 and 300 bar to produce chemicals ranging from 
methanol to higher alcohols, hydrocarbons and other 
oxygenated compounds. 


5.8.2.2 The suitability of the feed syngas composition 
for methanol synthesis can be determined by its 
Stoichiometric Number (SN) which is given by the 
following quotient of mole fractions; 


H,-CO, 


CO + CO, 


5.8.2.3 A stoichiometric number in the range on 
2-2.1 is generally regarded as optimum. In addition, 
a CO, content between 2.5 percent and 3.5 percent 


IS 17100 : 2019 


is desirable, up to a maximum of about 8 percent. A 
small amount of carbon dioxide is desirable to provide 
a reactive feed mixture, whereas high levels may affect 
catalyst life and will produce greater quantities of water 
in the reactor effluent, which is expensive to remove. 


5.8.2.4 During passage through the reactor only a 
portion of the feed syngas is converted to methanol. 
Un-reacted syngas is separated from the raw liquid 
methanol product and recycled back to the reactor. This 
allows for greater conversion efficiency and a smaller 
reactor size. However, inert components which do not 
participate in the reaction accumulate over time and 
must be purged from the synthesis loop. 


5.8.2.5 Methanol must be distilled to remove higher 
alcohols (fuel oils) and water to comply with chemical 
grade specifications. The distillation is energy intensive 
and requires at least two sizable columns. Methanol 
destined for gasoline production via MTG does not 
need to be distilled. 


10 


5.9 Other Chemicals 


As mentioned previously ammonia is used to produce 
fertilisers and explosives, including:- 


a) Nitric acid and ammonium nitrate; 

b) Urea Methanol is similarly be used to produce 
a wide range of chemical products, including 
Olefins and polyolefin for plastics; 


c) Dimethyl ether (DME) which is used as an aerosol 
propellant and fuel; 


d) Methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), a fuel additive; 


e) Formaldehyde, a precursor to products like 
adhesives and sanitary paper; 


f) Acetic acid, for food additives, glue and de-scaling 
agents, and; and 


g) Oxo-alcohols, for solvents, and 


plasticisers. 


detergents 


Organization(s) 
Oil And Natural Gas 


IS 17100 : 2019 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR SINGHAL (Chairman) 
Suri O. N. Gyanı (Alternate I) 
Suri A. K. Paswan (Alternate II) 
Ms VISHAKHA SINGH (Alternate II) 
SHRI KHALEQUZ ZAMAN (Alternate IV) 
SHRI SHAKEEL AHMED (Alternate V) 
Suri S MARANDI (Alternate VI) 


Atlas Copco Construction & Mining Sales, Pune SHRI ANIMESH NANDY 


(ATLAS-COPCO) 
BHEL, Hyderabad 


SHRI D. SATYA MOHAN RAO 


Central Fuel Reasearch Institute, Dhanbad (CFRI) Dr ASHOK Kumar SINGH 


Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute Dr P. K. CHATERJEE 


(CMERI) 


DRM. K. KARMAKAR (Alternate) 


Central Mine Planning And Design Institute Limited, Dr AKHILESH SINGH 


Ranchi (CMPDI) 


Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) 


Essar Oil Limited 


Gail India Limited 


SHRI SANJEEB GOSWAMI 
Suri T. ASHWINI Kumar (Alternate ) 


SHRI NILESH KAMAT 
SHRI ARUN SHARMA (Alternate ) 


Sarı D. M. Rao 
Dr D. BURAGOHAIN (Alternate) 


Great Eastern Energy Corporation Limited (GEECL) SHRI ANoop GUPTA 


Geological Survey Of India (GSI) 


Ism, Dhanbad (IIT-ISM) 


Neyveli Lignite Coporation (NLC) 


IIT, Madras 


In Personal Capacity 


In Personal Capacity 


SHRI PRIYARANJAN PATRA (Alternate) 


SHRI DINESH KUMAR 
SHRIP. N. SINHA (ALT) (Alternate) 


ProF M. JAWED 
Suri A. K. VERMA (Alternate) 


SHRI K. ALAGAR 
Suri M. KRISHNAN (Alternate) 


PROF. SRINIVAS JAYANTI 
PROF PREETI AGHALAYAM (Alternate) 


SHRI RAKESH KUMAR 


SHRI RUDRA PRATAP SINGH 


11 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory Institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 37 (13133). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg | 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern : 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi | 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) | 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


