**************** 




Disclosure to Promote the Right To Information 

Whereas the Parliament of India has set out to provide a practical regime of right to 
information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, 
in order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every public authority, 
and whereas the attached publication of the Bureau of Indian Standards is of particular interest 
to the public, particularly disadvantaged communities and those engaged in the pursuit of 
education and knowledge, the attached public safety standard is made available to promote the 
timely dissemination of this information in an accurate manner to the public. 




Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan 
"The Right to Information, The Right to Live'' 



IS 7146-1 (1973) : Methods of measurement on photosensitive 
devices^ Part 1: Basic considerations [LITD 4: Electron 
Tubes and Display Devices] 




Jawaharlal Nehru 
'Step Out From the Old to the New" 



aj^&vi iJii^s:y%K^ isb^^ni^seg 



:<>5&i| mT'5K^5?::5:^>^i»l 



K^^^iXSVCd^ 



Satyanarayan Gangaram Pitroda 
Invent a New India Using Knowledge 



Bhartrhari — Nitisatakam 
''Knowledge is such a treasure which cannot be stolen" 




^'^^^r 



k 




BLANK PAGE 



^*-^^^ 





PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT 



IS:7I46(Partl)-l973 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENT^' 
ON PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES 

PART I BASIC CONSIDERATIONS 



UDC 621-383 : 535-247-4 




© Copyright 1974 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARO 
NEW DELHI 110001 

April 1974 



AMENDMENT NO. 1 JANUARY 1975 

TO 

IS : 7146 (Part I)-1973 METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS 

ON PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES 

PART I BASIC CONSIDERATIONS 

Corrigendum 

( Page 5, Fig. I ) — Delete the word ' PISTE '. 



(ETDC40) 



Pnotcd at Neelkaaul Pilnten, Delhi. Indaa 



IS: 7146 (Part I)- 1973 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS 
ON PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES 

PART I BASIC CONSIDERATIONS 

Electron Tubes Sectional Committee, ETDC 39 

Chairman 

Prof S. Sampath 

Indian Institute of Technology, 
Madras 

Members Representing 

Dr S. S. S. Aoarwala Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute 

( CSIR ), Pilani 

Shri H. K. L. Arora All India Radio and Electronics Association, Bombay 

Shri R. G. Kbswani ( Alternate ) 

( Bombay ) 
Shri Arup Ghaudhury ( Alternate ) 

( Galcutta } 
Shri L. S. V. Easwar ( Alternate ) 
( Madras ) 
DiRBCTOR, Elbgtrioal Naval Headquarters 

Enoinberino 
Director, Electrical 
Enqineerino ( Material ) ( Alternate ) 

DiREOTOR, Electronics & Radar Ministry of Defence (R&D) 

Development Estabuihmbnt 
Shri B. P. Ghosh National Test House, Calcutta 

Shri R.K.Jain Radio Electronics & Television Manufacturers' 

Association ( RETMA ), Calcutta 
Shri S. B. Pax ( Alternate } 

Shri S. G. Majumdar Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( Ministry of 

Tourism & Civil Aviation ), New Delhi 

Shri £. G, Naoarajan Directorate of Technical Development & Production 

( Air ) ( Ministry of Defence ), New Delhi 



Shri R. C. Pandby ( AltemaU ) 
Ri K. N. Ramaswamv 

Shri Balraj Bhanot ( AltemaU ) 



Shri K. N, Ramaswamv Directorate General of Technical Development, New 

Delhi 

( Continued en page 2 ) 



(B Copyright 1974 

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 19S7 ) and 

reinroduction in whole or in part by any meana except with written permission of the 

publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act. 



IS: 7146 (Part I). 1973 

( Continued from page 1 ) 

Members Representing 

Shri £. V. R. Rao Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri p. K. Rao Directorate General of Inspection ( Ministry of 

Defence ), New Delhi 
Lt-Col B. D. Verma {Alternate) 
Research Engineer All India Radio, New Delhi 

Shri P. S. Saran Posts & Telegraphs Board ( Telecommunication 

Research Centre ), New Delhi 

Shri G. H. Vaze Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Dr R. p. Wadhwa Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 

Shri N. Srtnivasan, Director General, ISI (Ex-offieio Member) 

Deputy Director ( Elec tech ) 
( Secretary ) 

Panel for Special Purpose Tubes, ETDG 39 : P6 

Convener 
Shri G. H. Vaze Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Bombay 

Members 

Shri P. K. Patwardhan Atomic Energy Establishment, Bombay 

Shri R. S. Prakasam Electronics Corporation of India Ltd, Hyderabad 

Shri K. S. Sree Prakash Bharat Electronics Ltd, Bangalore 



IS: 7146 (Part I)- 1973 

Indian Standard 

METHODS OF MEASUREMENTS 
ON PHOTOSENSITIVE DEVICES 

PART I BASIC CONSIDERATIONS 
0. FOREWORD 

0.1 This Indian Standard ( Part I ) was adopted by the Indian Standards 
Institution on 29 November 1973, after the draft finalized by the Electron 
Tubes Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical 
Division Council. 

0.2 This standard is largely based on lEC Pub 306-1(1969) ' Measurement 
of photosensitive devices, Part 1 Basic considerations ' issued by the Inter- 
national Electrotechnical Commission. 

0.3 This standard is one of a series of Indian Standards on special purpose 
electron tubes. A list of standards so far prepared in this series is given 
on the fourth cover page. 

0.4 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this 
standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing 
the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : 2-1960*. 
The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be 
the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 



1. SCOPE 

1.1 This standard ( Part I ) covers basic considerations relating to general 
measuring methods applicable to all types of photosensitive devices. 

2. TERMINOLOGY 

2.0 For the purpose of this standard the terms and definitions prescribed 
in IS : 1885 ( Part IV/Scc 8 )-1973t shall apply. 



*Rulet for rounding off numerical values (nvuid). 

tBlectrotechnical vocabulary: Part IV Electron tubes, Section 8 Photosensitive devices. 

3 



IS: 7146 (Part I). 1973 

3. GENERAL CONDITIONS 

3.1 Basically, the properties of a photosensitive device are measured by 
exposing it to a calibrated radiation source. 

3.1 .1 Between the source and the device being measured, there shall be a 
blackened screen of sufficient size which supports a shutter, usually it is 
located near the source. 

3.1.2 Behind the source, at a distance of about 1 m, there shall be a black- 
ened background in order to avoid reflected radiation. 

3.1.3 Between the shutter and the device being measured, a series of 
blackened baffles shall prevent stray radiation falling on the device. The 
baffles should be designed with sharp edges in order to avoid series 
reflections. 

3.1.4 If additional walls are used to close completely the space between 
the shutter and the device, precautions shall be taken that they are well 
blackened and that there are no disturbing inter- reflections. 

3*2 As all sources develop heat, and the emitted radiation in practically all 
cases depends on the temperature of the source, closure of the space 
between the screen and the background should be avoided. A rise in 
temperature of the background caused by the source is only important if 
very long wavelengths are to be measured. This effect can be taken into 
account by a reading without the source, immediately after the radiation 
measurement. It should also be checked, with the source so far removed 
that no direct radiation falls on the device, whether there is any effect 
from radiation reflected by the background or not; this includes radiation 
from other sources in the room. 

3.3 The device should be so oriented that the radiation beam falls 
perpendicularly on the photosensitive surface, and a baffle immediately in 
front should be chosen so as to expose only the specified area of this sur- 
face. Filters or other attenuating devices may be located at a suitable 
place between the shutter and the device. 

3.4 The optical axis of the radiant flux usually passes through the centre 
of the photosensitive surface, so that the track on which the radiation 
source may move will be parallel to this optical axis. 

3.5 If the distance between source and device has to be altered in order 
to obtain another value of irradiation, it is advisable, for measurements, to 
move the device and not the source. For measurement of lower accuracy, 
of course, the source may also be moved. 

3.6 light-proof Enclosure — These general conditions specified in 3.1 
to 3.5 may be realized by a light-proof enclosure. In practice, the 



IS: 7146 (Part I). 1973 

enclosure is usually divided into two sections, one for the device being 
measured and the other for the light source, with specified apertures and 
filters inserted at the dividinjS^ partition. The distance between the light 
source and the device being measured may be variable ( see ¥ig. 1 ). 



APERTURES FOR 
INSERTION 



t 



t FILTERS FOR ATTENUATION 
^ ^BAFFLES 




PISTE 



PHOTO DEVICE 




TRACK 



LIGHT SOURCE 



L£ 



f 



OPTICAL AXIS 



ii Ml mi 



■K 



II til II II 



III liml I m 



Fio. 1 " Example of Light-Proof Enclosure with Fixed 
Photosensitive Device and Movable Light Source 



4. ^fEASURING ELEMENTS 

4.1 Standard Radiation Source — For the purpose of this standard, 
only standard illuminant A is considered [ see 4.17 of IS : 1885 ( Part IV/ 
Sec 8). 1973*]. 

Note 1 — In order to improve the life and the stability during life of the radiation 
source a lower colour temperature, for example 2 700**K, may be used; however, the 
lower colour temperature will introduce errors because of variations in spectral sensiti- 
vity, even between devices of the same type. 

For reference measurements, a colour temperature of 2 854® K shall be used. 

Note 2] — Tungsten filament lamps are extremely sensitive to variations in applied 
current. A I -percent change in current causes a 7-percent change in light intensity 
and a 15 to 20® K change in colour temperature. 

4.2 Radiation Sources for Measurement 

a) Light Sources — Either a secondary standard light source or a 
tungsten filament lamp calibrated according to 4.3 should be 
used as the light source for measurements of the photosensitive 
devices. 



•Electrotechnical vocabulary: Fart IV Electron tubes, Section 8 Photosensitive devices. 

5 



ISt 7146 (Part I) -1973 

b) Ultra Violet Sources — A commonly used source is a low-pressure 
mercury discharge lamp, with a specified envelope and filter, 
calibrated at 253'7 nm. There is also a high-pressure mercury 
discharge lamp of type U V-standard, the radiation of which at 
366 nm is known. 

Note — To avoid errors, reference is made to 4.5. 

c) Infra-red Sources — Under consideration. 

4.3 Galibration of Radiation Sources — The radiation source should 
be calibrated by the following method: 

a) The secondary standard should be certified periodically by an 
authorized laboratory, 

b) The working standard used for measurements should be calibra- 
ted by an approved means against the secondary standard light 
source, and 

c) The distance between the working standard and the photosensitive 
surface should be established with a suitable light sensitive device 
so that the working standard gives the same luminous flux as the 
secondary standard lamp does at the photosensitive surface. 

4.4 Intensity Measurement Equipment — For comparison purposes, 
in checking the working standard against the secondary standard, an 
intensity measuring device is needed; examples are : MacBeth Illumina- 
tor, Lummer-Brodhun-Photometer, stable phototubes or photovoltaic cells 
or other photosensitive devices corrected to standard colorimetric observer. 

4.5 Spectral Measurement Equipment 

4.5.1 The required apparatus for measuring the spectral sensitivity 
includes a source of monochromatic radiation at various wavelengths 
throughout the spectrum and a means of measuring the radiant power 
incident on the photosensitive device. 

43.2 The degree of spectral purity required is dependent on the rate of 
change of spectral sensitivity as a function of wavelength. 

4.5.3 Normally spectral bandwidths of the order of 1 percent of the 
wavelengths concerned are sufficiently narrow. Precautions shall be taken 
to ensure that extraneous radiation does not reach the device being 
measured. 

4.5.4 A monochroniator, such as the double prism or double-pass variety, 
may be used to provide high spectral purity. Even with these instruments, 
filters may be required to eliminate scattered radiation at wavelengths 
where the source emits strongly, or where the device being measured has 
very high sensitivity. The primary radiation source will depend on the 



ISx 7116 (Part I)- 1973 

wavelength desired. In the uhraviolet range, a mercury, xenon or hydro- 
gen discharge lamp is generally used. For the visible and near-infra-red, 
range, the tungsten incandescent lamp is satisfactory. 

4.5.5 A calibrated blackened-target thermocouple or thermopile plus 
the associated measuring circuitry is generally used for the measurement of 
the exit radiant power from the monochromator. In some instruments, the 
thermocouple is an integral part of the monochromator, with provision for 
shifting the beam of radiant energy emerging from the exit slit cither to 
the thermocouple or through an exit window on the photosensitive surface. 

Note — Care should be taken to avoid inaccuracies due to the thermocouple drift and 
change in the photosensitive device dark current. One method of achieving this is to 
include a light chopper in the monochromator, so that the output of the thermocouple 
or the photosensiuve device can be measured using a tuned amplifier or a synchronous 
detector. 

4.5.6 For ordinary use, a set of filters with known characteristics in 
conjunction with a suitable light source may be usv^d for the measurement 
of spectral sensitivity. 

4.6 Sensitivity Measurement Equipment 

4.6.1 Attenuating Filters — Because the range of measurement which can 
be obtained by moving the lamp, the full length of the enclosure, is typically 
only about 10 to I, a series of attenuating filters of known characteristics 
is needed, or some equivalent thereof. 

5. MEASUREMENTS 

5.1 Illuminance and Irradiance — If a working standard is calibrated 
for luminous intensity in a certain direction, the illuminance on the photo- 
sensitive surface, which has to be perpendicular to this direction, may be 
calculated as follows: 

^v «=■ "^ flo 

where 

Er =^ illuminance in lux, 

/v » luminous intensity of the light source in the direction 
concerned in candelas^ 

d = distance in metres, and 
Do =» 1 steradian. 
The same relation holds for irradiance E^ and radiant intensity /«: 

• 7 



I8s7146(PartI).1973 

I R 

Lce 



5*2 Lnuiaoiis Flax and Radiant Flax — The luminous flux may be 
derived from the illuminance as follows: 



where 

^v ■" luminous flux in lumens, 

A as area of the photosensitive surface in square metres, and 
Ey ss illuminance in lux. 

The same relation holds for radiant flux ^a and irradiance £*• : 



INDIAN STANDARDS 

ON 

SPECXAL PURPOSE ELECTRON TUBES 



IS: 



1885 ( Part IVASrc 1 )-iy73 Elect loiechniciil vocabulary: Part JV Electron tubes, Section 1 
Goiiinion terms {first revision ) 

1885 ( Part IV/Scc 8 )-1973 Electrotcchnical vocabulary: Part IV^ Electron tubes, Section 8 
Photosensitive devices 

4697-1968 Method of measurements on (ieigcr-NfiUler counter tubes 

5323-1969 Letter symbols and abbreviations for electron tubes 

6576-1972 Methods cjf measuremenlb on ga.s filled cold cathode indicator tubes 

6577-1972 Methods of measurements on gas. lilltd cold cathode voltage stabilizing and 
voltage reference tubes 

7146 (Partl)-1973 Methods of measuicmenls on photosensitive devices: Part I Basic 
considerations 



INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah'Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110001 

Telephone : 27 01 31 ( 20 lines ) Telegrams : Manaksanstha 

Branch Officer. Telephone 

'Sadhna*. Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur, AHMEOABAD 380001 2 03 01 

F Block, Unity Bidg, Narasimharaja Square, BANGALORE 560002 2 76 49 

534 Sardar Vallabhbhai Patet Road, BOI\/!B AY 400007 35 69 44 

6 Chowrlnghee Approach, CALCUTTA 700013 23-08 02 

Flat No. 1030-31 ( First Floor ), Sector 22B, CHANDIGARH 160022 2 83 20 

5-9-201 /2-A ( First Floor ). Chirag All Lane. HYDERABAD 500001 3 44 35 

117/418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 82 72 

S4 General Patters Road, MADRAS 600002 8 37 81 

B. C. I. Bldg. (Third Floor ), Gandhi Maldan East, PATNA 800004 2 56 55 



Prtated at Delhi Printers, Delhi 6. Indm 



