NAT ЯЛ IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 
Indian Standard 


writ 8 дат sara — Іпа 
AUT 1 BHT чча Ф іч чага 
( TET ніч) 


Tunnelling in Rock Masses 
— Guidelines 


Part 1 Conventional Tunnelling Methods 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 93.060 


© BIS 2022 


anda AM ሟሸ 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR чая, 9 serere TH ጧሚ 4 8፪ጠ- 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2022 Price Group 12 


Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, СЕР 48 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 1) (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft 
finalized by the Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee had been approved by the Civil Engineering Division 
Council. 


Tunnelling is an art practised by all engineers, geologists, planners and people. Failures should be regarded as 
challenges and opportunities for generating new vital knowledge and thereby increasing self-reliance in the 
tunnelling. The key to success is team spirit and love for rocks and nature. 


High overburden poses great challenges to tunnel construction with squeezing ground in weak rock masses and 
rock bursting in strong rock conditions. Further the shear zones are met frequently in Himalayan region. Special 
treatment is necessary to support shear zones in the tunnels. 


The design of underground excavations is, to a large extent, the design of underground support system according 
to excavation induced ground behaviour. These can range from no support in the case of a temporary excavation 
in good rock mass to the use of fully grouted and tensioned bolts or cables with wire mesh; or sprayed fibre 
reinforced shotcrete (FRS) in average rock mass to the use of reinforced ribs of shotcrete in poor rock mass. Steel 
rib with backfill concrete may also be required for the support of a large permanent civil engineering excavation. 


The philosophy of design of any underground excavation should be to utilize the rock mass itself as the principal 
structural materials, creating as little disturbance as possible during the excavation process and adding as little 
as possible in the way of shotcrete or steel supports. In weak zones with water ingress problems, pre-excavation 
grouting not only controls water ingress but also improves rock mass properties. The extent to which aim of this 
philosophy can be met depends upon the geological conditions which exist at site and the extent to which the 
designer and construction engineer is aware of these conditions. 


Experience and engineering judgement helps to make a considered and informed decision, but continuous 
measurements during construction are also essential to compare actual behaviour with those predicted. 


There are many difficult geological conditions and extraordinary geological occurrences, such as intra-thrust zones, 
very wide shear zones, geothermal zones of high temperature, cold/hot water springs, water charged rock masses, 
intrusions, etc. These are very difficult to forecast. Investigation methods like geophysical tests, probe drilling 
from drilling jumbo, core drilling, etc should be carried out to detect the extent of their presence for selection of 
right tunnelling method, treatment and excavation support measures for which experts may be consulted. 


This standard was first formulated in 2002. In this revision, to incorporate the latest advancement in tunnelling, 
the tunnelling method in rock masses has been grouped into two parts. This standard (Part 1) covers guidelines for 
conventional tunnelling methods. The other part in the series 15: 


Part 2 Mechanized tunnelling methods (under preparation) 
This revision incorporates the following major modifications: 


a) Elaborate details of the advance probing technique which include probe holes, tunnel geophysical 
probing and advance core drilling have been added; 


b) Improved details of classification of ground behaviour have been added; 

с) Separate clause has been added for shotcrete with specifications of materials for wet mix shotcrete; 

d) Provision of polypropylene fibres has been added; 

е) Provision of tunnel bolts like water expandable friction bolts, grouted rock bolts, self-drilling bolts 

and cable bolts have been included; and 

f) Provision of tunnel supports like lattice girders and reinforced ribs of shotcrete have been included. 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 
For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 


IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places retained 
in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


15 15026 (Раг 1) : 2022 


Indian Standard 


TUNNELLING IN ROCK MASSES — GUIDELINES 
PART 1 CONVENTIONAL TUNNELLING METHODS 


( First Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


This standard (Part 1) provides guidelines for 
construction of tunnels using conventional tunnelling 
methods. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provision of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. Any standards are subject to 
revision and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 


269 : 2015 Ordinary Portland cement — 
Specification (sixth revision) 

432 Specification for mild steel and 
medium tensile steel bars and 
hard-drawn steel wire for concrete 


reinforcement: 
(Part 1): 1982 Mild steel and medium tensile 
steel bars (fhird revision) 
Hard-drawn 


(third revision) 


(Part 2) : 1982 steel wire 


456 : 2000 Plain and reinforced concrete — 
Code of practice (fourth revision) 

800 : 2007 General construction in steel — 
Code of practice (third revision) 

4880 Code of practice for design of 


(Part 6) : 1971 tunnels conveying water: Part 6 


Tunnel supports 


5878 Code of practice for construction 


of tunnels conveying water: 
(Part 4) : 1971 
(Part 6) : 1975 


Tunnel supports 
Steel lining 


9012 : 1978 Recommended practice for 
shotcreting 
9103 : 1999 Concrete admixtures ፦ 


Specification (third revision) 


IS No. Title 


13365 
(Part 2) : 2019 


Quantitative classification systems 
of rock mass — Guidelines: Part 2 
Rock mass quality for prediction 


of support pressure, support 
system and engineering properties 
in underground openings 


(first revision) 
15388 
16481 


: 2003 
: 2022 


Silica fume — Specification 


Textiles — Synthetic micro fibres 
for use in cement based matrix — 
Specification (second revision) 


16993 : 2018 Microfine ordinary 


cement — Specification 
Observational method for 


tunnelling in rock masses — 
Guidelines 


portland 


17446 : 2020 


3 ADVANCE PROBING 


Long tunnels, sometime pass through complex 
geological conditions particularly in case of deep 
tunnels. It is extremely difficult to anticipate geological 
conditions in deep seated tunnels merely based on 
surface observations. 


3.1 Probe Holes 


Each round of probing inside tunnels should consist 
of at least 3 probe holes near tunnel periphery along 
the tunnel alignment with outlooking angle and located 
depending upon nature of anticipated problem or 
joint pattern of rock mass after discussion with the 
geologists. If the rock mass condition permit, each 
round of probe holes should be drilled preferably up 
to 18 m to 20 m length along the tunnel alignment with 
an overlap of atleast 5 m between successive rounds. 
Modern day drilling jumbos are equipped with sensors 
which record various measure while drilling (MWD) 
parameters, namely penetration rate, feed pressure, 
rotation pressure, rotation speed, flushing flow, flushing 
pressure, etc along the depth of each probe hole drilled 
by the machine. The data from the machine can be 
visualized and graphically interpreted through drilling 
jumbo software. These probe holes give a fair idea 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


about rock mass condition ahead of the face. It helps in 
suggesting the strategy of tunnelling. 


3.2 Tunnel Geophysical Probing 


Tunnel seismic prediction is a popular method to 
probe and predict complex geological conditions well 
in advance. The tunnel seismic prediction method 
detects changes in rock mass, such as irregular bodies, 
discontinuities, faults and fracture zones ahead of the 
tunnel face. Acoustic signals comprising compression 
(P) and shear (S) wave, are produced by a series of 
small blast shots of usually 50 g to 200 g of detonation 
cord aligned along one tunnel wall side and the reflected 
waves are captured through three component receivers 
fixed in the tunnel wall. With help of software, data 
can be processed and evaluated to determine rock 
mechanical properties, such as poisson's ratio and static 
and dynamic young's moduli within the prediction 
area. Inadequate contrast in physical properties of rock 
mass and less than 25? dip or strike angles compared 
to tunnel axis in the prediction area limits the effective 
usage of this test. Usually, depth of prediction obtained 
by this test method 15 in the range of 100 m to 125 m 
depending on the properties of rock mass conditions. 
The test should be performed as a risk control tool for 
determining exact location of fault zones, cavities or 
water bearing formations as predicted in the tunnel 
geological model. 


Other geophysical techniques may also be used for 
ascertaining rock conditions ahead of tunnel face. 


3.3 Advance Core Drilling 


In critical cases and where special investigations are 
required, advance core drilling can also be performed to 
ascertain various geotechnical parameters and complex 
geological conditions. 


4 EFFECT OF SEISMICITY 


A tunnel in a seismic area is likely to be affected near 
the portals and in neighbourhood of faults and thrusts. 
The effect 1s observed to be up to a distance along the 
tunnel within + В on both sides of the faults/thrusts, 
where В is span/size of the opening. The design 
support pressure in the affected length of tunnel may 
be taken as 1.25 times the ultimate support pressure 
[see IS 13365 (Part 2)]. 


5 TUNNEL 
MONITORING 


INSTRUMENTATION AND 


5.1 Instrumentation of tunnel openings should be 
done where squeezing ground condition is expected. 
The survival rate of tunnel instruments is generally 
as low as 30 percent. Therefore many sections of 
the tunnel should be instrumented so that enough 
instruments survive and reliable data is obtained. 
The post-monitoring of support system in squeezing 


ground should also be carried out until support system 
has stabilized with time. In cases of squeezing ground 
conditions, observed vertical and horizontal tunnel 
closures should be controlled to less than four percent 
of tunnel width and height, respectively. 


5.2 Monitoring and instrumentation strategy should be 
to verify design assumptions, assess stability and timely 
adjust tunnelling strategy, improve ground modelling, 
evidence collection and back analysis to have greater 
understanding of rock mass behaviour (see IS 17446). 


5.3 Monitoring and instrumentation programme should 
define expected behaviours and acceptable limits, 
instrumentation layout and frequency for observations, 
identification of roles and responsibilities for quick 
analysis of results, safety management plan with 
contingencies. 


6 SELECTION OF TYPE OF SUPPORT 
SYSTEM 


6.1 Table 1 classifies various possible ground behaviours 
for tunnelling. Rock bursts are rare in tunnelling for 
civil engineering projects. Table 2 suggests the method 
of excavation, type of supports and precautions for 
various ground behaviours. 


Squeezing is ruled out if observed in-situ maximum 
tangential strain (ratio of downward crown displacement 
to the tunnel radius) is less than the critical strain 
[ratio of uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) to 
modulus of elasticity of rock material] in case of 
properly supported tunnels. 


6.1.1 Before taking up the design of supports, the 
rock load and pressure likely to act on the supports 
shall be estimated. The determination of rock load is 
complex problem. This complexity is due to inherent 
difficulty of predicting the primary stress conditions 
in the rock mass (prior to excavation) and also due to 
the fact that the magnitude of the secondary pressure 
developing after the excavation of the cavity depends 
upon a large number of variables, such as size and 
shape of cavity, depth of cover, disposition of strike 
and dip of rock formation in relation to alignment of 
tunnel, method of excavation, period of time elapsing 
between excavation and the time when the rock is 
supported and the rigidity of support. These pressures 
may not develop immediately after excavation but may 
take a long period after excavation to develop due to 
adjustment/displacement in the rock mass. 


6.1.2 In major tunnels it is recommended that as 
excavation proceeds, load cell measurements and 
diametrical change measurements be carried out so that 
rock loads may be correctly estimated. In rock where 
the loads and deformation do not attain stable values, it 
15 recommended that pressure measurements should be 
made by using flat jack or pressure cells. 


Table 1 Classification of Ground Behaviours for Tunnelling 


(Clause 6.1) 


Ground Behaviour Type Ground Behaviour Remarks 
1 Stable The surrounding ground will stand unsupported for several days or | Massive, durable rocks at low and moderate depths. 
longer. 
я 
2 ofsingle blocks | Stable, with the potential fall of individual blocks. Discontinuity-controlled failure. 
ጄ в 2 Block Ға (5) - з - 
E = of several blocks | Stable with potential fall of several blocks (slide volume < 10 т”). 
E 2 3 Cave-in Inward, quick movement of larger volumes (> 10 m°) of rock fragments | Encountered in highly jointed or crushed rock 
8 Е 
5 ог рїесез. 
4 Running ground A particular material quickly invades the tunnel until a stable slope is | Examples are clean medium to coarse sands and gravels above 
formed at the face. Stand-up is time zero or nearly zero. groundwater level. 
5 Buckling Breaking out of fragments in tunnel surface. Occurs in anisotropic hard, brittle rock under sufficiently high load due 
to deflection of the rock structure. 
6 Rupturing from stresses Gradually breaking up into pieces, flakes or fragments in the tunnel | The time-dependent effect of slabbing or rock burst from redistribution 
surface. of stresses. 
3 ቺ 7 Slabbing Sudden, violent detachment of thin rock slabs from sides or roof. Moderate to high overstressing of massive hard brittle rock, includes 
3 z popping or spalling. 
= © 
5 Е; 8 Rock burst Much more violent than slabbing and involves considerably larger | Very high overstressing of massive hard, brittle rock of considerably 
2 š volumes. larger volumes (heavy rock bursting often registers as a seismic event). 
E 
n Ë 9 Squeezing Time-dependent deformation, essentially associated with creep caused | Overstressed plastic, massive rocks and materials with a high percentage 
by overstressing. Deformations may terminate during construction or | of micaceous minerals or of clay minerals with a low swelling capacity. 
continue over a long period. Mild squeezing (и /а = 1.3 percent). 
Moderate squeezing (и /а = 3.5 percent). 
High squeezing (и /а > 5 percent). 
10 Ravelling from slaking Ground breaks gradually up into pieces, flakes or fragments. Disintegration (slaking) of some moderately coherent and friable 
materials. Examples: mudstones, stiff and fissured clays. 
E of certain rocks Advance of surrounding ground into the tunnel due to expansion caused | Occurs in swelling of rocks, in which anhydrite, halite (rock salt) and 
E by water adsorption. The process may sometimes be mistaken for | swelling clay minerals, such as smectite (montmorillonite), constitute 
ጄ = 11 Swelling squeezing. a significant portion. 
= 
š š of certain clay Swelling of clay seams caused by adsorption of water. This leads to | The swelling takes place in seams having fillings of swelling clay 
= Ë seams or fillings | loosening of blocks and reduced shear strength of clay. minerals (smectite, montmorillonite). 
= 
x 12 Water ingress Pressurized water invades the excavation through channels or openings | May occur in porous and soluble rocks, or along significant openings or 
Я in rocks. channels in fractures or joints. 
2 13 Flowing ground A mixture of water and solids quickly invades the tunnel from all sides, | May occur in tunnels below the groundwater table in particulate 
g including the invert. materials with little or no coherence. 
5 
2 
Ф 


и, = radial tunnel closure; ወ = tunnel radius; and 


u,/a= normalized tunnel closure in percentage. 


፻፻0፻ ፡ (1 3184) 9፻05፤ SI 


Table 2 Method of Excavation, Type of Supports and Precautions to be Adopted for Different Ground Behaviours 


(Clauses 6.1 and 12.5.1) 


SINo. | Ground Behaviour Excavation Method Type of Support Precautions 
Type 
1) Block falls Full-face drill and controlled blast with | Flexible support: Shotcrete and systematic bolting (end | Sealing layer of shotcrete should be applied immediately after 
localized light forepoles anchored and pre-tensioned/friction bolts); fibre reinforced | scaling. Subsequent layer of shotcrete should be applied after 
shotcrete (FRS) may or may not be required some delay but within the stand-up time to release the strain 
energy of rock mass 
ii) Cave-in or running Multiple drift method with heavy fore-poles; | Full column grouted rock anchors and FRS, face sealing | Progress is very slow. Trained crew should be deployed. 
and flowing sometimes advance grouting of the ground | shotcrete, face bolting with glass fibre bolts, steel supports | Groutability tests of soil like strata may be required to decide 
is essential; shield tunnelling may be used in | depending upon overburden and in exceptional cases with | type of grout material. 
soil like condition shield tunnelling 
iii) Buckling or rupturing | Full face drill and blast Fibre reinforced shotcrete with full column grouted rock | Use forepoling if stand-up time is low 
from stresses or anchors/resin anchors immediately after excavation 
slabbing 

iv) Rock burst Full face drill and blast Fibre reinforced shotcrete with full column grouted ductile | Micro-seismic monitoring is essential 
rock anchors/resin anchors immediately after excavation. 

v) Mild squeezing Heading and bench, drill and blast Full column grouted rock anchors and FRS, floor to be | Install support after each blast; circular shape is ideal; side 
shotcreted to complete supporting. Lattice girders/reinforced | pressure is expected; do not have a long heading which delays 
ribs of shotcrete may or may not be required. completion of support ring. 

vi) Moderate squeezing Heading and bench, drill and blast Flexible support full column grouted ductile rock anchors | Install support after each blast; increase the tunnel diameter to 
and FRS. Lining stress controllers with lattice girders. Floor | absorb desirable closure; circular shape is ideal; side pressure 
bolting to avoid floor heaving, to develop a reinforced rock | is expected; instrumentation is essential; ductile elements like 
frame; sliding steel ribs, if required, should be installed and | rock bolts and steel supports should be compatible in load 
embedded in shotcrete for immediate activation sharing 

уй) | High squeezing Full face in small tunnels and heading and | Very flexible support, full column grouted ductile rock | Increase the tunnel diameter to absorb desirable closure; provide 
bench in large tunnels; use forepoling if | anchors and FRS; atleast four rows of lining stress | invert support as early as possible’ to mobilise full support 
stand-up time is low controllers spread along invert and overt with lattice | capacity long term instrumentation is essential; circular shape 
girders/yielding steel ribs with struts embedded in shotcrete; | is ideal; invert strut may be required to obtain ring closure in 
for immediate activation, close ring by erecting invert | heading; face bolting with glass fibre bolts/self-drilling anchors 
support; floor bolting to avoid floor heaving; sometimes | may be required to control face extrusion 
steel ribs with loose backfill is also used to release the strain 
energy in controlled manner (tunnel closure more than 
4 percent shall not be permitted) 
vii) Ravelling Heading and bench; drill and blast Steel support with struts/pretensioned rock bolts with fibre | Expect heavy loads including side pressure 
reinforced shotcrete may or may not be required 
ix) Swelling Full face or heading bench: drill and blast Full column grouted rock anchors with SFRS shall be | Increase the tunnel diameter to absorb the expected closure; 


used around the tunnel; increase 30 percent thickness of 
shotcrete due to weak bond of the shotcrete with rock mass; 
erect invert strut; the first layer of shotcrete is sprayed 
immediately to prevent ingress of moisture into rock mass 


prevent exposure of swelling minerals to moisture monitor 
tunnel closure 


፻፻0፻ ፡ (13484) 9፻05፤ SI 


6.1.3 In the absence of апу data of instrumentation, 
rock load or support pressure may be estimated by 
Q system as given іп 15 13365 (Part 2). 


6.1.4 As the tunnels generally pass through different 
types ofrock formations, it may be necessary to workout 
alternative cross-sections of the tunnel depicting other 
acceptable types of support systems. These types may 
be selected to match the various methods of attack that 
may have to be employed to get through the various 
kinds of rock formations likely to be encountered. The 
“А” and “В” lines shall be shown on these sections. 


6.1.5 The support system shall be strong enough to 
carry the ultimate loads. For a reinforced concrete 
lining it is economical to consider the steel supports as 
an integral part of the permanent lining. 


6.1.6 Temporary support system shall be installed 
within stand-up time for safety of workmen but not too 
early. 


7 SHOTCRETE 


7.1 General 


7.1.1 Shotcrete can be unreinforced, reinforced with 
anchored mesh or with steel/polypropylene fibres 
in the mix. АП loose rock shall be scaled out and 
washed before applying shotcrete. Shotcrete for tunnel 
supports may be used by itself as a thin skin type 
reinforcement or used in combinations with rock bolts, 
steel supports and other more conventional tunnel 
reinforcements. 


Before shotcreting all loose rocks are sealed and 
washed before applying shotcrete. Shotcrete is forced 
into open joints, fissures, seams and irregularities in 
the rock surface and in this way it serves the same 
binding function as mortar in a stone wall. Shotcrete 
hinders water seepage from joints and seams in the 
rock and thereby prevents piping of joint tilling 
materials and air and water deterioration of the rock. 
Shotcrete's adhesion to the rock surface and its own 
shear strength provide a considerable resistance to the 
fall of loose rock blocks from the roof of a tunnel. 
A thicker shotcrete layer (150 mm to 250 mm) 
provides structural support, either as a closed ring or 
as an arch type member. 


7.2 Mix 


Shotcrete shall be applied by either the wet or 
dry process as appropriate to the circumstances. 
Compatibility for various proportions of mix shall be 
verified before finalizing the mix. Shotcrete shall be a 
mixture of cement, sand and aggregate. 


7.2.1 Cement 


7.2.1.1 Ordinary Portland cement conforming 10 
requirements of IS 269, having higher fineness is 
considered suitable for shotcrete application. 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


7.2.1.2 Minimum cement content shall not be less than 
380 kg/m? and minimum total binder content shall not 
be less than 400 kg/m’. 


7.2.2 Aggregates 


7.2.2.1 The gradation curve of aggregates should be 
normally within the minimum and maximum limit 
given in Table 3. 


Table 3 Recommended Aggregate Gradation Zone 
(Clause 7.2.2.1) 


SINo.  ISSieve Size Percentage Passing 
АС 
mm Minimum Maximum 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) 0.125 4 12 
ii) 0.25 11 26 
iii) 0.5 22 50 
iv) 1.0 37 72 
у) 2.0 55 90 
уі) 4.0 73 100 
vii) 8.0 90 100 
viii) 10.0 94 100 
ix) 12.5 97 100 
x) 16.0 100 100 
7.2.3 Additives 


Densified silica fume conforming to IS 15388 may be 
added up to 10 percent by weight of cement to improve 
strength, adhesiveness, cohesiveness, durability, and 
achieve reduction in rebound without reducing total 
reactive content in shotcrete mix. Trials shall be carried 
before ascertaining right dosage. 


7.2.4 Water 


Water shall conform to requirements given in IS 456. 
For optimum results, water-cement ratio shall be 
kept in the range of 0.37 to 0.45 for high strength and 
durability. 


7.2.5 Chemical Admixtures 


7.2.5.4 Chemical admixtures shall conform 10 
requirements given in IS 9103. АП admixtures shall be 
free from chlorides such that percentage of chlorides 
shall not exceed 0.1 percent by weight. 


7.2.5.2 Superplasticizers shall be used to enhance work- 
ability of mix and reduce water demand. Preferably, 
high range water reducing admixtures shall be used 
which do not have undesirable effect on setting time. 


7.2.5.3 Liquid accelerators having alkali content less than 
1 percent are preferable. Typical dosage varies in range 
of 5 percent to 7 percent. Higher dosages of more than 
7 percent shall be subject to verification of detrimental 
effects over long duration of 6 months or more. 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


7.2.5.4 Typical wet shotcrete mix for M 30 grade 15 
suggested in Table 4. Actual proportions will vary as 
per actual site conditions and application requirements. 


Table 4 Typical Wet Shotcrete Mix 
(Clause 7.2.5.4) 


SI No. Material Quantity in 
(1) Q) (3) 
1) OPC 53 cement, kg/m? 380 to 420 
1) Densified silica fume, ke/m° 20 to 40 
iii) Fine aggregate, kg/m? 1 100 to 1 300 
iv) Coarse aggregate, kg/m? 600 to 800 
v) Steel fibre/poly fibre, kg/m? 20 to 35/4 to 8 
vi) Superplasticizer, percent 204 
уп) Liquid accelerator, percent 5to7 
уш) Water-cement ratio, kg/m? 0.37 to 0.45 


7.3 Thickness 


The thickness of shotcrete required depends upon the 
type of rock, the extent of stratification and/or joints, 
blockiness and also the size of the tunnel. The thickness 
may normally range from 50 mm to 150 mm and whether 
it should be used plain or fibre reinforced or with wire- 
mesh anchored to rock will depend upon the actual site 
conditions in each case. However, the thickness may be 
more than 150 mm in certain cases based on design and 
application requirements. 


7.4 Support Capacity of Shotcrete in Roof 


7.4.1 It is assumed that, shotcrete is intimately in 
contact with the rock mass and has the tendency to fail 
by shearing alone. Capacity of shotcrete, Р. is given by: 


241 
p әске ач) 
FB 
where 
q „= shear strength of shotcrete (300 т” in most of 
the cases); 
,U thickness of shotcrete (in m); 
B= size of opening (in m); 
BF = horizontal distance between vertical planes of 
maximum shear stress in shotcrete (in m); 
F = 0.6 = 0.05; and 
P = support capacity of shotcrete lining (in t/m?). 


7.4.2 The thickness of shotcrete may be estimated by 
substituting ultimate support pressure, P... for Р in 
equation (1). Additional layers of shotcrete should be 
sprayed to arrest tunnel closure if needed. 


7.5 Fibre Reinforced Shotcrete (FRS) 


7.5.1 Fibre reinforced shotcrete either alone or in 
combination with rock bolts (specially in large 


openings) provides a good and fast solution for both 
initial and permanent rock support. Being ductile, it 
can absorb considerable deformation before failure. 


7.5.2. Controlled blasting should be used preferably. 
The advantage of fibre reinforced shotcrete is that 
smaller thickness of shotcrete is needed, in comparison 
to that of conventional shotcrete. Fibre reinforced 
shotcrete is required, especially in rock conditions 
where support pressure is high. Use of fibre-reinforced 
shotcrete along with resin anchors is also recommended 
for controlling rock burst conditions because of high 
fracture toughness of shotcrete due to especially long 
fibres. This can also be used effectively in highly 
squeezing ground conditions. It ensures better bond 
with rock surface. With mesh, voids and pockets might 
form behind the mesh thus causing poor bond and 
formation of water seepage channels as indicated in 
Fig. 1. 


7.5.3 The major draw-back of normal shotcrete is that it 
is rather weak in tensile, flexural and impact resistance 
strength. These mechanical properties are improved by 
the addition of fibres. Deciding a performance criterion 
(in terms of energy absorption for a fixed deformation 
value or residual strengths at different deformation 
values) is mandatory for selecting the type and dosage 
of fibres for shotcrete application, for which specialist 
literature may be referred. Most commonly used fibres 
are steel fibres and polypropylene fibres. 


7.5.4 Steel Fibres 


7.5.4.1 Steel fibres are made in various shapes to 
increase their bonding intimacy with the shotcrete 
(see Fig. 2). It is found that hooked ends type steel 
fibres behave more favourably than other types of steel 
fibres in flexural strength and toughness. Glued fibres 
should be used to prevent balling of fibres and choking 
of nozzle at the time of shotcrete application. 


7.5.4.2 Steel fibres make up between 0.5 to 2 percent 
of the total volume of the mix (1.5 to 6 percent by 
weight). Shotcrete mixes with fibre contents greater 
than 2 percent are difficult to prepare and shoot. 


7.5.4.3 Steel fibres are manufactured by cutting cold 
drawn wires as per IS 432 (Part 1) and IS 432 (Part 2). 


7.5.4.4 Some of the important parameters of steel fibres 
shall be: 


a) Geometrical shape — Typically as shown in Fig. 2. 
Length of the fibres may be 20 mm to 40 mm. 
Recommended sizes of the fibres are 25 mm to 
35 mm. Equivalent diameter of the steel fibre may 
be in a range of 0.40 mm to 0.60 mm. 


b) Aspect ratio (length/equivalent diameter) = 60 to 
75. 


c) Ultimate tensile strength > 1 000 МРа 


——— PLAIN SHOTCRETE 


WELDED 
WIREMESH 


MESH PINNED 
TO ROCK 


COVER TO MESH 


IS 15026 (Part 1): 2022 


— FIBER 
REINFORCEMENT 
SHOTCRETE 


Fic. 1 DIFFERENCE IN SHOTCRETE CONSUMPTION WHEN WIRE MESH OR FIBRES 


25 mm 
0.45 mm 
Y 
Й 
LU 0.53 mm 


2A RECTANGULAR CROSS SECTION 


28 mm 


0.5 ጠጠ 2 


28 CIRCULAR CROSS SECTION 


Fic. 2 TYPICAL FIBRES USED IN SHOTCRETE WORK 


7.5.5 Polypropylene Fibres 


7.5.5.1 Polypropylene fibres may also be used to 
provide ductile behaviour to shotcrete. Certificate 
for declaration of performance of the fibre shall be 
obtained. See IS 16481. 


7.5.5.2 Some of the important 
polypropylene fibres shall be: 


parameters of 


a) Geometrical shape — Straight or deformed with 
plain or corrugated surface. Length of the fibres 
may be 40 mm to 60 mm. Equivalent diameter of 
the fibre shall be more than 0.30 mm. 


b) Aspect ratio (length/equivalent diameter) — 
60 to 75. 


c) Ultimate tensile strength > 500 MPa. 


7.5.6 Key to successful FRS construction is the use of 
a well trained and experienced shotcrete application 
crew. Pre-construction and post-construction testing 
of shotcrete shall be done for quality assurance as per 
IS 9012. 


7.5.7 To increase the standup time, for a full 
front tunnel profile in poor rock quality condition 
(or squeezing rock conditions), spiling dowels аге 
provided (see Fig. 3). 

7.5.8 To stabilize the broken zone in squeezing ground 


conditions more than one layers of fibre reinforced 
shotcrete (FRS) is provided (see Fig. 4). 


IS 15026 (Part 1): 2022 


ROCKBOLTS 


SHOTCRETE WITH FIBER 


60°-120° AS PER 
SITE REQUIREMENT 


SECTION A-A —<4<— A 


Fic. 3 ARRANGEMENT OF SPILING DOWEL WITH THE ADVANCEMENT OF TUNNEL FACE 


BROKEN ZONE COMPACTION 
ZONE 


FRS 
LAYERS 


ELASTIC ZONE 


Fic. 4 STABILIZATION OF BROKEN ZONE IN SQUEEZING GROUND CONDITION 


7.6 Capacity of Fibre Reinforced Shotcrete = thickness of fibre reinforced shotcrete (in m), 


7.6.1 It is assumed that the fibre reinforced shotcrete is B= size of opening (іп m), 


intimately in contact with the rock mass and having the ВЕ” distance between vertical planes of maximum 
tendency to fail by shearing. shear stress in FRS (in m), 
Е, = 0.6+0.05, and 


Р. = support capacity of fibre reinforced shotcrete 


7.6.2 Capacity of fibre reinforced shotcrete is given by: 


= 24.іһ (2) lining (in t/m?). 
ከር ”” S 
ВЕ, 7.6.3 Тһе thickness of fibre reinforced shotcrete lining 


may be estimated by substituting ultimate support 

pressure (P...) in equation (2) in place of P... Additional 

Я. = shear strength of fibre reinforced shotcrete layers of shotcrete should be sprayed to arrest tunnel 
I (550 t/m?), closure if needed. 


where 


7.6.4 Proper equipment should be used to avoid 
bunching of steel fibres and to ensure homogeneous 
mixing of fibres in the shotcrete. 


7.7 Drainage System in Road/Rail Approach Tunnels 
within Water-charged Rock Mass 


7.7.1 Strips of about 500 mm width along the side walls 
and roof should not be shotcreted to allow free seepage 
of ground water otherwise shotcrete is likely to crack 
due to building up of seepage pressure behind shotcrete 
in heavily water-charged formations. 


7.7.2 Drainage holes should be provided for proper 
drainage. 


7.7.3 The catch drain should have adequate capacity to 
carry seepage water. 


7.7.4 Water expandable friction bolts should be used to 
provide support to the rock mass as it is impracticable 
to put grouted bolts in heavy seepage conditions. 
However, suitably coated water expandable friction 
bolts may be used for enhanced durability. 


8 TREATMENT OF SHEAR ZONE 


8.1 The mean (Q) value may be determined, taking 
into consideration the breadth of weak/shear zone. The 
following equation (3) may be employed in calculating 
the weighted mean О value from the О values for shear 
zone and surrounding rock mass (see Fig. 5). 


їйє. = blogQ., +log Q. ... (3) 
b+1 
where 
Q „= mean value of rock mass quality Q for finding 


the support pressure 
[see IS 13365 (Part 2)], 


SHEAR ZONE 


E s % p ምካ 
WIRE MESH." 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


Q value of the weak zone/shear zone, 


e B 
Q = Q value of the surrounding rock, and 
b= thickness of the weak zone, in metre. 

Weighted mean value of joint roughness number, j 


may be obtained after replacing log О by appropriate 
value of joint roughness number in equation (3). 
Similarly, weighted mean of joint alteration number, j 


may be calculated. 


am 


The strike direction 0 and thickness of weak zone, b in 
relation to the tunnel axis 15 important for the stability 
of the tunnel and, therefore the corrected value b/(sin 0) 
has been suggested for the value of b in equation (3). 


8.2 Special bolting system is required for supporting 
the weak shear zone. Figure 5 shows a typical treatment 
of a thin shear zone which is thicker than 500 mm. 


8.3 First the gouge is cleaned out to the desired extent. 
Rock bolts are then installed across the shear zone and 
connected with chain wire-mesh. Finally, this ‘dental’ 
excavation is back-filled with shotcrete or gunite or 
fibre reinforced shotcrete. In wide shear zone (> 1 m), 
reinforcement has to be placed before shotcreting so 
that the reinforced shotcrete lining can withstand the 
heavy support pressure. 


9 GUNITING 


It is recommended that guniting with cement and sand 
mix of 1:3to 1 : 4 may be used as a temporary support 
with or without wire mesh to prevent deterioration of 
rock surface. When used in combination with rock bolts 
and chain link fabric, it forms a permanent support. 


10 ROCK BOLTS 


10.1 General 


Rock bolts can be broadly classified into two categories, 
active and passive. Active rockbolts are normally 


ROCK BOLT 


А 147 РА 


SHOTCRETE 


Fic. 5 TYPICAL TREATMENT OF A NARROW SHEAR ZONE 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


end anchored into borehole by mechanical or other 
means and tensioned to provide active confinement 
to surrounding rock mass which acts as the reinforced 
rock arch. Passive rockbolts generally includes 
dowels/anchor bars or other arrangements which are not 
tensioned after installation and supports the loosened 
rock mass externally. 


10.2 Types of Active Rock Bolts 
10.2.1 End Anchored 
10.2.1.1 Wedge апа slot bolt (mechanically anchored) 


These consist of mild-steel rod, threaded at one end, 
the other end being split into two halves for about 
125 mm length. A wedge made from 20 mm square 
steel and about 150 mm long shall be inserted into the 
slot and then the bolt with wedge driven with a hammer 
into the hole which will force the split end to expand 
and grip the rock inside the hole forming the anchorage. 
Thereafter, a 10 mm thick plate of size 200 x 200 mm 
shall be placed, over which a tapered washer is placed 
and the nut tightened (see Fig. 6). The efficiency of the 
splitting of the bolt by the wedge depends on the strata 
at the end of the hole being strong enough to prevent 
penetration by the wedge end and on the accuracy of 
the hole drilled for the bolt. The diameter of such bolt 
may be 25 mm or 30 mm. Wedge and slot bolts are not 


effective in soft rocks. 
ii WEDGE 


BOLT 


PLATE 


Еіс. 6 WEDGE AND SLOT BOLT 


10 


10.2.1.2 Wedge апа sleeve bolt (mechanically 


anchored) 


This consists of a 20 mm diameter rod, one end of 
which is cold-rolled threaded portion while other end is 
shaped to form a solid wedge forged integrally with the 
bolt and over this wedge a loose split sleeve of 33 mm 
external diameter 15 fitted (see Fig. 7). The anchorage 
is provided in this case by placing the bolt in the hole 
and pulling it downwards while holding the sleeve 
by a thrust tube. Split by the wedge head of the bolt, 
the sleeve expands until it grips the sides of the tube. 
Special hydraulic equipment is needed to pull the bolts. 


1 SLEEVE 


BOLT 
PLATE 
ከሀፐ 


Fic. 7 WEDGE AND SLEEVE BOLT 


10.2.1.3 End grouted rebar bolt 


These consist of reinforcement bars encapsulated only 
in a limited length at the far end inside the borehole 
with resin grouts (see Fig. 8). These bolts can be 
pretensioned immediately after installation. 


10.3 Types of Passive Rock Bolts 
10.3.1 Grouted 
10.3.1.1 Fully grouted bolt (anchor or dowel bar) 


These consist of reinforcement bars and encapsulated 
in a borehole along its entire length with either cement 
or resin grout (see Fig. 9). They interact with the rock 
mass through mechanical interlock of the bolt surface 
with the grout agent. Usually cement grouted bolts are 
not pre-tensioned, due to risk of debonding between 
bolt and grout. Resin grouted bolt when pre-tensioned 
immediately after their installation act as active 
rockbolt. Typical yield load of these bolts can be up to 
300 kN and depends upon diameter of the bolt. 


15 15026 (Раг 1) : 2022 


Fic. 8 END GROUTED REBAR BOLT 


UEDAO(UTUA) 


ROCK 


Fic. 9 FULLY GROUTED REBAR BOLT 


10.3.1.2 Self drilling bolt 


These bolts are used in conditions where borehole 
may collapse partially or completely before inserting 
the bolt or grout into the hole. It comprises a hollow 
anchor rod having coarse pitch threads on cylindrical 
surface of bolt and with a drill bit attached to its end 
(see Fig. 10). The bolt is drilled through a drilling 
machine and bit is sacrificed inside the hole. The 
cementitious grout is pumped into the borehole through 
hole in the anchor rod. It is important that anchor rod 
is sufficiently strong to cater to torsional and impact 
forces during installation. The bolt length can be 
extended by connecting coupling between two rods. 
The bolt is available in typical configurations of 25 mm 
outer diameter with yield load of 150 kN to 76 mm 
outer diameter having a yield load of up to 1 200 kN. 


10.3.3 Cable Bolts 


Cable bolts are used when reinforcement is needed 
to large depth, typically more than 10 m. These bolts 
are made of either single or multiple cable strands, 


and usually encapsulated with cementitious grout in 
boreholes. Each strand may consist of multiple wires 
(see Fig. 11). The advantage of cable bolts is the long 
reinforcement lengths and high load bearing capacity in 
the range of more than 1 000 kN. Deformation capacity 
of these bolts can be enhanced by debonding the bolt 
from grout by wrapping a plastic sleeve around the 
cable in the middle segment or upper segment near 
surface. 


10.3.4 Perfo Bolts 


This method of bolting consists of inserting into a 
bore hole a perforated cylindrical metal tube which is 
previously filled with cement mortar and then pushing 
a plain or ribbed bolt. This forces part of the mortar 
to ooze out through the perforations in the tube and 
come into intimate contact with the sides of the bore 
hole thus cementing the bolt, the tube and the rock into 
one homogeneous whole (see Fig. 12). The relation 
between the diameter of the bore hole and the diameter 
of perforated tube and bolts is given in Table 5. 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


АМСНОК 
PLATE 


EXTENSION 


HOLLOW COUPLING 


Houow ЗА BIT 
ROD 


- 
118 
\\\ 4 


НІШ ІШ 
ШИДІ) 


ШІ 


ከ 


ІШ 


[| 


ІШІ 


እ 4 


ШІ 


ІШІ 


| [11 ІШ 
ДУ 


ІШІ | 


m 


Ес. 10 SELF DRILLING Воск Вот 


BARREL AND WEDGE 
FIXED ANCHOR ANCHOR 
LENGTH, » 5m 


BOREHOLE 


SLEEVE — STEEL PLATE 


Fic. 11 CABLE Borrs 


PERFORATED TUBE 


O O O O O O O O O 
O O O O O O O O O 
O O O O O O O O 


ፅ 


SPACE FOR 
MORTAR 


Fic. 12 РЕВЕО BOLT 


12 


Table 5 Diameter of Perforated Tube апа 80105 
(Clause 10.3.4) 


SI No. Diameter of Diameter of Diameter of 

Bore Hole Perforated Tube Bolts 

(mm) (mm) (mm) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
i) 40 36 30 
ii) 38 31 25 
iii) 31 27 18 

NOTES 


1 The bolts and anchors should be checked for their 
straightness within + 1 mm. 


2 Pull-out tests should be done on 5 percent of bolts and 


anchors to check their capacity (P,..). 


10.3.5 Water Expandable Friction Bolts 


These rock bolts are made of welded steel tube folded 
into omega shape in the cross-section (see Fig. 13). The 
bolt 15 placed inside 8 borehole and water is injected 
with high pressure of more than 25 N/mm into folded 
tube through a small hole in the bushing at the bolt 
head. The tube expands and presses onto borehole wall 
resulting in a contact stress and mechanical interlock 
at bolt-rock interface. Oversize borehole diameter 
results in no contact and zero frictional strength. 
Typical breaking load of such bolts can be up to 
240 kN. Advantages of these bolts are less installation 
time and immediate full load bearing capacity over 
entire installed bore length. 


10.4 Design 


10.4.1 Immediately after a tunnel has been advanced 
by a length ‘? (see Fig. 14), the rock in this section 
expands and settles slightly developing a double arch 
effect. In the longitudinal direction of the tunnel, the 
arch rests on the still untouched rock at the front and 
on the already supported portion at the back (dashed 
lines in Fig. 14). The second arch effect, perpendicular 
to the axis ofthe tunnel is given by the form ofthe roof, 
which usually is an arch in tunnels. The period to which 
this combined arch will stand without support depends 
on the geological conditions, the length / and the radius 
of the tunnel roof. But in most cases, even in badly 
disintegrated rock, it will be possible to maintain this 


13 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


natural arch for some time, at least a couple of hours. 
If the natural arch 1s not supported immediately after 
mucking, it will continue to sink down slowly until it 
disintegrates. 


10.4.2 The portion that 1s liable to fall is generally a 
parabolic arch in shape having a depth t/2 (see Fig. 14) 
though the loosening process will never go as deep 
as this if the movement 15 stopped by quick support. 
It is recommended that the bolts should not be made 
shorter than ‘£ that is twice the depth of presumed 
maximum loosening. The natural surrounding rock of 
the cavity 15 in this way transformed into a protective 
arch, the thickness of which is given by the length of 
the bolts “7 which should be bigger than ‘£, also should 
be between B/4 to B/3, as the arch also should have a 
certain relation to the width of tunnel. “В” is the width 
of the tunnel. 


10.4.3 The rock requires a prestress by bolting and the 
bolts should follow the static principles of prestressing 
in reinforced concrete as much as possible. As it 15 not 
possible to place bolts in the way of stress bars at the 
lower side of a beam, they should at least be given an 
oblique position in order to take the place of bent-up 
bars and stirrups (see Fig. 15). 


10.4.4 With an arch instead of a beam, the shear forces 
will be greatly reduced by the vault effect but even in 
arch shaped roofs, shear forces may be caused by joint 
systems, especially by system of parallel layers like 
sedimentary formations, schist, etc. Hence the bolts 
should not only be made to exert a strong prestress to 
the rock but also should be set in a direction which suits 
best to the static demands of the geological conditions 
(see Fig. 15). 


10.4.5 Just as a static member of prestressed 
concrete has to be prestressed before receiving the 
load, the rock also shall be prestressed by bolting 
before the load develops. This means that the space t 
(see Fig. 14) shall be bolted immediately after blasting 
while the next round is being drilled. The spacing 
between bolts/anchors should be less than half the 
length of bolts/anchors. 


10.4.6 The pre-tension of ungrouted bolts is lost after 
blasting, so rock bolts shall be pretensioned again. 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


BUSHING AT 
BOLT END 


FOLDED STEEL WATER INJECTION 
TUBE HOLE 


ROCK MASS 


(a) (b) (с) 


Fic. 13 WATER EXPANDABLE FRICTION BOLT 


LIMIT OF LOOSENING x 


NATURAL 
ARCH CREATED LIMIT OF 
BY BOLTING LOOSENING 


SECTION YY SECTION XX 


Fic. 14 DIAGRAMMATIC SECTION DEMONSTRATING OF ROOF BOLTING 


14 


15 15026 (Раг 1) : 2022 


15А HoRIZONTAL JOINT SYSTEM 15B INCLINED JOINT SYSTEM 


15C VERTICAL JOINT SYSTEM 


Fic. 15 ROOF BOLTING IN STRATA RUNNING AT VARIOUS ANGLE OF DIP 


10.5 Capacity of Rock Bolts/Anchors 9... = minimum uniaxial compressive 
strength of reinforced rock mass 


10.5.1 The capacity of reinforced rock arch (Р ) is 
(joint will be critically oriented 


— somewhere along the arch); 
24м 1! sin 0 
mie ET. ss (A) Ë 78 
- іп ф, 
where й И .. (5) 
sin 0 = 1.3 8016]; 889. = JJ, ... (6) 
The arch subtends an angle of 20 at its centre. Pa 7 pe in bolt or anchor capacity 


15 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


centre-to-centre of 


bolts/anchors (in m); 


en spacing 


effective thickness of reinforced arch 
(in т); 


l , —FALI2—S, 2 ተ 


bolt bolt 
no shotcrete); us (7) 
Lion ~ FAL/2 — 5/4 + So (іп case 
of mesh reinforced shotcrete) ...(8) 
L7 PAL/2 (in both cases minimum 
value of /' to be checked) ...(9) 
fixed anchor length (in m) of anchors 
to develop pull out capacity P. 


bolt? 


(in case of 


rock 


FAL 


100 x diameter of anchor bars; 


« | m in case of mechanically 
anchored; 


average spacing of fractures in rock 
(in m); 


length of bolt or anchor (in m); 
size of opening (in m); 


mobilization factor of bolt/anchor; 


3.25 pos 


roof 


anchored 
bolts) 


(for 
and 


mechanically 
pre-tensioned 

... (10) 
9 5 pu» 


roof 


(for full column grouted 
a (11) 


ultimate support pressure in roof of 
tunnel (in t/m?); 


anchors) 


roof 


joint roughness number; and 


joint alteration number. 


The spacing and length of bolts should be so chosen 
that the estimated capacity of rock bolts/anchors, Р. is 
equal to ultimate support pressure, P 


roof* 


10.5.2 Full-column grouted bolts are more efficient 
in poor rock conditions according to equation 11 than 
ungrouted pre-tensioned bolts. For permanent supports, 
all bolts should be grouted. 


10.6 Guidelines for Usage of Various Rock Bolts 


Each type of Rockbolt has various merits and demerits. 
To tackle challenging ground conditions, most suitable 
type of Rockbolt should be used. Table 6 gives merits 
and demerits on usage various types of rockbolts. 


11 LATTICE GIRDERS AND REINFORCED 
RIBS OF SHOTCRETE 


11.1 Lattice girders (LG) and reinforced ribs of 
shotcrete (RRS) allow fast installation and facilitate 
shotcrete penetration through them. These supports 
minimize creation of projection shadow/void area in 
shotcrete lining, providing a composite structure acting 
as a reinforced lining. These supports can be fabricated 
before actual usage to different size and shape. Both LG 
and RRS also help to control excavated tunnel profile 
by permitting spiles/forepoles through them. Spacing of 
LG and RRS can be adjusted to meet required support 
stiffness and load carrying capacity. 


11.2 Lattice Girders (LG) 


11.2.1 Lattice girders (LG) consist of 3 or 4 primary 
reinforcement bars, arranged їп triangular ог 
rectangular manner, connected with stiffening elements 
which becomes integral part of tunnel shotcrete lining. 
Capacity of LG can be designed by selecting different 
bar sizes (see Fig. 16). 


Fic. 16 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR THREE AND FOUR CHORD LATTICE GIRDERS 


16 


15 15026 (Раг 1) : 2022 


Table 6 Guidelines on Usage of Various Types of Rockbolts 
(Clause 10.6) 


51 Мо. Туре of Rock Bolt Merits Demerits 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1) Mechanically * Relatively inexpensive * Suitable for only moderately hard rock and low 
anchored bolts + Immediate support installation stress areas not prone to rock spalling 
“ Can be tensioned to provide confinement to * Low reliability 
rockmass “ Regular monitoring and checking of tensioning 
* Prone to lose capacity with blast vibrations 
“ Not recommended as permanent support unless 
coated suitably 
ii) Fully grouted rock * Preferred to use in upright position * Different resin manufacturer Installation 
bolt (resin) * Suits a variety of ground guideline to be followed 
+ Permanently effective “ Resin is expensive with limited shelf life 
* High shear capacity * Stiff Rockbolts 
“ Immediate activation 
“ Can be used in holes with low ground 
water pressures 
iii) Fully grouted rock * Suits a variety of ground * Not preferred for upright positions. 
bolt (cement) * Permanently effective * Time required for grout cure 
* High shear capacity * Quality of mix affects capacity 
* High load carrying capacity * Stiff Rockbolts 
* Can't be used in holes with ground water 
* Can't be used in ground with open fractures 
iv) Water expandable * Immediate support installation * Expensive 
friction Bolts * No grout chemical required * Corrosion prone in long run 
* Suits a variety of ground * Low shear strength 
* Requires separate water pump 
* Not recommended as permanent support unless 
coated suitably 
v) Self-drilling bolt e Suitable for loose/fractured rockmass * Requires sacrificial bit suiting to hardness of 
where hole wall is not stable rock 
* Grout pour through bolt hole ensuring * High steel grade to ensure higher torsional 
complete length grouting resistance of bolt for drilling without failure 
* Time required for grout cure 
vi) Cable bolts * Very high load bearing capacity * Grout quality control is high 


Durable and permanent 


possible 


11.2.2 After scaling loose rock blocks and underbreaks, 
tunnel profile is shotcreted to attain profile of 
prefabricated LG. For thick shotcrete layers, a layer of 
wiremesh may be required to prevent loose falling of 
freshly applied shotcrete or for areas with low cohesion 
between rock and shotcrete. Afterwards, prefabricated 
LG 15 erected in place within permitted tolerances of 
line, level and spacing and covered with shotcrete up to 
half depth. Subsequently, spiles/forepoles are installed 
through empty area of LG, before embedding LG 
completely with shotcrete. 


11.2.3 LG is not advisable for tunnel profile with 
large overbreaks, as they start carrying load only after 


Higher length installation > 10 m is easily 


17 


Can't be used in holes with ground water 
Can't be used in ground with open fractures 


Time required for grout cure before stressing 


bringing the tunnel profile to required geometry of 
prefabricated LG, which may take a lot of time to fill 
with grout/shotcrete. 


11.2.4 In mild and moderate squeezing conditions, LG 
can be used effectively with lining stress controllers, 
to release tunnel pressure and reduce load on support. 


11.3 Reinforced Ribs of Shotcrete (RRS) 


11.3.1 RRS can be single layered, comprising 6 primary 
reinforcement bars of about 20 mm in diameter arranged 
in same plane at 100 mm to 125 mm spacing and tied 
to each other by a tie (usually cross reinforcement bars) 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


at equal intervals (see Fig. 17); or double layered, 
comprising 2 additional reinforcement bars. These 
have a larger capacity to take load and moments. Due 
to its configuration, RRS is very flexible by itself and 
attains stiffness only after complete embedment with 
plain shotcrete. Moment capacity of RRS is usually 
analyzed as a reinforced shotcrete beam. Depending 
on length of reinforcement bars available at site and 
on the basis of excavated profile perimeter, RRS can 
be fabricated in two or up to three lengths, taking into 
account an overlap of approximately 1 m between any 
two lengths. Preferably the overlap in the reinforcement 
bars should be distributed so that it should not occur in 
the same cross section for all the bars. This is important 
for achieving good shotcreting results as many 
overlaps in the same cross section may cast a shadow 
behind the shotcrete. In order to increase capacity 
of the RRS, additional rock bolts can be installed on 
RRS near invert. For details of configuration and 
spacing of RRS for different rock quality, please see 
chart for support system [see IS 13365 (Part 2)]. 


11.3.2 After scaling loose rock blocks and underbreaks, 
thin layer of plain sealing shotcrete without fibres is 
applied to attain a smoothened rock surface. Thereafter, 
base layer of 100 mm to 150 mm is built up as per 
design on entire surface before installation of rock bolts 
at required spacing/pattern. Two additional rock bolts 
are installed on left and right tunnel wall near invert 
апа аї RRS chainage. Subsequently, reinforcement bars 
cage (up to 12 m in length) and comprising 6/8 rebars 


tied with tie-bar at 1 m interval, is erected and placed 
through protruding part of rock bolt and fixed using 
rock bolt face plate at each bolt location. Finally, entire 
RRS is embedded in shotcrete to provide atleast 50 mm 
cover to all reinforcement bars. 


11.3.3 RRS provides efficient and cost-effective 
support mechanism through ground arch concept by 
acting through increased bearing surface at tunnel 
wall and acting together with rock bolts. RRS 15 
beneficial for tunnel profile with large overbreaks, 
as the reinforcement bars cage of RRS can be easily 
bent inside the tunnel to match irregular tunnel profile, 
not requiring filling of gaps between wall and RRS 
unlike LG. 


11.3.4 Using spiles/forepoles is comparatively difficult 
when the profile 1s irregular, however, overall time 
required to install RRS is much less and remaining 
profile can be filled up later. RRS can be erected behind 
the forepoles where it 1s possible to forepole in a rock 
quality that is better than the part of the weak zone 
around the tunnel periphery which RRS shall support. 
Usually, 32 mm diameter steel bolts with length of 
about 6-8 m are used as forepoles. 


11.3.5 There is not enough experience in using RRS for 
cases with high overburden where moderate and heavy 
squeezing conditions are observed due to high stresses. 
For mild squeezing conditions, installation of RRS can 
be delayed based on observation. 


CROSS PIECE 


TUNNEL 


Fic. 17 TYPICAL ARRANGEMENT FOR REINFORCED RIBS OF SHOTCRETE 


18 


12 STEEL RIBS 


12.1 Rock tunnel support systems of steel may be 
generally classified into the following principal types: 


a) Continuous ribs (see Fig. 18A), 

b) Rib and post (see Fig. 18B), 

c) Rib and wall plate (see Fig. 18C), 

d) Rib, wall plate and post (see Fig. 18D), 

€) Full circle rib (see Fig. 18E), and 

f) Yielding arch steel rib with socketed joints. 


Invert strut may be used in addition, with types (a) 
to (d) where mild side pressures are encountered 
(Fig. 18F) or squeezing ground is met. 


12.2 Selection of Type of System 


12.2.1 General 


While choosing the type of support following factors 
shall be considered: 
a) Method of attack; 


b) Rock characteristics, its 
development of rock load; and 


behaviour and 


с) Size and shape of the tunnel cross-section. 


12.3 Selection of Supports with Reference to 
Surrounding Strata and Shape of Tunnel 


12.3.1 Continuous Ribs 


This type can be erected more rapidly than the other 
types and is generally recommended for use in rocks 
whose bridge action period is long enough to permit 
removal of gases and mucking. Invert strut may be used 
in addition where mild side pressures are encountered 
and squeezing ground is met. 


12.3.2 Rib and Post 


This type 15 generally recommended for use in tunnels 
whose roof joins the side walls at an angle instead of a 
smooth curve. It may also be used in large tunnels, such 
as double-track rail road or two-lane highway tunnels, 
to keep the size of the rib segments within handling 
and transporting limitations. Invert strut may be used in 
addition where mild side pressures are encountered and 
squeezing ground is met. 


12.3.3 Rib and Wall Plate 


This type 15 generally recommended for use in tunnels 
with a large cross-section with high straight sides 
through good rock or in large circular tunnels, where it 
is possible to support the wall plate by pins and where 
the strata below the wall plate does not require support. 
This type of support may also be used for tunneling 
through spalling rock, provided spalling occurs only 
in the roof. However, in many cases it is extremely 
difficult to establish adequate support for the wall plate 
at any point above the floor-line due to irregularity of 
the overbreak. 


19 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


12.3.4 Rib, Wall Plate and Post 


This type of support permits post spacing to be different 
from the rib spacing and is generally recommended 
for use in tunnels with high vertical sides. Invert strut 
may be used in addition, where mild side-pressures are 
encountered and squeezing ground is met. 


12.3.5 Full Circle Rib 


This type is recommended for use in tunnels in 
squeezing, swelling and crushed, or any rock that 
imposes considerable side pressure. 


12.4 Spacing of Ribs 
Spacing of ribs is given by: 


... (12) 


where 
P 


rib 
S. 


rib = 
B= size of opening (in m), and 


= steel rib capacity (in t), 
spacing of rib (in m), 


P e = ultimate support pressure in roof of tunnel 
(in t/m?). 
The support capacity of steel ribs (P „) should be so 
chosen that the minimum clear spacing between ribs in 
poor rock condition is 100 mm more. 
NOTE — Joints have not been shown in Fig. 18(A) to 18(Е) 


and maybe located depending upon the construction and 
fabrication convenience. 


12.5 Selection of Steel Ribs Supports with Reference 
to Method of Attack for Tunnel 


12.5.1 All the types of supports mentioned in 12.2 are 
suitable for the full-face method of attack for rock 
where required bridge action period for providing 
supports is available. Detailed guidelines are given in 
Table 2. 


12.5.2 Rib and wall plate or rib, wall plate and post 
are suitable for heading and bench method. The rib, 
wall plate and post type may be supplemented by truss 
panels or crown bars, which are accessories developed 
to handle heavy loads that come quickly by supporting 
the intervening ribs while the bench is shot out. 


12.5.3 Where it becomes necessary to drive first the top 
heading only due to bad roof conditions, the rib and 
wall plate type of support is generally recommended 
for use in the heading, and post may or may not be 
used when the bench is taken out depending on rock 
conditions. If the post 18 used the excavated shape will 
Бе ‘D’ shaped while without the post the excavated 
shape will be a mushroom. 


12.5.4 Where the side drift method is used for driving 
a large size tunnel in poor rock conditions, the rib, wall 
plate and post type of supports are recommended; the 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


18 ል CONTINOUS RIBS 18 B КІВ AND POST 


ПШ. BIN 


18 С RIB AND WALL PLATE 18 D RIB, WALL PLATE AND POST 


СУ 


INVERT STRUT 
18 E FULL CIRCLE RIB 18 F CONTINOUS RIB WITH INVERT STRUT 


Fic. 18 ТҮРЕ$ OF STEEL SUPPORT SYSTEMS 


20 


wall plate, however, being flat. The posts апа wall 
plates are erected in the drift which is driven ahead at 
each side at sub-grade (see Fig. 19). 


12.5.5 Where extreme poor rock conditions are 
encountered, breakups to the crown may be made, 
leaving a central core. Temporary posts may be quickly 
placed between the core and the roof at dangerous 
spots, and crown bars may be slid forward to quickly 
catchup the roof. The roof ribs should then be placed 
on the wall plates and securely blocked to take the roof 
load, after which the temporary posts may be removed. 


12.5.6 The side drifts themselves usually need support 
which should be removed just prior to shooting out 
the core of the main tunnel and reused ahead. The 
support system used for the drifts is hybrid. The outer 
side consists of the posts and wall plates which later 
becomes a part of the support for the main tunnel, 
whereas the inner side is a continuous rib (see Fig. 19). 


12.6 Type of Support for Shafts 


For shafts, usually the full circle rib or segmental ribs 
are recommended depending upon the slope and rock 
conditions. In vertical shafts, ribs may be hung from top 
by hanger rods and blocked and packed. The spacing of 
hanger rods may be worked out as in the case of tie 
rods keeping in view that they shall be strong enough 
to support the weight of ribs. 


12.7 Components of Tunnel Supports 


Design of various components of tunnel supports shall 
be done in accordance with IS 4880 (Part 6). 


12.7.1 Ribs 


Ribs may be made of structural beams. H-beams or 
wide flange beams should be preferred to I-beams, as 
the wider flanges provide more surface for blocking and 
lagging, and the section has greater resistance against 
twisting. Channel sections are not recommended as 
their asymmetrical section is prone to twisting, and 
their flanges are narrow. In small tunnels, however, 
channel bent about their minor axis may be used under 
ordinary loads. When choosing the steel section with 
different weights for arch posts, it is advisable to select 
beams of equal depth. 


12.7.2 Posts 


The spacing between the posts may be normally equal 
to that of the ribs. However, by inserting wall plate 
between the ribs and the posts the spacing of the posts 
can be made independent of ribs. The posts should be 
made of H-section. The depth of these should normally 
be the same as that of the ribs, though in many cases 
they may be of lighter sections as long as no side 
pressure is present. 


21 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


12.7.3 Invert Struts 


Where the side pressures are present and tunnel section 
has not been converted to a full circle, it is necessary 
to prevent the inward movement of the rib or posts 
feet and in such cases, invert struts should be provided 
at tunnel subgrade. They should be so attached to 
the vertical members that they receive the horizontal 
pressure. They may be curved to form an inverted arch 
where there is upthrust from the floor. 


12.7.4 Wall Plates 


12.7.4.1 The following types of wall plates are 
commonly used: 


a) Double beam, 
b) Single beam, and 
c) Flat. 


12.7.4.2 The double and single beam wall plates which 
are intended to resist bending in vertical planes are 
recommended for use to transmit the loads from the ribs 
on to block or posts with a spacing different from that 
of the ribs. Flat wall plates merely serve as an erection 
expedient and a convenient surface for horizontal 
blocking, their resistance to bending in vertical planes 
being very small. Whenever flat wall plates are used, a 
post shall be placed under each rib. 


12.7.4.3 Double beam wall plates may be made of 
two I-beams placed side by side, webs vertical with 
about a 100 mm space between flanges to give access 
to the clamping bolt and admit concrete (see Fig. 20). 
The beams should be spaced by vertical diaphragms 
welded under each rib seat. Ribs and posts should be 
clamped by toggle plates and bolts, thus avoiding the 
time required for matching bolt holes. This method of 
attachment also permits variable spacing of either or 
both the ribs and the posts. This type of beam provides 
a broad surface of contact for blocking and to engage 
ribs and posts. Its box section makes it stable with 
respect to rolling and twisting. 


12.7.4.4 Single beam wall plates may be H-beams, with 
web vertical. To enable them to transmit vertical loads 
from rib to post, they may be reinforced at each rib seat 
with vertical T-shaped plates, if necessary (see Fig. 21). 
Attachment of ribs and posts shall be made by bolting 
through the flanges. 


12.7.4.5 Flat wall plates may be I-beams or wide flange 
beams used with their webs horizontal. They function 
merely as a cap for the posts and a sill for erecting roof 
ribs. The web shall be punched with vent holes which 
also helps to pass reinforcing rods if the concrete 18 
reinforced. 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


ANY, Lp EES 
SUPPORT FOR DRIFT, TO BE 
REMOVED AND REUSED AFTER 
THE CONSTRUCTION OF MAIN SUPPORT FOR TUNNEL USED 
TUNNEL SUPPORT — AS A SUPPORT FOR DRIFT 


Fic. 19 SIDE DRIFT METHOD 


ኳኳ SAAN 
3“ 3 АЗ 


2 


Й 
— > LLL 


Fic. 20 DOUBLE BEAM WALL PLATE 


IEEE. (222 


М CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCZ 
w 
pM 


A 


LLL 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


Fic. 21 SINGLE BEAM WALL PLATE 


CROWN BAR 


Fic. 22 CROWN BAR 


12.7.5 Crown Bars 


12.7.5.1 Crown bars may be built up of double 
channels (see Fig. 22) or may be H-beams or square 
timber beams. They are located parallel to the axis of 
the tunnel either resting on the outer flanges of the ribs 
already erected (see Fig. 23A) or attached to the ribs in 
hangers (see Fig. 23B). Crown bars are an accessory, a 


23 


construction expedient intended to carry loads till the rib 
sets are erected and the loads permanently transferred 
to them. They have one of the two functions to perform: 
(a) to support the roof immediately after ventilation and 
thereby gain time for the installation of ribs, or (b) to 
support the roof or roof ribs over the bench shot thereby 
relieving or supplementing the wall plates. 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


CROWN ВАК 


SECTION BB 


SECTION AA 
23A CROWN BAR SUPPORTED OVER RIBS 


CROWN BAR 


MEME 
ዘ | | ll 


SUSPENDED 
CROWN BAR 


SECTION CC 


SECTION BB 


SECTION AA 


23B CROWN BARS IN HANGERS 


ቀ BLOCKING BETWEEN ROCK AND 815 


[] BLOCKING BETWEEN CROWN RIB AND ROCK RIB 


Fic. 23 METHOD OF SUPPORT FOR CROWN BARS 


24 


^ SECTION CC 


12.7.6 Truss Panels 


12.7.6.1 These are accessories for use with the 
combination of rib and post types of support, for the 
heading and bench or top-heading methods of attack 
and heavy roof loads. Their purpose is to form, in 
combination with the ribs, a truss to span the gap 
produced by the bench shot. 


12.7.6.2 The truss panels should be attached to the 
inside face of the ribs for a distance of one or more ribs 
ahead of the bench shot (see Fig. 24) and should be left 
there until posts are installed, at that time they should 
be removed and sent up ahead. Attachment should be 
by means of only two bolts at each rib. The truss thus 
formed may even be designed to carry the roof over 
two bench shots making it more convenient to get in 
the post. 


TRUSS PANEL HAS BEEN 
REMOVED AND 
RE-ERECTED IN HEADING 


TIE ROD 6 
ра 


w! lll! 
рр 


15 15026 (Раг 1) : 2022 


12.7.6.3 When truss panels аге used, по wall р1аїез аге 
required although the flat wall plate тау Бе used to 
keep the lower ends of the ribs lined up laterally if it 
Is difficult to block the individual ribs against the rock. 
The truss panels eliminate the need for wall plate for 
drifts. 


12.7.7 Bracing 


12.7.7.1 Longitudinal bracing or struts increase the 
resistance of ribs and posts to buckling about their 
minor axis and prevent a displacement of these set 
members during blasting. If the space between the ribs 
or post is bridged by lagging which is firmly attached 
to the webs, no such bracing is required. The most 
common types of bracing are the rods and collar braces 
(see Fig. 25). The braces may, however, be placed as 
convenient between the rods. 


QA 
NSSN V, 
Ў OX 


NY SSS ጋሪ ጋይ “NY; NN 
CROoSS — SECTION 
TRUSS PANEL 
RIB 
Жаны 2 
ኣኳ N 
ILI > 
т] тт А!) ሪ ሪ 
сер 
ረ И 4 04 
| ea el el 22221 Ñ Ñ 
LL II 8 ጸበዱ፡፡ NS 
NZ x7 ANNAN ZAAN 
(А 
N N BENCH 
# 
= % 
SS ሠሪ WE 
BENCH SHOT 


FLAT WALL PLATE MAY 
OR MAY NOT BE USED 


LONGITUDINAL SECTION 


Fic. 24 TRUSS PANEL 


25 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


COLLAR BRACE 


Т ዘዘ Ш ——] 
RIB SUPPORT 


Fic. 25 COLLAR BRACE AND TIE Rops 


12.7.7.2 Tie rods may be 15 mm to 20 mm rods, with 
thread and two nuts on each end. The length shall be 
at least 100 mm more than the spacing of the ribs. The 
spacing of the rods shall be kept such that slenderness 
ratio //r for ribs is not greater than 60, where / is the 
spacing of the rods, and ris the least radius of gyration of 
the ribs. Collar braces may be usually pieces of timber, 
75mm х 100mm, 100mm x 150 mm, 150 mm x 150mm 
or any conventional size. Holes in pairs shall be 
provided in the web of ribs and posts for the tie rods. 
Collar braces shall be set in the line between ribs, tie 
rods inserted and the nuts tightened. Wooden collar 
braces should be removed before placing final lining. 


12.7.7.3 Spreaders (see Fig. 26) which are additional 
braces may be angles, channels, or I-beams with a clip 
angle or plate either bolted or welded on each end to the 
ribs. These are left in the concrete. In tunnels having 
steep slopes tie rods may be replaced by spreaders. 


12.7.8 Blocking 


It is generally done by using timber pieces tightly 
wedged between the rock and the rib. These timber 
pieces are to be removed prior to concreting. 


12.7.9 Lagging 
12.7.9.1 It performs one or more of the following 
functions: 
a) To provide protection from falling rock or spalls; 
b) To receive and transfer loads to the rib sets; 


c) To provide a convenient surface against which to 
block in case it is not convenient to block directly 
against the rib, because of irregular overbreak; 


26 


d) To provide a surface against which to place back 
packing; 

e) To serve as an outside form for concrete lining, if 
concrete is not to be poured against the rocks; and 


f) To divert water, and to prevent leaching and 
honey-combing of concrete. 


12.7.9.2 Lagging may be either of steel, precast 
concrete or timber. Steel laggings may be made out 
of channels, beams, beams and plates and liner plates 
(see Fig. 27 and 28). Liner plates, which are pressed 
steel panels may also be used with or without ribs 
depending upon the rock conditions. It is recommended 
that use of timber in underground work should be 
minimized as far as practicable, since timber once fixed 
can be rarely removed safely and is likely to deteriorate 
and prove to be a source of weakness. 


12.7.9.3 The spacing of lags shall be closest at the 
crown, increasing down to spring line. On the side only 
an occasional lag should be used, if necessary. Close 
lagging should be employed where rock conditions 
make it necessary. 


12.7.10 Packing 


The function and type of packing depends on the rock 
condition. In dry tunnels through jointed rock, packing 
is only used to fill large cavities produced by excessive 
overbreak. In broken, crushed or decomposed rock 
it serves to transfer the rock load to the lags, thereby 
acting as a substitute for excessive blocking. In 
squeezing rock it provides continuous contact through 
the laggings with the rib sets. In jointed water-bearing 
rock it has primarily the function of a drain. 


15 15026 (Раг 1) : 2022 


< / 


e JJ ILING, 


SPREADER 


FIG. 26 SPREADER DETAILS 


s 


CHANNEL 


I- SECTION 
SECTION 


BEAM AND 
PLATE 
LAGGING 


AAA we 


ў 
š 
5 


<< 
rene ss Sho 


Fic. 27 ТҮРЕ$ OF LAGGING 


Fic. 28 LINER PLATE 


27 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


12.7.11 Dry Packing 


Dry pack, which usually consists of tunnel spoil (hard) 
shovelled or hand packed into the space between the 
lagging and the rock, is recommended for use only 
where excessive rock loads are not likely to develop. 


It should be placed simultaneously with the erection 
of the lagging. Starting at the lowest point, a few lags 
should be placed and tunnel spoil (hard) shovelled in 
behind. This procedure should be carried up to the 
crown at which point it is necessary to pack endwise. 


12.7.12 Concrete Packing 


It is recommended for use where considerable 
rock loads are anticipated. However, its use is not 
recommended in case the tunnel supports are designed 
as yielding supports. Concrete packing may be 
M 10 concrete conforming to IS 456. It may be placed 
by manual labour or by pneumatic placer to the extent 
possible. Where excessive loads are anticipated, 
concrete packing should start from the inner flanges 
of the steel support so as to embed the whole steel 
supports in concrete. In such cases it is recommended 
that precast concrete may be used as additional lagging 
between two adjacent ribs so as to serve the purpose of 
formwork. 


12.8 Factors Determining Spacing and Layout of 
Supports 


12.8.1 The strength and spacing of rib system shall be 
determined by rock load. For a given rock load and 
cross-section of tunnel, the spacing between the ribs 
shall be worked out. The spacing of the ribs should be 
so chosen that the sum of the cost of ribs and lagging 
15 minimum. For preliminary designs in ordinary rocks 
the depth or rib section may be taken as 60 mm to 
75 mm for every 3 m of bore diameter with ribs spaced 
at about 1.2 m for moderate loads, 0.6 m to 1.0 m for 
heavy loads and 1.6 m for very light loads. Whether the 
ribs shall be of two or more pieces will depend on the 
lengths of the structural steel members available. 


12.8.2 For junctions, plugs and control chamber, etc, 
supports shall be designed to suit special features of the 
work and its construction procedures. 


12.8.3 Concrete blocks of suitable size and thickness 
may be provided, if necessary, below the vertical lags 
to provide adequate bearing area to the rib. 


12.8.4 In tunnels, where supports are not to be used 
as reinforcement, they may be installed plumb or 
perpendicular to the axis of the tunnel depending on 
tunnel slope and as found convenient. However, where 


28 


supports are to be used as reinforcement in pressure 
tunnels, they may be installed at right angles to the 
tunnel axis, if practicable. 


12.8.5 For speedy erection of supports, it is suggested 
to: 


a) design support system with a minimum number of 
individual members, consistent with construction 
convenience; 


b) design the joints with utmost simplicity and with 
minimum number of bolts; and 


с) check clearances for bolt and wrench, to be used 
at site, during fabrication of the members so 
that loss of time during support erecting can be 
minimized. 


12.9 Design 
12.9.1 General 


The design of steel components for tunnel supports 
shall generally conform to IS 800. 


12.9.2 Stresses 


Permissible stress in steel shall be in accordance with 
IS 800. 


12.9.3 Ribs 


Rock load may be assumed to be transmitted to the ribs 
at blocking points, each blocking point carrying the load 
of the mass of rock bounded by four planes, namely, the 
longitudinal planes passing through midpoints between 
the blocks and transverse planes passing through 
mid-points between the ribs to a height equal to the 
acting rock load. The blocking points may be assumed 
to be held in equilibrium by forces acting on it in the 
same manner as panel points in a truss. Values of 
thrust in the rib may be computed by drawing the force 
polygon. Ribs shall be designed for the thrust thus 
computed taking into account the eccentricity of this 
thrust with reference to the rise of the arc between the 
blocking points which will cause flexural stresses in 
addition to direct stresses. 


12.9.4 Tie Rods 


Tie rods are threaded 15 m to 20 m rods, which are 
used to hold and maintain spacing between adjacent 
steel ribs. [see also IS 5878 (Part 4)]. 


12.9.5 Lagging 


Lagging between steel ribs for tunnel support may be 
designed for the load of rock mass as shown in Fig. 29 
[see also IS 5878 (Part 4)]. 


15 15026 (Раг 1) : 2022 


ROCK PROFILE IF NO 


LAGGING PROVIDED 


LOAD FOR 
LAGGING 
DESIGN 


Fic. 29 LOADING DIAGRAM FOR LAGGING 


12.9.6 Liner Plates 


Where only liner plates are used for support their 
cross sectional area and their Joints shall be designed 
to transmit the thrust (see 12.9.3). It shall be ensured 
that liner plates are thoroughly in contact with the ribs 
so that passive resistance is developed and no bending 
moments are induced. For tunnels with more than 3 m 
diameter liner plates may be reinforced by I-beams. 
Where liner plates do not form a ring and are used in 
top half ribs, they shall be designed as lagging [see also 
IS 5878 (Part 4)]. The thickness of liner plates may 
vary from 5 mm to 10 mm depending upon the size of 
bore and loads encountered. The diameter of bolts may 
vary from 12 mm to 15 mm. 


12.9.7 Joints 


Butt joints should be preferred to spliced joints. In soft 
grounds and poor rock, welding of joints in the field 
should be avoided as far as possible. 


13 GROUTING 


13.1 General 


Grouting is carried out to fill discontinuities in the rock 
by a suitable material so as to improve the stability 
of the tunnel roof or to reduce its permeability or to 
improve the properties of the rock. Grouting is also 
necessary to ensure proper contact of rock face of the 
roof with the lining. In such cases the grouting may be 
done directly between the two surfaces or the process 
of grouting may be used to fill the voids in the rubble 
packing where used. All the three types of grouting may 
not be required in all cases. The grouting procedures 
should aim at satisfying the design requirements 
economically and in conformity with the construction 


29 


schedules. The basic design requirement generally 
involve the following: 


a) Filling the voids, and cavities between the concrete 
lining and/or rock and/or between the concrete and 
steel liner; 


b) Strengthening the rocks around the bore by filling 
up the joints in the rock system; 


ር) Strengthening the rock shattered around the bore; 


d) Strengthening the rock prior to excavation by 
filling the joints with cementing material and thus 
improving its stability; and 

e) Closing water bearing passages to prevent the flow 
of water into the tunnel and/or to concentrate the 
area of seepage into a channel from where it can be 
easily drained out. 


13.2 Before drawing up the specifications for grouting, 
the design requirements shall be established. In general 
for all underground structures, grouting is a universal 
requirement for all concrete lined tunnels. Design 
requirements are only to establish Ше maximum 
allowable pressure at which this grouting 15 to be carried 
out and the zone in the cross-section and the spacing 
of grout holes, both in the direction of the tunnel. For 
consolidation grouting, the design requirement to be 
established is the thickness ofthe rock stratum around the 
bore that is to be strengthened and made impermeable, 
the pressure and the spacing pattern of holes. This will 
determine the depth to be grouted. 


13.3 For tunnels, the commonly used procedures are 
to continue grouting to refusal at the design pressure in 
each hole or to interrupt the grouting if there is heavy 
intake with little or no pressure build up, indicating very 
open structures and escape of grout over a long distance. 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


13.3.1 Pattern, Depth апа Arrangement of Holes 
13.3.1.1 Backfill or contact grouting 


13.3.1.1.1 The purpose of backfill grouting 15 to fill the 
space left unfilled with concrete between the concrete 
lining and the rock surface in the arch portion of any 
tunnel or cavity due to shrinkage of concrete. 


13.3.1.1.2 Backfill grouting should be done after the 
concrete in lining has gained strength. The period of 
waiting may be from 21 days to 28 days. In case of 
precast lining segments this restriction of waiting will 
not apply and the grouting may be done immediately 
after the segments are erected. 


13.3.1.1.3 Backfill grouting is limited to the arch 
portion of a tunnel or cavity and is not required in case 
shaft of the concrete is poured in a concrete ring. 


13.3.1.1.4 The grout holes at the crown should be 
placed 5? to 10? from the crown, alternately to the left 
and right of the crown. In addition to the crown hole 
there shall be two more holes, one on either side of the 
crown. These holes will be 90? apart and will be located 
such that one of these two holes is at 22.5? from the 
crown alternately on the right and left of the crown. 
Such sections shall be, normally, 3 m apart. The exact 
location of the holes may be varied or additional holes 
provided depending upon the actual excavation profile 
at any section. The exact spacing of sections may also 
be varied on similar considerations. It should, however, 
be also adjusted to suit the length of the arch shutter 
used in such a way that there is no hole at the joint and 
the normal pattern of holes is more or less uniform in 
the shutter length. 


13.3.1.1.5 In the case of circular or horse-shoe tunnels, 
in addition to these holes, two holes (one on either 
side), located roughly at 45? on either side of the invert 
should be used. The location should be such that the 
holes are about 450 mm to 600 mm, above the junction 
of the invert and side walls or overt. 


13.3.1.1.6 The mortar used for backfill grout shall 
normally consist of cement, sand and water mixed in 
the proportion of 1 : 1 : 1 by weight. It may, however, 
be suitably modified if conditions so warrant. The size 
and grading of sand should be determined for each job 
by actual experimentation as it would depend on the 
type of sand and equipment available. 


13.3.1.1.7 Backfill grouting should normally be done at 
a pressure of 0.2 N/mm". 


13.3.1.2 Contact grouting 


13.3.1.2.1 The aim of contact grouting 15 to fully pack 
the space between the concrete lining and the rock 
surface or the space between the steel liner and concrete 


30 


lining caused by shrinkage or left unfilled even after 
backfill grouting. This is required for fulfilling the 
design assumption of the rock/concrete taking part 
of the load along with the lining and to prevent local 
accumulation of water, if any, and building up local 
pressure. 


13.3.1.2.2 Contact grouting should be done after the 
concrete lining has gained strength to withstand the 
pressure and shrinkage, if any has taken place. The 
usual minimum period of 25 days to 28 days of waiting 
should be allowed. 


13.3.1.2.3 The contact grouting should be limited to 
only the top arch (90? on either side of the crown) of 
tunnels. In case of vertical shafts and steel liner, contact 
grouting should be done along the full periphery. In 
case of steel liners, the grouting should be done usually 
at specific points as recommended in IS 5878 (Part 6). 


13.3.1.2.4 The holes at the crown shall be placed 5? to 
10? from the crown, being alternately to the left and 
right of the crown. In addition to the crown hole, there 
shall be two more holes one on either side of the crown 
in each section. These holes will be 90? apart and will 
be located such that one of the two holes is at 22.5? 
from the crown, being alternately on the right and left 
of the crown. Such holes shall normally be 3 m apart. 


13.3.1.2.5 In case of circular or horse-shoe tunnels, 
in addition to these holes, two holes (one on either 
side), located roughly at 45? on either side of the invert 
should be used. The location should be such that the 
holes are about 450 mm to 600 mm above the junction 
of the invert and arch. 


13.3.1.2.6 The depth of holes for contact grouting shall 
be such that at each location, the holes extend 300 mm 
beyond the concrete lining into rock. 


13.3.1.3 Consolidation grouting 


13.3.1.3.1 The aim of consolidation grouting is to fill 
up the joints and discontinuities in the rock up to the 
desired depth. 


13.3.1.3.2 Consolidation grouting shall always be done 
after the backfill grouting is completed in a length of at 
least 60 m ahead of the point of consolidation grouting. 


13.3.1.3.3 Consolidation grouting should be usually 
done all round the bore, and for a uniform radial distance 
from the finished concrete face. The extent of grouted 
rock mass should be determined by the designer based 
on the design of the concrete lining and the extent to 
which cracks are assumed to extend into rock when 
the lining is stressed by internal pressure. Usually, 
the depth should be between 0.75D to D where D is 
the finished diameter of the tunnel, except in special 
reaches where it could be more. 


13.3.1.3.4 The pattern of grout holes for consolidation 
may be a set of holes in one vertical plane, such a plane 
being called the grout plane. The spacing of the grout 
planes will depend upon the structural formation of 
rock and the travel of grout at the specified pressure. 
The exact spacing as in the case of contact grouting 
should also be adjusted in the field to suit the length of 
the shutter used for concreting. In this plane the number 
of holes may normally be 4 for small size tunnels and 
6 for large size tunnels. The arrangement should be 
staggered їп alternate grout planes, by about half the 
spacing between the holes along the periphery in the 
plane. In special locations the number of holes may 
be increased. The top three holes in grout pattern may 
be used for both backfill, contact and consolidation 
grouting. 


13.3.1.3.5 Around shafts and large opening like 
powerhouse, the grout pattern will be similar, but 
the number of holes in the plane may be increased 
depending on the size, but the spacing should generally 
exceed the depth of the hole. 


13.3.1.3.6 Contact grouting would not generally be 
necessary where consolidation grouting is to be done. 
However, it should be decided by actual contact 
grouting in jump holes after consolidation grouting. 


13.3.1.3.7 Depending upon the rock formations and the 
grout intake, the consolidation grouting should be done 
in one or more stages with increasing pressures. 


13.3.1.3.8 Maximum grout pressure should not 
normally exceed twice the design load on lining or 
supporting systems as the case may be. 


13.3.1.4 Permeation grouting 


13.3.1.4.1 The aim of рге-ехсауайоп permeation 
grouting is to reduce water ingress and hydraulic 
conductivity of rock mass surrounding tunnel wall by 
permeation of suitable grout under pressure through 
rock mass/fractures and creating a grout envelope. 
Such type of grouting is usually done ahead of tunnel 
face before tunnel excavation. 


13.3.1.4.2 The direction and length of grout holes 
15 fixed based on orientation and location of major 
rock fractures to cross maximum permeable features. 
Number of grout holes and grout take usually depend 
on the grouting stage, tunnel size and targeted ingress 
limit. 


13.3.1.4.3 When tunnel strata permit, length of the 
grout holes should be kept 15 m to 20 m ahead of 
tunnel face, so that atleast 5 m thick grouted envelope is 
available even after three to four rounds of excavation. 
The overlap distance between subsequent grout fans 
shall be 5 m or more. 


31 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


13.3.1.4.4 Lookout radial distance between end of each 
hole and to be excavated tunnel profile should be kept 
more than adopted rock bolt length. 


13.3.1.4.5 The grouting material should depend on 
aperture of features, quantum of ingress and targeted 
ingress value. For smaller openings where Ordinary 
Portland cement does not permeate, micro-fine cement 
[see IS 16993] should be used in grout mix. Sand is not 
used for permeation grouting. 


13.3.1.4.6 Grouting should be done with stable grout 
with suitable bleeding, viscosity, strength and setting 
time [see IS 16993]. Cement should be mixed in a high 
shear vane mixer of more than 1 400 RPM, with varying 
water cement ratio and superplasticizer depending 
on desired grout properties and grout acceptability by 
rockmass/fractures to be permeated. 


13.3.1.4.7 The grouting pressure should be sufficiently 
higher than the hydrostatic pressure to overcome the 
water ingress. Grouting should be started from holes 
near invert and gradually proceed towards side walls 
and then to crown. 


13.3.1.4.8 Suitable stop criterion for deciding grouting 
of holes should be kept depending on project restriction 
for allowable water ingress or volume of grout take or 
achievement of required grouting pressure. 


13.4 Pressure to be Used for Grouting 


13.4.1 The pressures to be used for grouting will depend 
on the rock characteristics, the design requirements 
and the rock cover. With adequate rock cover (more 
than 3 times the diameter of the tunnel), the other 
two will govern. For backfill grouting, the maximum 
recommended pressure is 0.5 N/mm’. For consolidation 
grouting, a maximum pressure of 0.7 N/mm? is 
normally recommended but this may be increased up to 
2.0 N/mm? in special cases provided that there is 
adequate cover and the joints in the rock are not likely 
to open up by this pressure. This pressure can be applied 
from inside the rock and not close to the concrete lining. 


13.4.2 The pressure gauge should be watched constantly 
so that the pressure on the grout 15 regulated as long as 
grouting is in progress. Any desired increase or decrease 
in the grouting pressure is obtained by changing the 
speed of the grout pump. When the grout in the supply 
line becomes slugging, the grout-hole valve should be 
closed and the blow off valve opened so that the supply 
line may flush or washed. 


13.5 Testing for Efficacy of Grouting 


This testing may be done by drilling the holes in 
between the grout planes and by testing water intake 
in these test holes. If this is compared with the water 
test made before the grouting, this water will give an 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


indication of the efficacy of grouting. Further grouting 
of this test hole and intake in this hole will give 
further indications. It is only after these tests that the 
engineer-in-charge may decide on increasing the 
number of grout planes, if required. 


13.6 Capacity of Grouted Arch 


The capacity of grouted arch is given as: 


24,1, 
ዲዴ E 
gt 
where 
4,- uniaxial compressive strength of grouted rock 
~ mass (іп t/m?), 
1„ = thickness of grouted arch (in m), 
B — size of opening (in m), 
F „= mobilization factor of grouted arch 
= 95 pollo ,and 
— ultimate support pressure in roof of tunnel 
(in t/m?). 


13.7 In case of water-charged rock mass or post 
construction saturation of rock mass, heavy support 
pressure and seepage pressure may develop on the 
concrete lining or shotcrete lining. The extra high 
support pressures/seepage pressures may be taken care 
off by grouted arch. 


14 DESIGN OF INTEGRATED SUPPORT 
SYSTEM 


14.1 General 


14.1.1 A semi-empirical approach is used to determine 
the capacity of support system consisting of shotcrete, 
reinforced rock arch, steel rib and grouted arch. In 
Fig. 30, the dotted line shows the effective width, /, of 
the reinforced rock arch. The load carrying capacity of 
the reinforced rock arch is dependent on the minimum 
uniaxial compressive strength ofthe reinforced rock arch. 


14.1.2 Figure 30 shows that the total support pressure 
(Р шг + U) will be equal to the sum of capacities of 
shotcrete, reinforced rock arch, steel rib and grouted 
arch. Simple hoop action is assumed as illustrated in 
Fig. 30. The arch subtends an angle of 20 at its centre 
which is about 90? for tunnels. Ultimate support 
pressure — Total capacity of support system, which is 
given by 


(и+ P.) =P, + Rot +P, +P, 
= 24.2 ES 2653 + 2444, Ë В, ssi (14) 
FB ЕВ ЕВ SB 
where 


P," Support pressure and is the seepage water 
pressure. 


32 


NOTE — In the above equation, it is assumed that shotcrete 
will shear along a length of arch approximately equal to 
(Е.В), where all the notations in above equation have the 


same meaning as described earlier. 


14.1.3 The following trends have been obtained: 


a) Pre-tensioned bolt is more effective in good rock 
conditions. The efficiency of pre-tensioned bolt 
decreased slightly for poor rocks due to creep and 
loss of tension. 


b 


— 


The full-column-grouted-untensioned anchors 
are more effective in poor rock conditions than 
in good rock conditions. The reason may be that 
the anchors are subjected to large radial strains 
in poor rock masses leading to more tension 
induced in anchors. Figure 31 illustrates better 
performance of grouted anchors. 


14.2 Application 
Approach 


of Semi-Empirical Design 


14.2.1 For tunnels located near faults/thrusts (with 
plastic gauge) in seismic areas, the ultimate support 
pressures may be increased by about 25 percent to 
account for accumulated strain in the rock mass along 
the fault. If the tunnel is away from the fault by 2B, the 
seismic effect 15 negligible. 


14.2.2 The support pressure, due to squeezing out 
of gouge from the shear zone, may be estimated by 
applying Terzaghi’s theory of arching which indicates 
that the support pressure, with gouge, will increase 
the width of the shear zone. As such, the treatment of 
shear zone is essential to bear the high support pressure 
as shown in Fig. 5. However, in this shear zone 
(say « 250 mm), the support pressure is very small 
and hence, there is no need for special shear zone 
treatment (see 8.1). 


14.2.3 The capacity of shotcrete and reinforced 
rock arch is calculated by trial and error. The design 
parameters are selected, so that ultimate pressure is 
equal to the design capacity. If support pressure is 
high, say more than 0.5 N/mm’, steel ribs may be used 
and embedded in shotcrete. The spacing of steel ribs 
may be estimated until equation (12) is satisfied. The 
design philosophy 15 illustrated in Fig. 32. In case 
of water charged rock mass, experience shows that 
design tables give useful parameters as they neglect 
the seepage pressure. Equation (14) may then be used 
to find out the extent up to which rock mass should 
be grouted. Grouting is possible generally where thick 
shotcrete has been provided to take high grouting 
pressure. 


14.2.4 In very poor rock conditions, assumptions are 
generally invalid. Hence, special specifications need 
to be followed to treat thick shear zones, rock burst 
conditions and highly squeezing conditions. 


15 15026 (Раг 1) : 2022 


Fic. 30 CAPACITY OF REINFORCED ROCK ARCH 


- ጫኤ 
wr ጐዴ 
” “ 
ሠ ` 
7 ` 
/ ኣ 
/ \ 

— | SHOTCRETE 

| 

| 
| ROCK BOLT 
LENGTH -lw 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
ያማ GROUND ARCH 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


аа 


Fic. 31 DESIGN OF WALL REINFORCEMENT OF CAVERN 


33 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


REINFORCED ROCK ARCH 


---- 


32А NoN-SQUEEZING GROUND 


32C MODERATELY SQUEEZING GROUND 


REINFORCED ROCK FRAME 


---- 


32D MODERATELY SQUEEZING GROUND 


Ес. 32 DESIGN PHILOSOPHY OF ROCK REINFORCEMENT IN TUNNELING 


14.2.5 In case of water and power tunnels, seepage 
pressure may be assumed equal to the internal water 
pressure and the worst case is when the tunnel is empty 
and seepage water pressure acts on the shotcrete lining. 
If required, rock mass may be grouted to take high 
support and seepage pressure, alternatively, concrete 
lining may be designed according to the design criteria. 


14.3 Tunnel Through Intra Thrust Zone 


In the Himalayas, the tunnels have to pass through 
intra thrust zone in some complex geological and 
tectonic situations. The faults and thrusts are subjected 


34 


to slip over a long period of time due to very slow 
tectonic movement of the Indian Plate with respect 
to the Chinese Plate. It is therefore essential to build 
a segmented concrete lining so that segments of the 
concrete lining can slip with respect to each other with 
time. The design decision should be taken on the basis 
of instrumentation plate within the intra thrust zone. 


14.4 Experience in Poor Rock Conditions 


14.4.1 Fibre reinforced shotcrete is very successful in 
weak rock masses. The main advantage is that lesser 
thickness of fibre reinforced shotcrete is needed. No 


welded mesh is required to reinforce shotcrete. Its 
rebound is less due to fibres, provided shotcrete is 
graded properly and sprayed properly. 


14.4.2 It is recommended that the mesh should not be 
raised where even surface of tunnel is not available due 
to over break, provided shotcreting is used. However, 
thickness of shotcrete should be increased by 10 mm. 


15 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS 


15.1 For treatment of shear zone, crossed rock 
anchors/bolts should be provided across shear zones. 
Further, the gouge should be cleaned to the desired 
extent, anchors are provided and connected to welded 
mesh. Final, dental shotcrete is back filled. In wide 
shear zone, reinforcement in shotcrete is also placed 
to withstand high support pressure. Anchors should 
be inclined according to the dip of shear zone to 
stop squeezing of gouge and thereby stabilize the 
deformations. 


15.2 In case of steel ribs in large tunnels and caverns, 
haunches should be strengthened by additional anchors 
to withstand heavy thrust due to the ribs. 


15.3 In case of poor rock mass, spiling bolts (inclined 
towards tunnels face) should be installed before blasting 
to increase the stand-up time of tunnel. Roof shotcrete 
is then sprayed on roof. Then spiling bolts are installed. 
In the final cycle, roof bolts are installed. 


15.4 In case of argillaceous rocks and swelling rocks 
where its bond with shotcrete is poor, thickness of 
shotcrete may be increased by about 30 percent. 


15.5 In reaches of very poor rock masses, steel ribs 
should be installed and embedded in shotcrete to 
withstand high support pressures. 


15.6 In rock burst prone reaches, resin anchors and 
fibre reinforced shotcrete should be used to increase 
ductility of support system and to convert brittle mode 
of failure into the ductile mode of failure. Stress release 
holes and stress relief blasting can also be used to 
release/minimize stresses. 


35 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


15.7 In highly squeezing ground condition (Н> 350 Q!5 
m and J/J,, < 1/2, where J is joint roughness number 
and J is joint alteration number [see IS 13365 (Part 2)] 
steel ribs with struts should be used when shotcrete 
fails repeatedly in spite of more layers. With steel ribs, 
excavation by force-poling is easily done by pushing 
steel rods into the tunnel face and welding other ends 
to ribs. Floor heaving can be prevented by rock bolting 
of floor. Some delay, but less stand-up time is necessary 
to release the strain energy of the broken zone. Smaller 
blast holes (approximately 1 m) will also be of help. 
Instrumentation of broken zone is needed. It should 
be ensured that the tunnel closure is arrested before it 
reaches the 5 percent of the width of the tunnel. 


15.8 In case of unstable portal, horizontal anchors of 
equal length should be provided inside the cut slope, so 
that it acts as a reinforced rock breast wall. 


15.9 In case of deep and long tunnels in complex 
geological conditions, probe hole of 20 m length should 
be drilled inside the tunnel face to get accurate picture 
of geological conditions in advance of tunnelling. The 
probe hole will also dissipate seepage pressure slowly 
in the water charged rock mass which 15 likely to be 
punctured during tunnelling. This will also avoid flash 
floods soon after blasting and consequent loss of life 
and support system. 


15.10 Concrete lining for water/pressure tunnels should 
be laid far away from the tunnel face where the broken 
zone is stabilized, that is about four times the radius of 
broken zone. The concrete lining should be segmented 
within active thrust zone to allow relative movement 
along the faults/thrust. 


15.11 Grouting of long bolts is sometimes not done 
satisfactorily due to the difficulty of supervision 
and expanding agent (aluminium powder) is seldom 
added. So pull out tests should be conducted on at least 
2 percent bolts to check the quality of bolts. If required 
extra bolting should be done to strengthen the support 
system. 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


АММЕХА 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 
Rock Mechanics Sectional Committee, CED 48 


Organization 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 
AIMIL Ltd, New Delhi 


Amberg Engineering AG India Private Limited, 
Gurugram 


Border Roads Organisation, New Delhi 


Central Board of Irrigation and Power, New Delhi 
Central Soil and Materials Research Station, 
New Delhi 
Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune 
Central Water Commission, New Delhi 
CSIR-Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CSIR-Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, 
Dhanbad 
CSIR-Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
Engineers India Ltd, New Delhi 
Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 


Indian Institute of Technology-ISM, Dhanbad 


Indian Society for Rock Mechanics and Tunnelling, 
New Delhi 


Irrigation Research Institute, Roorkee 
National Disaster Management Authority, New Delhi 
National Highways and Infrastructure Development 


Corporation Limited, New Delhi 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dn N. К. SAMADHIYA (Chairman) 
SHRI AKHIL RAJ 


SHRI KRIPAL CHOUDHARY 
SHRI RAKESH PANDITA (Alternate) 


Lr Cor ANIL RAJ 


SHRI G. P. PATEL 
SHRI UDAY CHANDER (Alternate) 


SHRI HARI ОБУ 
SHRI МАНАВІЕ DIXIT (Alternate) 


SHRI RIZWAN ALI 
DR S. A. BURELE (Alternate) 


MEMBER (D & R) 
CHIEF ENGINEER, DESIGN (NW & S) (Alternate) 


DR SHANTANU SARKAR 
SHRI KOUSHIK PANDIT (Alternate) 


Dr J. K. MoHNOT 
Dr R. D. DwivEpi (Alternate) 


DR PANKAJ GUPTA 
SHRI R. K. PANIGRAHI (Alternate) 


DR ALTAF USMANI 
SHRI SAIKAT PAL (Alternate) 


SHRI SANTOSH KUMAR TRIPATHI 
SHRI D. P. DANGWAL (Alternate) 


ProF R. AYOTHIRAMAN 
Рков PRASHANTH VANGLA (Alternate) 


DR MAHENDRA SINGH 
Dn PRITI MAHESHWARI (Alternate) 
PROF Sumit SEN (Young Professional) 


PROF А. K. MISHRA 
Dn R. К. SINHA (Alternate) 


Dr C. 5. KHOKHAR 


SHRI DINESH CHANDRA 
SHRI SHANKAR KUMAR SAHA (Alternate) 


J S (MITIGATION) 
Dr RAVINDER SINGH (Alternate) 


SHRI ASHOK KUMAR /НА 


REPRESENTATIVE 


36 


Organization 


National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Ltd, 
Faridabad 


National Institute of Rock Mechanics, Bengaluru 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
Rail Vikas Nigam Ltd, New Delhi 


Reliance Industries Limited, Mumbai 
RITES Ltd, Gurugram 


THDC India Limited, Rishikesh 


In Personal Capacity,( Jal Vidyut Apts, Sector 21-C, 
Faridabad - 121001, Haryana) 


In Personal Capacity, (С-1004, Park View City-2, 
Sector-49, Gurugram) 


In Personal Capacity, (Flat No. 4123, Tower 4, ACE 
Golfshire, Sector-150, Noida) 

In Personal Capacity, (4-125. Prodhyagiki Apartment, 
Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi) 


In Personal Capacity, (Naimex House, A-8, Mohan 
Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, 
New Delhi - 110044) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 15026 (Part 1) : 2022 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAJESH KUMAR 
SHRI AJAY KUMAR VERMA (Alternate 1) 
SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR GARNAYAK (Alternate 11) 


Dr A. RAJAN BABU 
SHRI G. GOPINATH (Alternate) 


SHRI N. К. JAIN 
SHRI PRAKASH Rawat (Alternate) 


SHRI SUMIT JAIN 
SHRI VIJAY DANGWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI ABHISHEK SAMPATRAO BHOSALE 


SHRIMATI JYOTSNA DIXIT 
SHRI SANDEEP SINGH NIRMAL (Alternate) 
SHRI AHMED $нА7. (Young Professional) 


Suri T. S. ROUTELA 
SHRI SAMRAT MUKHERJEE (Alternate) 
SHRI IMRAN SAYEED 
DR MANOJ VERMAN 
SHRI R. K. GOEL 


DR RAJBAL SINGH 


SHRI SHARIQUE KHAN 


SHRI ARUNKUMAR S., SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (CIVIL ENGINEERING) 


[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL (Ex-Officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


DR MANoJ KUMAR RAJAK 
SCIENTIST ‘D’ (CIVIL ENGINEERING), BIS 


37 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Асі, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: СЕР 48 (17934). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central : 601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8^ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : ፻101 No. 4-А, Sector 27-В, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : С.І.Т. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road Хо.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


