dia EI IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2020) 


Frater oars wae — feonfrdest 


WT 4 Wad Waa 


Construction Project Management — 
Guidelines 


Part 4 Quality Management 


ICS 03.100.30 


© BIS 2015 


dia AM pd 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HM “ad, 9 Fags WHC AMT, ae feect-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


November 2015 Price Group 7 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Part 4) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the 
Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee had been approved by the 
Civil Engineering Division Council. 


A construction project is an endeavour undertaken by a project team on behalf of owner/client to create and built 
facility suited to the defined functional stated or specified objectives. From inception to commissioning, the 
project goes through various distinct stages leading to progressive achievement of project objectives. Each stage 
involves specific inputs, processes (both technical and managerial) and deliverables. Typically, the life cycle of a 
project from inception to completion involves the following stages: 


a) Project appraisal — Inception, feasibility and strategic planning; 

b) Project development — Project brief development, planning and design, finalization of proposals, 
procurement strategy, construction documentation including tender drawings, construction drawings, 
specifications, cost estimates, bills of quantities, procurement documents; 


c) Planning for construction — Sequencing of project components, planning tools, resource planning and 
time cost trade off. 


d) Tender action — Open competitive bidding/pre-qualification of agencies, issue of tender documents, 
evaluation of bids, negotiation if required and award of work; 


e) Construction — Execution, monitoring, control, work acceptance; and 


f) Commissioning and handing over — Contractual closeout, financial closeout, defect liability 
commencement, facility handing over. 


The distinct features of a construction project include the temporary nature of the project team involved, the 
evolutionary process of the project deliverables during project development stages and the unique output as the 
built facility. As a result of these features, unless there is efficient and effective project management, a construction 
project is faced with challenges of uncertainties leading to time over-runs, cost over-runs, changes in project 
parameters, loss of quality and inability to meet the functional objectives. While technical soundness of a proposal 
is an important aspect of a construction project, the management aspects, which involve techno-legal, financial 
and other issues, have also a significant role in the success of a project. Therefore, management functions and 
technical processes in a construction project need to be integrated towards achieving project objectives. Top 
management commitment plays an important role in harmoniously achieving these project objectives. In some of 
the public domain projects, it may be necessary to share relevant information with public at large through 
appropriate means. 


To provide necessary guidance on effective construction project management, a series of standards are being 
developed as part of IS 15883 “Guidelines for Construction Project Management’. Part 1 General, of the standard 
since published as IS 15883 (Part 1) : 2009, covers general aspects of overall construction project management. 
This has been followed by publication of other parts as follows: 


Part 2 : 2013 Time management 

Part 3 : 2015 Cost management 

Part 5 : 2013 Health and safety management 
Part 6 : 2015 Scope management 

Part 8 : 2015 Risk management 


The other parts of the standard are under formulation which will cover functions such as procurement management, 
communication management, human resource management, sustainability management and integration 
management. 


(Continued to Third Cover) 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


Indian Standard 


CONSTRUCTION PROJECT MANAGEMENT — 
GUIDELINES 
PART 4 QUALITY MANAGEMENT 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard (Part 4) covers guidelines for quality 
management aspects of construction project 
management. 


1.2 The quality management aspects during the project 
formulation and appraisal stage of the project are not 
covered in this standard. The scope of this standard, 
therefore, covers the stages subsequent to the stage of 
approval (when a decision to implement the project 
including its financing is taken) till commissioning and 
handing over of the project. 


1.3 The provisions of this standard are to be read in 
conjunction with IS 15883 (Part 1). 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards given below contain provisions, which, 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to revision, 
and parties to agreements based on this standard are 
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the 
most recent editions of the standards indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
10708 : 1985 Guide for the analysis of quality costs 
(first revision) 
15883 Guidelines for construction project 
management 
(Part 1): 2009 General 
(Part 2): 2013 Time management 
(Part 3) : 2015 Cost management 
(Part 8): 2015 Risk management 
IS/ISO 9000: Quality management systems — 
2005 Fundamentals and vocabulary (third 


revision) 

Quality management systems — 
Guidelines for quality plans 
(first revision) 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the definitions given 
in IS/ISO 9000 shall apply. 


4 GENERAL 


IS/ISO 10005 : 
2005 


4.1 Need for Quality Management 


4.1.1 Every construction project has specific quality 


requirements which need to be met through appropriate 
processes. Quality management is necessary to ensure 
that a construction work is able to achieve its desired 
life span with least maintenance. It is required to 
provide a framework for decision making across all 
such processes through the responsibilities discharged 
within the organization and functions carried out in 
accordance with the requirements of project 
specifications, design details and contractual 
obligations. Quality management processes are 
systematically carried out during various stages of 
project to ensure conformance to the specified 
requirements. 


4.1.2 Quality requirements of construction processes 
are developed based on relevant project specific 
requirements and standards. Quality management 
encompasses quality systems framework, construction 
processes and responsibilities at performer, managerial 
and policy levels within the organization. 


4.2 Holistic View of Quality Management: Time, 
Cost and Quality Integration 


4.2.1 Quality management processes may be grouped 
under the following stages of project: 


a) Pre-construction stage: 
1) Project development, 
2) Planning for construction, and 
3) Tender action. 
b) Construction stage. 
c) Commissioning and handing over stage. 


4.2.2 While the goal of this standard is to provide 
guidelines for guality management, the same needs to 
be viewed holistically and shall be considered along 
with other functions of construction project 
management such as cost, time, safety, Scope, etc. 


4.2.3 For guality to be ensured in a consistent manner 
in construction projects, it is essential that all concerned 
involved with the projects are guality conscious, fully 
aware of the guality reguirements to be achieved and 
are able to manage these projects effectively and 
efficiently to meet the objective of aspects of guality, 
apart from time, cost, etc. 


4.2.4 Quality in a project is the totality of all its 
characteristics, be it materials or workmanship or 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


construction technology including mechanization. It 
shall involve appropriate selection and integration of 
these available inputs, also relating them with 
management of other functions like time and cost. 
Efficiency and quality of workmanship should be 
effectively planned to meet the project objective which 
requires need based upgrading of the technical skills 
at working level along with employing value based 
material and technology. 


4.2.5 A set of interrelated quality elements used to 
establish and achieve the objectives of quality includes 
organizational structure, planning activities, 
responsibilities, practices, procedures, processes and 
resources. It includes the activities of the overall 
management function that determine the quality policy, 
objectives and responsibilities, and implement them 
by means such as quality plan, quality control, quality 
assurance, etc within the quality system. 


4.3 Organization Structure for Quality 
Management 


4.3.1 Review of Organization Structure 


The organization structure of project team, involving 
design consultants, client and other stakeholders, 
construction agencies and the project management 
teams shall be reviewed to determine nature of 
interfaces and interactions. Considerations may also 
be given to the project delivery models, such as design- 
bid-build; design-build; turn-key; and build, operate 
and transfer. It would be important to ascertain the 
extent and level of involvement of each stakeholder so 
that strategies for participation could be developed for 
the construction stage. 


4.3.2 Quality management related responsibilities are 
delegated within the organization. A typical 
organization structure for quality management for 
design-bid-build model is given in Fig.1. 


4.3.3 To ensure effectiveness, the quality management 
team shall be independent of operative functions. 


4.3.4 Quality Management Structure in Various Stages 
of Construction 


During the stages of a project, activities may be 
undertaken as follows: 


a) Pre-construction — Quality management 
during this stage may be carried out in-house. 
The owner shall establish a quality 
management system. 


b) Construction — This is carried out generally 
through one or more contractors. Each 
contractor may engage sub-contractors, 
although the main contractor remains 
responsible for the overall performance of the 


contract. A typical quality management 
organizational structure of a construction 
agency is included in Fig. 1. In this way, every 
department shall manage the quality of the 
processes pertaining to them. Managing 
quality is the process owner’s responsibility. 
Project and the quality manager shall ensure 
this through audit or other interface. The 
quality manager shall have overall 
responsibility for managing a quality 
management system. 

c) Commissioning and handing over — While 
the construction agency or agencies may hand 
over the project or the concerned component, 
owner may also be involved in commissioning 
and subsequent operation of the project. 


The organizational structure for quality management 
process varies from project to project. On large and 
medium projects, it may be necessary to have a 
separate quality management team for each sub- 
contractor who in turn shall report to quality 
management team of the main construction agency. 
In small sized projects, this role may be merged with 
some other functions. 


4.3.5 Roles, Responsibility and Authority 


Organization should describe role of various 
participants in project, define interfaces, 
communication channels, responsibility delegation and 
authority. The role of project manager and the project 
team members with respect to their responsibilities 
within the organization as well as externally shall be 
delineated in relation to, 


a) owner/client, 

b) vendors and suppliers, 
c) contractor(s), and 

d) customers. 


4.3.5.1 Roles 


Project manager shall have a role in developing the 
project definition; undertaking the process for delivery 
of project within time, cost and quality requirements; 
and project procurement and coordination. 


Project management team shall comprehend role of 
project sponsor in commissioning project team, project 
review and resolution of project conflicts. 


Project management team members shall have a major 
role in performing various functions in project 
management processes. The role with respect to 
coordination shall be specifically highlighted including 
in respect of organizational interfaces with external 
agencies, such as consultants, contractors, suppliers, 
vendors and customers. 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


Owner/Client or his Representative 


Project Manager 


a ee Agency 


Fic.1 TYPICAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE For DESIGN-BID-BUILD MODEL 


4.3.5.2 Responsibilities 


Organization structure shall elaborate responsibilities 
of members of project management team consistent 
with their roles in project management. Responsibilities 
specific to attainment of quality objectives shall be 
defined. 


“Process owner’ responsibilities, wherein individuals 
perform leadership role in decision-making as well as 
coordination/support functions, shall be highlighted for 
the processes that have bearing on quality of the work 
performed. 


4.3.5.3 Authority 


Authority and accountability of individual project team 
members and their system of communication should 
be consistent with their role in overall quality 
objectives. 


4.4 Methods and Processes for Quality Management 


Construction quality management involves the 
following processes: 


a) Preparation of quality policy; 

b) Establishing quality management systems 
including preparation of construction quality 
management documentation and system 
implementation, quality/procedure manual; 

c) Preparation of quality plan; 

d) Management of stakeholder interfaces; 


e) Developing competence through training and 
awareness for quality; 


f) Procurement of supplies and services; 
g) Defining acceptance criteria and tests; 


h) Third party checks/audits for critical activity/ 
material; 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


j) Management of resources in relation to 
guality management; 

k) Integration, clash analysis, coordination and 
validation; 

m) Establishing infrastructure and environment 
for construction quality; 


n) Control of non-conforming works; 
p) Emergencies and disasters; and 
q) Monitoring and continual improvement. 


Quality management processes are developed 
considering the nature of project and performance 
requirements. Accordingly, the details and rigour of 
specific processes is defined. Quality management 
processes need to be defined in both pre-construction 
as well as construction phases of the project. 


5 MANAGEMENT OF QUALITY IN 
DIFFERENT STAGES OF THE PROJECT 


5.1 Pre-construction Phase 


Pre-construction stages include all processes carried 
out prior to undertaking the construction work. 


5.1.1 Project Appraisal 


Project appraisal includes inception, feasibility and 
carrying out strategic planning, which have bearing 
on quality management during subsequent stages. As 
the scope of this standard does not include project 
appraisal stage, the same is not elaborated further. 


5.1.2 Project Development 


Project development includes identification of 
requirements, evolution of design (preparation of 
preliminary designs, drawings, cost estimates, etc), 
development of detailed design proposals and 
preparation of project management proposals. Project 
appraisal stage outcomes are essential inputs for project 
development and the same shall be reviewed before 
undertaking project development processes. 


Following processes are essential during project 
development stage: 


a) Establishing procedures for determination of 
stated and implied needs of the users and other 
stakeholders as inputs; 

b) Defining functional and performance 
requirements; 

c) Identifying statutory and regulatory 
requirements; 

d) Defining scope of project development as 
outcomes; and 

e) Conducting design review, verification and 
validation. 


It is important to define design and development stages 


for effective implementation and monitoring. Project 
management team should ensure that the impact on 
quality due to any scope change is adequately assessed. 


Some of the important processes/studies that have 
bearing on the quality during project development stage 
include: time and cost analysis; project risk assessment; 
and, energy and sustainability studies. Project 
development processes should take design development 
decisions using tools and techniques including cost 
benefit analysis, life cycle analysis, benchmarking, 
quality function deployment, statistical quality analysis, 
and value engineering. 


Objectives of quality management team shall be 
consistent with those responsible for project execution. 
Quality considerations should, therefore, include 
sustainable project requirements and compliance to 
sustainable construction practices. It shall, therefore, 
be the responsibility of construction project 
management organization to identify such 
requirements and ensure that they are met through 
construction practices. 


5.1.3 Planning for Construction 


Construction planning considers aspects of quality 
planning along with other project management 
functions such as time management, cost management, 
resource management, risk management, etc. Reference 
shall be made to IS 15883 (Part 2) for time management, 
IS 15883 (Part 3) for cost management, IS 15883 
(Part 8) for risk management, for detailed procedure 
for planning for construction stage outcomes. Resource 
planning and planning for enabling works have bearing 
on achieving quality objectives. 


5.1.4 Tender Action 


Tender documents shall be clearly and unambiguously 
prepared specifically in regard to all quality 
requirements related to the project. The agencies shall 
be evaluated and selected based on their ability to 
supply product or services in accordance with the 
requirements of project, defined in the tender 
document. 


5.2 Construction Phase 
5.2.1 Requirements of Quality in Construction Stages 


Prior to the start of construction work, detailed planning 
shall be carried out which shall include, 


a) identifying aspects of design that have bearing 
on quality during construction phase; 

b) while planning and scheduling and budgeting 
various activities of the construction, making 
adequate time and cost allowance to carry 


work in accordance with guality standards and 
appropriate specifications; 

c) marking segmental quality plans ensuring 
timely delivery of quality and time; 

d) reviewing the proposed method statements of 
various activities, identifying construction 
processes and their capability to achieve the 
desired results considering the peculiarities 
of the project; 

e) when the risk level is unacceptable, taking 
additional quality control measures including 
revision of the work methodology so that all 
identified risks are addressed and quality 
assured; 


f) planning and establishing the facilities for 
implementation of quality systems and 
procedures for assurance and control; and 


g) ensuring that the appropriate enabling 
processes and systems that may be needed for 
executing the work in accordance with the 
quality standards, relevant statutes and 
standards, are put in place. 


5.2.2 Review of Pre-construction Managerial Decisions 


Pre-construction stage activities of the project shall be 
required to be reviewed before the project management 
processes are initiated for the construction stage. It is 
desirable to assess decisions of the briefing and 
feasibility stage outputs such as overall planning and 
construction methods affecting quality of design 
proposal and the construction from the point of view 
of function and the users, which may have bearing on 
construction stage. 


While the project documents and proposals are 
reviewed for the adequacy of quality in design and 
constructed facility, their specific impacts on 
timeframes, budgets and desirability of such quality 
attributes, including extent of management systems 
proposed to be employed during construction, shall 
also be considered. 


5.2.3 Design and Engineering 


Design drawings, construction methodology and plans 
shall be reviewed to determine whether any additional 
risks may arise during the construction due to the 
features in the design or methodology. 


For management of work processes, application of 
information technology based tools may be deployed 
to facilitate review of processes, comprehend 
complications during execution and plan appropriate 
construction methodologies. 


5.2.4 Quality Management System of Construction 
Agency 


Approach to quality and, specifically, the quality 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


management system of the construction agency shall 
be studied with the aim to determine its suitability to 
the peculiarity of project execution based on local 
conditions such as weather, work culture and 
availability of infrastructural facilities. In the absence 
of an established quality management system, it is 
essential that the agency prepares quality plan in 
accordance with standard guidelines detailing out 
organizational responsibilities, work procedures and 
quality assurance formats in particular. 


5.3 Commissioning and Handing Over Stage 


During completion and handing over of the project, 
effectiveness of quality management strategies, 
procedures, performance measurement and 
management system shall be reviewed for future 
planning. Procedures and practices, which may be 
necessary during operation and maintenance phase of 
the project, shall be documented. 


6 QUALITY MANAGEMENT 


6.1 Preparation of Quality Policy 


Quality policy is organizational commitment to meet 
the project objectives and continually improve quality 
management approach. Quality policy sets out mission, 
vision and values of the organization and its project 
undertakings. Quality policy takes cognizance of 
project requirements, stakeholder interests, 
technological issues and strategic planning approach 
while formulating and communicating high level 
commitments of the organization through its 
framework. Quality policy framework leads to 
establishment and review of quality objectives, which 
in turn determine quality tasks at the lower most level 
of the organization. Quality policy is contextual and 
needs review as the determinants undergo a change 
during the project or from one project to another. 


Quality policy shall convey the management 
commitment and intent of the organization towards 
quality, its organizational set-up and other 
arrangements, including resources to ensure that the 
set objectives are met. It also provides a framework 
for establishing, maintaining and periodically 
reviewing quality objectives and targets. 


The agencies involved in the project development such 
as the owner, consultant and contractor jointly or 
separately shall have a written statement prescribing 
the quality policy of the respective organization. 


The policy shall be communicated to all stakeholders 
through display and other means. The policy shall be 
displayed in local language(s) which may be 
understood by majority at all levels who determine 
quality. 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


Organization shall ensure that the quality policy is 
understood by all and interpreted appropriately in the 
relevant context of their responsibility. 


6.2 Preparation of Quality Assurance and Quality 
Control Manual and Project Specific Quality Plan 


Management processes specifically related to quality 
require documentation so as to ensure that the 
implementation is organization-wide and the decisions 
are evidence based. Quality management initiatives, 
therefore, would be effective when implemented as a 
system. Organization may develop quality management 
system based on established standards and develop 
documentation that may be needed for such standards. 
However, irrespective of the scale of operations and 
nature of projects undertaken, documentation in respect 
of the following quality management aspects may be 
done for proactive process based approach to quality. 


6.2.1 Quality Plan 


The purpose of the quality plan is to outline the quality 
management processes of the organization and define 
the processes to be performed in providing independent 
visibility to the quality of processes being used, and 
outcome conforming to the desired quality standards. 


Quality plans should detail out core process(es) along 
with delegation of responsibilities for process 
performers. Output of each process shall be clearly 
defined such that the same is verified in accordance 
with the specifications. Quality plan may be presented 
in the form of a flow chart, tabulation of processes or 
any other method that conveys the process flow in a 
comprehensive manner to its users. Quality plan should 
address the aspects of safety during processes, 
inspection and testing for work acceptance during the 
process as well as at end of the process. Reference 
should be made to IS/ISO 10005 for developing quality 
plans. 


A project specific quality plan shall be developed by 
the main construction agency and submitted to owner/ 
client and the consultants for approval. On approval, 
the project quality plan shall be used as a reference 
document for implementation, control and monitoring 
of quality aspects of the project by the main 
construction agency, owner/client, consultants and 
other parties concerned. 


Project quality plan shall describe how the project 
specific quality objectives and targets shall be achieved. 
It shall define the road map for achieving the standards 
that an organization lays down for itself so that efforts 
can be coordinated, synergized and monitored. 


Quality plan shall explain the means of establishing a 
positive quality consciousness and a culture of meeting 
quality standards at the project site. It shall identify 


and enumerate the control measures to mitigate the 
risks to the project completion arising out of quality 
issues so that the project processes are executed within 
the parameters of time, cost and scope. 


Salient aspects of a typical quality plan for a 
construction should include, but not limited to, the 
following: 


a) Project specific quality objectives, targets and 
programmes in line with quality policy; 

b) Meeting legal and other requirements; 

c) Resources, roles, responsibility and authority; 


d) Quality requirements to be followed by sub- 
contractors; 

e) Quality assurance and control procedure; 

f) Activities and processes requiring procedures 
to be carried out under controlled 
environment/conditions; 


g) Identification and control of special processes 
wherein output cannot be checked later (such 
as embedded items) and quality related 
problems could be noticed only at a future 
date; 


h) Quality management requirements of 
processes and activities which have high risk 
of deviation from desired standards due to 
inexperience in technology or performance 
under challenging conditions; 


j) Management of work environmental 
conditions which may have adverse impact 
on test outcome such as control room 
conditions, etc; 

k) Ensuring the competency and awareness of 
the performers, managers and policy level 
personnel within the organization; 

m) Management of special environmental 
conditions which may have adverse impact 
on outcomes, such as disasters and 
emergencies; 

n) Continual process improvement approach; 

p) Quality performance measurement, 
monitoring, inspection and test procedures; 

q) Conduct of quality audits with defined 
frequency; 

r) Reporting, records and investigation 
procedure for non-conformance control; 

s) Reward and reprimand for 
performance; and 

t) Checklists and formats. 


quality 


This list referred to above is indicative and users of 
this document may include other issues that may be 
identified from specifications pertaining to the specific 
items of work or project. 


6.2.2 Quality Procedures for Construction Equipment, 
Plant and Machineries 


Safety, work performance and efficient operation are 
critical aspects of construction equipment, plant and 
machineries. Quality assurance procedures shall be 
established for construction equipment, plant and 
machineries to ensure that such resources are deployed 
effectively. Scope of quality assurance procedures shall 
include calibration, adherence to safety requirements 
and compliance to energy and environmental norms. 
Such quality assurance procedures should be in 
synchronization with the manufacturers operational 
guidelines. 


6.2.3 Quality Procedures for Works 


Quality procedures elaborating quality assurance and 
quality control requirements for construction works 
(including construction materials and workmanship) 
shall be defined. Works involving items which cannot 
be checked at subsequent stages such as services 
embedded in concrete, works which have significant 
failure cost and works wherein performance would be 
known only during actual use (such as waterproofing) 
shall have quality assurance procedures defined in 
accordance with work specifications. 


6.2.3.1 Quality control procedures 


Quality control procedures include actions arising out 
of results of inspections and tests. Inspection and test 
points may be defined as, 


a) self-inspection point wherein the performer 
verifies the work progressively, preferably 
with a checklist, and maintains record; 


b) hold points beyond which work may not 
proceed without authorization; 


c) witness point wherein an opportunity is 
identified for inspection or test at the 
discretion of project manager; and 


d) surveillance point identified for intermittent 
monitoring of progress of work. 


The frequency of inspections and tests in respect of 
each of the categories of points identified in work areas 
shall be planned and actions defined based on the range 
of results. Results should be then used for analysis, 
interpretation and benchmarking of quality 
performance. 


6.2.4 Traceability 


Traceability of origin of material resources, performers 
and managers responsible for the work including the 
workmen, environmental conditions under which work 
was performed is essential for construction works since 
non-conformances and continual improvement 
activities would need analysis inputs to the work 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


performed. In many cases, the results of quality control 
test would be known after a considerable time and it 
may be necessary to identify the work and its inputs 
(resources, responsibilities and conditions) for 
undertaking improvement and corrective actions, 
should the need arises. 


6.2.5 Dissemination of Quality Documents to 
Construction Teams 


A system of dissemination of documents and decisions 
to the performing and managing teams shall be 
established to ensure that the obsolete and unnecessary 
information, which could be a reason for inappropriate 
interpretation, is removed. A master list of various 
documents and their recipients shall be maintained and 
used for dissemination and retrieval of obsolete 
information. Document system shall follow norms for 
identifying current changes. Drawings, specifications, 
work instructions shall be within the ambit of document 
and information dissemination system. 


6.3 Management of Stakeholder Interfaces 


Main construction agency should ensure that the project 
stakeholders are identified and their interest is 
recognized within its scope of responsibility. Such 
stakeholders may include user groups, project 
promoters, project consultants, other contractors 
engaged by the client and representatives of authority 
having jurisdiction. Interfaces with stakeholders are 
essential for coordination and facilitation of matters 
of direct relevance to the main construction agency as 
well as other agencies involved in the execution of the 
project. Effective interfaces should include 
communication, exchange of information of mutual 
interest and coordination of respective processes. 
Management of interfaces shall ensure that the 
stakeholders’ requirements are realized in full and 
ensure that these requirements are not conflicting with 
other requirements. 


6.4 Developing Competence through Training and 
Awareness for Quality 


Organization shall ensure competence of personnel 
performing work by continually sustaining relevance 
of their knowledge and skills through effective training 
programmes. The personnel should be aware of issues 
pertinent to the individual’s performance needs and 
organizational concerns regarding quality. 
Organization should establish training objectives based 
on performance needs. Trainer should have domain 
knowledge and adequate practical experience to 
appreciate challenges involved in achieving the quality 
during performance of the task. Subsequent to the 
training, the organization should have processes to 
assess effectiveness of training. 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


6.5 Procurement of Supplies and Services 


Procurement of supplies (materials and eguipment) and 
services (consulting) are key determinants of guality 
of construction works. Procurement of supplies and 
services should consider reguirements of work, risks 
involved and guality assurance and guality control 
reguirements. 


6.6 Management of Resources 


Organization shall analyze resources that are needed for 
the project to meet guality standards. Comprehensive 
analysis of need for the resources should be based on 
‘resource breakdown structure’ developed in conjunction 
with ‘work breakdown structure’ [see IS 15883 (Part 2)]. 
Resource analysis would also help in objective 
determination of requirements and thus develop 
procurement strategy (such as ownership versus renting). 
For effective utilization of resources, resource 
deployment planning should be carried out in 
conjunction with time planning. Resource based time 
planning can play a significant role to reduce resource 
specific risks. In absence of resource based time 
planning, construction schedule may not be actually 
realistic and hence, have adverse consequences on 
attaining desired quality standards. 


Resource need assessment and deployment planning, 
if carried out at the time of contract review before 
undertaking the project, may avoid contractual 
problems and better cost planning. 


Following resources require specific tools and expertise 
to decide on their need and to plan and manage their 
utilization: 


a) Technical reference material; 

b) Equipment, instrumentation and testing 
facilities; 

c) Enabling works; 

d) Finance; and 


e) Technical and managerial competencies. 


6.7 Identification of Project Peculiarities and 
Performance Risks 


Before undertaking works, project manager is required 
to determine project peculiarities, such as in relation 
to challenges involved in attaining quality, in terms of 
both the technical and managerial decision making. 
The risk related to the performance, such as variations 
in working conditions affecting workmanship and 
material use, etc. leading to quality failure. A reference 
to IS 15883 (Part 8) shall be made for risk management. 


Special processes are those items of works which can 
not be measured, monitored or verified after execution 


until the deficiencies are noticed during use when it is 
too late for any corrective action. In construction, special 
processes include items of work such as embedded items 
(reinforcements and services, etc), water proofing, 
foundation works and structural steel fabrication. Such 
special processes shall be identified which require 
execution under controlled conditions such as specific 
supervision, environmental conditions, special worker 
skill or use of a concerned equipment, etc. Special 
processes shall be validated before undertaking to prove 
that they are capable of generating planned results. 


6.8 Integration, Clash Analysis, Coordination and 
Validation 


Efforts should be made to ensure that the construction 
is well coordinated, decisions are taken by integrating 
inputs from various technical teams involved and 
analysis of the proposed work to be undertaken is 
carried out. All such actions should eliminate 
possibility of rework, interruption of work during 
construction and rejection. 


6.8.1 Integration of Technical Interfaces 


Technical interfaces between project participants, 
including consultant(s), contractor(s) and project 
manager, should be resolved to suit the needs of the 
project. It is vital that the technical inputs from various 
project participants are integrated. Explicit lines of 
communication between the project participants should 
ensure the manner in which technical interfaces would 
take place. 


6.8.2 Elimination of Redundancies and Adoption of 
Lean Construction Processes 


One of the objectives of the quality management is to 
ensure that the wastages by way of redundancies in 
processes are eliminated leading to efficient process 
approach. Lean construction approach aims to 
maximize value and minimize waste, which could 
include mistakes, working out of sequence, redundant 
activity and movement, delayed or premature inputs, 
and works that are not essential to meet the overall 
project requirements. Opportunities should be created 
to employ such management processes to make the 
processes inherently efficient. 


6.8.3 Coordination and Clash Analysis of Activities 


Project management responsibilities shall be planned 
to ensure that the works are coordinated and clash of 
incompatible activities is eliminated. Coordination may 
have to be analyzed from the point of view of work 
sequence during construction, interference during 
operations and work sequence during maintenance 
operations. The inputs obtained from each of the project 
participants shall be analyzed and work sequences 


defined in a coordinated manner. Appropriate software 
tools to create virtual physical models may be 
employed to finalize construction method, identify 
incompatibilities, clashes during work sequences. Such 
models may also be helpful to monitor work progress. 


6.8.4 Validation of Work Processes 


Validation refers to the performance during actual 
conditions. High-risk work processes must be reviewed 
from the point of view of the actual construction 
situations. Construction team involved in construction 
should be familiar with the processes as needed to 
complete the work in a safe manner. Validation may 
be specifically necessary where new materials or new 
specifications are being used without prior experience 
in similar works. 


6.9 Establishing Infrastructure for Construction 
Quality 


Quality management processes rely on infrastructure 
to achieve expected quality performance and undertake 
quality improvement initiatives. Such infrastructure 
may not be specifically defined as a part of work 
specifications but implied to be necessary for meeting 
the requisite quality standards. 


6.9.1 Provision for Inspection and Test Equipment 


Organization shall analyze quality requirements and 
identify appropriate inspection and test equipment and 
employ the same in accordance with the planned 
quality control procedures as mentioned in 6.2.3. Such 
equipment may need appropriate handling and storage 
facilities as well as training to the persons concerned 
for their use. 


6.9.2 Quality Control Laboratories and Testing 
Facilities 


Quality control infrastructure of laboratories and 
specific testing facilities may be required for 
assessment of work to arrive at evidence-based 
decisions for quality improvement and verification of 
work. The competent persons in accordance with the 
relevant standards shall maintain such laboratories. 
Periodic checking and calibration of testing equipment 
and updating of testing procedure, standards and codes 
shall be ensured by the QC Manager. 


6.9.3 Environmental Conditions and Enabling 
Infrastructure for Work Performance 


Ventilation, illumination, humidity and temperature 
conditions may be specifically needed to carry out 
construction work in a safe and appropriate manner. In 
some instances these requirements may be prescribed 
as a part of the work specifications as well. In such cases, 
required environmental conditions shall be ensured. In 
addition, infrastructure arrangements may also be 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


needed for undertaking the work involving use of such 
as scaffolds, barricades, safety nets, safe walkways with 
protection from falling debris, etc. Such enabling 
infrastructure shall be identified; appropriately designed 
to meet the structural, environmental and statutory 
requirements; and provided. 


6.9.4 Training Facilities 


Training is an integral part of construction quality 
management. Facilities for training must be provided at 
work sites. These could include arrangements for 
demonstration of work procedures on mock-ups, 
handling and use of apparatus and equipment to be used, 
conference facility with suitable training aids, etc. 


6.10 Control of Non-conforming Works, 
Emergencies and Disasters 


Quality management guidelines aim to ensure 
conformance to requirements. However, non- 
conformities may occur due to risks in performance, 
including workmanship. Non-conformities should be 
systematically analyzed to improve effectiveness of 
processes. Certain non-conformances lead to 
emergency situations or disasters, which need planning 
to limit the extent of damage to works as well as the 
persons involved. Following procedures shall be 
employed to manage non-conformities, emergencies 
and disasters. 


6.10.1 Identification, Segregation and Disposal of 
Non-conforming Works 


Non-conforming works shall be identified and 
segregated as soon as they occur so as to avoid 
inadvertent carrying out further construction activities. 
Non-conformities need to be traced to the origin of 
their cause. Therefore, the competent person under 
defined authorization should examine and analyze such 
works and propose in regard to the following: 


a) Re-work, acceptance with concession or 
disposal; and 

b) Process improvement to ensure non- 
occurrence of such non-conformities. 


The authority that approved the work originally shall 
duly evaluate the proposal so recommended. 


6.10.2 Review and Management of Risks for 
Emergencies and Disasters 


Construction project should be assessed for the 
anticipated risks leading to emergencies and disasters. 
Failures of scaffolds, collapse of excavation, failure of 
shuttering, collapse of walls, failures during hoisting 
operations, etc, are some of the typical high 
vulnerability construction procedures known to have 
led to emergencies and disasters. Hazard potential of 
such high-risk construction operations should be based 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


on assessment of probability of occurrence and its 
damage potential. Project management organization 
should develop understanding of risk and conseguent 
hazard potential based on past experiences. Reference 
shall be made to IS 15883 (Part 8) for this purpose. 


6.10.3 Planning for Management Response to 
Emergencies and Disasters 


Risk response should take into consideration the hazard 
potential of construction processes. Risk response 
should aim to, 


a) explore risk avoidance; 
b) risk transfer; and 
c) limit extent of damage under prevailing risks. 


6.10.4 Prevention and Corrective Actions 


Subsequent to identification and segregation of non- 
conformities, preventive and corrective actions should 
be taken to improve processes. Such preventive and 
corrective actions should be specifically monitored for 
their effectiveness and results of improved processes 
compared with the anticipated improvements. Until 
preventive and corrective actions yield the desired 
results, they shall continue to be under direct designated 
managerial responsibility. 


6.11 Monitoring and Continual Improvement 


Continual improvement is an inherent characteristic 
of quality management. Continual improvement 
process is centered on monitoring of efficiency and 
effectiveness of work procedures. Monitoring of works 
and processes encompasses, 


a) measurement of conformance to quality as 
process output; 

b) analysis of conformance to quality 
measurement; and 

c) interpretation of measurement and analysis in 


work/project context. 


6.11.1 Quality Performance Indicators and Acceptance 
Criteria 


Quality performance indicators should be identified 
relevant to the work and customer requirements. 
Accordingly, acceptance criteria should be defined 
considering customer needs and cost, and in 
conformance to national standards and accepted 
engineering practices. 


6.11.2 Statistical Analysis of Construction Process 
Outputs 


Consistency of conformance to quality requirements 
as process output should be measured and statistically 
analyzed to determine variance, consistency pattern, 
frequency of occurrence of non-conformances, etc. 


10 


6.11.3 Quality Auditing 


Quality audit is a systematic and independent 
examination to determine whether quality activities and 
related results comply with planned requirements and 
whether these arrangements are implemented 
effectively and are suitable to achieve the objectives. 
Quality audit may be first party, second party or third 


party. 


Quality audits should aim to determine, 


a) process efficiency and effectiveness; 

b) comprehension of quality objectives by 
performers and managers; 

c) effectiveness of corrective and preventive 
measures; 

d) promotion of quality culture: and 

e) non-conformities, responsibilities and 


remedial measures. 


Quality audit criteria, scope, frequency and procedures 
are defined considering nature of project ensuring 
objectivity and impartiality. Quality audit shall be 
conducted during pre-construction and construction 
stages of the project. During project development stage, 
quality audit shall focus on the project development 
process as well as effectiveness of the processes in 
achieving the stakeholder satisfaction. Design reviews 
can be audited to ascertain the extent of satisfaction of 
the stakeholders the processes are able to achieve. 
Quality audit should identify areas of improvement of 
project development to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness. During project development stage, 
project management proposals should be audited to 
ascertain for their adequacy in effectively meeting the 
project goals. 


During planning for construction stage, quality audit 
should focus on the process audit for planning for 
construction. 


During construction, the scope of quality audit shall 
include construction management process audit based 
on quality assurance and quality control results. A 
systematic study and examination of documents related 
to quality control should be done during the 
construction phase to establish that the inputs during 
construction process and the workmanship of work 
done conform to the prescribed specifications and are 
of acceptable standards. If it does not conform, it need 
to identify whether rejection and/or rectification or any 
remedial measures are needed. 


Broadly, quality audit team should focus on the 
following: 


1) Visual inspection or inspection with use of 


suitable instruments, of the works completed 
and/or under progress, perusal of photographic 
record, if any; 
2) Perusal of quality control and quality 
assurance (QC/QA) documentation, and all 
test records and registers; 
3) Inspection of testing laboratories, adequacy 
of testing facilities, and reliability thereof and 
general competence of laboratory staff; 
4) Contractor’s workforce and construction 
equipment deployed at works and assessing 
the adequacy thereof in respect of the quality 
related aspects; 
5) Whether any corrective/preventive actions are 
needed and being implemented; and 


6) 


Any other relevant aspect of quality assurance. 


Management responsibilities and follow up actions are 
crucial to effectiveness of quality audits. 


6.11.4 Quality Cost Analysis 


Construction projects have a major challenge to control 
wastages and handle quality failures (reworks, rejections 
and acceptance at lower quality, etc). Quality cost is an 
effective tool for assessing performance of quality 
management activities. Process effectiveness, as cost of 
quality, should be determined on the basis of, 


a) 


cost of conformance and cost of non- 
conformance; and 


b) preventive, appraisal and failure cost. 


Quality cost analysis may be carried out during pre- 
construction as well as construction stage processes. 
The analysis can be carried out for the process 
efficiency leading to intangible output such as design 
and also tangible outputs such as products of items of 
work executed. IS 10708 may be referred for further 
application. 


6.11.5 Continual Quality Improvement Benchmarks 


Continual quality improvement should be planned 
based on the measurement of performance using 
quality audits, quality cost analysis and statistical 
analysis of measurements. Continual quality 
improvement decisions should be fact based so that 
the effectiveness of such continual improvement 
benchmarks could be evaluated. 


6.11.6 Quality Improvement Interventions 


Quality improvements interventions should be 
undertaken involving all project participants 
concerned. It is important that the concerned project 
participants have a positive attitude towards the 
interventions else their effectiveness will be 
compromised. If required, the aspect of human 


11 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


behaviour may need to be addressed while undertaking 
guality improvement interventions. 


6.11.7 Organizational Process Assets Update on 
Ouality 


All relevant documents, which provide information on 
performance of organization in achieving, desired 
quality shall be compiled after the project closure. The 
aim is to learn from the experiences and create process 
assets for future use. 


7 PROMOTING A QUALITY CULTURE 


The owner/client, consultant and construction agency 
shall jointly endeavour to promote a positive quality 
culture at the project. 


Top management of the organizations should exhibit a 
visible management commitment and felt leadership 
towards quality. This shall be achieved by exhibiting a 
motivational and inspirational behaviour towards 
quality. 


The top management should clearly communicate that 
it considers quality as core value and it shall not allow 
it to get compromised. Such messages when it reach 
down the level in the organization enable to create a 
consciousness towards quality and appropriate attitude. 


8 PERFORMANCE 
RECOGNITION 


APPRAISAL AND 


Achievement of quality objectives is satisfaction to all, 
including the performers. Appraisal of achievement, 
and preferably exceeding, such objectives is the basic 
need for participatory management and a significant 
source of intrinsic reward for the team members. A 
systematic appraisal is fundamental to setting the 
benchmarks for the quality performance. Organization 
should endeavour to suitably reward success of 
achieving quality objectives for motivation. 


9 INTEGRATION 
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 


WITH OTHER 


In order to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of 
the organization, the quality management system 
established and implemented at the project shall be in 
coherence with other management systems 
implemented for the project. 


10 POST CONSTRUCTION REVIEW AND 
DOCUMENTATION 


Post construction review shall be done analyzing the 
quality related important instances and their impact 
including learning from the non-conformities to avoid 
their repetitions and shall be documented and preserved 
for later reference. 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Construction Management (Including Safety in Construction) Sectional Committee, CED 29 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Aecom India Private Limited, Noida 


Airports Authority of India, New Delhi 


Builders’ Association of India, Mumbai 


Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council, New Delhi 


Central Building Research Institute (CSIR), Roorkee 


Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Construction Industry Development Council, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 
Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi 


Delhi Metro Railway Corporation, New Delhi 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Construction Company Limited, New Delhi 


Hindustan Prefab Limited, New Delhi 


Indian Buildings Congress, New Delhi 


Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 


Larsen and Toubro Limited, Chennai 


M.N. Dastur and Company (P) Limited, Kolkata 


Military Engineer Services, Engineer-in-Chief’s Branch, 


Army Headquarters, New Delhi 


Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, New Delhi 


National Buildings Construction Corporation Limited, New Delhi 


National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Institute of Construction Management and Research, 
Mumbai 


Nirman Vikas Anusandhan Sansthan, Raipur 


12 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KrisHNAN (Chairman) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI PRADEEP KUMAR 
Suri S. SREEKUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri H. S. PASRICHA 
Suri SANJAY Soni (Alternate) 


Dr SHAILESH KUMAR AGRAWAL 
SHRI PANKAJ Gupta (Alternate) 


DR AcCHAL K. MITTAL 
Suri AJAY CHAURASIA (Alternate) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
SHRI SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


Suri P. R. SWARUP 
Suri Ravi Jar (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


SHRI ASHOK KHURANA 
CHIEF ENGINEER (HQ) (Alternate) 


SHRI DALJEET SINGH 


SHRI JOSE KURIAN 
Suri VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 


Suri R. K. Das 
Suri M. D. DESHPANDE (Alternate) 


Suri D. M. KUDTARKAR 
SHRI RAJENDRA SAWHNEY (Alternate) 


CHAIRMAN AND MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Suri RAJEEV CHAUDHARY (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. SRIVASTAVA 
Suri P. S. CHADHA (Alternate) 


ProF B. BHATTACHARJEE 
Dr K. N. Jaa (Alternate) 


Suri M. P. Namu 


Suri R. SHANKAR NARAYANAN (Alternate) 


Suri S.K. GUHA 


SHRI GOBINDA PAL CHOUDHURY (Alternate) 


BRIG Manos KUMAR 
Cot M. K. Prasan (Alternate) 


DR DEVENDRA VERMA 
Suri R. RAsEsH (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJENDRA CHAUDHARI 
Suri H. K. DHAWAN (Alternate) 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. N. CHOWDHARY (Alternate) 


DR ANIL AGARWAL 


SHRI SANJEEV KASLIWAL 
SHRI AMARJEET SINGH (Alternate) 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


Organization 
NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 
PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry, New Delhi 


Representative(s) 
SHRI ANIL KAPOOR 
DR RANJEET MEHTA 
Planning Commission, New Delhi SHRI S. S. GANAPATHY 


SHRIMATI LEENA GUPTE SAMANT 
Suri TEJAS SURA (Alternate) 


PMI Organization Centre Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


SHRI PAWAN CHOUDHARY 
Suri M. D. Josm (Alternate) 


RITES Ltd, Gurgaon 


School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi DR V. K. PAUL 


Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida SHRI Manos Kumar MITTAL 


The Institution of Engineers (India), Kolkata Lr GEN (RETD) HARI UNIYAL 


SHRI O. P. GOEL (Alternate) 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C,Vasant Kunj, DR VANITA AHUJA 


New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (411, Technology Apartments, Patparganj, Suri R. P. LAHIRI 


Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, Suri A. K. SHARMA 


Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Delhi) 


BIS Directorate General Suri J. Roy CHOWDHURY, Scientist F and Head (Civil Engg) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretaries 
SHRI SANJAY PANT 
Scientist E (Civil Engg), BIS 
and 
SHRI S. ARUN KUMAR 
Scientist C (Civil Engg), BIS 


Panel for Construction Project Management, CED 29/P1 


Organization 
In personal capacity (103, Charak Sadan, Vikaspuri, New Delhi) 
Central Public Works Department, New Delhi 


Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 


Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation, 
New Delhi 


EH and S Cares, New Delhi 

Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 

Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai 

NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 

School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Shelter Consulting Engineers, Noida 


In personal capacity (204, Sector A, Pocket-C,Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (E-9, Gaur Green Avenue, Abhay Khand-II, 
Indirapuram, Ghaziabad) 
In personal capacity (C-2/2324,Vasant Kunj, New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (4/1, Sector A, Pocket-C,Vasant Kunj, 
New Delhi) 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, I.P. Extension, 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 125, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, 
Delhi) 


13 


Representative(s) 
Suri P. KRISHNAN (Convener) 


Suri B. B. DHAR 
SHRI SANJEEV RASTOGI (Alternate) 


SHRI AMAN DEEP 


Suri JOSE KURIAN 
Suri VIVEK BANSAL (Alternate) 


Suri A. K. TRIPATHI 

SHRI S. MUKHERJEE 

Suri M. P. Namu 

SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 

Dr V. K. PAUL 

SHRI Manos Kumar MITTAL 


DR VANITA AHUJA 


SHRI IFTIKHAR A. DRABU 


SHRI CHANDRA PAL 


SHRI KRISHNA KANT 


Dr S. N. MANDAL 


SHRI A. K. SHARMA 


IS 15883 (Part 4) : 2015 


Organization 


In personal capacity (Flat No. 220, Ankur Apartments, Patparganj, 


Delhi) 


Representative(s) 


Dr V. THIRUVENGADAM 


Working Group on Quality Management, CED 29/P1/WG3 


Organization 
School of Planning and Architecture, New Delhi 
Creative Design Consultants and Engineers (P) Ltd, Ghaziabad 
Engineers India Limited, New Delhi 
Larsen and Toubro Ltd, Chennai NTPC Ltd, New Delhi 


In personal capacity (608, Technology Apartment, I.P. Extension. 
Delhi) 


In personal capacity (A-206 Plot No. GH-2, C-Dot apartments, 
sector-56,Gurgaon) 


> 


14 


Representative(s) 
DR V. K. PAUL (Convener) 
SHRI AMAN DEEP 
SHRI S. MUKHERJEE 


Suri M. P. Namu 
SHRI SATISH UPADHYAY 


Dr S. N. MANDAL 


DR Upay KANT MISRA 


(Continued from Second cover) 


This standard (Part 4) on guality management has been formulated with the aim to provide guidelines for ensuring 
that the project guality reguirements are achieved during construction process with minimum rework. Some of 
the important aspects that this standard covers include: overview of guality pre-reguisites during various project 
development stages, reguirements for guality management, work procedures that determine guality assurance, 
infrastructure needs for construction guality and management of non-conforming works. 


The guidelines may be applicable in general to all construction projects. However for smaller projects, the 
applicability of various provisions may be decided appropriately by the parties concerned. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular reguirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
“Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and guality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CED 29 (7907). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.LT. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


