( Reaffirmed 2002 )

IS : 9732 - 1981

Indian

Standard

METHOD FOR RECORDING INFORMATION FOR DISTRIBUTION TRIALS FOR COMPLETE, FILLED TRANSPORT PACKAGES
Transport Packages Sectional Committee, MCPD 18

Chairman SHRI M. R. SUBRAMANIAN

Representing

Indian Institute

of Packaging,

Bombay

ggI

F $. pH:tzrAN

] ( Alternates

SHRI B. M. CHOPRA ( Alternate ) Indian Road Transport Development Association, SHRI MURARI LAL BAHRI Bombay SHRI M. P. SANGHAVI( Alternate 1 Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta SHRI D. P. BHATTACHERJEE Department of Explosives, Nagpur SHRI CHARANJITLAL Directorate General of Health Service, New Delhi SHRI P. C. KAPUR India Tobacco Co Ltd, Calcutta SHRI S. K. KESHAVA SHI<IP. DAYAL ( Alternate ) Indian Posts & Telegraphs Department, New Delhi SHRI N. D. KULKARNI Air-India, Bombay SHRI 0. MATHIAS SHRI R. TEWARI ( Alternate ) SHRI H. S. UBEROI ( Alternare ) Bayer India Ltd, Bombay DR S. Y. PANDIT DR P. V. RAIKAR ( Alternate ) Sarabhai Chemicals Ltd, Vadodara SHRI M. R. PARANJAP~ Association of State Road Transport Undertakings, SHRI HANUMANTHA RAO New Delhi Research % Development Organization (R & D ) DR N. P. RAO ( Ministry of Defence ) All India Shippers' Council, New Delhi SHRI RAW BHUSHAN

SHRI D. S. `ARYA

to Shri M. R. Subramanian Ministry of Railways

)

( Continued

on page 2

)

@

Copyright

1981

INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Indian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written permission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

IS : 9732- 1981
( Continuedfrom page 1

1
Representing

Members
SHRI K.

C. SAKSENA

SHRI N. K. SHUKLA CAPT N. A. TAMHANE SHRI B. A. TIKKU CAPT K. N. VARGHESE

SHRI P. VEERRAJU A. R. VIJAYENDRA RAO ( Alternate ) SHRI P. S. DAS, Director ( MCPD ) ( Secretary
SHRI

Directorate General Factory Advice Service & Labour Institute, Bombay Forest Research Institute and Colleges, Dehra Dun Indian National Shinowners' Association, Bombay Calcutta Port Trust; Calcutta The Shipping Corporation of India Ltd, Bombay Central Food Technological Research Instrtute ( CSIR ), Mysore Director General, IS1 ( Ex-oficia
Member

)

IS : 9732- 1981

Indian Standard
METHOD FOR RECORDING 1NFORMATION FOR DISTRIBUTION TRIALS FOR COMPLETE, FILLED TRANSPORT PACKAGES
0.
0.1 This Indian Standard

FOREWORD

was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 30 January 1981, after the draft finalized by the Transport Packages Sectional Committee had been approved by the Marine, Cargo Movement and Packaging Division Council. 0.2 The transport may be important methods, relationship between hazards encountered by complete, filled packages in a distribution system and the resulting damage that sustained by the packages, or their contents, or both of them is in the development of new test methods, in #efining existing test and in the preparation of appropriate test schedules.

0.3 The study of such relationship is facilitated if, when carrying out distribution trials involving complete, filled transport packages, adequate information is recorded on a uniform basis. This enables proper comparision to be made of data obtained at different times and under various circumstances. 0.4 The purpose of this standard is to aid such comparisons by specifying the information to be recorded. Its contents are likely to be of interest to all concerned with the trials under various circumstances. 0.5 In order to facilitate international coordination on the subject this standard is based on Draft International Standard ISO/DIS 4178 Complete, filled transport packages-Distribution trials-Information to be recorded.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard

specifies the information to be recorded when carrying out distribution trials involving complete, filled transport packages.

1.2 It is applicable to distribution systems in which the hazards of stacking, vertical impact, horizontal impact, and vibration are encountered or are likely to be encountered. 3

Is : 9732 - 1981 2. INFORMATION TO BE RECORDED

2.0 The following information 2.1 Description of Trial

shall be recorded in the order given. possible, results shall be set out in the form of a table.
2.1.1 A brief description

Where

of the trial shall be given, including:

a) The purpose of trial; b) A brief description of the packages used; c) The starting point and the destination journey was involved; of the package(s), if a

d) A description of the operations carried out on the package(s), and the order in which they were carried out; e) The time interval between the various operations the packages; f) The duration of each of the various operations packages; and 2.2 Results carried out on carried out on

g) The modes of transport, if any involved at each stage of trial.
of Trial 2.2.1 The results of the trial shall be given and may be quoted in terms of the reduction in quality of the packages and/or its contents, by the extent of loss of package contents, by the extent of damage to the package and/or its contents, or in terms of measurements made on the package and/or the contents. Preferably, the results shall be in such terms that changes in the factors under investigation in the trial can be correctly assigned to the operations and hazards in the distribution system that produce them.

2.3 Package
2.3.1 A description

of each package shall be given, including:

a) Mass, in kilograms; b) Dimensions ( actual ), in millimetres; c) The nature of the packaging, sealing; d) The contents; e) The marking of the package; and f) The handling aids attached or available for use.
4

including fittings and method

of

Is : 9732 - 1981 2.4 Hazards in Trial 2.4.1 Climatic conditions at each operation or hazard in the trial shall be recorded, preferably by means of a continuous recorder. 2.4.2 Where necessary, recorded separately. operations involving the same hazard shall be for each type of hazard as given for

2.4.3 Information shall be recorded in 2.4.3.1 to 2.4.3.4.

2.4.3.1 Stacking - The following information shall be recorded each stage in the trial at which packages were stacked:

a) The b) The C>The d) The

number of packages stacked; number of packages on which no load was superimposed; attitude of each package;

height of the stack and, if the packages in the stack were assorted, the average density of the stack;

4 The nature of the upper and lower loading surfaces; f > The duration of loading of packages, preferably in the form of a
cumulative frequency curve; and

g) The stacking pattern, if the packages in the stack were identical;

h) How measurements were carried out.
2.4.3.2 Vertical impact - The following information shall be recorded for each stage in the trial at which packages sustained vertical impact:

4 The number of packages observed or measured;

b) The number of packages which sustained no drop;
c) The attitude of the packages;

4 The drop heights, preferably in the form of a cumulative frequency
e) The number of drops; f 1 The nature of the impact surfaces;

distribution of drop height but, if this is not possible, the 5.50 and 95 percentile points shall be recorded whenever possible;

8) How measurements were carried out; h) The time intervals between drops, if more than one drop per
package was involved. 5

IS : 9732- 1981

Where applicable the following information j) The vehicle or craft involved; k) The degree or loading of the vehicle;

shall also be recorded:

m) The positions in the vehicle at which measurements were made; and n) The route and type of terrain ( or sea or air conditions ). 2.4.3.3 Horizontal impact - The following information shall be recorded for each stage in the trial at which packages sustained horizontal impact: a) The number of packages observed or measured; b) The number of packages which sustained no impact; c) The attitude of the packages; d) The form of the cumulative frequency distribution for velocity of impact, but if this is not possible, the 5.50 and 95 percentile points shall be recorded for 1 to n impacts on an individual package; e)' The number of impacts; f) The nature of the impact surfaces; g) How measurements were carried out; h) The time interval between impacts, if the trial comprises several operations involving horizontal impact; Where applicable, the following information j) The vehicle or craft involved; k) The degree of loading of the vehicle; m) The positions in the vehicle at which measurements were made; n) The route and type of terrain ( or sea or air conditions ). 2.4.3.4 Vibration - The following information shall be recorded for each stage in the trial at which packages were vibrated: a) The number of packages on which measurements were made; b) The attitude of the packages; c) The vibration frequency and amplitude. If there was more than one vibration frequency or amplitude, the distribution curve shall be given; d) The duration of vibration; 6 shall also be recorded:

Is : 9732 - 1981

e) The magnitude of the superimposed load, if any, in kilograms; f) How measurements were carried out and the records analysed. Where applicable, the following information g) The vehicle or craft involved; h) The degree of loading of the vehicle; j) The positions in the vehicle at which measurements were made; and k) The route and type of terrain ( or sea or air conditions ). 2.5 General Information
2.5.1 The following general information

shall also be recorded:

shall also be recorded: concerned in the trial and in the

a) Organization(s) and individuals analysis of the results; and b) Any other relevant information.

INTERNATIONAL
Base Units

SYSTEM

OF UNITS

( SI UNITS )
Symbol

Quantity Length Mass Time Electric current Thermodynamic temperature Luminous intensity Amount of substance
Supplementary Units

Unit metre kilogram second ampere kelvin candela mole

m kg
S

A K

cd mol Symbol rad sr Symbol N J W Wb T Hz S V Pa Definition 1 N=lkg. m/s* 1 J=lN.m 1 W=l J/s 1 Wb=l V.s 1 T=l Wb/m" 1 Hz=1 c/s (s-l) 1 S=l A/V 1 V-l W/A 1 Pa=1 N/ma

Quantity Plane angle Solid angle
Derived Units

unir radian steradian Unit newton joule watt weber tesla hertz siemens volt Pascal

Quantiry Force Energy Power Flux Flux density Frequency Electric conductance Electromotive force Pressure, stress

