IS 2720 ( Part 11 ) : 1993 (Ruuiilpw)2002 ) ( Reaffirmed

.

6th

if dfm

fi Tg alVft

97 W'WWT TUWd% rnaFt

WTFf W3-I

(~Fm-0
Indian Standard

METHODS OF TEST FOR SOILS
PART 11 DETERMINATON OF THE SHEAR STRENGTH PARAMETERS OF A SPECIMEN TESTED IN UNCONSOLIDATED UNDRAINED TRIAXIAL COMPRESSION WITHOUT THE MEASUREMENT OF PORE WATER PRESSURE (

First Revision)

First Reprint NOVEMBER 1998
UDC

624-131-376-5

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

October 1993

.

Price CrouQ 3

Soils and Soil Engineering

Sectional

Committee,

CED 23

FOREWORD This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, the draft had been finalized by the Soils and Soil Engineering Sectional Committee had approved by the Civil Engineering Division Council. after been

With a view to establish uniform procedures for determination of different characteristics of soils and also for facilitating the comparative study of the results, an Indian Standard Method This part covers the determination of of test for soils, IS 2720 has been published in 41 parts. the compressive strength of a specimen of saturated cohesive soil in the triaxial compression apparatus under conditions in which the cell pressure is maintained constant and there is no change in the total water content of the specimen. This standard was first published in 1971. In this first revision apart from general updation. the three amendments issued have been incorporated and the quantities and dimensions have been given in SI units. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be of the specified value in this standard. is complied with analysis, shall be values ( revised )`. the same as that

IS 2720 ( Part II ) : 1993

Indian Standard
METHODS OF TEST FOR SOILS
PART 11 DETERMINATON OF THE SHEAR STRENGTH PARAMETERS OF A SPECIMEN TESTED IN UNCONSOLIDATED UNDRAINED TRIAXIAL COMPRESSION WITHOUT THE MEASUREMENT OF PORE WATER PRESSURE ( 1 SCOPE

First Revision )
a test specimen are listed in 3.2 and 3.3 to cover the three possible following procedures: a) Procedure 1 - For obtaining a specimen from a sampler tube of the same internal diameter as the required specimen. Procedure 2 - For obtaining a specimen b) from a sampler tube of larger diameter than the required specimen. c) Procedure 3 - For obtaining from a block sample. 3.2 Articles Common
3.2.1 Split Afould by all Three Procedures to a Sample

1.1 `This standard ( Part 11 ) describes the test of the compressive for the determination strength of a specimen of saturated cohesive soil in the triaxial compression apparatus under conditions in which the cell pressure is maintained constant and there is no change in the total water content of the specimen ( see Notes 1 and 2 ).
NOTES 1 In this standard the term csamp!e' is used to denote th: soil submitted to the laboratory for the testing and the term <specimen' refers to a portion of the sample upon which the test is performed. 2 The result of any test made in accordance with this standard requires interpretation in relatiaa to the nature of the soil and the way in which the specimen was obtained and prepared.

a specimen
Preparation

Of diameter specimen.

and

length

to

suit

the

test

1.1.1 This test is limited to specimens in the form of right cylinders of nominal diameter 38, 50, 70 and 100 mm and of height approximately equal to twice the nominal diameter samples; ( see Note ). In case of remoulded ratio of diameter of specimen to maximum size of particle in the soil should not be less than 5.
of the specimen is to be NOTE - The diameter selected haviug regard to the character of the so11 and the maximum size of the particles present Generally, a diameter of 38 mm in the sample. will b,: suitable for homogeneous fine-grained soils.

3.2.2 Trimming Knife Sharp-bladed knife. for example a spatula or pallet

3.2.3 Piano Wire Saw 3.2.4 Metal Straightedge 3.2.5 Metal Scale 3.2.6 Non-Corrodible Caps Metal or PIastic End-

2 REEERENCES
2.1 The Indian Standard

Of the same diameter as the test specimen. The upper end cap is to have a central spherical seating to receive the loading ram ( see Note ).
NOTE - A plastic upper end cap, 20 mm thick, is normally satisfactory for use on soft or very soft soils. Metal end caps are considered preferable for use on stiff soils. A metal upper end cap 12 to 20 mm thick is normally satisfactory.

ssary adjunct IS No.

listed below to this standard: Title

is nece-

Methods of test for soils: Part. 2720 ( Part 2 ) : 1973 2 Determination of water content ( second revision ) 3 APPARATUS
3.1 Apparatus

3.2.7 Seamless Rubber Membrane In the form of a tube, open at both ends of internal diameter equal to the specimen diameter and of length 50 mm greater than the height of the specimen. The membrane
1

required for the preparation

of

IS 2720 ( Part 11) : 1993 thickness should be selected having regard to the size, strength and nature of the soil to .4 thickness of 0.2 to 0.3 mm is be tested. normally satisfactory. 3.2.8 :Membrcne Stretcher the size of the specimen. capable of being opsned for the insertion of the specimen, suitable for use with the fluid selected for use at internal pressures.up to 1 MPa and provided with a means of applying additional axial compressive load to the specimen by means of a loading ram. A transparent chamber is rticommended. The base of the cell shall be provided with a suitable central p:des:al with drainage outlets with valves. a.-zd Muiritain3.4.2 An Apparatus for Applying ing the Desired PrcFsure on the Fluid Within the Cell To an accuracy of 10 kPa ( preferably 5 kPa ) with a gauge for measuring the pressure. .The gauge shall be regularly calibrated. 3.4.3 Machine Capable of Applying pression to the ;;pecimen (a) and (b) (b) A.rial Com-

T:) wit 3.2.9

the size of the specimen.

Rubber Rings &tion for to suit Moisture the Content diameter Deter-

Clf circular crzs; of ihe end caps. 3.2.10 Apparatils mination As described 1973. 3.2.11 Balance Readable

in section

1 of !S 2720 ( Part 2 ) :

and accurate

to O-5 g.

3.3 Additional 3.3.1 Extruders of 3.1 ExtrudeIs

Items for the Specific Procedures [ For ] Procedures

3.3.2 Thin-walled Tubes [ For Procedure of 3.1 ] (for obtaining test specimens )

The tubes shall be smooth inside and out and turned at one end to form a cutti;;g edge at rhe inner surface of the tube. The area ratio ( see Note ) shall be kept as low as posible consistent with the strength requirements of the specimen tubes and its value shall not exceed 10 percent. The length of the tubes shaII be at Ieast 50 mm more than the requi::d length of the specimens. NOTE - The area ratio is defined 2s the volume of soil displaced by the sampler io propor:ioh to the
volume of the sslllple and is detincd as:

At convenient speeds to cover the range 0.05 to j mm per minute. The machine should have a capacity of 50 KN. A means of measuring the axial compression of the specimen to an accuracy cf 0.01 mm shall be provided and the machine shall be capable of applying an axial compression of about onethird the height of the specimen tested. NOTE - In case the travel of the dial gauges is not sufficient a magnetic spacer of known thickness may be r:sed. 3.4.4 provision shall be made for measuring the additional axial load on the specimen. Proving ring of 1 KN capacity with sensitivity of 2 N for low strength soils and one of 10 KN capacity with sensitivity of 10 N for high strength soils are found suitable. 4 PREPARATION OF SPECIMENS

Area ratio where Do .= outside DC = inside 3.3.3

=

D,= - Dc2 Dr" x 100 percent

4.1 Undisturbed Specimens diame!cr diameter of the tube, of the cutting and edge. 4.1.1 The object of the specimen preparation is to produce cylindrical specimens of height twice the sp:clmcn diameter with plane ends normal to the axis and with the minimum change of the soil structure and moistcre content. The method of pl-sparation will depend on whether the sample is received in the laboratory in a tube o,r as a block sample and any one of the procedures given in 4.1.1.I, 4.1.1.2 OT 4.1.1.3 may be used. ---__ 1 kPd = IiXl kgf,rnz 1 KK z 109 kgf

Soil Lathe [ For Procedure test specimens.

(c) of 3.1 ]

For preparing 33.4

Meier Box [ For Procedure

(c) of 3.1 ] perpe,ldi`Test

For cutting the ends of the specimen cular to their axes. 3.4 Apparatus Required for Triaxial 3.4.1 Triaxial PI iriaxial Test Cell

test cell of dimensions

appropriate

to

IS 2720 ( Part 11 ) : 1993

4.1.1.1 A specimen from a sampler tube of the same internal diameter as the required specimen May be obtained as given in (a) to (e):

a) When the ends of the sampling tube are not Rat and normai to the axis of the tube, a length of the sample sufficient to form a specimen shall be extruded from the tube and cut cff. This specimen shall then be placed in the split mould and the ends trimmed flat and normal to its axis. b) As an alternative to (a) when the tube enclosing the sample is in good condition and the ends are plane and normal to the axis of the tube, the specimen may be prepared in the tube and extracted. c) Auy wax. used for sealing, shall be removed and the cutting edge end of the sample smoothed so that it is approximately normal to the axis of the tube. The extruder shdl then be used to ptish the sample through the tube so that the other end may be cut normal to the axis and finally smoothed with the metal straight edge. The sample should be extruded from the tube pushing from the cutting edge side and cut to the required length. During this operation the sample tube shall be held vertical. Precautions shall be taken to prevent adhesion between the soil and the extruder, for example, by interposing oiled paper discs or lightly oiling the face of the extruder. diameter and mass d) The length, the specimen shall be measured to accuracy enabling the bulk density to calculated to an accuracy of f percent. of an be 1-O

tubes or by hand trimming GII a soil lathe. Specimens of sensitive clays and, in some cases, of stiff fissured, clays, may be best prepared by the latter methcd. The preparation of specimens cn the soil lathe is dealt with in 4.1.1.3. To prepare specimens by means cf thin-wslled tubes the sample shall be extruded from the sample tube directly into a number of thin-walled spec@en tubes rigidly clamped with their cutting ends a short distance from the ezd of the sampling tube. Tejt speci;nc:;s shall be prepared from the thinwalled specimens tubes in the manner described in 4.1.1.1. 4.1.1.3 A specimen from a block sample May be obtained as given in (a) to (c) :

a) A rectangular

prism slightly Iarger than the required final dimension of the specimen shall be cut from the block sample. The rectangular prism shall bc cut either on a required orientation or an orientation as best suited to the sample. The ends of the prism shall be made plane and parallel using the meter box and the prism shall b.2 placed in the soil lathe. The excess soil shnll be cut off in this layer. The trimming operation, rotating, the sample between each cutting operation, shall be continued until a cylindrica1 specimen results. specimen shall be removed from the soil lathe, placed in the split mould and cut to the correct length and the ends made plane and normal to the axis of the specimen. be as described of the preparation in 4.1.1.1. shall

b) The

Cl The remainder
4.2 Remoulded

e) The specimen shall be placed on one if the end caps and the other end cap shall be put on top of the specimen. The rubber membrane shall then be placed around the specimen using the membrane stretcher and the membrane sealed to the end caps by means of rubber rings. The specimen is then ready to be placed on the pedestal in the triaxial cell. The pedrstzl should be either covered with a solid end cap or the drainage valve should be kept ciosed. 4.1.1.2 For obtaining a specimen from
Two mthods ai'e abailable, either ~n.ty bc cut :<I size by means of a sample tlrbc of larger d,`gmeter then tire required specimen the spxinle;l thin walled

Samples

Rcmoulded samples prepared at the desired moisture and density by static and dynamic methods of compaction or by any other suitable method, where necessary. 5 TESTING 5.1 The specimen prepared as described in 4 shall be placed centrally on the pedestal of the triaxial cell. The cell shall be assembled wi:h the loading ram initially clear of the top cap of the specimen and the cell containing the specimen shall be placed in the loading machine. The operatiitg fluid shall be admit ted to the cc!1 and the pressure rziscd to the desired value.
3

IS 2720 ( Part 11) : 1993 5.2 The loading machine shall be adjusted to bring the loading ram a short distance away from the seat on the top cap of the specimen and the initial reading of the load measuring The loading machine gauge shall be recorded. shall then be further adjusted to bring the loading ram just in contact with the seat on the top cap of the specimen and the initial readir,g cf the gauge measuring the axial compression of the specimen shall be recorded. A rate of axial compression shall be selected such that failure is produced within a period of approximately 5 to 15 minutes. The test shall be commenced, a sufficient number of simultaneous readings of the load and compression measuring gauges being taken to define the stress strain curve (see Note ). The test shall be continued until the maximum valae of the stress has been passed or until an axial strain of 20 percent has been reached. The specimen shall then be unloaded and the final reading cf the load measuring gauge shall be recorded as a check on the initial reading.
NOTE - It is often convenient to make a plot of load versus compression as the rest proceeds, to enable the point of failure to be determined.

6.1.1 The area of the specimen normal to its axi$ at any stage of the test shall be computed on the assumption that the sample deforms as This area at any strain is a right cylinder. given by:

A=+
where A0 e where = = initial normal ( L, -

A

area of the specimen to the axis, and

L )/Lo
length of the specimen,

L, L

= initial
and

= length

of the specimen at the stage of test at which area is to be determined.

6.1.1.1 The principal stress difference ( o1 - CT: ) for any stage of the test shall be determined by dividing the additional axial load by the corresponding area A. 6.1.1.2 A correction to allow for the ing effect of the rubber membrane made as given below: Correction where = 4M I-& D restrainshall be

5.3 The cell shall be drained of fluid and dismantled, and the specimen taken out. The rubber membrane shall be removed from the specimen and the mode of failure shall be noted ( see Note I ). The specimen shall be weighed (see Note 2 ) and samples for the determination of the moisture content of the specimen shall be taken [ see Section 1 of IS 2720 ( Part 2,) : 1973 1. If there is a moisture change in the specimen it should be recorded and discretion used with regard to acceptability of the test.
NOTES 1 The most convenient method of recording the mode of failure is by m:ans of sketch indicating the position of the failure planes. The angle of the failure plan (s) to the horizontal may be r;corded, if required. These records should be completed without undue delay to avoid loss of moisture from specimen. 2 Comparison with the recorded mass of the specimen before testing provides a check on the impermeability of the rubber membrane if water has been used as th: operating fluid in the cell.

M=

the compression modulus of the rubber membrane in kg/cm of width ( see 6.1.1.4 ), E = the axial strain at the maximum principal stress different, and

D=

initial in cm.

diameter

of

the

sample

6.1.1.3 The value of the correction as given in 6.1.1.2 shall be deducted measured maximum principal stress to give the corrected value of the principal stress different.

calculated from the difference maximum

6 CALCULATIONS 6.1 According to the procedure given in this standard the difference between the initial reading and any subsequent reading of the loading measuring device is the axial load applied to the specimen in addition to that due to cell pressure. 4

6.1.1.4 The compression modulus of the rubber membrane cannot be measured directly but may be assumed to be equal to the modulus measured in extension. The extension modulus of a circumferential strip ( 25 ) mm wide cut from the membrane may be determined by means of the arrangement shown in Fig. 1. The contact faces between the rubber and the glass rods should be dusted with talc powder to reduce friction. 7 REPORTING OF RESULTS of each test specimen, the moisture content, the

7.1 The dimensions the bulk density,

IS 2720 ( Part 11) : 1993 the value of the maximum ce:l pressure, principal stress difference ( al-a, ), and the corresponding strain and time to failure and the rate of strain at which the test was conducted shall be reported. 7.1.1 When required the stress-strain curve of the test shall be plotted with the axial strain as abscissa and the principal stress difference as ordinate. 7.1.2 The type of sampler and method sampling in the field shall be reported. of

7.2 The shear parameters shal1 be obtained from a plot of Mohr circles for which purpose peak values of principal stress different: or principal stress ratio or the ultimate value as desired may be used. 7.3 A proforma for the record results is given in Annex A. of the test

MEAN

LENGTH

OF

MEMBRANEeZ(l-d-2t)+H(d*t) LOAD PER 2Smm= y EXTENSION MODULUS(M! LOAD PERem STRAIN EXTENSION STRAIN = MEAN LENGTH =

W FIG. 1
APPARATUS FOR MEASURING THE EXTENSION MODULUS OF RUBBER MBMBRANE

1s 2720 ( Part 11 `r : 199.3

ANNEX

A

( C!ause 7.3 )
UNCONSOLIDATED THE Operator Site Specimen Initial preparation procedure UNDRAINED TRIAXIAL COMPRESSION TEST WITIIQ~I1 MEASUREMENT OF POREWATER PRESSURE Date Borehole No. Sample No. length of specimen specimen Bulk density Moisture content Depth

Initial diameter

Initial weight of specimen Load gauge No. Cell pressure Description ( 0, ) = of sample

Load gauge constant Rate of strain Sketch of specimen after failure

Mode of failure Angle of shear plane with vertical Compression Gauge Reading (1) Load Gauge Reading (2)
cotnp-

axis Strain Corrected Area (5) Load Deviator Stress (01 - %) (7) Vertical Stress 01 -_-.-_..~ (8)

ression of Sample (3) (4)

=i *3 (9)

(6)

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Dot: No. CED 23 ( 4992
Amendments
)

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Tex: Affected

BUREAU

OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 0131,323 33 75,323 94 02 Regional Offices: Central Eastern Northern Southern Western
:

Teiegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone 32376 17,3233841 337 84 99,337 85 61 337 86 26,337 9120 60 38 43 1 60 20 25 235 02 16,235 04 42 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 832 92 95,832 78 58 1 832 78 91,832 78 92

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

:

:

:

:

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GWAZIABAD. GUWAI-IATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPIJR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.
Printed by Reprography Unit, BlS, New Delhi

