IS 14665 (Part 2/Set
(Superseding IS 1860:1980

1 & 2) : 2000
and IS 6620:1972)

( Reaffirmed 2005 )

Indian Standard
ELECTRIC
OPERATION Section

TRACTION LIFTS
FOR INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE Lifts

PART 2 CODE OF PRACTICE

1 Passenger and Goods Section 2 Service Lifts

ICS 91.140.90

0 BIS2000 BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS MANAKBHAVAN,9 BAHADURSHAHZAFARMARG NEW DELHI 110002

April 2000

Price Group

I1

Lifts and Escalators

Sectional

Committee,

ET 25

FOREWORD This lndian Standard (Part 2/Set I and 2) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Lifts and Escalators Sectional Committee had been approved by the Electrotechnical Division Council. The necessity of lifts in multi-storeyed buildings has been so well recognized that no multi-storeyed building is planned without proper provision for lifts. The installation of lifts has been governed in cities by different L#s Act and Rules thereunder, which are intended to ensure safe installation and operation of the lifts. However, there is no uniformity in these rules regarding minimum standards of installation which should be fulfilled for
safe working of lifts, and this standard is intended to give the necessary guidance for safe installation, of electric passenger, goods and service lifts. by the Lifts and Escalators Sectional Committee as operation and standard maintenance

This standard is one among the series of standards finalized
detailed below. Lifts and Escalators

This was done in view to align the Indian Standards with the latest developments

in the field of EN 8 1. lifts all over the

and also to align the standards with the European Norms on Lifts and Escalators

Moreover, these standards are published
country, where presently different

in view to have a uniform code for electric traction
by different states.
Superseding

rules are being followed

New Series 14665 Electric Part I traction lifts:
3534 (first

Outline

dimension

: 1979
revision)

Outline

dimensions

of electric

lifts

Part 2

Code of practice for installation, and maintenance: Passenger and goods lifts

operation

Sectiott I

1860

: 1980 Code of practice for installation,
maintenance of passenger

operation lifts

and

and goods

(first revision) Section 2 Service lifts
6620

: I972

Code of practice for installation, of service lifts

opera-

tion and maintenance Part 3 Safety rules
4666

Section 1 Passenger and goods lifts Section 2 Part 4 Section I Service lifts Components Lift buffers

: 1980

Electric

passenger and goods lifts

6383 : 1971

Electric service lifts

9803 : 1981 Buffers for electric lifts

passenger and goods

Section 2

Lift guide rails and guide shoes

10191 : 1982 Car and counter weight guide rails, guide rail supports and fastenings and 11615 : 1986 Car and counter weight guide shoes for electric passenger and goods lifts of carframe for for lifts

Section 3

Lift carframe, suspension

car, counterweight

and

I 1706 : 1986 General requirements electric passengers and goods lift

Section 4

Lift safety gears and governors

9878 : 1981 Safety gears and governors passenger and goods lifts

for electric

(Continued

011

third cover)

AMENDMENT NO. 3 SEPTEMBER 2012 TO IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000 ELECTRIC TRACTION LIFTS
PART 2 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE Section 1 Passenger and Goods Lifts (Page 1, clause 3.2) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: `3.2 Bottom Counterweight Runby The distance between the counterweight buffer striker plate and the striking surface of the counterweight buffer when the car floor is in level with the top terminal landing.' (Page 2, clause 3.8.1) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: `3.8.1 Bottom Car Clearance The clear vertical distance from the floor of the lift-pit to the lowest structural or mechanical part, equipment or device installed beneath the car-platform, except the guide shoes, rollers, safety jaw blocks and platform apron or guard located within 300 mm measured horizontally from the sides of the car platform when the car rests on its fully compressed buffers.' (Page 3, clause 3.24) -- Delete. (Page 4, clause 3.41.6) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: `3.41.6 Car Switch Operation Method of operation by which the movement of lift car is directly under the operation of the attendant by means of a Handle / Switch in the lift car.' (Page 5, clause 3.60) -- Insert 3.61, 3.62 and 3.63 after 3.60: Price Group 3 1

Amend No. 3 to IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000 `3.61 Compensating Ropes or Chains Ropes or chains suspended from the car frame and the counterweight frame, to counterbalance the weight of the suspension ropes. 3.62 Traction Drive Lift whose lifting ropes are driven by friction in the grooves of the driving sheave of the machine. 3.63 Trailing Cable Flexible cable providing electrical connection between the lift car and a fixed point or points.' (Page 8, clause 5.6) -- Insert new clause 5.7 after 5.6: `5.7 No equipment except that forming a part of the lift or necessary for its maintenance shall be installed in the lift well.' [Page 16, clause 8.4.1(a)] -- Substitute the following for the existing: `a) Power supply mains -- The electric supply for the lifts shall be separate from other building services, on separate circuits from the main switch rooms and shall be taken through armoured cable separately through respective lift shafts. The route of the armoured cable shall be safe from fire. Separate cables for power supply and lighting shall be provided from meter room to machine room.' (Page 17, clause 8.4.2.7) -- Insert new clause 8.4.2.8 after 8.4.2.7: `8.4.2.8 The trailing cable conductor utilization shall be designed to ensure maximum safety in case of failure of insulation, keeping in mind different voltages that may be present in the cable. Accordingly, conductors of incoming and outgoing safety circuits shall not be adjacent to each other to ensure that the safety circuit does not get bypassed in the eventuality of conductors getting short circuited with each other.' 2

Amend No. 3 to IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000 (Page 18, clause 9.5) -- Insert new clause 9.6 after 9.5: `9.6 Emergency Stop Switch on Car Top An emergency stop switch, of manually opened and closed type, shall be provided on top of every lift car and shall be marked conspicuously.' [Page 18, clause 10.1(e) and 10.1(f)] -- Substitute the following for the existing: `10.1 e) Requirements associated with machine room and overhead pulley room (see 10.6); f) Requirements associated with lift well (see 10.7);' (Page 19, clause 10.6) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: `10.6 Requirements Associated with Machine Room and Overhead Pulley Room 10.6.1 Machine room should be considered as plant space, and conditions provided to permit reliable operation of electrical switchgear and rotating machinery, and be conducive to good maintenance. Machine room shall be adequately ventilated. It shall be such that the motors and equipments as well as electric cables, etc, are protected as far as possible from dust and humidity. The ambient temperature in the machine room shall be maintained between + 5�C and +40�C. Machine room should also be weatherproof, and if ventilation louvers are provided, they should be designed and located to prevent entry of rain water in the machine room. Lighting should be provided to give at least 200 lux around the controller and machine. At least one plug socket point shall be provided in the machine room. The switch for the machine room light shall be fixed near the entrance of the machine room. The machine room walls, ceiling and floor should be finished in dust-resisting materials, tiles, etc, or painted as a minimum to stop dust circulation, which otherwise could damage rotating machinery and cause failure of switchgear. 3

Amend No. 3 to IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000 The machine room shall be designed so as to allow free and easy access to all parts of the equipment and the width of the clear space around the machine from any two sides shall in no case be less than 600 mm. Provision shall be made to allow the removal and replacement of various units. The entrance door of the machine room shall have sufficient opening to allow for removal and replacement of machinery therein. The floor of the machine room shall be designed and constructed to carry safely at any point the heaviest part of the equipment and withstand the loads and forces to which they are intended to be subjected to and comply with the requirements stipulated in the National Building Code. If the floor does not extend to the enclosing wall, the open sides shall be adequately guarded by suitable means. The height of the machine room shall be sufficient to allow any portion of the equipment to be accessible and removable for repairs and replacement and shall not be less than 1 980 mm clear from the floor of the access area and working area. There shall be a clear vertical distance of at least 300 mm above the rotating parts of the machine. The machine room shall be locked and shall be accessible to those who are concerned with the operation, maintenance and inspection of the machinery or equipment. Approach way to machine room from top landing level shall be direct, easy and safe to walk and preferably be by way of staircase. If this is not possible, sufficiently wide and deep permanent structural steps may be used. These structural steps shall be provided with adequate hand holds, shall not be too steep. A danger notice board shall be displayed permanently on the outside of the machine room door and near the machinery. There shall not be any common wall/slab between machine room and water tank. The machine room shall not be used as a store room or for any purpose other than housing the machinery/components connected with the lift installation. The machine room shall not act as a passage to any other room or utility. 4

Amend No. 3 to IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000 10.6.2 The place in which the overhead pulleys, overspeed governors and similar machinery are fixed shall be easily accessible for maintenance and repair purposes. It shall be lighted adequately and safe working procedure shall be established for maintenance and repair works.' (Page 19, clause 10.7) -- Substitute the following for the existing clause: `10.7 Requirements Associated with Lift Well and Pit 10.7.1 Lift wells should be constructed to be weatherproof and of a dust free surface material or should be painted to minimize dust circulation on to moving apparatus and from being pumped by the car movement in to machine room or on to landings and shall be rendered fire-resistant to the greatest possible extent. The structure of the well shall conform to the requirements as laid in National Building Code and be able to support at least the loads which may be applied by the machine, by the guide rails at the moment of safety gear operation, in case of eccentric load in the car, by the action of buffers, by those which may be applied by the anti rebound devices, by loading and unloading the car, etc. The well shall have a mechanical strength such that when a force of 300 N, being evenly distributed over an area of 5 cm2. in round or square section, is applied at right angles to the wall at any point on either face it shall, a) resist without permanent deformation; and b) resist without elastic deformation greater than 15 mm. Where the well is not required to contribute against the spread of fire, for example observation lifts in connection with galleries or atriums, tower buildings, etc. the well does not need to be totally enclosed, provided the height of the enclosure at places normally accessible to persons shall be sufficient to prevent such persons: 1) resist without permanent deformation; 2) being endangered by moving parts of the lift, and 3) interfering with the safe operation of the lift by reaching lift equipment within the well either directly or with hand held objects. 5

Amend No. 3 to IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000 Glass panels placed at points normally accessible to persons shall be made of laminated glass. Adequate lighting shall be provided in the lift well for safety of maintenance personnel when working on lift car top or in the lift pit. 10.7.2 Should a lift entrance open out in to an area exposed to the weather, the entrance should be protected by a suitable canopy and the ground level sloped up to the lift entrance to prevent rain or drainage water entering the lift well through the clearances around the landing doors. Any push buttons exposed should be of weatherproof type. The inner surface of the lift-well and its enclosure facing any lift-car entrance shall, so far as practicable, be kept smooth and flush devoid of projections or recesses. Where any projections or tops of the recesses cannot be rendered flush, they shall be levelled on the underside to an angle not less than 60o from the horizontal, by means of metal plates, cement rendering or other fire resisting material. 10.7.3 Where a lift car levelling device is operative with the lift car gate open, such interior surfaces shall always form a smooth and flush surface below each landing level. 10.7.4 Sufficient space shall be provided between the guides for the car and the side walls of the lift well enclosure to allow safe and easy access to the parts of the safety gears for their maintenance and repairs. 10.7.5 All landing openings shall be protected by gates or doors which shall extend to the full height and full width of the landing openings. These openings shall not be less than 680 mm clear in width when the gates or doors are fully opened. 10.7.6 The approach of the landing gate on each floor shall be kept lighted during the whole time the lift is available for use at night, and during the day time, if so required due to insufficient natural light. 6

Amend No. 3 to IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000 10.7.7 Where wire grill or similar construction is used, the mesh or opening shall be such that the opening between the bars shall reject the ball of 32 mm in diameter and the lift well enclosure shall be of sufficient strength to resist accidental impact by users of the staircase or adjoining floors. 10.7.8 Where the clearance between the inside of an open type lift well enclosure and any moving or movable part of the lift equipment of apparatus is less than 50 mm, the opening in the enclosure shall be further protected by netting of square mesh of aperture not greater than 12 mm and of wire not smaller than 1 mm dia. 10.7.9 The distance between the lift-well enclosure on the sides facing any liftcar entrance and the sill edge of the car shall not be more than 30 mm. in the landing zone below the landing gate. If such distance is more than 30 mm., in the lift-well enclosure, the same shall be finished with suitable and smooth plaster work or facia plates so as to make the surface thereof devoid of all projections and recesses. In case the enclosure on the sides facing the lift-car entrance is more than 130 mm. From the sill edge of the lift-car platform, the lift-car door of such lift shall be provided with means to prevent it from being opened except when the lift-car is at the landing served by such car entrance. 10.7.10 When the distance between consecutive landing doorsills exceeds 11 000 mm, intermediate emergency lift landing doors shall be provided such that the distance between landings is not more than 11 000 mm. Rescue to these landings is permissible in case of automatic rescue device operation. 10.7.11 No counter-weight shall be allowed to travel in any lift-well, or part of any lift-well other than that to which it belongs. 10.7.12 On every passenger lift, there shall be provided at each floor, a floor Position Indicator or in use indicator or direction call registering light. 10.7.13 Pit shall be soundly constructed and maintained in a dry and clean condition. Where necessary, provision shall be made for permanent drainage. 7

Amend No. 3 to IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000 10.7.13.1 The floor of the pit shall be able to support beneath each guide rail, force due to mass of guide rails plus the reaction at the moment of safety gear operation. 10.7.13.2 The floor of the pit shall be able to support beneath the car buffer supports, force equal to 4 times the static load being imposed by the mass of fully loaded car and is given by: 4g(P + Q) where P = mass of empty car and components supported by the car, that is part of travelling cable, compensating rope/chain if any, etc, in kg; Q = rated load; and g = acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m / s2). 10.7.13.3 The floor of the pit shall be able to support beneath the counterweight buffer support, 4 times the static load being imposed by the mass of the counterweight and is given by: 4g(P + qQ) where P = mass of empty car and components supported by the car, that is part of travelling cable, compensating rope/chain if any, etc, in kg; Q = rated load in Kg; g = acceleration due to gravity (9.81 m / s2); and q = Live load balancing factor (normally q = 0.5). 10.7.13.4 If accessible spaces do exist below the car or the counterweight, the base of the pit shall be designed for an imposed load of at least 5 000 N/m2, and, a) either there shall be installed below the counterweight buffer, a solid pier extending down to solid ground; or b) the counterweight shall be equipped with the safety gear. 8

Amend No. 3 to IS 14665 (Part 2/Sec 1) : 2000
NOTE -- Lift wells should preferably not be situated above a space accessible to persons.

10.7.14 In the case of a lift well which is common to more than one lift and where the lift car or the counterweight of one lift is working in juxtaposition to the lift car or counterweight of another lift, such lift cars or counterweights shall be guarded carefully and adequately in order to protect persons working in the lift well or on the lift cars from accidental contact with such cars or counterweights in any part of their travel. (Page 25, clause 15.1) -- Insert new clause 16 after 15: `16 Notices A notice board with the following instructions as applicable, and/or other applicable instructions shall be placed in conspicuous position in the lift car: a) The lift car shall not be used by more than........ Persons / ........ kg. b) Close the car and landing door / gate properly, on entering, or while leaving the lift car. c) Do not open the lift-car gate when the lift-car is moving. The gate should only be opened after the lift-car has stopped opposite a landing gate. d) Do not put hand or any other object in the collapsible gates. e) In case of danger, press the alarm button, but do not try to open the car door. Wait inside, until the lift car is brought opposite a landing, and do not attempt to leave the lift car until the landing door is opened fully. f) Children under 12 years of age shall not use the lift, unless accompanied by an adult.'

(ETD 25) 9

Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

AMENDMENT NO. 2 NOVEMBER 2011 TO IS 14665 (PART 2/SEC 1) : 2000 ELECTRIC TRACTION LIFTS
PART 2 CODE OF PRACTICE FOR INSTALLATION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE Section 1 Passenger and Goods Lifts [Page 16, clause 8.3.14.1(b), line 1 (see also Amendment No. 1)] -- Substitute `1 h' for `2 h'. (ET 25)
Reprography Unit, BIS, New Delhi, India

IS 14665 (Part Z/Set I) : 2000

Indian Standard ELECTRIC
OPERATION Section

TRACTION LIFTS
FOR INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE and Goods Lifts

PART 2 CODE OF PRACTICE

1 Passenger

1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part 2iSec 1) covers the essential
requirements, design considerations, precautions to be exercised during passenger and goods lifts operated so as to ensure safe and satisfactory also provides installation. guidance for proper testing installation performance. maintenance and of It

3.3 Buffer A device storing designed beyond to stop a descending limit car or by

counterweight

its normal

of travel

or by absorbing

and dissipating

the kinetic

by electric

power, after

energy of the car or counterweight. 3.3.1

Oil Buflhr
using oil kinetic as a medium which absorbs and car 01

A buffer and maintenance among the architect, of lifts necessarily the various parties and the consulting

1.1.1 Installation
calls concerned, engineer, mechanical that should stage of maintenance. 2 REFERENCES The following

dissipates-the counterweight. 3.3.1 .I

energy of the descending

for co-ordination namely, engineer. planning

Oil hifer

stroke
movement the travel of the buffer plunger or of the buffer-plungel

the lift manufacturer be exchanged to

and the electrical parties

This code gives the information between from the including installation

The oil-displacing piston, excluding device. accelerating 3.3.2

Spring-Bz@
energy of

A buffer which stores in a spring the kinetic the descending 3.3.2.1 car or coutiterweight.

Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts

to this standard: IS No. 732 : 1989 1950 : 1962 304; Code wiring ation

Spring-hufjhr

load rating

Title
of practice installation for electrical (third revision) for sound insulbuildings earthing

The load required to compress the spring by an amount equal to its stroke. 3.3.2.2

Springhfftir

stroke

Code of practice Code Electric Safety and of practice traction rules, goods

of non-industrial for lifts

The distance, the contact end of the spring can move under a compressive solid. 3 3.4 Call Indicator A visual and audible the attendant been made. device in the car to indicate from which to 2 load until the spring is compressed

: 1987

14665 (Part 3/ Set Land2):2000

: Part

Section lifts,

I Passenger
Section

Service lifts 3 TERMlNOLOGY For the purpose definitions of this standard, the following

the lift landings

calls have

3.5 Car Bodywork The enclosing bodywork ofthe lift car which comprises

shall apply.

3.1 Bottom Car Runby The distance between the car buffer striker plate and the striking surface of the car buffer when the car is in level with the bottom terminal landing.

the sides and roof and is built upon the car platform. 3.6 Carframe The supporting frame or sling to which the platform ofthe lift car, its safety gear, guide shoes and suspension ropes are attached. buffer striker 3.7 Car Platform

3.2 Bottom Counterweight

Runby
of the counterweight

The distance between the counterweight plate and the striking surface

buffer when the car is in level with the bottom terminal landing.

The part ofthe lift car which forms the floor and directly
supports the load.

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set 1) : 2000 3.8 Clearance 3.8.1 Bottom Cur Clearance
The clear vertical distance from the pit floor to the lowest structural or mechanical part, equipment or device installed beneath the car platform aprons or guards located within JO0 mm, measured horizontally when the car rests 3.9.7 Alternating

3.9.6 Alternating Control

Current Variable Voltage (ACVV)

A system of speed control varying voltage machine the driving variation induction

which

is accomplished torque

by

and braking motor.

by way of

of the power supply

to the driving

from the sides of the car platform on its fully compressed buffers. 3.8.2

Frequency

Currenr Vurioble Voltage Variable (ACVVVF) Control
which is accomplished motor. by

Top Car Clearance
distance between the top of the

A system of speed control to the driving machine

varying the voltage and frequency The shortest vertical induction car crosshead, or between the top of the car where no crosshead is provided, and the nearest part of the overhead structure or any other obstruction when the car floor is level with the top-terminal 3.8.3 landing.

of the power supply

3.9.8 Solid-State A solid-state accomplished d.c. motor.

d. c. Variable Voltage Control
system of speed control of driving which is of

by varying

the voltage

and direction

Top CoutUerweight

C'learance

the power supply to the armature

machine

The shortest vertical

distance between any part of the

counterweight structure and the nearest part of the overhead structure or any other obstruction when the car floor is level with the bottom terminal landing.

3.10 Counterweight A weight or series of weights to counter-balance the

weight of the lift car and part of the rated load. 3.11 Deflector

3.9 Control
l'ile

Shieve
of a rope

system governing

starting, +eed

stopping.

direction

of

motion, acceieration. member. 3.9.1 Single-Speed

and retardation

of moving

An idler pulley used to change the direction lead. 3.12

Door
Door, Ccntrc CIpcnit7g S:`iding and consists of two that the) move

Alternating

Current Control
motor which

3.12.1

A control for a driving

machine induction

A door which slides horizontally
or more panels which usually so simultaneously. interconnected

is arranged to run at a single-speed. 3.9.2

open from the centre and are

Tko-Speed

Alternoting

Current C'ontrol
induction different

A control for a two-speed driving-machine motor which is arranged to run at two synchronousspeeds motor or by two different 3.9.3 armatures.

3.12.2

Door; Mid-Bar Collopsihle
bars mounted between

either by pole changing ofa single

A collapsible door with vertical the normal vertical members. 3.12.3

Rheostatic

Control
which is accomplished by -varying

Door, Single Slide

A system of control circuit 3.9.4

A single panel door which slides horizontally. 3.12.4

resistance or reactance or both in the armature or field or both of the driving-machine motor.

Door; TM~O Speed Sliding
and consists of two

Variable- Voltuge Motor Control (GeneratorField Control)

A door which slides horizontally other. 3.12.5

panels, one of which moves at twice the speed of the

A system of control which is accomplished by the use of an individual generator for each lift wherein the voltage adjusted generator 3.9.5 applied field. to the driving-machine motor is by varying the strength and direction of the

Door, Verticnl Bi-porting
slides vertically and consists that they of two move

A door which

panels or sets of panels that move away from each other to open and are so interconnected simultaneously.

Electronic

Devices
3.~12.6 Door, Vertical Llfiing is accomplished the lift by the use motor at A single panel door which vertically up to open. slides in the same plane

A system of control which of electronic variable speed. devices

for driving

2

IS 14665 (Part t/Set
3.12.7

1) : 2000

Door; Swing
type single panel door which is opened

3.24

Guide

Rails of a lift car

A swinging manually released. 3.13

The members used to guide the movement or counterweight of goods.

and closed by means of a spring closer when

3.25 Guide Rails The members used to guide the movement closes a manually-opened or counterweight in a vertical direction. of a lift car

Door Closer

A device which automatically door.

3.26 Guide Rails Fixing The complete assembly comprising the guide rails

3.14 Door Operator A power-operated device for opening and closing doors.
3.15 Car Door Electric

bracket and its fastenings. 3.27 Guide Rails Shoe An attachment the purpose frame. 3.28 to the car frame or counterweight for

Contact
of which is to prevent by the normal

An electric device, the function operation operating position. of the driving device

machine

of guiding

the lift car or counterweight

unless the car door is in the closed

Landing Call Push

3.16 Electrical

and Mechanical

Interlock
operation

A push button fitted at a lift landing, either for calling
the lift car, or for actuating the call indicator.

A device provided to prevent simultaneous of both up and down relays. 3.17 Electra-Mechanical Lock

3.29

Landing Door
porting of a lift well enclosure.

The hinged or sliding controlling contact 3.30

access to a lift car at a lift landing.

A device which combines in one unit, electrical and a mechanical and/or car doors. lock jointly

used for the landing

Landing Zone
plane 40 cm below

A space extending from a horizontal Stop Push or Switch
or switch provided circuit inside the car

3.18 Emergency
A push button designed

a landing to a plane 40 cm above the landing. 3.31 Levelling

Devices Device, L[fi Cm
which either automatically landing or under the and only,

to open the control

to cause the lift

3.31.1

Levelling

car to stop during emergency.

Any mechanism the control levelling automatically 3.31.2 zone

3.-19 Floor Levelling A switch for bringing

Switch
the car to level at slow speed in speed machines.

of the operator, towards

moves the car within the

stops it at the landing.

case of double speed or variable 3.20

Levelling

Device, One- Why Automcltic
in case of the level

F!nor-Selector
A device which corrects the car level only under-run during 3.31.3 of the car but will and unloading. not maintain

ci mechanism forming a part of the control equipment,
in ccliain automatic !ifts, designed to operate controls landings. .vhich cause the lift car to stop at the required

loading

3.21 Floor Stopping

Switch

Levelling Maintaining

Device, TMjo-Way Automatic

A switch or combination of switches arranged to bring the car to rest automatically at or near any pre-selected
landing. 3.22 Gearless Machine

A device which corrects the car level run and over-run, loading 3.31.4 and maintains and unloading.

on

both underduring

the level

A lift machine in which the motive power is transmitted to the mounted 3.23 driving directly sheave from the motor without intermediate reduction gearing and has the brake drum

Levelling Non-maintaining

Device, TMIo-Way Automatic

A device which corrects the car level on both underrun and over-run loading 3.32 but will not maintain the level during and unloading.

on the motor shaft.

Goods Lift
for the transport or unloading of goods,

Levelling

Zone
above or below a lift landing

A lift designed primarily
necessary for the loading

The limited

distance

but which may carry a lift attendant

or other persons of goods. 3

within which the levelling

device may callse movement

of the car towards the landing.

IS 14665 (Part 3.33 Lift

2/Set I) : 2000 have been actuated making the stops in the order in of its direction of travel.

which the landings are reached after the buttons have An appliance designed to transport persons or materials between two or more levels in a vertical or substantially vertical 3.34 direction by means of a guided car or platform. been actuated but irrespective 3.41.3

Selective

Collective

Automirtic

O~percrtiori

Lift Car unit with its floor or platform, car

Automatic

operation

by means of one button in the car served and by
up

The load-carrying frame and enclosing 3.35 That Lift Landing portion

for each landing the momentary wherein actuation the

level actuation

and down by but

bodywork.,

buttons at the landings, wherein under non-selective or structure used for stops collective registered

all stops registered operation,

of the car made as defined automatic by the momentary of

of a building

discharge of passengers or goods or both into or from a lift car. 3.36 Lift Machine comprising reduction the motor

of the landing

buttons are made in the order

in which the landings are reached in each direction

travel after the buttons have been actuated. With this type of operation, all `up' landing calls are answered when the car is travelling in the up direction and all `down' landing calls are answered when the car is travelling in the down direction, or lowermost except in the case of ofthe direction the uppermost calls which are answered

The part of the lift equipment and the controlgear brake(s) therewith, and winding

gear (if any),

drum or sheave, by which the

lift car is raised or lowered. 3.37 Lift Pit

as soon as they are reached irrespective of travel of the car. 3.41.4

The space in the lift well belpw the level of the lowest lift landing served. 3.38 Lift Well

Single Automatic
operation

Operation

Automatic The unobstructed space within an enclosure provided for the vertical movement of the lift car(s) and any counterweight(s), for top clearance. 3.39 Lift Well Enclosure including the lift pit and the space

by means of one button in the car

for each landing

level served and one button at each

landing so arranged that if any car or landing button has been actuated, the actuation of any other car or landing operation button will have
no

effect on the to the first

movement

of the car until

the response

button has been completed. 3.4 1.5 Group Automatic Any structure surroundings. 3.40 Lifting Beam below the machine room which separates the lift well from its Automatic equipped The supervisory dispatching dispatching one button the control of lift machine. terminal 3.41 .I Automatic operation oftwo or move non-attendant is co-ordinated including lifts by a with power-operated of the cars operation system car and landing doors. automatic

Operatim

operation

A beam, mounted immediately

ceiling, to which lifting tackle can be fixed for raising or lowering parts of the lift machine. 3.41 Operation

means whereby selected cars at designated points automatically close their doors and served and up buttons at in

proceed on their trips in a regulated manner. It includes in each car for each tloor The method of actuating and down buttons at each landing landings). actuation (single

The stops set up by the momentary

Operation

of the car buttons are made automatically

A method of operation in which by a momentary pressure of a button the lift car is set in motion and caused to stop automatically 3.41.2 at any required lift landing.

succession as a car reaches the corresponding landings irrespective of its direction of travel or the sequence in which the buttons are actuated. The stops set up by the momentary actuation of the landing buttons may be accomplished automatically the landing 3.41.6 Method by any lift in the group, and are made by the first available car that approaches in the corresponding direction.

Non-Selective
operation

Collective Automatic

Operation

Automatic

by means of one button in the car

for each landing

level served and one button at each

landing, wherein all stops registered by the momentary actuation of landing or car buttons are made irrespective of the number of buttons actuated or of the sequence in which the buttons are actuated. With this type of operation, the car stops at all landings for which buttons

Car Switch Operation
of operation by which the movement of lift by

car is directly

under the operation

of the attendant

means of a handle.

4

IS 14665 (Part 3.41.7

2/Set

1) : 2000 in the

Signal Operation
operation, except that the closing

free fall, or, if governor descending 3.52 direction.

operated,

of over-speed

Same as collective

of the door is initiated 3.41.8

by the attendant.

Sheave is grooved of which to receive power is

Double Button (Continuous Operation
Operation

Pressure)

A rope wheel, the rim of which the suspension rigidly ropes. 3.53 Slack Rope Switch Switch provided to slackening attached and by means

ropes but to which

the ropes are not to the suspension

by means of buttons or switches

in the car

and at the landings any of which may be used to control the movement is manually of the car as long as the button or switch pressed in the actuating Device position.

transmitted

from the lift machine

3.42 Operating

to open the control

circuit

in case of

A car switch, push_button or other device employed actuate the control. 3.43 Overhead The members, Beams usually of steel, which immediately

of rope(s).

3.54 Suspension Ropes The ropes by which suspended. 3.55 Terminal Slow Down Switch shall compulsorily on the circuitry cut offthe to run the
on

the car and counterweight

are

support the lift equipment 3.44 Over-Speed An automatic counterweight the event exceeding

at the top of the lift well.

Governor which brings the lift car and/or the safety gear in direction

A switch when actuated high speed and switch in levelling elevator landings. 3.56 Terminal

device

to rest by operating

speed before reaching

terminal

of the speed in a descending a predetermined limit. Lift

Stopping Switch Normal current in case of landing level. or a current so as to

3.45 Passenger

Switch for cutting all the energizing A lift designed for the transport 3.46 Position and/or Direction indicates of passengers. Indicator or in the 3.57 Terminal car travelling beyond switch which cuts off the energizing

the top or bottom

bring the car to a stop at the top and bottom A device which the direction 3.47 Rated on the lift landing lift car or both, the position of the car in the lift well or Stopping Device -Final

or both in which the lift car is travelling. Load load for which the lift car is designed !o carry safely at its rated speed.

A device which automatically cause the power to be removed from an electric lift driving-machine motor and brake, independent terminal stopping terminal emergency ofthe functioning device, ofthe normal device or any device, the operating stopping landing.

The maximum and installed 3.48

after the car has

Rated Speed speed attained direction by the lift with rated

passed a terminal

The means of the maximum car in the upward load in the lift car. 3.49 Retiring Cam

3.58 Total Headroom The vertical distance from the level of the top lift room slab.

and downward

landing to the bottom 3.59 Travel

of the machine

A device which prevents the landing doors from being unlocked 3.50 by the lift car unless it stops at a landing. The vertical handing Roping Multiple 3.60 Geared A system multiplying counterweight of2tol,3tol,etc. 3.51 Safety Gear A mechanical counter~veight device attached to the lift car or of roping where, in order to obtain a A machine gearing. 4 EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION installation is within the scope with Fig. 1, in which worm the power or worm is transmitted to the sheave through and spur reduction factor from the machine to the car, multiple sheaves on the car or or both. It includes roping arrangement Machine distance between the bottom and top lift served.

falls of rope are run around

4.1 If the prqjected of 7, the guidelines to be established. to stop and to hold

laid down together

or both. dcsizned

will enable the preliminary

scheme for the installation

the car or counterweight

to the guides in the event of

IS 14665 (Part t/Set

1) : 2000 5.3 Conformity with Indian Standards to IS 14665 (Part 3

Although the recommended outline for the various classes of lifts given in 7 enables the general planning details to be determined by the architect, these should be finally settled, at the earliest possible stage, by detailed investigation with the purchaser's representative reaching agreement with the Iif? maker, where necessary, before an order is finally placed. This will enable a check to be made and information to be exchanged, on such vital matters as:

5.3.1 The lift shall conform Set 1).

4

the number. capacity, speed and disposition of the lifts necessary to give adequate lift service in the projected building; the provision of adequate access to the machine room; the loads which the lift will impose on the building structure, and the holes to be left in the machine room floor and cut-outs for wall boxes for push-buttons and signals; the necessity for and type of insulation to minimize the transmission of vibration and noise to other parts of the building; other requirements permit'; of local authorities and set out in the `planning

5.3.2 All materials, fittings, appliances, etc, used in electrical installations shall conform to Indian Standard specifications wherever these exist. In case of materials for which Indian Standard specifications do not exist, the materials shall be approved by a competent authority. 5.4 Conformity with Fire Regulations

b) c)

The installation shall be carried out in conformity with the local fire regulations and rules thereunder wherever they are in force. 5.5 Bottom and Top Car Clearances 5.5.1 Bottom Car Clearance When the car rests on its fully compressed buffer, there shall be a vertical clearance of not less than 600 mm between the pit floor and the buffer striker plate or the lowest structural or mechanical part, equipment or device installed. This clearance shall be available beneath the whole area of the platform except for : 4 guide shoes or rollers, safety jaw blocks, platform aprons, guards of other equipment located within 300 mm, measured horizontally from the sides of the car platform; and Compensating sheaves.

4

e> the special~requirements

the need for the builder to maintain accuracy of building as to dimensions and plumbing; the periods of time required for preparation and approval of relevant drawings for manufacturing and the installation of the lift equipment; b)

h) j> k)

the requirements for fixing guide brackets to the building structure; the time at which electric power will be required before completion to allow for testing; the requirements etc; for electrical supply feeders,

Provided that in all the cases, including small cars, a minimum clearance of 600 mm is available over a horizontal area of 800 mm x 500 mm. Provided also that in all the cases, when the car rests on its fully compressed buffers, there shall be a vertical clearance of not less than 50 mm between any part of the car and any obstruction of device mounted in the pit. 5.5.2 Top Car Clearance The vertical clearance between the car cross-head and the nearest overhead obstruction within 500 mm measured horizontally to the nearest part of the crosshead when the car platform is level with the top landing, shall be not less than the sum of the following: a) b) c) The bottom counterweight runby; buffer used;

m> the requirements
n)

for scaffolding in the lift well and protection of the lift well prior to and during installation of equipment; and

delivery and storage of equipment. REQUlREMENTS with Lifts Act and Rules

5 ESSENTIAL 5.1 Conformity

The installation shall be carried out in conformity with Lift Act and Rules thereunder, wherever they are in force. 5.2 Conformity with Indian

The stroke of the counterweight

Electricity Act and

One-half of the gravity stopping distance based on: 1) 115 percent of the rated speed where oil buffers are used and no provision is made to prevent the jump of the car at counterweight buffer engagement, and Governor tripping buffers are used. speed where spring

Rules
All electrical works in connection with installation of electric lifts shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the provisions of the Indian Electricity Rules, and shall also comply with the provisions of IS 732. 6

2)

1A Straight Line Arrangement for Three Lifts 1B Alcove Arrangement for Four Lifts

1C Arrangement for Six Lifts

1D Ardngement for Eight Lifts
FIG. 1 ARRANGEMENTOF

Las

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set 1) : 2000
NOTE The gravity formula stopping velocity distance based on the gravity according retardation from any initial may be calculated

c>
d)

I5 cm, and one-half on: the gravity stopping distance based

to the following

:

S=S.l I'*
where S c' = = free fall in cm (gravity initial velocity In m/s. stopping distance), and

1)

one hundred and fifteen percent of the rated speed where provision counterweight oil buffers are used and no jump of the and is made to prevent

at car buffer engagement,

d)

600 mm.
below the ceiling of the

2)

governor tripping are used.

speed where spring buffers

Where there is a projection

well and the projection is more than 500 mm, measured horizontally from the centre line of the cross-head, but over the roof of the car. a minimum not less than that available Provided equipment overhead calculated vertical shall clearance also be above

5.6 In order to maintain a safe work environment, warning signs should be installed avoid potential hazards. 6 DIMENSIONAL

clear

in all work areas to

between the roof of the car and the projection. that the vertical mounted obstruction clearance between any

TOLERANCES

6.1 Lift Well Dimensions
Plan dimensions represent purchaser's the of lift wells given by the lift maker clear plumb sizes. with The the in conjunction

on top of the car and the nearest shall be not less than the sum of above plus

minimum

the three items (a), (b) and (c) as calculated 150 mm. 5.53

representative,

Bottom Runbyftir
The bottom

Cars and Counterweights

5.5.3.1

runby of cars and counterweights

builder, should ensure that adequate tolerances are included in the building design so that the specified minimum plumb dimensions are obtained in the finished work. Dimensions dimensions maximum in excess for lift well of these minimum
up

shall be not less than the following: a) b) 1) 2) 15 cm where oil buffers are used. Where spring-buffers 15 cm for controls are used: as in 3.9.4 to 3.9.8, and for controls as

plumb to certain

and openings

(but not less)

can be accommodated be necessary involving

by the lift maker additional

values, beyond which changes in design may expense or work by should take representative

not less than the following in 3.9.1 to 3.9.3:

the builder. The purchaser's

these factors into account when specifying the lift well structural dimensions on the basis of the constructional tolerance appropriate to the building technique.

Fated Speed
mls Up too.125 0.125 to 0.25 0.25 to 0.50 0.50 to 1 ____-_.. 5.5.3.2

Runby
cm

6.2 Landing-Door

Openings
that finished landing openings

It is very important
7.5 1~5 22.5 30

should be accurate to design size, and plumb one above the other for the full travel the structural openings of the lift. In constructing in concrete walls to lift wells it

is not possible to achieve a degree of accuracy vertically which will allow doors and frames to be inserted in the openings without to overcome some form of masking or packing Provisions should, therefore, height the nominal inaccuracies.

Maximum

bottom runby
bottom runby exceed

be made in design by increasing to each jamb and head. I In addition, the alignment

In no case shall the maximum the following: a) b) 5.5.4 60 cm for cars, and 90 cm for counterweights.

from design finished floor level, and width ofopenings

of the outer face of the front when architrave

wall of the lift well of fixed dimensions alignment

is of importance

are called for, and in this case the

Top Counterweight

Clearances

of the outer face from floor to floor should being

The top counterweight clearance shall be not less than the sum of the following four items :

not vary to a greater extent than can be acconmodate by the subsequent front wall finish, the architrave set accurately To facilitate common 8 plumb. accurate alignment of landing at each sills it is an

4
b)

the bottom

car runby,

the stroke of the car buffer used,

practice

to provide

landing

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set
independent adjusted. threshold, the position of which can be and the quality of service is measured

1) : 2000
of

in terms

waiting time of passengers at various floors. Both these

6.3 Structural

Limits for Lift Wells at Any Level
A and B of Fig. 2) entrance not encroach openings on these

basic factors require proper study into the character of the building, frequency control, obtained formula lifts. 7.1.2 building The number of passenger lifts and their type extent and duration of peak periods, and method of of service ~required, of landing type

If the net plumb well (dimensions and the nominal structural wall should (dimensions dimensions. Dimension within

C and D of Fig. 2) are defined by plumb

patience, coefficient are not provided.

doors, etc. In busy cities, bein, 0 low, satisfaction cannot be capacities and speeds no simple

lines, the actual

if lifts with adequate is possible

In view of many variables, for determining

the fotlowing

K (inside face of wall of Fig. 2) should fall limits :
-0+25mm -0+35mm -0+50mm by the lift maker of Fig. 2) of Fig. 2) can be

the most suitable

For wells up to 30 m For wells up to 60 m For wells up to 90 m When architrave dimension should should fall dimension within M (outer

capacities, that is load and speed, required depend on the characteristics of these are: The most important a> b) c) d)

for a given

of the building.

are to be supplied the limits to a greater

L (side of structural

opening

the number of floors to be served by the lift; the pitch of the floors; the population the maximum of each floor to be served; and peak demand. This demand may as in up and down traffic movement. on the on a peak

of 0 and 25 mm and extent plumb. by the builder, be made for the than

face of the front wall

not vary

accommodated architrave

by the subsequent front wall finish, the

being set accurately linings provision

be unidirectional,

periods, or a two-way It should be appreciated capabilities

When entrance corresponding

are supplied should

that all calculations

finished openings to be accurately plumb one above the other for the full travel of the lift end to design size.

traffic handling

of lifts are dependent

number of factors which vary according of lift and the assumptions It follows, therefore, they can only beput to limited For instance, compare the capabilities

to the design

made on passenger actions. use of a comparative advantage nature.

that the result of such calculations can with be used to

K

,L_

A

, ,; I I

K

of lifts in a bank with different the same set of factors are of different makes of

loads and speeds provided

used for all cases. On the other hand, they cannot be used to compare the capabilities lift used for a given bank of lifts. Different authorities and manufacturers differ widely

in their methods of calculation,

due to the variations

in lift performance, especially with regard to rates of acceleration and deceleration and door operation times, which form the components the will calculations not necessarily of performance made agree. by time. Therefo-re, organizations different

7.2 Preliminary

Lift Planning

7.2.1 General
Methods of calculating FIG. 2 LIFT WEI.L TOI.ERANCE 7 PRELIMINARY the traffic handling for office capabilities In due The

of lifts were first devised applications application frequently Therefore, as general without used. the following guidance

buildings.

DESIGN

course detailed modifications altering to office

were devised to suit other the basic principles. is still the most

7.1 Number of Lifts and Capacity 7.1.1 Two basic considerations,
of service required building. handling Quantity capacity and the quality of service namely, the quantity of service desired, in a particular the passenger

buildings

general method may be used lift planning for set out in the

determine the type of lifts to be provided gives

on preliminary

offices, bearing last paragraph

in mind the differences of 7.1.2.

of the lifts during the peak periods 9

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set
A lift
the

1) : 2000
building is normally are:
NOTE For residential buik!lngs. hn!gzr intervals Shllid he

installation

for office

designed to populate

the building

at a given rate and

perniissible.

three main factors to be considered a) population lift service, b) handling required c) interval capacity

7.2.5

Trqflic Peaks
traffic flow during the morning building. peak The and

or the number of people who require

The maximum period transportation employees

is usually

use as a measure in an office

of the vertical

or the maximum

flow

rate

requirement

by these people, or the quality of service required.

of all offices are subject to discipline traffic flow is extremely

are required to be at their place in time. Consequently, the incoming arrival high and the time is over a short period.

7.2.2

Population

The first point to be ascertained from the eventual occupier is the total building population and whether this is likely to increase in the future. If a definite population figure is unobtainable an assessment should be made from the net area, and probable density population can vary density. Average population that from about one person per 4 ml to therefore, owner. of the probable from population density If no for

Sometimes

it becomes necessary to reduce the ooering the arrival of the maximum traffic flow by sta,, employees so that different groups arrive at different times. This reduces the peak and also the requirement of lifts. However, many organizations may object to staggering and prefer to have all employees arrive at the same time since it is claimed that staggering will affect the proper co-ordination 7.2.6 of business.

one person per 20 ml. It is essential, some indication should indication be obtained is possible the building

Capacity
size of car recommended is one suitable for a single

The minimum purpose

(a speculative

development

buildings

for a duty load of

example) population in the region of 5 m2 per person for general office buildings is usually assumed. 1.2.3 Qzmntity qf Service The quantity handling handled of service is a measure of the passenger transportation peak period system. of the

884 kg. Generally, for large office buildings cars with capacities up to 2 040 kg are recommended according to the requirements. 7.2.7 Speed

capacity during

of a vertical

It is dependent
and the quality Therefore, be given.

upon the quantity

of service required the speed can general

It is measured in terms ofthe total number ofpassengers each five-minute day. A five-minute base, period is used as this is the most practical time oLer which the traffic can be averaged. The passenger handling capacity should be approximately 10 percent to I5 percent ofthe estimated population that has to be handled in the building in five minutes for diversified office building. is sufficient. 7.2.4 tenancy office building buildings, and

of service desired (see 7.2.3 and 7.2.4). for indicating the following However,

no set formulae

recommendations No. qf Floors 4 to 5 6to I2

are made:

Speed
0.5 to 0.75 mls 0.75 to I.5 Above
Ill/S

IS percent to 25 percent for single purpose occupancy
For residential 7.5 percent

13to20 7.2.8 at the various factor for

1.S mls

Quulity ofService
of service on the other hand is generally shall be the guiding

Layout
lift car bears a fol of

The quality floors.

measured by the passenger waiting~time The following determining this aspect:

The shape and size of the passenger distinct relation to its efficiency handling.

as a medium of trafic lift well entrance

A study of the most suitable proportions

these lifts reveal that the width ofthe the best proportions. car is determined Excellent Good Fair Poor Unsatisfactory 7.2.9 metre permissible

Qua/iv qf Service or Acceptable Interval 20 to 25 seconds
30 to 35 seconds 34 to 40 seconds 45 seconds Over 45 seconds

is, in reality, the basic element in the determination

In other words, the width of the by the loading per square

by the width of the entrance, and the under this standard. Centre opening.

depth of the car is regulated

doors are the most practicable and the most efficient entrance units for passenger lifts.

Determination qf Transportation Capacity During the Morning Peak

or Hcrndling

10

IS 14665 (Part Z/Set 1) : 2505 7.2.9.1 formula: 3OOxQx100 h) The handling capacity is calculated by the

g)

Periods of full rated speeds between stops going up, and Periods of full rated speeds between stops going down.

H=

TXP

It is observed proportional proportional

where

that the handling capacity is inversely which in turn is to waitin, u interval to WT. Reducing the RTT of a lift from capacity by its handling

H

=

handling

capacity

as the percentage of handled during

120 to 100 s increases 20 percent. The round increasing trip time

the peak population 5 min period,

can be decreased

not only

by

Q
T P

=
= =

average number of passengers carried in a car, waiting interval, and to be handled period. during bank of

the speed of the lift but also by improving

the design of the equipment related to opening and closing of the landing and car doors, acceleration, deceleration, (It is related to levelling and passenger movement. These factors are discussed below:

total population peak morning lifts.)

the area served by a particular

4

The most important

factor

in shortsning

the

time consumed between the entry and the exit of~the passengers to the lift car is the correct design of the doors and the proper car width. For comfortable is I 000 mm entry and exit for passengers and that of car width is it has been found that most suitable door width 2 000 mm.

The value of `Q' depends on the dimensions maximum calculating capacity

of the car. for

It may be noted that the car is not loaded always to its during each trip and, therefore, capacity of the car. by the formula: `11" the value of `Q' is taken as 80 percenl carrying

of the maximum The waiting

interval

is calculated

b)

The u&ilization been a definite

of centre

opening

doors

has

factor in improving

passenger

RTT T=-..iv
where

transfer time, since when using this type of door the passengers, as a general rule, begin to move before the doors have been completely opened. door On the other hand, with a side opening

the passengers tend to wait until the door has

T
N

=
=

waiting

interval;

completely

opened before moving.

number of lifts, and round full floor, upper ground trip time, that is, the average from grc 2nd back to

RTT=

The utilization of centre opening doors also favours the door opening and closing time periods. Given the same door speed, the centre opening opening lift. 7.2.9.2 An example illustrating the use of the above door door is much faster than the side in of a opening type. It is beyond doubt that the centre represents capacity an increase transportational in the operation

time required

by each lift in taking one them coming taking for in various fresh

load of passengers discharging floors floor and

passengers for the next trip.

RTT is the sum of the time required
process:

in the following

consideration

is given below: = I 100 in' = 950 ground = I5 = 9.5 m' per person 14 x 950 _ P=----9.5 = I 400 persons
Ill'

Gross area per floor a) b) Entry of the passengers on the ground Exit of the discharge, Door closing operation, Door opening operation, Acceleration Stopping passengers on each floor, floor of Net usable area per floor

No. of landings including
Assuming population

density

c)

time

before

each

starting

d)

time

on each

discharging

Probable

population

in 14

e) f)

periods, periods, II

upper floors Taking 20 passengers lift with

and levelling

2.5 m/s the calculated

RTT

= 165 s

IS 14665 (Part Z/Set 1) : 2000

Q
a) Taking No. of lifts N RTT N H= 165 4

= 20 x 0.8 = 16 =4

A large capacity goods lift at high speed is often a very uneconomical enhanced equipment, preposition. The inherent small high cost is for such due to the very demand

much of which is custom made. The high

T=------.=--

=41

s

capital cost of the lift, building work and electrical supply equipment usually shows a much smaller return as an investment than more normal sizes of lifts. 8 POWER AND CONTROL

300xQ.100 TxP =

300 x 16 x 100 41x1400

SYSTEMS

= 8.3 percent b) Taking No. of lifts N = 6

8.1 Features Associated 8.1.1 Industrial
Switchgear for

with Power Systems

Switchgear
controlling lift power systems is

T&Z
6 H= 3OOxQx 100

= 27.6 s

characterized by its high duty cycle and its high rupturing capacity. Switchgear must be robust enough and shall be so designed as to withstand the high duty cycle and high rupturing capacity introduced during the operation of the lifts. 8.1.2 Flameproof

300x 16x 100 = 27.6 x 1 400

TX P

= 12 percent

Equipment
involved in the use of If possible,

7.3 Quite Operation
Every precaution

of Lifts

Because of the complications flameproof equipment,

the power

and the control in such a way

should be taken with passenger lifts

systems should be as simple as possible. the~machine room should be arranged that normal equipment can be used. 8.1.3 Levelling The levelling

to ensure quiet operation of the lift doors and machinery. The insulating of the lift machine and any motor generator from t'rle floor by rubber cushions, or by a precast concrete prevents transmission recommendations, in IS 1950. slab with rubber cushions, of most of the noise. Some are given

Accuracy
tolerances given in IS 14665 (Part 3/

useful in this connection

Set 1) are those which can be reasonably expected between no load and full load in either direction. Where greater levelling accuracy is required, or practical. careful such Advice

7.4 Position of Machine

Rooms
to IS 14665 over whenever distance

It will be noted that all lifts conforming
the lift well, and this should

examination increased

should precision

be made to see whether is justified

(Part 3/Set I), have machine rooms immediately be arranged possit$e without restricting the overhead required for normal safety precautions. Alternative considered the additional top floor. It is desirable that emergency case of large machine elevators. 7.5 Goods Lifts Normally, rooms machine positions should

should also be obtained, cost may be involved, requirement 8.1.4 This

as additional apparatus and and in some cases the

may not be practicable.

only

be

Corrective
should only

Levelling
be used when it is impossible tolerances, levelling

when there are special reasons justifying cost, such as headroom authority restrictions for lifts serving the

otherwise

to achieve the required

levelling

imposed by the planning

or on long travel lifts to maintain the required

exit may be provided having

in

tolerances during loading and unloading. Generally, a.c. motors are not suitable for corrective levelling except for certain special power systems using auxiliary levelling motors. 8.1.5 Levelling A variable regulation

four or more

with Variable Voltage
system is one using continuous speed differences refinement due to speed is of its

goods lifts have lower speeds than passenger because traffic conditions are and more time is required for loading

voltage

lifts for the same travel, less demanding, and unloading.

which minimizes Therefore,

load variation. regulation

the actual levelling

of less importance control. may be identifiable. 8.1.6

than the general

In fact no levelling

speed as such

As loads for goods lifts increase in size and weight, so the operation difficult. increases. 12 of loading and unloading becomes more greater Therefore, it is usual to require as the capacity

Overload

Tests
the contract not, by

accuracy of levelling

of the goods lift

A lift is designed to operate and transport load at the required duty cycle,

and should

IS 14665 (Part Z/Set 1) : 2000 intention, During or habitually, be used to carry to cover overloads. supply for the It is, however, possible to add a car preference feature

test, as a safeguard conditions,

variable

to all current types of operation 8.2.3 Automatic Automatic momentary motion control

system (see 8.3.2).

and temperature car to complete

a lift is checked

one round trip with contract load plus

Control
is a method of operation by which a at any

10 percent at nominal supply voltage and nominal ambient temperature. There is also a static test with contract will load plus 25 percent to check that the brake sustain the car. to specify efficiency and additional and safety overload to the to

pressure on a push button

sets the car in

and causes it to stop automatically

required lift landing. This is the simplest control system and it is sometimes A car answers referred to as push button control. or car call whichever IS

It is unnecessary test or capacity, normal do so. 8.1.7 running

and in fact it is detrimental

a landing

of the lift

actuated first by momentary is not in use. Momentary

pressure, provided

the lift

pressure of a car push button floor. The car always to a landing

Occasional

Extra Loud

will send the car to the designated push button. With this type of control, or direction is the lift is travelling.

responds to a car push button in preference extra running load. overload It is test a RED landing

It is not good practice to request that a lift should be
designed tantamount to carry an occasional to the normal to specifying an excessive

signal light

which is detrimental and safety of the lift. 8.2 Description

efficiency

arrow indicates that the car is in use, that

of Operation

Systems

This type of control applications:

is recommended

for the following

8.2.1 Methods of Control Systems
a) The methods of control a) b) Attendant Automatic systems are as follows: b) and dual control (see 8.2.2), and (see 8.2.3). push button operation Goods lifts serving any number of floors, where it is usually the most suitable For special purposes, the following be considered: a) Despatch from landings as an additional operated the by pressing floor. as an a key form of control. two systems may A single passenger lift serving
up

to 4 floors.

8.2.1. I Types qf control systems The types of control systems are as follows: (see 82.4); collective control (see

a> Collective
b)
Single 8.2.5);

control

feature for a goods lift with manually doors. The call is registered

push button

car push button and when the doors are closed the car will travel to the designated

c>
4 e) f)

Down collective Directional 8.2.7); Directional

control

(see 8.2.6); for one car (see

b)

Automatic, additional

with feature

attendant on goods

control lifts with

collective

control

operated switch in the car to transfer the control from normal automatic collective control for two or three to attendant operation. with buzzer the There is also a visual call indicator in the car to indicate (see 8.2.9). in 8.3. 8.2.4

cars (see 8.2.8); and Group supervisory control

to the attendant

landing floors at which push buttons have been pressed when the car is under attendant control.

Features of control 8.2.2 Attendant Type

systems are described

Collective
control

Control
is a generic term for those methods by which calls made by pressing in floor sequence at

arid Dual Control
Collective whereby or push the attendant buttons. directly ofautomatic operation

of operation switch

controls the movement operated operation,

of the car by~means of a handle The car switch feature and the attendant

push buttons in the car and at lift landings are registered and answered by the car stopping each lift landing irrespective for which calls have been registered,

signal operation

of dual operation, generally form part of this. Dual operation is the type where there is a provision for both automatic control and attendant operation, in automatic the transfer switch of an operation, of operation being achieved by a key operated

of the order in which the calls have been

made, and until all calls have had attention. Collective control of any form is usually not suitable for goods lifts, except where loading is not expected to fill the car and additignal stops. loads can be taken at other

in the car. Due to improvements these types are sparingly automatic with attendant

used with the exception operation.

13

IS 14665 (Part

Z/Set 1) : 2000 Control
has a single push as the be cannot 8.2.8

8.2.5 Single Push Buttot? Collective
Single push button collective button direction registered 8.2.6 at each landing. in which by the intending control

Directional Three Cars

Collective
control

Control for TVVO or
for two or three cars is a the two or three One push button at

It is recommended, to travel passenger.

Directional

collective

it is desired

system covering

a control

in which

cars in a bank are interconnected. unit with UP and DOWN If, for architectural be specified. Each

Down Collective

C'ontrol
irrespective door being

push buttons are required

each landing and the call system is common to all lifts. balance, landing in the case of a three car these should call is automatically bank, extra push button units are required,

Down collective are registered

is a control system where landing calls from a single push button, or the landing

of the car being in motion

open, and calls are stored until answered. Any number of car calls can be registered and the car will stop in sequence in the down direction at each ofthe designated floors. The car will travel in the up direction to the highest call registered. stopping only in response to answering calls car calls. It will then travel downwards the car travels to the floor of call. This system is suitable the ground traffic. contio1. With this type included: a) b) A landing signa! light indicates that the call has been registered and will be answered. Illuminated entrance. car position indicator above car of conir!:ji the following signals are Iwo where there is traffic only, between

allocated to the best placed car. The control is designed so that cars are effectively spaced and thus give even service. When a car reaches the highest floor to which there is a call, its direction reversed return to the parking Automatically floor of landing calls when a car Other of travel is automatically when it next starts. One or more cars will

in floor sequence. If only one call has been registered

bypassing

is fully loaded is an essential feature for three-car banks. It is also necessary for two-car cars will continue When three-car some form to provide banks in offices. service to all floors. and over, (as and no interfloor

and upper floors

or three car banks have interconnected

banks serve 7 or 8 floors supervisory

of automatic

control

described in 8.2.9) is generally of efficiency. With this type of control included: a) A landing signal button indicated registered b) Illuminated entrance c) Arrow

necessary in the interests

the following

signals

are

light for each landing push that the call has been

8.2.7 DLvectional Collective Directional system intermediate collective landings control

Control for One Car
for one car is a control push buttons at the call is registered Calls from the car

and will be answered. car position in the car. with indicator above the

having

IJP and

DOWN of travel.

whereby.

shaped signal lights in conjunction

for the intended direction

or landing push buttons are registered and stored until answered. The car will answer calls in floor sequence in one direction direction travel is reversed. of travel. Calls for the opposite of of travel are answered when the direction

an audible single stroke gong are required above each landing entrance to indicate to the waiting person(s) which and in which direction course. For light landing traffic conditions, two cars having person arrow car is going to stbp it will continue its

If only one call has been registered

the car travels to the floor of call. This system is suitable for single lifts serving 4 or more floors with interfloor traffic, such as small offlce biocks, hotels and blocks of flats. With this type of control included: the following signals are

shaped signal lights in the back of each car or on the to indicate to the entering in which direction the car is going to depart, can be used as an alternative. 8.2.9

Group Supervisory
a supervisory

Control
traffic passengers lifts the system to co-ordinate

A bank or group of intensive
light for each landing push requires

a>
b)

A landing and will

signal

button indicates that the call has been registered be answered. car position indicator above the

operation of individual lifts which are all on collective control and are interconnected. The very nature of intensive service control calls for a

Illuminated

entrance in the car.

sophisticated

automatic

supervisory

system so`

c>

Arrow

shaped signal lights in the back of the direction the car is going to

as to match the speed capacity

of these lifts. of as

car or on the landing to indicate to the entering person in which depart. 14

The supervisory system regulates fhe despatching individual cars and provides service to all floors different traffic conditions arise, minimizing

such

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set 1) : 2000
unproductive excessive automatically DOWN factors as idle cars, uneven service and waiting time. The system conditions, or light traffic, will respond to traffic such as UP and and provides

8.3.4 Motor Generator Shut Down
Lifts control They controlled by variable voltage system automatically conditions; shut down when slmject to an over-riding under certain service as for example, no demand put back for lift service. into

peaks, balanced

which puts them out of service are automatically

for other specialized

features. in the lift information is

If desired, a master station can be provided lobby which gives, by indicators, under the system programme. visual regarding operating. programme, the pattern Where control which

required. 8.3.5

the system

Basement

Service
control when service is required floor, which is usually the and/or a sub-basement, are then

is based on a definite for altering For lifts with collective below ground required, usually 8.3.6 floor, There are other facilities, the main parking

means are provided of any lift from

the type oftraffic

such as the removal 8.3

service.

to a basement

the lift maker should be informed

of the type of service

Features of Operation Systems

as special technical necessary.

considerations

8.3.1 List of Features for Operation System
Features covered are:

Hospitul

Service
beds and stretchers so than of the car when require required. a `car This an attendant can have

4 b)

Car preference Landing Motor

(see 8.3.2) bypass (see 8.3.3),

Lifts

for carrying switch control

preference' call automatic generator complete shut down (see 8.3.4),

c>
4 -3

Basement service (.ree Hospital service (see

8.3.5),

requirement should be specified as `car preference' and it will function as described in 8.3.2. Otherwise such lifts can have the same control passenger lifts, the choice of lifts. 8.3.7 systems as for normal on the number and the number depending

8.3.6),

0 g)
h)

Manually closed doors (see 8.3.7),
Automatically Controlled power closed doors (see 8.3.Q power closed doors (see 8.3.9) of doors (see 8.3. IO),

of floors served, the service required

Manually
open'

Operated Doors (Without Closers)
alarm should be provided to draw door which has been left

A `door attention open.

.i)
k) In>

Safe operation Director Indication

to a car or landing

service (see 8.3.1 I), of car at landing (see 8.3.12),

8.3.8 Automatically For passenger Service switches (see 8.3.13) Fire switch (see 8.3.14) and landing

Power Closed Doors
when the car arrives at a automatically open and then This time interval in

n>
P) 4) 8.3.2

operation

the doors will

close after lapse of a time interval. can be overruled the car to give instant door closing. An `open door' push button

by the pressure of a push button

Push buttons and signals (see 8.3.15).

Car Prefkence
it is necessary to give a special personal purpose, it should be specified as `car from normal passenger is by a key operated switch is then from the car only and for

is provided

in the car to

Sometimes

reverse closing motion of the doors or hold them open. 8.3.9

service or a house service. When this service is required and for whatever preference'. The transfer

Controlled

Power Closed Doors
that particularly affect the or trucks,

When there are conditions the closing continuous landings. A `door attention open' alarm

control to `car preference' in the car. The operation a floor destination. car position not illuminated. special operation normal service.

safety of passengers or damage to vehicles of the doors should only pressure of push buttons

be made by the in the car or on

the doors remain open until a car call is registered indicators

All landing calls are bypassed and on the landings for this lift are of the key when the restores the control to The removal is completed

should

be provided is required

to draw for some

to a car or landing

door which

has been left

open. This means of operation forms of goods lifts.

8.3.3 Landing For collective landing

Call Automatic
operation,

Bypass
bypassing of

8.3.10

Safe Operation

qf Doors
of IS 14665 (Part 31 should be

automatic

`The safety of passengers passing through lift entrances
is fully covered specified. by the provision Set I). No modification of these provisions

landing calls can be provided. are not cancelled.

This device will bypass loaded but the calls

calls when a car is fully

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set 1) : 2000 8.3.11 Director Service the fire authority to take over the complete control of one or more lifts in an installation [see IS 14665 (Part 3/Set l)]. 8.3.15 Push Buttons and Signals It is most important that the purpose of every push button and signal should be clearly understood by all passengers. 8.4 Electrical 8.4.1 General IS 14665 (Part 3/Set 1) states the requirements for main switches and wiring with reference to relevant regulations. The lift maker should specify, on a schedule, particulars of full load ~current, starting current, maximum permissible voltage drop, size of switches and other details to suit requirements. For multiple lifts adiversity factor may be used to determine the cable size and should be stated by the lift manufacturer. It is important that the switches at the intake and in the machine room which are provided by the electrical contractor are the correct size, so that correctly rated HRC fuses can be fitted. No form of `NO VOLT' trip relay should be included anywhere in the power supply of the lift. The lift maker should provide overcurrent protection for power and control circuits, either on the controller or by a circuit breaker, but the following are not included in the contract: Installation Requirements

There are many forms of giving special service for individuals, but they should always be avoided. They range from key operated switches at preferred landings to the complete segregation of one out of a bank of lifts. It is obvious that any preferential treatment of this nature can seriously jeopardize the efficiency of the service as a whole. When a bank of say three lifts is installed to meet the anticipated traffic requirements, and then, when the building is occupied, one lift is detached permanently for directors' service, the traffic handling can be reduced by a half rather than a third. When preferential service is imperative, then the car preference feature should be available (see 8.3.2). 8.3.12 Indication of Car Arrival

As all lift cars are illuminated when available (in service), it is recommended that this illumination be used to signal the arrival of a car at a landing in preference to special signals such as LIFT HERE signs since signal lamps can fail when the lift is still operating satisfactorily. The following is the practice adopted for vision panels in doors:

a> For
b)

lifts with manually operated car and landing doors, vision panels are provided in all doors;

For lifts with power operated car doors and manually operated landing doors, vision panels are provided in the landing doors only; For lifts with automatically opened car and landing doors, no vision panels are required; and When vision panels are provided they should comply with the requirements of IS 14665 (Part 3/Set 1).

a>

c>
d)

Power supply mains - The lift sub-circuit from the intake room should be separate from other building service. Each lift should be capable of being isolated from the mains supply. This means of isolation should be lockable.

b)

8.3.13 Service Switches When switches are provided to take cars out of service, that is because the remaining cars in the group can cater for the required passenger traffic, it is essential that such switches should not stop the fireman's control from being operative in the event of the lift being designated as a fireman's lift. Service switches should not be confused with maintenance switches, which are only used when it is dangerous to attempt to operate the lift because maintenance work is actually in progress. A control station fitted on top of the car is regarded as a maintenance switch. 8.3.14 Fire Switch When required by the fire authority a fire switch has to be provided, the function of which is to enable 16

For banks of interconnected lifts, a separate sub-circuit is required for the common supervisory system, in order that any car may be shut down without isolating the supervisory control of the remainder. Lighting- Machine rooms and all other rooms containing lift equipment should be provided with adequate illumination and with a switch fixed adjacent to Ihe entrance. At least one socket outlet, suitable for lamps or tools, should be provided in each room.

c)

The supply to the car light should be from a separate circuit, and controlled by a switch in the machine room. For multiple lifts with a common machine room a separate supply should be provided for each car. The car lighting supply should be independent of the power supply mains.

IS 14665 (Part.Z/Sec
Plug should be provided the lower terminal floor with a light, the switch for and accessible from which should be in the lift well, entrance. to a transformer

1) : 2000

When a telephone is to be provided in the lift car the lift maker should fit the cabinet in the car and provided wiring from the car to a terminal box ad_jacent to the lift well. Where a telephone is to be connected to an outgoing switchboard, a post office type should be fitted (for which a rent is charged). The type of telephone should be stated in the enquiry.

When the alarm system is connected or trickle machine 8.4.2 room lighting.

charger, the supply should be taken from the

Electric
All

Wiring and Apparatus
supply lift lines and apparatus shall in

8.4.4 Earthing 8.4.2.1
electrical with the connection constructed installation be so worked

8.4.4.1

The terminal

for the earthing machine,

of the frame of of the carry to a

and shall be so installed, protected,

the motor, and similar the main

the winding electric current

the frame normally

and maintained therefrom. 8.4.2.2 All

that there may be no danger to persons

control panel, the cases and covers of the tappet switch appliances shall which be at least equivalent

metal

casings

or metallic

coverings lines of

10 mm diameter bolt, stud or screw. The cross-sectional area of copper earthing conductor shall be not smaller than half that of the largest current-carrying conductor subject to an upper limit of 65 mm' (see also IS 3043). 8.4.4.2 The terminal buttons, for the earthing stop buttons, of the metallic limit

containing or protecting any electric supply apparatus shall be efficiently earthed.

8.4.2.3 No bare conductor shall be used in any lift car as may cause danger to persons. 8.4.2.4 voltage All cables and other wiring at which these are intended covering in connection to be worked with and

cases and covers of door interlocks, and control switches, junction which normally boxes and similar

door contacts, call car switches, electrical fittings

the lift installation if metallic earthed. 8.4.2.5

shall be of suitable is used it shall

grade for the be efficiently

carry only the control

current shall be

at least equivalent to a 5 mm brass screw, such terminal being one specially provided for this purpose, and caution notice 250 V. shall be affixed near the earth conductor shall be at least equivalent to a 7/0.750 mm conductor. 8.4.4.3 earthing conformity trailing cable The earthing terminal with the conductor in made shall be secured with and also to the in

Suitable

every motor or other apparatus in which energy is used at a pressure exceeding 8.4.2.6

Circuits which supply current to the motor shall in any twin or multicore with the control and safety devices. conductors

accordance in IS 3043 provisions

not be included

recommendations

used in connection 8.4.2.7 A trailing

latest

of lndian

cable which incorporates

Electrici& 8.4.4.4
installed earthed. 8.4.4.5 fittings cover fitting. a fitting, earthing

Rules.
apparatus bonded and on a lift car shall be sufficiently

for the control circuits shall be separate and distinct from that which incorporates lighting and signalling circuits in the case of buildings In the case of building use of single travelling circuits is permitted, less than 30 m in height. more than 30 m in height or cable for lighting provide voltage and control are

The exposed metal parts ofelectrical

Where screwed carrying electrically control

conduit current

screws into electric making with the case and the into to earth the conduit the conduit,

where high speed lifts (1.52 m/s or more) are employed, that all conductors

continuous conduit

of the conduit Where flexible the fitting

may be considered

insulated for the maximum 8.4.3

found in the cable.

is used for leading

Emergency

Signal or Telephone
that lift car be provided signal that is operative the lift well outside either a

and such length of flexible earthed. winding

It is recommendatory
with an emergency lift car and audible telephone.

shall be effectively 8.4.4.6

from the or with

One side of the secondary

of bell

transformers 9 MACHINE

and their cases shall be earthed.

/ EQUIPMENT

GUARDING
guarded from

When an alarm bell is to be provided, with an alarm push which in the lift well indicator at the ground floor

each car is fitted box by the lift maker.

All open rotating parts shall be effectively accidental or incidental contact.

is wired to a terminal

This alarm bell, to be supplied agreed position may be from machine

by the lift maker (with

9.1 Pit Stop Switch Accessible

from Landing and
an emergency from stop

for more than one lift), should be fixed in an and wired to the lift well. The supply a battery (or transformer) fixed in the from the building

Pit
All pits must be equipped which is easily and the pit floor. with switch landing required, 17 accessible the lowest

room or, when available,

If more than one switch is in series.

fire alarm supply.

two switches must be wired

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set 1) : 2000 3.2 Pit Ladder
Where pit floor lowest landing is greater than 1 300 mm below the sill, a pit ladder must be used. For speeds above 3.5 m/s it is necessary to use a lock9.3 Pit Counter

For speeds of 2.5 m/s and above, steel wire rope should be hung between car and counterweight, passing round
an idler tension pulley in the lift pit.

Weight Protection
must be provided to

down arrangement the counterweight safety gear.

of idler tension jumping with

pulley

to prevent of car

A physical

means of protection sheave.

application

prevent accidental rope compensation

contact with the counter weight and

A switch should be provided

to the idler tension pulley circuit should the be disturbed.

9.4 Stop Switch in Split-Level Stop switches shall

Machine

Room
or

in the lift pit to isolate the control normal operating condition

be provided

in split-level

separated machine room to have sufftcient control over moving equipment.

10.3 Lift Entrance

Operation

10.3.1 General for Machine Below Installations
locations above to Every lift journey involves two horizontal movements, The

9.5 Stop Switches

in and out of the car, to one vertical Stop switches shall be provided for at! lift installations have sufficient control at convenient type of door, and the operation major careful 10.3.2 part in the service consideration. given, other than machine over moving

movement.

of the doors, play a and should receive

equipment.

10 CONDITIONS

FOR OPTIMUM

PRACTICE

Goods Trqffic
require relatively longer

110.1 General
The subjects covered are as follows: a) b) Application of rope compensation (see 10.3); (see 10.2);

Most types of goods traffic loading frequently and unloading used for economy

times and manual and simplicity.

doors are

Lift entrance operation Painting

Power operation can be applied, especially for large entrances, to give automatic opening; the doors then always open fully, reducing the risk of damage. For many types of goods traffic, it is preferable for the closing, thougIl powered, to be controlled pressure initiated button, rather than being [see IS 14665 (Part 3iSec I)]. sliding robust, by continuous automatically

C>
d) e) f,

at works and on site (see 10.4); (see 10.5); rooms (see 10.6); of walls and floors, etc

Special environments Ventilation Lighting of machine and treatment

For heavy duty lifts, a power operated vertically door is preferred; this can be made extremely and is capable of extension 10.4 Painting

(see 10.7); 8) h) j) Stairwell enclosures (see 10.8);

to very large entrances.

Car door locks (sde 10.9); Handwinding installation release (see IO. 10); and procedure and

at Works and on Site
with normally before receive a protective despatch will be necessary, coat and is of the

Lift equipment of paint painting normally equipment

at works

to site. Further coat and can take

of lift equipment

k)

Guide shoes (see 10.11).

in the form of a finishing

10.2 Application

of Rope Compensation
is to minimize the

place on site. Alternatively, coat with normal touching be necessary. Any additional erection for tong by premises, and/or painting, final

the further painting

may be carried out at works as a finishing up after site erection as may

The purpose of rope compensation out-of-balance the car at any position

rope tension on the driving cables.

sheave with

in the lift well due to the weight

of suspension ropes and travelling Unless this weight travel driving relationship

due to site conditions operating conditions between

during in the the lift

is minimized

is subject

to negotiation

lifts, the traction

between suspension ropes and situation

maker and the purchaser. Decorative negotiation. finishes are a subject for separate

sheave may create a dangerous or excessive.

being deficient

Rope compensation

may be used for any travel,

but it

10.5 Special

Environments
is suitable for use inside normal and industrial are buildings likely to but be

is usually only necessary for travels over 30 m. Standard lift equipment For slow speed lifts only, that is below 2.5 m/s, chains can be used as the means of compensation. I8 residential, where commercial unusual

environments

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set
encountered, economic mechanical the advice of the lift maker solution should be

1) : 2000

10.7.3

Should

a lift entrance

open out into an area

sought at the earliest possible stage to enable the most satisfactory protection to be found. Special or and/or electrical enclosures may with statutory particular at the

exposed to the weather the entrance should be protected by a suitable canopy and the ground level sloped up to the lift drainage entrance from to prevent entering during rain or surface the the lift well through

be necessary as well as compliance other regulations requirements, ~time of enquiry. Examples consideration a) b) c) d) of situations are: to weather, which

and with the purchaser's

clearances around the landing doors. Any push buttons so exposed should be of weatherproof 10.8 Stairwell type.

which should be fully considered

Enclosures
is not recommended. of guides normally in order The and width, are resulting lacking in the span used, affect the the to

necessitate

special The location of lifts in stairwells

exposure

for example,

car parks;

The use of stair stringers for fixing involves fabricate attachments robustness. and, unless extensive purpose-made are often For stairwells uneconomic under varying

low temperatures, high temperatures, hosing-down, decontamination;

for example, for example,

cold stores; boiler plant; or

site measurement brackets. unreliable of normal sections

for example,

for hygiene

required for the lift machine support beams is excessive deflections motion load adversely

e)

corrosive works;

atmosphere,

for example,

chemical

of the lift. continuous

f,

dusty atmospheres. for example, and flour mills; and explosive atmospheres.

boiler

plant

The necessary provision of suitable enclosures can be very expensive. 10.9 Car Door 10.9.1 Locks

g)

for example,

gas plant.

10.6 Ventilation Machine

of Machine

Rooms
They shall be such

It shall not be possible under normal operation

rooms shall be ventilated.

to open a car door whilst the car is in motion. It is undesirable the possibility to specify and further the car door. floor level through restriction on

that the motors and equipment dusts and humidity. +40�c. 10.7 Lighting

as well as electric cables temperature in the

etc, are protected as far as possible from dust, harmful The ambient machine room shall be maintained between + YC and

of opening

If the car is stopped power supply failure, operation, from

away from ofopening

fault conditions

or maintenance for a number of

and Treatment
rooms

of Walls, Floors, Etc
be considered and rotating as

the possibility

the car door easily

within

the car is beneficial

10.7.1

All

machine

should provided switchgear

reasons. as follows:

plant space. and conditions operation machinery, Lighting of electrical

to permit reliable

a> Car

ventilation

is increased and if, as is~often overlaps conditions claustrophobic

and be conducive should be provided

to good maintenance. to give at least 200 lux

the case, the car door opening partially a landing opening, are lessened.

around the controller

and machine. The machine room

walls, ceiling and floor should be faced in dust-resisting materials, tiles, etc, or painted as a minimum to stop dust circulation which otherwise could damage rotating machinery and cause failure of switchgear. Machine rooms should also be weatherproof and if ventilation louvers are provided to prevent iipparatus. 10.7.2 Lift snow they should be designed and sited being driven through or to the

b)

In some cases passengers through unlocking the restricted the landing door

may be released available by with the release

opening

key. Even ifthis is not possible, communication may be mproved. aid given and panic averted. such as fire, rescue should obstruction as far with safety requiremen's.

c>

In circumstances, be facilitated as is compatible

by minimizing

wells

should to minimize

be constructed surface dust circulation

to be or on to

weatherproof moving

and of a dustfree

material

should be painted movement Lighting stopping

10.10 Handwinding Indication
The release procedure who have received it is dangerous so.

Release Procedure

and

apparatus and from being pumped by the car into machine rooms or on to landings. at the top and bottom of personnel when

by handwinding

should only be persons because

carried out in an emergency

and by authorized

should be provided

the necessary instruction,

each lift well for safety of maintenance

for any other persons to attempt to do

on to lift car tops or into lift pits.

19

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set

1) : 2000

Before attempting to move the car, it is imperative that any person in the car be warned of the intention to move the car, and that they do not attempt to leave the car until they are advised that it is safe to do SO. Any failure to carry out this precaution may render the person concerned guilty of negligence should an accident occur. Before attempting to handwind the lift machine, it is vital that the supply is switched off at the main switch. It is usually necessary to have two persons in the machine room; one to operate the brake release and the other to carry out the handwinding. The exceptions are small lift machines where the handwinding and brake release equipment are so located that they can be easily controlled by one man, and larger machines which need two men to operate the handwinding alone with an additional man to control the brake release. If the car is stuck in the lift well and cannot be moved when an attempt is made to move it in a downward direction, then no attempt at handwinding should be made because the car safety gear may have set. Any further procedure should be carried out under the instruction of a qualified lift mechanic. Provided the car is free to be moved in the downward direction, then it should be hand wound to the nearest floor. There is a preference to move the car in a downward direction. However, this may not always be practical owing to the distance involved and the time taken to complete the movement. In addition the amount of out of balance load on the counterweight side, due to the size of car and the small number of persons inside it, may make it necessary to wind the car upwards. In the case of higher speed lifts the direction of handwinding will usually be governed by the effort required to move the car because of the absence of a large gear reduction ratio. It is essential that all detail operations be carried out according to the manufacturer's instructions for the lift concerned, and these should be clearly stated and permanently displayed in the form of a notice in the machine room.
10.11 Guide Shoes

that they tend to smooth out vibrations to gear motion.

in the car due

For installations with a high mechanical efficiency, such as gearless lifts, roller guide shoes are preferable. Sliding guide shoes can be used but they have a variable coefficient of friction due to variations in the state of lubrication. Roller guide shoes have the advantage of not requiring any lubrication the guides and so promote cleanliness and reduce the fire risk. On the other hand, they require some provision for horizontal movement of the car, and generally cost more than sliding shoes. The risk of noise from the roller/ball bearings in roller guide shoes is reduced by increasing the diameter ofthe roller for the higher speed lifts. For 5.0 m/s the roller diameter for car and counterweight should be not less than 250 and 150 mm, respectively, and for 2.5 m/s, 150 and 75 mm, respectively. Sliding guide shoes for speeds exceeding I .O m/s should be resiliently mounted, and self-aligning with automatic lubrication. For lower speeds, solid adjustable guide shoes are sufficient with grease lubricant applied manually _to the guide.
11 LIFT ENQUIRY TENDER 11.1 General A period of four weeks is normally sufficient-for return -of tenders. This should be extended if large numbers of lifts or special requirements are involved. OR INVITATION TO

The enquiry documents should be kept to the essential minimum, and should be strictly confined to material relevant to the lift work and to the particular project concerned. The following list indicates the data needed by the lift maker when lifts are selected. When building restrictions, orspecial types of load, preclude the use of lifts complying with this standard, data additional to the following will be needed according to the particular circumstances: a) b) c) d) e) f) g)
h) _i) 20

Identification

of lift:

The following comments will facilitate the correct application ofthe various types ofguide shoe available. Goods lifts have a relatively heavy reaction between guide shoe and guide. Forthis reason roller guide shoes are not suitable for goods lifts, so sliding guide shoes should be used. For passenger lifts, including bed lifts, sliding or roller guide shoes may be used. Roller guide shoes can be used for lifts with geared machines, but sliding guide shoes have the advantage

IS outline reference and type; Contract load and speed; Lift travel and floor-to-floor Location and designation heights;

of levels served;

Electricity supply (voltage, etc);
Power system (see 8); Control Additional system and indicators items (see I I .2); (see 8.2);

IS 14665 (Part k) m) n) Finishes (see 11.3); Inclusions and exclusions (see 11.4); and P) 4) 11.2 Additional Items items required suppression and r) The enquiry should state any additional beyond those specified dismantling Lifts similar of existing as fireman's control, radio interference lift, etc. in adverse applications, conditions, require such as and individual n) Lifting during

2/Set

I) : 2000

tackle and small electric the actual installation;

tools for use

Services of erection

staff to install and wire; and provision of

Site programme

(see 11.5).

Services of testing engineer,

the necessary instruments and test weights; and Guarantee of equipment. in IS 14665 (Part 3/Set l), such

The lift maker should exclude the supply and fixing of such items as the following:

to be installed works, specialized lifts

a>
b)

Builders' inserts;

work,

such as forming room, and

lift well,

pit

chemical

used with power

trucks,

and machine

building

in wall

consideration 11.3 Finishes Finishes provisional

according

to the circumstances.

Machine room floor including any reinforcement necessary for load bearing: Lifting beams in machine room where

should be specified

at the enquiry

stage, or

c) 4

sums should be included may include; ventilation, vision

for them. car bodywork, trims, car and if required, car and fittings,

necessary; Steel surrounds doors; for vertical bi-parting sliding

Finishes to be considered ceiling, landing floor, doors, light fitting, including

panels

landing architrave landings.

push and indicator

e> Any

necessary tanking,

lining or reinforcement

of the pit; ~Dividing beams for multiple wells, and inter-

11.4 Inclusions and Exclusions A number of peripheral installation, by the builder, items are associated with a lift by the lift

well pit screens;

s)

Temporary Scaffolding, Off-loading Cutting

guarding

of openings;

of which some should always be provided and some are best included vary to some extent with the

+I _i)
k) m) n)
P)

planks and ladders; and storage of materials; good;

maker. The requirements type of installation. It is important

away and making

that the limits

of responsibility

are

clearly understood , and the enquiry be specific in this respect. The lift maker should include a) b) c) d) e)

documents should

Site painting Working electricity

of steel work, etc; temporary and permanent

lights,

such items as

supplies, etc; and sanitary accommodation and

Mess rooms, welfare

Guide brackets and wall inserts; Buffers and any associated steelworks; Pit screen to counterweight; Steel beams of raft for machine and pulleys; Sound insulation required; Doors; Door tracks; Supporting steelworks for horizontal sliding to machine where this is

facilities. discussion of the requirements for

For more detailed site preparation

and work

by other trades, reference

should be made to IS 14665 (Part YSec I), and to other ~clauses of this standard, such as 6, 8.4 and 13. Apart from the items are referred common to in the preceding to almost all lift

clauses,

which

f) g) h)

installations, Sill

the following support

shall apply with

:
toeguards goods supply lifts, are for

members

included as part of the complete doors entrance except which support; for general the builder and or finish surrounds to doors : if of be provided filling by the lift general back by the purpose should doors and frames for hinged doors; j) Wiring materials for the lift itself, starting from by the purchaser; (type to be specified) the sill

the supplies furnished k) Overcurrent protection (see 8.4.1); Alarm

Architrave, metal, maker, contractor

these should with

and if of timber

by the joinery

m)

push and bell or telephone

(see 8.4.3); 21

contractor.

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set I) : 2000
As referred to in 11.5, facilities contractor's installing unloading crane heavy facilities should equipment, should for the use of the main to assist in to other to include in addition be instructed The period between order and delivery of materials of details, and when be provided falls into two stages; first the finalizing secondly the actual production

of the equipment, such as:

on site in the course of erection.

depends on the first stage. Within the first stage, other dates may need to be considered, a) all relevant submission approval building

The main contractor these facilities

in his own quantities. in b) c) d)

information

available,

Where the lift maker agrees to use mobile platforms place of lift well scaffolding, the general

contractor

of lift maker's and

drawings,

should provide 4001440 V 4-phase and 200/220 V single-phase supply in the lift shaft to operate such equipment, the supply to terminate at the position the lift well required by the lift maker. These mobile personnel platforms are limited in

of drawings,

final selection

offinishes. the site work can

Information 13 and 14.

relevant to programming

in use for erection of light equipment and also in platform

be found in other clauses of this standard, such as in

and the transportation

only, but use of a crane will also be necessary to assist in the installation of the heavy machinery the initial installation of the mobile equipment. 11.5 Site Programme The enquiry should indicate as accurately as possible the contract programme as it affects the lift maker, in particular date when availability the target date for lift completion, the lift site will be prepared of a crane. and the and the

12.4 Drawings Following showing loadings. purchaser's detail order, the lift maker should supply drawings builder's work required, these together with point the To enable representative drawings. to be prepared,

should furnish the relevant

building

12.5 Approval The purchaser's approval

of Drawings
representative should (after give written if

of the drawings

modification

12 ACCEPTANCE OF TENDER SUBSEQUENT PROCEDURE

AND

necessary), at the same time asking for such additional copies (up to five of each drawing) distribution as he requires for to other parties concerned. of Finishes

12.1 General
The procedure indicated below particularly relates to the most usual case, where the lift maker is a subcontractor. 12.2 Order The main contractor been offered, is instructed to place an order schemes have indicate which

12.6 Selection

Where the contact provides~for the purchaser's choice ofdecorative finishes, colours, etc, the decisions should be communicated by the purchaser's representative as early as possible, and preferably not later than the time of approval of drawings.

with the selected lift maker. If alternative the order should clearly has been accepted. 12.3 Programme As noted indicated enquiry. in 11.5 the programme as accurately At the time of order,

12.7 Electricity Operation

Supplies

to Lift

of +he machine under power is required from early stage of installation for the most

a comparatively shouid have been of

efficient working, and supplies should be furnished accordingly. Whilst temporary supplies may be sufficient for erection purposes, final testing and setting up can only be carried out with the permanent supplies connected. -permanent For this reason the timely supplies is important. provision of the

as possible

at the time

the programme

manufacture agreed.

and installation

of the lift should

for be

The programme including a) b) C)

should

cover

each lift

separately,

13 CO-ORDINATION

OF SITE WORK

dates such as: the order date, the date when the lift site will be ready, the date for provision and of lift electricity supplies,

13.1 Preparatory

Work on Site

It is customary for the lift maker to make periodic visits
to the site before his starting date to check progress on the lift weli construction and discuss relevant matters with the contractor. The IiA maker should assure himself that all building work has been completed in accordance with his requirements.

d)

the lift completion

d:;t::

2:2

IS 14665 (Part Z/See 1) : 2000 Immediately before the time for lift erection to commence the lift maker should check that site conditions are fit to permit erection to proceed. Building work to be completed before lift erection starts includes the following: a) Pit, lift well and machine room complete and weathertight. Pit dry and watertight, including tanking if necessary and clear of rubbish.
In certain system buildings, and buildings ofover IO it may be necessary the top portion

constructional

work in that part of the building containing the lift should be made in consultation among all parties concerned.

13.5 Service of Other Trades The lift erector will require the services of joiners, bricklayers and other trades as the work proceeds, and it is essential that the lift erector should give due notice to the building contractor of the demands to t;e made on other trades, so that he can plan accordingly. 13.6 Scaffolding, Fencing, Etc

NOTE floors, before

to start erection of the lift well has been constructed, in
contractor should temporarily deck out

by prior agreement

which case the general and waterproof

b)

Preparation for lift fixings in pit, lift well and machine room complete. If built-in wall inserts are used, these should be placed accurately and slots cleared of any seepage of concrete. Steelwork items finally grouted or otherwise fixed in position after checking for correct position by the lift maker (for example lift well trimmers and machine beams). Scaffolding in position, as arranged with the lift maker; lift well, etc, properly fenced and guarded in accordance with current regulation. -Entrance preparatiqns completed, including preparations for door frames, push boxes and indicators. In many cases, progress can be facilitated by omitting the front walls of the lift well until the lift car, doors, etc, are installed. Datum line (in elevation) established at each floor to enable the lift maker to set metal sills and frames in relation to finished floor levels. of Material

Scaffolding timbers, rollers and similar items required for the unloading and erection of the lift, and also for the proper guarding and close fencing of the lift well should be provided, erected and maintained by rhe building contractor. The lift well should not be used as a means of disposal for rubbish from the upper floors. Such practice is dangerous. The lift well should be handed over to the lift contractor complete, and no other trades should be allowed to work above or below during the whole time of erection of the lift, except by arrangement with the lift contractor. 13.7 System Building Sites

c)

d)

e)

If the building programme allows insufficient time for lift erection in conventional fashion after the well is completely built special procedures are needed. This applies particularly to industrialized multi-storey buildings. Methods differ in detail. in most cases however the building contractor's crane is used to lower and position pre-assembled batches of lift equipment into the progressively rising top of the lift well. The building contractor should provide a suitable portable cover to the completed portion of the lift well in order to protect the lift en'ctors working below against the weather and falling objects. When the top of the well has been reached it is normal to cap it itnmediately with a precast load bearing floor slab on to which is lowered the pre-assembled machine room equipment. It then remains for the building contractor to complete and weatherproof the machine room as swiftly as possible. On all such projects as these the closest co-operation between the building contractor and the lift maker is essential. 13.8 Connecting to Power Supply

f,

13.2 Delivery

The lift maker should advise the contractor when equipment is ready for despatch, so that the contractor can make arrangements on site to receive and unload with appropriate hoisting tackle, slings and supports, as near as possible to the lift well. 13.3 Storage Adequate provision should be made by the building contractor for storing, protecting and preserving against loss, deterioration or damage, all material on the site. Attention is drawn to the adverse affect of damp conditions eon electrical equipment and on steel wire ropes. 13.4 Site Meetings For the successful progress of the work, operation among all parties is essential, and sites it will be found that regular meetings parties are beneficial. Programmes full coon large of such for the 23

The lift maker should give prior warning to the building contractor of the date the power supply to the lift is required, so that suitable airangements for connection can be made.

IS 14665 (Part

2/Set 1) : 2000 TEST,
acceptance, contractor it should be immobilized. The main against such time should take effective precautions until

14 PROCEDURE FOLLOWING INCLUDING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE 14.1 Acceptance
The purchaser accepting should make timely on completion

damage especially

to finishes, or damage to equipment debris,

from dampness and builder's as the lift is required. arrangements of test, for and for A separate service contract inspect, lubricate lift. and report

the lift

should be made with the on the condition of the

insurance cover. Special goes into normal service. 14.2 Guarantee Any guarantee conditional servicing, materials

arrangements

(see 14.4) are before the lift

lift maker to make regular visits during this period, to

necessary if there is to be an interval

and Servicing
provided by the lift maker should be regular and adequate of reasons of faulty period, cover the free replacement through months. of satisfactory and safe should in the guarantee

A date should also be agreed with the lift maker from which his guarantee 14.5 Temporary If the purchaser before taking immobilized, period will commence.

upon the lift receiving and should

Use of Lifts intends to permit temporary service, use of a contractor, of those

parts which prove defective or workmanship twelve which is generally

lift by some other party, such as the building it into normal then the responsibilities

so that it is not

To ensure the continuance
operation,

the purchaser (or building

occupier)

concerned should be clearly defined and agreed. In addition to the precautions noted in 13.4, temporary insurance cover should be arranged. If temporary preferably use of lifts be given is envisaged, it should stage,

arrange for the completed lift to receive regular servicing by competent persons at such intervals as the type contract. of equipment It is desirable and intensity and normal of operation demand. Such service can be secured under a service for the lift maker to be entrusted with the servicing period of a new lift. The scope of a service contract may be extended to cover not only regular servicing, but also intermediate service calls, repairs and replacement of worn parts. during the guarantee

consideration

at an early

having regard to the conditions to take place. 14.6 Cleaning Acceptance

under which it is likely

Down
test should include checking the finishes, before the lift maker

following

condition of decorative leaves the site.

The building owner should co-operate with the service
engineer, and should ensure that the equipment is properly used, and that unauthorized persons are not permitted to enter the lift well or machine rooms. Particular attention should with be paid to methods furniture and equipment of

After a shut down (or temporary service) period, the lift may require a further general cleaning down immediately before taking into normal service. The lift maker should be instructed accordingly this work and if any accidental to undertake damage has occurred,

ensuring that lifts are not overloaded used in connection

when they are

to~repair this at the same time. Both these items should be the subject of extra costs.

removals, and internal redecoration and other similar activities which may be undertaken within the building. 14.3 Statutory Lifts in certain Examinations premises are required at'intervals, form. by statutory as specified

15 GENERAL INFORMATION WITH INQUIRY AND ORDER 15.1 When enquiring

TO BE GIVEN
an electrical lift

for or ordering

in accordance with this standard, the particulars below shall be supplied :

given

regulations

to be examined

by the Liji Act, by a competent to report on a prescribed normally Statutory servicing; specially arranged be kept in a register. examinations the provision included separately.

person, who is required Such reports should I) 2) 3)

Particulars

of List

Passenger or goods .. . . .. . .. . . . .. .. . .. . . .. . .. . .. . .. . Number of lifts required . . .. . .. .. . .. . .._._.........

are not a substitute for of statutory reports may be contract or may be

in a service

Load : number or persons . . . .. . .. .. . . . . . . .. . .. kg .... ......... ........ .... Rated speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._.. m/s .. .. .. .. . ... . . .. .. .. . . contract speed m/s Travel . . . . . .. . . .. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . m Serving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . floors .. . . . . .. . . . .. .. . . . .. entrances . . . . .. . .. . . . .. . . .

4)

14.4 Lift not in Immediate Maintenance) When conditions

Use (Shut Down
5) 6)

do not permit a lift to be taken into following completion and

normal service immediately

24

IS 14665 (Part 7) 8) 9) 10) 11) 12) 13) Names of floors Method Position served .. . . .. .. . . .. .. .. . .. . .. .. . .. . .. .. . .. . . .. . .. .. .. . .. . . .. . .. . .. . . . room .. . .. . .. .. . .. .. .. . .. . .. . .

Z/Set I) : 2000
circuit ?

19)
20)

Is neutral wire available

for control

of control of machine

volts Lightina b .,........................... .................... Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ac!dc

Size of lift well Position Internal

. .._.............................

....

21)

Are premises subject to Lijis Ac//Ru/~`.s ?

. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . 22)
23) 24) 25) Proposed date for commencement
on

of counterweight

. . .. .. . .. . .. . .. . . .. . . .

site

size of lift car . . .. . .. . .. . .. .. . .. .. .. design and finish

.. ..
of car

,...........,__...................................

Construction, bodywork

Proposed date for completion Additional items, if required,

. . .._._.._.....,........... . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . .. .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. .

14) a) b)

Car entrances Number,

:

Booklet giving complete details of maintenance schedule and circuit diagram where so specified . . .. . . . .. . . .. .. . . . .. . . .. . . . . . .. . . .. .. .. . . . . . .. . . . .. . .. .. . . . . . . . .. .. . . . ..

size and type of doors. or

Car open in front only or open through opening on ad.jacent sides. operation.

15.2 The following the lift contract:

items are usually

excluded

from

c) IS) 16)

Power or manual Car light

a) b)

Builder's making

work, good.

such as cutting

away

and

.. . . . . . . . ..___......................................... . . . . . .. . .. . .. . . .. . . .. .. . .. .. . Position

Call indicator indicator

Lift well enclosure included

(landing

doors are usually

in car .._._.......__..... entrances

in the contract). beams, or other steel work or the

17) a)

Landing

:
gates or

c>
4

Overhead drilling

Number, shutters.

size and type of doors,

of any steel work.

Scaffolding. guarding of lift well. cables to lift machine room point in lift

b)

Location

of landing

entrances in different

e> Temporary
0
and lighting well.

floors, if the car has more than one opening. 18) Electric supply

Power and lighting

:

cables to half-way

Power . ... . ... .. .. .. . .._....... volts acidc ... ... . ... ... . ... .. . Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..__..... Cycles .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . Wire system

d

Main switch(s) and fuse(s) or circuit breaker(s) in machine room and main switches and fuses for isolating main cables to machine or other professional fees. room(s).

. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._........_.....

h)

Surveyor's

25

As in the Original Standard, this Page is Intentionally Left Blank

IS 14665 (Part

2/Set 2) : 2000

Indian Standard

ELECTRIC TRACTION LIFTS
PART 2 CODE OF PRACTICE OPERATION Section FOR INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE 2 Service Lifts

1 SCOPE I.1
This standard (Part 2iSec 2) covers the essential design considerations, testing and requirements,

a>
b)
of service

Size and position of its enclosures;

of lift well with particulars

Number of floors to be served including vertical distance between floors;

precautions to be exercised during installation ensure safe and satisfactory It also provides installation. guidance performance.

lifts (dumb waiters) operated by electric power so as to

c>
4

Position of

of machine room including and etc; number and type general layout

provision showing

access

for proper maintenance

after

ventilation,

Size, position, doors;

of landing

1.2 This standard applies to service lifts (dumb waiters) as defined apply in IS 14665 (Part 3lSec 2) and does not

e)

Total head room; and Depth of pit. The purchaser drawings: of any trimmer joists or should provide the following

motor vehicle lifts, amusement devices, skip hoists, conveyors or similar apparatus used for raising, 2 REFERENCES The following Indian Standards are necessary adjuncts pilling or tiring.

to platforms,

f)
4.1.1

additional a) b)

Size and position

stanchions adjacent to~the lift well at each floor; Size and position roof level; and of supporting steel work at

to this standard: IS

No.
Code wiring Electric tion,

Title
of practice installation traction for electrical c)

732 : 1989

(third revision)
4.1.2 maintenance,

Size and position of any footings or grillage foundations, if these are adjacent to lift pits. Purchaser should particulars also of supply to the lift in

14665 (Part 2iSec I): 2000

lifts: and

Part 2 Code of practice for installaoperation Section

manufacturers, accordance 4.2 Builders Preliminary

requirements

with IS 14665 (Part 3/Set 2).

I Passenger and goods lifts
traction lifts: Part 3 Safety and lifts Lifts and and Section I Passenger lifts, Section 2 Service Section 3

Work
information regarding supporting steel good,

14665 (Part 3/ Set 1 and 2) : 2000 (Part 4/Set 3) 2000 (Part 4/Set 6) 2000 3 TERMINOLOGY

Electric rules, goods

work, builders work, cutting away and making should also be available on request. 5 ESSENTIAL

Components, carframe, suspension

car, counterweight devices

REQUIREMENTS with Lifi Act and Rules
shall be generally wherever carried of relevant buildings out in

5.1 Conformity
The installation conformity

Lift doors and locking contacts

with the safetv provi;ions

Lifts
and

Act and Rules thereunder,
given 14665 when such installations public places. 5.2 Conformity The installations engineer conformity amended wherever factories from

they are in force

3.1 For the purpose of this standard, definitions in IS 14665 (Part 2/Set I) and IS (Part 3iSec 2) shall apply. 4 EXCHANGE

are in residential

with Factory Act and Rules
shall time be generally of Factories carried out in

OF INFORMATION
with consulting giving manufacturer such as : at the time of

4.1 Purchaser in consultation
shall furnish enquiry dimensions to the lift a set of drawings,

with provisions

Act, 1948 as
in

to time

and Rules thereunder, of Factories

details of available

they are in force when such installations are coming under the purview

and requirements

Act.
27

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set 2) : 2000 5.3 Conformity and Rules with Indian Electricity Act 5.6.4 Top and Bottom Counterweights 5.6.4.1 Top car clearance Clearances for Car and

All electrical work in connection with installation of electric service lift shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of Indian Electricity Act, 1910 and the latest provisions of Indian Electricity Rules and shall also comply with the provisions of IS 732. 5.4 Conformity with Indian Standards lift shall conform to IS 14665

The top car clearance shall be sufficient to avoid any protruding part fixed on the top of the car coming in direct contact with the ceiling or diverting sheave. The clearance shall be calculated taking into account the following and shall not be less than the sum of the foliowing four items : a) b) c) The bottom counterweight runby, buffer used,

5.4.1 The service (Part 3/Set 2).

5.4.2 All materials, fittings, appliances, etc, specified in IS 14665 (Part 3/Set 2) shall conform to Indian Standard specifications, wherever they exist. The materials shall be approved by a competent authority. 5.5 Lift Wells

The stroke of the counterweight

The dimensions of the portion of the diverting sheave hanging underneath the ceiling in the lift well, and 15 cm for compensating for gravity stopping distance and future repairs to the rope connections at counterweight and at the car or at the suspension points.

d) 5.5.1 tGo equipment except that forming a part of the service lift or necessary for its maintenance shalt be installed in the lift well. 5.5.2 The internal surfact: of service lift well, so far as practical, shall be kept flush. 5.5.3 Sufficient space shall be provided between the guides for the car and the side walls of the lift well enclosure to allow safe and easy access to the parts of the safety gears for their maintenance and repairs; if such safety gears are provided in accordance with IS 14665 (Part 3/Set 2). 5.5.4 Lift wells, together with the whole of tne contained equipment and apparatus, shall be rendered fire-resisting to the greatest possible extent. 5.5.5 In case of a completely enclosed lift well, with solid landing doors, a notice with the word `Service Lift' &all be placed outside each landing door. 5.5,6 Every counterweight shall travel in juxtaposition to its car in the same lift well. 5.5,7 It is undesirable that any room passage or thoroughfare be permitted under any lift well. If unavoidable then the pit floor should be strong enough to withstand the impact of free falling loaded car or counterweight. 5.6 Lift Pits, Bottom Clearance and Top Clearance 5.6.1 A lift pit shall be provided at the bottom ofevery service lift from the loading level ofthe lowest landing. 5.6.2 Pits shall be soundly constructed and maintained in a dry and clean condition. Where necessary, provision shall be made for permanent drainage. 5.6.3 Where pit depth exceeds 1.5 m, suitable access shall be provided by a cat ladder or any other suitable device and a light point and switch shall also be provided for facility of maintenance and repair work. 28

5.6.4.2 Bottom car clearance The bottom car clearance shall be maintained in such a way that the counterweight shall not come in contact with the ceiling or any part hanging underneath the ceiling, when the car completely rests on fully compressed buffers, provided the buffers are spring type mounted on solid concrete or steel bed. In case ofwooden buffers the bottom car clearance shall be maintained in such a way that the total downward travel of the car from the service level of the immediate floor near the pit, shall not be more than the top counterweight clearance, when the wooden buffers are completely crushed. 5.6.4.3 Top counterweight clearance

The top clearance for the counterweight can be calculated taking into account the following and shall not be less than the sum of the following three items: a) b) Car runby, Compression of the buffer spring or height of the wooden block used as buffer, and 15 cm to compensate for gravity stopping distance for counterweight and any future repairs to rope connections at the counterweight at the car ends or at the suspension points.

c)

5.6.5 Runby for Cars and Counterweights 5.6.5.1 The bottom runby for cars and counterweights shall not be less than 15 cm. 5.6.5.2 Maximum bottom runby bottom runby exceed

In no case shall the maximum 30 cm.

IS 14665 (Part Z/Set 2) ; 2000 5.7 Lift Well Enclosures 5.7.1 Lift well enclosures shall be provided
and shall extend on all sides from floor to floor or stair to stair. 5.7.2 The inner sides of the lift well enclosures facing any car entrance smooth, continuous or recesses. 5.7.3 Where an open lift well would construction. construction is used, increase the fire shall be of 5.9.2 The design of the locking that reasonable 5.7.4 Where wire grill or similar the bars shall reject to resist accidental permit the mesh or opening between strength shall be such that the opening the ball of 30 mm in 5. IO Suspension The provisions movement interference system shall be such parts does not of the lift by wear between working with the operation shall, as far as practicable, form a flush surface devoid of~projections

5.8 Service Lift Cars 5.8.1
Where necessary doors shall be provided to

service lift cars [see IS 14665 (Part YSec 2)]. 5.9 Locking

Devices for Landing

Doors and

Shutters 5.9.1 The system of landing door or shutter interlocks
shall be of the kinds as provided in 1~s 14665 (Part 4/Set 6).

risk in a building, fire resisting

the lift well enclosures

of the lock handles.

diameter and the lift well enclosure shall be of sufficient impact by users of the or trucks staircase of adjoining floors or by materials

Ropes
of IS 14665 (Part 4/Set 3)

shall apply. 5.11 Sheaves and Pulleys

being moved in the vicinity. 5.7.5 Where the clearance between the inside of an Provision of IS 14665 (Part YSec 2) shall apply.

open type lift well enclosure and any moving or movable part of the lift equipment of apparatus is less than 5 cm, the opening protected by netting in the enclosure shall be further of square mesh of aperture not

5.12 Counterweight Provision (Part 2/Set 5.13 Motor of IS 14665 (Part 4/Set 1) shall apply. 3) and IS 14665

greater than 1 cm and of wire not smaller than 1 mm (the provision of Factories sufficient). 5.7.6 There shall be no opening permitting in the service lift well lift car by in this clause need not be adhered to for lift wells in factory premises, coming under the purview

Room and Overhead

Structures
and all other such

Act. In such cases provision

of 5.7.4 is

5.13.1

The service lift machine controller as function

apparatus and equipment apparatus and equipment shall be adequately weatherproof. 5.13.2

of the same, excepting

in the lift well or and

enclosure

access to the service

other positions shall be placed in the motor room which lighted and rendered fireproof

passing under the counterweight. 5.7.7 Indicutors

The secondary sheaves, pulleys, floor selecting may be placed in a place other than the shall be adequately and weatherproof. room but such position fireproof

Where service lifts are installed in totally enclosed wells, car arrival or position indicator and direction arrow or IN USE indicators should be installed on each landing along with operation push buttons. 5.7.8

equipment motor lighted 5.13.3

and rendered

The machine room floor shall be designed and to carry safely at any point the heaviest both during erection and purpose. or unit of equipment

Landing Doors

constructed portion

Every service lift well shall, on each side from which there is access to a car, be fitted with a door. Such a door shall be fitted locking when the service until the door lift with efficient electromechanical and that the If the door be provided is for so as to ensure t!lat it cannot be opened except car is at landing and locked.

for maintenance

5.13.4 The machine room shall be kept closed except to those concerned with the operation and maintenance of machinery 5.13.5 or equipment. room shall be equipped with the machinery. room floor or platform does with an flexible

service lift car cannot be moved away from the landing is closed locked, The machine portable mechanically opening emergency means should insulated hand lamp provided

the same by means of special or inspection.

key during

cord for examining 5.13.6

If any machine with

5.7.9 Automatic An efficient maintained

Devices for Cutting Off' Power
device shall be provided and

not extend to the enclosing be provided guarded. 5.13.7 The machine room

walls, the open sides shall or otherwise suitably

automatic

hand rails

in each service lift whereby

all power shall

be cut off from the motor before the car or counterweight lands on the buffers. 29

shall

be provided

with

access doors opening

outwards.

IS 14665 (Part 2lSec 2) : 2000 5.13.8
The machine room shall not be used as a store other than housing the lift and its associated apparatus and equipment. 5.16 Safety Provisions

Gear Test
of IS 14665 (Part 2/See I) shall apply.

room or for any purpose machinery 5.13.9

5.17 Slack Rope Switch
All machines, pulleys. and similar units shall any of these beam shall be be so supported affecting and held as to prevent Supporting Provisions of IS 14665 (Part 2/See I) shall apply.

machines or parts thereol'hecoming their safe working. of steel or reinforced 5.13.10 machine concrete.

loose or displaced

6 ELECTRICAL 6.1 Provisions

WIRING

AND APPARATUS
1) shall apply.

of IS 14665 (Part 2/Set

7 POSITIONING

OF MACHINE

ROOM
I) shall apply.

There shall be direct access to the service lift room. `The height to allow of t!re machine any portion room shall be

7.1 Provisions
7.2 Structural

of IS 14665 (Part 2/Set

Consideration
machine room and to the essential

5.13.11
sufficient

of equipment

to be

7.2.1 Lift well enclosures, liftpits,
requirements construction drawings. 7.2.2 Machine Room in 5, should and comply

accessible and removable

for repair and replacement,

machine supports besides conforming

and shail be not less than 1.2 111 clear from the floor.

form part of the building with the lift manufacturer's

513.12

The total

load on the overhead to all equipment

beams shall resting on the

be assumed as equal

beams plus twice the maximum the beams. 5.13.13 `The factor of saitity

load suspended from

Floors shall be designed to carry a load of not less than beams 350 kg/m? over the whole area and also any load which may be imposed thereon by the equipment both during periods of normal operation used in the and repair. machine room or by any reaction from such equipment

for all overhead

and supports based on ultimate and load in accordance than the following : For steel For reinforced

strength of the material

with 5.13.12 shall be not less

5 concrete 7

7.2.3 The side wall of the service lift well may be made of reinforced as to provide the guides. 7.3 Access to Machine Safe and convenient be provided. well overhead may be either cement concrete at least 7.5 cm thick so satisfactory anchoring arrangement for

The deflection of the overhead beams under the maximum static load calctilated in accordance with above shall not exceed l/l 500 of the span. 5. I4

Room and Lift Pits

access~to every machine room shall from the roof or by an internal with a proper

Housing of Overhead
or other

Pulleys
in which

Access to the machine room above a lift ladder

The penthouse

space

pulleys, are housed shall have a clear height of at least 1.O m and shall allow safe and convenient access and where practicable, and be provided illumination. have a substantial platform or floor with permanent and adequate artificial

staircase or by a removable arrangement for fixing.

7.4 Fire Protection
Provisions of IS 14665 (Part 2iSec 1) shall apply.

7.5 Quite Operation Provisions of IS 14665 (Part 2iSec I) shall apply.

5,15 Buffers 5.15.1
Buffers shall be placed symmetrically with respect to the centre of gravity of the lift car within a tolerance of+5
cm

7.6 Supply Cables and Switches Provisions of IS 14665 (Part 2iSec I) shall apply.

and shall be so arranged, that the circumstances of operations 8 TESTING

service lift car, in ordinary cannot strike them. 5.15.2 similar

8.1 Test shall
for service lift cars and 9 RUNNING

be carried

out

in accordance

with

The buffers shall be fitted under counterweight, to those specified be!ow the weight.

IS 14665 (Part 3iSec I).

AND MAINTENANCE
of IS 14665 (Part 2/Set I) shall apply.

arranged symmetrically

9.1 Provision

30

IS 14665 (Part 2/Set

1 & 2) : 2000

COMMITTE Lifts and Escalators

COMPOSITION Sectional
Cllurrlllull

Committee,

ET' 25

;SttuD
Maharashtm

H. I'.~L

Public Works Department

Practicmg Engineers. Arhitects & Town Planners Mumbai BuIldus Association of lndla. Momhal

Bharat Bi.jlee Ltd. Mumhai

Central Electricity

Authority.

New Delhi

Govt. 0fGujarat Department ChiefElectrical

(IW). Energy & Petrochemical Gandhmagar Inspectorate (Karnataka), Bangalore

<:hicfElectrical

!nspector(Tamil

Nadu), Chennal

Ch~efElectrical

lnspector(West

Bengal), Calcutta

Central Mechanicai Durgapur

Engineers Research Institute.

Central Public Works Department.
SE(E)DCECVI (~~l//emle)

New Delhi

SHRI

S

K;. KAIL~

Ministry

ofDefencc,

New Delhi

SHRI B I< BEIIL. (, f//e/me) SHRI I Q. N \,.&\I Maharashtra Directorate Public Works Department. General ofSupplies Ptme

& Disposals. New Delhi

SHRI I'. K

BANU
(.4~1emate)

ECE Industries Ltd. Ghaxiabad

SIIRI JAGAT MotiAN

Kone Elevator India Ltd. Chennai

SHRI

K.
SHRI

L GROVCI<
A\ INASH IbXiAR%!\I (rfitemtr)

Office ofthe Labour Commissioner.

Delhi

Administratlc~n.

New Delhi

StiRI

A. DK

s. tILRM%Dh 6. 11

\R

QTiS ElevatorCo(lndta)
RAO S P (Allemnle)

l.td. Mumbal

MAl.h.4NI/SHRI

SHKI ii

M

Bti,un,

Dwector (Elec Tech)

Member S;cretuty
SHIZI G

Rau BIS

Deputy Director (ElecTech),

31

(Continued from second cover)
New Series

Superseding

Section 5 Lift retiring cam Section 6 Lift doors and locking devices and contacts

10448 : 1983 Retiring cam for passenger and goods lifts 7759 : 1975 Lift door locking devices and contacts and 11633 : 1986 Lift doors

Section 7 Lift machines and brakes Section 8 Lift wire ropes Section 9 Controller and operating devices for lifts Part 5 Inspection manual

10913 : 1984 Brakes for electric passenger and goods lifts
-

-

This standard does not cover oufline dimension of lif? wells, lift pits and other layout dimensions necessary for lift installation. These are covered in IS 14665 (Part 1). Indian Standard specification for safety rules for electric passenger, goods and service lifts IS 14665(Part3/Sec 1 and 2) prescribes the constructional and safety requirements and methods of tests for electric passenger, goods and service lifts. This standard of practice is intended to cover such of those aspects dealing with installation, operation and maintenance of electric traction lifts. Where the term `purchaser's representative' is used in this standard, it should be considered to refer to the architect, consulting engineer, or other competent person nominated by the purchaser to act on his behalf, and who will be able to give specialized advice. The committee responsible for preparation of this standard is given is Annex A. For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2: 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

Bureau

of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of stardardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publication), BIS
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards: Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard.has been developed from Dot: No. ET 25 (4098).
Amendments Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones: 323 013 1,323 3375,323 94 02 Regional Of&es: Central Eastern
Northern
:

Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone
323 76 17,323 38 41

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 CALCUTTA 700054

: l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi
: :

3378499,337~8561 3378626,33791 20 60 38 43 { 60 20 25 23502 16,2350442 { 235 15 19,235 23 15 8329295,8327858 1 832 78 91,832 78 92

SC0 335336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MIJMBAI 400093 AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD. PATNA. PUNE. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Southern Western Branches

: :

Printed at Simco Printing Press, Delhi

