( Reaffirmed 2005 )

IS : 6151 (Part III) - 1976

Indian Standard
STORAGE MANAGEMENT CODE
PART III SPECIFIC CARE IN HANDLING AND STORAGE OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE AND INPUTS Storage Structures and Storage Management Committee, AFDC 28
Chairman

Sectional

CHIEFENGINEER (FOOD)
Members DR N.

Representing Central Public Works Department,

New Delbi

S. AGRAWAL

SHRI 0. P. GARG (Altemak) AGRICULTURAL MARKETING ADVISER Directorate of Marketing and Inspection (Ministry ~0 THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA of Agriculture & Irrigation), Faridabad DEPUTY AGRICULTURAL MARKETW~ ADVISERTOTHE
G~~ERNM~~NToFINDL~(AZ~YZ~~~)

Directorate of Storage and Inspection (Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation), New Delhi

DR HARPAL SINCH SHRI S. N. GUPTA (Alternate) DR M. S. PRADHAN SHRI J. R. ATAL (Alternate)

Planning Commission National Co-operative New Delhi Development Corporation,

SHRIP.'RAMDM Central Warehousing SHRI S. SAMPATHKUMAR (Alternate)

Corporation, New Delhi

DR N. P. RAO

Defence Institute of Stores Preservation and Packaging (Ministry of Defence), New Delhi SHRI L. M. PARTHASARTHY (Alternate) COL j. N. SINCH Quartermaster General's Branch, Army Headquarters, New Delbi DY DIRECTOR (FOOD INSPECTION) (Alternate) DR D. SRINATH Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage (Ministry of Agriculture & Irrigation), Faridabad A.%X~TANT DIRECTOR (LOCUST CONTROL) (Alternate) SHRI S. VIJAYARAGHAVAN Food Corporation of India, New Delhi SKI G. C. GAIKWAD (Alternate) SHRI T. PURNANANDAM, . Director General, IS1 (En-oficio Member) Deputy Director (Agn & Food) Secretmy SHRI MANo= T. SANTWANI Deputy Director (Agri & Food), IS1 (Contin& on page 2) Q INDIAN

copyright 1977

INSTITUTION This publication is protected under the Zndian Copyright Act (XIV of 1957) ad reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written pezrnission of the publisher shall be deemed to he an infringement of copyright under the said Act.

STANDARDS

IS : 6151 (Part III) - 1976
(Continued from page 1)

Storage Management
DRN. Conmzr S. ACRAWAL

Subcommittee,

AFDC

28 : 9

Representing Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation

Members SHRI V. S. AGGARWAL DR S. N. BANERJEE DR D. SRINATH(Alternate) DR S. S. BAINS DR B. S. CHAHAL (Alternate) DIRECTOR SHRI S. S. BEDI (Alternnte) SHRI GURBACHAN SINGH SHRI R. N. DIWAN (Alternate) SHRI R. P. JAIN SHRI H. S. PRUTHI (Alternate) DR K. KRISHNAMURTHY DR G. K. GIRISH (Alternate) SHRI S. K. MAJUMDER MANAGER (STORAGE) SHRI MANGALDA~ NATHUBHAI DR M. S. PRADHAN SHRI J. P. MITAL (Alternate) SHRI P. RAMDAS DR N. P. RAO SHRI V. K. JERATH (Alternate) COL K. SEETARAM

Indian Produce Association, Calcutta Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage (Ministry of Agriculture &Irrigation),

n__:~-L__l

Punjab Agricultural Food

University, Ludhiana Government of

and Supplies Department, Punjab, Chandigarh _

Punjab State Co-operative Supply Federation Ltd, Chandigarh Rolle;;cyipur Millers' Federation

& Marketing of India, New

Indian Grain Storage Institute, Hapur Central Food Technological Research Institute (CSIR), Mysore Food Corporation of India, New Delhi ~Grain, Rice and Oilseeds Merchants' Association, Bombay National Co-operative Development Corporation, New Delhi Central Warehousing Corporation, New Delhi Defence Institute of Stores Preservation and Packaging (Ministry of Defcnce), New Delhi Quartermaster General's quarters, New Delhi Branch, Army Head-

LT-COL D. D. VOHRA (Alternate) Andhra Pradesh Rice Millers' Association, SHRI ADUSUMILLI SUBBA RAO Vijayawada National Seeds Corporation Limited, New Delhi SHRI S. S. VIRDI

2

IS : 6151(Part III)-1976

Indian Standard
STORAGE MANAGEMENT CODE
PART III SPECIFIC CARE IN HANDLING AND STORAGE OF AGRICU~LTURAL PRODUCE AND INPUTS

0.

FOREWORD

0.1This Indian Standard (Part III) was adopted by the Indian Standards

Institution on 29 October 1976, after the draft finalized by the Storage Structures and Storage Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Agricultural and Food Products Division Council.

0.2 Scientific storage of agricultural produce and inputs demands proper care of different commodities, construction of appropriate type of storage structures suitable for different commodities; hygienic transport, receipt, distribution and delivery of these commodities; maintenance of warehouse inspection records; etc. The standardized norms of storage management would help in overcoming every day problems of recurring nature like general and specific care of agricultural commodities; calculation of storage space for various commodities, occupancy of storage structures; and calculation of cost of storage and construction. Such a code would, therefore, lead to overall improvement in storage at farmers', trade and government level and ultimately to overall economy in the storage of various agricultural commodities. 0.3 In India, there is a huge avoidable loss of agricultural produce and inputs during handling and storage. The loss is due to faulty handling or due to infestation by insects, micro-organisms or rodents; seepage of ground and rain-water and development of temperature gradient in storage structures. 0.3.1 The loss may, therefore, be avoided by scientific handling and storage. Besides the general norms of handling and storage of some agricultural produce and inputs, a number of them demand specific care and management. The agricultural produce and inputs which require specific care and management include fertilizers, pesticides, seeds, chillies, jaggery and cotton. 0.4 With a view to providing information on causes of loss in handling and storage of such agricultural produce and inputs which demand specific care, and guidelines on norms of scientific handling and storage which would lead to better storage awareness and conditions in the country, this standard has been formulated. 3

IS : 6151 (Part III) - 1976
0.5 The chemicals proposed to be used shall be sprayed in such a way that the pesticidal residues should not exceed the limits laid down in the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955. 0.6 This code is being formulated follows : Part I Terminology in three parts. Other two parts are as

Part II General care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs. 0.7 For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS : Z--1960*. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard (Part III) prescribes specific care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs.

13.1 This standard does not deal with such commodities which require cold storage.
2. TERMINOLOGY

2.1 For the _purpose of this standard,
IS : 6151 (Part I)-19717 shall apply.

the definitions of terms given in and abbreviations given in IS : 6151 (Part II)-1971:

3. CARE

IN HANDLING

3.1 Pesticides 3.1.1 Pesticides, being toxic chemicals, should be handled with extreme

care and by those operators who are fully conversant with the nature of pesticides and their handling and storage work.

3.1.2 While loading and unloading pesticides for storage, hooks should not be used as it may result in spillage of the pesticides and contamination of the clothes and skin of the workers. 3.1.3 Pesticides should be handled in leak- and moisture-proof bags properly stitched -and prepared with ears for facilitating lifting or in drums properly sealed.
*Rules for rounding off numerical values (retied). @torage management code: Part I Terminology. SStorage management code: Part II General care in handling and storage of agricultura produce and inputs.

IS :

6151(Part III) - 1976

3.1.4 While handling pesticides no foodgrains should be handled simultaneously since there is a risk of the contamination of the foodgrains.
3.1.5 The operators should wear eye-shield and respirators. 3.1.6 Care should be taken that there is least amount of oil or grease on the head and body of the operator. 3.1.7 Eating,_smoking or drinking should not be allowed in the course of handling of the pesticides. 3.1.8 The bags used for pesticides shall be lined with suitable material to make them leak- and moisture-proof. 3.1.9 Vehicles in which hazardous chemicals or pesticides have been transported should not be used for any foodgrains unless the vehicle has been cleaned properly. Prior to the use of the vehicle for transport of foodgrains sound, clean and dry sheets of suitable size shall be spread on the floor. 3.1.10 All stocks of the pesticides should be clearly marked with the word `Poison'. 3.1.11 The stocks should always be kept under lock and key in the custody of a responsible person. 3.1.12 ~Proper licence for storage of these chemicals should be obtained from the concerned authority. 3.1.13 The godown where pesticides are stored should not be used for the storage of ~edible commodities. 3.1.14 It is recommended that the godown incharge should be supplied with the detailed chemical and physical properties of the pesticides at the time of their storage. 3.1.15 Immediately after handling the pesticides, the personnel should thoroughly wash their hand with soap and water. - The care in handling of fertilizers shall be as given in 3.2 Fertilizers IS : 5985-1971". 3.3 ChiUies 3.3.1 The whole or ground chillies should be handled in B-twill gunny bags. 3.3.2 The vehicles in which chillies are transported should not be damp. Before loading the bags in a vehicle, suitable polyethylene sheets or tarpaulin should be spread on the floor to avoid ingress of moisture. 3.3.3 Chillies should not be transported produce. 3.3.4 3.3.5
recode

along with other agricultural

Filling should be loose so as to avoid damage to the chillies. The size~of the bags should be as specified in IS : 2566-1965t.

for handlingand storageof baggedfertilizers. tspecification for B-twill jute bags (rev&d).

5

IS : 6151 (Part III) - 1976 3.3.6 The chillies when overdry become brittle; these should, therefore, be transported in covered vehicles to avoid overdrymg during transportation.
3.4 Jaggery 3.4.1 Jaggery should preferably be handled in lumps. of chips, these should be handled in bags. However, in case

3.4.2 Before loading the bags in a vehicle, suitable polythene sheets or tarpaulins should be spread on the floor of the vehicle to avoid ingress of moisture in the lumps or the chips. In case the lumps are transported, the vehicles should be covered to keep the lumps safe from sun and dust. 3.5 Seeds - The care in handling of seeds shall be as given in `Indian Standard code of practice for handling and storage of seeds (under preparation) ' .

3.6 Coffee Beans - The care in handling of coffee beans shallbe
in IS : 6399-197I*.

as given

3.7 Cotton 3.7.1 In handling the cotton in pressed bales, care should be taken to maintain absolute dry conditions of loading and unloading. 3.7.2 As the colour of cotton changes due to moist weather, its transport in damp vehicles or during damp weather should be avoided. 3.8 Other norms of the general care in handling of the above commodities during transport, receipt, issue and prior to storage shall be as given in IS : 6151 (Part II) - 1971t. 4. CARE PRIOR TO STORAGE 4.1 Prior to storage of the commodities given in 3.1 to 3.7, the bags shall

be examined for any damage and the damaged bags shall be seggregated as given in 6.2 of IS : 6151 (Part II) - 19717. 4.2 In case the moisture content of any of the commodities exceeds the safe level given in Table 2 of IS : 6151 (Part II) - 19717, these shall be dried to the safe moisture level. 4.3 In case of the heated commodities especially wtton, it shall be suitably serated under dry conditions in shade. 4.4 Preparation of BGSS tion of vacant BGSS shall be 4.5 Capacity of BGSS - In the capacity of a BGSS shall of IS : 6151 (Part II) - 1971t. Before storage of the commodities, disinfestadone as suggested in 13 of IS : 609-1955:. order to avoid overloading of storage space, be approximately estimated as given in 6.6.1

*Code of practice for construction of coffee seed storage structure. tStorage management code: Part II General care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs. $Code of practice for improvement of existing structures used or intended to be used for foodgrain storage.

6

IS m:6151 (Part m) - 1976

4.5.1 While estimating the height of the stacks, care shall be taken to see that a minimum of 2 m space is left between the top surface of the stack and the under surface of the roof (or ceiling). 4.6 Stack Height - The maximum height to which the bags of the commodities or lumps may be placed in a stack depends upon the load bearing capacity of the floor or racks, nature of commodity, strength of container, etc. However, for practical purpose, the height of stacks for the different commodities shall not exceed the limits given below:
Commodity Stack Height (Bags) Approximate Height in Me&es

Coffee seeds and other seeds Chillies Pesticides Jaggery chips in bags Manual handling Mechanical handling Fertilizers : Hygroscopic Non-hygroscopic

:: 12 6 :"; 12 18

t.5 3 to 4
3.5 5.5 3 4.5

1.5 1 to 1.5

4.6.1 Stack Space - Depending upon the capacity of the BGSS, and size of fumigation cover available, the floor area shall be marked into a number of rectangular or square stack spaces. Care shall be taken to leave alleyways of 75 cm minimum width between the stacks and walls and also in between the stacks. The width of the alleyways in front of door opening should be 150 cm. The length and breadth of a stack shall be not more than 9 m and 6 m respectively.

4.7 Dunnage
4.7.1 Pesticides and Fertilizers - Wooden crate with a layer of matting over it to keep the stocks 10 to 15 cm above the floor and to allow free circulation of air. Alternatively, a layer or polyethylene sheet sandwiched between two layers of bamboo or similar matting should be provided. 4.7.2 Chillies and Seeds - Wooden crates or polyethylene sheet sandwiched between two layers of matting should be provided. 4.7.3 Jaggery and Cotton - For jaggery chips, wooden crates with minimum two layers of matting or three layers of matting or a layer of polyethylene sheet sandwiched between two layers of matting should be provided.

7

IS : 6151 (Part III) - 1976 4.7.4 After laying the dunnage, the floor space between them as well as the dunnage itself should be sprayed with 0.5 percent malathion emulsion by the method prescribed in Appendix B of IS m:6151 (Part II) - 1971*. 4.8 ?3tacking of Bags - The care in building stacks shall be as described in 6.8 of IS : 6151 (Part II) - 1971*.

5. CARE DURING STORAGE 5.1 General care during bag storage of fertilizers shall be as given in 7 of IS : 6151 (Part II) - 1971*. 5.2 Fertilizers and Pesticides 5.2.1 The specific care in storage of fertilizers shall be as given in IS : 5985-1971t. 5.2.2 The pesticides shall not be stored with any agricultural commodity as it may result in serious contamination of the commodity. 5.2.3 The pesticides shall be properly stacked in a cuboid shape, having all bags in one plane, with no face of the stack bulging outward or onward at any point. 5.2.4 Pesticides should be stored in godowns capable of protecting them The warehouses should be well ventilated from atmospheric deterioration. and away from places of fire hazards. 5.2.5 Hazardous pesticides, that is, pesticides capable of explosion and fire should be either stored in a separate godown away from other pesticides or to store them reasonably ~away from any combustible material. 5.2.6 In places where pesticides are stored or handled, smoking and the use of fire and naked flames shall be forbidden. In places where pesticides are stored, appropriate label (for example `poison') may be displayed. 5.2.7 During periods of high humidity, the ventilators and doors of the godown shall be kept closed. The stacks of hygroscopic pesticides may also be covered with polyethylene sheets or tarpaulins or gunny sheets during such periods. But when the humidity of the atmosphere is not high, the doors and ventilators should be kept open and free aeration of the godown should be allowed. 5.3 Chillies 5.3.1 Chillies should be stored in well-ventilated and damp-proof godowns. The godowns should preferably have reinforced cement concrete roof. 5.3.1.1 Godowns having tin roofs should not be used for storage of chill& as the pods may break into small pieces due to overheating. 5.3.2 Chillies should be stored separately from other agricultural commodities.
*Storage management code: Part II General care in handling and storage of agricultural produce and inputs. tCode of practice for handling and storage of bagged fertilizers.

8

IS I 6151 (Part 5.3.3 The bags of chillies received for storage pyrethrum dust containing 0.2 percent pyrethrins. repeated at intervals of three weeks.

III) - 1976

should be dusted with The dusting should be

5.3.3.1 In case of infestation of chillies by insects, the stock should be fumigated with EDCT mixture or with methyl bromide or with aluminium phosphide. The method of fumigation and care involved in the fumigation operation shall be as given in Appendix B of IS : 6151 (Part II) - 1971*. 5.3.3.2 5.4 Jaggery 5.4.1 The jaggery lumps shall be stored on special racks provided on the walls in a 2- or 3-tier system. Alternatively, they may be stored in floor of the godown with suitable dunnage as given in 4.7.3. The chips in bags shall be stored with suitable dunnage as given in 4.7.3. 5.4.2 The godown for storage of jaggery should have a high plinth preferably a flat reinforced cement concrete roof. 5.4.3 The godown shall be rodent-proof. and The godowns should be rodent-proof.

5.4.4 The jaggery being a hygroscopic commodity, should preferably be stored in a godown provided with shutter-type doors, and windows to make it airtight. 5.4.5 Pests like ants, house flies, bees, wasps may be warded off by maintaining suitable hygienic conditions. All spillages and sweepings should be collected immediately. 5.4.6 carried 1971*. In case of infestation by rats, the poison-baiting of rats shall be out by the method given in Appendix D of IS : 6151 (Part II) -

5.5 Seeds - The care in storage of seeds shall be as given in `Indian Standard code of practice for handling and storage of seeds (under pre$aration)`. 5.6 Cotton 5.6.1 Cotton bales being susceptible to fire hazards require separate storage. 5.6.2 Care should be taken that no open light is allowed in the godown. 5.6.3 As the colour should not be exposed of cotton to humid changes weather. due to moisture, the commodity

5.6.4 During storage, cotton may develop heating and therefore, first in, first out rule may be followed at the time of delivery of the commodity. 5.6.5 It is essential that each consignment should be stored separately bearing the date of arrival, etc, on stack cards. 5.6.6 In rainy season, all windows and ventilators should be clcsed. Ventilation should be given on clear days.
*Storage management code: tural produce and inputs. Part II General care in handling and storage of agricul-

9

IS : 6151 (Part

III) - 1976

5.6.7 The godown shall be rodent-proof.
5.6.8 Automatic fire hydrants should be provided in the godowns where cotton bales are to be stored as it is very difficult to carry the other fire fighting equipment inside the_godown when fire takes place and bales start breaking due to heat expansion. 6. PERIODICAL treatment

INSPECTION 6.1 Details of periodical inspection

of bags, classification of infestation, shall be as given in 7.3 of IS : 6151 (Part II) - 1971".

and

7. ISSUE OF COMMODITIES 7.1 The care during issue of the commodities IS : 6151 (Part II) - 1971".

shall

be as given

in 10 of

8. SAFETY PRECAUTIONS 8.1 Suitable provisions of first-aid supplies and equipment safeguard against any accidental exposure to pesticides.

shall be made to

*Stores management code: tural produce and inputs.

Part 11 General care in handling and storage of agricul-

