IS 15700:2005

%m9v7m -

Indian Standard QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS -- REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE QUALITY BY PUBLIC SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS

ICS03. I2O.1O

0 BIS 2005

BUREAU
MANAK
December 2005

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

BHAVAN, 9 .BAHADUR SHAH ZA.FAR MARG NEW DELHI 110002
Price Group 3

Quality Management Sectional Committee, MSD 2

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Quality Management Sectional Committee had been approved by the Management and Systems Division Council. All organizations, large or small, have an established way or system of doing business. A quality management system is about how an organization manages its business activities which are associated with quality of service. Quality management system helps an organization to build systems which enable it to provide quality service consistently. It may be clarified that characteristics of the service(s) and their standards (norms) are defined in the respective service standards, and not in the quality management standards. Therefore, quality management system standards are not alternate to service standards. In fact, they are complementary to each other. The use of service standards together with quality management system standards help in not only maintaining but also continually improving quality of services, which may result in enhancing customers' satisfaction and competitiveness. Quality management systems standards take into consideration eight quality management principles, namely, customer focus, leadership, involvement of people, process approach, system approach to management, continual improvement, factual approach to decision-making, and mutually beneficial supplier relationships, which are relevant and applicable to all organizations providing service. Quality management standards promote the adoption of a process approach when developing, implementing and improving the effectiveness of a quality management system, to enhance customer satisfaction by meeting customer requirements. For an organization to fimction effectively, it has to identifi and manage numerous linked activities. Set of inter-related or interacting activities which transforms inputs into.outputs is termed as process. 0t3en the output from one process is the input to the next process. The application of a system of processes within an organization, together with the identification and interactions of these processes, and their management, can be referred to as the `process approach'. An advantage of the process approach is the ongoing control that it provides over the linkage between the individual processes within the system of processes, as well as over their combination and interaction. In addition, it highlights the value addition at every stage. When used within a quality management system, such an approach emphasizes the importance of a) b) c) d) understanding and meeting requirements, the need to consider processes in terms of added value, obtaining results of process performance and effectiveness, and continual improvement of.processes based on objective measurement.

This standard has been specifically designed for the public service organizations, and in its formulation, considerable assistance has been drawn tlom 1S/1S0 9001 :200.0 `Quality management systems -- Requirements', 1S/1S0 10002 :2004 `Quality management -- Customer satisfaction -- Guidelines for complaints handling in organizations' and Government of India guidelines on `Citizens' charter' and"`Public grievance handling'. This standard can be used by internal and external parties, including certification bodies, to assess the organization's ability to meet customer, regulatory and the organization's own requirements.

IS 15700:2005

Indian Standard QUALITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS -- REQUIREMENTS FOR SERVICE QUALITY BY PUBLIC SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS
1 SCOPE 1.1 This standard specifies requirements for a quality management system where a public service organization

dissatisfaction made to an organization related to its products, services and/or process, where a response or resolution is explicitly or implicitly expected. 3.3 Complainant -- Person, organization, representative, making a complaint. or its

a) needs to demonstrate its ability to consistently provide effective and ei%cient service that meets customer and applicable legal, statutory and regulatory requirements, b) aims to enhance customer satisfaction, and c) aims to continually improve its service and service delivery process.
1.2 The requirements for complaints handling process

3,4 Complaints Handling Objective -- Something sought, or aimed for, reiated to complaints handling. 3.5 Customer -- Organization or person that receives a product andfor service.
Example: Consumer, client, citizen, end-user, beneficiary and purchaser.

covered in this standard do not apply for employment related disputes and/or disputes referred for resolution outside an organization. 2 R-EFERENCE The following standard contains provision, which through reference in this text constitutes provision of this standard. At the time of publication, the edition indicated was valid. All standards are subject to revision and parties to agreements based on this standard is encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent edition of the standard indicated below: IS No. 1S/1S0 9000:2005
Title

3.6 Customer Satisfaction -- Customer's perception of the degree to which the customer's requirements have been t%ifilIed.
NOTES 1 .Crrstomer complaints are a common indicator of low customer satisfaction but their absence does not necessarily imply high customer satisfaction. 2 Even when customer requirements have been agreed with the

customer and fulfilled, this does not necessarily ensure high customer satisfaction.

3.7 Feedback -- Opinions, comments, suggestions and expressions of satisfaction/dissatisfaction. 3.8 Non-conformity
-- Non fulfillment of a requirement.

Quality management systems � Fundamentals and vocabulary
(third revision)

3 TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

3.9 Public Service Organization -- An organization which provides service(s) to public at large and/or whose activities influence public interest.
Example: Government ministries and departments, Regulatory bodies, Public utility service providers, etc.
NOTE -- Wherever the term `organization' has been used in this standard, it means `public service organization'.

For the purpose of this standard, the following terms and definitions, in addition to that givenin1S/1S09000shall apply. 3.1 C%tizens'Charter -- Citizens' charter is a document declaring the intentions and the commitment of an organization for providing effective and efllcient service, taking into account customer's expectations and minimum acceptable levels of service, thereby providing assurance that the organization complies with the service quality standards. 3.2 Complaint
(Grievance) --

3.10 Quality -- Degree to which a set of inherent characteristics t%lfilsrequirements.
NOTES -1 The `requirements' include product rind/or service requirements.

2 `Inherent', as opposed to `assigned', means existing in something, especially as a permanent characteristic.

Expression

of 1

3.11 Service -- The results generated, by activities at the

IS 15700:2005

interface between the organization and the customer and by organization's internal activities, to meet customer requirements. 3.12 Service Delivery -The organization's activities, including those at ~he customer interface, necessary to provide the service. 3.13 Service Quality Objectives --Something sought, or aimed for, related to service quality. 3.14 Service Quality Policy -- The overall intentions and direction of an organization as regards service quality, as formally expressed by top management. 3.15 Stakeholder (Interested Party) -- Person or group having an interest in the performance or success of an organization.
Example: Customers, owners, people in an organization, suppliers, bankers, unions, partners or society.
NOTE -- A group can comprise an organization, more than one organization. a part thereof, or

delivery processes at the customer interface and those needed to directly support them (see 7.2). 4.3 Control of Documents 4.3.1 All the documents required by this standard shall be a) approved for adequacy prior to issue; b) reviewed periodically, updated as necessary and re-approved. The changes made shall be identified; and c) legible and identifiable indicating their current revision status.
4.3.2 The organization shall

a) maintain a master list of all documents related to the scope of this standard which also identifies their current revision status; b) maintain distribution list of all such documents; c:) ensure that the current versions of applicable documents are available at points of use; d) ensure that obsolete documents, if retained for any purpose, are suitably identified to prevent their unintended use; and e) ensure that the documents of external origin are identified and their distribution controlled.
4.3.3

3.16 Top Management -- Person or group of people, who directs and controls an organization at the highest level. 4 DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS 4.1 General The organization shall document the following: a) Service quality manual; b) Citizens' charter; c) Any other document needed by the organization for effective planning, operation and control of its service and service delivery processes; and d) Records required by this standard (see4.4).
4.2 Service Quality Manual

A documented procedure shall be established to define the controls needed for the above.

4.4 Control of Records Records (including files) shall be established and maintained to provide evidence of conformity to requirements and for the effective operation of the management system for service quality. The records shall remain legible, readily identifiable and easily retrievable. The method of identification, storage, protection, disposition of each record, their retention time and responsibility for each of these activities shall be established in a documented procedure.
5 MANAGEMENT 5.1 Management RESPONSIBIkJTY Commitment

The organization shall establish and maintain a service quality manual which includes a) scope of service quality management system; b) service quality policy; c) service quality objectives; d) complaints handling objectives; e) responsibility and authority ofpersonnel at relevant levels within the scope of this standard; 8 documented procedures required by this standard; g) other documents, needed by the organization for -effective planning, operation and control of its service and service delivery processes, or reference to them; and h) description of service processes including service 2

Top management shall a) establish the service quality policy .attd citizens' charter, b) ensure that service quality objectives and complaints handling objectives are established, c) conduct management reviews, and d) ensure the availability of resources. 5.2 Customer Focus Top management shall ensure that the customer

IS 15700:2005

requirements are determined and are met with the aim of enhancing customer satisfaction. 5.3 Service Quality Policy an-dflitizens' Charter rop management shall ensure that service quality policy and citizens' charter
5.3.1

5.6.2.1

The responsibilities of the working group shall

include a) identifying all stakeholders of the organization, b) identifying all key services provided by the organization, c) preparing a draft citizens' charter in consultation with stakeholders, d) formally issuingheleasing the citizens' charter afler its approval by appropriate authority, and e) reviewing and updating, as necessary, based on the feedback.and continuing suitability. 5.6.3 Nodal Officer
5.ii.3. 1 Nodal officer at apex level

a) are documented, b) are appropriate to the purpose of the organization, c) are made available to all personnel including customers and other stakeholders, d) are communicated organization, and understood within the

e) include a commitment to comply with requirements and continually improve the effectiveness of the quality management system, and 9 are reviewed for continuing suitability.

5.3.2 The service .quali~ policy shall provide a framework for establishing and reviewing service quality objectives and complaints handling objectives. 5.4 Objectives Service quality objectives and complaints handling objective shall be consistent with the service quality policy and shall be established at relevant functions and levels within the organization. All the objectives shall be measurable and documented. 5.5 When establishing the above policy and objectives, the following factors shall be taken into account: a) Input of customers and other stakeholders; b) Any relevant legal, statutory and regulatory requirements; and c) Financial, operational requirements. 5.6 Responsibility,
Authority

Top m-anagement shall appoint a member of its management as a nodal officer at apex level who, irrespective of other responsibilities, shall have responsibilities and authority, which include
a)

ensuring that processes needed for the service, service delivery, citizens' charter and complaints handling are established, implemented and maintained;

b) acting as member-secretary of the working group (see 5.6.2) for formulation of the citizens' charter; c) acting as public grievance officer and reporting to top management of any complaints which have a significant impact on the organization; d) regularly reporting to the top management on the performance of the service quality, citizens' charter and complaints handling with recommendations for improvement; and e) devising mechanism for obtaining feedback and interna[quality audit (see 8.3). NOTES

rind organizational

and Communication

1 The responsibility of the nodal ot%cer at apex level may also include liaison with the certifying body. 2 While nodal officer at apex level shall be responsible for the above, he mzy take the help of other officer in the organization, if required, on account of administrative exigencies or in public interest.

5.6.1 Top management shall ensure that the responsibilities

and authorities are established at relevant f~ctions and levels, related to the scope of this standard, and communicated within the organization. 5.6.2 Working Group for Citizens' Charter Top management shall constitute a working group for formulation of the citizens' charter. The nodal officer (see 5.6.3) at the apex level shall act as a member secretary of the working group. The working group shall include representatives from top management, middle management, staffassociationh-miens, customers and other stakeholders. The selection of team members shall be done in a transparent reamer, the details of which are accessible to public. 3

5.6.3.2 Nodal ojicer at unit level Where an organization is providing services through its different units, the top management shaIl ensure the appointment of a nodal officer at unit level, who, irrespective of other responsibilities, shall a) ensure that processes needed for the service, service delivery, citizens' charter and complaints handling are implemented and maintained; b) act as public grievance oftlcer and c) report regularly to the nodal ofllcer at the apex level, on the performance of the service quality,

IS 15700:2005

citizens' charter and complaints handling with recommendations for improvement. 5.6.4 Internal Communication Top management shall ensure that appropriate communication processes are established within the organization so that effective communication takes place for the various processes related to service, citizens' charter and complaints handling. 5.7 Management
Review

a) selected on the basis of capability to satis~ defined job specifications, b) trained to ensure that they understand the tasks to be performed and the objectives to be achieved including how they contribute to the achievement of objectives, c) aware of their responsibilities including promptly reporting on complaints/feedback which have a significant impact on the organization, and d) aware of procedures to be followed and information to be given to the customers, 6.2.1 The training records shall be maintained (see 4.4). 6.2.2 The organization shall ensure that the personnel, who are in direct contact with the customers a) are available and accessible, as specified; b) are sensitized to treat customers in a courteous manne~ c) respond promptly to customer's enquigdcomplain~ d) provide accurate, information; and updated and complete and good

5.7.1 Top management shall review the organization's management systems for service quality, citizens' charter and complaints handling at planned intervals to ensure their continuing suitability, adequacy, efficiency and effectiveness. This review shall include assessing opportunities for improvement and the need for changes, including the service quality policy and objectives. Records of management reviews shall be maintained (see 4.4).

5.7.2 The input to management review shall include information on a) follow-up actions fi-omprevious reviews, b) results of audit, c) customer feedback including results of customer satisfaction surveys, d) changing customer requirements, e) feedback from other stakeholders, 8 extent to which objectives are achieved, g) status of preventive/corrective actions, h) review of processes performance, and j) recommendations for improvement.

good interpersonal e) possess communication skills. 6.3 Infrastructure and Work Environment

The organization shall determine, provide and maintain

the infrastructure and work environment necessary for achieving service quality and complaints handling. 7 CITIZENS' CHARTER, SERVICE AND COMPLAINTS HANDLING
7.1 Citizens' Charter 7.1.1 The citizens' charter shall contain PROVISION

5.7.3 Review output shall include any decisions and actions related to a) improvement in service quality standards; b) improvement in customer satisfaction; c) improvement in the management systems for service quality, citizens' charter, and complaints handling; and d) Resource needs.

a) vision and mission statement of the organization, b) list of key service(s) organization, and being offered by the

c) measurable service standards for the service(s) provided and remedies available to the customer for non-compliance to the standards. 7.1.2 The citizens' charter shall

6 RESOURCE 6.1

MANAGEMENT

a) represent a systematic effort of the organizationto focus on its commitment towards its customers; b) be simple and easily understandable and also printed in local languages, as require~ c) be non-dkcriminatory; d) describe or refer to complaints handling process; e) include the name, address, telephone number and other contact details of the public grievance offlce~ 4

The organization shall determine and provide resources for effective implementation of management systems for service quality, citizens' charter and complaints handling. The resources shall include human resources, infrastructure and work environment. 6.2 The organization shall ensure that the personnel are

IS 15700:2005

0 be periodically reviewed for updation and continual
improvement;

d highlight expectations of the organization from its
customers, wherever required; and h) provide information on the date of issue of the citizens' charter and persons who were consulted during its preparation. 7.2 Service Provision The organization shall a) ensure that services being provided by the organization take into account expectations of the customer and regulatory requirements; b) ensure that the service delivery processes are in line with the objectives defined by the organization; c) assure the quality of the products and/or services purchased and/or outsourced, which affects its service quality; d) ensure availability ofprocedures/work instructions, information, wherever necessary, and their implementation so that service delivery processes are carried out as specified; e) ensure availability and use of suitable equipment, monitoring and measuring devices; f) ensure calibration or verification of measuring equipment at specified intervals, or prior to use, wherever necessary; g) identi& the verification status of the service or service delivery process at relevant stages; h) identi~, veri~, protect and safeguard the customer property, whenever provided by the customer for its use in service; and .j) ensure implementation of monitoring and measurement including time norms as specified in the citizens' charter.

c) Widely publicizing the information about complaints handling process through print, web and other media. The name, address, telephone number and other contact details of the public grievance ofllcer of the organization shall also be displayed prominently at the reception and other convenient places in the organization; d) Unique identification of the complaint and recording necessary information including relevant details of complaint, remedy requested, due date of redress, relevant data related to the complaint and immediate action to be taken (if any); e) Scrutiny of the complaint and its categorization as critical, major or minor depending upon its seriousness and severity;

f) Acknowledgement of each complaint promptly
giving the complaint number along with an indication of the redress time and the name, designation and telephone number of the employee to be contacted for all future correspondence;

`a Investigation

of relevant circumstances and information relating to the complaint. The level of investigation shall be commensurate with the seriousness and severity ef the complaint. If the complaint cannot be immediately resolved, it shall be dealt in a manner which would lead to its effective redress as soon as possible and the complainant shall be intimated;

h) Communication of the decision to the complainant regarding his complaint immediately after the decision is taken and getting his feedback. In case the decision is not in line with the remedy requested by the complainant, the justification for the decision taken along with alternative internal and external recourse available for appeal shall also be intimated aflerwhich the complaint shall be closed; and

j) Nominating

7.3 Complaints Handling The organization shall establish a documented procedure for complaint handling process. Various steps in the complaints handling process shall include the following: a) Identification of complaint prone areas "in a systematic manner and determine the time norms for their redress; b) Providing information concerning complaints handling process in clear language and formats accessible to all. Such information shall include: 1) where and how the complaints can be made, 2) minimum information complainant, and to be provided by

`Ombudsman' who could be approached if normal service delivery mechanism does not respond.

8 IMPLEMENTATION, MONITORING, MEASUREMENT AND IMPROVEMENT 8.1 Implementation The organization %hall a) establish single-window system at points of public contact to facilitate disposal of applications; b) set up information and facilitation centres and helplines for information on procedures, application status, etc; c) widely publicize Ihe citizens' charter through organization's website, media and sending copies to all stakeholders; 5

3) time "limitswithin which the complaint will be closed.

IS -15700:2005 d) prominently display the citizens' charter in the organization; and e) publishannually thedata relating toperforrnance, namely commitment relating to citizens' charter in the annual report or by some other suitable means. 8.2 Monitoring and Measurement designed methodology. This information shall be used for continual improvement. 8.3 Internal Quality Audit The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals to determine whether the management system for service quality c-onforms to the requirements of this standard and to the documents established by the organization. An audit plan shall be documented indicating the scope, frequency of audit, auditor(s), auditee and audit date(s)/time. Selection of auditors and conduct of audits shall ensure objectivity and impartiality of.the audit process. Auditms shall not audit their own work. The auditee shall ensure that actions are taken without undue delay to eliminate detected non-conformities and their causes. Follow-up activities shall incIude the verification of the actions taken and reporting of verification results. Records of the audits shall be maintained (see 4.4). 8.4 Analysis of Data
The organization shall analyze the data collected during

8.2.1 The organization shall monitor and measure a) the characteristics of the service and service delivery processes to veri@ that the service quality objectives and service standards have been met. This shall also be carried out at all stages and locations where the organization has an interface with the customer; b) the performance, namely commitment made in the citizens' charter and complains handling procedure on a regular basis and report to top management with recommendations for improvement; and c) the workhg of the complaints handling machinery through random checks. 8.2.1.1 In addition, the editor's/grievance column of the local newspapers shall be regularly examined by the organization for picking up cases, as appropriate. 8.2.1.2 Records of the evidence of conformity shall be maintained (see 4.4). 8.2.2 Customer Satisfaction The organization shall establish and implement a system for measuring customer satisfaction through suitably

monitoring and measurement (see 8.2. 1) and customer satisfaction (see 8.2.2) to determine current level of performance and opportunities for continual improvement, particularly where non-conformities are recurring. 8.5 Improvement
8.5.1 Corrective and Preventive Actions

The organization shall take action to eliminate the cause(s) of non-conformities and potential cause(s) in order to prevent recurrence and occurrence respectively. These shall be appropriate to the effects of the non-conformities encountered and potential problems. Records of action taken and improvements effected shall be maintained (see 4.4).

6

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not ~reclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if the review indwates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards

should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Catalogue' and' Standards : Monthly Additions'. This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc : No. MSD 2 (3 13).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS Headquarters : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bihadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones :23230131,23233375,2323 9402 Regional Offices : Central Eastern Northern Southern Western : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 : 1/14 C. LT.Scheme VII M, V. L P, Road, Kankurgachi KOLKATA 700054 : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross-Road, CHENNAI 600113 : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093 Telegrams: Manaksanstha (Common to all offices) Telephone j' 23237617 ~ 23233841 23378499,23378561 { 23378626,23379120 2603843 { 2609285 22541216,22541442 "15 { 22542519,225423 28329295,28327858 { .28327891,2832 7b 92

Branches : AHMEDABAD. 13ANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. NALAGARH. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. VISAKHAPATNAM.
`Printed at Rabhat Offset Ress, New Dethi-;

