Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2019) 


apis — caret ugt aaa fafer 
art y faecal co faaea f 
ae fako & fae mgo at fafa 


Geosynthetics — Method of Test for 
Determination of Performance 
Strength of Geomembranes by the 
Wide Strip Tensile Method 


ICS 59.080.70 


© BIS 2015 


Rs AH Rt 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM WH, 9 Teg wt art, ve feeei-110002 
Vee” MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.org.in www.standardsbis.in 


December 2015 Price Group 4 


Geosynthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by the Geosynthetics 
Sectional Committee had been approved by the Textile Division Council. 


In the formulation of this standard assistance has been drawn from ASTM Designation: D4885 - 01 ‘Standard 
test method for determining performance strength of geomembranes by the wide strip tensile method’, issued by 
the American Society for Testing and Materials, USA. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 
‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (revised)’. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off 
value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 16477 : 2015 


Indian Standard 


GEOSYNTHETICS — METHOD OF TEST FOR 
DETERMINATION OF PERFORMANCE STRENGTH OF 
GEOMEMBRANES BY THE WIDE STRIP TENSILE 
METHOD 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This test method covers the determination of the 
performance strength of synthetic geomembranes by 
subjecting wide strips of material to tensile loading. 


1.2 This test method covers the measurement of tensile 
strength and elongation of geomembranes and includes 
directions for calculating initial modulus, offset 
modulus, secant modulus, and breaking toughness. 


1.3 The basic distinctions between this test method and 
other methods measuring tensile strength of 
geomembranes are the width of the specimens tested 
and the speed of applied force. The greater width of 
the specimens specified in this test method minimizes 
the contraction edge effect (necking) which occurs in 
many geosynthetics and provides a closer relationship 
to actual material behaviour in service. The slower 
speed of applied strain also provides a closer 
relationship to actual material behaviour in service. 


1.4 As a performance test, this method will be used 
relatively infrequently, and to test large lots of material. 
This test method is not intended for routine quality 
control testing of geomembranes. 


2 REFERENCES 


The following standards are necessary adjuncts to this 
standard: 


IS No. Title 
13162 (Part 3): Geotextiles— Methods of test: Part 3 
1992 Determination of thickness at 


specified pressure 


13321 (Part 1): Glossary of terms for geosynthetics: 


1992 Part 1 Terms used in materials and 
properties 
SP 45 : 1988 Handbook on glossary of textile 
terms 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard the definitions given 
in SP 45, IS13321 (Part 1) and the following shall 
apply. 

3.1 Atmosphere for Testing Geomembranes — Air 
maintained at a relative humidity 65 + 2 percent and a 
temperature of 27 + 2°C. 


NOTE — Any other atmosphere for testing may be used as per 
the agreement between the concerned parties. 


3.2 Breaking Force (F), J — The force at failure. 


3.3 Breaking Toughness, T, (F/L), J/m? — For 
geosynthetics, the actual work per unit volume of a 
material corresponding to the breaking force. 


NOTE — Breaking toughness is proportional to the area under 
the force-elongation curve from the origin to the breaking point 
(see also, work-to-break). Breaking toughness is calculated from 
work-to-break and width of a specimen. In geomembranes, 
breaking toughness is often expressed as force per unit width 
of material, in mm-kg values. In other materials, breaking 
toughness is often expressed as work per unit mass of material. 


3.4 Corresponding Force — Synonym for force at 
specified elongation. 


3.5 Elastic Limit — In mechanics, the stress intensity 
at which stress and deformation of a material subjected 
to an increasing force cease to be proportional; the limit 
of stress within which a material will return to its 
original size and shape when the force is removed, and 
hence, not a permanent set. 


3.6 Failure — An arbitrary point beyond which a 
material ceases to be functionally capable of its 
intended use. 


NOTE — In wide strip tensile testing of geosynthetics, failure 
occurs either at the rupture point or at the yield point in the 
force-elongation curve, whichever occurs first. For reinforced 
geomembranes, failure occurs at rupture of the reinforcing 
fabric. For non-reinforced geomembranes which exhibit a yield 
point, such as polyethylene materials, failure occurs at the yield 
point. Even though the geomembrane continues to elongate, 
the force-elongation relationship has been irreversibly altered. 
For non-reinforced geomembranes which do not exhibit a yield 
point, such as plasticized PVC materials, failure occurs at 
rupture of the geomembrane. 


3.7 Force at Specified Elongation, FASE — A force 
associated with a specific elongation on the force- 
elongation curve (Synonym for corresponding force). 


3.8 Force-elongation Curve — In a tensile test, a 
graphical representation of the relationship between 
the magnitude of an externally applied force and the 
change in length of the specimen in the direction of 
the applied force (Synonym for stress-strain curve). 


3.9 Geomembrane — An essentially impermeable 
geosynthetic used with foundation soil, rock, earth, or 


IS 16477 : 2015 


any other geotechnical engineering related material as 
an integral part of a man-made project, structure or 
system. 

NOTE — Other names under which geomembranes are 


recognized include: flexible membrane liners (FML), liners and 
membranes. 


3.10 Index Test — A test procedure which may contain 
a known bias, but which may be used to establish an 
order for a set of specimens with respect to the property 
of interest. 


3.11 Inflection Point — The first point of the force - 
elongation curve at which the second derivative equals 
Zero. 


NOTE — The inflection point occurs at the first point on the 
force - elongation curve at which the curve ceases to curve 
upward and begins to curve downward (or vice - versa). 


3.12 Initial Tensile Modulus, J,, (F/L), N/m — For 
geosynthetics, the ratio of the change in force per unit 
width to the change in elongation of the initial portion 
of a force - elongation curve. 


3.13 Offset Modulus, J, , (F/L), N/m — For 
geosynthetics, the ratio of the change in force per unit 
width to the change in elongation below an arbitrary 
offset point at which there is a proportional relationship 
between force and elongation, and above the inflection 
point on the force-elongation curve. 


3.14 Performance Test — A test which simulates in 
the laboratory as closely as practicable selected 
conditions experienced in the field and which can be 
used in design (Synonym for design test). 


3.15 Secant Modulus, J... (F/L), N/m — For 
geosynthetics, the ratio of change in force per unit 
width to the change in elongation between two points 
on a force-elongation curve. 


3.16 Tensile — Capable of tensions, or relating to 
tension of a material. 


3.17 Tensile Modulus, J, (F/L), N/m — For 
geosynthetics, the ratio of the change in tensile force 
per unit width to a corresponding change in elongation. 


3.18 Tensile Strength — The maximum resistance to 
deformation developed by a specific material when 
subjected to tension by an external force. 


3.19 Tensile Test — For geosynthetics, a test in which 
a material is stretched uniaxially to determine the 
force - elongation characteristics, the breaking force, 
or the breaking elongation. 


3.20 Tension — The force that produces a specified 
elongation. 


3.21 Wide Strip Tensile Test — For geosynthetics, a 
tensile test in which the entire width of a 200 mm wide 


specimen is gripped in the clamps and the gauge length 
is 100 mm. 


3.22 Work-to-Break, W, (LF), J — In tensile testing, 
the total energy required to rupture a specimen. 
NOTE — For geomembranes, work-to-break is proportional to 


the area under the force-elongation curve from the origin to the 
breaking point. 


3.23 Yield Point — In geosynthetics, the point on the 
force-elongation curve at which the first derivative 
equals zero (the first maximum). 


4 PRINCIPLE 


A relatively wide specimen is gripped across its entire 
width in the clamps of a constant rate of extension type 
tensile testing machine operated at a prescribed rate of 
extension, applying a uniaxial load to the specimen 
until the specimen ruptures. Tensile strength, 
elongation, initial and secant modulus, and breaking 
toughness of the test specimen can be calculated from 
machine scales, dials, recording charts, or an interfaced 
computer. 


5 SIGNIFICANCE AND USE 


5.1 This test method is a performance test intended as 
a design aid used to determine the ability of 
geomembranes to withstand the stresses and strains 
imposed under design conditions. This test method 
assists the design engineer in comparing several 
candidate geomembranes under specific test 
conditions. 


5.2 As a performance test, this method is not intended 
for routine acceptance testing of commercial shipments 
of geomembranes. This test method will be used 
relatively infrequently, and to establish performance 
characteristics of geomembrane materials. 


5.3 All geomembranes can be tested by this method. 
Some modification of techniques may be necessary 
for a given geomembrane depending upon its physical 
make-up. Special adaptations may be necessary with 
strong geomembranes or geomembranes with 
extremely slick surfaces, to prevent them from slipping 
in the clamps or being damaged by the clamps. 


6 APPARATUS 


6.1 Clamps — A gripping system that minimizes (with 
the goal of eliminating) slippage, damage to the 
specimen, and uneven stress distribution. The gripping 
system, shall extend to or beyond the outer edge of the 
specimen to be tested. 


6.2 Specimen Cutter — An appropriate cutting device 
which does not create irregularities or imperfections 
in the edge of the specimen. For wide strip specimens, 
a jig may not be necessary provided that the actual cut 


dimensions of the specimen can be measured 
accurately to the nearest 1.0 mm, and that the width of 
the specimen is constant to within 1.0 mm. 


6.3 Tensile Testing Machine — A testing machine of 
the constant rate of extension type shall be used. The 
machine shall be equipped with a device for recording 
the tensile force and the amount of separation of the 
grips. Both of these measuring systems shall be 
accurate to + 2 percent and, preferably, shall be external 
to the testing machine. The rate of separation shall be 
uniform and capable of adjustment within the range of 
the test. 


7 SAMPLING 


7.1 Laboratory Sample 


For the laboratory sample, take a full-width swatch 
approximately 1m long in the machine direction from 
each roll in the lot sample. The sample may be taken 
from the end portion of a roll provided there is no 
evidence it is distorted or different from other portions 
of the roll. 


7.2 Test Specimens 


Take a total of twelve specimens from each swatch in 
the laboratory sample, with six specimens for tests in 
the machine direction and six specimens for tests in 
the cross-machine direction. Take the specimens from 
a diagonal on the swatch with no specimen nearer the 
edge of the geomembrane than 1/10 of the width of 
the geomembrane. Cut each specimen 200 mm wide 
by at least 200 mm long with the length precisely 
aligned with the direction in which the specimen is to 
be tested. The specimens must be long enough to 
extend completely through both clamps of the testing 
machine. Draw two parallel lines near the centre of 
each specimen length that (a) are separated by 100 mm, 
(b) extend the full width of the specimen, and (c) are 
exactly perpendicular to the length of the specimen. 
Exercise the utmost care in selecting, cutting, and 
preparing specimens to avoid nicks, tears, scratches, 
folds, or other imperfections that are likely to cause 
premature failure. 


8 CONDITIONING 


Expose the specimens to the standard atmosphere for 
testing geomembranes for a period long enough to 
allow the geomembrane to reach equilibrium with the 
standard atmosphere. Consider the specimen to be at 
moisture equilibrium when the change in mass of the 
specimen in successive weighings made at intervals 
of not less than 2 h does not exceed 0.1 percent of the 
mass of the specimen. Consider the specimen to be at 
temperature equilibrium after 1 h of exposure to the 
standard atmosphere for testing. 


IS 16477 : 2015 


9 PROCEDURE 


9.1 Test adequately conditioned specimens. Conduct 
tests in the atmosphere for testing as specified in 3.1. 
The engineer may specify additional temperatures 
based upon expected service conditions for the 
installation. 


9.2 Measure for the specimens thickness at the four 
comers of the specimen. Select specimens used in this 
procedure so that thickness is uniform to within 5 
percent. Measure thickness using the test method as 
specified in IS 13162 (Part 3). 


9.3 Position the grips of the testing apparatus to a 
separation of 100 + 3 mm. At least one clamp should 
be supported by a free swivel or universal joint which 
will allow the clamp to rotate in the plane of the fabric. 
Select the force range of the testing machine so that 
the break occurs between 10 and 90 percent of full 
scale load. Set the machine to a strain rate as given 
in 9.6. 


9.4 Mount the specimen centrally in the clamps. Do 
this by having the two lines, which were previously 
drawn 100 + 3 mm apart across the width of the 
specimen as close as possible adjacent to the inside 
edges of the upper and lower jaw. The specimen length 
in the machine direction and the cross machine 
direction tests, respectively, must be parallel to the 
direction of application of force. 


9.5 Start the tensile testing machine and the area 
measuring device, if used, and continue running test 
to rupture. Stop the machine and reset to the initial 
gauge position. Record and report the test results to 
three significant figures for each direction separately. 


9.5.1 Ifa specimen slips in the jaws, or if for any reason 
attributed to faulty operation the result falls markedly 
below the average for the set of specimens, discard 
the result and test another specimen. 


9.5.2 The decision to discard the results of a break shall 
be based upon observation of the specimen during the 
test and upon the inherent variability of the fabric. In 
the absence of other criteria for rejecting a so-called 
jaw break, any break occurring within 5 mm of the 
jaws which results in a value below 20 percent of the 
average of all the other breaks shall be discarded. No 
other break shall be discarded unless the test is known 
to be faulty. 


9.5.3 It is difficult to determine the precise reason why, 
certain specimens break near the edge of the jaws. Ifa 
jaw break is caused by damage to the specimen by the 
jaws, then the results should be discarded. If, however, 
it is merely due to randomly distributed weak places, 
it is a perfectly legitimate result. In some cases, it may 
also be caused by a concentration of stress in the area 


IS 16477 : 2015 


adjacent to the jaws because they prevent the specimen 
from contracting in width as the load is applied. In 
these cases, a break near the edge of the jaws is 
inevitable and shall be accepted as a characteristic of 
the particular method of test. 


9.5.4 If a geomembrane manifests any slippage in the 
jaws or if more than 24 percent of the specimens break 
at a point within 5 mm of the edge of the jaw, then the 
jaws may be padded, or the surface of the jaw face 
may be modified. The user should exercise the utmost 
care to select jaw modifications which will not damage 
the test specimens in any manner. If any modifications 
of the jaw faces are used, state the method of 
modification in the report. 


9.6 Measure the elongation of the geomembrane to 
three significant figures at any stated load by means 
of a suitable recording device at the same time as the 
tensile strength is determined. 


9.6.1 Extensometers are preferred for measurement of 
elongation in geomembranes. Other means of 
measuring elongation should be calibrated against 
extensometers, whenever possible. In any case, the 
means of measuring elongation should be clearly 
indicated in the report. 


9.7 Crosshead speed shall be 10 mm/min unless 
otherwise specified otherwise by the engineer. 


10 CALCULATION 


10.1 Tensile Strength 


Calculate the tensile strength for individual specimens; 
that is, calculate the maximum force per unit width to 
cause a specimen to rupture or yield as read directly 
from the testing machine expressed, in N/m of width, 
using following equation: 

a, = F/W. 
where 


a, = tensile strength of width, N/m; 


k 
ll 


observed breaking force, N; and 
W, = specified specimen width, m. 
This value shall be reported to three significant figures. 


NOTE — When tear or yield failure occurs, so indicate and 
calculate results based upon force and elongation at which tear 
or yield initiates, as reflected in the load-deformation curve. 


10.2 Percentage Elongation 


Calculate the percent elongation for individual 
specimens; that is, calculate the elongation of 
specimens, expressed as the percentage increase in 
length, based upon the initial gauge length of the 
specimen using following equation (1) for XY type 
recorders, or equation (2) for manual readings (ruler). 


E, = (E x R x 100)/(C x L) (1) 

£e, = (AL x 100) / L, .. (2) 
where: 

& = elongation, percent; 

E = distance along the zero load axis from the 


point the curve leaves the zero load axis to 
a point of corresponding force, mm; 


R = testing speed rate, m/min; 
C = recording chart speed, m/min; 
L, = initial nominal gauge length, mm; and 


AL = unit change in length from a zero force to 
the corresponding measured force, mm. 


10.2.1 Gauge marks or extensometers are preferred to 
define a specific test section of the specimen; when 
these devices are used, only the length defined by the 
gauge marks or extensometers shall be used in the 
calculation. Gauge marks must not damage the 
geomembrane. 


10.3 Tensile Modulus 
10.3.1 Initial Tangent Modulus 


Determine the location and draw a line tangent to the 
first straight portion of the force-elongation curve. At 
any point on this tangent line, measure the force and 
the corresponding elongation with respect to the zero 
load axis. Calculate initial tensile modulus, in N/m, of 
width using following equation: 


J = (F x 100) / (e, x W) 


where 

J, = initial tangent modulus at corresponding 
elongation per metre of width, N; 

F = determined force on the drawn tangent line, 
N; 

€, = corresponding elongation with respect to the 
drawn tangent line and determined force, 
percent; and 

W, = specimen width, m. 


10.3.2 Offset Modulus 


Determine the location and draw a line tangent to the 
force-elongation curve between the first point of 
inflection and the proportional limit and through the 
zero load axis. Measure the force and the corresponding 
elongation with respect to the load axis. Calculate offset 
tensile modulus using following equation: 


J, = (F x 100), x W) 
where 


J, = offset tensile modulus at corresponding 
elongation per metre of width, N; 


F = determined force on the drawn tangent line, 
N; 
€, = corresponding elongation with respect to the 


drawn tangent line and determined force, 
percent; and 


W, = specimen width, m. 


10.3.3 Secant Modulus 


Select a force for a specified elongation (€,) usually 
10 percent and label the corresponding point on the 
force-elongation curve as P,. Likewise, label a second 
point, P,, at a specified elongation, €, usually 0 percent 
elongation. Draw a straight line (secant) through both 
points P, and P, intersecting the zero load axis. The 
preferred values are 0 and 10 percent elongation, 
respectively, although other values may be substituted 
by the design engineer. Calculate secant tensile 
modulus using following equation: 


J, = (F x 100) / (£, x W) 


where 

J... = secant tensile modulus between specified 
elongations per metre of width, N; 

F = determined force on the constructed line, N; 

€, = corresponding elongation with respect to the 
constructed line and determined force, 
percent; and 

W, = specimen width, m. 


10.4 Breaking Toughness 


10.4.1 When using the force-elongation curves, draw 
a line from the point of maximum force of each 
specimen perpendicular to the elongation axis. Measure 
the area bounded by the curve, the perpendicular, and 
the elongation axis by means of an integrator or a 
planimeter, or cut out the area of the chart under the 
force-elongation curve, weigh it, and calculate the area 
under the curve using the weight of the unit area. 


10.4.2 When determining the breaking toughness of 
geomembranes using a manual gauge (steel rule or dial) 
to measure the amount of strain at a given force, record 
the change in specimen length for at least ten 
corresponding force intervals. Approximately equal 
force increments should be used throughout the 
application of force having the final measurement taken 
at specimen rupture. 


10.4.3 Calculate the breaking toughness or work-to- 
break per unit surface area for each specimen when 
using XY recorders using Equation 3, or when using 
automatic area measuring equipment using equation 
(4) or when using manually obtained strain 
measurements with a steel rule or dial gauge using 
equation (5): 


IS 16477 : 2015 


T= (A, x Sx R)/(W.x CXA) 1G) 

LVRS RIE <A) .. (4) 

T = J f (@d AL) (5) 
where 


T, = breaking toughness, 

A, = area under force-elongation curve, 
S = full scale force range, 

R = testing speed rate, 

W, = recording chart width, 

C = recording chart speed, 


A, = area of test specimen within the gauge 
length, 


V = integrator reading, 

I, = integrator constant, 

F; = observed breaking force, 
AL 


= unit change in length from a zero force to 
the corresponding measured force, 


p = unit stress per area of test specimen within 
the gauge length, and 


0 = zero force. 
10.5 Average Values 


Calculate the average values for tensile strength, 
elongation, initial tangent modulus, secant at modulus, 
and breaking toughness to three significant figures. 


10.6 Standard Deviation (Estimated) 


Calculate the standard deviation using following 
equation and report the value to two significant figures: 


2 1/2 
A= [=(+-¥) n- | 
where 
s = estimated standard deviation, 
x = value of a single observation, 
n = number of observations, and 


x = arithmetic mean of the set of observations. 
11 REPORT 


11.1 Report that the specimens were tested as directed 
in his test method, or any deviations from this test 
method. Describe all materials or products sampled 
and the method of sampling each material. 


11.2 Report all of the following applicable items for 
both machine direction and cross machine direction 
of all materials tested: 


a) Average force at failure of width as tensile 
strength, in N/m; 


IS 16477 : 2015 


b) 


c) 


d) 


e) 


Average elongation at failure in percent, and 
the method of measuring elongation; 
Average initial tangent or secant modulus of 
width, in N/m. For secant modulus, state that 
portion of the force-elongation curve used to 
determine the modulus, that is 10 percent 
elongation reported as 10 percent secant 
modulus. Other portions of the force- 
elongation curve can be reported as 
appropriate for the design requirements; 
Standard deviation or the coefficient of 
variation of the test results; 


Thickness and width of specimens; 


n) 


p) 


Number of specimens tested; 

Make and model of the testing machine; 
Grip separation (initial); 

Crosshead speed (rate of separation); 
Gauge length (if different from grip 
separation); 

Type, size, and facing of grips, and description 
of my changes made to the grips; 
Conditioning of specimens, including details 
of temperature, relative humidity, and 
conditioning time; and 

Anomalous behaviour, such as tear failure or 
failure it the grip; 


IS 16477 : 2015 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Geo-synthetics Sectional Committee, TXD 30 


Organization 


The Bombay Textile Research Association, Mumbai 


Brahmaputra Board, Guwahati 


Business Coordination House, New Delhi 


Central Coir Research Institute, Alappuzha 


Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 


Central Soil and Materials Research Station, New Delhi 


CIDCO, Mumbai 
Department of Jute and Fibre Technology, Kolkatta 


Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals, New Delhi 


Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna 


Garware Wall Ropes Ltd, Pune 


Gujarat Engineering Research Institute , Vadodara 


Indian Jute Industries’ Research Association, Kolkata 


Indian Jute Manufacture Association, Kolkatta 
In Personal Capacity 


Kusumgar Corporates, Mumbai 


Macaferri Environmental Solutions Pvt Ltd, Navi Mumbai 
Maharashtra Maritime Board, Mumbai 
National Highways Authority of India, New Delhi 


National Jute Board, Kolkatta 

National Institute of Research on Jute and Allied Fibre Technology, 
Kolkatta 

Office of the Textile Commissioner, Mumbai 

Premier Polyfilms Ltd, Ghaziabad 

Reliance Industries Ltd, New Delhi 

Strata Geosystems (I) Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 


Techfab India, Mumbai 


The Synthetics & Art Silk Mills Research Association, Mumbai 


Representative(s) 


Dr. A. N. Desai (Chairman) 
Suri V. K. PATIL (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI SAMIR GUPTA 
SurIMATI Ritika Gupta (Alternate) 


DIRECTOR 
Jomt Director (Alternate) 


SHRI SUDHIR MATHUR 
Suri JAl BAHAGWAN (Alternate) 


Suri NRIPENDRA KUMAR 
Suri ManisH Gupta (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Dr SWAPAN GHOSH 
Suri K. R. Gurra (Alternate) 


ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR GENERAL (QA) 


SHRI S. Masoop Husain 
Suri Ravi BHUSHAN Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri TIRUMAL KULKARNI 
Suri S. J. Curtis (Alternate) 


Suri L. V. AsHARA 
RESEARCH OFFICER (Alternate) 


Suri P. K. CHOUDHURY 
Suri Kousuik Das (Alternate) 


REPRESENTATIVE 
Suri V. N. Gore 


Suri Y. K. KusuMGAR 
Dr M. K. TaLukpar (Alternate) 


Dr RATNAKAR MAHAJAN 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri R. K. GANDHI 
Suri R. P. Sincu (Alternate) 


Suri T. SANYAL 
Suri A. K. Kuastaair (Alternate) 


Dr Gauram Bose 
Dr Sanjoy DEBNATH (Alternate) 


SHRI AJAY PANDIT 
Suri M. BALASUBRAMANIAN (Alternate) 


DR SANJEEV K. VERMA 
Suri HARINDER Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri M. S. VERMA 
Suri V. RAvIKANTH (Alternate) 


SHRI NARENDRA DALMIA 
SHRI SHAHROKH Bacu (Alternate) 


SHRI ANANT KANOI 
Suri SAURABH Vyas (Alternate) 


Dr MAnNIsHA MATHUR 
SHRIMATI ASHWINI SuDAM (Alternate) 


IS 16477 : 2015 


Organization Representative(s) 
Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai Dr PRASHANT BHAVE 
BIS Directorate General SHRI PRABHAKAR Ral, Scientist ʻE’ and Head (TXD) 


[Representing Director General (Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
Suri J. K. Gupta 
Scientist ‘C’ (TXD), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: TXD 30 (1187). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.1.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : SCO 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 260 3843 
260 9285 
Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. 
FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


