IS:2717-1979

,

Indian Standard

(Reaffirmed 2003)

GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO VITREOUS ENAMELWARE AND CERAMIC-METAL SYSTEMS

( First Revision )
First Reprint JULY 1989

UDC

666.293:OOl.b

I' -%

`e.(

::_k

@ copyriiht 1980

BUREAU

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARC NEW DELHI 110002

May 1980

IS : 2717- 1979

Indim Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO VITREOUS ENAMELWARE AND CERAMIC-METAL SYSTEMS

( First Revision )
Ceramicware
Chairman DR S. P. VERMA

+

Sectional Committee,

CDC 27
Development,

Representing Directorate General of Technical New Delhi

Members SHRI D. S. CHABRAL ( Alternate Dr S. P. Vex-ma ) As;;T~;;NT DIRECTOR( Da S. K. BANE~JEE
SHRI G. K. BHA~AT SHRI K. K. BHATIA

to Railway Board, Ministry of Railways West

SHRI A. K. BHATIA ( Alternate ) All Slrru N. D. DAVDA

Directorate of Industries, Government of Bengal, Calcutta Bengal Potteries Ltd, Calcutta U. P. Ceramics & Potteries Ltd, Ghaziabad

Sum 0. P. DHAMIJA SIIRI D. P. AHUJA ( dltcrnafe ) The Parshuram Pottery Works Co Ltd, Wankaner SHRI M. K. GANPULE SHHI Ii. R. DEO ( Alternate ) ,_Ministry of Defence ( DGI ) S~rtr K. K. GH~I DR S. P. SINCI~ DHAI~AR~Y ( Atternate ) Central Glass & Ceramic Research Institute Dn S. K. GUHA (CSIR), Calcutta Kerala Ceramics Ltd, Kundara SHRI P. T. JACOB Geological Survey of India, Calcutta DR A. MAJUMDER Sur Enamel & Stamping Works Pvt Ltd SHRI D. P. NIYOCI Calcutta SRRI PRONOB KUMAR Sun ( Alternate ) DR L. M. PANDE Ministry of Defence ( R & D ) DR R. K. NIGAM ( Alternate ) National Test House, Calcutta SFin1E.K. RAMACHANDRAN SARI G. C. DAS ( Alternate ) ( Continued on page 2 Q COpVright 1980 0.F 1NDIAN STANDARDS

India Pottery Manufacturers' Association, Calcutta Export Inspection Council of India, Calcutta

1

BUREAU

This publication is. protected under the Zndian Copyright Act ( XIV of 1957 ) and reproduction in whole or in part by any means except with written ermission of the publisher shall be deemed to be an infringement of copyright un z er the said Act.

IS :2717 -1979
( Continurdfrom

page1 )
Representing
RAO E. 1. D.-Parry Ltd, Ranipet Commissioner ( Small Development Industries ), New Delhi Vitreous Enamellers' Association, Calcutta Director General, IS1 ( fi-o$i Member )
Secsetary

Members SHEI I'. JAOANNATH

Snm L. T. P. SINHA

Scale

SHIII P. Sun Dn G. M. SAXENA, Director ( Chem )

SH~I G. P. SABASWAT Deputy Director ( Chem),

ISI

Ceramic-Metal
SJIRI G. M. AGARwAL

Systems Subcommittee,
Ferro Coatings

CDC 27 : 4
Ltd, Calcutta

& Colours

SHRI P. MISR.4 ( Alternate) SHRI D. S. CHABIUL

Dn S. K. Das
Smx

D. P. NIVOGI

Directorate General of Technical Development, New Delhi Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, Calcutta Sur ~~un~~ and Stamping Works Pvt Ltd, of Defence, Defence Metallurgical Ministry Research Laboratory (DRDO ), Hyderabad of Research in Basic Sciences, Directorate New Delhi Bcnaal Enamel Works Ltd, Calcutta Enamellers' Association, Calcutta

lh B. V. S. SUBBA RAO

SHW S. K. SUR ( Altcrnatc )
DR I. N. BHATIA ( Alternate)

StlRI A. K. SEN SHRI A. K. CIL~KRABOETY ( Alk-rnafi) Vitreous SHRI PRONOB KUUAR Sun Snnr B: K. C~ATTERJEE ( rllternnle )

2

IS 2 2717 - 1979

Indian Standard
GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO VITREOUS ENAMELWARE AND CERAMIC-METAL SYSTEMS

( First Revision )
0. FOREWORD

0.1 This Indian Standard ( First Revision ) was adopted by the Indian Standards Institution on 25 October 1979, after the draft finalized by the Ceramicware Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 0.2 This standard was first published in 1964 under the title `Glossary of terms used in vitreous enamelware industry `. However, in view of the progress made by the industry during the years, the Sectional Committee responsible for its preparation decided to revise it with a view to updating it. 0.3 In the preparation of this standard assistance has been derived from publication C286-1977 ` Standard definitions of terms relating to porcelain enamel and ceramic-metal systems `, issued by the American Society for Testing and Materials, USA.

1. SCOPE 1.1 This standard covers the terms and definitions enamelware and ceramic-metal systems. 2. TERMS AND DEFINITIONS A Ablation -Wearing and carrying away of the surface layer used as a protective coverage of an object exposed to an environment of intense heat and/or abrasion. degree to which an enamel Abrasion Resistance -The resist attack by abrasive materials. Abrasives Materials used for wearing off the surface. 3 coating will relating to vitreous

IS : 2717- 1979 process in which ferrous metal shapes Acid Annealing - An annealing are coated with acid before and in conjunction with annealing. Acid Resistance - The attack by acid solutions. degree to which an enamel coating will resist coating

Adherence - The degree to which an enamel remains attached to the metal substrate. Ageing - The storing of enamel slip after time to improve its suspension properties. Alkali Resistance-The resist attack by aqueous degree to alkali solutions. which

or other ceramic for enamel

milling an

predetermined coating will of the coating which suitable

Alligator Hide - A defect characterized by extreme enamel surface, a severe case of ` orange peel `. Aluminium Enamel aluminium or aluminium Anatase - One of imparts characteristic Annealing temperature An enamel alloys. specifically

roughness for

designed

the crystalline forms of titanium white colour to vitreous enamel. castings

dioxide to to a

Heating metal shapes or raw to relieve stress prior to cleaning.

Anti-scale Compound - A preparation which is applied Tools ' to protect them from scaling, while in service.

`Burning

enamel Architectural used for manufacturing Enamel - An architectural panels to produce a texture and finish for indoor or outdoor use in building construction. B Ball Mill - A rotating cylinder lined with porcelain, silex or any other such tiles, used for wet or dry milling of ceramic materials. Generally, pebbles, porcelain balls, etc, are used as grinding media. Base Metal Batch The metal on which of raw materials enamel coating is applied. of frit.

A mixture

used for the preparation

Batch Smelter - Smelter that operates as a periodic unit, being charged, fired and discharged according to a predetermined cycle. Bead a) A turned b) Spherical enamelled edge on any fabricated or semi-spherical surface. 4 article. of enamel on an

accumulation

IS : 2717- 1979 Beading a) The process of turning the edge of any fabricated article. b) The application of enamel of contrasting colour on the bead rim of any article. Beading Enamel -Enamel ` Beading (b) ' ] specially prepared for beading
or

[see

Bend Test - A test in which the enamelled article is progressively distorted by bending to determine resistance of the enamel coating to fracture. Bentonite - Highly colloidal clay mineral which greatly increases the ` set ' of an enamel slip when used in small amounts with clay. Biscuit Cracking Biscuit or Bisqrefiring. Black Edging a) A black enamel used for beading [ see ` Beading (b) ' 1. b) The process of brushing off cover coat bisque and then applying the black vitreous enamel over the ground coat or exposed area prior to firing. Blackboard Enamel - A special type of cover coat enamel providing a writing surface for chalk. used for The fracturing of the enamel biscuit. The dried coating of wet process enamel before

Blackhead - A defect similar to copperhead, but smaller and black, It may occur on ware that has been enamelled following nickel dip. Black Speck dark speck. A defect that appears in the fired cover coat as a small to form a of abrasive hole in the

Blank - A piece cut from metal sheet to the size required finished article. Blasting - The cleaning of metal surface by impingement material projected against it at high speed. Blister - A defect consisting of a bubble enamel coat exposing ground coat or metal. Blowhole a) A void in the metal castings. b) A void in the enamel surface ` base metal `. 5 or a circular

associated, with a void in the

IS : 2717 - 1979 Blue Enamel - In dry process enamelling, so thin, that it appears blue. an area of enamel coating

Boiling - Defects visible in fused enamel surface which may take the form of numerous blisters, pin-holes, black specks, dimples or spongy surface. Bolt-Hole Brush - A special round brush used to remove bisque from in and around small openings in the ware. Box Furnace - A furnace in which introduced, fired and removed. a load of ware is periodically defect characterized by an

Break Out - In dry process enamelling;a area of blisters with well-defined boundaries.

Bright Annealing - The heating of steel to red heat in a reducing atmosphere to avoid oxidation. Bubble Structure-The the fused enamel surface. Buck size and distribution of voids or bubbles in

A special support for heavy ware during the firing of enamel. used to suspend or

equipment Burning Bars, Points or Tools -An support the ware during firing operations. Burning Tool Burn Off See ` Perrett `.

A surface lacking in gloss due to overfiring of enamel.

Button Test - A test to determine the relative fusibility of enamel frits or powder, so called because the fused test specimens resemble buttons.

Cast Iron Enamel to cast iron.

An enamel

specifically

designed for application on

protective coating Ceramic Coating - An inorganic, non-metallic metal, generally for use at high temperatures ( above red heat ).

Ceramic Fertilizer - Special types of enamel or glass frits containing minute quantities of certain trace elements, which are gradually released into the soil to provide nutrients to the plant& Ceramic its colour process. Ink - An ink containing a ceramic pigment which develops on firing, used for ceramic transfers and in the silk-screen Enamel See` Blackboard Enamel `. 6

Chalkboard

IS : 2717 - 1979 chalky - The condition of an enamelled surface which has lost its gloss due to devitrification, or atmospheric corrosion, frequently leaving a loose deposit. er y enamelling in which different coloured enamels Chempleve -J ewe 11 are separated by ridges of metal remaining after the design has been cut into the surface. Chilled Shot - Metallic abrasive comprising crushed, chilled iron or rounded steel shots used for blasting cast metal surfaces prior to enamelling. Chipping - Fracturing enamel from the surface. and breaking away of fragments of fused

Chrome1 Metal - Heat resistant nickel-chromium making jigs for suspending or supporting enamelware during firing.

alloy used for in the furnace

Cleaner - An alkaline solution or organic solvent used to remove oil, grease, drawing compounds or dirt from the sheet metal ware prior to pickling. Clear Frit A frit which remains essentially transparent after fusing.

Cloisonne -J ewellery enamelling in which enamels of different colours are separated by fine wires secured to the metal base. Coating Application of enamel to cover a surface.

Coefficient of Scatter - The rate of increase of reflectance with thickness at infinitesimal thickness of enamel over an ideal black backing. Cold-Rolled Steel A low-carbon, cold-reduced sheet steel. by reflec-

Colour Difference Meter - An instrument tance, the difference between shades of colour. Coloured Frit - A frit obtained colourant has been added. Colour Oxide Comb-Rack Material

for measuring,

by melting a raw batch in which a

used to impart colour to vitreous enamel,

A burning tool shaped like a comb. to return to

Comeback - The time required by a box furnace temperature after the introduction of a load of ware.

Cone-Screen Test - A method for testing fineness of milled enamels with a cone-shaped sieve [ see also ` Screen Test' 1. 7

IS : 2717 - 1979 property of an ename1 slip which controls its Consistency -The [ see also ` Viscosity ' and draining, flowing and spt3yin.g behaviour ` Thixotropy ' 1. Consistometer - An instrument in which a standard volume of slip is allowed to pass through a standard orifice for measuring its yield and mobility. Continuity of Coating - The degree to which a vitreous enamel or ceramic coating is .free from defects such as `boiling', `blisters' and ` copperheads ' that cortlcl reduce its protective properties. Continuous Furnace - A furnace into which the ware is fed continuously and through which it progresses during firing. Continuous Smelter-A type of smelter into which the raw mix is fed continuously and from which the molten product is discharged continuously.
Cdntrast Ratio - A ratio of the reflectance backing to its reflectance over a backing ( 80 percent ).

of a coating ol.er black of reflectance of 0'80 in which the ware on coat

Cooling Zone - That part of the continuous furnace is allowed to cool after firing. Copper copper. Enamel An enamel specifically

designed for application ground

Copperhead - A defect occurring in fused sheet, metal enamel which usually appears as reddish-brown spots. Cover Coat -A ground coat. layer of vitreous enamel normally

applied over a coating obscures

Covering Power - The degree to which an enamel the underlying surface. Cracking -

A defect in the bisque consisting of fractures or separations. mottled textural effect in a wet process vitreous enamela wrinkled surface. appearing as agglomerates

Crackled-A ing, resembling Crawling or irregularly

A defect in the vitreous enamel shaped islands.

Craze, Crazing -A defect appearing vitreous enamel surface. Crinkled-A textural effect on the appearance of fine wrinkles or ridges. 8

as fine cracks or fractures in the enamelled surface giving the

IS : 2717 - 1979 C~:MI CdetBend Test See ` Bend Test `.

Crushed or broken glass used as a part of raw batch.
A spray gun with a fluid container as an integral part.

CUpCan-

Capping -The pouring of slip over areas of a part during draining to produce uniform application. cartingA defect similar to ` crawling `. by a

Curt&taA defect in sheet steel ground coats characterized &aped pattern of darkened areas that are sometimes blistered.
D

Decalcomania ( Decal ) - A design or wording printed on tissue paper with ceasxnk ink and transferred to a fused enamel surface and then refired to form an integral part of the enamel coating. Decking -

The multiple. layer loading of ware for firing.

De-enamelling

- The removal of fused enamel from cast iron or sheet metal by means of sand blasting or using chemicals.

Deflocculating - Thinning of the consistency addition of a suitable electrolyte. Degreasing

of an enamel slip by the

-Process of removing grease or oil either by heating or immersion in hot alkaline solutions in preparation of the metal surface for enamelling.

Delayed Fish,Scaling - Fish scaling which occurs some tinle after the final enamel processing ( see also ` Fishs caling ' ).
Dent A defect in the form of depression on the base metal, manifested in the finished articles. Resistance - The degree to which an enamel coating will resist attack by detergent solution. Devitrification - A surface result of crystallization. Dimple Dipping -

Detergent

defect manifested

by loss of gloss as a

A shallow depression in the fused enamel.

- The process of coating a metal shape by immersion in slip, removal, and draining; in dry process enamelling, the method of coating by immersing the heated metal shape for a short time in powdered frit. Dipping

on dipped ware.

Weight--The

weight of enamel slip retained Usually expressed as dry weight.
9

per unit area

IS : 2717- 1979 Direct Firing - The firing operation in a furnace is not shielded from the products of combustion. Direct-on-Cover Enamel Cover coat directly in which the ware

applied

on base metal.

defect caused by the movement of the wet slip on Double Draining -A the ware after it appears that the draining has been completed. Double-Face WareA ware which has a finish coat on both surfaces. surface in which as a line or

DragThe flow of enamel during its fusion on the vertical resembling heavy `orange peel `, or developing into short runs. Draining the excess -The part of the dipping or flow-coating slip flows from suitably positioned ware. process

non-uniform thickness of coating Drain Line -A streak in the dipped or flow-coated ware. Dredge A sieve used for the application of dry

appearing

of dry process enamel. powder to hot ware enamel by to

Dredging -`The application screening or sifting. Drop Test-A fracture caused Dry Grinding Drying Crack-

enamel

test to determine the resistance by a sudden blow/impact. -The milling of frit without

of a vitreous medium.

liquid

A defect

characterized of dry

by a fissure in the bisque. powdered enamel to heated itself in the

Dry Process-The castings.

application

Dry Spray - A defect confined to sprayed ware manifesting fired vitreous enamel asrrreug~h, sandy texture. Dry Weight The weight per unit area of enamel bisque.

Dummy HoleA smooth, well-covered depression on the surface of fused dry process enamel, generally caused by sucking of the enamel into a cavity in the casting on cooling. Similar to a large ` dimple `. Dust Coat A relatively thin, sprayed coating of enamel slip.

Dusted. ;t) Loug hantllcd sieve used for the application of dry process enamel, 1 ibratctl by hand or mechanical means [see also ` Dredge']. 1)) `l'hc operator applying the above process. 10

IS : 2717- 1979
Dusting a) See `Dredging'. b) To remove extraneous material generally after brushing. E Edging a) The process of removing to expose the underlying b) The spraying ware. or coating bisque from the edge of a piece of ware vitreous enamel. of special slip on to the edge of the from the biscuit before firing,

stiff-bristled brush with metal guide, used to remove Edging Brush -A bisque from the edges of a ware before the firing operation. Egg-Shell Finish ( Semi-matt Finish) -The appearance fused enamel which has a smooth but non-glossy surface shell. Electrolyte-A Electrolytic application accelerating the cathode it, the anode Enamel inorganic chemical used to adjust the ' set ' of enamel of a correctly like an egg slip.

Cleaning - The process of cleaning or pickling by the to the cleaning or pickling bath fo, of electric current the chemical cleaning process. The ware is generally nlade (negative pole) and the metal tank or an iron rod dipped in (positive pole). or alas<)

(Vitreous Enamel) - A substantially vitreous material bonded to any metal surface by fission. Iron-Sheet metal specially having a low carbon content. &c ` Colour surface Oxide `. texture F resulting from chemical prepared for vitreous

Enamelling ling, usually Enamel Etched -

cnanlcl-

Stain -

An altered

attack.

Filler

I\ ceramic

putly usrd to fill holes in castings before relati\:e resistance of enamel

ennnlelling.

Film Strength damage.

-The

biscuit to nlechnnical

degree to which an enamel frit has been milled.in wet Fineness -The or dry form, usually expressed in grams of residue retained on a specific siev? from a 50 ml or 100 g sample. 11

Id : 2717- 1979 Finish Coat - The final cover coat.
Firing

-The substrate.
Firing

process of heating

to fuse the applied cua&g in which

on to the a vitreous

Range -The time-temperature interval enamel or ceramic coating is satisfactorily matured. Temperature -The

Firing

maturing of the coating.

degree of heat attained by the ware during

Firing Time - The period during which the ware remains in the firing zone of the furnace to mature the coating. Firiqg

Zone - That portion of a continuous furnace through which the ware passes and that remains at or near the firing temperature of the _~ coating.
- A defect appearing as small half moon-shaped fractures resembling the scales of a fish. Frit - Frit which, after smelting, between water-cooled rollers. Flaking Off -

Fishscaling

Flake

has been quenched by passing slivers of the enamel

The breaking

away of conchoidal

layer. Flame Spraying, Thermal Spraying - The process of coating metals with vitreous enamels, oxides, carbides, silicides, nitrides, etc, rendered into molten form by passing them through high temperature flame.
Flocculating - Thickening the consistency of the enamei addition of suitnble electrolytes.

slip by the

Flow Coat!ng -- The process of coating a metal shape by causing the slip to flow over its surface and allowing it to drain.
Flux 4

A substance which promotes fusion in a ceramic misture. them fusible. clear enamcl added to colouring oxides to make

b) A low-melting

Fork - A piece of metal equipment used during the firing operation for placing a ware in and removing it from a box furnace. Frit -

The product of the melted batch of enamel, often quenched in \r:\ter or between rolls to prodlIce <grains or smnll flakes.

m-r 2717 - 1979 Fritted Trace Elements Fritting frit. Fusibility fused. The The rapid
( FTE ) - See ` Ceramic

Fertilizer `. to produce can be flow of

chilling

of the molten with

glassy material which

readiness

or otherwise

an enamel relative

Fusion Flow Test-A method of measuring the enamels in the molten state; a measure of `fusibility'.
G

Gas Pocket - A subcutaneous cavity to cause a blister or black speck.
Gassing

in cast iron filled with gas, liable

a) Enamel defects, such as scumming and lack of gloss, caused by fusing the ware in a furnace containing gases other than air, mainly sulphur oxides. b) The formation
Gassy Surface -

of gas bubbles defect

in milled

enamel

slip. gloss and

A surface

characterized
Steel,

by poor

minute

bubbles.
Steel ( Glass-Lined Glassed Steel ) - Steel enamel to provide temperature and

Glass-Coated

equipment coated \vith special type of glass or vitreous high resistance to attack by chemicals at elevated pressure. Glass
Glass Glossy Graining Enamel Eye -

An enamel

specifically

designed

for decorating blister

glass. usually

pert a ining

to ` Dry

A defect consisting Process `.

of a large
`.

unbroken

Undercoat -

.-~~ ~Ycc ` Underglaze

A 111 occ'ss lijl producing

a pattern
Graining Graining Granite

to the enaincl
Paste RollWare

surface

a decorative I-)y means of rolls.

. finish by transferring

A nlixturc

of colonr oxides, fluxes and oils. of roll used for transferring the

grain pattern produced the slip.

A specialized type to the vitreous enamel.

-- A single coat enamelled by controll corrosion of thr

article with a mottled pattern metal base during drying of

IS : 2717 - 1979 Ground Coat (Grip Coat ) - The first layer of enamel applied to sheet or cast metal, containing ingredients specially designed to produce adherence to the metal. vegetable gum used in small amounts to act as binder Gum Arabic -A and.suspending agent in enamel slips. H Hair Lines ( Strain Lines, Stress Lines ) - Group of parallel or near parallel lines, usually at a place where metal has been worked, having the appearance of cracks healed by fusion and appearing as a variation in They may show the colour of the ground coat in colour or the enamel. which case they are sometimes called ` Strain Lines'. Hard Enamel Hardness a) The degree of resistance of a fused enamel to abrasion. b) The degree of resistance of a frit to milling. c) The relative refractoriness of a vitreous enamel or frit. Heat Craze-Lines or cracks which may be parallel or have a common source either on part or on the whole of the enamelled surface of a casting. Holloware -Ware, Hue such as pots, pans and kettles. colour of an enamelled I distinctness with which a sharply Image Gloss ( of a Surface ) -The outlined character is reflected in the surface. Impact Test See` Drop Test `. added to an acid pickling solution to retard its Inhibitor -A reagent attack on the metal. surface. The predominant An enamel melting at a high temperature.

J
Jar Mill A small ball mill. Jewellery Enamel - A special type of enamel used in the manufacture of jewellery, insignia and objects of art. Jumping -The spontaneous chipping off of pieces during subsequent drying or fusing of cover coat. 14 of fired enamel

L - A fault in sheet iron in which a void expands Lamination firing to produce a blister or a line of blisters. Lead Enamel Luminous -An

during

enamel containing lead compounds.
Enamel

or Luminescent

a) An enamel which emits light in darkness. b) An enamel violet light.
Lumps Lustre -

which

emits

visible

light

when exposed to ultra-

See ` Bead(b) `.

or Lustre Finish -A special iridescent finish produced by spraying fused enamel coating of the ware, whilst still hot, with ferric chloride or other medium to produce a lustre effect.

M
Magnetic Majolica Separator - An equipment designed for removal of metallic iron or magnetic iron oxide from enamel slip.

Enamel - A transparent enamel of composition and properties such that when applied over a white ground or as under coat on curved surfaces or patterns in relief, the convex surfaces retain less enamel than the concave or flat surfaces, with consequent variation in the density of colour. Marbleized Matt Finish-An enamel

grained marble.
Enamel-

finish imitating

the appearance

of

An enamel

which, when correctly fused, has flat non-

glossy surface. Matt Ground Coat-A type of cast iron ground coat which is not completely melted, but only sintered to give a porous layer with a matt surface ( see also ` Ground Coat ' ) .
Matt Surface -

A non-glossy surface.

Maturing

a) Heating an enamelled ware for a sufficient time in the fusing furnace to develop the full properties of coating. b) See ` Ageing `.
Maturing Temperature - The temperature at which vitreous enamel is to be held for a specific time to achieve the desired properties.

15

IS : 2717 - 1979 Metal Blister (Blistered Iron) - A blister formed on the surface of sheet metal during grease burning, pickling or fusing of the ground or cover coats, caused by inclusions or cavities in the metal. Metal Grit See` Chilled Shot `. of fine blisters, Material often parallel lines, originating

Metal Strain-Lines from metal. Mill Additions -

added to the ball mill charge of a frit.

Monet Metal - An acid-resisting nickel-copper alloy used in the enamel industry for making pickling baskets which carry the ware through all the cleaning operations prior to enamelling. Mottled Ware - An enamel finish having a background of uniform colour on which an enamel of a different shade or colour has been applied in small spots or patches. N Neutralizer - A dilute alkaline soIution in which the sheet metal ware is placed after acid pickling in order to neutralize acid remaining on the surface of the ware. Nickel Dipping-The recess of dipping acid-pickled ware in a bath of nickel salts to promote tK e deposition of metallic nickel on the metal.

0
Oil Max-k - A defect on fired enamel with oil or oily condensate. One-Coat Ware a) Articles finished in one cover coat of enamel; in the case of sheet metal over a ground coat, or direct on to cast iron. b) Articles finished in single coat of vitreous enamel. One-Fire Finish -Vitreous processed in a single firing. Opacifier - A material covering power of enamel. enamel coating on the finished diffuse product or surface due to contamination

which

increases

the

reflectance

Opacity - The property in an enamel of reflecting its covering power. 16

light diffusively or

IS : 2717 - 1979 Opaque Enamel - An enamel that is dense to light. hides the surface to which it is applied. An enamel that

Optical Pyrometer - An instrument employed for checking the temperature of a furnace by comparing the colour of the filament of its electric lamp with that of the furnace interior. Orange Peel - A condition of the fused enamel coat showing a rippled surface characteristic of orange peel. Organic Stain - A substance used for colouring slips, which burns out on fusing; used to identify slips of the same colour but of different types. Overfiring -- The fusing of an enamel for too long a time or at too high a temperature, or both. Overspray - The slip from the spray gun not deposited on the ware. Also, spray application of a light coat of slip to an unfired vitreous , enamel. P Pastel Colour Pebble media. Mill -A The term employe;1 to a light colour. ball mill in which pebbles are used as grinding

Peeling - The detachment over a matt ground coat.

of large pieces of cast iron enamel applied

Perrett ( Perrit, Burning Tool ) - A support for enamel ware during the fusing process,`usually made from special heat-resisting metal. Perrett Marks ( Burning Tool Marks, Pin Marks ) ware resulting from contact with perretts. Pickle Basket - A basket fabricated to hold ware during pickling. Pickle Pills - Small the pickling solutions. Marks on the

from corrosion resistant material

capsules ( or pills ) used for testing the strength of

Pickling - The chemical process by which the surface of metal ware is cleaned and prepared for enamelling. Pick-Up See` Dipping Weight `.

Pin-Hole - An enamel surface defect characterized by a small depression, as though made by a pin, resulting from the breaking of a gas bubble, and frequently reaching the base metal: 17

IS : 2717 - 1979 Pin Marks Pit See` Perrett Marks `.

A defect similar to a dimple, but smaller and deeper.

Plasma Spraying - The process of coating metals with oxides, carbides, silicides, nitrides, and other vitrifiable materials by transfer through the recombination zone of a constricted electric arc of a plasma gun. Pop-Off-Jumping off of small pieces of enamel from enamel surface in ground coat or cover coat, similar to fish-scale, but round in shape. Poppers - A defect characterized by randomly occurring, relatively small, circular-shaped areas of ground coat appearing in the first cover coat sheet steel vitreous enamel. Pot Furnace - A furnace contained in a crucible. used to smelt vitreous enamel raw batch through which by air

portion of a continuous furnace Preheat Zone -The the ware passes before entering the firing zone. Pressure pressure. Tank A container

from which slip is removed

evolution Primary Boiling -The enamel; sometimes a defect.

of gas during the initial firing of ( N&PzO, )

Pyro - A common expression for tetrasodium pyrophosphate either hydrous or anhydrous. a

%enching - The operation of cooling the molten frit by pouring into water or by passing through water-cooled rollers. R Raw Batch See` Batch `.

it

R&oiling - The evolution of gas from sheet metal during the fusing of the first or subsequent cover coat causing in the enamel bubbles which do not subside, and frequently leave dark marks resembling specks, or a mass of bubbles under the surface. Recirculating Dip Tank - A dip tank provided keeping the slip in constant circulation. Reclqim a) Enamel recovered from the spray booth, which is suitable for reconditioning for use. b) Enamel powder recovered from the pit in the dry process. 18 with a means for

IS : 2717 - 1979 Reflectance -The percentage of the incident diffusively from an enamelled surface. light which is reflected

Reflectivity --The reflectance of a coating so thick that any additional thickness does not change the reflectance. Reflectometer Refractory An instrument to measure reflectance.

Difficult to fuse. with expansion suitable for use

Rim Enamel-A dry process enamel on small radii convex surfaces.

Rotary Smelter - Any of the cylindrical smelters that depend on slow rotation about a horizontal axis for agitation of the molten mass. Rotospray centrifugal Rubbing - A rotary spray-screening force. Stone device which sieves enamel by

A shaped abrasive used in stoning vitreous enamel.

formation of specks or spots of rust on the base Rust Spotting -The metal when the first coat is dried too slowly, due to moisture left in the processing of the metal before enamel application, or iron salts left on the Controlled rust spotting is sometimes surface of the metal after pickling. used as a special speckled finish ( granite ware ). of the crystalline forms of titanium dioxide which Rutile -One This also imparts a characteristic yellow colour to vitreous enamels. refers to one of the natural ores of titanium dioxide. S Sagging - The ,bending of metal ware during fusion due to insufficient support for the weight of the metal. Sanitaryware etc. Enamelled ware, such as sinks; lavatories, bath-tubs,

-The formation of soap from an animal or vegetable Saponification oil which occurs during the alkali degreasing process if these types of oils are present on the surface of the ware. Scab - A defect in vitreous enamelling metal sheets or castings, having the appearance of a loose piece of metal, tongue, or flap on the surface. Scale-Oxide on the surface of sheet metal, either remaining from the manufacturing process or purposely created by heating to redness. Sdaling -The process of forming scale with or without acid fumes; sometimes refers to spontaneous detachment of scale. I9

JS : 2717 - 1979 Scouring a) The cleaning of met.al surface by rubbing with an abrasive material and water, as in the cleaning of castings for dry process enamelling, when it is not essential to use sand blasting. b) Deep scratching in parallel lines on pressings, usually on vertical faces. Scrappings booth. --- The overspray that has been recovered the relative from a spray of an

Scratch Test---Test used to determine enamel surface to scratching. Screening Screen -

resistance

Application of.enamel by the screen process. A standard test for fineness of vitreous enamel or slip.

Test -

Scumming - The formation of areas of poor gloss on the surface of an enamel ware during or after firing; usually associated with the action of sulphur which may be picked up before firing by the biscuit, or from the furnace atmosphere. Self-Clean ( Continuous Clean ) Enamel - A special type of porous enamel coating finish, mostly used on walls of roasting chambers of cooking ovens. The porous coating accelerates oxi'dation of oils and greases that are deposited on the walls of the oven during its use and no further cleaning is required. Semi-matt Finish -- See ` Egg Shell Finish `.

Semi-muffle Furnace - A furnace with a partial muffle, in which the products `of combustion come in contact with the ware. Set -The property which enables an enamel slip to leave a layer of definite thickness on a non-porous surface immersed in the slip and allowed to drain. Setting-Up Agent in an enamel slip. A substance used to produce or increase ` pick up '

Set Up - To adjust the flow properties of an enamel so that it will leave a layer of definite thickness either by dipping or spraying. Sheet Iron Enamel to sheet iron. An enamel specifically designed for application

Shiner - A form of fish-scaling in which the scales or ` shiners ' are very minute in size. 20

IS : 2717 - 1979 Shorelines -Rings or lines appearing in a fused enamel surface resembling in appearance the lines produced by waves on the shores, caused by too rapid drying or by unsuitable setting up of the enamel. Sign Enamel - A brilliant high gloss enamel particularly for sign work, having high resistance to weather attack. Silex - A fine crvstalline, natural surface, used for linmg ball mills. silica rock of irregular adaptable and rough

Sslk Screen - A piece of silk, metal or nylon cloth tightly stretched over a frame, through which enamel colour ( ceramic ink ) may be pressed. Usuahy the screen is blocked out in the desired design. Sliding - A defect in the draining characteristics of the coating slide produce an uneven coating. Slip-The prepared grinding operation. Slump Test-Test whereby measurement slip over a Hat plate. suspension of frit in water of slip wherein produced by patches the wet

to determine the degree is made of the spreading ware

of consistency of a slip of a specified volume of to distribute the slip are on

Slushing-Manipulation of the dipped uniformly and to remove excess material. Smelter melted. A furnace in which the raw

materials glassy

of the frit batch material formed

Smelter Drippings - Drippings the crown of the smelter.

of molten

Softening Temperature - The temperature, tions, at which vitreous enamel or frit begins to

under
flow.

specified

condi-

Solution Ceramics - Method for producing an adherent inorganic ( usually oxide) coating on a heated metal surface by spraying with solution of soluble salts of refractory metals. Spalling -- A defect characterized by separation of the vitreous erramel from the base metal without apparent external cause. tcsl used to detect h high voltage eleclrical Spark Test of the non-conducting enamel coating on a metallic base. Specking -- SW ` Black Speck `. 21 discontinuity

IS 12717 - 1979
Specular Gloss - The ratio of reflected light to incident light, multiplied by 1 000, for specified a rtures of illumination and reception when the axis of reception coinci (p" es with the mirror image of the axis of illumination. Spider -

enamel.

A defect characterized

by a star-shaped fracture in the vitreous in the enamel layer caused matter by the deposits

Spongy EnamelImperfections presence of masses of bubbles. Soilability

-- The relative ease with which extraneous on the surface of a material.

Speckled Ware - A decorative finish with particles of one colour appearing in a uniform backgrouhd of anqher colour or shade. Spot Welding -

parts are joined together.

A process of welding where two pieces of thin metal by application of pressure on a series of spots &lose

Spray Sagging - A process defect characterized by a wavy line or lines appearing on the vertical surfaces of Sprayed ware prior to drying. Squeegee Squeegee

in squeegee paste.
Paste

Oil -- A liquid

mixture

bf organic

materials
Paste

used as vehicle

( Screening

Ink, Screening

squeegee oil and finely divided inorganic materials and fluxes.
Stain Enamels StainlessSee ` Colour Oxide `.

) - A mixture of such as colour oxides

An enamelled surface which is not stained, discoloured or otherwise attacked by acids ( except hydrofluoric ), chemicals, dyes, fruit juices under atmospheric conditions or ordinary conditions of use.
Star-Marks -

fracture.
Stencil -

A defect

sometimes

characterized a design:

by

a

star-shaped

h template used in biushing

n) lhxsh-Out

Stencil -- Where the design is removed by brushing.

b) .Brrr.+ On Stencil the design.
Stippled Finish -

Where the surplus enamel is removed to leave textured
22

coloured.

A pebbly

vitreous

enamel,

often

muiti-

IS I 2717 - 1979 Stoning - The operation of removing, portioris of vitreous enamel. Strain Lines Stripping See' Hair Lines `. `. by abrasion, the undesirable

See` De-enamelling

Super-opaque Enamel - An enamel having high opacity, and requiring little or no opacifier as a mill addition. Suspension - The property of an enamel slip which keeps the solid particles uniformly distributed throughout that liquid without settling under the influence of gravity. Swab Test - A low voltage electrical test used to evaluate vitreous enamel. Sweat Spot - Imperfection of enamel surface perspiration falling on the bisque ware. caused continuity of by a drop of

application of enamel to both sides of metal ware by Swilling -The immersion in enamel slip, and subsequently draining or shaking. T Tearing ( Tear ) - A defect in the cover coat enamel distinguished by minute breaks in the enamel which have healed. Thermal Shock A sudden change of temperature.
is measured by the difference between the is heated, and the lower temperature t, of is subsequently immersed or the cold water subjected.

NOTE - Resistance to thermal shock upper temperature I1 to which an article the cold water bath, in which the article spray to which the article is subsequently

Thixotropy - The condition of a system consisting of a solid dispersed in a liquid, which sets when at rest but flows freely on agitation, setting again on standing.
NOTE - It is the property which allows the ware to be dipped readily in enamel slip and when drained to leave a regular even layer of predetermined thickness on the n&ace.

Thread Test -A test performed by draining a thread from the enamel during the melting process to ascertain its degree of melting, and to examine for undissolved or unmelted particles. Transfer See` Decalcomania `. Transparent Enamel-An enamel which has the property of transmitting a high percentage of the incident light striking its surface (see also ` Clear Frit `). 23

IS : 2717 - 1979 Triangle Bars - Burning bars of triangular Bars, Points or Tools ' ) . Tube Furnace alloy tubes. A mufIle furnace in which cross-sect ion ( SPE` Burning

combustion

occurs

kvithin

Two-Coat

Ware -

Ware

finished

in two cover coats.

U Underfiring a temperature, The fusing or both. of enamel for too short a time, or at too low

( Glossy Undercoat ) - An enamel applied to cast iron to facilitate the release of gases from the metal before the application of an acid-resisting enamel as the finish coat. Underglaze U-Type Furnace path. A continuous furnace wherein the ware travels in a U-shaped

V Viscosity - The measure of the resistance of a fluid to flow, but in the enamelling industry the term is used in relation to the flow properties of the complex mixture of liquids and solids which constitute enamel slip ( see also ` Thixotropy ' ). Vitreous Enamel See ` Enamel `. W Warping Change in the original contour of the enamel ware.

Water Line ( Water Streak ) resulting from water running separation dclring drying.

A line caused by the absence of enamel down the wet bisque surface, or from

Water Mark ( Water Spot ) a depressed spot.

An appearance

defect

characterized

by

Weathering-Deterioration
atmosphere, bacteria,

of the enamel surface by the action or temperature fluctuations in the course of use. of vitreous enamel materials

of

Wet Milling liquid

The grinding to form a slurry.

with sufficient

24

I

IS : 2717 - 1979

Wet Process Enamelling -~-~ A method of enamclling in \\~hicll the slip is applird to a metal article at ambient tcmperaturr, prior to drying and firing. `. Whales swilling --~ Draill 11i:rrI;s from holes, cut-outs, process as tllick lines of enamel. Coat ~-\\`hite enamv! applied etc, which appear in the

White Ground ~`Tnl"d coat.

direct

to the metal

ZIS;1

25

INDIAN ON CERAMICWARE

STANDARDS

IS:

6154-1971 6988- 1973 7087- 1979 7402 ( Part 7462 ( Part 7775-1975 801j'-1976 8687 (Part 8687 (Part

Prrforated plates for drsiccators ,Fine china dinnerware Ctramic tower parkings ( ret ision ) I)_1974 C:t,ramic water filters: Part 1 Filter containc>rs C~~ramic water fltcrs: Part II Filt(,r cantll*~s 11 j-1975

jrst

87091977

Ceramic grinding media and lining Vitreous enamelled reflectors for use with tungsten filament lamps I )-1977 Methods of test for vitreous enamels and frits: Part 1 Sieve analysis II)-1977 Methods of trst for vitreous enamels and frits: Part 11 Fusion ilow test Method of test for colour retention of vitreous enam&

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg. NEW DELHI 110002 Telephones: 331 01 31, 331 13 76 Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offiies) Regional Offices: Telephone Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, 331 01 31 NEW DELHI 110002 331 13 75 I 36 24 99 *Eastern : l/14 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola. CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, 21843 CHANDIGARH 160036 1 3 16 41 41 24 42 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, MADRAS 600113 41 25 19 ( 41 2916 tWestern : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ), 6 32 92 95 BOMBAY 400093 Branch Offices: Pushpak', Nurmohamed Shaikh Marg, Khanpur. 2 63 48 AHMAOABAD 380001 I 2 63 49 $Peenya Industrial Area 1st Stage, Bangalore.Tumkur Road 38 49 55 BANGALORE 560058 38 49 56 I Gangotri Complex, 5th Floor, Bhadbhada Road, T. T. Nagar, 667 16 BHOPAL 462003 Plot No. 82/83. Lewis Road,. BHUBANESHWAR 751002 5 36 27 631'6. Ward No. 29. R.G. Barua Road, 5th Byelane, 3 31 77 GUWAHATI 781003 6-B-56(3 L. N. Gupta Marg ( Nampallv Station Road ), 23 1083 HYDERABAO 600001 63471 R14 Yudhister Marg. C Scheme, JAIPUR 302005 1 6 98 32 21 68 76 1171418 B Sarvodaya Nagar, KANPUR 208005 1 21 82 92 Patliputra Industrial Estate, PATNA 800013 6 23 05 T.C. No. 14/1421. University P.O.. Palayam 16 21 04 TRIVANDRUM 695035 16 21 17 /nspection Offices ( With Sale Point ): Pushpanjali. First Floor, 205-A West High Court Road, 2 61 71 Shankar Nagar Square, NAGPUR 440010 Institution of Engineers ( India ) Building,.l332 Shivaji Nsgar, 6 24 36 PUNE 411005
*Sal08 Office in COlCutte ir et 5 Chowringhw Approach,P. 0. Princep 27 68 00 Street. Calcutta 700072 tSalrs Office in Bombay ir at Novofty Chambws, Grant Road, 88 65 28 Bombay 400007 $Salea Office in Bwtgalore is at Unity Building,-f4ararimharaja Square, 22 36 71 Songalore 560002

Reprography

Unit,

BIS, New Delhi,

India

.

AMENDMENT

NO. 1
TO

JULY 1990

IS 2717 : 1979 GLOSSARY OF TERMS RELATING TO `VITREOUS ENAMELWARE AND CERAMIC-METAL SYSTEMS

( First Revision ) ( Page
8 ) -

Insert the following new definition after the definition of

`Contrast Ratio': `Cookingware - Articles which are intended to be used for heating in the course of preparation of food and beverages.'
'

(Pagell)Insert the following of `Enamel ( Vitreous Enamel )`:

new definition after

the definition

`Enamel Frit - The frit having specific ceramic ceramic coating on metals.'

composition to produce

(Page 12) - Insert the following new definition after the definition of `Flame Spraying, Thermal Spraying':

`Flatware - Articles having an internal depth not exceeding 25 mm, measured from the lowest internal point to the horizontal plane passing through the point of everflow.'
(Page

12) -

Insert the following

new definition after the definition serving for the

of `Flux': `Foodware - A flatware and hollow-ware used in the preparation, or storage of food and beverages.' ( Page 12, Definition of 'Frit ' ) existing definition: Substitute the following

`Frit - It is an intermediate product formed by quenching in water or between water-cooled rolls, a mixture of inorganic materials in the molten state. IC may be partially crystalline. It is used for providing a protective coating in admixture with various additives on different ceramics, glassware and metal.' ( Page 14, Definition of `Hollow-ware' ) the existing definition: `Hollow-Ware Articles having an internal 1 Substitute the following for depth greater than 25 mm,

measured from the lowest internal point to the horizontal plane passing through the point of overflow. a) Small Hollow-ware l-1 litres. b) Large Hollow-ware( Page 23 ) heading `T': Hollow-ware with a capacity of less than

Hollow-ware with a capacity of 1'1 to 5 Iitres.' after the alphabet

Insert the following new definition

`Tanks and Vessels -

Article having a capacity of 5 litres or more.'

(CHD09)

2
Printed at Printwell Printers, Delhi, India

