апей HAF IS 2088 : 2023 
Indian Standard 


atten oh fanor eh тїї 
( TT qha ) 


Methods for 
Determination of Arsenic 


( Third Revision ) 


ICS 71.060 


© BIS 2023 


ARA OAT 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
AM IA, 9 ЕТ ME HH AMT, AE 18 - 110002 
M МАМАК BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI - 110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2023 Price Group 6 


Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee, CHD 01 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (Third Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized 
by the Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee had been approved by the Chemical Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1962 covering only modified Gutzeit method. Newer techniques for 
determination of arsenic were increasingly applied, and one such method was based on silver 
diethyldithiocarbamate. The standard was revised in 1971 to incorporate this method. This method assisted in 
determining the actual arsenic content as against the limit test provided by modified Gutzeit method. 
Selection of either silver diethyldithiocarbamate or modified Gutzeit method were to be judged from the end 
use. 


The second revision of the standard was undertaken in 1983 to align it with ISO 2590 *General method for 
the determination of arsenic-silver diethyldithiocarbamate photometric method'. Before the test could be 
applied to the material, any arsenic present had to be quantitatively converted into its simple derivatives like 
arsenic trichloride or pentachloride which could completely be reduced to arsine by action of zinc in presence 
of dilute acid. These derivatives had to be free from interfering substances like nitrate, copper, silver, 
mercury, cobalt, nickel, molybdenum and palladium which are to be removed suitably and taken in the 
desired volume containing the desired amount of free acid. Though the preparation of test solution had to be 
dealt by individual material specifications, the possible treatments either alone or in combination, was 
considered suitable for most samples. Such treatments are prescribed in Annex A for guidance. 


Further, in the third revision, alternative test method, ICP-OES has been incorporated in the standard. In 
addition to this, reference clause has also been updated. 


The composition of the committee responsible for formulation of this Standard is listed in Annex B. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 2022 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values (second revision)’. The number of significant places 
retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 2088 : 2023 


Indian Standard 


METHODS FOR DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC 
( Third Revision ) 


1SCOPE 


1.1 This standard prescribes methods for determination 
of arsenic. 


1.1.1 Modified Gutzeit method of test for arsenic 
shall be employed in cases where the actual arsenic 
content 1s not needed and only a knowledge of limit 
is desired. In cases where the actual arsenic content 
is to be determined, silver diethyldithiocarbamate 
method or ICP-OES method may be followed. The 
silver diethyldithiocarbamate method is applicable to 
quantities of arsenic (as As) in the range of | ug to 


20 ug. 
2 REFERENCES 


The Indian Standards listed below contain provisions 
which through reference in this text, constitute 
provision of this standard. At the time of publication, 
the editions indicated were valid. All standards are 
subject to revision, and parties to agreements based 
on this standard are encouraged to investigate the 
possibility of applying the most recent editions of the 
standards listed below: 


IS No. Title 


IS 265:2021 Hydrochloric acid — Specification 
(fifth revision) 


IS 323: 2009 Rectified spirit for industrial use — 
Specification (second revision) 


IS 336 : 1973 Specification for ether (second revision) 


IS 695 : 2020 Acetic acid  — 
(fourth revision) 


Specification 
IS 1070 : 1992 Reagent grade water — Specification 
(third revision) 
3 APPARATUS 


3.1 The apparatus for modified Gutzeit method shall be 
as given in Fig. 1. 


3.2 For silver diethyldithiocarbamate method the 
apparatus shall consist of the following: 


3.2.1 Evolution and Absorption Apparatus 


It shall consist of a conical flask A of 100 ml capacity 
for evolution of arsine, a connecting tube B to trap 
hydrogen sulphide, and absorption tube C with a 


spherical or conical groundglass joint. A spring clip 
may be used to ensure firm joint between the 
connecting tube B and absorption tube C when a 
spherical joint is used. Suitable forms of apparatus 
using spherical joint with fritted glass are shown in 
Fig. 2, 3 and 4. 


3.2.2 Spectrophotometer or 
Absorptiometer — with filters in 
520 nm to 560 nm and 10 mm cells 


NOTE — The glassware should not be rinsed with organic 
solvents to facilitate drying. Traces of organic matter, 
especially, acetone may adversely affect the reaction between 
zine and acid. 


Photoelectric 
the range 


4 QUALITY OF REAGENTS 


4.1 Unless specified otherwise, pure chemicals and 
distilled water (see IS 1070) shall be used in the tests. 


NOTE — ‘Pure chemicals’ shall mean chemicals that do not 
contain impurities which affect the results of analysis. 


4.2 All the reagents used shall be free from arsenic. 
5 REAGENTS 


5.1 Lead Acetate Solution — 10 percent (m/v). Add 
sufficient acetic acid (see IS 695) to obtain a clear 
solution. 


5.2 Lead Acetate Paper Strips 


Soak Filter paper strips of 70 mm x 50 mm size in lead 
acetate solution contained in a glass bottle. Before use, 
take out the strips and dry them in an atmosphere free 
from hydrogen sulphide. 


5.2.1 Absorbent Cotton Wool Impregnated with Lead 
Acetate 


Saturate cotton wool with lead acetate solution, drain 
pass and dry under vacuum at room temperature. 


5.3 Mercuric Bromide Solution 


Dissolve 5 g of mercuric bromide in 100 ml of rectified 
spirit (see IS 323). 


5.4 Sensitized Mercuric Bromide Paper Strips 


Soak Filter paper strips cut to a size of 
70 mm x 50 mm in mercuric bromide solution 
contained in an amber-coloured glass bottle in dark. 
Before use, remove the strip, press it between sheets 
of rilter paper, and dry it in an atmosphere free from 
hydrogen sulphide. 


IS 2088 : 2023 


ЫИС ИНС арбы 
HL MN TUBE =. 


CLASS WOOL aS ENED 
WITH LEAD. ACETATE 
OU iO 


AAA] 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


FIG. 1 APPARATUS FOR TEST OF ARSENIC (MODIFIED GUTZEIT METHOD) 


IS 2088 : 2023 


10 TO 12% 


210 


= ka - = [uomen 
UE 


oe 


| __ 


А 


АП dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 2 APPARATUS FOR ARSENIC DETERMINATION 


IS 2088 : 2023 


14 Т0 15 
14 BULBS 


250 


All dimensions in millimetres. 


Fic. 3 APPARATUS FOR DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC 


(SILVER DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE METHOD) 


IS 2088 : 2023 


CONNECTING TUBE 


ABSORBER 


RUBBER 
AUNG 


ер, 


RUBBER 
puna 


т 
"x 

Fy 
jm. 

т 

г 


ALLE 


TE 


GAS k 
DISTRIBUTION TUBES 


All dimensions in millimetres. 
Fic. 4 APPARATUS WITH FRITTED GLASS FOR DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC 


(SILVER DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE METHOD) 


IS 2088 : 2023 


5.5 Dilute Sulphuric Acid — Approximately 5 N. 
5.6 Concentrated Hydrochloric Acid — see IS 265. 
5.7 Potassium Iodide Solution — 15 percent (m/v). 


5.8 Stannous Chloride Solution 


Dissolve 40 g of stannous chloride in 100 ml of 
hydrochloric acid. Discard this solution ifan appreciable 
deposit forms. 


5.9 Zine — Granules, of size 0.5 to 1.0 mm. 


5.10 Standard Arsenic Stock Solution 


Weigh, to the nearest 0.1 mg, 0.132 0 g of arsenic 
trioxide and transfer it to a beaker of suitable capacity 
(for example 100 ml). Dissolve the arsenic trioxide 
with 2 ml of sodium hydroxide solution containing 
50 g/l. Transfer the solution to a 1 000 ml volumetric 
flask. Wash the beaker several times. Collect the 
washings in the volumetric flask and make up the 
volume. One millilitre ofthis standard solution contains 
100 ug of arsenic (As). 


5.10.1 Diluted Standard Arsenic Solution 


Containing 2.5 mg of arsenic per litre. Take 25 ml of 
the standard arsenic solution, transfer it to a 1 000 ml 
volumetric flask and make up the volume. Prepare 
this solution at the time of use. One millilitre of this 
standard solution contains 2.5 ug of arsenic (As). 


5.11 Silver Diethyldithiocarbamate Solution 


Dissolve 1 g of silver diethyldithiocarbamate in 
water-white pyridine and dilute to 200 ml with pyridine. 
Store the solution in stoppered-glass bottles away from 
light. 


5.11.1 Silver diethyldithiocarbamate may be 
commercially available or it may be prepared from 
sodium diethyldithiocarbamate as follows: 


Dissolve 10 g of sodium diethyldithiocarbamate 
[(C,H,),N.CS.SNa.3H,O] in 35 ml of rectified spirit 
(IS 323) and filter. Add to the solution with stirring, 
100 ml of ether (see IS 336). Filter it by using suction, 
wash the precipitate with ether and dry them in air. 
Dissolve separately 22 g of the material in 100 ml of 
water, and 1.7 g of silver nitrate in 100 ml of water. 
Slowly mix these two solutions with constant stirring. 
Keep the temperature of the mixture below 10 ?C. 
Decant the supernatant liquid, wash the precipitate 3 or 
4 times with water, at a temperature below 10 ?C. Filter 
and dry the product in vacuum at room temperature. 
Preserve the material protected from light in a cool 
place. This silver diethyidithiocarbamate solution in 
water white pyridine is stable for about 2 months. 
NOTE — Alternatively, silver diethyldithiocarbamate may be 
prepared as follows: 


Dissolve 22 g of freshly purified sodium 
diethyldithiocarbamate (as described above) in 250 ml of 
water-white pyridine. 


Dissolve 1.95 g silver nitrate in 250 ml of water-white pyridine. 
With continuous stirring pour the former solution into the 
latter. Allow to stand over-night and filter through a fast filter 
paper. Store the solution in a well-stoppered dark coloured 
bottle protected from light in a cool plate. The solution is stable 
for at least 3 months. 


6 PROCEDURE 


6.1 Modified Gutzeit Method 


Prepare the solution of the material as specified in the 
individual material specification (see also Annex A). 
Place the dry lead acetate paper in the lower portion 
of the tube B and cotton wool moistened with lead 
acetate in its upper portion. Place the sensitized strip 
of mercuric bromide paper in tube A and connect 
the tubes together with a rubber stopper. Introduce 
the solution of the material into the bottle C and add 
10 ml of dilute sulphuric acid. Add 0.5 ml of stannous 
chloride solution, 5 ml of potassium iodide solution and 
make up the volume with water to about 50 ml. Mix the 
contents and drop in about 10 g of zinc. Fit in position 
the rubber stopper carrying the tube B immediately. 
Place the bottle in a warm place at about 40 °C. 
Remove the test strips after 40 min with the help of 
tweezers. Conduct the test in exactly similar manner by 
using a volume of standard arsenic solution as specified 
in the material specification, in place of the solution of 
the material and compare the stain produced with the 
material with that produced with the arsenic solution. 


6.1.1 The limit prescribed in the material specification 
shall be taken as not having been exceeded if the 
length of the stain as well as the intensity of its colour 
produced in the test with the material is not greater 
than those produced with the corresponding standard 
arsenic solution. 


6.2 Silver Diethyldithiocarbamate Method 
6.2.1 Principle 


Absorption of arsine in a solution of silver 
diethyldithiocarbamate involves the reaction: 


The colloidally dispersed silver, purplish-red colour, is 
measured by photometry (nephelometry) at 540 nm. 


6.2.2 Preparation of Calibration Curve 


The curve shall be confirmed every time when a new 
solution of silver diethyldithiocarbamate is prepared. 


6.2.3 Evolution of Arsine 


Transfer to a series of 100 ml conical FLasks, aliquots 
of standard arsenic solution corresponding to 0 ug, 
5 ug, 10 ug, 15 ug, 20 ug and 25 ug of arsenic and 
proceed as given in 6.2.3.1. 


6.2.3.1 Add 10 ml of concentrated hydrochloric acid 
and dilute to 50 ml + 5 ml with 1 litre water. Add 
2 ml of potassium iodide and stannous chloride 
solution respectively. Mix well and let it stand for 


15 min to 20 min. Pack lightly the top third of the 
connecting tube with impregnated absorbent cotton 
wool and assemble the absorption train. Transfer 
5.0 ml of silver diethyldithiocarbamate solution to 
absorption tube C. After 15 min to 20 min, introduce 
5 g of zinc granules into the conical flask A and 
quickly reassemble the apparatus. Allow the reaction 
to proceed for 45 min to 60 min at room temperature. 


6.2.3.2 Spectrophotometric measurements 


Disconnect the absorption tube and tilt the absorber so 
that the reagent solution flows back and forth between 
the absorber and bulb to disperse the solid contents, if 
any, and to mix in the solution well. Transfer the solution 
to a photometric cell and measure its absorbance at the 
wavelength of maximum absorption, 540 nm using 
water as reference liquid. 


NOTE — The colour of the dispersion is not very stable 
for long time and hence absorptiometric (nephplometric) 
measurement should be made within 2 h of the development of 
colour. Care should also be taken to prevent the evaporation of 
solution as its volume is small. 


In the case of fritted glass absorber raise and lower 
the connecting tube into the absorber several times, 
to allow the solution to pass through the frit back and 
forth effecting the dispersal of the red deposit. Let the 
connecting tube finally drain into the absorber. 


10 ug standard shall have an absorption of the order 
of 0.4. 


6.2.3.3 Plotting of the calibration curve 


Calculate corrected absorbance by subtracting the 
reading obtained for the solution containing no standard 
arsenic solution from the observed reading. Plot a 
graph of corrected absorbance of solution against their 
arsenic contents. 


6.2.3.4 The test solutions shall be prepared as prescribed 
in relevant individual material specifications so as to 
contain | ug to 10 ug of arsenic in a solution of 5.0 ml 


IS 2088 : 2023 


+ 0.5 ml volume. Transfer the solution to the conical 
flask, cool to room temperature if necessary and 
proceed as prescribed in 6.2.3, 6.2.3.1 and 6.2.3.2. 


6.2.4 Blank Test 


Carry out a blank test, as prescribed in 6.2.3, 6.2.3.1 
and 6.2.3.2 omitting the sample. 


6.2.5 Calculation 


Calculate the corrected absorbance by subtracting the 
value obtained for the blank solution from that obtained 
for the test solution and read from the calibration curve 
the corresponding mass of arsenic. 


= 


Arsenic content, parts per million by mass = 
2 


where 
M, = mass in pg, of arsenic found; and 
M, — mass in g, of sample in the solution tested. 


7 DETERMINATION OF ARSENIC BY 
INDUCTIVELY COUPLED PLASMA 
OPTICAL EMISSION SPECTROMETER 
(ICP-OES) METHOD 


7.1 Principle 


The sample solution under analysis is nebulized 
through a nebulizer inside a spray chamber. The aerosol 
formed is aspirated to argon plasma torch produced 
by a radio-frequency inductively coupled plasma 
(ICP), where the molecules break into constituent 
atoms and/or molecular species and atoms get excited. 
These excited atoms then return back to the lower 
energy state by emitting radiation of specific 
wavelength. These emitted radiations are characteristic 
of an element and are measured by the Photomultiplier 
tube detector and intensity of such emitted radiation is 
directly proportional to the concentration of respective 
constituent element in the sample. 


Table 1 Recommended Wavelengths, Achievable Limits of Quantification for Different Configuration of 
Instruments and Important Spectral Interferences 


(Clauses 7.2 and 7.4) 
SI No. Element Wavelength (nm) Approx. Achievable Limits Interfering Elements 
Radial viewing Axial viewing 
(ug) (ug) 

(1) 0) (3) (4) (5) (6) 

i) As 188.979 18 14 Al, Cr, Fe, Ti 
193.696 5 14 Al, Co, Fe, W, V 
197.197 (100) 31 Al, Co, Fe, Pb, Ti 


IS 2088 : 2023 


7.2 Recommended Wavelength, Limit of 
Quantification and Important Spectral Interferences 


Elements along with the recommended wavelengths 
and typical estimated limits of quantification are 
listed in Table 1. Actual working detection limits are 
dependent on the type of instrumentation, detection 
device and sample introduction system used and on 
the sample matrix. Therefore, these concentrations can 
vary between different instruments. 


7.3 Reagents and Solutions 
7.3.1 Nitric Acid (65 Percent) Suprapure 
7.3.2 Standard Stock Solution 


Either prepare by dissolving proportionate amount 
of soluble compounds of elements (preferably 
spectroscopic grade), or use commercially available 
certified stock solution of 10 ug/ml, 100 ug/ml or 
1 000 ug/ml of lead, iron or arsenic in 2 percent to 
5 percent nitric acid. It is preferable to prepare 
single stock solution of multi elemental 
standards for analysis. 

7.3.3 Standard Solution 

Pipette out 5 ml from 100 ug/ml standard stock solution 
into a 100 ml volumetric flask and make up volume 
with 2 percent nitric acid to prepare 5 ug/ml solution. 
From this 5 ug/ml solution, an aliquot of 1.0 ml, 
3.0 ml and 5.0 ml taken in 50 ml volumetric flasks 
(separate) and make up volume with 2 percent nitric 
acid to prepare 0.1 ug/ml, 0.3 ug/ml and 0.5 ug/ml 
solution of respective elements under reference. 


7.3.4 Sample Preparation 


Weigh about 2.5 g sample ina 50 ml volumetric flask 
and add 1.0 ml nitric acid and make up the volume 
with water. 


7.3.5 Reagent Blank Solution 


Place 50 ml of nitric acid and 1 000 ml of water into 
an HDPE or PP container. For ultra-trace analysis, 
polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) containers should be 
used. Prior to analysis, make sure that the acid matrix 
and concentration of the reagent blank solution is the 
same as in the standard and sample solutions. 


7.4 Instrument 


Set up the instrument as per the manufacturer's 
instructions manual for recommended operating 
parameters, based on the manufacturers operating 
manual and evaluated by internal check analysis using 
standard solution of element as well as data selected 
carefully from Table 1. 


For analysis of arsenic, a gas (hydride)/vapour 
generating system 1s coupled with ICP, instead of 
using nebulizer. The arsine generated through the 
system is carried by the carrier gas (Ar) plasma torch, 
and other instrumental conditions shall be the same as 
above. 
NOTE — Sensitivity, instrumental detection limit, precision, 
linear dynamic range and interference effects will be 
investigated and established for each individual analyte line on 
that particular instrument. 


7.5 Procedure 
7.5.1 Calibration 


Profile and calibrate the instrument according to the 
instrument manufacturer's recommended procedures, 
using the intermediate mixed standard solutions 
(7.3.3). The relationship between concentration and 
intensity is linear up to six orders of magnitude. 
Examine the spectra of the element and make 
necessary adjustments (if required) for the exact peak 
positions and baselines to ensure proper 
measurements of the respective peak intensities. 


Flush the system with the reagent blank solution 
between each standard. 


7.5.2 Before beginning the sample run, re-analyse the 
reference standard with the highest concentration as if 
it were a sample. Ensure that the concentration values 
do not deviate from the actual values by more than 
+ 5 percent (or the established control limits, whichever 
is lower). If they do, follow the recommendations 
of the instrument manufacturer to correct for this 
condition. Begin the sample run by flushing the system 
with the reagent blank solution (7.3.5) between each 
sample. It is recommended to analyse a calibration 
check solution and the calibration blank solution every 
10 samples. Analyze the sample solution and calculate 
the concentration in pg/ml of the lead (arsenic or iron) 
in the sample solution. 


7.6 Calculation 


The mass concentrations for each element are 
determined with the aid of the instrument software by 
following steps: 


a) Relate emission signals from calibration blank 
and calibration solutions with the signals from 
reference elements and establish a calibration 
plot; and 


b) Determine the mass concentrations of samples 
with the aid of the emissions and the calibration 
graphs and calculate the quantity in mg/kg of the 
constituent elemental impurities in the sample, by 
multiplying the value by 20 (dilution factor). 


IS 2088 : 2023 


ANNEX A 
(Foreword and Clause 6.1) 
PREPARATION OF TEST SOLUTIONS OF ARSENIC 


A-1 PREPARATION OF SOLUTION 


A-1.1 The preparation of test solutions may be 
considered under the three possibilities described in 
A-1.2 to A-1.4. 


A-1.2 Sample Solution 


A large portion of samples may be simply dissolved in 
water, with or without concentration, bromine treatment 
or addition of acid. 


A-1.3 Wet Oxidation 


The organic matter is destroyed and arsenic compounds 
not directly reducible under conditions of test are 
broken down. Care shall be taken that fuming of the 
acid does not start until all the peroxide is used up 


for destruction of organic compounds. Generally, 
50 percent (v/v) hydrogen peroxide is used for 
destruction of organic compounds. 


A-1.4 Solution of Difficult-to-Dissolve Substances 


A-1.4.1 For opening up of siliceous materials; a 
mixture of hydrofluoric and sulphuric acid may be used 
but some hydrogen peroxide should be added before 
fuming of sulphuric acid starts. 


A-1.4.2 Fusion with a mixture of sodium peroxide and 
sodium carbonate is useful in some cases where direct 
treatment with acids is not effective. If the sample is 
highly ferrogenous as in case of iron, ore, borax may be 
added in equal quantity. 


IS 2088 : 2023 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Inorganic Chemicals Sectional Committee, CHD 01 


Organization 
Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research 


Institute, Bhavnagar 
Alkali Mfrs Association of India, Delhi 


Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 


Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 


Consumer Voice, Delhi 
DGQA, New Delhi 


Geological Survey of India, Kolkata 


Global Absorbents Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 
Grasim Industries Ltd, Nagda 


Gujarat Alkalies and Chemicals Ltd, Vadodara 


Hindalco 


Hindustan Lever Ltd, Mumbai 


Indian Chemical Council (ICC) 


Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 


Industrial Carbon Pvt Ltd, Ankleshwar 


Molecular Products Group India Pvt Ltd 


Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, New Delhi 


Ministry of Defence (DGQA), Kanpur 


National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 
National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 


National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd, 
Hyderabad 


National Peroxide Ltd 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 


National Test House (NR), Ghaziabad 


Office of the Development Commissioner (MSME 
New Delhi 


Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, Delhi 


Representative(s) 


Dr Kannan Srinivasan ( Chairperson) 


Shri K. Sriniv asan 
Shri H. S. Das ( Alternate) 


Dr A. V. R. Reddy 
Dr S. М. Achary ( Alternate) 


Dr Raman Mohan Singh 
Shri M. A. U. Khan 
Shri K. C. Chaudhar y (Alternate) 


Dr Gurbachan Singh 
Shri B. S. Tomar (Alternate) 


Shri P. V. V. R. Sarma 


SHRI SANJAY DHANUKA 
Shri Alok Singh 
Shri P ankaj Gupt a (Alternate) 


Shri V. K. Mahida 
Shri Shailesh P atel (Alternate) 


SHRI NAGESWAR KAPURI 
SHRI AJITH RAMACHANDRA (Alternate) 


Ms Vrinda Rajw ade 
Shri Sojan Varghese (Alternate) 
DR U. SHETKAR 
DR RAKESH KUMAR (Alternate) 
Dr Praveen R. Likhar 
Dr Rajender Reddy (Alternate) 


Shri Sa tyan Rohit Kumar 


SHRI VIKRANT PATIL 


Dr Rohit Misra 
Dr O. P. Sharma (Alternate) 


SHRI R.N. APARAJIT 


Dr Darbha Sriniv as 
Dr Paresh Dhepe (Alternate) 


Dr Trilochan Mishra 
Shri Devbra ta Mishra (Alternate) 


Shri Rajan Kumar 


Dr Prashant Sharma (Alternate) 
DR Joy ANTHONY 
Dr Nahar Singh 

Dr S. P. Singh (Alternate) 
Ms Richa Kundra 


Dr Kar thikey an 
Ms Anna Backiam (Alternate) 


Dr LaxmiRawat 
Shri B. Govindan (Alternate) 


10 


Organization 


Tamilnadu Petroproducts Limited, Chennai 
Tata Chemicals Ltd, Gujarat 
The Dharamsi Morarji Chemicals Co Pvt Ltd 


Vaibhav Analytical Services, Ahmedabad 
Delhi Jal Board, Delhi 


In Personal Capacity (5/4 Veer Apt, Sector 
13, Rohini, New Delhi-110085) 


In Personal Capacity (Hari Nagar Co-Op- 


Society, Gotri Road, Vadodara, 
Gujarat-390007) 


BIS Directorate General 


IS 2088 : 2023 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAVI MUTHUKRISHNAN 
SHRI NAJMUL HASAN KHAN 
SHRI MANDAR GAIKWAD 


SHRI GAURANG OZA 


SHRI ASHUTOSH KAUSHIK 
Suni D. K. JAIN 


DR R. S. BAGHEL 


SHRI A. K. LAL, SCIENTIST “E” AND HEAD 
(CHEMICAL) [REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(Ex-officio)] 


Member Secretary 
SAGAR SINGH 
SCIENTIST ‘C’ (CHEMICAL), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Head (Publication & Sales), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the website- 
www.bis.gov.in or www.standardsbis.in. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: CHD 01 (18253). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 


Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 


Regional Offices: Telephones 


Central :601/A, Konnectus Tower-1, 6^ Floor, DMRC Building, 
Bhavbhuti Marg, New Delhi 110002 


Eastern : 8^ Floor, Plot No 7/7 & 7/8, CP Block, Sector V, 2367 0012 


| 2323 7617 
Salt Lake, Kolkata, West Bengal 700091 | 2320 9474 


Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg 
Chandigarh 160019 


265 9930 


Southern : C.LT. Campus, IV Cross Road, Taramani, Chennai 600113 2254 1442 

2254 1216 

Western У Plot No. E-9, Road No.-8, MIDC, Andheri (East), | 2821 8093 
Mumbai 400093 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. CHANDIGARH. CHENNAI. 
COIMBATORE. DEHRADUN. DELHI. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HIMACHAL PRADESH. HUBLI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU & KASHMIR. 
JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. KOLKATA. LUCKNOW. MADURAI. MUMBAI. NAGPUR. 
NOIDA. PANIPAT. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. SURAT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


