IS 12940 : 1990
( Reaffirmed 2003 )
ma3u * m-wTs;rw mm af+k-i--~mT

0

Indian Standard

DOCUMENTATION-LIBRARY GUIDE

STATISTICS-

UDC

025'12

@ BIS 1991

BUREAU
AiANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG

9 BAHADUR SHAH NEW DELHI 11ooO2

Jutmary 199 1

Price Group 3

Information

and Documentation

Sectional

Committee,

BSD 8

FOREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by the Information and Documentation Sectional approved by the Basic Standards, Systems and Services Division Council. on 10 January 1990, Committee had been

In the preparation of this standard, considerable assistance has been drawn from IS0 2789-1974 `International library statistics' issued by the International Organization for Standardization.

IS 12940

: 1990

Indian Standard

mDOCUMENTATION-LIBRARY GUIDE
1 SCOPE 1.1 The standard statistics referred to in the shall cover libraries, as defined present in 2.1. 2.5 Printed

STATISTICSCovers

2 TERMINOLOGY 2.0 For following the purpose of this definitions shall apply. standard, the

Documents generated by all methods of reproduction whatever their nature with the exception of microforms mimeographed and photocopied documents are included in this definition. 2.6 Serials

NOTE -The definitions used in this standard are designed for statistical purposes. They are not necessarily the definitions which would be applicable for other purposes in documentation or librarianship.

2.1

Library

and organized collection of _A staff`ed documents such as manuscripts, printed books, serial publications and microforms or any other cartographic, graphic, audio-visual and electronic documents, available for use. 2.2 Administrative Any independent libraries. 2.2.1 Service Point Any library at which is provided in separate quarters a service for users, whether it is an independent library or a part of a larger administrative unit. Independent libraries, central libraries and branch libraries (both stable and/or mobile) are considered as service points provided that they serve their users directly or indirectly. The points at which mobile libraries stop but do not serve users, are not counted as service points. 2.3 Collection All documents users. provided by the library for its Unit library, or a group of

Publications constituting the issues in a continuous series under the same title published over an at regular or irregular intervals, indefinite period, individual issues in the series being numbered consecutively or each issue being dated. Newspapers as well as publications appearing annually or less frequently are included in the definition. 2.7 Title

Word or phrase, usually appearing on the title page of a document by which it is convenient to refer to it, w-hich may be used to identify it and which often distinguishes it from any document. 2.8 Volume or manuscript

A physical unit of any printed work contained in one cover. 2;9 Library User

organization A person or an services of the library. 2.10 Registered Borrower

utilizing

the

A person or an organization registered library in order to borrow documents. 2.11 2.11.1 Expenditure

with a

Recurring Expenditure
in the running of a library. the following only are shown of money allowances

NOTE - Documents include all such two-dimensional and three-dimensional items as are covered in 2.1 and are treated as individual units in a documentation of their physical forms or irrespective process characteristics.

Expenses incurred Within this total, separately:

4 b)

Employees-

2.4 Annual

Additions

The total amount spent on salaries and wages, and other related costs; and of

Acquisitions -

All materials added to collections during the year whether by purchase, donation exchange or any other method. 1

The cost manuscripts, ( printed audio-visual materials) library collection.

all documents microform and added to the

IS 12940 : 1990 2.11.2 Capital Expenditure
NOTE - Libraries which may not be categorized `national' but are of national importance with regard to uniqueness in collections and use and recognized by the Central Government shall be placed in this category.

Expense which results in the acquisition of or addition to fixed assets, for example, building sites, new buildings and additions, equipment, and accessories (including initial book stocks and furnishings for new and extended buildings). Within this total, the following are shown separately: Sites a> and buildings -- Expenditure for the acquisition of or addition to building sites, new buildings, and extension; computers, etc; and

3.2 Academic

Libraries

Libraries primarily serving students and teachers in colleges, universities and similar other institutions of education. A distinction shall be made among: university library or a) The main or central a group of libraries which may be located separately but having one and the same professional head; attached to university, institutes b) Libraries or departments but which are not under the direction of or administered by the main or central university library; and

b) 4
2.12

Library equipment, such as microform units, photocopiers, Other Library capital expenditure.

Personnel who have

All persons employed In libraries received training in librarianship.

NOTE - The training may be by formal methods or by means of an extended period of work of a professional nature in library under supervision.

attached c) Libraries higher education university. 3.3 School Libraries

to the institutions which are not part

of of

3 CLASSIFICATION 3.0 Each definition following

OF LIBRARIES

of the libraries covered by the set out in 2.1 shall be classified in the categories and sub-categories. Libraries

3.1 National

All libraries which, irrespective of their title, are responsible for acquiring and conserving copies of all `significant publications published in the country and functioning as a deposit library either by law or under other arrangements. Such a library will also perform some of the following functions:

Libraries attached to all types of schools below the level of education at the third level and serving primarily the pupils and teachers of such schools, even though they may also be open to the general public. Separate collections for the use of several classes in the same school will be regarded as a single library, which should be counted as an administrative unit and as a service point. 3.4 Special Libraries

4 b) 4 4 4 f)

Produce

a national

bibliography, and the

Collect and conserve all printed non-printed material concerning country wherever published, Hold and keep representative literature, 0 rganize exchange up-to-date collection

a large and of foreign international

Libraries maintained by an association, government, department, parliament, research institution (excluding university, institutes ), museum, learned society, business firm, industrial enterprises, chamber of commerce, etc, or other organized group, the greater part of their collections being in a specific field or subject ( for example, natural sciences, social agriculture, chemistry, sciences, medicine, economics, engineering, law, history, etc). A distinction should be made between:

a) b)

national and of publications,

libraries which provide materials services to all members of the public need them; and

and who

Act as a national brbliographical information/reference centre, Compile Publish graphics, Participate loan, and national union catalogues, national biblio-

d
h)
j)

retrospective in

those libraries whose collections and services are for the most part designed to provide for the information needs of their primary users, even if in some cases, they serve the information needs of specialists outside the group responsible for their maintenance. Libraries

international

inter-library planning 9

3.5 Public

Cooperate in coordinating and library system in the country.

JJibraries which serve the population of a state/ region or community free of charge or for a

IS 12946 nominal fee; they may serve the general public and/or special group- of users, such as chfidren, members of the armed forces, handicapped, hospital patients, prisoners, workers, employees, A distinction shall be made between: etc. a) public libraries proper, that is, those libraries receiving financial support, in whole or in large part, from the public authorities ( state / district / subdivision / town/block ); and b) libraries financed from private sources. one of the 3) Microforms manuscripts

: 1990

of books, periodicals, and other materials: of number rolls of

i)
ii) iii)

Microfilms by number and/or length in cm. Other microforms physical units. Films by number in cmi'metres. by

of rolls and length ( by numbers ).

4) Audio-visual

documents

Each library shall appear in only categories as mentioned under 3. 4 REPORTING OF STATISTICAL

These include such documents as records, tapes, cassettes, audio compact discs, slides, transparencies, motion pictures, and video recordings. 5) Cartographic documents ( by numbers ).

DATA

4.1 Statistics-referred to in the present standard should be drawn up at regular intervals of The information given shall be three years. presented in conformity with the provisions of 2 and 3. Attention shall be drawn to try difference between the definitions and classification contained in this standard. 4.2 Library statistics, should, unless otherwise Data stated, cover the following types of data. referring to a period shall cover the year in and not the interval between two question, successive sweeps. a) Number of Libraries: 1) Administrative 2) Service points units. static, mobile.

These include such 2- and S-dimensional documents as maps, globes, plans, topographic models, tactile maps, and serial representations; and exclude atlases and other cartographic documents in codex micro, and audio-visual and machine-readable form. 6) Graphic documents ( by numbers ).

These include art prints, art originals, art reproductions, photographs, posters, study prints, technical drawings, etc. 7) Electronic documents ( by numbers ).

b)

Population Served - By public libraries as defined in 3.6, that is total number of inhabitants in the towns/districts/blocks, etc, served by public libraries. concerning Collections - Information library collections shall cover only the following documents available to users and including an allowance for materials on loan: 1) Books and periodicals occupied metres of volumes or: by numbers of and shelves by

These include published machine readable data files and micro-computer application softwares which may be recorded on punched cards, paper magnetic tapes, discs, digital tapes, and video-discs, read-only optical media that are designed to be processed by a computer or similar machine. 8) Other documents. relating to additions cover the following numbers and/or by

c)

d) Additions - Statistics, to collections, shall materials only: 1) Books by volumes: i) Braille number ii) Reprints iii) Pamphlets iv) Patents v) Standards 2) Manuscripts 3) Microforms titles,

literature/documents and/or volumes. by titles and numbers. by titles and numbers.

9
ii) iii)

literature/documents Braille numbers/volumes. Reprints Pamphlets by numbers. by numbers. and/or

by titles and numbers. by numbers. by number of books, of units. manuscripts, etc: of

iv) Patents

by numbers.

v) Standards

by numbers. of

2) Manuscripts by numbers or metres occupied shelves and volumes.

i) Microfilms counted by number rolls and/or by length in cm.

-" 1s ----IZYQV

:

1990
counted and by number length in ii) Pamphlets counted by number. counted by

ii) Other microforms of physical units. iii) Films counted cm/m.

by rolls materials documents

iii) Patents/standards number of volumes.

iv) Audio-visual v) Cartographic bers ). vi) vii) viii) Graphic Electronic Number

by numbers. ( by num). ).

2)

Copies produced to take the place of original materials, counted by number of volumes and pages. or micro-

documents documents

( by numbers

3) Number of pages microfilmed fiched and supplied. 4) Audio-visual 5) Cartographic 6) Graphic 7) Electronic h) Inter-library Level: 1) Items documents documents

( by numbers titles by ).

by number. by number.

of current periodical

Number of titles received library during the year. ix) Other documents ( by number

the

documents documents Lending

by number. by number. at the International

e) Number

of Re<.$stered Borrowers

issued to other

countries:

Only borrowers registered to the specified year shall be counted. The number of Registered borrowers shall not be counted in the special libraries but case of library users in general.

i)

Books, Braille literature, reports, theses, periodicals and manuscripts, counted by number of volumes. produced to take place materials, counted by of pages copied. of the or

f > Number

of original ~documents loaned in out/consulted and copies supplied place of loans: 1) Books, Braille literature, reports, and manuscripts pericdicals counted by number of volumes: i) Reprints. ii) Pamphlets. iii) Patents number and/or standards of volumes. counted by j) theses, loaned

ii) Copies original number

iii) Number of pages microfilmed microfiched and supplied. iv) Audio-visual 4 Cartographic documents documents

by number. by number.

vi) Graphic vii) Electronic

documents documents from

by number. by number. countries.

2) Items

received

other

2)

Copies produced to take the place of original materials, counted by number of volumes and pages copied. or

Books, literature for the blind, reports, theses, periodicals and manuscripts counted by the number of volumes: i) Reprints. ii) Pamphlets. iii) Patents number and/or standards of volumes. counted by

of pages microfilmed 3) Number microfiched and supplied. 4) Audio-visual 5) Cartographic 6) Graphic 7) Electronic documents documents by number. by number.

documents documents

by number. by number.

iv) Copies received in place materials counted by the volumes and pages copied.

of original number of or

d

Inter- Library Lending within the Country - Only loans between separate administrative units shall be counted. Items used: 1) Books, braille literature, reports, theses, periodicals and manuscripts counted by the number of volumes: i) Reprints volumes. counted by number of

of pages microfilmed v) Number microfiched and supplied. vi) Audio-visual vii) viii) Cartographic Graphic documents documents by number. by number.

documents documents

by number. by number.

ix) Electronic

k) Photo and other cnpies - Copies produced by libraries for their users and those designed to take the place of original materials in

4

IS 12940 :1990 the inter-library as folbws: lending shall be counted q) Library Employees: 1) Tatal of frames, and/or or employees: counted in full-time in

1) Paper copies by number of sheets. 2) Microfilms by number pages /length in cm. 3) Microfiche copied. individually

i) Full time. ii) Part-time; equivalents.

pages

2) Librarians holding diploma/degree library and Information Science: i) Full-time. ii) Part-time; equivalents. 3) Librarians librarianship institution: i) Full-time. ii) Part-time: equivalent. counted in counted holding of in

Number of queries attended by number ( telephone, personal, on line searches, etc ).
Ordinary Expenditure:

full-time

a

certificate in recognized

1) Total 2) Employees 3) Acquisitions
Capital Expenditure:

full-time

1) Total 2)
Building sites and buildings 3) Library equipment such as computers, reprographic machines, etc 4) Others

who have received their 4) Librarians training in the form of an extended in a recognized of work period library under adequate professional supervisions: i) Full-time. ii) Part-time: equivalent. counted in full-time

Standard

Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BlS and operated by the producer. Standard marked products are also continuously checked by BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau of Indian Standards BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of fndm Standards Act, I986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copy Aght BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sixes, type grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director ( Publications BIS. Revision of Indian Standards in in or ),

Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, if any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition. Comments on this Indian Standard may be sent to BIS giving the following reference: Doc:No.BSD8(112)

-Amend No.

Amendments -___

Issued Since Publication Date of Issue Text Affected

_---_--___BUREAU Headquarters: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 331 01 31,331 13 75 Regional Central Offices : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Maniktola 160036 600113 331 01 31 { 331 13 75 37 86 62 2 18 43 41 29 16 6 32 92 95 Telegrams : Manaksanstha ( Common to all Offices ) OF INDIAN STANDARDS

Eastern : l/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P.Road, CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 445-446,

Sector 35-C, CHANDlGARH

Southern : C.I.T.

Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, BOMBAY 400093 Branches : AHMADABAD. COIMBATORE. HYDERABAD.

Marol, Andheri (East)

BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. JAIPUR. KANPUR. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at Arcee Press, New Delhi, India

