Indian Standard

.

. $.a'

HIGH FREQUENCY DIELECTRIC HEATING INSTALLATIONS -TEST METHODS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF POWER OUTPUT

ICS

25180.10

0 BIS 1997

BUREAU
MANAK

OF INDIAN
9 BAHADUR NEW DELHI

STANDARDS
SHAH 110002 ZAFAR MARG

BHAVAN,

Juty 1997

Price Group 4

Industrial Electroheat

Equipments

Sectional Committee,

ET 17

NATIONAL FOREWORD This Indian Standard which is identical to IEC Pub 1308 ( 1994 ) `High-frequency dielectric heating installations -Test methods for the determination of power output' was adopted by Bureau of Indian Standards on the recommendations of the Industrial Electroheat Equipments Sectional Committee, ET 17. and approval of the Electrotechnical Division Council. The text of the IEC Standard has been approved as suitable for publication as Indian Standard without deviations. In this standard, certain terminology and conventions Attention is specially drawn to the following: a) Wherever the words`lnternational `Indian Standard. are not identical with those used in Indian Standards.

Standard'appear,

referring to this standard, they should be read as

b)

Comma ( , ) has been used as a decimal marker while in Indian Standards, use a point ( ) as the decimal marker.

the current practice is to

Only the English language text in the International Standard.

Standard has been retained while adoping it in this Indian

For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with, the final value, observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis, shall be rounded off in accordance with IS 2 : 1960 `Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised)`. The number of significant places retained in the rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. In this standard, reference appears to certain International Standards for which Indian Standards also exist. The corresponding Indian Standards which are to be substituted in their place are listed below along with their degree of equivalence : International Standard Corresponding Indian Standard IS 1885 (Part 17) : 1979 Degree of Equivalence Technically equivalent

IEC 50 (841) : 1983 International Electrotechnical Vocabulary Chapter 841 : Industrial electroheating IEC 519-9 : 1987 Safety in electroheat installation - Part 9 : Particular requirements for high frequency dielectric heat installations

IS/IEC 519-9 ( 1987 )

Identical

IS/IEC

1308

(1994)

Indian Standard HIGH FREQUENCY DIELECTRIC HEATING INSTALLATIONS -TEST METHODS FOR THE DETERMINATION OF POWER OUTPUT
Section 1: General
1.1 Scope and object

Standard is applicable to industrial radio- or high-frequency dielectric This International heating installations used for the purpose of thermal applications such as heating, assembly by melting, melting and drying of partially conductive or non-conductive materials, such as plastics, wood, rubber, textiles, glass, ceramics, paper, foodstuffs, etc., in both normal and protective atmospheres, using, for example, inert gas or vacuum.

This standard relates to high-frequency dielectric heating installations in the frequency range 1 MHz to 300 MHz for power levels of 50 W and above. Comprising high-frequency generators and capacitors for the substance to be heated which, according to the requirements, may also contain the necessary mechanical devices.

The main purpose of this standard is to assist in compliance with the requirements set out in 6.4 of IEC 519-9, when testing electro-heating power sources. It is not primarily intended as a means of representing a potential high-frequency heating application for the requirement of the user. Due to the large variety of dielectric heating applications, any output power figures obtained as a result of these tests should not be taken as representing the amount of power that can be dissipated into a particular dielectric heating installation, but in certain instances the output power figures could be used as an indication of performance.

The amount of power required to heat a product will be dependent, for example, on the of the electrode type of material, temperature and moisture and on the construction system. This standard relates to equipment normally operating and where the output terminals are easily accessible. 1.2 Normative references under continuous rated conditions

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through reference in this text, constitute provisions of this International Standard. At the time of publication, the editions indicated were valid. All normative documents are subject to revision, and parties to agreements based on this International Standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the most recent editions of the normative documents indicated below. Members of IEC and IS0 maintain registers of currently valid International Standards.

1

iS/iEC

1308 (1994)

IEC 50(841): 1983, international lndus trial elec trohea ting

Electrotechnical

Vocabulary

(IEV)

-

Chapter

841:

IEC 519-9: 1987, Safety in electroheat installations high-frequency dielectric heating installations
1.3 Definitions

- Part 9: Particular

requirements

for

For the purpose of this International Standard, the basic definitions IEC 50(841), IEC 519-9 and supplemented by the following definition.
1.3.1 high-frequency output power:

are defined

in

Maximum amount of power measured

into the test

load defined in this standard. The high-frequency power. output power will be equal to, or greater than, the rated useful output

Section 2: Tests
2.1

Power output

test loads

There are three different types of output power test loads for use in high-frequency dielectric heating installations. Only the principals are outlined. Detailed constructions shall conform to known engineering techniques.

2.1 .l

Calorimeter

load

A calorimeter load is used for applications determining the high-frequency output power where the load is assumed to be a combination of capacitance and resistance and for power measurements of about 1 kW and above. 2.1.2 Matched resistive load

A matched resistive load is used for applications determining the high-frequency output power where the load is required to be of a specific resistance and for power measurements of 50 W and above. 2.1.3 Lamp load temperature method

The lamp load temperature method is used for applications determining the high-frequency output power where neither of the above methods is suitable and for power measurements of 50 W to about 1 kW.

Section 3: Description of tests
3.1 Methods
of test and measurements

Measuring devices should not be affected by high-frequency

fields.

lS/lEC 1308 (1994)
3.1 .l

Calorimeter load

Typical examples are shown in figures la and lb, but variations of these designs are acceptable. The measuring element is composed of glass, or a lower loss material and comprises two electrodes manufactured from a non-magnetic material such as copper, aluminium, etc. The generator output terminals are connected to the two electrodes and water as the power absorbing medium flows through the element. The electrode spacing may be adjustable for load setting purposes. To achieve the correct impedance matching between the generator and the load, it may be necessary to use a tuning circuit, to extract the required output power. A recommended per kW. water flow would be about 1 I/min per kW, but not less than 05 I/min

To avoid localized thoroughly mixed.

water temperature

hot spots through

the element,

water

shall

be

To avoid the formation of steam, which may lead to explosion, monitored, for instance, by means of flow interlocking switches. The water inlet temperature The water outlet temperature shall not exceed 35 *C. shall not exceed 60 *C.

the water flow should be

The difference between the outlet temperature and the inlet temperature 10 K in order to obtain results of an acceptable accuracy. The specific conductivity The measurement

shall be at least

of the water shall lie between 200 @/cm and 600 @/cm.

shall be carried out when the load is in thermal equilibrium. from the following equation: 4,1868 x 0 x P=

The power output is calculated

AT
= 0,07 x 0 x

60

AT

where P Q is the power output, in kW; is the water flow rate, in I/min;

AT is the temperature difference, in kelvins, between water inlet and outlet temperatures.
NOTE - 1 cal = 4,1868 J.

The accuracy of power output measurement

shall be within &5 %.

3.1.2

Matched resistive load

The matched resistive load takes the form of a low reactance resistor which can be cooled by natural air convection, by forced air or by water. It is generally connected to the

3

IS/IEC 1308 (1994) generator by a coaxial feeder at a characteristic impedance of 50 f-2. Other values characteristic impedances are available and alternative feeders may be used. of

The power is obtained by measuring the current or voltage at the resistor and the meter can indicate the power directly as 12R or V2/R. The matched resistor loads are commercially available at power levels from tens of watts to hundreds of kilowatts.

Typical accuracies 3.1.3

are from f2.5 % to k5 % dependent on the particular method

design.

Lamp load temperature

A typical example is shown in figure 2. A filament lamp hl is connected to the generator output terminals. To achieve the correct impedance matching between the generator and the load, it may be necessary to use a tuning circuit to extract the required output power. The temperature of the lamp is measured with the generator switched on.

A similar filament lamp h2 is then connected across an adjustable mains supply voltage. The voltage is set to provide the same lamp temperatures as for hl . The voltage and current through the lamp h2 are measured and the product gives the power dissipated which will also be the high-frequency output power of the high-frequency generator.

For power levels greater than can be achieved for one lamp, several lamps can be used but problems may occur with non-uniform temperature levels for the various lamps. The difficulties increase with frequency and with the use of lamps with longer filaments. For frequencies above 30 MHz this method is not recommended, and above 100 MHz, practically not suitable.

In view of dielectric strength and better comparability, maximum of 70 % of their rated voltage.

the lamps shall be operated

at a

Typical temperature measuring devices could include photoelectric cells (see annex A) or pyrometers. The accuracy of power output measurement shall be within k5 %.

4

IS/IEC 1308 (1994)

Packing glands

Water inlet from temperature point

* -

-

Water outlet towards temperature measurement point

>

High-frequency terminals

Electrodes

d

Glass tubes -A

1

\

Blindage Screening case

Figure la

Figure 1 - `two examples of calorimeter loads

5

IS/lEC 1308 (ld94')

Aluminium

top electrode

r

/
I I I

L

I I
I I I

I--------_---_I
I I I I I I i I I k I

---)

Water outlet

Insulated tube fltted I_ with water seals

I I I I I I

I
I I I I

y

Insulated

spacers

Water Inlet +

c

-_-m-1 _----_I

\

Aluminium

bottom electrode

Figure lb

Figure 1 - Two examples of calorimeter loads

Kl , K2

Additional

reactances

Un

Mains voltage

r

Regulation

resistor

Uh

Lamp voltage

hl, h2

Comparison

lamps

UHF

High-frequency

voltage from generator

iN

Lamp current

Figure 2 - Example of photoelectric method

IS/IEC 1308 (1994)

Annex A
(informative)

A recommended test circuit for the lamp load method

Figure A.1 - A recommended

test circuit for the lamp load method

In the' figure A.l, Ce is a silicon photo-electric cell and produces, under the radiation of filament lamp h, d.c. current I' in the circuit consisting of Ce, resistor r' and d.c. ammeter A. The meanings of other symbols are the same as in figure 2.

First, the lamp h is connected to the mains voltage Un through terminals 1 and 3, and resistor I is regulated to variate the brightness of the lamp h. The voltage and current through the lamp h are measured and their product gives the power P. At the same time, the current I' is measured. Then the curve of P = f(/`) can be drawn. The lamp h is then connected to the high-frequency voltage UHF through terminals 2 and 3. Current I' is measured and the high-frequency output power of the high-frequency generator can be obtained from the curve of P = f(V).

7

Bureau of Indian Standards

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau ofIndian StandardsAct, 1986 to promote harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country.
Copyright

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS.
Review of Indian Standards

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed periodically; :I standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are needed; if &hereview indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of `BIS Handbook' and `Standards : Monthly Additions'. Thrs Indian Standard has becndevelopcd from Dot No ET !7 ( 3895 ).

Amendments

Issued Since Publication

Amend No.

Date of Issue

Text Affected

BUREAU
Headquarters:

OF

INDIAN

STANDARDS
Telegrams: Manaksanstha ( Common to all offices ) Telephone 323 76 17 323 3841 3378499,3378561 337 86 26, 337 86 62 C 60 38 43 60 20 25 2350216,2350442 I 235 15 19,235 23 15 8329295,8327858 8?27891,8327892

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 Telephones : 323 01 31, 323 94 02, 323 33 75 Regional Offices: Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg NEW DELHI 110002 Eastern : l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola CALCUTTA 700054 Northern : SC0 335-336, Sector 34-A, CHANDIGARH 160022 Southern : C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) MUMBAI 400093

BHUBANESHWAR. BHOPAL. Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. CQIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. PATNA. PUNE THIRUVANANTHAPURAM.

Printed at N&v India Pnnting Press,

Khur~a,

!ndm

