*\

16 13668 : 1983
( Reaffirmed 2001 )

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR a FIXING INTENSITY OF IRRIGATION

UDC

626.5 l/d34

@ BIS 1993

BUREAU
MANAK

OF
BHAVAN,

INDIAN

STANDARDS
ZAFAR MARG
.

9 BAHADUR. SHAH NEW DELHI 110002

January 1993

Price Group 1

River Valley Projects: RVD 6

Planning,

Irrigation

Management

and

Evaluation

Sectional

Committee,

POREWORD This Indian Standard was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized and Evaluation Sectional by the River Valley Projects: Planning, Irrigation., .Management Committee had been approved by the River Valley Division Council. Intensity of irrigation can be defined as the percentage of culturable commanded area proposed to be irrigated in a given period of time ( season/year ). The intensity may depend on the objective of the projects such as intensive irrigation system, where the intensity may be 100 percent or even more, as it depends on putting the same land under multiple croping once or twice under different crops. While under protective irrigation system, the aim will be to extend facilities to a large area and hence intensity may be low taking into consideration, the disperse1 of benefits to the community as a whole. However the lower intensity may be so fixed that viability of small holding is not affected. The determination of a suitable intensity involves a careful consideration of various factors. Where the availability of water is not a limiting factor, the adoption of high intensities is obviously called for. The raising of more than one irrigated crop in any area leads to the better use of inputs like fertilizers and improved implements and also of residual soil moisture from the previous crop.

IS 13668 :>1993

Indian Standard
GUIDELINES FOR FIXIN,G INTENSITY OF IRRIGATION
1 SCOPE This standard fixing intensity 2 REFERENCE The Indian Standard 4410 ( Part 1 ) : 1967 `Glossary of terms relating to river valley projects : Part 1 Irrigation .practice' is necessary adjunct to this standard. 3 FACTORS To fix the intensity of irrigation, factors need to be considered: the following dgals with the of irrigation. guidelines for the irrigation needs is most important. In hilly areas, intensity will be naturally low. If the land is flat, the intensity of irrigation will be high. Intensities in the alluvial plains have to be considered in the light of their drainage conditions. Where the natural drainage is sluggish because of flat slopes, the ground water table is likely to be already high. Adoption of high intensities with surface waters in such areas is fraught with the risk of water logging. To attain high intensities ( say more than 100 percent ), conjunctive use of surface and ground water, accompanied by an efficient system of surface drainage is necessary. Where natural drainage is good, the risk of wafer logging is less. High intensities should always be accompanied by efficient drainage. In areas, where the total water resources are the alternatives limited, are either high intensity in a part of the area or low intensitv over the whole area. In the former case thk policy is maximum production per unit of area but the benefit of water would be restricted to few cultivators. In the latter case irrigation should be provided with an intensity which gives benefit per unit of irrigation water to as large a number of cultivators as possible. 6 SOIL The nature of the soil is of prime importance. The field capacity of the soil is an important criterion for determining irrigability. The soil type has an intimate relationship with intensity of irrigation, because the water holding capacity depends on the nature of soil that is, sandy `This may also depend on loamy or clayey. sub-soil drainage and depth of the soil. If the soil is shallow, then part of the applied water may be lost through drainage, but if the soil is deep, the applied water will remain in the sub-soil and it will be available to crops. 7 GROUND WATER CONDITION
If the ground

a) Climate, b) Topography, C>Soi.1,

4

Ground water condition, 4 Amount and nature of available supply 3 f ) Drainage, d Socio-economic needs of the area, * h) Dispersal of benefits, Crop pattern, and j) 4 Water application method.

water

4 CLIMATE Climatological factors such as temperature, humidity and wind will have relation to the intensity of irrigation, but mainly rainfall has a defi,lite relation to the intensity of irrigation. Distribution of rainfall will also have a relation with the intensity of irrigation. In heavy rainfall zones the irrigation needs for crops will be very less and almost one less watering compared to the arid/semi-arid zones will be required hence higher intensities can be achieved in high rainfall zones. In semi-arid zones the intensity of irrigation should be kept low as irrigation needs will be very frequent. Not only the irrigation is required frequently in semi-arid zones, but there is a need for irrigation for preparing land and sowing. 5 TOPOGRAPHY Topography has direct relation to irrigation intensity, because preparation of land to suit
1

water conditions are conducive ( low water table ) in any project, the intensity of irrigation may be suitably increased. High intensities help the farmer to derive the maximum, economic benefit from the land and

IS 13668 : 1993 provide continuous gainful agricultural employment, provided the soils are suitable and the ground water table is low enough to preclude the risk of water logging. 8 AMOUNT AND NATURE OF AVAILABLE WATER SUPPLY The total amount of surface water available will vary from project to project. Similarly the amount of ground water depends upon the information Complete of water rainfall. available from both the sources is required ( amount, character, seasons, periods ) before one can arrive at the optimum intensity of irrigation for that command area. 9 DRAINAGE High intensity of irrigation requires proper Artificial drainage facidrainage conditions. lities will have to be provided where natural drainage is not adequate for disposal of excess rain water as well as ground water, before high intensity of irrigation can be proposed. 10 SOCIO-ECONOMIC THE AREA CONDITIONS OF aim to a high intensity so that the total income per holding can be optimized. 11 DISPERSAL OF BENEFITS Dispersal of benefits to the community as a whole and to as large an area as possible shou!d be the aim while fixing intensity of irrigation. Considering family as a unit the irrigation benefits should be dispersed in the command of the project. Every family will irrigate either full or part of its land according to the availability of water for irrigation. 12 CROP PATTERN The intensity of irrigation will also depend upon the type of crops grown in the command. If the percentage of crops with high water requirement like sugarcane is high, the intensity of irrigation will be reduced. Hence to achieve higher intensity of irrigation crops requiring less water should be cultivated. 13 APPLICATION METHOD By limiting the wastage of water and by adopting modern methods of application of water such as drip irrigation, sprinkler irrigation, it may be possible to bring more area under irrigation within the available quantum of water, thereby increasing intensity of irrigation.

Socio-economic conditions like density of population and size of holding also dictate the intensity of irrigation. In densely populated area with small holding size, it is necessary to

i

Standard Mark

The use of the Standard Mark is governed by the provisions of the Bureau of Indian Standards Acr, 1986 and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder. The Standard Mark on products covered by an Indian Standard conveys the assurance that they have been produced to comply with the requirements of that standard under a well defined system of inspection, testing and quality control which is devised and supervised by BIS and Standard marked products are also continuously checked by operated by the producer. BIS for conformity to that standard as a further safeguard. Details of conditions under which a licence for the use of the Standard Mark may be granted to manufacturers or producers may be obtained from the Bureau of Indian Standards.

Bureau df Indian Standards ,.BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2986 to of standardization, marking and quality .`promote harmonious development of the activities certification of goods and attending to connected matters in the country. Copyright No part of these publications may be reproduced BIS has the copyright of all its publications. in any form without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type to copyright be addressed to the Director Enquiries relating or grade designations. ( Publications ), BIS. Revision of Indian Standards if Indian Standards are reviewed periodically and revised, when necessary and amendments, any, are issued from time to time. Users of Indian Standards should ascertain that they are in Comments on this Indian Standard may be possession of the latest amendrnents or edition. sent to BIS giving the following reference:
Dot

: No. RVD 6 ( 38 1

Amendments Issued Since Publication Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected

BUREAU OF INDIAN Headquarters:

STANDARDS

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Mar-g, New Delhi Telephones : 331 01 31, 331 13 75

110002 Telegrams ( Common
: Manaksanstha

to all

Offices )

Regional Central Eastern

Offices :
: Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur

Telephone Shah Zafar Marg 37 84 99, I 37 86 26, 53 38 43, 110002 33101 31 I 331 13 75 37 85 61 37 86 62 53 16 40 235 04 42 235 23 15 632 78 58 6327892

NEW DELHI

: l/l4 C. I. T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Maniktola

CALCUTTA Northern Southern Western

700054 160036

: SC0 445-446, Sector 35-C, CHANDIGARH

: C. I. T. Campus, IV Cross Road, MADRAS 600113
: Manakalaya,

235 15 19, 632 92 95, 6327891,

E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri ( East ) BOMBAY 400093

Branches : AHMADABAD. BANGALORE. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. KANPUR. LUCKNOW. PATNA. THIRUVANANTHAPURAM. Printed at Printwell Printers, Aligarh, India

