NAT FATF IS 11340 : 2020 
Indian Standard 


tae ft este — faterts 


( Teel JAGET ) 


Ratchet Lever Hoist — Specification 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 50.020.10 


© BIS 2020 


anda AM SA 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
HAR WH, 9 Te TH AN, ay fereft— 110002 


Vee MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 
NEW DELHI-110002 
www.bis.gov.in www.standardsbis.in 


June 2020 Price Group 4 


Cranes, Lifting Chains and its Related Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 14 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision ) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards, after the draft finalized by 
the Cranes Lifting Chains and its Related Equipment Sectional Committee had been approved by the Mechanical 
Engineering Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1985. In this revision, following major modifications have been done: 
a) New terminology has been introduced; 
b) Lifting capacity has been increased upto 9 tonne; and 


c) Safety requirements like load controlling mechanism, over travel restraint, overload limiting device, 
overload warning device have been introduced. 


The relevant SI units and corresponding conversion factors are given below for guidance: 
Pressure 1 Pa (Pascal) = 1 N/m? 
1 kgf/mm? = 9.806 65 MPa 
The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex A. 


For the purpose of deciding whether a particular requirement of this standard is complied with the final value, 
observed or calculated, expressing the result of a test or analysis shall be rounded off in accordance with 
IS 2 : 1960 ‘Rules for rounding off numerical values ( revised )’. The number of significant places retained in the 
rounded off value should be the same as that of the specified value in this standard. 


IS 11340 : 2020 


Indian Standard 
RATCHET LEVER HOIST — SPECIFICATION 


( First Revision ) 
1 SCOPE IS No. Title 
This Indian Standard specifies the minimum 15191 : 2002 Forged steel components for use 


performance requirements for manually operated lever 
chain hoists used for the purpose of lifting, lowering, 
pulling and tensioning applications with safe working 
load of 0.25, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0, 1.6, 2.5, 3.2, 6.3 and 9.0 
tonnes. This standard applies to manually operated 
lever chain hoists fitted with either link chain or roller 
chain only. 


2 REFERENCES 


The standards listed below contain provisions which 
through reference in this text, constitute provisions of 
this standard. At the time, of publication, the editions 
indicated were valid. All standards are subject to 
revision, and parties to agreements based on this 
standard are encouraged to investigate the possibility 
of applying the most recent editions of the standards 
indicated below: 


IS No. Title 
2429 (Part 1): Specification for round steel short 
1987 link chains (electric butt welded ), 
grade L(3): Part 1 Non-calibrated 
load chain for lifting purposes 
(third revision) 
IS/ISO 3076 : Round steel short link chains 
2012 for general lifting purposes — 
Medium tolerance sling chains 
for chain slings — Grade 8 ( first 
revision ) 
IS/ISO 3077 : Short link chain for lifting 
2001 purposes — Grade T (Type T, 
DAT and DT), fine tolerance hoist 
chain 
3822 : 2002 Eye hooks for use with chains — 
Specification (second revision ) 
6217 : 1982 Specification for short link chain, 
grade S(6), non-calibrated for 
lifting purposes (first revision) 
6296 : 1983 Specification for short link chain 


grade S(6) calibrated for pulley 
blocks and other lifting appliances 
(first revision ) 


with grade T(8) chain and chain 
slings — Specification 

Point hooks with shank up to 
160 tonne — Specification 


Round steel short link chains for 
lifting purposes — Fine tolerance 
hoist chains for hand operated 
chain hoists — Grade VH 


Round steel short link chains for 
lifting purposes — Fine tolerance 
hoist chains for hand operated 
chain hoists — Grade TH 


15560 : 2005 


16772 : 2018 


16773 : 2018 


3 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard following definitions 
shall apply. 


3.1 Ratchet Lever Hoist — A lever operated manual 
device used to lift, lower or pull a load and to apply or 
release tension. 


3.2 Working Load Limit — The maximum mass, 
which a ratchet lever hoist can lift in general service. 


3.3 Safe Working Load — The maximum mass, 
which a ratchet lever hoist can lift in a particular stated 
service. It shall never be greater than the working load 
limit. 


3.4 Rating or Capacity — The safe working load in 
tonnes specified by the manufacture of the hoist. 


3.5 Effort — Average operating effort applied on the 
lever to raise a load equal to the working load limit 
together with the effective radius of the handle of the 
hoist. 


3.6 Lift — The maximum distance through which the 
load hook can travel. 


3.7 Head Room — The distance between the saddle 
of the load hook and the saddle of the suspension hook 
when the load hook is in its fully retracted position (that 
is, upper most position). 


IS 11340 : 2020 


3.8 Competent Person — The person who is approved 
and declared as such under the relevant statutory 
provisions. 


3.9 Inspector — The representative of the purchaser. 


3.10 Brake — A device for retarding and stopping 
motion of the load. 


3.11 Hook Latch — A mechanical device to bridge the 
throat opening of a hook. 


3.12 Idler Sprocket — A device free to rotate that 
changes the direction of the load chain. This device 
is sometimes called idler wheel, idler sheave, pocket 
wheel or chain wheel. 


3.13 Load Block — The assembly of hook or shackle, 
swivel, bearing, pins, sprocket and frame suspended by 
the load chain. 


3.14 Load Chain — A specially constructed hoist 
chain that passes through the hoist to support the load. 


3.15 Roller Link — A series of alternately assembled 
roller links and pin links in which pins articulate inside 
the bushings and rollers are free to turn on the bushings. 
Pins and bushings are press fit in their respective link 
plates. 


3.16 Ratchet and Pawl—A load controlling mechanism 
consisting of interlocking pawl(s) and ratchet that act to 
hold the load by mechanical engagement. 


3.17 Load Hook —The hook used to connect the load 
to the hoist. 


3.18 Load Sprocket — A hoist component that 
transmits motion to the load chain. This component 
is sometimes called a load wheel, load sheave, pocket 
wheel, chain wheel, or lift wheel. 


3.19 Operating Lever — The lever or handle provided 
to operate the hoist. 


3.20 Reeving — The reeving of the hoists is the path of 
the load chain between the hoist and load block. 


3.21 Suspension Hook — The hook attached to the 
body of the hoist. 


4 PERFORMANCE 


4.1 General 


4.1.1 All equipment selected in accordance with this 
standard is designed to perform satisfactorily when 
used in accordance with 4.4 and used within the safe 
working load. 


4.1.2 All equipment shall provide operating lever pull, 
lift and headroom in accordance with the manufacturer’s 


specifications agreed upon by the manufacturer and 
user. 


4.2 Application 


4.2.1 Ratchet lever hoists shall be suitable for lifting, 
lowering, pulling or tensioning loads within their safe 
working load. They shall be capable of being used 
in pulling or tensioning applications at any angle, 
provided the load block, chain and hoist body are not 
restricted from forming a straight line with the direction 
of loading. 


4.2.2 Because of varying environmental conditions, 
loading and usage the hoist service life is interrelated 
to the type and frequency if maintenance performed on 
the unit. Equipment covered by this standard should be 
inspected and maintained according to 6. 


4.3 Characteristics 


4.3.1 Strength 


The hoist shall be designed to withstand all stresses 
imposed under normal operating conditions while 
handling loads within the safe working load. 


Load suspension parts shall be designed so that the 
static stress calculated for the safe working load shall 
not exceed 25 percent of the average ultimate material 
strength. Elements specifically intended to give visible 
warning of severe overload by permanent deformation 
shall be designed to show obvious deformation before 
failure of other load suspension parts. 


Working — Ratchet lever hoists shall be constructed to 
provide the following operating characteristics: 


a) The hoist shall lift, lower or pull a load and apply 
or release tension in controlled increments when 
a manual force is applied to the operating lever 
(handle); 

b) The hoist shall lift or pull the safe working load 
when one operator exerts a typical lever pull; 

c) The hoist shall be equipped with a mechanism 
(ratchet and pawl) that shall hold and control 
loads within the safe working load when the hoist 
is being operated in either direction; 

d) The hoist shall be equipped with accessible 
operating controls; 

e) The hoist should have a free-chaining (free- 
wheeling) capability, which will allow the operator 
to adjust the load hook position when the unit is 
not under load; and 

f) The load chain shall be free from twist and tangle 
at the time of winding or unwinding. 


4.4 Performance Characteristics 


See Table 1 for generally available lever hoist capacities 
and typical performance characteristics 


IS 11340 : 2020 


Table 1 Typical Characteristics of Ratchet Lever Hoists — Welded Link and Roller Chain 
( Clause 4.4 ) 


SI No. Safe Working Load (7) Reeving Headroom Effort Lever Length 

mm Kg mm 

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
i) 0.25 1 200 — 250 20-25 150 — 200 
ii) 0.5 1 240 — 290 30-35 180 — 250 
iii) 0.8 1 270 — 320 20-30 240 — 300 
iv) il 1 300 — 350 30-40 240 — 300 
v) 1.6 1 330 — 380 30-40 260 — 410 
vi) 2.5 1 375 — 425 30-40 260 — 410 
vii) 3.2 1 390 — 440 30-40 400 — 450 
viii) 6.3 2 540 — 590 30-40 400 — 450 
ix) 9 3 680 — 730 30-40 400 — 450 


NOTE — This table indicates the range of capacities and characteristics generally available. Those values including a dash (for 
example, 150-200) denote typical ranges. Consult individual manufacturer’s catalog for specific values. 


HEAD ROOM 
(CLOSED HEIGHT) 


REACH 
(EXTENDED HEIGHT) 


LIFT 


LOAD HOOK IN THE FULLY 
RETRACTED POSITION (UPPER 
LIMIT OF TRAVEL) 


| LOAD HOOK AT ITS FULLY 
EXTENDED POSITION (LOWERS 


SUSPENSION 


IDLER SPROCKET 


LIMIT OF TRAVEL) 


SINGLE REEVED 
(1 PART) 


LOAD HOOK 


MULTIPLE REEVED (2 PARTS) 


Fic. 1 MANUALLY LEVER OPERATED CHAIN Holst 


5 CONSTRUCTION 
5.1 General 


The construction in general shall be composed of the 
body of which the main frame is equipped with gear 
mechanism, load controlling mechanism, lever, free- 
wheeling change-over device, idling device, load 
sheave and the load chain. The upper part of the body 
and the lower end of the load chain are equipped with a 
hook. Typical construction of manually lever operated 
ratchet lever hoist is shown in Fig. 1. 


5.2 Load Sprockets 


Load sprockets shall have pockets or teeth formed to 
allow proper engagement of the load chain. They shall 
be guarded to minimize entrance of foreign objects. 
Provision shall be made to guard against jamming 
of the load chain within the hoist mechanism under 
normal operating conditions. 


5.3 Load Chain 


Load chain shall be either roller link or welded link 
type and shall be suitable for hand operated hoist 


IS 11340 : 2020 


service (IS/ISO 3076, IS/ISO 3077, IS 2429 (Part 1), 
IS 6217, IS 6296, IS 15191, IS 16772, IS 16773 or 
higher equivalent). Chain shall be accurately pitched 
and sized to pass over sprockets without binding. They 
shall be proof tested by the chain manufacturer or 
hoist manufacturer with a load of at least equivalent 
to 1% times the hoist safe working load. If a load is 
supported by more than one part (line) of load chain, 
the tension on the parts (lines) shall be equalized. 


5.4 Hooks 


If the hooks are of the swiveling type, they should be free 
to rotate [see IS 3822, IS 15560 or higher equivalent]. 
Load blocks should be capable of rotating through 360 
when supporting the safe working load. Hooks shall be 
equipped with latches unless the application makes the 
use of a latch impractical. When required, a latch shall 
be provided to bridge the opening of the hook for the 
purpose of retaining slings, chains, etc., under slack 
conditions. 


5.5 Load Blocks 


Load blocks shall be guarded against load chain 
jamming during normal operating conditions. 


5.6 Load Controlling Mechanism 


The hoist shall be equipped with a load controlling 
device of a ratchet and pawl type, which shall perform 
the following functions under normal operating 
conditions with safe working load and under test 
conditions with test loads up to 150 percent of safe 
working load: 


a) Stop and hold the load when the lever force is 
removed; and 


b) Provide for incremental movement of the load 
when lifting or lowering. 


The load controlling mechanism shall have heat- 
dissipating capability for the specified frequency of 
operation. 


5.7 Over Travel Restraint 


Before the load chain can be completely run out of the 
hoist, it shall be restrained in its fully extended position. 
The restraint shall be such that the unloaded hoist can 
withstand a lowering operating lever force of twice the 
force required to lift the safe working load, or such that 
the hoist with the safe working load can withstand a 
lowering operating lever force equivalent to the force 
required to lift the safe working load. 


5.8 Overload Limiting Device 


5.8.1 An overload limiting device, when furnished, shall 
be designed to permit operation of the hoist within its 
safe working load and to limit the amount of overload 
that can be lifted or pulled by a properly maintained 
hoist under normal operating conditions. 


5.8.2 The overload limiting device may allow the lifting 
or pulling of an overload, but shall be designed to 
prevent the lifting or pulling of an overload that could 
cause damage to the hoist. This does not imply that any 
overload is to be intentionally applied to the hoist. The 
overload limiting devise is an emergency device and 
shall not be used to sense the overload imposed by a 
constrained load. 


5.9 Overload Warning Device 


5.9.1 An overload warning device, when furnished, 
shall consist of an element or elements designed to 
warn the operator of an overload condition that could 
damage a properly maintained hoist. The presence of 
an overload warning device does not imply that any 
overload is to be intentionally applied to the hoist. 


5.9.2 The overload warning device is an emergency 
device and shall not be used to measure the maximum 
load to be lifted or pulled and shall not be used to sense 
the overload imposed by a constrained load. 


6 LOAD TESTING, MARKING, 
OPERATING, INSPECTION 
MAINTENANCE PROCEDURE 


MANUALS, 
AND 


6.1 Load Testing 


All complete new hoists shall be tested by the 
manufacturer with a test load of at least 125 percent 
of the safe working load, except hoists incorporating 
overload devices, in which case the hoists shall be tested 
with at least safe working load. In addition, all operating 
functions shall be checked to ensure proper operation. 


6.2 Design Test 


At the purchaser’s option and expense a sample 
chain lever hoist or hoists shall be selected by the 
representative of the purchaser and shall be subjected 
to at least 4 times the working load limit for at least 
one minute, without breakage of material, partial 
or complete, or such distortion as could result in the 
release of the load. Following this test all parts shall be 
defaced to make them unusable. 


6.3 Examination 


After the proof loading the hoist shall be thoroughly 
examined and shall be recorded. It complies with this 
standard only if it is found free from deformation, 
cracks, flaws and other defects. 


6.4 Marking (by Manufacturer) 


6.4.1 Safe Working Load 


The safe working load shall be marked on the hoist or 
load block. 


6.4.2 Controls 
All control functions shall be identified. 


6.4.3 Identification 


The hoist shall be marked with the following 
information: 


a) Name of the manufacturer; 
b) Manufacturer’s model or serial number; and 


c) Safe working load. 
6.4.4 BIS Certification Marking 


The product(s) conforming to the requirements of 
this standard may be certified as per the conformity 
assessment schemes under the provisions of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards Act, 2016 and the Rules and 
Regulations framed thereunder, and the product(s) may 
be marked with the Standard Mark. 


6.5 Warnings 


All hoists shall have affixed to the hoist or load block 
in readable position information concerning operating 
procedures. The label or labels shall include cautionary 
language against: 

a) Lifting more than the safe working load; 


b) Operating a hoist with a twisted, kinked, or 
damaged chain; 


c) Operating a damaged or malfunctioning hoist; 
d) Lifting people or loads over people; 


e) Operating a hoist with other than manual power; 
and 


f) Removing or obscuring a warning label 


6.6 Manual 


The manufacturer shall furnish with each hoist one 
copy of an instruction manual. The manual shall 
include information on the following: 


a) Operation; 
b) Inspection and testing; and 


c) Lubrication, maintenance and repair. 
6.7 Operation 
6.7.1 Procedures 


Operating procedures recommend in the manufacturer’s 
instruction manual should be followed. In addition to 
these recommendations, operating practices and load 
handling procedures, as detailed below, should be 
followed. 


6.7.2 Operating Practices 


It is recommended that the following practices be 
adhered to when using a ratchet lever hoist: 


a) The supporting structure or anchoring means 
shall have a load rating as least equal to that of the 
hoist; 

b) The operator shall familiarize himself or herself 
with the operation of the equipment and its 


IS 11340 : 2020 


proper care; If adjustments are necessary or any 
damage is known or suspected, the hoist shall 
be removed from service and not used until 
corrections are made; 


c) Hoists shall be used only in locations that will 
allow the operator to be free of the load; 


d) The operator shall ensure that he has firm footing 
and is otherwise secured before operating the 
hoist; 

e) The operator shall have access to the operating 
lever; 


f) Before using the hoist, the operator shall be certain 
that all people in the vicinity are clear of the load; 


g) The operator shall not engage in any activity 
that will divert his attention while operating the 
hoist; 

h) The operator shall not attempt to use the free 
wheeling feature with any load on the hoist. Load 
shall not be applied with the hoist control in free 
wheeling mode; and 


wa 


Hoists shall not be operated by means other than 
hand power nor operated with an extension on the 
lever. 


j 


6.7.3 Handling the Load 
a) The safe working load shall not be exceeded; 


b) The hoist chain shall not be wrapped around the 
load; 

c) The load shall be attached to the hook or attached 
by means of slings or other approved devices; 

d) The load slings or other approved devices shall 
be seated properly in the saddle of the hook and 
the hook latch (if used) shall be closed before 
operating the hoist. Hooks shall not be tip loaded; 
and 


€ 


wa 


Before lifting or pulling a load, the operator shall 
be certain that: 


1) Chain is not kinked, twisted, or fouled and is 
properly seated in the pocket; 

2) Load is not caught on any obstructions; 

3) Multiple chain parts are not twisted and are 
free to take up load with the load equalized on 
each supporting strand; 


4 


wa 


Clearance is available to avoid personal injury 
or property damage; 
5 


wa 


Hoists shall not be operated until the load 
block, chain and hoist body are directly in line 
with the direction of loading to avoid side 
pull; 

6) When starting to lift or pull, the load should 
be moved a few inches, at which time the hoist 
should be checked for proper load holding 
action. The operation shall be continued only 


IS 11340 : 2020 


after the operator is assured that the hoist is 
operating properly; 

7) Do not release the hoist lever while it is 
under load. Keep control of the lever until 
the ratchet pawl in engaged and the lever is at 
rest; 


8 


wa 


A hoist shall not be used to lift support or 
otherwise transport people; 


9 


wa 


The operator shall not use the hoist to carry 
loads over people; and 


10) The operator should not leave a loaded hoist 
unattended at the end of a work shift or for 
extended periods during the work shift. Where 
operations are such that this condition cannot 
be avoided, the operator must be assured that 
the condition does not create a hazard to people 
or property. 


6.8 Inspection and Maintenance Procedures 


The inspection and maintenance procedures as covered 
in the manufacturer’s manual should be followed. 


Consideration should also be given to pertinent 
central, state and local regulations in the use of this 
equipment. 


6.8.1 Inspection, Certificate of Test and Examination 


6.8.1.1 Inspection 


The representative of the purchaser shall have access 
to the works of the manufacturer at all reasonable 
times for the purpose of witnessing the specified test 
and inspecting the testing equipment and methods of 
examination. 


6.8.1.2 Certificate of test and examination 


A certificate of test and examination shall be issued 
with every consignment of hoists, giving the following 
information for each one: 


a) Safe working load; 

b) Distinguishing mark; 

c) Chain, size and grade; and 
d) Proof load applied. 


IS 11340 : 2020 


ANNEX A 
( Foreword ) 


COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Cranes Lifting Chains and its Related Equipment Sectional Committee, MED 14 


Organisation 


BEML Ltd, Bengaluru 
ABB, Bengaluru 


Action Construction Equipment Limited (ACE), 
Palwal, Haryana 


Marathon Electric Motor (India) Ltd, Kolkata 
Anupam Industries Limited, Anand, Gujarat 


Armsel Mhe Pvt Ltd Bengaluru 


Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Bhopal/Haridwar 

Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, Trichy 

Brady & Morris Engg.Co Ltd 

Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 

Demag Cranes and Components (I) Pvt Ltd, Pune 

Demelec Techni Con, Nasik 

Dte Gen Factory Advice Service & Labour Institute, 
Mumbai 

Egs Computer India Pvt Ltd, Chennai 


Furnace & Foundry Equipment Co, Mumbai 


Heavy Engineering Corpn Ltd Ranchi 


Indian Chain Pvt Ltd, Kolkata 


Ipss Secretariat Cet, Delhi 


M.N. Dastur & Co Ltd, Kolkata 


Representative(s) 


SHRI RAMESH Desai (Chairman) 


SHRI GUNDE VINOD KUMAR 
SHRI FRANKLIN G. STEPHENSON (Alternate) 


Suri V. K. JADON 
SHRI RAVINDRA LUTHRA (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJIV RANJAN 


SHRI P. JHA 
Suri S. K. Mitra (Alternate I) 
Suri A. K. Jua (Alternate II) 


SHRI PREET HESTON HERI 
SHRI MOHAMMED ABDUL ROUFF (Alternate) 
Suri ANOOP S. BHARADWAJ (Young Professional) 
SHRI HEERALAL BHARANI 
SHRI SHANKER Dutt (Alternate) 
SHRI K. PALANIVEL 
SHRI M. ARTHANARI ESWARAN (Alternate) 
SHRI S. GOWRISANKAR 
SHRI J. B. BHATT (Alternate) 
Suri R. S. Bist 
SHRI NARENDRA KUMAR (Alternate) 
SHRI DEEPAK DESAI 
SHRI NEERAJ WAGHALE (Alternate) 
SHRI DHRUBA MALLIK 
SHRI MADHURIMA MALLIK (Alternate) 
Suri B. N. JHA 
Suri K. Dura! (Alternate) 
SHRI NATARAJAN R. 
Sarı B. ASHOK (Alternate) 
SHRI SHYAM M. GURNANI 
SHRI SANJOY J. Masan (Alternate) 
SHRI RAMJANAM PRASAD - MECHANICAL 
SHRI SATISH KUMAR (Alternate) 


Suri R. N. JHA - ELECTRICAL 
Suri T. K. Sanu (Alternate) 


Suri P. CHITLANGIA 
SHRI ROHAN CHITLANGIA (Alternate) 


Suri R. S. PRASAD - MECHANICAL 
SHRI DEEPAK BISWAL (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJEEV KUMAR JHA - ELECTRICAL 
SHRI PRIYAJIT SARKAR (Alternate) 


SHRI ANSHUMAN BHANDARI 
SHRI AMIT KUMAR MURARKA (Alternate) 


IS 11340 : 2020 


Organisation 


Mecon Limited, Ranchi 
Mega Drives Pvt Ltd, Thane 


Ministry of Defence (Directorate General of Quality 
Assurance), Pune/Bengaluru 


Ministry of Shipping, New Delhi 


Ministry of Surface Transport, New Delhi 
Monal Chains Limited Mumbai 


Mukand Ltd, Distt Thane 


Mumbai Port Trust 


Sail, Bhilai/Bokaro/Durgapur 


Schneider Electric India Pvt Ltd, Ahmedabad 


Siemens Ltd, Thane 
Tata Iron and Steel Co Ltd, Jamshedpur 
Techno Industries, Ahmedabad 


The Indian Link Chain Mfrs Ltd, Mumbai 
Til Ltd, Kolkata 


Unique Indl Handlers Pvt Ltd, Mumbai 
Wmi Kone Cranes Ltd, Mumbai 


BIS Directorate General 


Representative(s) 


Suri G. K. RANJAN 
SHRI ANKIT JALAN (Alternate) 


SHRI DEEPAK MAJUMDAR 
SHRI S. CHAKRABORTY (Alternate) 


Lr CoL A. VASUDEVA 
JT CONTROLLER (JAG/NrsG) (Alternate I) 
SHRI S. B. ALHAT Acga (Ep) (Alternate ID 


SHRI CHANDRAMANI ROUT 
SHRI RAMJI SINGH (Alternate) 


Suri T. K. Dutta 
SHRI ANUJ RBs GUPTA 

Suri D. M. JAIN (Alternate) 
SHRI T. MURALIDHAR 

MR ANAND MITKARI (Alternate) 
Suri N. G. KAMAT SATOSKAR 

Suri A. B. Upavant (Alternate) 


Dr S. L. SINGH. 
SHRI SANJEEV RANJAN SINGH (Alternate I) 
SHRI KAMLESH Kumar SINHA (Alternate II) 


SHRI DIPAK PATEL 

SHRI SENTHILKUMARAN C. (Alternate) 

SHRI ANMOL CHAUDHARI (Alternate) 
SHRI SOURAV SADHUKHAN 

SHRI ZUBIAR SHAKEEL (Alternate) 
SHRI S. K. SUMAN 

SHRI S. Biswas (Alternate) 


Suri J. B. BHATT 


SHRI NIRAG A. CHoksHi (Young Professional) 


Suri P. K. NEVATIA 


SHRI SUDIPTA GANGOPADHYAY 
SHRI BIPLAB GHOSH (Alternate) 


SHRI G. L. MIRCHANDANI 
SHRI S. E. BADLAWALA (Alternate) 


Suri S. M. MALANI 
SHRI D. CHATTERJI (Alternate) 


SHRI RAJNEESH KHOSLA SCIENTIST ‘E’ AND HEAD (MED) 
[ REPRESENTING DIRECTOR GENERAL ( Ex-officio ) | 


Member Secretary 


CHANDAN GUPTA 
Scientist ‘C’ (MED), BIS 


Bureau of Indian Standards 


BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 2016 to promote harmonious 
development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods and attending to 
connected matters in the country. 


Copyright 


BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form without 
the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of implementing the 
standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. Enquiries relating to 
copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 


Review of Indian Standards 


Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 
‘BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards: Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MED 14 (1460). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 

Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 

Telephones: 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.gov.in 

Regional Offices: Telephones 

Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg f 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 

Eastern: 1/14 C.I.T. Scheme VII M, V.I.P. Road, Kankurgachi f 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 

Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg | 265 0206 
CHANDIGARH 160019 265 0290 

Southern : C.I.T. Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 | 2254 1216, 2254 1442 

2254 2519, 2254 2315 

Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 

MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches : AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMMU. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. 
NAGPUR. PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


