dia Arch IS 12940 : 2017 
Indian Standard (Reaffirmed 2022) 


Documentation — Library 
Statistics — Guide 


( First Revision ) 


ICS 01.140.20 


© BIS 2017 


ada AM AR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 
WM “ad, 9 FGM WAL om, ae fereit-110002 
MANAK BHAVAN, 9 BAHADUR SHAH ZAFAR MARG 


NEW DELHI-110002 
Www Dis org. In www.standardsbis.in 


December 2017 Price Group 4 


Documentation and Information Sectional Committee, MSD 05 


FOREWORD 


This Indian Standard (First Revision) was adopted by the Bureau of Indian Standards after the draft finalized by 
the Documentation and Information Sectional Committee, had been approved by the Management and Systems 
Division Council. 


This standard was first published in 1990 and is being revised to incorporate the various changes occurred due to 
technological advancements and integration of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) Tools in 
libraries and information centres. 


Statistics are important for strategic planning especially for policy formulation and its review viz a viz target 
achievement. Libraries being organization can also plan all the activities by obtaining statistical data regarding 
various core areas of activity. This standard aims to act as a guidance tool to encourage good practice in the use of 
statistics for the management of modern day library/knowledge centres. 


This standard covers about the statistic related to library, library staff, library users, library collection, library 
services, library infrastructure, library budget which are very common in each and every library. The users have 
been given flexibility to extend the above parts keeping in mind the local variations. This standard aims to act as 
a guide to encourage best practices while preparing the annual report, as the standard is supported by a sample 
given in Annex A. 


BIS has also published an Indian Standard IS 15996 : 2012/ISO 11620 : 2008 ‘Information and documentation 
— Library performance indicators’. This will be useful adjunct to this standard. 


The composition of the Committee responsible for the formulation of this standard is given in Annex B. 


IS 12940 : 2017 


Indian Standard 
DOCUMENTATION — LIBRARY STATISTICS — GUIDE 


1 SCOPE 


1.1 This standard specifies rules for the library and 
information services community on the collection and 
reporting of statistics 


a) for the purpose of reporting, and 


b) to encourage good practice in the use of 
statistics for the management of library and 
information services. 


2 TERMINOLOGY 


For the purpose of this standard, the following 
definitions shall apply: 


2.1 Serials — Any publication issued in successive 
parts, appearing at intervals, usually regular ones and 
as arule intended to be continued indefinitely. The term 
includes periodicals, newspapers, etc. 


2.2 Journals — A periodical issued by a Society or 
Institute and contains news, proceedings, transactions 
and reports of work carried out in a particular field. 


2.3 Library — An organization, which maintains an 
organized collection and facilitate the use of such 
documents as printed, non-printed, serial, microforms 
or any other cartographic, graphic, audio-visual, 
electronic and web based, as are required to meet the 
informational, research, educational, cultural or 
recreational needs of its users. 


2.4 Classification of Libraries 
2.4.1 National Library 


A library, irrespective of its title, which is responsible 
for acquiring and conserving copies of all publications 
published in the country and may function as a deposit 
library either by law or under other arrangements. Such 
a library will also perform some of the following 
functions: 


a) Collect and conserve all documents 
concerning the country wherever published, 


b) Hold and keep up-to-date a large and 
representative collection of foreign document, 


c) Produce a national bibliography, 
d) Compile national union lists/catalogues, 


e) Act as an access point for national 
bibliographical information/reference centre 
both in-house and on-line, 


f) Organize national and international exchange 
of publications, 


g) Participate in facilitating in international inter- 
library loan, 


h) Cooperate in coordinating and planning 
library system in the country, and 


j) Coordinate research and development service. 


NOTE — Libraries which may not be categorized 
‘national’ but are of national importance with regard to 
uniqueness in collections and use and recognized by 
the Central Government shall be placed in this category. 


2.4.1.1 The objective of National library is to 
a) act as a referral central, 


b) provide complete and accurate knowledge of 
all sources of bibliographic information, 


c) acting as a centre for international book 
exchange, and 


d) preparation of Indian National Bibliographies 
(INB). 


2.4.1.2 Services provided by the National Library could 
be referencing; lending; text books; reprographic; 
documentation and other services as per the 
requirements. 


2.4.2 Academic Library 


A library which serves a school, college or university 
students, researchers, faculty and staff. The library 
serving the students and faculty of a college or a 
university is generally considered to be a library of the 
institution of higher learning. This library is an integral 
part of a college or university and administered to meet 
the information, curricular, and research needs of its 
students, faculty and staff. Libraries in elementary, 
secondary, senior secondary schools are called school 
libraries. These libraries support the school’s 
curriculum in the teaching learning process. 


2.421 School library — Library attached to 
elementary, secondary or senior secondary school 
serving its pupils, teachers and staff. 


a) The objective of college library is to 


1 foster interest in reading books; 
2 create love for books; 
3 inculcate reading habits. 
b) Services provided by the School Library could 


IS 12940 : 2017 


be lending; guidance and advice; referencing 
purpose or other service to promote the 
interest of the children for reading books. 


2.4.2.2 College library 
a) The objective of college library is to 


1 provide variety of curriculum based 
collection. 


2 orient the students about the library 
resources. 


3 building foundation of knowledge in 
browsing through library. 


b) Services provided by the College Library 
could be referencing; lending; text books; 
reprographic; documentation and other 
services as per the requirements. 


2.4.2.3 University library 


a) The objective of University library is to 
support teaching and learning, research, 
publication and extension services. 


b) Services provided by the University Library 
could be referencing; lending; text books; 
reprographic; documentation and other 
services as per the requirements. 


2.4.3 Special Library — A library or information centre, 
maintained by an individual, corporation, association, 
government agency or any other group. A collection of 
books and other printed, graphic or record material 
dealing with a limited field of knowledge, and provided 
by a learned society, research organization, industrial 
or commercial undertaking, government department or 
educational institution. 


NOTE — It may also be a special branch of a public library 
serving certain interests or occupational groups, such as a 
technical library; or a subject library meeting the needs of all 
enquirers on a given subject, such as a music library; or to 
cater to the interest of differently abled persons like Braille 
collections, etc. Broadly, a library which is neither academic, 
commercial, national nor public. It is intended to serve the needs 
of a portion of the community requiring detailed information 
respecting a limited subject field. 


2.4.3.1 The objective of Special Library is to meet the 
information requirements of the organizations with 
which they are attached. 


2.4.3.2 Services provided by the Special Library could 
be reference; lending; text books; reprographic; 
documentation and additionally 


a) provide bibliography (Literature/patent 
search) 


b) current awareness services 


c) indexing of and abstracting documentation 


d) other services as per the requirement of the 
users 


2.4.4 Public Library — A library provided wholly or partly 
from public funds, and the use of which is not restricted 
to any class of persons in the community but is freely 
available to all. Some of the levels of public libraries in 
India are — State Central Library, State Library, District 
Library, Sub-Divisional Library, Tehsil Library, Taluka 
Library, Block Library and Village Library. 


a) The objective of Public library is to 


1 foster and promote the spread of 
knowledge, education and culture; 


2 strengthen the forces of societal 
secularism, democracy and rule of law; 


3 equal opportunity of free access to the 
users; 


4 promote library movement in the country; 

5 enunciate a national library policy and to 
help build up a national library system; 

6 provide financial and technical assistance 
to libraries; 


7 provide financial assistance to 
organizations, regional or national, 
engaged in the promotion of library 
development; 


8 publish appropriate literature and to act 
as a clearing house of ideas and 
information on library development in 
India and abroad; 


9 promote research in problems of library 
development; and 


10 advise the government on all matters 
pertaining to the library development in 
the country. 


b) Services provided by the Public Library could 
be reference; lending; text books; 
reprographic; documentation; mobile library 
services or other services as per the 
requirements. 


NOTE — Children section is a part of the public library. 


2.4.5 Government Library — A library maintained by 
Central/State Government Departments, attached and 
Subordinate Offices catering to the needs of 
Government Officials, Technocrats and other special 
user groups. 


2.5 Library Collection 


The total accumulation of material of all kinds 
assembled by a library for its users. 


NOTES 


1 Comprises documents held locally (excluding interlibrary 


lending and document delivery) and remote resources for which 
permanent or temporary access rights have been acguired by 
the library itself, by a consortium and/or through external 
funding. 

2 Acguisition is to be understood as deliberately selecting a 
document, securing access rights and including it in the On- 
line Public Access Catalogue (OPAC) or other databases of the 
library. 

3 Does not include links to Internet resources for which the 
library has not secured access rights by legal agreements (for 
example legal deposit right), license or other contractual and/ 
or cooperative agreement. 


2.5.1 The library collection may comprise the 
following: 


2.5.1.1 Print collection 
a) Books; 
b) Serials; 


c) Others like theses/dissertations, reports, 
standards, patents, pamphlets, preprints/ 
reprints, journal/conference papers, portfolios, 
etc; and 


d) Maps and Charts (Cartography). 
2.5.1.2 Non-print collection 

a) Manuscripts; 

b) Braille; 


c) Multi-media; 


d) Microfilm, microfiche, etc; and 


e) Electronic/Digital resources (like databases, 
e-journals, e-books, etc). 


2.6 Library Users 


2.6.1 Registered User — A person who is authorized 
to borrow/access the library resources. 


2.6.2 Other User — A person who makes use of library 
collection within or outside the library. 


2.7 Library Staff 


2.7.1 Professional Staff — A member of the 
professional staff performing work of a nature requiring 
training and skill in the theoretical and scientific parts 
of library work as distinct from its merely mechanical 
parts. 


2.7.2 Specialist Staff — Library employee who has 
received training in a specialized discipline. 


NOTE — The specialized staff could be Archivist, 
Documentalist, System Analyst, bookbinder, etc. 


2.7.3 Semi-professional Staff — Person employed in a 
library who has received certificate/diploma in 
librarianship and/or information science equivalent 
work experience in a library. 


IS 12940 : 2017 


2.7.4 Supporting staff — All other supporting 
employees (skilled or unskilled) with or without formal 
qualifications in librarianship/information science or 
other relevant specialization. 


NOTE — The supporting staff can be M.T.S., Photocopy 
Operator, Library Attendant, etc. 


2.7.5 Volunteers/Professional Interns — Persons 
working on library tasks without payment. 


NOTE — These persons may receive token reimbursements or 
expense allowances. 


3 NEED AND PURPOSE 


3.1 Uses, Benefits and Limitations of Statistics 


3.1.1 The statistical data defined and described in this 
standard can be used for the evaluation and comparison 
of library and information services. The term “library” 
is used for convenience and should generally be read 
as including “information/knowledge resource/ 
documentation centres and services”. 


3.1.2 Library statistics are compiled by the individual 
library/centre and should be summarized on a regional, 
national or international scale for all libraries or for 
different types of libraries. While individual libraries/ 
centres mostly use statistics for strategic planning and 
decision-making statistics on a regional, national or 
international scale are needed for comparison, review 
and formulation of policy. 


3.1.3 Objectives for library statistics can be summarized 
as follows: 


a) to monitor operating results against standards 
and data of similar organizations; 


b) to provide a base for planning, decision- 
making, improving service quality, and 
feedback on the results; 


c) to demonstrate the value of library services 
obtained by users, including the potential 
value to users in future generations; 


d) to inform national or regional organizations 
in their support, funding and monitoring roles; 


e) to create awareness about the use and 
important role of libraries to concerned 
stakeholders; 


f) serve as indicator of workload, department- 
wise and staff-wise; 


g) provide inputs for the annual report of library; 


h) provide useful data for planning of all the 
activities of library such as opening hours, type 
of readers’ services, etc in all the various 
departments; 


IS 12940 : 2017 


j) Support proposals for staff reguirement in 
library; 


k) work out rational distribution of work-load 
among staff; 


m) provide guidelines for collection development 
as per readers’ requirement; and 


n) justify utility and desirability of library 
services. 


3.1.4 While the form of statistics varies between 
academic, public, school and special libraries, and 
between closed, open and remote access situations, their 
objectives are the same. While all libraries provide 
certain core services like referencing, lending, guidance 
and advice, etc, special services could also be provided 
by them, based on their nature, type or user demand. 


4 LIBRARY STATISTICS 


4.1 The Library Statistics may be given about the 
following to achieve the objectives of different libraries: 


4.1.1 About the Library 
a) Name of the organization/institution 
b) Type of library 
c) Central/Branch library 


d) Library timing/Opening hours 
4.1.2 Library Staff 
4.1.3 Library Users 
4.1.4 Library Collection 
4.1.5 Library Services 
a) Lending Services 
b) Reference Services 
c) Reprographic Services 
d) Electronic resources and Services 
e) Digitization 
f) Documentation Services 
g) Maintenance Services 
h) Extension Services 
4.1.6 Infrastructure Facilities 
4.1.7 Funding & Expenditure 
a) Total Budget 
b) Expenditure 
c) Revenue Generation 


4.2 A specimen proforma is given in Annex A for reference. 


ANNEX A 
(Clause 4.2) 
SPECIMEN PROFORMA FOR LIBRARY STATISTICS 


A-1 ABOUT THE LIBRARY 
a) Name of the organization/institution 
b) Type of library 
c) Central/Branch library 
d) Library timing/Opening hours 
A-2 LIBRARY STAFF 
a) Professional Staff 
b) Specialist Staff 
c) Semi-professional Staff 
d) Other Staff 


e) Volunteers/Professional Interns 


A-3 LIBRARY USERS 


a) Number of users (categorization may be given 
separately as per requirement) registered 


b) Number of users withdrawn 


A-4 LIBRARY COLLECTION 
a) No. of books 


1 Purchased 
2 Gifted 
b) No. of Serials/Journals 
c) No. of theses/dissertations, reports, standards, 


patents, pamphlets, preprints/reprints, journal, 
conference papers, portfolios, etc 


d) 
e) 
f) 
g) 
h) 
i) 


No. of Maps and Charts (Cartographic materials) 
No. of Manuscripts 

No. of Braille scripts 

No. of Multi-Media 


No. of Microfilm, microfiche, etc 


No. of Electronic/Digital resources like 
databases, e-journals, e-books, etc 


A-5 LIBRARY SERVICES 


A- 5.1 Lending Services 


No. of books issued 
No. of books renewed 
No. of books reserved 


No. of books issued through inter-library loan 
(ILA) 


No. of books received through inter-library 
loan (ILA) 


No. of books consulted 

ILA requests received from overseas 
ILA request made to overseas 

No. of mobile library services 


Book Bank 


A- 5.2 Reference Services 


a) 


b) 
c) 
d) 


e) 


No. of reference queries attended (long-range 
and short-range) 


No. of bibliographies compiled 
No. of literature/patent searches conducted 


No. of Indian National Bibliographies (INB) 
prepared 


No. of Documents transmitted by a Library 
from its collection in Electronic format (full 
text) 


A- 5.3 Reprographic Services 


a) 


No. of sheets photocopied (official and non- 
official) 


A- 5.4 Electronic Resources and Services 


a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 


No. of downloads 
No. of internet access 
Use of digitized collection 


No. of virtual visits 


IS 12940 : 2017 


A- 5.5 Digitization 


f) 


No. of digitized books 
No. of digitized serials 
No. of digitized manuscripts 


No. of digitized microforms 


No. of digitized audio-video documents 


Others 


A- 5.6 Documentation Services 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Current Arrival Services (CAS) 


New Arrivals 


Current Contents 


LA N -e 


Book Review 
4 Press Clippings 
Selective Dissemination of Information (SDI) 


— SDI Services Provided 
Translation 


A- 5.7 Maintenance Services 


a) 


b) 


c) 


Binding 
1 No. of Books bound 


2 No. of Journals bound 
Preservation and Conservation 


1 Chemical treatment 
2 Preservative/Restorative measures 
Stock verification 


No. of documents withdrawn 
No. of documents weeded out 


WN e 


No. of documents written off 
4 No of documents — price recovered 


A- 5.8 Extension Services 


a) 


b) 
c) 


g) 


Orientation programmes conducted 


(individual or group users) 
Book Exhibitions organized 


Book weeks/book related programmes 
organized 


Public lectures 
In-service training 
Development/research activities 


Any other 


A-6 INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES 


a) 


No. of photocopying machines 


IS 12940 : 2017 


b) No. of binding machines 

c) No. of printers 

d) No. of lamination machines 
e) No. of scanners 


f) No. of On-line Public Access Catalogue 
(OPAC) points 


g) No. of Internet Access points 
h) Any other 


A-7 FUNDING & EXPENDITURE 
a) Total Budget 


b) 


c) 


Expenditure 

1) Purchase of documents (both print and 
non-print) 

2) Binding 

3) Preservation/restoration activity 

4) Furniture and equipment 

5) Library Stationery 

6) Any other 


Revenue Generation 


NOTE — The above points can be extended keeping in 
mind the local variation of different types of libraries. 


IS 12940 : 2017 


ANNEX B 
(Foreword) 
COMMITTEE COMPOSITION 


Documentation and Information Sectional Committee, MSD 05 


Organisation 


In personal capacity (536, Modern ApartmentSector-15, 
Rohini, New Delhi 110089) 


AIIMS, New Delhi 

Aligarh Muslim University (AMU), Aligarh 
BHEL (R&D), Hyderabad 

Central Secretariat Library, New Delhi 


College of Engineering, Jawahar Lal Nehru Technological 
University, Hyderabad 


Defence Scientific Information & Documentation Centre (DESIDOC) 


Delhi Public Library, New Delhi 


Delhi University Library, University of Delhi, Delhi 


Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Grievances 
(DARPG), New Delhi 


Directorate of Printing and Stationary and Publication, Bangluru 
Directorate of Printing, New Delhi 

Government of Indian Librarian Association, New Delhi 

Indian Agricultural Research Institute Library, New Delhi 
Indian Council for Medical Research, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi 

Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, New Delhi 

Indian Library Association, New Delhi 

Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts, New Delhi 


Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), New Delhi 
INFLIBNET, Ahmedabad 


Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi 


Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, Haryana 


Library, Indian Statistical Institute, Delhi 
Ministry of I&B (Publication Division), New Delhi 
National Archives of India, New Delhi 


National Council of Educational Research & Training, New Delhi 


National Institute of Scientific Communication and Information 
Resources (NISCAIR), New Delhi 


National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi 
Netaji Subhash Chandra Institute of Technology, Delhi 
The Hindu, Chennai 


In personal capacity (500, Pocket C-8, Rohini, Delhi 110058) 


In personal capacity [Flat No. W-404 (3rd Floor) Anupam Apartment, 


East Arjun Nagar Near Karkardooma Court, Delhi 110032] 


Representative(s) 


Dr Monner SINGH (Chairman) 


REPRESENTATIVE 

REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRIMATI C. VUAYA BHARATHI 
SHRI RAMESH CHANDER (Alternate) 


Suri A. PRABHU KUMAR 


Suri S.K. JINDAL 
SHRI ASHOK Kumar (Alternate) 


Suri B.L. MEENA 
Suri S. RAJAGOPALAN (Alternate) 


Dr K.P. SINGH 


REPRESENTATIVE 


Suri M. RAVISHANKAR 

Suri D. K. Jain 

SuRI N. K. BAR 

SHRIMATI UsHA KHEMCHANDANI 
REPRESENTATIVE 

SHRIMATI SUNITA GULATI 

DR BIBHUTI BHUSAN SAHOO 
DR PARDEEP RAI 


SHRI PRATAPANAND JHA 
Suri Beyaz HASHMI (Alternate) 


PROF JAIDEEP SHARMA 


Suri P. KANNAN 
Suri DINESH RANJAN PRADHAN (Alternate) 


SHRI RAMEsH C. GAUR 
DR. Manorama TRIPATHI (Alternate) 


PROF Manos KUMAR JOSHI 
DR Sau K. SHARMA (Alternate) 


Suri U.V. KANDHA (Alternate) 
REPRESENTATIVE 


SHRI RAM SWAROOP 
Suri J. K. LuTBRA (Alternate) 


Dr MOORTTIMATEE SAMANTARAY 


Dr NARENDRA KUMAR 
Dr G. MAHESH (Alternate) 


Suri N.K. WADHWA 
REPRESENTATIVE 


Sarı H.R. MOHAN 
Suri K. RAJENDRA Bapu (Alternate I) 
Suri J. VASUDEVAN (Alternate ID 


DR R. K. VERMA 
DR N. K. KHATRI 


Member Secretary 
SHRIMATI SNEH LATA, 
Scientist ‘E’ (Management and Systems), BIS 


7 


Bureau of Indian Standards 

BIS is a statutory institution established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 to promote 
harmonious development of the activities of standardization, marking and quality certification of goods 
and attending to connected matters in the country. 

Copyright 

BIS has the copyright of all its publications. No part of these publications may be reproduced in any form 
without the prior permission in writing of BIS. This does not preclude the free use, in the course of 
implementing the standard, of necessary details, such as symbols and sizes, type or grade designations. 
Enquiries relating to copyright be addressed to the Director (Publications), BIS. 

Review of Indian Standards 

Amendments are issued to standards as the need arises on the basis of comments. Standards are also reviewed 
periodically; a standard along with amendments is reaffirmed when such review indicates that no changes are 
needed; if the review indicates that changes are needed, it is taken up for revision. Users of Indian Standards 
should ascertain that they are in possession of the latest amendments or edition by referring to the latest issue of 


“BIS Catalogue’ and ‘Standards : Monthly Additions’. 


This Indian Standard has been developed from Doc No.: MSD 05 (0511). 


Amendments Issued Since Publication 


Amend No. Date of Issue Text Affected 


BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS 


Headquarters: 
Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi 110002 
Telephones : 2323 0131, 2323 3375, 2323 9402 Website: www.bis.org.in 
Regional Offices: Telephones 
Central : Manak Bhavan, 9 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 2323 7617 
NEW DELHI 110002 2323 3841 
Eastern : 1/14 C.T. Scheme VII M, V. I. P. Road, Kankurgachi 2337 8499, 2337 8561 
KOLKATA 700054 2337 8626, 2337 9120 
Northern : Plot No. 4-A, Sector 27-B, Madhya Marg, CHANDIGARH 160019 26 50206 
265 0290 
Southern : CUT Campus, IV Cross Road, CHENNAI 600113 2254 1216, 2254 1442 
2254 2519, 2254 2315 
Western : Manakalaya, E9 MIDC, Marol, Andheri (East) 2832 9295, 2832 7858 
MUMBAI 400093 2832 7891, 2832 7892 


Branches: AHMEDABAD. BENGALURU. BHOPAL. BHUBANESHWAR. COIMBATORE. 
DEHRADUN. DURGAPUR. FARIDABAD. GHAZIABAD. GUWAHATI. 
HYDERABAD. JAIPUR. JAMSHEDPUR. KOCHI. LUCKNOW. NAGPUR. 
PARWANOO. PATNA. PUNE. RAIPUR. RAJKOT. VISAKHAPATNAM. 


Published by BIS, New Delhi 


